There is extant of the same Authors, Two excellent Treatises, in large Octavo,
viz.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, or a Treatise
containing the Nature, Necessity, Marks and Means of Regeneration; as also, the
duty of the Regenerate. Heaven and Hell Epitomized, or the true Christian
Characterized.
THE Christian-mans Calling: OR A TREATISE OF Making RELIGION ones Business.

WHEREIN The Nature and Necessity of it is discovered.

As also the Christian directed how he may per^^^^^ it, In Religious Duties.
Natural Actions. His Particular Vocation, His Family Directions, and His own
Recreations.


By GEORGE SWINNOCK, M.A. Preacher of the Gospel at Great-Kimbel in the County
of Bucks.

To be read in Families for their Instruction and Edification.

Non dormientibus provenit regnum caelorum, nec otio and desidia torpentibus
beatitudo aeternitatis ingeritur. Prosp. de vita Contemplat. Luke 2.46. Wist ye
not that I must be about my Fathers business. (...), Phil. 3.20. London,
Printed for T.P. and are to be sold by Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the
Poultry, next Grocers-Alley. 1662.

TO THE Worshipful and his Honored Patron, RICHARD HAMPDEN Of Hampden in
Buckinghamshire Esquire And to the Honorable Lady LAETITIA HAMPDEN, His Virtuous
Consort.
THough Philosophers difference Man specially from Brutes, Lactant. de ira Dei.
by his chief Natural quality, Reason; yet some Divines like rather to do it by
his Supernatural excellency, Religion: Probably upon this twofold ground,
partly because Religion is the highest and truest reason, and therefore causes
the greatest Essential distiction. What can be more rational, then for the
Supreme Truth to be believed, the chiefest Good to be embraced, the first cause
to be acknowledged; and those who were made by God, and live wholly upon him,
to improve all for him, and to live wholly to him? The giving up our Souls and
Bodies unto God, is called our reasonable Sacrifice, Romans 12.2. Those that are
irreligious, are termed unreasonable, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Indeed Atheists are but
Beasts shaped in the proportion, and dressed in in the habits of men. It is
impossible for man to manifest more want of Reason, then in wandering from God,
the Fountain of his being, and the wellspring of all his blessedness: Who
ever, unless bereft of his wits, and distracted, would murder his Body, much
less his precious Soul for ever? As soon as ever the Prodigal came to himself,
he came to his Father: 'Twas a clear sign he had lost his reason, when he left
bread in his Fathers house, for busks amongst Swine. Means hearts naturally are
(like Nebuchadnezzars) the hearts of Beasts, grazing only in fleshly Pastures,
and savouring only Sensual Pleasures, till their reason returns to them,
then they bless and honor the most high God, who lives for ever, Dan. 4.31.
then they mind Spiritual Dainties, and relish Celestial Delights. The
irreligious are Fellow-Commoners with Beasts, the Religious with Angels.

Partly, because Religion is the end and excellency of the Rational Creature,
of which Brutes are wholly incapable: Brutes were made to serve God, Men only
to worship him. The Jewish Talmud propounds the question, Why God made man
just on the Evening before the Sabbath? and gives this answer, That he might
immediately enter upon the Sanctification of the Sabbath, in the worship of the
blessed God, the end for which he was made. Purity or Religion, was our
primitive, and therefore must n^eds be our principal perfection: All who have
any knowledge of the great God, will easily grant, that man was a curious
piece, rare workmanship indeed, when he came immediately out of his Makers
hands: It is is impossible, but that the child must be amiable and beautiful
in a high degree, which was begotten by, and is the Picture of such a Father.

A Religious life (which consists in exalting God in our affections, as our
chiefest good; and in our actions, as our utmost end) is the life of God
himself: How high, how noble, how excellent a life does the blessed God live!
Ephesians. 4.18. Others live like Beasts, like Devils; true Christians only like
Angels, like God, above these carnal comforts, and drossie delights; The way of
life is above to the wise, Prove. 15 24. Atheists, like Hedge-Sparrows, settling
here below, are easily taken in Satan's snares, and destroyed; when Saints, like
Eagles, soaring aloft, are free both from his shot and limetwigs, They are not
terrified with the worlds affrightments, having Armor of proof. Those that are
at the top of some high Tower, regard not the croaking of Frogs, nor hissing of
Serpents below; like the Moon at the full, being fixed in Heaven, they can keep
their course, though Dogs bark at them here on earth; It is called (...) by the
Grecians.
They are not entangled in the Worlds allurements. The World indeed like a
Serpent (some write of) when she cannot overtake the fleeing passengers, does
with her beautiful colors so amaze many, that they have no power to pass away,
till she has stung them; but they see her emptiness and vanity under all her
painting and dawbery: Besides, their eyes behold the glorious God in some
measure, in his brightness and beauty, and are so dazzled therewith, that as
those that look on the great Luminary of the world, in its Meridian splendour,
they can see no glory in any thing besides. These poor Candles are slighted
into disappearance, because the Sun himself has arisen upon them. How quickly,
how quietly did Abraham leave his Kindred and Country, when once the God of
Glory appeared to him, Acts 7.2. Ah what pitiful fare is the Worlds most
luscious food, to them that ever feasted with the Holy Jesus!

The old Grecians, Eustath. in Homer.
who had altogether fed on acorns before, when bread came in among them, made
no reckoning of their mast, but reserved it only for their Swine. Senec. de
Benef.
The Lacedaemonians despised their iron and leathern money, when gold and silver
was brought into their Cities: When a Soul once comes to know the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; what toys and trifles, what babies and
butterflies are the honors, and riches, and pleasures of this beggarly World to
him? nay, how does he befool and bebeast himself, Psalm. 73.31.
for doting so much upon specious dreams, and gilded nothings! Now he is
elevated to the top of the Celestial Orbs, even to Heaven, and therefore the
whole earth is but a small spot of ground, a little point in his eyes.

The driving of this high and heavenly trade, is the sum and substance of this
Treatise; which I present to you both, as a testimony of my gratitude, Diodo.
Sic. lib. 2.
for the great engagements you have laid upon me. The Storks amongst Fowls, is
said to leave one of her young in the place where she hatcheth them. The
Egyptians amongst men are famous in history for a thankful people, and are
recorded to have made Eunuchs of ungrateful persons, that the world might not
be plagued with their posterity. Quidam furtive gratias agunt, and in angulo,
and in aurem; non est ista verecundia sed inficiandi genus. Senec. de benef.
lib. 2. cap. 23.
The Master of Moral Philosophy, upbraideth them sharply that steal favors by
private acknowledgements: the truth is, a public confession of your
kindeness, as it is the least (since providence has given me the opportunity)
so it is (next my prayers) the greatest requital I am able to make you. If my
pains have yielded any fruit in these parts, those that received it, owe the
ackowledgement (under God) to you.

Though neither of you love to hear your own praise, nor did I ever love
flattery, knowing by too much experience, that pride will burn and continue
(like the Elementary fire) of it self without any fuel; yet I esteem it my duty
to publish some things to the world or example to others. The place to which I
am presented, has not half a maintenance, nor so much as a house belonging to
the Minister; but the Lord has given you such compassion to Souls, that you
have given me both a convenient dwelling, and a considerable maintenance
(besides the Tithes, above seventy pound per annum, out of your own
inheritance) that I enjoy, through the good hand of my God upon me, a competent
encouragement, and comfortable employment. When others refuse to draw out their
purses to hungry bodies, the gracious God has enabled you both to draw out
your purse and hearts unto starving souls: Soul-charity is the highest and
noblest charity, and such fruit as will much abound to your account at the day
of Christ, Phil. 4.17. Hereby, like wise Merchants, you return your riches into
the other world by bills of Exchange. How much are you both in debted to free
Grace! Usually the richest mines are covered with the most barren earth; and
men who receive much from God very quietly (like narrow mouthed glasses) will
part with nothing without much stir and reluctance. God has bestowed on you
large hearts, as well as large inheritance. Many a Vessel has been sunk with
the weight of its burden: Some Mariners out of love to their lading, have lost
their lives; but God has made you Masters of (not as many other servants to) a
fair Estate.

It is also your honor, that the Ark, the worship of the blessed God, finds
entertainment in your house: Your whole Family, though large, have set-meals
daily for their inward man, as well as for their outward; your children and
servants are commanded by you to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19. and as
if your house were built of Irish Oak, which will suffer no Spider near it, no
iniquity is allowed to dwell in your tabernacle. I have with much delight
observed your care and conscience to have all your Family present at morning
and evening duties. O it is a blessed and beautiful sight to behold a little
Church in a great house! Many great persons think the company of the glorious
God too mean for them in their houses; Religion waits at their doors like a
Beggar, and cannot obtain the favor to be called in, when the Vermin (as in
the Egyptian Palaces) of pride and drunkenness, and swearing, reside amongst
them, and crawl in every room of their dwellings. The service of the living
God, which is the greatest freedom, they count their bondage and fetters; The
Society of the Lord Jesus is to them, as to the Devils, a torment, Mat. 8.
Alas, alas, Whether is man fallen, that the company of his Maker should be
esteemed his dishonor! that the Worship of God, which is the preferment of
Glorious Angels, should be judged a disparagement! Ah, how will their
judgments be altered, when they come to dye, to throw their last casts for
Eternity! Steph. Gardener. Fox. Acts and Monu.
then (as that Popish Prelate said of justification by Faith, That it was good
Supper Doctrine, though not so good to break fast on) they will confess, that
it is good to dye in the Lord; they will cry out, O let me dye the death of the
Righteous, and let our latter end be like theirs! how lightly soever now they
think of living their lives. The Persian Messenger, though an Heathen, could
not but observe the worth of Piety in such an hour of extremity: ^^schiles in
Traged.
When the Grecian forces hotly pursued us (says he) and we must needs venture
over the great water Strymon frozen then, but beginning to thaw, when a hundred
to one we had all dyed for it, with mine eyes I saw many of those Gallants,
whom I and heard before so boldly maintain, There was no God, every one upon
their knees, with eyes and hands lifted up, begging hard for help and mercy,
and entreating that the ice might hold till they got over: Those Gallants who
now proscribe godliness their hearts and houses (as if it were only an humor
taken up by some precise persons, who will needs be wiser then their
neighbors, and Galba like, scorn at them who fear, or think of death) when
they themselves come to enter the list with the King of Terrors, and perceive
in earnest, that this surly Sergeant Death will not be denied, but away they
must into the other world, and be saved, or tormented in flames for ever, as
they have walked after the Spirit, or after the flesh here; without question
they will change their note, sing another tune, and say, Beatus es Abba Arsen^,
qui semper hanc horam ante ocules habuisti, Bibl. Patr.
as dying Theophilus did of devout Arsenius, Thou art blessed, O Arsenius, who
had always this hour before thine eyes.

Blessed be God, ye walk not in the vicious ways of such voluptuous wretches;
but to the joy of all that know and love you, sit like wise Pilots, in the
hindermost part of the ship, dwell in the meditation of your deaths, and thence
endeavor to steer the vessel of your conversations aright. Give me leave
(Honored Friends) out of the unfeigned respect which I bear to you both (which
if I know my own heart, is not so much for the favors received from you,
though I shall ever acknowledge them; but for what of God and godliness I have
seen in you) to beseech you, that as ye have received, how ye ought to walk,
and to please God, so ye would abound more and more, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. God has
done great things for you, and God expects great things from you: To whom
much is given, of them much is required. Where the Husbandman bestows the
greatest cost, there he looks for the greatest crop: The rents which your
Tenants pay, are somewhat answerable to the Farms which they enjoy. Ye have
more obligations to serve God then others, and more opportunities for his
service; and therefore having fairer gales, should sail more swiftly then
others, toward the Haven of Happiness; your trading must be suitable to the
talents with which ye are entrusted: Perfection will be your reward; and
proficency is your work. Heavenly mindedness and Humility, which are the
greatest glory of our English Gentry, are excellent helps to growth in grace.
Children that feed on ashes, cannot thrive. Silly Pismires, that continually
busy themselves about their hoards and heaps of earth, never grow bigger.
Indeed great persons are liable to great temptations: Flies will strive to
fasten upon the sweetest Conserves. The longest robes are aptest to contract
most dirt. Satan (as some write of the Irish to take their enemies) digeth
trenches in the earth (as it were) and covers the surface of it with the
green turfs of carnal comforts and contentments: which men treading upon, and
taking to be firm ground, fall in to their ruin. But your sight of the glory
to be revealed by the Prospective glass of faith, will help you to wink more on
these withering vanities. Ah what a muckheap to that, is all the wealth of this
lower world! Naturalists tell us, that the Loadstone will no^ draw in the
presence of the Diamond. Sure am, the world, notwithstanding all its pomp and
pride, glory and gallantry, has but little influence upon Christians when they
behold their undefiled inheritance. Humility is also helpful to proficiency in
holiness: The lofty mountains are barren, when the low valleys abound in corn;
As the Spleen swells, the whole body consumes: as pride grows, the new man
decays. This high wind raises strange tempests in the soul: He gives grace
to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.6. God lays these richest mines in ^ge lowest parts
of the earth. Trees even in time of drought, whose roots are deep in the
ground, bear fruit when corn and grass wither: Christians, like the Sun in the
Zenith, must show least, when at the highest; and as branches fully laden, bend
the more downward. Why should the mud^ wall swell because the Sun shines on
it? We may say of every mercy and excellency we enjoy, as the Prophet of his
hatchet, Alas Master, for it is borrowed, 2 Kings 6.5.

If ye please also to peruse the ensuing Tractate, possibly it may be some
small furtherance to you in your course of Christianity. The intent of it is to
discover and direct how Religion, the great end for which we are born, and the
great errand upon which we are sent into the World, may be made our principal
business; and how our Natural and Civil Actions, and all o^r seeming diversions
may be so managed, that they may (like an elegant Parenthesis) not at all
spoil, but rather adorn the sense of Religion: I hope the worth of the matter
handled, notwithstanding, my weakness in the manner of handling it, will make
it acceptable to you. I could wish the face of the Discourse were clean, I may
safely say it is far from being painted; and pardon me if I suffer the stream
now to run in two Channels: Such as it is I humbly tender.

Sir, to your favorable eye, whose happiness it is to inherit your Ancestors
graces, as well as their riches. It was counted a great honor to the Family of
the Curio's, that there were three excellent Orators in it one after another;
and to the Family of the Fabii, Plutarch.
that there were in it three Presidents of the Senate successively: It is your
glory to descend not only of a Father who walked with God, and of a
Grandfather, who (it is hoped) dyed in the faith;) but also of a great
Grandfather, who was famous for serving the will of God in his generation. The
holy Apostle speaks to the glory of Timothy, concerning his unfeigned faith
which dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice, 2 Timothy 1.5.
To the glory of free grace I mention it, Holiness in your house did not run
only in the masculine race; your tender Mother was like Dorcas, full of good
works, and a dutiful Daughter to the Father of mercies; and your Honored
Grandmother yet alive, is an old Disciple of the holy Jesus: O how much are you
bound to the Lord, that grace should thus run in a blood! Boleslaus King of
Poland, when he was to speak or do any thing of concernment, would take out a
little picture of his Fathers, that he carried about him; and kissing it would
say, I wish I may speak or do nothing at this time, unworthy thy name.

Sir, it is your privilege to reap the benefit of their Precious Prayers; and
your piety, more and more to imitate their Gracious patterns. How exactly
should you walk, having such lights (so near) to direct you? And how Accurately
should you write in every line of your life, having such fair copies before
your eyes: It is no small advantage likewise,

Daughter to the right Honorable the Lord Pagit.
Madam, to your fair hands, who are a branch of a Noble and Honorable stock;
but your birth from above, is your present greatest credit, and will be your
future chiefest comfort. Alexander must derive his Pedigree from the gods, or
else he thinks himself ignobly born: To be born of God, to have heavenly
blood running in your veins; to be the Spouse of the dearest Savior, to have
your name written in the Book of Life, will stand you instead, and (as many
figures) amount to millions, in an hour of death, and dreadful day of
judgment, when civil and natural privileges (though now favors) will stand
for ciphers, and signify nothing. The Jews indeed tell us, that women are of
an inferior creation, and therefore suffer them not to enter their Synagogues,
but appoint them galleries without; but they speak more truly and wisely, who
call women the second edition of the epitome of the world: Souls have no Sexes,
in Christ there is neither male nor female. Persevere (honored Lady) in your
pious course, to confute those painted carcasses, who spend all their time in
priding and pleasing their brittle flesh, and neglect their immortal spirits;
to publish to the World, that greatness and goodness are not inconsistent. O
it is a rare and lovely sight to behold Honor and Holiness matched and married,
lodging and livlng together: As a Diamond well set in a golden Ring, is most
sparkling; and as light in Stars of the greatest magnitude, is most glorious
and shining; so Grace is often most amiable in persons that are most Honorable.
The Exceeding Advantage your Ladyship has (this way) of doing God much
service, is an awakening argument to endeavors after much sanctity: It is a
farther encouragement,

that you are joined to a loving Yoke Fellow, who will draw equally with you in
the road to Canaan: That you may both walk in the day of your lives, like
Zachariah and Elizabeth (that Peerless Pair, as one calls them) in all the
Commandments of the Lord, blameless; that when the night of death shall
overtake you, you may expire like the Arabian Phoenix, in a bed of sweet Spices
(the graces and comforts of the Spirit, leaving a sweet savor behind you)
that your children may be heirs to your Spiritual riches, and see the eternal
felicity of Gods chosen: And that your house may throughout all Generations be
known by this name, Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there, is the desire, and
shall be the prayer of,

Your Servvnt for Jesus sake, George Swinnock.

TO THE READER, ESPECIALLY Of the Parish of Great-Kimbel in the County of Bucks.
HE who does but exercise his reason in considering the infinite cost which the
glorious God has bestowed in erecting the stately fabric of Heaven and Earth,
and the curious Workmanship which he has discovered in the several creatures
which are the Inhabitants of the higher and lower House (causing his Almighty
Power, embroidered Wisdom, and unsearchable Goodness to glister and sparkle
far more gloriously in them, then the stars in the clearest night, or the Sun
in his noonday brightness) will easily grant me this Assertion, That this great
Landlord of the world must needs deserve and expect a considerable rent of
Honor and service somewhat suitable to the vaste charge he has been at. Who
can be so brutish as to conceive, that the Only wise God should take so much
pains, as with infinite counsel to contrive the goodly frame and comely
structure of this visible Creation from all Eternity, and by his Omnipotent arm
to give it a being, and not intend that his boundless excellencies and vast
perfections, written in such a fair print and large characters should be
admired and adored. That man is the person designed to give him his due and
deserved praise, is the next unquestionable concession, no other of Gods
visible works being capable of his worship. Indeed man's sight is so bad that he
can see little of that beauty which appears in the glass of the world; but
beasts are stark blind they can see nothing at all.

Why should God create man with a rational, spiritual soul, and thereby
capacitate him for so noble a service as the pleasing and praising himself, if
he had not intended him for this purpose Brutish Principles would have been
sufficient to have fitted him for brutish practices: If God had made him to eat
and drink and sleep, and wallow in the mire of carnal contentments, the soul of
a beast might have served his turn. It is impossible that such an intelligent
workman should infuse into our flesh Angelical spirits in vain, and not appoint
us to some honorable work answerable to the excellency of our Natures and
beings. Some of the wiser Heathen have gathered from the tendency of man's
countenance toward heaven, that he is more noble, and born to higher things,
then like a moving carcass to be buried alive in the earth. Those who to help
the weak eyes of Nature, have the spectacles of Scripture, cannot but see more
into Man's excellency and his Makers end. It is written in such broad letters in
the Word, That God formed man for this purpose, namely, to show forth his
praise, that he who runs may read it. But alas, alas, what is become of man?
well may God call to him, Adam where art thou? Man where art thou? he who ere
while, like a star, keeping a loft in the firmament of Heaven did glitter and
shine most brightly, to the amazement of all his beholders, now declining from
that pitch, and falling to the earth, as a commet does vanish and disappear. He
who was the worlds Lord, is now its slave and Vassal; He who was the Master of
Wisdom, is now sent to school to the very beasts, to learn of them
understanding; He who was unspeakably blessed in his love to, delight in, and
communion with the fountain of his being, is now miserably cursed in his
contrariety to, and deviation from the Ocean of his happiness. Ah this image of
Heaven is become the vizard of Hell! though this princely Creature was made to
be company for his Maker, to stand as an Angel always in his presence, and
attend his noble pleasure; yet look how like a pitiful Laquey he runs sneaking
after the drossie world and dreggie flesh, as his Lords. Though Religion were
first in Gods intention, yet its last in man's execution. Things without reason
honor God in their stations, They obey his will. Creatures without sense do him
service; they keep within the bounds which he has set them, and fulfill those
ends for which he made them; Mine hand has laid the foundation of the earth,
and my right hand has spand the heavens; when I call to them they stand up
together, Isa. 48.13. Nay, these inanimate creatures are so compliant with his
pleasure that they will thwart their own nature to serve his honor. Fire will
descend (as on Sodom:) and water, though a fluid body, stand up like a solid
wall (as in the red Sea) if he do but speak the word. But man, who is most
indebted to his Creator, degenerateth most of all; when his inferiors, Beasts,
and his superiors, Angels, are loyal servants, he proves a rebellions subject.

They whoever had any real sense of the worth of immortal souls, and any
serious consideration of the weight of their unchangeable estates in the other
world, cannot but be affected with the madness of multitudes who turn their
backs upon the blessed God, their greatest and only Friend, as if he were
their greatest and only Foe. They who have tasted God to be gracious, and know
what fellowship with Jesus Christ means, who have rejoiced in their present
gracious privileges and hope of their future glorious possession, cannot but
wonder and pity at that folly which many are guilty of, in disesteeming the
noble concernments of their precious souls, and distasting that honorable
preferment and comfortable employment of wal^ing with the blessed God. How
greedily do men grasp the smoke of earthly vanities, which will wring tears
from their eyes, and then vanish into nothing!

Who can sufficiently bemoan it, that man who is capable of, and created for so
high an honor, and so heavenly an exercise, as to serve his Ma^er here, and to
enjoy him hereafter, should all his time, like an hog, be digging and rooting
in the earth, and not once look up to heaven in earnest, till the knife is put
to his throat, that he comes to die, and enter into the other world!

What a deal of pains does the Spider take in weaving her web to catch flies!
She runs much and often up and down, hither and thither; she spends her
self, wearing out and wasting her own bowels to make a curious cabinet, which
when she has finished and hung aloft, in the twinkling of an eye with the
sweep of a besom its thrown to the ground, and her self destroyed in it. Thus
silly are many men; How do they cark and care, toil and moil for this world
which they must leave for ever; they waste their time and strength to increase
their heaps, when on a sudden all perishes, and themselves often with it.

Reader, If thou art one of these Moles who live in the earth, as their
element, carking and caring chiefly how to exalt self and please the flesh;
Answer God these four Questions which from him I shall propound to thee. I
shall allow thee to be thy own Judge; only I request thee for the sake of thy
precious soul to ponder them with all seriousness; possibly through the
blessing of God they may make thee wise to salvation.

Art thou not convinced that the true and living God made thee a rational
creature, and has served thee in all thy days with innumerable mercies, upon a
nobler design, Friend, what say thou? do not muzle the mouth of conscience,
but give it leave to speak its mind freely; art not thou satisfied fully in
this weighty truth, That the mighty Possessor of Heaven and Earth created thee
and preserves thee to worship, honor and enjoy himself? If thou art
convinced, as its impossible but thou should, unless thou art a beast in the
shape of a man: Why then does thy life every day give thy conscience the lie?
Do thou not live without God? Is not Religion thy burden and bondage? Has
not the World the top and cream of thy heart, and time, and strength? How often
do thou put God off with the Worlds scraps and leavings? How little is God in
all thy thoughts? Is he not forbidden thy heart? nay, Do thou not daily
proclaim open war against him by thy Profaneness and Atheism, as if he had not
the least right to thee, nor thou the least dependence on him; and all this
against the convictions of thine own Conscience? Friend, Do thou know what
thou do? Why thou put thy finger into the very eye of Nature? The eye of
the body is a tender part; but how tender is the eye of the soul? yet thou art
all this while endeavoring to put out the eye of thy very soul. Believe it,
sins against nature are of a crimson color: for thy conversation to contradict
continually thy very Conscience, will bring upon thee dreadful vengeance.

Answer me again, Is not the blessed God worthy of all thy service and honor?
Does he not deserve all thy love, and fear, and trust, all thy time and
strength, and wealth, and infinitely more? From whom came they, but from him?
and to whom should they be given, but to him? Art thou not bound to him by
millions of engagements? Art thou not the work of his hands? Do thou not lie
at his mercy every moment? Can thou live, or move, or breathe without him?
Can he not as easily sink thee with fury, as support thee with mercy; turn thee
into hell, as warn thee of hell? O think of that place, The God in whose hand
is thy breath, thou have not glorifi^d, Dan. 5.23. Alas, alas man, though thou
make no reckoning of pleasing the blessed God, but banishest him thy heart
and house, as if his company were a burden, yet know, that thy breath is in
his hands continually; if he do but shut his hand, thine eyes will be no longer
open, but thy mouth quickly stopped with earth. Ah, how soon can he take away
that airy difference between sleep and death! He can wink thee into the other
world, and look thee into the unquenchable Lake; By the breath of God they
perish, and by the breath of his nostrils they are consumed, Job 4.8. If thou
dependest altogether upon another man for thy livelihood, thou would think he
deserved thy service, and that it concerned thee to please him: O how highly
does it concern thee to worship and honor the Almighty God, in whose hand is
thy livelihood, life, and everlasting weal or woe! Ah, did thou but know what
perfections are in him, and how indispensable thy dependence is every minute
upon him, thou would wonder at thy folly and madness in slighting him, and
make it thy principal business to glorify and enjoy him.

In the next place tell me, Is not thy Conscience convinced, That God is in all
respects the best Master, his worship the best work, and his pay the best
reward? Have thou not knocked many time at the Creatures door, entered in, sat
down, and fed on such fare as it had to set before thee, and after all, gone
away as empty and unsatisfied as thou came? Have thou not found by
experience, that the Creature keeps a poor, pitiful house; that they who run
to it with heads full of hopes, return back with hearts full of heaviness? And
shall no learning teach thee! Man, man, where is thy reason! Have thou no eyes
to behold the rottenness of the Worlds ware, because its glazed over with gaudy
Dyings? Shall the sweet breath of this alluring Panther still bewitch thee,
notwithstanding all his deformity and ugliness, vanity and emptiness, so as to
get thee within his power, and destroy thee? Do thou not see hundreds before
thine eyes of the Worlds chief favorites, whom she dandled on her knees, and
was very fond of, hurried in haste into the other World, leaving all her gifts
behind them, and not a button the better for all her fondness and fooleries?
Did thou never observe, how she leaves her Lovers in the lurch, and like a
false, deceitful friend, forsakes them wholly in the time of their greatest
extremity? Man walks in a vain show, he disquieteth himself in vain; He
returns to his earth, and in that day his thoughts perish, Psalm. 39.8. and
146. As he that goes to a Fair with a purse full of money, is devising and
debating with himself how to lay it out (possibly thinking, that such and such
commodities will be most profitable, and bring him in the greatest gain) when
on a sudden a cutpurse comes and eases him both of his money and cares how to
dispose of it. Surely thou might have taken notice how some of thy Neigbours
or Countrymen, when they have been busy in their contrivances, and big with
many plots and projects how to raise their estates, and names, and families,
were arrested by death in a moment, returned to their earth, and in that day
all their gay, their great thoughts perished, and came to nothing. The Heathen
Historian could not but observe, how Alexander the Great, when he had to carry
on his great designs, summoned a Parliament before him of the whole World, he
was himself summoned by death to appear in the other World; The Dutch therefore
very wittily to express the Worlds vanity, picture at Amsterdam a man with a
full blown bladder on his shoulders, and another standing by pricking the
bladder with a pin, with this Motto, Quam Subito, How soon is all blown down!

Reader, it is impossible, if thou usest thy rational faculty, but thou
should be convinced of the truth of these things: Why then do thou spend
thy strength for that which is not bread, and thy labor for that which will
not satisfy? O that I could invite and persuade thee to the most gainful
trade: Hearken unto me, and eat that which is good, and let thy soul delight it
self in fatness. If Religion were thy business, God would not serve thee as the
World does its servants: God is such a Master, that ten thousand Worlds to him
are as nothing, yea less then nothing and vanity: He is a Master without
exceptions, because he is an ocean of all (and nothing but) infinite
perfections. His Worship must needs be the best work, because it is it self a
reward. Thou can not deny but the work of Saints and Angels in Heaven, is the
best work by a thousand degrees that Creatures are capable of, or can possibly
be exercised in; Truly their work and reward is the same, to worship and enjoy
the blessed God. They who make Religion their business, have a taste beforehand
of their future blessedness. Religion also brings in the greatest profit. The
World pays her servants in Ciphers and Counters, aerie honors, a brutish
pleasure, and fading riches, which are worth nothing; but Religion here in
Figures and Pearls, which are worth thousands, the precious blood of Christ,
the inestimable Covenant of Grace, and Eternal immediate communion with the
Infinite God. Reader, if profit be the bait at which thou will bite, I will
tell thee in a few words, how much Religion will he worth to thee: Truly two
Worlds, not a farthing less. Exercise thy self unto Godliness: Godliness has
the promise of this life, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.7, 8. Ah, who
would not work for thee, O King of Nations, when in doing of thy commands,
there is such great reward! Friend, who would not cast his net into the waters
of the Sanctuary, when he may be confident of such an excellent draught?

Once more, If none of these things move thee, What will thou do in a dying
hour? I say again, Reader, if Religion be not thy business now, What will thou
do when thou come to dye? Now possibly thou bear thy self up with the
streams of carnal comforts; but what will become of thee, when all these waters
shall be dried up, and nothing of them seen but the mud of those sins which
thou have been guilty of, in the use, or rather abuse of them? Now thou can
do well enough (thou think) without God and his Worship; but ah, what will thou do when thou come to look into the other World! Alas, then thy brightest
Sun of bodily delights will be clouded, thy freshest flowers will be withered,
and thy greatest candles extinguished, and leave only a stink behind them:
Believe it, death will search thee to the quick, and try to purpose what metal
thou art made of. When thou come to lie upon thy sick bed, and thy wealth,
and honors, and relations, and flesh, and heart, shall fail thee; what will
become of thee, if God be not the strength of thy heart, and thy portion for
ever? What will he do to look death in the face, upon whom the jealous God
shall frown? We read in Epiphanius of a Bird called Charadius, that being
brought into the room where one lies sick, if he look on the sick person with
a fixed eye, he recovereth; but if he turn away his eyes from him, he dies.
Friend, what a miserable condition will thy poor soul be in, when all thy
friends and riches shall leave thee, and the blessed God himself shall not
vouchsafe thee a good look, but turn away his face from thee? Surely thy
disease will be unto death eternal. Thy friends may carry thy body to its grave
for a time, but frightful Devils will carry thy soul to hell, to remain there
for ever and ever: Religion indeed is like the stone Chrysolampis, which will
shine brightest in the dark of death. The truly Religious may launch into the
Ocean of Eternity, and sail to their everlasting harbor, as the Alexandrian
ship came into the Roman haven with top and top gallant, with true comfort, and
undaunted courage: Let death come when it will, he can bid it welcome. Death is
never sudden to a Saint; no guest comes unawares to him who keeps a constant
table: But as when the day dawns to us in Europe, the shadows of the evening
are stretched on Asia; so the day of their Redemption will be a long night of
destruction to thee: That Jailer who knocks off their fetters, and sets
them at perfect liberty, will bind thee in chains of darkness, and hale thee
to that dungeon of horror, whence thou shall never come forth.

O Reader, these are no jesting matters: I am confident as lightly now as thou
think of a Religious man, as if he were only some singular and affected
person (it may be thou can hardly look on him but with a squint eye, or speak
of him, but with a jeer) yet when thou come to dye, thou would give a
thousand Worlds (if thou had them to give) for the least drop of his
holiness, or the least crum of his happiness. Ponder these four forementioned
particulars, and thou can not but think them weighty Questions: Do not, O do
not dally or jest with them; for be confident, thou will find them one day to
be edged tools.

Possibly Reader, thou art one of them that have heard these Sermons preached,
and belongest to that Parish where Providence has cast me: And then as I have
a special relation to thee, I must beg of thee, as upon my bended knees, for
the Lords sake, and as thou would not have them brought in against thee at
the dreadful day of judgment, that thou put the will of the Lord discovered
therein, immediately into practice: My hearts desire and prayer to God for thee
is, that thou might be saved. O that I knew what to do for thee, which might
be effectual for that end! If thou will believe the blessed God, the way to the
happiness in Heaven, is to exercise thy self to godliness on Earth there is no
going into life, but through the strait gate. The Devil puts old men's
spectacles on young and old men's eyes, which cause them to think, that the way
to Heaven is broad and large; when God himself has told us, that it is narrow,
and few go in it. I have acquainted thee in this Treatise, what is the price
(not natural, but pactional) of Salvation; there must be striving, laboring,
fighting, using violence, a working it out with fear and trembling, and God is
resolved he will not abate the least mite. O that I could therefore prevail
with thee, to set upon it in good earnest. I do not plead with thee for my
self, but for thy own profit, that thou may be happy for ever; and shall I
lose my labor? Neighbor, surely thou believe that these things are not toys
and trifles, but matters of infinite concernment; and will thou slight them?
Alas, to be frying in Hell, or living in Heaven for ever, are of greater
consequence then thy understanding can possibly conceive. The weight of these
things has so overburthened several persons minds, that it has made them
distracted and mad; and can thou trample them as dirt under thy feet, without
any regard at all!

Because I would willingly be both faithful and helpful to thee, I shall
earnestly in the name of the blessed God be^eech thee, as thou would leave
these dying comforts, with a lively courage, to mind and practice these two
particulars, without which thou can never make Religion thy business.

Make sure that thy heart be thoroughly changed: That building which reaches up
to Heaven, must have a strong and sure foundation: If the Watch be not of the
right make, it will never go true. He must live in the Spirit, who would walk
in the Spirit. Natural bodies follow the tendency of that body which is
predominant in them. Stones move downward, Fire upward, each would be at its
Center; that which stops either, offers violence to it. So it will be with
thee; thy life will be according to the tendency of thy heart; if that be
carnal, and the flesh predominant, such will thy life be; if that be changed,
and the Spirit be predominant in it, thy life will be spiritual also; if the
Law of God be written in thy affections then, and not till then, it will be
legible in thy conversation. O do not rest in Civility, Morality, Performances,
Privileges, or any thing short of renewing-grace. It is the heart by
generation chiefly polluted, and it is the heart by Regeneration which must be
purified, or thou perishest eternally. When an error is in the foundation of an
house, it will not be mended by daubing or roughcast, but must be pull^d down,
and built up anew: If any man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new Creature: Old
things are past away, and all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17.

O Friend, consider, that by the irrevocable decree and sentence of the living
God, None shall he saved but those that are converted and renewed; And for the
sake of thy precious soul, give thy self no rest, till this change be wrought.
I assure thee, it concerns thee; for thine everlasting life or death
depends upon it, 3 John ver. 3. Mat. 18.3. Heh. 12.14.

Be much with God in Religious duties. Secret praying, reading and meditating,
are great helps to piety. The bottom of a Christians building is underground,
and out of the Worlds sight: The greatest part of that trade which a Saint
drives with God, is unseen, and his returns are unknown to the world. Christ
gives his sweetest kisses and dearest embraces to his Spouse, when she is
alone. Jacob met with the blessing when he had parted with his company, and
wrastled singly with the Angel of the Covenant: Bread eaten in secret, how
sweet is it! When God meets thy soul in a morning, or evening prayer,
communion with his Majesty will be sweet to thee indeed.

Take heed of omission of duties in the Closet. The Amalekite had not eaten in
three days who was nigh death. It is observed that the places under the Line,
are not so hot, as some places at a further distance, because, though they have
the beams of the sun falling perpendicularly to cause a more intense heat, yet
the nights there being longer then in some other parts, the days are not so
hot. When the nights are long, the days are very cold; when there are long
omissions of duties, godliness will cool. Ah, did thou but know what many a
Saint has gained by that hidden calling, I am confident thou would mind it,
what ever thou did omit. Remember how often and earnestly I have urged thee
to this duty. It is thy privilege that though thou can not every day have
the showers of public Ordinances, yet may thou have the watering-pots of
secret duties to make thy soul fruitful. Let no day pass without thy morning
and evening Sacrifices. Fasting is bad for some bodies, I am sure to fast from
spiritual food is exceeding injurious to thy soul.

He that runs into enormities (as a Drunkard, or Swearer, or Adulterer,
etc.) he stabbeth his soul; he that omiteth daily duties, he starveth his soul.
Now what great difference is there between the death of the soul by stabbing
and by starving. If thy soul dye eternally it will be little comfort to thee to
plead that thou did not drink or swear as others. O Friend, let no day pass
without secret duties; if thou risest in the morning and followest thy calling
all day, and lie down at night, and never desire Gods company or ask his
blessing, I would know wherein thou do God more service then the Ox or Ass;
For shame Friend, do not thus play the beast any longer.

I have in this Treatise endeavored to assist thee by discovering the Nature
and Necessity of making Religion thy business. I cannot but think that the
Reasons which I have laid down for this duty will move any man, who is not
resolved to make himself eternally miserable. It is no mean mercy that thou
may adopt all thy natural and civil actions into the family of Religion; that
though like ciphers they signify nothing of themselves, yet having the figure
of Godliness put before them, they may signify much and stand for thousands. I
shall Reader only acquaint thee with some particulars which I treat of in the
book, and then leave thee and it to the blessing of God. I am very large in
directing thee about the immediate Worship of the Lord, as knowing that is of
greatest weight and worth. No preparation can be too great for, No devotion can
be too gracious in Religious Actions. Amongst many other Rites and Ceremonies
of the Jews, ^nt. Margarit le R tibus lulaeo^um.
it is related that before the doors of their Synagogues, they have an iron
plate, against which they wipe and make clean their shoes before they enter,
and that being entered they fit solemnly for a season, not once opening their
mouths, but considering with whom they have to do. Truly Friend, it concerns
thee to be full of reverence when thou appearest solemnly in Gods presence.
Think of it, He is a jealous God, and will not be mocked; they that dally with
him, undo themselves. Serious piety will abundantly profit thee; but careless
service will highly provoke God. Spiders cobwebs may better be suffered in a
Cottage the^ in a Kings Palace.

In the next place I proceed to Natural Actions, and then to Recreations; about
both which thy care must be that they exceed not their bounds, and that they
taste and savor of Religion. Mandrakes if duly taken, is good physic; but if
immoderately, it casts into a dead sleep and congeales the spirits. It
requires much piety and prudence not to abuse those things whilst thou art
using them; Satan catches many a soul with these baits, and then throws them
into the fire. But if Religion be thy business, that which is poison to others,
will be nourishing food to thee.

After these I speak to Particular Callings, that they might be managed so, as
not to be hurtful but helpful to our General Callings. I conclude the Book with
Government of Families, wherein thou may learn that thy house must be
dedicated to God. Religion in thy house must of necessity be minded, or the
whole Family is cursed. The Naturalists observe of the Eagle, that building her
nest on high she is much maligned by a venomous Serpent called Parias, which
because it cannot reach to the nest, makes to the windward and breathes out
its poison, that so the air being infected, the Eagles young may be destroyed;
but by way of prevention, the Eagle by a natural instinct keeps a kind of
Agath-stone in her nest, Plin. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 10.
which being placed against the wind, preserves her young. Satan the crooked
Serpent is ever busy to poison the Air in thine house, and thereby to destroy
thy self, servants and whole household; the only stone for prevention is to set
up Religion. Neighbor, I have many a time pressed this duty upon thee, and I do
again in the name of the blessed God charge thee, as thou will answer it at the
Bar of Christ, that thou immediately set up the worship of God in thy Family.
Thou know how many Sermons I preached from Josh. 24.15. on this subject, all
which ere long thou shall give an account of; how inexcusable will thou be if
after all those warnings thy Family be found in the number of them that call
not on God! Good Lord, how dreadful will it be for thee to sink into hell with
thy whole house on thy back!

And now Reader, whoever thou art, out of affection to thy precious soul and
eternal salvation, let me prevail with thee not to use Religion as men do
perfumes, refresh themselves with them whilst they have them, but they can well
enough be without them, but to make it thy chief, and main and principal
business. What shall I say to thee? Assure thy self, Religion will be thy best
friend at last. O if thou had but the same apprehensions of it now which thou will have on a dying bed, and day of Judgment, thou would make it thine only
business; them Religion will be Religion indeed, and of infinitely more worth
to thee then millions of worlds; All other things will then, like leaves in
Autumn, fall from thee; but though all thy most loving friends will part with
thee, Religion will walk with thee in the valley of the shadow of death; it
will direct and refresh thee in the pleasant waters of life, and it will
protect and comfort thee in those salt waters of sickness, and when thou
passest the Mare mortuum, the Sea of death. When the world, in thy extremity
will serve thee as the herd do a Deer that is shot, push thee out of their
company. When thy wife and children will, like Orpah to Naomi, kiss thee, and
take their leave of thee, Religion will, like Ruth, stick closs to thee, where
thou go it will go; where thou lodgest it will lodge; death it self shall
not part thee and it.

As the noble Grecian answered Philip when he asked him Whether he was not
afraid to die? No, says he, for the Athenians will give me a life that is
immortal. Thou should not need to fear death; for Religion will give thee a
life that is immortal. As the old grave Counselors told Rehoboham, Be thou a
servant to this people this day, and they will be thy servants for ever. So say
I to thee, Be thou but a faithful servant to Religion in this short day of thy
life, and Religion will be thy servant to all eternity.

If thou art resolved to give thy self up to the service of this noble Mistress,
possibly this Treatise may do thee some little service, by acquainting thee
with her will, and directing thee in her work.

If in the perusal of it thou receive any profit, let God alone have the
praise, and remember him in thy prayers, who is

Thine in the Lord, George Swinnock.

THE The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. THe Preface and Coherence of the Text, page 1 Chap. II. The opening
of the Text, and the Doctrine, page 7 Chap. III. What Religion or Godliness is.
page 12 Chap. IV. What it is to make Religion ones business, or to exercise
ones self to Godliness. page 21 Chap. V. The first Reason of the Doctrine,
wherein is showed that Religion is the great end of man's creation, page 39
Chap. VI. The second Reason of the Doctrine, wherein is discovered, that
Religion is a work of the greatest weight; it is soul-work, it is God-work it
is eternity-work, page 45 Chap. VII. The third Reason of the Doctrine, wherein
is discovered the necessity of making Religion ones business, in regard of Gods
Precept; the opposition a Christian meets with in the way to Heaven, and the
multiplicity of business which lies upon him. page 60 Chap. VIII. The first
Use by way of complaint, that this trade is so dead, and the worlds trade so
quick, page 71 Chap. IX. The same complaint continued, that this trade is
neglected, and superstition and sin should be embraced, page 82 Chap. X. The
second Use by way of advice, to make Godliness our main business in the whole
course of our lives. page 94 Chap. XI. How a Christian may make Religion his
business in religions duties, or the worship of God in general; as also, a good
wish about it, wherein the former heads are epitomized, page 106 Chap. XII. How
a Christian may make Religion his business in Prayer; and 1. Of prayer in
general, and the Antecedents to it, page 136 Chap. XIII. Of the concomitants of
prayer, wherein the matter of our petitions, the qualification of the
Petitioner, and the properties of our prayers are handled, page 163 Chap. XIV.
The subsequent duties after prayer; as also a good wish about prayer, wherein
the several heads in the antecedents, concomitants, and subsequents of prayer
are epitomized, page 185 Chap. XV. How a Christian may make Religion his
business in hearing and reading the Word, and of preparation for hearing, page
197 Chap. XVI. Of the Christians duty in hearing, page 223 Chap. XVII. Of the
Christians duty after hearing, as also a good wish about hearing, wherein the
former heads are all epitomized, page 234 Chap. XVIII. How a Christian may make
Religion his business in receiving the Lords Supper, wherein arguments to, and
the nature of preparation for it is discovered, page 250 Chap. XIX. How a
Christian may make Religion his business at the Table, when he is receiving,
page 284 Chap. XX. What a Christian ought to do after a Sacrament; as also a
good wish, wherein all the former heads are epitomized, page 318 Chap. XXI. How
a Christian may make Religion his business on a Lords day, page 335 Chap. XXII.
Brief directions for the sanctification of the Lords day from morning to night;
as also a good wish about the Lords day, wherein the former heads are
epitomized; and a good wish to the Lords Day, page 381 Chap. XXIII. How a
Christian may make Religion his business in natural actions; and 1. in eating
and drinking, page 400 Chap. XXIV. How a Christian may make Religion his
business in his apparel and sleep; as also a good wish about natural actions,
wherein the several heads are epitomized. page 427 Chap. XXV. How a Christian
may make Religion his business in his Recreations and and Pleasures; as also a
good wish about Recreations, wherein the several heads are epitomized, page 445
Chap. XXVI. How a Christian may make Religion his business in his particular
calling; as also a good wish about ones particular calling, wherein the several
heads are epitomized; and a good wish about the calling of a Minister, wherein
his several properties and duties are briefly described, page 466 Chap. XXVII.
How a Christian may make Religion his business in the Government of his Family;
as also a good wish, wherein the several heads are abreviated, page 467
Books Printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the sign of the three
Crowns, over against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside.
Folio's
THe Annotations on the whole Bible, or all the Canonical scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, together with, and according to their own Translation of all
the Text, as both the one and the other were ordered and appointed by the Synod
of Dort; now faithfully translated for the use of Great Britain, at the earnest
desire of many eminent Divines of the English and Scottish Nation, A Commentary
upon the three first Chapters of Genesis, by John White. The Works of that
famous and learned Divine Mr. William Pemble, gathered into one volume. The
History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piedmont: containing a
most exact Geographical description of the place, and a faithful account of the
Doctrine, Life and Persecutions of the ancient Inhabitants: Together with a
most naked and punctual relation of the late bloody Massacre, 1655. and a
Narrative of all the following transactions to 1558. justified partly by diverse
ancient Manuscrips, written many hundred years before Calvin or Luther, by
Samuel Morland Esquire A Commentary upon the holy Writings of Job, David and
Solomon; that is, these five, I^^, Psalins, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the
Song of Songs, being part of those which by the Ancient were called
Hagiographa. Wherein the diverse Translations and Expositions, both litteral and
mystical, of all the most famous Commentators, both ancient and modern are
propounded, examined and censured; and the Texts from the Original much
illustrated, by John Mayor, Doctor in Divinity. A practical Commentary, or an
Exposition with Observations, Reasons and Uses, upon the first Epistle general
of John, by that pious and worthy Divine Mr. John Cotton, Pastor of Boston in
New England. A learned Commentary, or an Exposition upon the first Chapter of
the second Epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians; being the substance of many
Sermons formerly preached at Gray's Inn, London, by that Reverend and Judicious
Divine Richard Sibbs, D. D. sometimes Master of Katharine-Hall in Cambridge,
and Preacher to that honorable Society. (...), or divine characters, in two
parts, acutely distinguishing the more secret and undiscerned differences
between 1. The Hypocrite in his best dress of seeming virtue, and formal
duties; and the true Christian in his real graces, and sincere obedience: As
also, between the blackest weeds of daily infirmities of the truly godly,
eclipsing saving grace; and the reigning sins of the unregenerate, that pretend
unto that godliness they never had; by that late burning and shining Lamp Mr.
Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of Wrington in Summersetshire.
Quarto's.
Two excellent Treatises of Mr. Ieremi ah Buroughs, one on the fifth of
Matthew, being many Sermons preached at Cripplegate, upon all the Beatitudes:
And Gospel-Revelation in three Treatises, viz. 1. The Nature of God. 2. The
Excellency of Christ. And 3. The excellency of man's Immorral Soul: both
published by William Greenhill, William Bridge, Philip Nigh, John Yates, Matthew
Mead, William Adderly. Peoples need of a living Pastor, at the Funeral of Mr.
John Frost, by Mr. Zachary Crofton. Holy things for holy men, or the Lawyers
Plea nonsuited, etc. In some Christian reproof and pity expressed toward Mr.
Pryns Book, entitled, The Lords Supper briefly v^ndicated, by S.S. Minister of
the Gospel. A Vindication of the Christians Messiah, that Jesus is the true
Messiah prophesied and foretold by all the holy men of God, who were writers of
the Old Testament, as also proved out of their own Talmud. The Souls progress
to the Celestial Canaan, by way of godly Meditations, and holy Contemplations,
by John Wells Preacher of the Gospel. Comfortable Sermons on Psalm 24.
preached before the Lady Elizabeth her Grace, by Daniel Dyke, B.D. Plenary
possession makes a lawful subjection to Powers that are in being, proved to be
lawful and necessary, in a Sermon before the Judges in Exeter, by Rich.
Saunders Preacher of the Gospel. The new World, or the new Reformed Church
discovered, out of the second Epistle of Peter, by Nath. Homes D. D. God save
the King, in a Sermon preached the day after his Majesty came into London, by
Antho^y Walker, Preacher of the Gospel. A Plea for Ministers in Sequestrations,
against Mr. Mossom, by S.S. An Ant dote^ against Anabaptism, wherein the
Baptizing Infants, taking Tithes, etc. are fully vindicated, by Aylmor
Haughton. The Conversation as Heavenly, and as Natural, in two Treatises, by Dr
Stoughton. An Exposition, with practical Observations, continued upon the
thirtieth and one and thirtieth Chapters of the Book of Job, being the
substance of thirty seven Lectures delivered at Magnus near the Bridge, London,
by Joseph Caryl, Pastor of the Congregation there. Also a Continuation by the
same Author of the 32, 33, and 34. Chapters of Job, being the substance of
Forty nine Lectures, delivered at Magnus near the Bridge, London. The Covenant
of life opened, or a Treatise of the Covenant of Grace, by Samuel Rutherfurd,
Professor of Divinity in the University of S. Andrews. Jesus Christ the
mystical or Gospel Sun, sometimes seemingly eclipsed, yet never going down from
his people: or Eclipses spiritualized, opened in a Sermon at Paul, Church,
before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, etc. March 28. 1652. the
day before the late Solar Eclipse, by Fulk Beller M.A. and Preacher of the
Gospel in the City of London. A Sermon preached before the Honoradle House of
Commons, at their late Monthly Fast, being on Wednesday, June 30. 1647. by
Nathaniel Ward, Minister of Gods Word. A Declaration of the Faith and Order
owned and practiced in the Congregational Churches in England, agreed upon and
consented unto by their Elders and Messengers, in their Meeting at the Savoy,
October. 12. 1658. An account of the last hours of Oliver Cromwell, wherein you
have his frame of Spirit, expressed in his Dying Words upon his Deathbed;
together with his last Prayer a little before his Death. Drawn up and published
by one who was an eye and ear witness of the most part of it. The humble Advice
of the Assembly of Divines, concerning a Confession of Faith, presented by them
to both Houses of Parliament. A serious Admonition to those Members of
Parliament that sat alone without the secluded Members; with another to those
Soldiers yet living, that secluded the major part o^ the House of Commons,
setting up the rest, whom afterward they twice dissolved; by a Minister of the
Gospel. The humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines, concerning a Larger
Catechism, presented by them to both Houses of Parliament. A Sermon preached by
Hugh Peter's, preached before his death, as it was taken by a faithful hand, and
now published for public Information. Mesolabium Architectonicum, that is, a
most rare and singular Instrument, for the easy, speedy, and most certain
measuring of Plains and Solids by the foot; invented long since by Mr. Thomas
Bedwol Esquire A Changling no company for lovers of Loyalty, or the Subjects Lesson
in point of sacred submission to, and humble compliance with God and the King.
The Beauty of Magistracy, in an Exposition of the 82 Psalm, where is set forth
the Necessity, Utility, Dignity, Duty and Morality of Magistrates, by the
labors of Thomas Hall B. D. and Pastor of Kingsnorton; and George Swinnock, M.
A. and Pastor of Great Kimbel.
Large Octavo's.
THe door or Salvation opened, by the Key of Regeneration; by George Swinnock
M.A. Preacher of the Gospel at Great Kimbel in Buckinghamshire. Heaven and Hell
Ep^tomized, the true Christian characterized, by the same Author. Four
profitable Treatises very useful for Christian practice, viz. The killing power
of the Law, The Spiritual watch, The New Birth: O^ the Sabbath; by the reverend
Will. Fenner, late Minister of Rotchford in Essex. Enchiridion Iudicum, or
Iehoshaphats charge to his Judges; together with the Catastrophe Magnatum, or
King David's lamentation at Prince Abners Incineration, by James Livesey,
Minister of the Gospel at Atherton. The greatest loss, upon Mat. 16.26. by the
same Author. Meditations Divine and Moral, by Henry Tabb M.A. The Psalms of
King David, translated by King James. Wilful Impenitency the grossest
Self-murder, by that able, faithful and labourious Minister of Jesus Christ,
Mr. William Fenner. (...), the Almost Christian discovered, or the
False-professor tried and cast, by William Mead. Spiritual Wisdom improved
against Temptation, by the same Author. Beams of former light, discovering how
evil it is to impose doubtful and disputable forms or practices upon Ministers.
The Pastor and the Clerk, or a debare (real) concerning Iufant Baptism, by John
Ellis. Habakkuk's prayer applied to the Churches present occasions, on Hab.
3.2. and Christ's counsel to the Church of Philadelphia, on Revel. 3.11. by that
late reverend and faithful Minister of Jesus Chrst Mr. Samuel Balmford, Pastor
of Albons Woodstreet, London. The Rudiments of Grammar: The Rules composed in
English Verse, for the greater benefit and delight of young beginners, by James
Shirley. The Ladies Dispensatory, containing the Natures, Virtues and qualities
of Herbs and Simples useful in physic, 'reduced into a methodical order, for
their more ready use in any sickness, or other accident of the body.
Small Octavo's.
Catechizing Gods Ordinance, in sundry Sermons, by Mr. Zachary Crofton,
Minister at Buttolphs Aldgate, London. The Godly man's Ark in the day of his
distress, discovered in diverse Sermons; the first of which was preached at the
Funeral of Mris. Elizabeth Moor. Whereunto is annexed Mrs. Elizabeth Moors
Evidences for Heaven, composed and ^ollected by her in the time of her health,
for her comfort in the time of sickness; by E. Calamy B. D. Pastor of the
Church at Aldermanbury. The Gale of Opportunity, and the beloved Disciple, by
Thomas Froysal. Sion in the house of Mourning, because of sin and suffering,
being an Exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations; by D.S. Pastor of
Vpingham in Rutland. The one thing necessary; by Mr. Tho. mas Watson, Minister
of Stephen Walbrook. A Plea for Alms, delivered in a Sermon at the Spittle, on
Tuesday in Easter Week, April 13. 1658. by the same Author. Moses unvailed, or
those figures which served unto the pattern and shadow of heavenly things,
pointing out the Messiah Christ Jesus, briefly explained; whereunto is added
the harmony of the Prophets, breathing with one mouth the mystery of his
coming, and of that Redemption which by his death he was to accomplish; by
William Guild Minister of Gods Word at King-Edward in Scotland. Good company,
being a collection of various, serious, pious meditations; by I. Melvin,
Minister of the Gospel at Vdimer in Sussex. A Religious Treatise upon Simeons
Song; or instructions how to live holily and dye happily; by T. Woodriff B.D.
Pastor at Kinsland in Herefordshire. The Reformation, in which is
Reconciliation with God and his people; or a Catechism unvailing the Apostles
Creed, with Annotations; in which Faith, Ordinances and Government are
professed as in the primitive times, in opposition to all Errors and Heresies;
by W.K. Minister of the Gospel. Prospering profaneness provoking holy
conference, and Gods attention; several Sermons from Mal. 3.15, 16, 17. by
Zachary Croston. The Catechism of Hugo Grotius, done into English. Benedictio,
Valedictio, or the Remembrancer of thy Friend, and thy end, being a
farewel-Sermon, preached at the house of the (late) Right Honorable, Leticia,
Lady Paget, Dowager, deceased, by her Chaplain Anthony Sadler.
Twelves.
JOhnsons Essays, expressed in sundry exquisite fancie^. The dangerous Rule, or
a Sermon preached at Clonmel in the Province of Munster in Ireland, upon August
3. 1657. before the reverend Judges for that circuit, by S. L. Master in Arts,
and lately fellow of C.C. C in Oxon. The Woman's glory, a Treatise asserting the
due honor of that Sex, by manifesting that women are capable of the highest
improvements; by Samuel Torshel. The discovery of the most dangerous dead
faith; by John Eaton M. A. and sometime Student in Trinity College in Oxford.
The new Testament of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; newly translated out of
the Original Greek, and with the former Translations diligently compared and
revised, By his Ma^esties special command, printed at Edinburgh.
Twenty fours.
GRoans of the Spirit, or a Trial of the truth of prayer. A Handkercher for
Parents wet eyes, upon the death of their Children, or Friends.
There is in the Press, A continuation of the Exposition on the remaining
Chapters of the Prophet Ezekiel, beginning at the thirtieth Chapter, to the end
of that Prophecy, by William Greenhil, late Minister of Stepney, London, to
complete the whole Exposition upon that part of Scripture. There is likewise in
the Press the second part of this ensuing Treatise, by Mr. Swinnock,
containing, Dealings with all men, in all conditions, whether in prosperity or
adversity; in all companies, good or bad; in solitariness on the Week day from
morning to night; in visiting the sick upon a dying-bed.
A Table of such Scriptures as are occasionally Explained in this following
Treatise.
Genesis 9.13. page 417 Exodus 18.12. page 401 22. ult. page 103 28. 43. page 127
Levit. 10.3. page 112 Deuteronomy. 6.13. page 15 Deuteronomy, 32.46, 47. page 46, 47 1 Kings
9.31. page 338, 339 1 Chronicles. 29.1, 2. page 55 Joh 5.3 page 522 15 20 page 88
Psalm. 5 3 page 186 27 8 page 361 36 8 page 458 65 4 page 358 73 1 page 269 93
ult. page 108 103 18 page 244 118 24 page 365 Prove. 14 1 page 551 6 6, 7 page
353 23 1, 2, 3 page 421 27 8 page 471 Cant. 3 6 page 158 7 2 page 267 Jer. 17
11 page 114 Hos. 2 21, 22 page 485 Zach. 14 20, 21 page 105 Luke 11 28 page 241
13 24 page 63 John 4 24 page 18 Acts 10 33 page 223 24 16 page 101 Romans 6 17
page 242 8 26 page 118 1 Cor. 11 27 page 258 11 28 page 266 11 29 page 262
Ephesians. 3 12 page 126 4 8, 10, 11 page 363 Phil. 2 12 page 11 3 10 page 29 3 18
page 11 Col. 3 17 page 126 1 Timothy 4 5 page 404 4 7 page 7, 8 Heb. 12 28 page
125 1 Pet. 3.4, 7 page 562 1 John 4 9 page 299
REader, the Authors absence from the Press has occasioned many mistakes: Thy
candor must excuse some false stops and comma's, and thy pen correct some
verbal errors, or thou will hardly find sense in some places.

ERRATA.

PAge 3. line 2. add some respect, p. 4. l. 2. for determination, read
detection, p. 6. l. 4. r. (...), p. 6. l. 24. for our Chapels, r. our
Churches, p. 13. l. 25. for their backs, r. the back, p. 16. l. 8. for a very,
r. an aerie, p. 75. l. 4. for earthly mansion, r. earthly mammon, p. 76. l. 14.
for their mouth, r. their paws, p. 83. l. 2. for conservations, r.
consecrations, l. 6. for over beared, r. overtired, p. 95. l. 13. add good, p.
103. l. 23. for all their words, r. all their works, p. 132. l. 10. for
thereupon, r. there, upon, p. 149. l. 26. for and which, r. by which, p. 151.
l. 6. della three, p. 152. l. 30. for Devils, r. dangers, p, 156. l. 6. for the
faith, r. thy faith, p. 168. l. 22. for to buy or relieve, r. to buy relief, p.
175. l. 16. for the Lord, r. thee Lord, p. 184. l. 23. for wear with prayer, r.
rear with praise, p. 249. l. ult. add never, p. 284. l. 23. for wound, r.
wounds, p. 287. l. 20. for which, r. and, p. 324. l. 30. add in, p. 366, l. 30.
some, r. such, p. 388. add evening, p. 480. l. 1. for delightfulnes, r.
deceitfulness, l. 18. for thirst, r. thrift, p. 516. l. 22. add a, p. 522. l.
3. for the cursed, r. the curse, p. 524. l. 6. della to, p. 533. l. 16. for me
r. men. p. 535. line ult. for but the, r. by the p. 545. l. 1. add thy p. 559.
l. 28. for was in, r. was not in.

1 TIMOTHY 4.7. But refuse profane and old wives fables, and exercise thy self
unto godliness.

Exercise thy self unto Godliness.


CHAP. I. The Preface and Coherence of the Text.
THe unclean spring of ungodliness divides it self (like the third African
gulf) into two main cursed channels Atheism and Superstition. In one of which,
Plin. not. hist. lib. 5. cap. 4.
all the children of men swim by nature, and very many, as the filly fish, down
the streams of Jordan, till they descend into the lake of Sodom, the dead sea
of hell, and perish. Which of these two passages are most fatal and perilous,
seems worth our inquiry. The waters in the former stream are deepest; Atheism
denies the very being of God: But to prevent sinking in these waters, Nature
her self has provided some skin-deep bladders; for though there be many
Atheists in practice, yet there be no Atheists in principles. The being of a
Deity was so fairly written on the tables of man's heart at first, that though
it be exceedingly blotted and blurred by the fall, yet it is still legible.
Those Heathen, as Caligula and others who endeavored to extinguish that candle
of the Lord, which showed them a first cause, or being of beings, could never
accomplish it. It is a part of that Law which is written in all men's hearts,
Romans 2.15. The Cicer. de rat deorum.
Orator could say, That no Nation was so barbarous, as to deny the being of a
God. ^actant. Inst Epicu^ u^^psum quem nibil pudendum pudet, tamen Deum neg^e
pudet. Mornae^s de verit. Christ. relig c 1.
Tullus Hostilius, third King of the Romans, who derided his Predecessor Numas
sacrifices, saying, That Religion did but effeminate men's mind, did himself (as
Lactantius in Instit. observes) worship the god Fear. Idolatry is a clear proof
that all men believe a Deity, otherwise they would never worship (not only the
Sun, as the Masagetes, but) dead men as the Grecians; whom their Governors
would appoint, as the Romans; Cats, Dogs and Horses, as the Egyptians, Idem
ibid.
and any thing rather then nothing. Though there be, says a learned Author,
Nations without Kings, without Laws, without clothes, yet there are none
without a God. When man fell, this truth stood.

The waters in the latter stream are not so deep, but they seem more dangerous;
for Nature is a friend to Superstition, though an enemy to Atheism: It would
give God some worship, but it must be in its own way. Atheism denies the being
of a Deity; Superstition undermineth the authority of God. The Atheist would
have no God, the Superstitious would be his own God; his Will not Gods Word is
the rule of his Worship. In this gulf, has many a soul been swallowed up: The
Atheist turns to the left hand, the Superstitious to the right hand, but he
must turn to neither, that will keep his feet from evil, Prove. 4. ult.

The Text presents us with a caution against the poison of Fabulosam
doctrinam and prophanam vocat eam quae in ritihus and disciplina vitae aliquid
excogitat praeter sacrae scripturae mentem, Huic opponit (...) hoc est veram
rationem colendi deum. Aret. in loc. ^ngiendum est in disciplina morali (...),
fabulosum, hoe est quod speciem habet antiquitatis sed cum vero D^i cultu non
congruit. Idem. ibid.
Superstition, and propounds to us the golden Medium between the two
extremes; Avoid or refuse old wives fables, and exercise thy self unto
godliness.

The scope of the Apostle in this Epistle is to furnish Timothy with necessary
directions for, and to fortify him against the opposition he should meet with
in the work of the Ministry.

In this Chapter Paul does prophetically forewarn Timothy of, and practically
forearm him aagainst the Apostasy of the latter times.

In it first, the Malady is described, and 2. The Remedy is prescribed.

First, The Apostasy is described. 1. By the sure determination of it; the
Spirit speaks expressly, had it been doubtful, it need not have been so
dreadful, but its certain, and therefore calls for the more caution.

2. By the season of it, In the latter times. When the world grows old, it
will door and decline; when it comes to the bottom, it will run dregs. Its last
days which should be best, will be its worst days

3. By the causes procuring it, Seducing spirits, and Doctrine of devils, Satan
and his Emissaries will, like Sampsons Foxes carry firebrands abroad to set the
world in a hellish flame.

Secondly, The Remedy is prescribed, in reference to himself.

Something he must forbear, Refuse profane and old wives fables; (...). Rejice
Piscat. Beza. Excommunica, alii.
If thou would not swim down with the tide of those apostatising times, take
heed of steering thy course by profane though ancient customs: Refuse them
with scorn, reject them with anger; let thy spirit rise and thy stomach turn at
the very sight of such sins. One way to prevent Apostasy, is to refuse
ungrounded antiquity. The will of the Father of spirits, not the ways of the
fathers of our flesh is to be the rule of our walking. It is well observed that
God in no command but the second (which forbids his Worship in any way not
appointed by his Word) threatens to visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children, because superstitious. Worshippers are of all men most strengthened by
the Traditions of their Fathers. They will tell us. Shall we be wiser then our
Fathers. Now because they are resolved to sin with their Fathers, God is
resolved they shall suffer for their Fathers. They that will follow their
forefathers in sin, for ought I know must follow their forefathers to hell. If
Timothy would not share in others declensions, he must forbear others
traditions, Refuse profane and old wives fables.

Something he must also follow after, Exercise thy self unto godliness: This is
the special help which the skilful physician appoints his beloved patient in
those infectious times to preserve his soul in health. As a pestiferous air is
very dangerous to the body, yet for a man to get, and make it his work to keep
a sound constitution will be an excellent means to prevent infection: So an
Apostatizing place or people is very dangerous to the soul (spiritual diseases
are more catching and killing then corporal) but a spiritual habit of a real
sanctity, with a constant care to continue and increase it, will be a sovereign
means to preserve it in safety. Bodies without life quickly corrupt and become
unsavory; not so living creatures: Running waters are sweet and clean, when
standing ponds putrify and abound in vermin. He that is ever trading and
thriving in godliness need not fear that he shall prove a bankrupt: Carts
overthrow not going up hill.

Timothy is considerable in his twofold capacity.

1. As a Minister of Christ, or in his particular calling, in this respect he
must exercise himself to godliness. Non tan tum sana doctrina, sed eti^m pia
and relig^ola vita m^^i^ri verbo opus ^st Beza in loc
A Pastor must not only some days give precepts, but every day give a pattern
to his people, he must not only (...), but also (...) not only divide the
word rightly, but also order his conversation aright. He must as Nazianzen said
of Basil, thunder in his doctrine, and lighten in his life. Singular holiness
is required of those that minister about holy things: as Painters, they must
teach by their hands, by their lives, as well as by their lips.

Ministers must exercise themselves to godliness, that is, do their duties with
the greatest diligence. They are sometimes called the Salt of the earth, Matt.
5 13 14,
because they must waste themselves to prevent corruption in others. Sometime
the light of the world, they must consume themselves to direct others in the
way to heaven. Greg in 1. cap. lob.
Gregory observes that the Spirit of God appeared in two shapes, in the shape
of a Dove signifying innocence, in the shape of Fire signifying activity. The
zeal of Gods house (not the rust of idleness) must eat the Minister up; he must
be a burning shining light; if ever he would thaw the frozen hearts of his
hearers, Quic quid d^cit Lutherus quicquid scribit id in a^in: as pe^etrat and
mirificos relinquit acul^os in cordibus ^o minum Melch. Adam. in vit. Luther.
our Chapels must not be turned into Chapels of ease; Christ neglected his
food, spent his strength, wrought so hard that he was thought to be beside
himself. We are called Fishers, Laborers, Soldiers, Watchmen, all which are
laborious callings. We are compared to clouds, the clods of the earth lie
still, but the clouds of heaven are ever in motion, and dissolve themselves to
refresh others.

But alas how many fleece their flocks, Sacerdotum nomi^a acce^imus non ad
quiet^n^ sed ad labore^^ ut inver amu^ in oper^ q^od sig^amur in no mine Greg.
l. 4. ep. 8.
but never feed them, as if their Benesices were Sine cures. The Green Sickness
is the maids, and laziness many Ministers disease: Who is instant in season and
out of season? It was a notable speech of Boniface the Martyr, to one that
asked him, whether it was lawful to give the Sacramental wine in a wooden cup.
Time was, when we had wooden cups and golden Priests, but now we have golden
cups and wooden priests.

CHAP. II. The opening of the Text and the Doctrine.
2. TImothy is to be considered as a member of Christ, or in his general
calling; and so this Exhortation belongs to every Christian.

In it we may observe these three parts.

1. The act, Exercise. 2. The subject of that act, Thy self. 3. The object
about which it was to be conversant, Unto godliness; Exercise thy self unto
godliness.
I shall briefly open the terms in the Text, and then lay down the Doctrinal
truth.

Exercise] The word signifies, (...). Exercei semeti^sem ad pietatem qui
diligerter intambit action bus qui bus deus servitur. Est. in loc
strip thy self naked; its a metaphor from Runners, or Wrestlers, who being to
contend for the prize, and resolved to put forth all their strength and power,
lay aside their clothes which may hinder them, and then bestir themselves to
purpose; as if Paul had said, O Timothy, let godliness be the object of all thy
care and cost. Follow thy general calling with the greatest industry; pursue it
diligently, do not loiter but labor about it: lay aside what may hinder, lay
hold of what may further, and mind it as the main and principal work which thou
have to do in this world.

Thy self] A Christians first care must be about his own spiritual welfare.
(...)
Religion commands us to be mindful of, and helpful to our neighbors and
relations; The Sun rayeth out his refreshing beams, and the Spring bubleth up
her purling streams for the good of others. Fire in the chimney warmeth the
whole room, but it is burning hot on the hearth. Grace in a Saint will make him
useful to sinners, but chiefly (though not solely) to his own soul. Timothy, be
not like a burning glass to put others into a flame, whilst thou thy self
remainest unfired, but work hard to exalt holiness in thine own heart: Exercise
thy self.

Unto godliness] Godliness is taken in Scripture either strictly or largely.
(...) Verum and rectum dei culium significat maxi ^^ socris Scrip (...).
H^braea ph^asi timor domini vocatur. Sv^us interp. justitiam vo cat. Est in loc.


1. Strictly, and then it includes only the immediate worship of God, or
obedience to the First Table, and is distinguished from righteousness, Tit.
2.11, 12. so ungodliness is distinct from unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.

2. Largely, And then it comprehends our duty to our neighbor, as well as to
God, and obedience to the Second as well as the first Table, so righteousness
is religion, and in our dealings with men we may do our duty to God; its taken
thus, 1 Timothy 6.6. and in the Text. The good Husbandman makes no balks in the
field of Gods precepts. Timothy must make it his trade to pay God and men their
due. He must not like the Pharisees seem as tender of the First Table as of the
apple of his eye, and trample the second as dirt under his feet; they prayed in
Gods house all day, to prey upon the widows house at night; nor as some (whom
the world call honest men) who will not wrong their neighbors of the least
mite, and yet wickedly rob God of many millions; they steal from him both time
and love, and trust and bestow them on earthly trifles; the bird that will fly
well must use both wings; the Waterman if he would have his boat move rightly,
must ply both oars; the Christian if he would make any thing of his heavenly
trade must mind both Tables.

The Truth that I shall draw from the Text is this, That Godliness ought to be
minded, as every ones main and principal business. Exercise thy self unto
godliness.

Religion must be our chief occupation. The great Trade that we follow in this
world, must be the Trade of Truth.

It is observable, that the more noble and singular a being is, the more it is
employed in a suitable working. God who is the highest in perfections, is not
only the holiest but the most constant and diligent in his operations.
Hitherto my Father works and I work, Joh. 5.17. His work indeed is without
weariness, his labor without the least lassitude (as they say of Heaven Coeli
motus quies) all Gods working days are Sabbaths, days of rest; but he is a pure
act, and he is every moment infinitely active from and for himself. Angels are
next to God in being, and so are next to him in working. They do God the most
service, and they do him the best service; they serve God without sin, and they
serve him without ceasing; he makes his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a
flame of fire, Heb. 1.7. spirits are the most active creatures with life, fire
is the most active creature without life, a flame is the most operative part of
the fire: Thus active are Angels in working for God. Some by fire understand
lightnings, by spirits, winds. As winds and lightnings presently pass through
the earth, so Angels presently fulfill Gods holy Will.

Now as he has given man a more excellent being, then the rest of the visible
world, so has he called him to follow after and abound in the most excellent
work. God has appointed contemplation or vision to be man's reward in heaven.
To see God as he is, and to know him as he is known of him; but service and
action to be his work on earth, to exercise himself to godliness.

Some read that, Job 5.7. thus, Man is born to work as the sparks fly upward.
Indeed it is the decreed lot of all mankind to labor. Adam was called to
industry in his state of innocence, Genesis 2.15. and since man's fall, Non est
panis cujusquam proprius, nec summi quidem re gis nisi strenue laboret in
vocatione sua. Roll. 1 Thessalonians. 3.6.
his work which was before his pleasure, is now his punishment, if he eat not
his bread in the sweat of his brow or his brains, he steals it: He that like a
body louse lives upon others sweat, is like Jeremiahs girdle good for nothing.
But the main work which God commands and commends to the children of men,
is to glorify him upon earth, by exercising themselves to godliness. This is
Gods precept, and this has been the Saints practice: This is Gods precept,
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. In which words we
have the Christians end, eternal life, Salvation; and the means to attain it
diligent labor, work out your salvation; he had need to labor hard that would
attain Heaven. Non dicit (...), operaminised (...), acurate magnoque cum stud^o
operamini, cum m^^ta dil^gentia and solicitudine pergite vestram operari
salutem. A Lapid. in Phil. 2.
Godliness must be not (...), his by-business, but (...), his main business.
The Jews have a proverb (alluding to Manna, which was to be gathered the sixth
day for the seventh, because on the seventh none fell from heaven) He that
gathers not food on the Sabbath eve, shall fast on the Sabbath day.
Intimating thereby that none shall reign in Heaven but such as have wrought on
earth.

This has been the Saints practice, Our conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.18.
Though our habitations be on earth, yet our (...), our negotiation is in
heaven. As a Merchant that lives in London drives a great trade in Turkey, or
the remotest part of the Indies: So Paul and the Saints traded and traffiqued
afar off in the other world above, even when their abodes were here below.
Godliness was their business; Christianity was minded and followed as their
principal trade and calling: It is the calling of some, to plough, and sow, and
reap: The Christian makes and follows it as his calling, to plough up the
fallow ground of his heart, to sow in righteousness, that he may reap in mercy,
Hos. 10.12. The trade of others is to buy and sell; the godly man is the wise
Merchant trading for goodly pearls, that sells all to buy the field where the
pearl of great price is, Matthew. 13.43.

For the Explication of this Truth, That religion or godliness ought to be
every ones principal business, I shall speak to these three things:

First, What Religion or godliness is.

Secondly, What it is for a man to make Religion his business, or to exercise
himself to Godliness

Thirdly, Why every Christian must mind Godliness as his main business.

CHAP. III. What Godliness is.
FOr the first, what Religion is. The derivation of the word, will somewhat
help to the explication of the thing, the Latin word Religio from which our
English word comes, C^^er. ^b. 2. de (...) d^^r. ^^^^h. ^on. ^. lib. 1. de
relig. cap. 13.
Some derive a Relegendo, because men by serious reading come to be Religious,
grace sometimes finds a passage through the sight into the soul. The eye (as
in Austin and Junius) has affected the heart, Zanchy derives it a Religendo,
or rather a re-eligendo from chosing again, or a second time, because a
Religious person chooses God for his chiefest good and portion. His first
choice was carnal of the flesh and the creature but his second choice is
spiritual of God and Christ, and this choice is Religion. Austin and Lactantius
(to whom I rather incline) derive it a Religando from binding or knitting, Aug.
Tom. 1. lib. de vera relig. Lact. lib. 4. Divin. inflit. c. 18.
because it is the great bond to join and tie God and man together. As the
parts of the body are knit to the head, by the nerves and sinews, so man is
knit to God by Religion. Sin and irreligion separate God and man asunder, your
iniquities have separated between you and your God, Isa. 59.2. Godliness and
Religion unite God and man together, I will dwell in them and walk in them, and
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. 2 Cor. 6.16: Atheism is a
departing or going away from God, Ephesians. 4.18. Heb. 3.12. Religion is a coming or
returning unto God, Heb. 10.22. Jer. 3.1. The great misery of man by his fall,
is this, He is far from God; And the great felicity of man by favor, is this,
He draws nigh to God, Psa. 73.2. ult. Jam. 4.8. Irreligion is a turning their
backs upon God, but Religion is a seeking the face of God, and a following hard
after him, Psa. 2.3. Psa. 27.8. Psa. 63.8. By ungodliness men wander and
deviate from God, by godliness men Worship, and are devoted to God, Psa.
119.150 and 38. verses.

The Grecians call it (...), Beza thinks, Beza in Col. 2.18
from Orpheus a Thracian, who first taught the Mysteries of Religion among his
Countrymen. Ab (...) hene vel recte and (...) colo.
The word in the Text is (...), which in a Word signifies right or straight
worship, according to which I shall describe it thus.

Godliness is a Worshipping the true God in heart and life, according to his
revealed Will.

In this description of Godliness I shall observe four parts. First, The Act,
it is a Worship. Secondly, The Object of this Act, the true God. Thirdly, The
Extent of this Worship, in heart and life. Fourthly, The Rule, according to his
revealed Will.

First, Cultus religiosus est obsequium supremum illi soli debitum qui est
principium and author tam creatio is quam beatificationis nostrae Daven. Determ.
For the Act, Godliness is a Worship; Worship comprehends all that respect
which man owes and gives to his Maker, it is that service and honor, that
fealty and homage, which the creature owes and tendereth to the fountain of
his being and happiness; it is the Tribute which we pay to the King of Kings,
whereby we acknowledge his Sovereignty over us, and our dependence on him.
Cultus corporis and cultus conscientiae.
Give unto the Lord the Honor due unto his Name, Worship the Lord in the
beauty of holiness, Psa. 29.2. To Worship God is to give him the Glory which is
due to him; It is a setting the Crown of Glory on Gods Head, to render him due
honor, is true Holiness; To deny this is Atheism and Irreligion. All that
inward reverence and respect, and all that outward obedience and Service to
God, which the word injoyneth, is included in this one word Worship.

This Worshipping God, is either external or internal, God is to be worshipped
with the body, Joshua fell on his face and Worshipped, Josh. 5.14. Moses bowed
his head and Worshipped, Exodus 4.32. Jesus lifted up his eyes to Heaven and
Prayed, Joh. 17.1. David lifted up his hands to God, Psa. 63.4. The bodies of
Saints shall be glorified with God hereafter, and the bodies of Saints must
glorify God here, Phil. 3.21. Romans 12.1.

Inward worship is sometimes set forth by loving God, Jam. 2.5. sometimes by
trusting him, Psa. 16.1. sometimes by delighting in him, Psa. 37.3. sometimes
by sorrow for offending him, Psa. 51.3. because this Worship of God (as one
piece of gold contains many pieces of silver) comprehends all of them. All
the graces are but so many links of this golden chain. As all the members of
the natural body are knit together, and walk always in company, so all the
parts of the new man are joined together, and never go but as the Israelites
out of Egypt, with their whole train; If there be one Wheel missing in a Watch,
the end of the whole is spoiled; if one grace should be wanting in a Saint, he
would be unsainted. There is a concatenation of graces, as well as of moral
virtues. Those that Worship God give him their hottest love, their highest joy,
their deepest sorrow, their strongest faith, and their greatest fear, as
Abraham gave Isaac, he gives God all.

What Moses calls fearing God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. our Savior quoting, calls
Worshipping God ( Mat. 4.9, 10.) by a Synecdoche, because the former is both a
part and a sign of the latter. As when the guard are watching at the Court
gate, or on the stairs, and examining those that go in, its a sign the King is
within, so when the fear of God stands at the door of the heart, to examine all
that go in, least the Traitor Sin should steal in slily, its a sign that God is
within, that he sits upon the Throne of the soul and is worshipped there.

Secondly, The Object, the true God. All Religion without the knowledge of the
true God, is a mere notion, a very empty nothing, Divine Worship is one of the
chiefest jewels of Gods Crown, Cove ne qu^cquam vel mente agnoscas vel corpore
colas ut Deum, praet r me Ienovam Deum iuum. Calv. in 1. mand.
which he will by no means part with, God alone is the Object of the godly man's
worship, Exodus 20.2. His hope is in God, Psa. 39.7. his dependence is on God,
Psa. 62.8. His dread is of God, Psa. 119.122. His love is to God, Ps. 18.1. God
is the only object of his prayers, Psalm. 5.3. and 44 20. and of God alone are
all his praises, Psalm: 103.1. God alone is to be worshipped, because he alone
is worthy of worship; Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and
power, for thou have created all things, Rev. 4.11.

To hold any thing in opinion, or to have any thing in affection for God which
is not God, is Idolatry; to worship either men, as the Samaritans did Antiochus
Epiphanes, (stiling him the mighty God) or the host of Heaven, as the
Ammonites; or the Devil, as the Indians; or the Belly, as the Glutton; or
Riches, as the Covetous; or the Cross, as the Papist, is unholiness.

There is a civil worship due to men, Genesis 48.11. but sacred worship is due
only to God; and he is a jealous God, who will not give his glory to
strangers, nor his praise to images.

The Heathen worshipped several gods, the Assyrians worshipped Belus; the
Tyrians, Baal; the Athenians, Diana; the Samians, Juno; the Lemnians, Vulcan;
the Moabites, Chemosh; the Syrians Rimmon; the E Kronites, Baalzebub; the
Babylonians, Bell; those Infidels, as one observes well had their Deos
mortuos, Idols; mortales men; mortiferos Lusts: therefore its considerable that
when the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, during the time of their
unregeneracy, whilst they served false gods, he says, they lived without God,
Ephesians. 2.12. False gods are no Gods; an Idol is nothing. 1 Cor. 4.8.

Thirdly, The extent, In heart and life: Godliness is the worshipping God in
the inward motions of the heart, and the outward actions of the life; where the
spring of the affections is clear, and the stream of the conversation runs
clear, there is true godliness, the Egyptians of all fruits would make choice
of the Peach to consecrate to their goddess, and they gave this reason for it,
because the fruit thereof resembles an heart, and the leaf a tongue. As they
gave heart and tongue to the false god, we must to the true God.
Heart-godliness pleases God best, but Life godliness honors him most; the
conjunction of both make a complete Christian. In a godly man's heart, though
some sin be left, yet no sin is liked; in his life, though sin may remain, yet
no sin reigns: His heart is suitable to Gods Nature, and his life is answerable
to Gods Law; and thence he is fitly denominated a Godly man.

In heart, Hypocrisy is a practical Blasphemy; I know the blasphemy of them
that say they are Jews and are not. Gods eye takes most notice of the jewel of
spiritual devotion; the eyes of men, of the cabinet of outward adoration. My
son give me thy heart, says God, Pro. 33.26. The Heart is the King in the
little world, Man; which gives Laws both to the inward powers, and outward
parts, and reigns and rules over them at pleasure.

The life of Godliness lies much more in the heart then in the life; and the
Saints character is from their inward carriage toward God, they worship God in
the Spirit, Phil. 3.3. A great French Peer is called le bon Chrestien, the good
Christian, because they say it is never rotten at the core; God is a Spirit,
and he will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.24. In truth, that is
scripturally, opposite to the inventions of men's heads: In Spirit, that is
sincerely, opposite to the dissimulation of men's hearts. The deeper the belly
of the Lute is the pleasanter the sound; the deeper our worship comes from the
heart, the more delightful it is in Gods ears.

And Life godliness, as it sets God on the Throne of the conscience, so it
walks with God in the conversation. Though the spiritual (as the natural) life
begin at the heart, yet it does not end there, but proceeds to the hands; the
same water appears in the Bucket which is in the Well. As when the heart is
like a dunghill full of filth, it sends forth a noisome and unsavory stench in
the life; so when the heart is like a box of musk, it perfumes and sents the
tongue, and eyes, and ears, and hands, and whatsoever is near it with holiness:
Worship is called the name of God, Ps. 29. and worshipping, a praising him, 2 Chronicles. 7.3. Because as a man by his name, so God by his worship is known in the
world; and those that worship him in their practices, do before the eyes of the
world give him praise.

Fourthly, The Rule, according to his revealed will Every part of Divine
Worship, must have a Divine Precept. As the first Command teaches us what God
is to be worshipped, so the second Command teaches in what way he will be
worshipped. The Tabernacle and all the instruments thereof, yea the very
snuffers and ash-pans were to be made exactly according to the pattern in the
mount, Exodus 25.40. Heb. 8.5. Typifying that all the exercise of worship used
by the Church, whether in Doctrine or Discipline, must be conformed to the
written Word, Gal. 1.8. Our Religion must be not only rational but regular;
our worship must be both universal and canonical, (...), Gal. 6.16. As many as
walk according to this canon, or rule, peace be unto them. The Saints service
must be Word-service, (...), To. 12.1. so the word is rendered by our
Translators, 1 Pet. 2.2. (...), the sincere milk of the Word. The institutions
of Christ, not the inventions of men are the rule of worship. Our work is not
to make Laws for our selves or others, but to keep the Laws which the great
Prophet of his Church has taught us: that coin of worship which is current
amongst us must be stamped by God himself. Traditioni humanae nomen religionis
applicant, ut religio appelletur, cum sit sacrilegium quia quod contra
authorear est sacrilega mente in ventum est Amb. in Col. 2.
We are to be governed as the point in the compass, not by the various winds
(the practices of former ages, or the fashions of the present generation which
are mutable and uncertain) but by the constant heavens. Our devotion must be
regulated exactly according to the Standard of the Word. It is Idolatry to
worship a false god, or the true God in a false manner.

Men indeed are no sooner plucked out of the pit of Atheism, Nihiladeo offen dit
hominum mentes ut sim plicitas divinorum operum, Tertul.
but they presently climb the high places of superstition, delighting to go
from one extreme to another. As a gay suit of apparel, so the service of God in
a gaudy dress, is most taking with carnal eyes. I have read of a Popish Lady in
Paris, that when she saw a glorious procession to one of their Saints, cried
out, Oh how fine is our Religion beyond, that of the Huguenots, they have a
mean and beggarly religion, but ours is full of bravery and solemnity. But as
Heralds say of a coat of Arms, The second commandment binds to the true
worship of the true God, which is only as himself commands and by the means,
rites and services which he ordains. Ainsw Arrows. against Idols cap. 1.
if it be full of gays and devices it speaks a mean descent; so truly that
manner of worship which is mingled with men's inventions, speaks its descent to
be mean; namely, from man. To the Law and to the Testimonies, if they speak not
according to this, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20.

Such may serve God with more pomp then others, but I am confident they serve
him to less. profit then others, In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men, Matthew. 15.9. their worship is in Gods
account no worship, they who made Temples, Altars and Ceremonies of their own
heads, thought that they had remembered God, but he tells them plainly that they
had forgotten him, Hos. 8.11, 13, 14. Men manifest abundance of arrogance in
undertaking to prescribe newer and neater ways of worship then God himself, as
if they excelled his Majesty in wisdom; but little do they think how
exceedingly by such practices they provoke him to fury, Will Worship
Ezekiel. 8.3, 4, 5, per tot. Ezekiel. 43.8. In their setting of their thresholds by
my thresholds, and their posts by my posts, they have even defiled my holy name
by the abominations which they have committed; wherefore I have consumed them
in mine anger, So Ezekiel. 6.9. 2 Chronicles. 7.20.

CHAP. IV. What it is for a man to make Religion his business, or to exercise
himself to Godliness
I Proceed to the second particular promised, is to show what it is for a man
to exercise himself to Godliness. It implies these three things.

First, To give it the precedence in all our actions; that which a man makes
his business he will be sure to mind, whatsoever he omits. A good Husband will
serve his shop before his sports, and will sometimes offer an handsome and
warrantable kind of disrespect to his friends, that his calling may have his
company; he will have some excuse or other to avoid diversions, and force his
way to his trade through all opposition, and all because he makes it his
business: He that makes Religion his business, carries himself toward his
general, as this man does toward his particular calling: In his whole life he
walks with God, and is so mannerly and dutiful as to give God the upper hand
all the way. He knows that his God must be worshipped, that his family must
be served, and that his calling must be followed (for Religion does not
nullify, only rectify his carriage toward his earthly vocation) but each in
their order, that which is first in regard of excellency, is first in regard of
his industry. He is not so unnatural as to serve his cattle before his
children, nor so Atheistical as to serve his body and the world before his soul
and his Savior. He is so sensible of his infinite engagements to the blessed
God, that he allotteth some time every day for his religious duties, and he
will be sure to pay God home to the utmost of his ability whosoever he
compounds with or pays short.

As he sail along through the tempestuous sea of this world toward his
eternal Haven of rest, he has many temporal affairs in his company, but he is
specially careful that they keep their distance, and strike sail through the
whole voyage. If his worldly-businesses offer, like Hagar, to justle or quarrel
for pre-eminence with their superior, Religion, he will if possible chide them,
into subjection and cause them to submit; but rather cast them out, then suffer
them to usurp Authority over their Mistress.

He that minds Religion by the by, will if other things intervene, put it back,
and be glad of an excuse to wave that company, to which he has no love; nay he
does in the whole course of his life, prefer his Swine, as the Gadarens, before
his soul; set the Servant on Horseback, and suffer the Master to go on foot.
His voice to Religion is like the Jews to the poor man in vile Raiment; stand
thou there, or fit thou here under my footstool; and his words to the World,
are like theirs to the man in goodly apparel, Come up hither, or sit thou here
in a good place, James 2.2, 3. He does like Jacob, lay the right hand of his
care and diligence upon the youngest Son, the body; and the left hand upon the
first born of the soul; That which was Esaus curse is esteemed by him as a
blessing, that the Elder serves the Tounger; He is so unwise as to esteem lying
vanities before real mercies; often so unworthy, as to forget God, whosoever he
remembers; and so uncivil at best, as to give God the Worlds leavings, and to
let the Almighty Creator Dance attendance till he pleases to be at leisure. If
he be in the midst of his devotion, he makes an end upon the smallest occasion,
Plut.
and is like the Patriarch, who ran from the Altar when he was about his
Office, to see a Fool new fallen from his beloved Mare.

But every Saint like Solomon first builds an house for God, and then for
himself. Whoever be displeased, or whatever be neglected, he will take care
that God be worshipped; Abraham's Steward, when sent to provide a Wife for
Isaak, though meat were set before him, refused to eat till he had done his
errand, Genesis 24.33. Godliness is the errand about which man is sent into the
World, now as faithful servants we must prefer our Message before our meat, and
serve our Master before our selves.

He that makes godliness his business, gives it the first of the day, and the
first place all the day. He gives it the first of the day; Jesus Christ was at
prayer, a great while before day, Mark 1.35. Abraham rose up early in the
morning to offer Sacrifice. Genesis 22.1. So did Job 1. and 5. David cries out O
God, my God, early will I seek thee, Psa. 63.1. In the morning will I direct my
prayer to thee, and look up, Psa. 5.3. The Philistines in the morning early
offered to their God Dagon. The Persian Magi Worshipped the rising Sun, with
their early hymns, The Saint in the morning waits upon Heavens Majesty. As soon
as he awakes, he is with God, one of his first works when he rises, is to ask
his Heavenly Father Blessing. Like the Lark he is up early, singing sweetly the
praise of his Maker, and often with the Nightingale late up, at the same
pleasant tune.

He finds the morning a greater friend to the Graces, then it can be to the
Muses. Naturalists tell us that the most orient pearls, are generated of the
Morning dew. Sure I am, he has sweet communion with God in morning duties.

Reader, Let me tell thee, if Religion be thine occupation, thy business, God
will hear from thee in the morning, one of the first things after thou art up
will be to fall down and worship him. Thy mind will be most free in the
morning, and thine affections most lively (as those strong waters are fullest
of spirits which are first drawn) and surely thou can not think but that God
who is the best and chiefest good, has most right to them, and is most worthy
of them.

As a godly man gives religion the precedence of the day, so he gives it the
precedence in the day; The Jews (some say) divide their day into prayer, labor
and repast, and they will not omit prayer, either for their meat or labor.
Grace (as well as nature) teaches a godly man not to neglect either his Family
or body, but it teaches him also to prefer his soul, and his God before them
both. Seneca though an Heathen, could say, I am greater, and born to greater
things then to be a drudge to, and the slave of my body. A Christians
Character, is that he is not carnal, or for his body, but spiritual, or for his
soul, Romans 8. It was a great praise which Ambrose speaks of Valentinian, Never
man was a better servant to his Master, then Valentinians body was to his soul.

This is the godly man's duty, to make Heaven his Throne, and the Earth his
footstool. Its the exposition which one gives upon those words, Subdue the
Earth, Genesis 1.28. that is thy body, and all earthly things to thy soul. Our
earthly callings must give way to our Heavenly, we must say to them as Christ
to his Disciples. Tarry you here while I go and pray yonder, and truly
godliness must be first in our Prayers, Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come,
before, give us this day our daily bread; and first in all our practices seek
first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all other things
shall be added to you. Mat. 6.33.

Secondly, to make Religion ones business, contains to pursue it with
industry, in our conversations. A man that makes his calling his business, is
not lazy but laborious about it, what pains will he take? what strength will he
spend? how will he toil and moil at it early and late? The Tradesman, the
Husbandman, eat not the bread of Idleness, when they make their callings their
business; if they be good Husbands, they are both provident to observe their
seasons, and diligent to improve them for their advantage, they do often even
dip their food in their sweat, and make it thereby the more sweet. Their
industry appears in working hard in their callings, and in improving all
opportunities for the furtherance of their callings.

1. Thus he that makes Religion his business, is industrious and laborious in
the work of the Lord. The heart of his ground, the strength of his inward man,
is spent about the good corn of Religion, not about the weeds of earthly
occasions. He makes have to keep Gods Commandments, knowing that the lingering
lazy Snail is reckoned among unclean creatures, Levit. 11.30. and he is hot and
lively in his devotion, knowing that a dull, Eo quod pigrnns and tardum ani^^
(...) est. ^ellarm.
drou sie Ass (though fit enough to carry the image of Isis yet) was no fit
sacrifice for the pureand active God, Exodus 13.13. He gives God the top, the
chief, the cream of all his affections, as seeing him infinitely worthy of all
acceptance: He is not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, when he is
serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. He beleiveth that to fear God with a secondary
fear, is Atheism; that to trust God with a secondary trust, is Treason; that to
honor God with a secondary honor, is Idolatry; and to love God with a
secondary love, is Adultery; therefore he loves (and he fears, and trusts,
and honoreth) the Lord his God, with all his heart, and with all his soul, and
with all his strength, Mat. 22.36, 37. His love to God is a labor of love, as
strong as death, the coals thereof are coals of Juniper, which do not only
burn long (some say twelve months together.) but burn with the greatest heat.
His measure of loving God is without measure.

The Samseans in Epiphanius were neither Jews, Gentiles nor Christians, yet
preserved a fair correspendency with all: An Hypocrite is indifferent to any,
never servent in the true Religion.

It is reported of Redwald King of the East Saxons, Cambd Brittan.
the first Prince of this Nation that was baptized, that in the same Church he
had one Altar for the Christian Religion, another for the Heathenish
Sacrifices. The true Beleiver does otherwise, he that makes Religion his work,
gives God the whole of his heart without halting and without halving.

Set him about any duty, and he is diligent in it. In prayer, Innuit certamen
and quasi luctam cum deo ipso. Epis. Dav. in loc.
he labors in prayer, Col. 4.12. he cries to God, 1 Samuel 7.9. he cries
mightily, Jonah 3.8. he pours forth his soul, Lam. 2.19. he strives in
supplication with God, Romans 15.30. stirs up himself to lay hold on God, Isa.
27.5. and even wrestleth with Omnipotency, Genesis 32.14. When the mill of his
prayer is going, his fervent affections are the waters that drive it. There is
fire taken from Gods own Altar (not the ordinary hearth of Nature) and put to
his incense, whereby it becomes fragrant and grateful to God himself. His
fervent prayer is his key to Gods Treasury, and his endeavor is that it rust
not for want of use. When he goes to the Sacrament he is all in a flame of
affection to the Author of that feast: With desire he desires to eat of the
Passover. He longs exceedingly for the time, he loves the Table; but when he
sees the Bread and Wine, the wagons which the Lord Jesus has sent for him, oh
how his heart revives! When he sees the Sacraments the Body and Blood of
Christ in the elements, who can tell how soon he cents? how fast this true
Eagle flies to the heavenly carcass.

At hearing he is heedful, he flies to the saltstone of the Word with
swiftness and care, as Doves to their columbaries, Isa. 60.8. As the new born
babe, he desires the sincere milk of the Word, and when he is attending on it,
he does not dally nor trifle, but as the Be the flower, and the child the
breast, suck with all his might for some spiritual milk, Isa. 66.11. Deuteronomy.
28.1. he hearkneth diligently to the voice of the Lord his God; let him be in
company, taking notice of some abominable carriage, he will rebuke cuttingly,
Tit. 1.13. If he gives his bitter pill in sweet syrrup, you may see his
exceeding anger against sin, whilst you behold his love to the sinner; he is
though a meek Lamb when himself, yet a Lion when God is dishonored; his anger
waxes hot when men affront the most High, Exodus 32.19. If he be counselling
his child or friend to mind God and godliness, how hard does he woo to win the
soul to Christ? how many baits does he lay to catch the poor creature? you may
perceive his bowels working by his very words: How fervent, how instant, how
urgent, how earnest is he to persuade his relation or acquaintance to be happy?
He provokes them to love and to good works.

Set him about what religious exercise you will, and he is, according to the
Apostles words, zealous (or fiery fervent) of good works; like spring water, he
has a living principle, Plin. lib. 5. cap. 5.
and thence is warm in winter, or like Debris in Cyrene is seething hot: As
Augustus said of the young Roman, Quicquid vult, valde vult; Whatsoever he
goes about, that concerns the glory of his Savior and the good of his soul,
he does it to purpose. As Paul says of himself, I follow after if that I may
apprehend, Phil. 3.10. The word in the original is emphatical (...), I
prosecute it with all my strength and power, that I may attain if it be
possible. The word is either an allusion to persecutors, Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12.
for its used of them frequently, so Piscator takes it. Or to Hunters, Est more
vena tarum persequi feram. Ar^t.
according to Aretius; take either and the sense is the same, and very full. As
persecutors are industrious and incessant in searching up and down for poor
Christians and hailing them to prison; and as Huntsmen are up betimes at their
sport, follow it all day, and spare for no pains, even sweating and tyring
themselves at this their pleasure; so eager and earnest, so indifatigable and
industrious was Paul, and so ought every one of us to be (the command is
delivered to us, in the same word, Heb. 12.14.) about godliness.

A man that minds godliness only by the by, looks sometimes to the matter,
seldom to the manner of his performances. Opus operatum the work done is a full
discharge for him, how slightly or slovenly soever it be done. If he stumble
sometimes upon a good work, yet it is not his walk, and when he is in that way
he cares not how many steps he treads awry. It may be said of him as of Jehu,
He takes no heed to walk in the way of the Lord God of Israel, with his heart,
2 King. 10.31. He makes an Idol of the blessed God, (he prays to him, and hears
from him, as if he had eyes and saw not, as if he had ears and heard not, as if
he had hands and wrought not) and any thing will serve an Idol. How aptly and
justly may God say to him after his duties, as Caesar to the Citizen after
Dinner (who having invited the Emperor to his Table, made but slight
preparation and slender provision for him) I had thought that you and I had not
been so familiar.

But he that exercises himself to godliness has a more awful and serious
carriage toward God. 'Er (...) omnibus viribus vobementer, prolixe, toto
animo. A Lapide. (...) dicitur quod in longum protenditur. ^eza.
The twelve Tribes served God, instantly day and night, Acts 26.7. fervently,
vehemently to the utmost of their power; the word implies both extension and
intention, the very Macro. Satur lib. cap. 4.
heathen could say that the Gods must be worshipped, (...) either to our utmost
with all, or not at all.

2. The industry of a man about his calling, or whatsoever he makes his
business, appears in his taking all advantages for the furtherance thereof. A
Tradesman that minds his employment, does not only in his Shop, but also
abroad, and when he is from Home, drive forward his Trade. Indeed, when he is
in his Shop, his eyes are most about him, to see what is wanting, that it may
be supplied, to take care that all his customers may be satisfied, and to order
things so, that by his buying and selling, his stock may be increased; but if
he walk from home, he does not wholly leave his Trade behind him If he visit
his friends or acquaintance, and there be any likelihood of doing any good, you
may observe him questioning the price of such and such commodities, enquiring
at what Rates they are afforded in those parts, and if they be cheap, possibly
furnishing himself from thence, if dear (it may be) putting off a considerable
quantity of his own. Because he makes it his business, his mind runs much upon
it, that wherever he is, he will be speaking somewhat of it, (if occasion be
offered) whereby he comes now and then to meet with such bargains as tend much
to his benefit; so the Christian that makes Religion his business, is
industrious to improve all opportunities for the furtherance of his general
calling: as his time (for he is Gods servant) so his trade goes forward every
hour; He is David like as a sparrow upon the house top looking on this side and
that side to see where he may pick up some spiritual food. He does not only in
the Church and in his Closet, but also in all his converses with men walk with
his God. If God prosper him, as the ship mounts higher according to the
increase of the Tide, so his heart is lifted up the nearer to God, as Gods hand
is enlarged toward him. If God afflict him, as the nipping north wind purifies
the air, so the besom of affliction does sweep the dust of sin out of his
heart. As his pulse is ever beating, so his heavenly trade is ever going
forward His visits to his friends are out of conscience as well as out of
courtesy, and his endeavor is either by some savoury Scripture expression, or
some sober action to advantage his company: He will watch for a fit season to
do his own and others souls service, and catch at it as greedily, and improve
it as diligently as Benhadads servants did Ahabs words.

If he be eating or drinking, the salt of grace is ever one dish upon the table
to season all his diet: He will raise his heart from the daily bread, to the
bread that came down from heaven; he eats, is full, and blesses the Lord:
Before he begins he asks God leave, while he feeds, he tastes Gods love, and
when he has done he gives God thanks.

If he be buying or felling, he is very willing that God should be a witness to
all his bargains, for he prays to God as if men heard him, and he tradeth
with men as if God saw him; His shop as well as his Chapel, is holy ground.

If he be amongst his Relations, he is both desirous and diligent to further
Religion. His endeavor is that those that are nigh him in the flesh may be
nigh God in the spirit. He is careful that both by his precepts and pattern he
may do somewhat for their profit. His house as well as his heart is consecrated
to God.

As Cesars Image was stamped on a penny, as well as on a greater piece, Mat.
22.20. So godliness which is the Image of the King of Kings is imprinted not
only on his greater and weightier, but also upon his lesser and meaner
practices.

Godliness is not his Physic which he only now and then (as at Spring and
Fall) makes use of, but his food, which he daily deals about; besides his set
times for his set meals of Morning and Evening devotion, he has many a good
bait by the by, in the day time. Evening, Morning, and at Noon will I pray, and
cry aloud, Psa. 55.17. Oh how love I thy Law, it is my meditation, (not some
part but) all the day. Whether the actions he be about be natural or civil, he
makes them sacred; whether the Company he be in be good or bad, he will mind
his holy calling; whether he be riding or walking, whether he be at home or
abroad, whether he be buying or selling, eating or drinking, whatsoever he be
doing, or wheresoever he be going, still he has an eye to further godliness,
Anima est tota in toto and tota in qualibet part
because he makes that his business. What the Philosopher said of the soul in
relation to the body, The soul is whole in the whole body, and whole in every
part of it, is true of godliness, in reference to the life of a Christian,
godliness is whole in his whole conversation, and whole in every part of it. As
the constitution of man's body is known by his pulse, if it beat not at all he
is dead, if it beat and keep a constant stroke, its a sign the body is sound:
Godliness is the pulse of the soul, if it beat not at all, the soul is void of
spiritual life, if it beat equally and constantly, it speaks the soul to be in
an excellent plight.

It was the practice of our Savior (who left us a blessed pattern therein) to
be always furthering godliness; when bread was mentioned to him, upon it, he
diswaded his Disciples from the leaven of the Pharisees, Mat. 16.5.6. When
water was denied him by the Samaritan woman, he forgets his thirst and seeks to
draw her to the Wellspring of happiness, John 4.10. When people came to him
for bodily cures, how constantly does he mind the safety of their souls; Thou
art made whole, go sin no more, or thy sins are forgiven thee. He went about
doing good, in the day time working Miracles and Preaching, in the night time
he often gave himself to meditation and prayer.

He that minds Religion by the by does otherwise, he can ( Proteus like) turn
himself into any shape which is in fashion. Purch. Pilgr. Vol. 1. p. 416.
As the Carbuncle, a Beast amongst the Blackamores, which is seen only by
night, having a stone in his Forehead, which shines incredibly and gives him
light whereby to feed, but when he hears the least noise, he presently lets
fall over it a skin, which he has as a natural covering, least its splendour
should betray him; So the half Christian shines with the light of holiness by
fits and starts, every fright makes him hold in and hide it. The mark of
Antichrist was in his followers hands, which they can cover or discover at
their pleasure, but the mark of Christ's Disciples was in in their Foreheads,
visible at all times.

Thirdly, To exercise our selves to godliness, implies to persevere in it with
constancy to our dissolution. Men follow their Trades, and open their Shops
till death shut their eyes, and gives them a writ of ease; men pursue their
earthly works, till death sound a retreat, and command their appearance in the
other World. Many a one has breathed out his last in the midst of his labor:
His life and his labor have ended together. Let every man abide in the calling
whereto he is called says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 7.24.

They who make Religion their business, are constant, immovable and do always
abound in the work of the Lord. Their day of life is their day of labor, the
sun arises and man goes to his labor, until the Evening, Psa. 104.23. Death
only is their night of resting, when they die in the Lord, then, and not till
then they rest from their labors. Saints are compared to Palm Trees, because
they flourish soon; to Cedars, because they continue long; True Saints in youth
always prove Angels in age. B. Hall med. ti. cent. ^.
they often set out with the first, but always hold on to the last. The
Philosopher being asked in his old age, why he did not give over his studies;
answered, When a man is to run a race of forty furlongs, he will not sit down
at the thirty ninth and lose the price. The pious soul is faithful unto death,
and injoyeth a Crown of life. As Caesar he is always marching forward, and
thinks nothing done whilst any thing remains undone; Nil actumc edens si quid
su per sset agend^m i^u^an.
As they are fervent in their work, so they are constant at their work. The
Church of Ephesus had Letters Testimonial from Heaven, for my names sake thou
have labored, and have not fainted. Rev. 2.3.

Water in the Baths is always warm; As long as there is Water, there is heat;
not so our ordinary water, though this may be warmed by the fire at present,
yet if taken off, it returns to its former coldness (nay it is colder then
before, because the spirits which kept it from the extremity of cold, are by
the fire boyld out of it) The reason is plain, the heat of the Baths is from an
inward principle, and therefore is permanent, the heat of the latter is from an
external cause, and therefore is inconstant.

That warmth of piety which proceeds from an inward principle of a purified
conscience, is accompanied with perseverance; but that profession which flows
from an outward motive (wheremen as Chamelions take their color from that
which stands next them, their Religion from those they have their dependence
upon,) is of short duration.

A man that minds Religion by the by, is like Nebuchadnezzars Image, he has an
head of gold but feet of clay. His beginning may be like Nero's first five
years, full of hope and encouragement, but afterward as a carcass he is more
filthy and unsavory every day then other. His insincerity causes his
inconstancy. Trees unsound at the root, will quickly cease their putting forth
of fruit. Such men if godliness enjoy a summer of prosperity may like a Serpent
creep on the ground and stretch themselves at length, to receive the warmth of
the Sun, but if Winter come he will creep into some Ditch or Dunghill, least he
should take cold.

Travelers that go to Sea, merely to be Sea-sick, or in sport, if there arise
a black cloud or storm, their voyage is at an end, they hasten to the harbor;
they came not to be Weather beaten, or to hazard themselves amongst the
boistrous Billows, but only for pleasure: But the Merchant that is bound for
a voyage, whose calling and business it is, is not daun^ed at every Wave and
Wind, but drives through all with resolution. He that only pretends toward
Religion, if a storm meet him in the way to Heaven, he leaves it and takes
shelter in the earth; as a Snail, he puts out his head to see what Weather is
abroad (what countenance Religion ^ath at Court, whether great men do smile or
frown upon the Ways of God) and if the Heavens be lowering he shrinks into his
shell, esteeming that his only safety. But they that make godliness their
business, do not steer their course by such cards, they follow their trade,
though they meet with many trials; as resolved travelers, whether the ways be
fair or foul, whether the weather be clear or cloudy, they will go on toward
their Heavenly Canaan, They go from strength to strength, till they appear
before God in Sion, Psa. 84.8.

When men follow godliness by the by, and in jest, they take it to farm and
accept leases of it for a time, but if the times come to be such, that in their
blind judgments, it prove an hard pennyworth, they throw it up into their
Landlords hands; Vadat Christus (as he said) cum suo Evangelio; but men that
make Religion their business, take it as their free hold, as their fee simple
which they enjoy (and esteem it their privilege so to do) for the whole term
of their lives, I have chosen thy statutes as my heritage for ever, I have
inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always unto the end. Psa. 119.11, 12.

The godliness of an unsound professor, is like the light of a Candle, fed
with gross and greasy matter (as profit and honor and pleasure) which
continues burning, till that tallowy substance be wasted, but then goes out
and leaves a stench behind it; the holiness of a true Christian is like the
light of the Sun, which has its original in heaven, and is fed from above, and
thereby shines brighter and brighter to perfect day. Prove. 4.18.

CHAP. V. Religion is the great end of man's Creation.
I Come in the third place to the reasons, The Reason of the Doctrine.
Why godliness should be every man's main and principal business.

First, Because it is Gods chief end in sending man into, and continuing him in
this World. It is without question, that the work should be for that end, to
which it is appointed, and for which it is maintained by a sovereign and
intelligent workman. Where the Master has authority to command, there his end
and errand must be chiefly in the servants eye. Laert invit. Zen
Zeno well defines Liberty to be (...), a power to act and practice at a man's
own Pleasure; opposite to which, servitude must be a determination to act at,
and according to the will of another. (...) Arist Polit. c. 9.
A servant is (as the Orator says well) nomen officii a word that speaks one
under command, he is not one that moves of himself, but the Masters living
instrument (according to the Philosopher) to be used at his pleasure. According
to the title or power which one has over another, such must the service be.
Where the right is absolute, the obedience must not be conditional; God having
therefore a perfect sovereignty over his creatures, and complete right to all
their services; his end and aim, his will and word, must be principally minded
by them. Paul gathers this fruit from that root. The God whose I am, and whom I
serve Act. 27.23. His subjection is founded on Gods Dominion over him.

Now the great end to which man is designed by God, Hic si. is Iu^a
naefornationis ut homo si etmplem De, and Deus ara homi nis.
is the exercising himself to godliness. God erected the stately fabrique of
the great World for man, but he wrought the curious piece of the little World
[man] for himself, Of all his visible works he did set man apart for his own
Worship. Man says one, ^ustum est ut creatura laudet creatorem ipse enim ad
laudan dum secreavit. Aug.
is the end of all in a semicircle, intimating that all things in the World
were made for man, and man was made for God. It is but rational to suppose that
if this World was made for us, we must be made for more then this World. It is
an ingenious observation of Picus Mirandula, God created the Earth for beasts
to inhabit, the Sea for fish, the Air for fowls, the Heavens for Angels and
Stars, man therefore has no place to dwell and abide in, but the Lord alone.

The great God according to his infinite Wisdom has designed all his creatures
to some particular ends, and has imprinted in their natures an appetite and
propensity toward that end, as the point and scope of their being. (Yea the
very inanimate and irrational creatures are serviceable to those ends and uses
in their several places and stations) Birds build their nests exactly, bringing
up their young tenderly. Beasts scramble and scuffle for their Fodder, and at
last become man's food. The Sun, Moon and Stars move regularly in their orbs,
and by their light and influence ^dvantage the whole World. The little
Commonwealth of Bees work both industriously and wonderfully for the benefit
of mankind. Flowers refresh us with their sents; Trees with their shade and
fruits; Fire moves upward, Earth falls downward, each by nature hastening to
its center; Thunder and Winds being exhalations drawn up from the earth by the
heavenly bodies, The ancient Philosophers and the old Divines among the Pagans
did pourtray their gods in wood and stone with musical instruments, not that
they believed the gods to be fiddlers or lovers of music, but to show that
nothing is more agreeable to the nature of God, then to do all in a sweet
harmony and proportion. Platarch.
are wholly at (though stubborn and violent creatures) the call and command of
the mighty possessor of Heaven and Earth, and with them, as with besoms he
sweeps and purifieth the air; Fish sport up and down in rivers; Rivers run
along sometimes seen, sometimes secret, never ceasing or tiring till they empty
themselves into the Ocean; the mighty Sea (like a pot of water) by its ebbing
and flowing purges it self, boyleth and prepares Piscis a pasco
sustenance for living creatures. Through this womb of moisture, this great
pond of the world (as In contemp
Bishop Hall terms it) men travel in moveable houses, from Country to
Country, transporting and ex changing commodities. Thus the Almighty Creator
does ((...), as Plato says) observe a curious comely order in all his work,
and appoints them to some use according to their nature. Surely much more is
man (the point in which all those lines meet) designed to some noble end,
suitable to the excellency of his being; and what can that be but to worship
the glorious and blessed God, and the exercising himself to godliness?

The Lord made all things for himself, Prove. 16.4. God made things without life
and reason, Plato finem hujus mundi bonitatem dei esse affirmavit.
to serve him passively and subjectively by administering occasion to man, to
admire and adore his Maker; but man was made to worship him actively and
affectionately, as sensible of, and affected with that Divine wisdom, power,
and goodness which appear in them. As all things are of him, as the efficient
cause; so all things must necessarily be for him, as the final cause. But man
in an especial manner is predestined and created for this purpose, Isa. 43.1,
and 7. Thou art mine; I have created him for my glory; I have formed him, yea I
have made him. There is both the author and the end of our creation; the
author, I have created him; the end, for my glory. As man is the most exact
piece on which he bestowed most pains, Sol^s homo sapientia instructus est ut
religianem solus intelligat and haec est hominis atque mutorum vel praecipua
vel sola di^antia. Lact. de^ira dei.
so from him he cannot but expect most praise. Lactantius accounts religion
the most proper and essential difference between men and beasts. The praises
which Beasts give God are dumb, their sacrifices are dead; but the sacrifices
of Men are living, and their praises lively.

God did indeed set up the admirable house of the visible world (floaring it
with the earth, watering it with the Ocean, and ceiling it with the pearly
Heavens) for his own service and honor, but the payment of this rent is
expected from the hands of Man the inhabitant. He was made and put into this
house upon this very account, that be might as Gods Steward gather his rents
from other creatures, and pay in to the great Landlord his due and deserved
praise. Man is made as a glass to represent the perfections that are in God. A
glass can receive the beams of the Sun into it, and reflect them back to the
Sun again. The excellencies of God appear abundantly in his works; man is made
to be the glass where these beams of Divine glory should be united and
received, and also from him reflected back to God again.

O how absurd is it to conceive that God should work a body so curiously in the
lowest parts of the Earth, embroyder it with nerves, veins, variety and
proportion of parts (miracles enough says one between head and foot, to fill a
Volume) and then enliven it with a spark of his own fire, a ray of his own
light, an Angelical and Heaven born soul, and send this picture of his own
perfections, this comely creature into the World, merely to eat, and drink, and
sleep, or to buy and sell, and sow and reap. Surely the only wise God had an
higher end, and nobler design in forming and fashioning man with so much care
and cost.

The upright figure of man's body (as the poetical Heathen could observe) may
mind him of looking upward to those blessedmansions above; Os hominisublime
dedit taelumque tueri jussit. Ovid.
and that fifth muscle in his eye (whereby he differs also from other
creatures) who have only four, one to turn downward, Columb. de re anat. l. 1.
c. 9.
another to hold forwards, a third to turn the eye to the right hand, a fourth
to turn the eye to the left, but no unreasonable creature can turn the eye
upward as man can) may admonish him of viewing those superior glories, and
exercising himself to godliness, it being given him for this purpose, says the
Anatomist, that by the help thereof he might behold the Heavens; thus the
blessed God even by sensible demonstrations speaks his mind and end in making
man, but the nature of man's soul being a spiritual substance, does more loudly
proclaim Gods pleasure, that he would have it conversant about spiritual
things. He made it an heavenly spark, that it might mount and ascend to Heaven.

A Philosopher may get riches, Arist. Polit. lib. 1. cap. ult.
says Aristotle, but that is not his main business, a Christian may, nay must
follow his particular calling, but that is not his main business, that is not
the errand for which he was sent into the World. God made particular callings
for men, but he made men for their general callings. It was a discreet answer
of Anaxagoras Clazamenius to one that asked him why he came into the World,
Coelum mihi patria cuius cura summa est Anaxago. Diogen Laert.
Vt coelum contempler, that I might contemplate Heaven. Heaven is my Country
and for that is my chiefest care. May not a Christian upon better reason,
confess that to be the end of his creation that he might seek heaven, and be
serviceable to the Lord of Heaven, and say as Jerome, I am a miserable sinner,
and born only to Repent. The Jewish Talmud propounds this question, Why God
made man on the Sabbath-eve, and gives this answer, That he might presently
enter upon the command of sanctifying the Sabbath, and begin his life with the
worship of God, which was the chief reason and end why it was given him.

CHAP. VI. Religion is a work of the greatest weight. It is Soul-work, it is
God-work, it is Eternitywork.
SEcondly, Godliness ought to be every man's main business, because it is a work
of the greatest concernment and weight. Things that are of most stress call for
our greatest strength. Our utmost pains ought to be laid out upon that which is
of highest price: Man's diligence about any work must be answerable to the
consequence of the work. The folly of man seldom appears more then in being
very busy about nothing, in making a great cry where there is little Wool;
like that empty fellow that showed himself to Alexander (having spent much time
and taken much pains at it before hand) and boasted that he could throw a Pea
through a little hole, expecting a great reward, but the King gave him only a
bushel of Pease for a recompense, suitable to his diligent negligence, or his
busy Idleness. Things that are vain and empty are unworthy of our care and
industry. The man that by hard labor and hazard of his life did climb up to
the top of the Steeple, to set an Egg an end, was deservedly the object of pity
and laughter: We shall think him little better then mad, that should make as
great a fire for the rosting of an Egg, as for the roasting of an Ox.

On the other side, the wisdom of men never presents it self to our view in
livelier colors, then in giving those affairs, which are of greatest
concernment, precedence of time and strength. Of brutes man may learn this
lesson. When the cart is empty, or has but little lading, the Team goes
easily along, they play upon the road, but when the burden is heavy or the Cart
stuck, they pull and draw, and put forth all their strength.

Now godliness is amongst all man's works of the greatest weight. The truth is,
he has no work of weight but this; this is the one thing necessary, and in
this one thing are man's all things. Our unchangeable weal or woe in the other
world is wrapped up in our diligence or negligence about this; our earthly
business be they about food, or raiment, about honors or pleasures, or
whatsoever, are but toys and trifles, but bables and Butterflies to this. As
Candles before the sun they must all disappear and give place to this.

Moses a pious and tender Father, when leaving them (in his Swan-like Song)
gives savoury advice to his Children. We need not doubt but his spiritual
motions were quickest, when his natural motions were slowest; that the stream
of grace ran with full strength, when it was to empty it self into the Ocean of
glory. Mark what special counsel he gives them who were committed to his
special care, Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your hearts to all the words which I command you
this day, for it is not a vain thing because it is your life, in which words we
have 1. a Commandment, and 2. an Argument. The commandment is, Set your hearts
to all the words which I command you this day, that is, exercise your selves to
godliness. He does not say lend them your ears, to listen to them slightly, or
let them have your tongues to speak of them cursorily. No, it is not set your
heads, but set your hearts to all the words, etc. He does not say, let your
works be according to these words, or let your feet ever make them your walk;
No, it is not set your hands but set your hearts to the words that I speak unto
you. Make it your business, and then your Ears and Tongues, your Feet, your
Heads, your Hands, and all will be employed about them to the purpose. But what
special Argument does Moses urge for the enforcement of this great work, Surely
that which I am speaking of, the weight of it. Set your he arts to all the
words which I command you this day, For it is not a vain thing, because it is
your life v. 47. Moses had experience that the hearts of the Israelites were
exceeding knotty wood, and therefore he uses an heavy Beetle to drive home the
Wedge: It is not a vain thing, it is life; as if he had said, Were it a matter
of small moment, ye might Laze and Loyter about it, but it behooves you to
bestir your selves lustily to follow it, laboriously to set your hearts to it,
for it is as much worth as your lives; that pearl of matchless price is
eng^g^d, and at stake in your pursuit of godliness. Life though but natural, is
of so much value, that men will sacrifice their honors, and pleasures, their
wealth, and liberty, and all, to it.

The Egyptians parted with their costly jewels willingly, Hinc clamor ille
desperation is index; omnes mortui sumus, binc facilitas illa in dando Calo. in
Exodus 12. ^anquam si hoc pretio animas redimissent. Jun. in loc.
to redeem their lives, as Calvin observes. The widow in the Gospel spared
none of her wealth to obtain health, which is much inferior to life. Skin for
skin, all that a man has will he give for his life, Throw but a brute into the
water to drown it, how will it labor, and toll, and sweat to preserve its
life. View a man on his deathbed, when a distemper is like a strong enemy,
fighting to force life out of the field, how does Nature then with all the
might and strength it has, strive and struggle to keep its ground? What
panting and breathing, what sweating and working of all the parts do you
behold? and no wonder, The man labors for life: If there be such labor for
a natural life, that is but umbra vitae, a shadow to this the substance, which
is but the union of the body and soul, and lies under a necessity of
dissolution? what labor does a spiritual life deserve that consists in the
souls union and communion with the blessed Savior, and which neither men nor
devils, neither death nor hell, shall ever deprive a believer of, but in spite
of all it will grow and increase till it commence eternal life? Well might
Moses expect that such an heavy weight as this should make great impression,
and sink deep into their affections. For it is not a vain thing because it is
your life.

We may say of this work of Christianity, compared with all other works, what
David said of Goliahs sword, There is none like it; this is soulwork, this is
God-work, this is eternity-work, and therefore of greatest weight, and
requires us all to make it our business: Such blows as these three are, one
would think might force fire out of a flint.

This is Soul-work: As soul woe is the heaviest woe, and soul-wants are the
greatest wants, so soulwork is the weightest work; the dangers of a soul are
the deepest dangers, the loss of the soul is the dreadfullest loss, the neglect
of the soul is the dolefullest neglect: The consequence of the action is
frequently specified from the excellency of the person or subject concerned in
it. The soul of man is a most excellent piece, both in regard of the
spirituality and immortality of its substance, as also in regard of that divine
image imprinted on it, those heavenly qualities with which it was at first
endowed. Princes stamp not their image (except in cases of necessity) on brass,
or tynn, or leather, but on gold and silver, the chiefest and most excellent
metals; therefore though those affairs which concern the body are but of
ordinary respect, yet those that concern the soul are of unconceivable weight
and regard. One soul is more worth then ten thousand bodies, then ten thousand
worlds.

The greatest thing (says one) in this world is Man, and the greatest thing in
man is his Soul. It is an abridgement of the invisible world, as the body is of
the visible: The body though no mean work considered absolutely, yet of
ordinary worth considered comparatively to the soul. It is a mudwall enclosing
a rich treasure; as a common mask to a beautiful face, as a course cabinet
having in it a precious carkanet.

The very Heathen acknowledged that the soul was the man, (...). Plat.
the body but its servant; and therefore the Christian may well call it, and
care for it as his darling, as his only one, as the original is in that place,
Psalm. 22.20. Chrysostom observes, Omnia Deus dedit duplicia. Homil. 22. ad
popul. Antioch.
God has given man two Eyes, two Ears, two Hands, two Feet, that the failing
of the one, may be supplied by the help of the other; Animam vero unam, but one
Soul; if that miscarry there is no remedy: Nebuchadnezzar lost his Reason, and
that was restored; David lost his Wives, Children and Goods, and yet they were
recovered; nay Lazarus lost his life and was revived, but for the loss of the
Soul, no power can recover it, no price can redeem, no pearls, no not the whole
world can recompense its loss.

Well might Charles the Fifth, Val. Rath. Car. lib. 3.
when solicited by a great Counselor Antonino de Leva to cut off all the
Princes in Germany, that he might rule alone, forbear to put his advice into
practice, and cry out, O Anima, Anima! O my soul, my soul, what then will
become of my soul? It was a royal answer which Maximilian King of Bohemia gave
the Pope, who persuaded him to turn good Catholic, promising him much
advantage; I thank your Holiness, but my souls health is dearer to me then all
the things in the world. Hist. Counc. Trent.

The Apostle calls the body a vile body, Phil. 3. ult. in regard of its
original production (it was made not of heavenly materials, as Sun or Stars;
nor of precious materials, as pearls or jewels, but ex pulvere limoso and
lutoso, of dust mingled with water) and in regard of its ultimate resolution,
it becomes first an ugly ghastly carcass, and then moulders into earth; but the
Holy ghost calls the Soul, The breath of the Almighty, Job 33.4. It was not as
the body framed of the dust, but immediately breathed by God himself; it was
not the fruit of some praeexistent matter, but the immediate effect of Divine
power: The soul is in a spiritual as well as in a natural sense, the life of
the body, especially if you take vivere for valere, to live for to be lusty,
and to be in health; for what the Sun is to the greater, that the Soul is to
the lesser World. When the sun shines comfortably how cheerfully do all things
look? how well do they thrive and prosper? the birds sing merrily, the beasts
play wantonly, the trees and herbs put forth their buds and fruits; the whole
Creation enjoys a day of light and joy: But when the Sun departs, what a
night of horror follows? how are all things wrapped up in the sable mantle of
darkness? nay let but the heat of its beams abate, how do all faces gather
paleness? the creatures are buried, as it were in the winding sheet of Winters
frost and snow: so when the soul shines pleasantly on the body, refreshing it
with its beams of holiness, with its rays of grace, the body cannot but enjoy a
Summer of health and strength. Such a soul in such a body, is like a pure wax
candle in a crystal lanthorn, refreshing with its sent, directing by its
light, and comforting with its heat; but if the soul be weak, and full of
spiritual wants, the body must needs wither. The soul is the ship in which the
body sails, if that be safe the body is safe, if that sinks the body sinks for
ever.

From all this it appears that Soul-work is a weighty work (not to be dallied
or trifled with) b^t to be made the business of every man. Godliness must
therefore be followed with care and conscience because of soul consequence. It
was our deprivation of godliness which was the souls greatest loss, and
therefore for the regaining of it, ought to be our greatest labor. God sent
his Son into the world for this very purpose, that he might by his bloody
passion restore man to his primitive purity and perfection. Godliness is the
souls food which nourishes it; who would feast his horse (^orpus est jumentum
animae) and starve himself? The souls raiment both for its defense and warmth,
nay the life of its life. The life of the soul as Jacobs in Benjamin, is bound
up in godliness. Take godliness away and the soul goes down into the grave of
the other world with unspeakable sorrow.

Godliness, as it is Soul-work, so it is God-work; as the excellency of the
subject in which, so also the excellency of the object about which it is
conversant speaks it to be weighty. Actiones specificantur a fine objecto and
circumstantiis. Eustath. de mor. Philos.
The Moralists tell us; That actions are specified not only from their ends
and circumstances, but likewise from their objects. And the Divines assure us,
that the chiefest source of man's sin and sorrow is his causing the bent and
stream of his inward man to run after wrong objects. If objects then can vary
the species, they may much more add to the degree, to the weight of an action.
Where the object is great, no slip can be small

Evil words spoken, or blows given to an ordinary man, bear but a common action
at Law, but in case they relate to the King, they are Treason. The higher the
person is with whom we converse, the holier and more exact should our carriage
be. If we walk with our equals, we toy and trifle by the way, and possibly if
occasion be, wander from them; but if we wait upon a Prince, especially about
our own near concernments, we are serious and sedulous, watching his words, and
working with the greatest diligence, for the performance of his pleasure. A
Lawyer will mind the Countrymans cause when he is at leisure, when greater
affairs will give him leave, and then (it may be) do it but coldly and
carelessly: But if he have business committed to him by his Sovereign, which
concerns the prerogative, he will make other causes stay, crowd out of the
Press to salute this, attend it with all his parts, and power, and ability, and
industry, and never take his leave of it till it be finished. I need not
explain my meaning in this, it is obvious to every eye that godliness is the
worshipping the infinite and ever blessed God; surely his service is neither to
be delayed nor dallied with, it is not to be slighted or slubberd over, Cursed
is he that does the Work of the Lord negligently.

When we deal with our equals, with them that stand upon the same level with
us, we may deal as men, our affections may be like Scales that are evenly
poized, in regard of indifferency, but when we have to do with a God (so great,
that in comparison of him, the vast Ocean, the broad Earth, and the highest
Heavens are all less then nothing, and so glorious that the great lights of the
World, though every Star were a Sun, yet in respect of him are perfect
darkness) we must be like Angels, our affections should be all in a flame in
regard of fervency and activity. The very Turks though they build their own
houses low and homely, Turk. Hist. Fol. 342.
yet they take much pains about their Moschees, their Temples, they build them
high and stately. David considered about a Temple for God. The work is great
for the palace is not for man, but for the Lord God. Now (says he) I have
prepared with all my might for the House of my God. Upon this foundation that
it was God-work, David raises this building to make it his business, to
prepare for it with all his might, as if he had said. Had it been for man, the
work had been mean, it had wanted exceedingly of that weight which now it has;
but the work is great for the palace is not for man, but for God; and because
it is a work of such infinite weight, therefore I have prepared for it with all
my might. I can think no pains great enough for so great a Prince.

It was provided in the Old Law, that the weights and measures of the
Sanctuary, should be double to the weights and measures of the Commonwealth,
Godw. Jew. Antiq. l. 6. c. 9. and 10.
The shekel of the Sanctuary was half a Crown of our money, and the shekel of
the Commonwealth but fifteen pence; the cubit of the Sanctuary a full yard, the
Common cubit but half a yard, compare 1 Kings 7.15. with 2 Chronicles. 3. and 15.
The common Talent was one hundred eighty seven pound ten shillings; the Kings
Talent two hundred eighty one pounds five shillings; the Talent of the
Sanctuary was three hundred seventy five pounds, Itinerarium Sac. And what was
the Gospel of this, but to teach us, that in things that appertain to God, we
must give double weight, double measure, double care, double diligence; though
men be slothful and sluggish in the service of men, yet they must be fiery and
fervent in spirit, when they are serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. To give brass
money to any is lamentable, but to cast it into the treasury is most
abominable, God is a great God, and looks to be served like himself, and
according to his excellent greatness, Cursed be the deceiver which has in his
flock a Male, and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great
King says the Lord of Hosts, and my name is dreadful among the Heathen, Mal.
1. ult.

There are some of the Heathen, ^ohu. Pierii Hieroglyph.
that Worship the Sun for a God, and would offer to the Sun somewhat suitable,
and therefore because they wondered at the Suns swift motion, they would offer a
Horse with Wings; Now an Horse is a swift creature, (...). Paus.
and one of the strongest to continue in motion for a long time together, then
having Wings added to him, they conceived him a sacrifice somewhat suitable to
the Sun. Surely much more cause have Christians to take care that their
sacrifices to the glorious and boundless Majesty, be some way suitable to his
unconceivable and infinite excellencies.

Further, Godliness is Eternity-work and therefore must needs be of infinite
weight, and is worthy of all our pains and diligence. We esteem Lands which we
hold in fee-simple to us and our heirs for ever, at a far greater rate, and are
more diligent to secure our Titles to them, then those lands which we have
only a lease of, or a life in. Men's estates are of more or less value,
according to the term of years they have in them; Ministers are often much more
exact in their Printing, then in their Preaching. Such in whose ordinary
Preaching, words like a spring run full and fast; and sense, or at least
judgment, like a pond stands still; will if they Print, scrue their parts to
the highest pitch, and spare for no pains, that if possible) sense and
sentences, reason and expressions may keep equal pace. Even those whose Sermons
when delivered in their Auditories smell (as Chalcus said of Demosthenes
orations) of the Lamp, Plut in vit. Demost.
are the fruits of much prayer, and study, yet when they are to publish them to
the World, they will survey every sentence, weigh every word, bestow more care
and labor on them, hence possibly ou^ proverbial speech, when a thing is done
exactly. This is done in Print. But what is the ground of this? I suppose one
of the chiefest: because men print in a sense for Eternity, Sermons preached,
or men's words pass away (with many) like wind, how soon are they buried in the
grave of oblivion; but Sermons printed are men's works, live when they are dead,
and become an image of eternity; This shall be written for the generation to
come.

Godliness is a work that relates not only to few lives, as lands do, or to a
few generations as men's books do, but to the boundless bottomless Ocean of
eternity indeed, and therefore calls for all our care and diligence: Drex.
Eternit. Conclus. lib.
Drexelius observes well out of the Father, Our works do not pass away as soon
as they are done (as they may seem to do) but as seed sown in time, they rise
up to all Eternity. A little neglect now may prove an eternal loss; Whatsoever
we think, speak or do, once thought, spoke or done it is eternal, it abides
for ever.

Eternal life is promised to the diligent; Idem Non consid. cap. 1.
Eternal death is the portion of the negligent: The former shall be bathed in
the rivers of Gods eternal pleasures, the latter shall suffer the vengeance of
eternal fire. To be tormented day and night for ever and ever, and to enjoy the
exceeding and eternal weight of glory are certainly no jesting matters, but of
more concernment then we can possibly conceive. Who would not labor hard to
attain eternal life? Who would not work night and day to avoid eternal death,
eternal woe.

Zeuxis the famous Limner made painting his bufiness, and was exceeding careful
and curious in drawing all his lines; he would let no piece of his go abroad
into the world to be seen of men, till he had turned it over and over; viewed
it on this side and that side, again and again, and being asked the reason,
answered, Because what I paint, I paint for eternity; so it is with every man
and woman in the exercise of godliness, it is of eternal concernment; we pray,
we hear for eternity, we read, we sing, we watch, we fast we live, we die for
eternity; O how exactly, how diligently should all be done?

The Holy Ghost urges it as a reason, why men's eyes and hearts should not be
set upon riches, because they are not eternal. In one place Solomon tells us,
That riches are not, Prove. 23.5. In another place, that they are not for ever,
Prove. 27.4. because things that are not for ever, are as if they were not at
all. Eternal life is the true life, says Augustine, this is but the shadow or
semblance of life. The affairs of time are but trifles to the affairs of
eternity; but our eyes and hearts must be set upon godliness, because it is for
ever, it will do a soul good for ever; our Savior does from this argument
command us to make godliness our chief employment; Labor not for the meat that
perishes, but for that meat which endures to everlasting life, Joh. 6.27.
where labor for temporal food is not prohibited, but labor for eternal food,
is preferred.

It was the consideration of this that made the forty Martyrs suffer so
ventrously and valiantly under Licinius, Basil. 40. Mart.
Anno 300. When Agricolaus his Deputy and one of the devils agents, set upon
them several ways to draw them to deny Christ, and at last tempted them with an
offer of Wealth and Preferment; they all cried out with one consent, (...), O
Eternity, Eternity; give us money that will last to Eternity, and glory that
will abide for ever. They slighted that pitiful wealth which was current only
in this beggarly world, and made Religion their business, because it brought
them in durable riches. Things that are transient and temporal may, like hasty
storms, salute only the surface of our hearts and away, but things that are
permanent and eternal, must like soft showrs sink deep into our affections and
command all our actions. Ah did but man know what it is to be eternally in Hell
fire, and what it is to live eternally in Gods Favor, he would do any thing
were it never so hard to arrive at Heaven.

The Romans build their Temples round, and the rule of Pythagoras was, When men
worshipped they must turn themselves round: Those Heathens had confused notions
of Eternity, and represented it by round things, because such had neither
beginning nor end. If they by the light of Nature saw a little of it, and
thence would have their Temples and Worship suitable to it; then much more we,
who have clearer apprehensions by the light of Scripture must, have our
conversations answerable.

CHAP. VII. The necessity of maki^g Religion our business both in regard of the
opposition a Christian meets with, and the multiplicity of business which lies
upon him.
THirdly, Godliness must be made our principal business, our main work, because
otherwise we shall lose our reward. We say As good never a whit as never the
better. Piety without much pains will redound to little or no profit: How
foolish is that builder, who in setting up an house has been at much cost, and
yet loses all because he will be at no further charge: Many lose what they
have wrought, 2 John 8. Their works, because not their business, are not
perfect, and so to small purpose. The sloathful roasts not what he took in
hunting, Prove. 12.27. He was at some labor to catch the Beast, but was loath
to be at any more in dressing it, and so all was lost; laboriousness to
godliness is as the soul to the body; which being separated from it, godliness
dies and quickly becomes unsavory.

The reward of Godliness is of infinite worth, the end of Holiness (as of Hope)
is the salvation of the soul, the eternal and immediate enjoyment of God in
Heaven. Now who can think to atrain the place of such ravishing pleasures
without much pains. Iter per angusta ad augusta.

Things that are most delicate cannot be had without the greatest difficulty;
they that will enjoy large Diadems must run through many deaths, and dangers,
and use much diligence. Nature her self will not bestow her precious treasure
without much unwearied labor. Dust and Dirt lie common in Streets, but the
gold and silver mines are buried in the bowels of the earth, and they must work
hard and dig deep that will come at them. Ordinary stones may be had in every
quarry, but pearls are secret in the bottom of the Sea, and they must dive low
and hazard their lives that will (fetch up the Oysters in which they breed,
and) enjoy them.

When did we ever find Nature so prodigal of her gifts, as to bestow skill and
excellency in any art or science, without industry and diligence. Does she not
force her students to beat their brains, to wast their bodies, to break their
sleep, to burn up their strength, before she will permit them to pry into her
secrets, to pick the lock of her curious Cabinet, and gain any considerable
knowledge of her Wealth and richness. And can we think the God of Nature will
give men to know him, as they are known of him, will bestow on them the
unspeakable gift, the pearl of price, the holy of holies, such things as eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither man's heart conceive, while they lie
lazing on the bed of Idleness.

Heaven is not unfitly compared to an Hill; among Heathen to Olympus, among
Christians to Mount-Sion. They that will climb up to it, must pant, and blow,
and sweat for it. Elijahs Translation to the place of bliss, was much more
speedy and facile then ordinary. We see no p^nting heart, no trembling hands,
no quivering lips, no ghastly looks to be the forerunners of his passage into
Eternal life. Where the union is near and natural, there the separation is hard
and painful, but behold here the Marriage knot betwixt body and soul is not
untied. Those loving Relations like Husband and Wife, ride triumphantly
together in a stately Chariot to the Heavenly Court; yet even in this rapture,
God would teach us that the Virgin inheritance must be ravished: There appeared
a Chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and Elijah went up by a Whirlwind into
Heaven, 2 Kings 2.11. Why a Chariot of fire but to note that Heaven must be
stormed and taken by force. Fire is the most active inanimate Creature; hereby
is figured that laborious action is the way to the beatifical vision. The
Chariot is made of fire, the Wheels upon which it runs are a whirlewind.
Activeness and violence are the only way to the blessed inheritance. Who ever
entered into Heaven with ease? They that will be knighted must kneel for it;
they that will wear the Crown must win it. A man is not crowned except he
strive lawfully, that is strenuously, 1 Timothy 2.25. He that will be saved, must
work out his salvation, and that with fear and trembling, Legitime certare est
ad pugnam se preparare and animose adversarium aggredi. Bald.
Phil. 2.

Christ who first bought the purchase, has already set the price, upon which,
and no other the Sons of men may come to the possession. There is indeed a
twofold price of a thing, a natural price, when so much is laid down, as is
commensurate or proportionable to the thing bought, so the price of Heaven was
the blood of Christ, Heb. 10.19.

A pactional price, when so much is laid down, (though inferior to the
commodity) upon which the seller is contented that you enjoy the thing desired;
so labor, knocking, working is the price of Heaven, Isa. 55.3. This price is
made of man's future felicity, and Christ is resolved not to abate the least
farthing, Strive, says he, (...). Conamini omnibus virib us Extremas summatque
vires velut agonizantes exerite, quass provita si vincitis, pro morte si
vincimini luctaturi. A Lapid. in Loc.
to enter in at the straight gate, for many will seek to enter in and shall not
be able, Luke 13.24. As if he had said, there will be many Seekers, Many that
will both cheapen Heaven by a profession, and bid somewhat by performances, but
they shall miss the place for want of more pains, they shall not be able; if ye
therefore have any love to your souls, be not only seekers but strivers, do
not only cheapen and offer a little, but come up to the price. Put forth all
your strength as Wrestlers do, that strive for Masteries, as ever ye would
enjoy those eternal pleasures. Men were as good bid nothing as not come up to
the sellers price.

All run in a Race, but one receives the prize; Sicnotat diligentiam and
celeritatem. Cor. A. Lapid.
So run that ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. They that intend for the Crown, do
before hand diet themselves, breath their bodies, and when they run for the
Conquest strive and stretch themselves to the utmost, he that loytereth is as
sure to lose as if he sat still.

The lazy World, because Christ sends chapmen up and down with his wares, to
offer them to every house, to every heart, think to have them at their own
ordinary rates, but they shall find that grace which is many degrees short of
glory, is not to be had by sloth and idl^ness; there must be lifting up the
heart, lending the ears, seeking, searching, begging, digging, attention of the
ou^ward intention of the inward man, before men can understand the fear of the
Lord, and find the knowledge of God, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. Though it be easy to let
the backet into the Well, yet it is hot work, and hard labor to draw water out
of the Well of Salvation. The laborious Be, only is laden with honey.

The desire of the slothful kills him, O si, O si, O tiosi
because his hands refuse to labor, Non est e terris mollis ad aslra via Se^^c.
Prove. 21.5. He is full of wishing, but far from working. As the Cat, he would
fain have the Fish, but is unwilling to wet his Feet; his desires are destitute
of suitable endeavors, and therefore rather harm him, then help him. Like
Ishbosheth he lazeth on his bed till he is deprived of his life. He thinks to
be hurried in have to Heaven, to be carried as passengers in a Ship, asleep in
their cabins to their Haven, but is all the while in a deceitful Dream. There
is no going to those Heavens where Christ is in his glory, as the sick man came
to the house where Christ was, in his estate of ignominy, let down in a bed.

He that will be but almost a Christian, must be content to go but almost to
Heaven.

Idleness is the burial of our persons, and negliligence is the burial of our
actions. Writing on the Sand is easy, but soon worn out. Its marred wit^ a
small breath of wind, but writing on marble, as it is more permanent, so it
costeth more pains. An idle servant is in Gods esteem an evil servant; he does
not distinguish betwixt a slothful and an unfaithful man: His Word tells us
that he has bonds for those hands that are folded in the bosom, when they
should be working for a blessing; that he has fetters for those feet that
stand still and stick fast in the mire and mud of sinful pleasures, when they
should be running the way of his precepts; nay, that he has utter darkness for
them that will not walk and work while they enjoy the light, Matthew. 25.26, and
30. He that takes his ease in this world must travel in the next.

Two things show a necessity that Godliness must be made our business, if ever
we would make any thing of it.

First, Because of the opposition we meet with in the way of Religion, When the
Wind and Tide are both with the Mariner he may hoise up his sail and sit
still, but when both are against him, he must row hard or never think to come
to his Haven. The way to Heaven is like Jonathans passage against the
Philistims, betwixt two rocks, the one Bozez, dirty; the other Seneb, thorny;
the men of the world will be ever diligent, either with dirt to bespatter their
credits, or with thorns to wound and pierce their consciences that walk in this
path; he must therefore have a mind well resolved to take pains, and his feet
well shod with patience, that will go this way to Paradise. The way of this
world is like the vale of Siddim, slimy and slippery, full of lime-pits and
stumbling blocks to maim or mischief us. Saints are Princes in all lands, but
as Princes that pass through a Country in disguise meet with many affronts, so
do Christians.

The flesh is like Birdlime, which when the spirit would at any time mount up
to Heaven with the wings of Faith and Meditation, hampers and hinders it; it is
the holy souls prison, wherein it is fettered and fastened that it cannot as it
would walk at liberty, and seek Gods precepts. The Devil, both a Serpent for
craft, and a Lion for cruelty, does out of his hatred to God make it his
constant business by his power and policy to hinder Godliness. As the Panther,
because he cannot come at the person, he tears the picture wherever he finds
it; We wrestle not with flesh and blood but with Principalities and Powers,
Ephesians. 6.12. While Satan reigns in a creature all may be quiet and calm, but
if he be once cast out he will rage and roar to purpose. While Israel serves
the Egyptians, carrying their crosses, bearing their burdens, doing their
drudgery all is well; but when once they shake off Pharoahs yoke, turn their
backs upon Egypt, and set out for Canaan, with what force and fury are they
pursued to be brought back to their former bondage? Christ was no sooner
baptized then buffetted; he went as it were out of the water of baptism into
the fire of temptation: and if the Prince were all his time persecuted, his
Subjects must not expect to be wholly privileged. The cross is tied as a tag
to the profession of Christianity, Matthew. 10.30. One Article in the Indenture
which all Apprentices must seal to, that will call Christ Master, is to bear
the cross daily, Matthew. 16. The Saints are as vessels floating on the waters of
Meribah, where ( Omne quod flat Aquilo est, as Tertullian says of Pontus) no
wind blows but what is sharp and keen. The Hebrews were no sooner enlightened to
their conversion, but they endured a sharp fight of affliction; their lightning
was accompanied with a grievous storm, Heb. 10.32. Holiness is usually followed
with much hatred and hardship. The enemies of man's salvation are impudent and
uncessant, ever raging never resting. Plut. in vit. Marcel.
What the Carthaginian Commander said of Marcellus, may be truly spoken by us
in regard of them; Per varios casus per tot discrimina rerum. Tendimus ad coelum
That we have to do with those who will never be quiet, either Conquerors or
conquered; but Conquerors, they will pursue their victory to the utmost; and
conquered, labor to recover their loss. Satan especially is both wrathful and
watchful to undermine souls. He is fitly called Beelzebub, the master Fly,
because as a Fly he quickly returns to the bait from which he was but now
beaten. Though Emperors may turn Christians, says Austin, yet the Devils will
not.

Does not this fully speak the necessity of making Godliness our business? --
Opposuit Natura Alpemque nivemque Deduxit scopulos and montem ru oit Aceto.
Juv. Sat. 10.
Can such difficulties be conquered without much diligence? Who can eat his way
like Hannibal) through such Alps of opposition without hot water and hard work.
If like Sampson we would break all these cords of opposition in sunder, we must
awake out of sleep and put forth all our strength; Saints are all called to be
Soldiers: Our whole life is a warfare, All the days of my appointed time, Job
14.14. An Expositor reads it, Ad agendum nat^milites. Cicer.
All the days of my warfare I will wait till my change come. The Soldiers
life, is no lazy life; Armies are wholly for action, especially when they deal
with such subtle, strong adversaries that assault them day and night without
ceasing. Who can conquer three such mighty Monarchs as Flesh, World and Devil
are, or force his way through their temptations and suggestions, unless he
fight in earnest, and make it his business. That fire, if ever any, had need to
be hot that must melt and overcome such hard metal; and that hand, if ever
any, had need to work hard that will remove and level such high mountains. If
the silly Hare, pursued by such a pack of Hounds offer once to stand still or
lie down, she is sure to be torn in pieces and devoured. There is a time, says
the holy Bishop, Hall Holy observe. 20.
when Kings go not forth to warfare; our spiritual war admits no intermission,
it knows no night, no winter; abides no peace, no truce; this calls us not into
Garrison, where we may have ease and respite, but into pitched fields
continually; we see our enemies in the face always, and are always seen and
assaulted; ever resisting, ever defending, receiving, and returning blows; if
either we be negligent or weary, we dye; We can never have safety and peace but
in victory: There must our resistance be courageous and constant where both
yielding is death, and all treaties of peace, mortal.

Secondly, There is a necessity of making it our main work, Because of the
multiplicity of businesses that is incumbent on every Christian. That stream
had need to run freely and with full force, that must be divided into many
channels. That estate had need to be large that must be parted among many
children. Who can count the variety of works that every Christian must be
engaged in? how many Dangers he must wade through? how many Snares must he
avoid? how many Taunts and Mocks must he abide? how many Temptations must he
conquer? how many Graces must he exercise? how many Lusts must he mortify? how
many Duties must he perform? every relation, every condition calls for
answerable duty and diligence; every Ordinance must be improved by him, every
Providence must be sanctified to him; Mercies must like a ladder mount him
nearer to Heaven; Misery must, like the famine to the Prodigal, force him to
hasten to his Fathers house: His Wife, his Children, his Servants, his
Neighbors, his Friends, his Enemies, his shop, his closets, his visits, his
journeys do all require suitable service, and who can perform it that is not
diligent and sedulous?

Consider him in reference to Gods immediate Worship, he must pray, hear, read,
meditate, watch, fast, sanctify Sabbaths, sing Psalms, receive the Sacrament,
and in all walk humbly, reverently and uprightly with his God. Consider him in
reference to poor men, he must love mercy and supply their necessities
according to his ability, and not like a muck-heap, good for nothing till
carried forth; whatever men he deals with, he must do justly, love his Neighbor
as himself, and as God gives him opportunity provoke them to mind Grace and
Sanctity; as Musk, perfume if possible all that he comes near. Consider him in
reference to himself; he must live soberly, vigilantly; his heart is like a
subtle sturdy theif, ever seeking to break the goal, and therefore must have a
strong guard; his corrupt nature is like fire, and his whole man like thatch,
and therefore he must keep a narrow watch; his Senses are the Outworks which
Satan is ever assaulting, by them to gain the Royal Fort of the Soul, that he
must defend them with care and courage day and night. What is said of the
Husbandman is true of every Christian, His work is never at an end; The end of
one work is but the beginning of another; He must always be employed, either in
dunging, dressing, ploughing, sowing, harrowing, weeding or reaping his ground;
he has no leisure to be idle and lazy who has so much work lying upon his
hand. Nullus mihi per ^tium exiit dies partem etiam noctium studiis vendico non
vacosomno sed juc cumbo, and oculos vigilia fatigatos cadentesque in opere
detinco. Sen. epist 67.
Seneca thought Philosophy cut him out so much work, that he was necessitated
to spend every day and part of the nights in making it up. Christianity, a
nobler Mistress, as she gives better wages, so she commands greater work; that
her servants may say well with the Emperor, Let no day pass without a line; and
with Solomon's Houswife, not let their candle to go out by night, Prove. 30.

The French Duke de Alva could say (when he was asked by Henry the Fourth,
Whether he had seen the Eclipse of the Sun) That he had so much business to do
upon Earth, that he had no time to look up to Heaven. Sure I am, the Christian
may say with more truth and conscience, That he has so much business to do for
Heaven, that he has no time to mind vain or earthly things. That servant who
does ponder the strictness of his Master, consider the shortness of his time,
conceive the largeness of his task, and believe the weightiness of his work,
how it must be done, or he is undone for ever, will be easily convinced that it
nearly concerns him, that it highly behooves him to shake off sloth and
sluggishness, to gird up the loins of his mind, to give it the precedence in
all his actions, to pursue it with industry against all opposition, to
persevere in it with constancy to his dissolution, and in a word, to make it
his main business, his principal work.

CHAP. VIII. A Complaint that this Trade is so dead, and the Worlds trade so
quick.
THe Use which I shall make of this Doctrine, shall be either by way of
Complaint or Counsel.

First, By way of Lamentation: If Godliness ought to be every ones principal
business, How sadly should it be lamented that this calling is so exceedingly
neglected? What one man is there of many that does follow this trade, and
exercise himself to Godliness? Men generally cry out Trading is dead, their
particular callings are gone; they make no considerable returns, they stand in
their shops all the day idle: But may not God rather complain, The holy,
heavenly trade is decayed and dead; general callings are left and lost; Why
stand ye all the day idle, and refuse to work in my vineyard. While the Devil
has whole droves to do his drudgery; the Flesh vast flocks to flatter its
fancies, and the World many millions to admire and adore its vanities; the ways
of Sion mourn, they are unoccupied, none come to the solemn feasts, all her
gates are desolate. While the Lawyers Closet is filled with Clients for counsel
about their Estates, the Physicians chamber with Patients about their bodily
health, and the Tradesmans shop crowded with customers, Jesus Christ is left
alone. Though he offers wares which are of infinite worth, and stretches out
his hand all the day long yet no man regards.

It is reported of some Spaniards that live near the place where is store of
fish, P. P^grim.
that they will rather go without them then take the pains to catch them;
Heaven and Happiness, Savior and Salvation are near men, they are brought to
their very doors, and yet men will rather lose then labor for them, rather go
sleeping to Hell, then sweating to Heaven; All seek their own, and none the
things of Jesus Christ.

Offer a crust to a dog and he will catch at it, offer him a Crown and he will
contemn it; offer these men the crusts of vanity, and how greedily are they
embraced, while the Crown of Glory is most unworthily despised; like beastly
swine they trample this pearl under their feet, and love to wallow in the mire.

But possibly you may say, that there are many that make Religion their
business, only they are so near me that (according to the rule of Optics
which requires a due distance between the faculty and the object) I cannot
behold them; they abound in every Country, Parish, Family, All are Christians
and make the Worship of God their main work.

I must answer as he did when he saw the vast Army of Antiochus, There are many
men, but few Soldiers; many mouths but few hands; there are many nominal but
few real Christians; many that flourish like fencers, beating only the air,
but few that fight in earnest the good fight of faith. Godliness has many
complemental servants that will give her the cap and the knee, a few good words
and outward ceremonies, but Godliness has few faithful friends that make her
the Mistress of their affections, that give her the command of their hearts, and
that wait upon her, and walk with her all the day long. Pretenders to her
service are indeed like the sand of the sea numerous but practitioners or
faithful servants are like the pearl of the sea rare and precious; many court
her, but few marry her; for indeed men generally deal with Godliness as the
Germans with the Italians, or the Dutch with the Spaniards, hold a fair out
ward correspondency, enough to serve for mutual trade and traffic, but enter
not into a near familiarity; they have no great intimacie with Godliness; its
rather a stranger to them, whom now and then they bestow a visit on for fashion
sake, then an indweller or constant inhabitant.

Lepidus Major a loose Roman, when his Comrades were exercising themself in the
Camp, would lay himself down to sleep in the shade, and cry out, Vtinam hoc
esset laborare, would this were all the duty I were to do: Such Soldiers are
many who pretend to fight under Christ's Banner; when they should be watching
their souls, and warring with Satan and fin, they are sleeping and snoring as
if that were the way to work out their salvations. Reader, I must acquaint thee
with the Physicians rule, that Spontanae lassitudines morbos loquuntur;
Weariness without some apparent cause is a sign of a diseased body; so thy
laziness does speak a very unsound soul.

This complaint is urged with a threefold consideration.

First, How eager is the worldling for wealth and earthly things? though they
loyter about the meat which endures to eternal life, yet they can labor for
the meat that perishes; though they are so negligent about the Kingdom of
Heaven, yet the Kingdom of Earth suffers violence. What pains do the Mariners
take for treasure? What perils does the Soldier under go for plunder? what
labor and industry does the Husbandman use for profit? he rises early, sits
up late, denies himself, loses his sleep, rides and runs too and fro,
imbraceth all opportunities, is eaten up almost with cares and fears, all for
the earthly ma^^^^, whilst the heavenly Mansions are like the unknown part of
the world, which no man regards or looks after: They pant after the dust of
the earth as greedily as hot creatures do after the air to cool their scorched
intrails, Amos 2.7. The Serpents curse is entailed on that poisonous brood, the
dust is their diet, they feed on ashes, Genesis 3.14. Amos 7. They laugh at
dangers and trample upon difficulties, they force their way through darkness,
and the shadow of death, through stifling damps and overflowing floods, through
rocks and mountains in the pursuit of earthly treasures, Job 28.9, 10, 11. Its
said of the Dutch they are so industrious at Navigation that if it were
possible to sail in ships to Heaven they would not come short of that Haven: Ah
what pity is it that this jewel should hang in a swines snout, which would so
well become the Christians finger; that this diligence, this violence should be
exercised about men's earthly and particular, which would so well suit their
heavenly and general calling. The ambitious person, like the Panther, Pliny
not. hist. lib. 8. cap 27.
is so greedy of the poisonous Aconite (hung up by the Hunters purposely in
vessels above their reach) of air and honor, that he never leaves leaping and
straining thereat till he breaks and bursts himself in sunder.

The covetous man (says one) that has more then enough yet perplexeth himself
with his own wants; look how like a fool he goes, leading his horse in his
hand, and carrying his saddle on his back till he be pickled in his own sweat,
and killed with cares, when his horse would with ease carry him and his saddle
The Voluptuous man, like the Drone, is busy about the glass of water baited
with honey, in it he labors and wearieth himself even till he be drowned.

How do men (like the Israelites in the Egyptian bondage) travel up and down
and even weary themselves to gather straw. What pains do they take to hew unto
themselves broken cysterns. Their chief strife is with the Toads, who shall
fall asleep with most earth in their mouths, who shall leave this world with
most wealth in their hands: Their parts and gifts, their time and talents, are
all improved to help forward their earthly trade, They are wiser in their
generation then the children of light.

Oh how lamentable is it that the oynions and garlic of Egypt are preferred
before the milk and honey of Canaan. Luthers Colloq. Mensal p. 85. Lysippus
made Alexanders picture with this posie. tupiter asserai terram mihi ta assere
coelum.
Luther tells us of a noble man at Vienna, in the time of his abode there,
which made a great Supper, and in the midst of his mirth belched out this windy
and blasphemous speech, If God will leave me this world to live and enjoy my
pleasure therein but a thousand years, then let him take his Heaven to himself.
This man spoke what most men think; the bramble of their bodies reigns and
fire arises out of it to consume the cedar of their souls.

The Heathen have admired and bemoaned man's industry about earth, Sen. lib. 6.
not. cap. 26.
they have wondered what made man, who is of an erect countenance looking up to
Heaven, Tertal. de corona militis.
thus to bow down and bury himself alive in the earth. Tertullian stood amazed
at the folly of the Romans, who would undergo all manner of hazards and
hardships to be Consul, which he fitly calls, One years fleeting joy. The
Prophet tells such that they rejoice in a thing of naught, Amos 7. Nay the
forementioned Moralist tells us that such worldlings operose nihil agunt, Take a
great deal of pains to do nothing. That their whole life is but a laborious
loytering, or at most a more painful kind of playing; their account will be
nothing but ciphers; like children they run up and down and labor hard to
catch a gaudy Butterfly, which when caught will foul their fingers and fly
from them. O mortal men, how long will ye love vanity and follow after leasing,
Psa. 4.

Is it not sad that so noble a being as man's soul should be wholly taken up
with such mean sordid things. That phrase in Psa. 24.5. That has not lift up
his soul untovanity, is read by Arius Montanus, He that has not received his
soulin vain. O how many receive their souls in vain, making no more use of
them, then the Swine of whom the Philosopher observes, Cujus anima pro sale,
their souls are only for salt to keep their bodies from stinking. Who would
not grieve to think that so choice a piece should be employed about so vain a
use.

Reader, If one should be entrusted with the education of a great Prince (who
was descended of the blood royal, and heir to a large Empire) and should set
him only to rake in Dungils, or cleanse Ditches, thou would exceedingly
condemn such a governor. Would thou not think, It is pity indeed that so
Noble a person should be busied about such low unworthy projects.

God has entrusted thee with a precious soul, descended highly even from God
himself, claiming kindred with the glorious Angels, and capable of inheriting
that kingdom to which the most glorious Empires of the World are but
Muck-heaps. Art thou not one of them that employ this Princely soul, altogether
about unsuitable and earthly practices, and causing it (as the lapwing though it
have a coronet on its head) to feed on excrements? It was one cause of
Jeremiahs sad lamentation, that the precious Sons of Sion comparable to fine
gold should be esteemed as earthen Pitchers, the work of the hands of the
potter, that they which were brought up in Scarlet, should embrace Dunghils,
Lament 4.2, 5. Have not we more cause of sorrow that men's souls, the precious
sons of God should be put to no better use then earthen pitchers, that they
which should be brought up delicately in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, should be busy about dross, and embrace Dunghils, that thy precious soul
should thus lacquey after earth and vanity, when it should like an Angel, be
always standing and waiting in the presence of God.

Who can read the stories how Domitian the King spent his time in catching
Flies, Solomon the Magnificent in making Arrow-heads; Achmat the last in making
strings for Bows; Harcatius the King of Persia in catching Moles; Caligula the
Emperor in playing the Poet; Nero the Emperor in Fidling, and not admire at
their folly; that such great Princes should busy themselves in things so
infinitely below their places. But thy folly Reader (if one of them I am
writing of) is far greater, in that thy practices are more below thy spiritual
and heavenly principle. May I not say to thee as Philip to Alexander, (when he
heard him singing) Art thou not ashamed being a Kings Son, to sing so well; Art
thou not ashamed being an immortal angelical substance, the offspring of God,
and capable of his likeness and love, to be glewed as a Toad-stool to the
earth, to spend thy time and strength, venture the perishing of thy mortal body
and immortal soul too, for that meat which perishes. It is storied of Pope
Sixtus the fifth, that he sold his soul to the Devil for Seven years enjoyment
of the Popedom. What fool ever bought so dear? what mad man ever sold so cheap?
yet every worldly person does implicitly the same with this Pope. He sells
what is more worth then all the World for a little Wind. Ah, how costly is that
treasure which makes him a beggar to all eternity.

O Lord, what a foolish silly thing is man, to prize and take pains for husks
before bread, vanity before solidity, a shadow before the substance, the Worlds
seraps, before the costly feast, the dirty Kennels, before the Crystal water
of life, an Apple before Paradise, a mess of Pottage before the Birthright, and
the least fleeting and inconstant good, before the greatest truest and eternal
good. Their particular callings are but about earth, the lowest, meanest and
vilest of all the elements in these callings, they deal but with men and
bruits, their gains here at best cannot be large, because their lives here
cannot be long, and yet how eagerly are they pursued? how closely are they
followed? how constantly are they busied about them? their general callings are
about their souls, their eternal salvations, in these they have to do with the
blessed God, the lovely Savior, in communion with whom is Heaven upon Earth,
their gains here are above their thoughts, and beyond their most enlarged
desires, no less then infinite and eternal. The profit of godliness is
invaluable above price. It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be
weighed for the price thereof, It cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with
the precious Onix or the Saphir. The Gold and the Crystal cannot equalit, and
the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of fine gold; No mention shall be
made of Coral or of Pearls, for the price of Wisdom is above Rubies. The Topaz
of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure gold, Job
28.15, to 20. yet how lingringly is this calling entered upon, how lazily is it
followed, and how quickly cast off, O foolish man who has bewitched thee, that
thou do thus dislike and disobey the truth.

I cannot more fitly resemble man then to a silly Hen, which though much good
Corn lie before her, takes little notice of it, but still scrapes in the Earth.
The favor of God, the promises of the Gospel, the Covenant of Grace, the blood
of Christ, the embroydery of the Spirit, the life of faith, the hope of Heaven,
joy in the Holy Ghost, are laid before man, yet he overlooks them all, and
lives like a Mole digging and delving in the earth.

Though men see before their eyes, a period and end of all earthly perfections,
that the beauty, bravery, of all earthly things is but like a fair Picture
drawn on Ice, quickly perishing; that their riches and estates are but like
Snow, which children take much pains to rake and scrape together, to make a
Ball of, which upon the Suns shining on, it presently melts away; though they
see daily men that hoarded up Silver, and wrought hard for wealth, hurried away
into the other World, leaving all their heaps behind them; yet they will take
no warning, but as the silly Lark still play with the feather in the Glass,
till they are caught and destroyed by the Fowler: Men wrong themselves, and
misconstrue God, who (as if he had hidden those things because he would have
them sought, and laid the other open for neglect) bend themselves only to the
seeking of those earthly commodities, and do no more mind Heaven, then if there
were none. If we could imagine a beast to have reason, how could he be more
absurd in his choice.

What a beast is he to love his silver above his soul, Plut. in vit. Anton.
and lose his God for a little corruptible gold? While he lives (like the King
of Armenia by Marc. Anton.) he is a close prisoner in golden fetters, and when
he dies, this worldling may say to his darling, as Cornelius Agrippa to his
familiar spirit near his end, Abi perdita bestia, quae me perdidisti, Be gone
thou wicked wretch, thou have undone me.

It was good counsel which was given John the third King of Portugal, to
meditate a quarter of an hour every day on that divine sentence. (And O that
Reader, I could persuade thee to it) What will it profit a man to gain the
whole World and lose his own soul, or what will a man give in exchange for his
soul, Mat. 16. I have read of a Philosopher, who living near a Black Smith, and
hearing him up every morning, at his Hammer and Anv^l, before he could get out
of his Bed to his Book; professed himself much ashamed, that such an ignoble
trade (as a Smiths) should be more diligently atended then his more serious and
excellent studies: What say thou, Reader, Do thou not blush to think that
Worldlings are more busy and laborious about the low things, the rattles and
trifles of this life, then thou art about the high affairs of God and thy Soul,
the noble and serious concernments of Eternity?

CHAP. IX The ^omplaint continued that this Calling is so much neglected, when
superstition and sin are embraced, and diligently followed.
SEcondly, How do men make Superstition and Idolatry their business. Though
they are carel^ss about Divine institutions, yet they are zealous for humane
traditions. How zealous were the Pharisees for the inventions of their Elders.
They called them Mashlamathath, Completions or Perfections; esteeming them both
helpful to the observation of the Law of God, and also to the perfection of it.
Superstitious persons do naturally think that their postures, gestures,
ceremonies, and additions do render the Worship of God more comely and more
complete; but truly such embrace a cloud instead of Juno, worship the shadow
of Christ, whilst the Prince himself goes unsaluted. Men are exceeding prone
to, and earnest for such vain and false ways and worship; partly because its
pleasing to corrupt spirits, who naturally love a fair show in the flesh. A
pompous holiness, suits best with a proud heart; partly because these
traditions were received from their Ancestors; and as Austin observed in his
time; Men were resolved right or wrong to be followers of their Fathers.
(Suitable to which Cicero said, I will never forsake that way of Divine service
which I have received from my Forefathers, for any man's pleasure, or by any
man's persuasion) No not though Christ himself dyed to redeem them from their
vain conversations, received by tradition from their Fathers, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
hence, though they are so backward where God Commands, yet they are forward
when men command. What an outcry does Micah make for his Idol? What a privy
search does Laban make for his Image? Gideon, must dye for throwing down the
Alter of Baal. How earnest are many for priests, Tapers, Altars, Sacrifices,
Days, Meats, Conservations, the Holy of Holies, Crossing and Cringings. In
these their zeal is hot, boiling over to the scalding of themselves and others.
Though this fervency is aptly compared to a Ship without Ballast, over-beared
with Sails, which in a strom casts away all aboard her; they disesteem their
estates and possessions in comparison of Idolatry and Superstition. Such
persons are not only liberal but lavish; Jeroboam will be at great cost for
his Idols, they must be, not Iron or Brazen, no not Silver, but Golden Calves,
not Gilded over, but Massy, molted Gold; they lavish gold out of the bag, and
weigh silver in the balance, and hire a Goldsmiths, and he makes it a God,
and they fall down and Worship it. Isa. 46.6. The Israelites will spare their
Jewels for their Idols, Exodus 32.3. Micha's mother to make molten and graven
Images will lay out eleven hundred shekels of silver, Judge. 17.2, 3. The
Papists are so prodigal though it is the less wonder in them, because they hold
such actions meritorious of Salvation, (and what would not a man give or do to
be saved?) that not only their Churches but even Clorsters are stuck and stuffed
with costly, pearly presents, to their supposed Saints. The Indians in the Isle
of Zeylon having a consecrated Apes tooth got from them, offered an incredible
mass of treasure to recover it. How many zealots that will hardly give a penny
to the releif of a poor Christian throw away pounds for the maintenance of
Superstition?

They slight their relations to further their idolatrous devotion. The
superstitious Jews would sacrifice their children to Moloch, 2 King. 17.17.
Diodor Sic.
The Carthaginians at one time (after they had received an overthrow by
Agathocles) sacrificed two hundred of their prime Nobility to appease their
incensed Deity: Good God whether is nan fallen! to be more cruel then a Beast
to the children of his own body? What slavery is it to serve Satan, and what
liberty to serve thee?

Nay they will sacrifice not only their Estates and children, but their lives
and all their outward comforts to superstition: Verberari a dae moan mallebat
quam a Deo coronari. Mendoz. in 1 Samuel 8.
How did the worshippers of Baal cut and lance themselves. Ahaz sacrificed to
the gods of Damascus that smote him, 2 Chronicles. 28.23. So fervent he was that he
chose rather, in the service of false gods to be scourged, then in the service
of the true God to be saved. Pur. Pilgrim. p. 1478.


Among the Mahometans are a sect called the Dervises, whose sharp and strict
penances exceed those of the Papists; they live on the tops of hills, solitary,
for contemplation, fast till nature be almost decayed, have no clothes but to
cover their nakedness, wear such massy fetters of iron upon their legs, that
they can scarce stir, and yet go as fast as they can with them many miles to
visit the Sepulchers of their deluded Saints. Al. oran.
The Turks willingingly lay down their lives in their Wars to propagate their
Religion, which their Prophet has taught them must be done, non disputando,
sed pugnando, not by disputing with, but by destroying others. The unhappy
Jesuit (though his Religion be an heap of formalities, as the Turks a bundle
of fooleries) is yet so zealous for it, that Campian could impudently in a
Letter to Q. Elizabeth's Council affirm, That as long as there was one Jesuit
left for Tiburn, they had vowed never to desist endeavors to set up their
Religion in this Nation. O devout ungodliness, or ungodly devotion! How few
take such pains to go to Heaven, as many do to go to Hell?

Alas what sorrow does this call for and command? that men should be so hot and
fiery in Will Worship, in false Worship, wasting their wealth, cutting and
carving their bodies, as if they were made only to be their slaves, and
themselves to be the Tyrants over them; laying out so much cost, and exercising
so much cruelty, for that which is worse then nothing, for that which will not
only not profit them, but extremely and eternally prejudice them; and in the
interim the easy yoke of Christ is scorned, the power of Godliness slighted
which might be minded with much more mildness and mercy to their outward and
inward man.

It was a good meditation of a forequoted Author, Those that travel in long
pilgrimages to the holy Land, what a number of weary paces they measure? What a
number of hard lodgings and known dangers they pass? and at last when they are
come within view of their journeys end, what a large tribute they pay at the
Pisan Castle to the Turks? and when they are come thither, what see they but
the bare sepulcher wherein their Savior lay, and the earth that he trod upon,
to the increase of a carnal Devotion? What labor should I willingly undertake
in my journey to the true Land of Promise, the celestial Jerusalem, where I
shall see and enjoy my Savior himself? What tribute of pain or death should I
refuse to pay ^or my entrance not into his Sepulcher, but his Palace of glory,
and that not to look upon, but to possess it.

Thirdly, As many make the World their main work, and others Superstition their
principal occ^pation, so most make wickedne their chief, their constant trade
and busine. While sanctity is but coldly entertained, but complemented with,
sin is laid in the bosom and heartily embraced; the turnings and windings that
are in the sinners way, are not easily to be observed; the pains which he takes
to bring forth and breed up those Birds which will peck out his own eyes, can
neither be fully described, nor sufficiently lamented. In what have and hurry
is Absalom for an Halter? what work does lust make in Ammon, to wast his body,
and send his soul to endless woe? How fast does Gehazi run after a Lepros^e, as
if he might come too late? How sick and violent is Ahab for Naboths Vine yard?
How fiercely does Balaam ride even without raigns, after the wages of
unrighteousness? How eager and earnest were Pharaoh, and his Egyptians, to
fight against God? what a stir, what a do, they make to overtake destruction,
and to sink like Lead, in the midst of the migthy waters Joshua could stop the
Sun in his course, but not Achan in his covetous career; Paul before his
conversion (as one observes) followed the Saints with such close persecution,
and was so mad upon it, that like a tired Wolf, wearied in worrying the flock,
he lay panting for breath, and yet still breathed out persecution. In one
Journey he traveled one hundred and sixty miles (namely from Jerusalem to
Damascus) as an inquisitour for private Heresy. At Muscleborough field many of
the Scots ran away so fast, that they fell down dead; truly so do men by sin,
run away a pace from God, even to the tyring of themselves here, and tormenting
themselves hereafter. They run as fast as if they feared that Hell would be
full before they came thither.

The wicked man travelleth with pain all his days, Job 15.20. A wicked man's
whole course, is spent in carking care, as the Seventy read it. He has many
sharp throws, bitter pangs, before he can bring forth that hideous horible
Monster, Sin. Some Women are very long in labor, several days in pain; but a
wilful Wicked man, travelleth with pain all his days; He works himself weary in
digging descents into Hell, and labors harder at it then many do for Heaven. I
remember Buntingus in his Itinerarium totius Sacrae Scripturae, when he comes
to the Travails of Antiochus Epiphanius, that fierce enemy of Gods people,
first relates the tedious journies (in all eight thousand one hundred fifty
three Miles) various hazards, desperate dangers and difficulties, which this
wicked wretch underwent to satisfy his malice, and gratify his revengeful
spirit, and then concludes thus. We see that the Wicked with more sorrows,
troubles and vexations, gain eternal damnation, then the just, though they
suffer grievous affliction, obtain everlasting Salvation. For amongst all the
Patriarchs, good Princes and Prophets, there is not found any that had so many
long and tedious journies as this Antiochus, who continually oppressed his mind
and conscience with unprofitable vanities and wicked thoughts, and at length
had a miserable and terrible end.

Though God has few diligent Servants, yet the Devil has many drudging slaves
that work hard at grinding in his Mill all their days. Their calling is a trade
of corruption which they follow with diligence and constancy. They plow
iniquity, sow wickedness, and reap the same, Job 4.8. Alas what pains do they
take to pollute themselves spiritually, and perish eternally? They Plow
iniquity, Plowing is no easy, lazy work. We say of such works as require much
pains, a man were as good go to Plow all day; These sons of Belial, that will
not stoop to the easy yoke of the Savior, can submit their proud Necks to the
hard yoke of Satan, and follow his Plow willingly. Sin is their diet, their
meat and drink, they eat the bread of violence, and drink the wine of deceit,
Prove. 4.17. Nay it is their dainties their delicates, let me not eat of their
dainties, Psa. 141.4. These Apish Monkies (who now and then act the part of
Christians without a principle of Christianity) feed on Spiders, on Poison.
Further, it is not only their nourishment in the day, but their refreshment in
the night, They cannot sleep unless they cause some to fall, Prove. 4.16. Till
their stomachs are gorged and glutted with the sweet meats of sin, and thereby
their heads filled with filthy fumes and vapors arising thence, they can take
no rest. They love sin above sleep, and let them but riot, they will lose their
rest. The Murderer rises with the light, to cut asunder the silver thread of
his Neighbors life. The Drunkard that hellish good Husband, can be all night
drinking healths to others, whilst he leaves none to himself, how often does
his brains crow before break of day; the Chief and Adulterer love and long for
darkness, to cover and countenance their cursed deeds, Job 24.14, 15, 16. Pro.
7.9. Once more. As sin is their nourishment, their food and sleep, so it is
their Garment their Ornament. Pride compasses them about as a chain, violence
covers them as a Garment, Psa. 73.6. A chain of pearl does not better become
their Necks, nor the richest robes adorn their Backs, then sin does in their
judgments become and suit their souls. They glory in their shame; Plato says
of Protagoras, that he boasted whereas he had lived ^ixty years, he had spent
Forty years in corrupting youth. They brag of that which they ought to bewayl.

They plot sin with their heads, They conceive mischief, Psa. 7.14. they affect
sin with their hearts, their hearts are after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.
They act with their hands, what their heads forge, and their hearts favor;
they do evil with both hands earnestly. Micah 7.3. They work so hard till they
are weary, thou have wearied thy self in the multitude of thy counsels, Isa.
47.13. Pliny says of the Scorpion, that there is not one minute wherein he
does not put forth his sting; these cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2. they do
even contend which of them shall exceed in sin, as unhappy boys strive who
shall go farthest in the Dirt.

All the rubs which are laid in their way, do rather increase their rage then
hinder their riot. When God would stop the stream of their lusts by his
prohibitions, laws, judgments, like waters dammed up, they swell the more, and
like the possessed person break all those cords in pieces. When Paul chides the
Ephesians for their Idolatry, they cry out for it with the greater vehemence.
When Steven had reproved the Jews for their cruelty, they were cut the to heart
and gnash upon him with their teeth. Acts 7.54, 57. When Ahaz. was hampered in
affliction, like a mad Dog he bites at his Chain, and sins yet more in his
distress, against the Lord. When the sinners tide of nature is thwarted and
croft by the winds of reproof or some judgment, what a storm is presently
raised? how does he like the Sea presently discover and foam out his own shame.
Though God command, entreat, persuade, threaten, promise, yet all this Physic
does often but move and stir, not remove nor purge away their ill humors. O
how deadly is that disease which no physic can cure? and how tough is that
wood which no wedge can cleave? The bird will beware of the pitfal in which she
bath been caught, and the beast of the snare in which he has been taken, but
brutish man more foolish then beasts, will not be parted from sin though he
have been sharply punished for it.

The Wicked are estranged from the womb they go astray as soon as they are
born, speaking Lies; Their poison is like the poison of a Serpent, they are
like the deaf Adder that stops her ears, which will not hearken to the voice
of Charmers, charming never so wisely, Psa. 58.3, 4, 5. The Serpent when she
begins to feel the Charmer, clappeth one ear presently to the ground, and
stops the other ear with her tail, although by hearkening to the Charmer (as
some observe) she would be provoked to spit out her poison, and renew her age.
So hot is man upon his Harlot sin, that he is deaf to all that would counsel
him to the contrary, he stops his ear, hardens his heart, stifneth his
neck, against the thunders of the Law, the still voice of the Gospel, the
motions of the Spirit, and the convictions of his own conscience. When sin
calls they run through thick and thin for have, when the World commands how
readily do they hearken, how quickly do they hear, how faithfully do they obey?
but when the blessed God cries to them, charge them by his unquestionable
authority, beseeches them for their own unchangeable felicity, they (like
statues of men rather then living creatures) stand still and stir not at all.
Other things move swiftly to their centers, Stones fall tumbling downward,
Sparks fly apace upward, Conies run with speed to their burrows, Rivers with
violence to the Ocean, and yet filly man hangs off from his maker; that neither
entreaties, nor threatenings, nor the word, nor the Works of God, nor hope of
Heaven, nor fear of Hell, can quicken or hasten him to his happiness. Who would
imagine that a reasonable souly should act so much against sense and reason?
Where is the Saint that is not shamed by the very damned, sinners drive
furiously (like Jehu) against their God, their Sovereign, but Saints like
Egyptians drive heavily though they are marching in the road to the Heavenly
Canaan. Ah who presses toward the mark, for the price of the high calling?
Who works so hard to be preferred to the beatifical vision, as wicked men do to
be punished with eternal destruction? they sweat at sowing in the Devils field,
when all they shall reap thereby will be damnation, and thou freezest in
seeking Gods favor when the fruit thereof will be everlasting Salvation.

O Reader, Consider and mourn, that the deceitful world (who will leave their
lovers in the greatest danger) should have such hot and violent woers; that
Superstition should be so greedily caught at, though like Hemlock, it makes
them run mad that eat it, and ends often in desperation; nay that the loathsome
monster Sin (whose Father is the Devil, whose service is perfect slavery, whose
Jointure is blackness of darkness for ever) should have so many and such eager,
earnest Suitors; and ^et Godliness (whose birth is noble from Heaven, whose
person is lovely, the beautiful image of the blessed God, whose portion is
large, no less then Eternal life) should be by most wholly slighted, and it
best but coldly courted. Surely this ought to be for a lamentation. Good God
whither did man go when he departed away from thee!

The ancient men wept when they saw the foundation of the Second Temple laid,
considering how far it came short of the glory and beauty of the First, Ezra
3.12. What cause have we then to weep floods of tears when we ponder how short
man is, nay how contrary man is to his primitive purity and perfection.
Godliness was then his business but is now his burden; Sin was then loathed as
his bane, but is now loved as his daily bread.

CHAP. X. An Exhortation to make Godliness our business in the whole course of
our lives.
THe second and principal Use which I shall make of this Doctrine, shall be by
way of Exhortation; Ought Godliness to be every ones business? then Reader let
me persuade thee in the fear of God to put this Precept into practice; Exercise
thy self to Godliness. Let it be the chief trade thou drivest, the principal
calling thou followest, to worship the true God in heart and life, according to
his revealed Will. I hope thou art satisfied in the weight of the Reasons
already delivered; what can thou say, why thou should not presently set
upon the work. Thou have heard it is the great end of thy being and continuance
in this world, That it is an employment of the greatest concernment; How it is
Soul work, God-work, Eternity-work; That it must of necessity be made the main
business, or otherwise all thy labor will be lost: ^anst thou easily break
this threefold cord; let conscience judge between God and thee, whether such a
work as this is, does not deserve all thy time and strength, thine utmost care
and greatest diligence, and ten thousand times more then thou can possibly
give it. Thou have also read how fiery and furious Worldlings, Formalists,
Sinners are for their Dalilahs and Minions; Oh why art thou so slothful to go
in and possess the land, Judge. 18.3.

Themistocles seeing two Cocks fight, Aelian^ 2 Va. H^st c. 28.
when he was going to a battle, pointed his Soldiers to them and said, Do you
see ^onder Combatants, how valiantly they deal their blows? with what fury they
fight? and yet they fight not for their Country, nor for their Gods, nor for
the honor of their Ancestors, nor for Glory, nor Liberty, nor Children? What
courage then, my brave Countrymen, should this put into our hearts, on whose
resolution all these depend, and by whose valor they subsist? So say I to
thee, Reader, Do thou see yonder Worldling, how he rides, runs, toileth,
moileth, sweateth, wastes his strength, wrongeth his body, makes a very
pack-horse of it, and will searce allow it time to eat or sleep? Do thou see
yonder Superstitious person, how zealous he is for the inventions of men,
laying his Estate, Limbs, Laberty and Life at the feet of his own Idol (...)
how like one upon a fiery Steed full of mettle, he rides post out of Gods way,
and from Gods Word? Nay do thou see yonder Sinner, what time he spends, what
miseries he endures? what Wealth he wastes? how hard he labors to gratify his
Lust? And yet these work not for the Blood of Christ, nor for the Love of the
Father, nor for the Graces of the Spirit, nor from freedom from the Curse of
the Law, the slavery of Satan, the torments of Hell, nor for their Souls, nor
for their God, nor for fullness of joy, and the pleasures that are at Gods right
hand for evermore? What Zeal and Fervency should this put into our hearts, Dear
Friends! and what diligence and industry into our hands, when we work and trade
for all these? and if we make them our business our labor shall not be invain
in the Lord.

Exercise thy self to Godliness, not to Superstition: As the Ivy in time eats
up the very heart of the Oak it grows about; so does Formality and
Superstition the very heart and life of Religion; Let Gods Laws, not thy own or
others Lusts be the rule whereby thou governest thy heart and life.

Superstition (says an eminent Divine) is to true Holiness, Gurnal. Christ.
incomp. arm. part. 2. edit. 2. p. 224.
what the Concubine is to the true Wife, who is sure to draw the Husbands love
from her; this Brat the Devil has long put out to nurse to the Romish Church,
which has taken a great deal of pains to bring it up for him, and no wonder
when she is so well paid for its maintenance, it having brought her in so much
worldly treasure and riches.

What some observe of Horse hairs, that, though liveless, yet lying nine days
under water, they turn to Snakes, may pertinently be applied to superstitious
Ceremonies, which though at first dead, or held at most but indifferent, yet in
continuance of time have quickened and done much mischief. There is a
simplicity in the Word and Worship of God, which I would entreat thee to look
after. ( I fear least your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which
is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3.) not as simplicity is opposed to wisdom, but as
simplicity is opposed to mixtures; Compositions do but diminish and abate the
virtue of Simples. The more natural and simple the Wine is, the more pure it
is, mixtures do but adulterate it. The more simple the Worship of God is, (I
speak of Gospel simplicity and order) the more pure it is, humane inventions
and mixtures may abase it, they cannot adorn it. Gods Altar under the law must
be of earth. If thou lift up a tool upon it, thou have polluted it. Exodus
20.24, 25. Men are apt to think, that by lifting up tools on Gods altar, they
polish it, but God himself says they pollute it.

When the Church was in her infancy, she was dressed in the swaddling clothes of
Ceremonies, but since she is grown up, God has provided her other attire. To
the Jews, the Sun of righteousness was behind, and therefore the shadow of
those Ceremonies was before. They were in force and power, but to us Gentiles
the Sun of righteousness is before, and therefore the shadow of ceremonies is
behind. When Christ came, those shadows seemed to say as the Angels to Jacob,
Let us go, for the day breaks, Genesis 32.26. at the death of Christ the Vail of
the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, to acquaint us that
the Jewish Ceremonies must then vanish, Mat. 27.51.

Reader, I would not be mistaken, I do not advise thee against that order and
decency, which is commanded in the Worship of God, nor against active obedience
to authority in things that are circumstantial, or not directly, nor
consequentially forbidden in Scripture, but I would counsel thee to beware,
least (like the Dog in the Fable) whilst thou art snapping at any shadow thou
do not lose the substance; and withal I must tell thee that as when the
shadows grow long, its a sign the Sun is declining; so when those shadows,
those even indifferent things increase, usually the substance, the light of
holiness decreaseth.

When Corn runs out into straw and chaff, those that feed on it, may well be
thin and lean, but when it runs into ear and kernel, thou may expect such as
eat of it to be fat and well favored; when Religion runs into Formalities and
Ceremonies, her followers can never be thriving spiritually, they may starve
for all the gaudy flowers wherewith the several dishes on her table are decked
and set forth; it is the power of godliness alone, which like wholesome and
substantial food, will distribute nourishment and strength to the inner man; I
expect nourishment from bread, not from straw or stones, because God has
annexed his blessing to the former, not to the latter. I look for spiritual
strength from divine institutions, not from humane inventions, because Gods
promise is made to wordworship, not to will worship; one would think the sparks
of that fire wherewith Aarons Sons were consumed, should fly in the faces of
men, and make them afraid to offer up to the Lord what he commanded them not,
Lev. 10.1, 2.

Exercise thy self to this Worshipping the true God according to his revealed
will. Do not dally and trifle at it, be not cold and careless about it. Take
heed of the Worldlings politic principles. Fair and softly goes far; Too
much of one thing is good for nothing; Its good to be Religious, but not too
conscientious; A little moderation would not do amiss. These men would serve
thee as ignorant Montebanks do their Patients, that whilst they go about to
cool the liver (least it should set the blood in a flame) kill the stomach, and
thereby necessarily destroy the body. They pretend some fear that thou may
work too hard, even to thy hurt, when thou can never do enough, much less,
too much, for thy God and thine everlasting good: I must needs tell thee that
there is an impossibility of dividing thy service betwixt thy sins and thy
Savior, and of parting thy heart and work between the world and the word. No
man can serve two Masters. Mat. 6.24. If like a Meteor thou hangest between
heaven and earth, haltest between Christ and the flesh, as a hunting Dog
between too Hares, running sometime after this, sometime after that, thou will
be sure at last to lose both.

Those creatures under the Law, which did both move in the waters, and hover up
and down in the Air, were unclean in Gods account. Lev. 11.10. There is a story
of a Bastard Eagle, which has one foot close like a Goose, with which she
swims in the waters, and dives for fish, and another foot open and armed with
talons, with which she soareth in the Air, and seiseth her prey; but she
participating of both natures, is weak in either, and at last becomes a prey to
every ordinary Vulture. The am bodexter in Religion who is both for the flesh
and the Spirit, for Riches and Righteousness is all his time a servant of sin,
and will at last become a prey to Satan.

Wherefore I must entreat thee, Reader, to make godliness thy sole design and
delight, thy main occupation and recreation. If thou find not the golden veins
upon the surface, or just under the skin of the earth, do not throw off thy
trade nor cast away thy Tools, but delve and dig lower, thou shall certainly at
length come to the rich treasure. (...)
The virtuous man in Greek is denominated from a word that signifies
industrious and diligent. Labor is the way to get and increase virtue, and the
more virtuous thou art, the more laborious thou will be, frequent use must keep
thy spiritual arms from rust.

It is a more worthy thing to abound in work, In operibus, sit abundantia mea,
div tiis per me l^cet abundet quisquis volue. rit.
then to abound in wealth. Melancthon spoke nobly Let others take Riches, give
me Labor. They who have been busy about much meaner studies, have yet pursued
them with incredible pleasure, and extraordinary pains. Plutarch
Endymion spent whole nights on Rocks and Mountains, in contemplating the
motions of the Stars. It is said of Crisippus, That he was so intent on his
Book that he had starved his Body, had not his maid put meat into his mouth.
Cicer Ep. lib. 9.
Cicero professed, He would part with all he was worth that he might but live and
dye among his Books; did they reckon Humane Knowledge, that curious piece of
vanity at so high a rate that they would trample on their possessions, take any
pains to procure it, to promote it? What a price should thou set upon
Godliness, upon Divine Knowledge, which is the very seed of eternal life? Joh.
17.3. should not thou undervalue thy estate and strength for it? should not
thou spend all thy time, employ all thy talents, and improve all thy
opportunities for the furthering of it? O that holy Paul might be thy pattern:
Herein I exercise my self, to keep a conscience void of offense toward God and
Men, Act. 24.16. Here is Paul's precious cabinet, and his care to preserve it;
(...) me exerceo laboro, ^otus sum in hac re, ut inculpate deo serviam nec
homines offendam.
his Cabinet was his conscience void of offense, a treasure of inestimable
value; in this Cabinet were all the jewels of Divine Graces. His Faith and
Love, his Hope and Humility, his Patience and Heavenly mindedness were
glistering in it gloriously, like so many costly and sparkling Diamonds; but
observe Paul's care of this Cabinet, I exercise my self to keep a conscience
void of offense; Paul knew many subtle theives were abroad, and therefore he
must make it his business to keep his pearls, or otherwise they would be stolen
from him. He knew if he were robbed he were ruined; nay if but a flaw were made
in the jewel of his conscience, it would be of exceeding ill consequence to
him, therefore he did exercise himself to keep a conscience void of offense.

Again, Exercise thy self to Godliness, make it thy business, in the whole
course of thy life, nay in every passage of thy conversation. As the blood runs
through the whole body, and every vein of the body; so Godliness must run
through our whole conversation, and every particular action of it. Godliness
must be like the Sun (though its situation be in Heaven, and that the main
place of its residence) enlighten and warm the whole body of the air, and all
the earth by its influence, shine on all thy natural, civil and spiritual
works, nothing must be hid from the heat thereof. Reader, observe the command,
Be ye holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.

The Greek word ((...)) and the Latin word (conversatio) for conversation, come
of a verb that signifies to turn, to note that which way soever a Christian
turns himself he must be holy; he must be holy in his closet alone, holy
among company, holy at home, holy abroad, holy in his shop, holy among his
sheep, holy in the Church, holy in his chamber, holy at his table, holy in his
travails, holy in prosperity, holy in adversity, holy in every relation, and in
every condition, in all manner of conversation. As oil is laid over all colors
to make them durable; so Godliness must be laid on every part and practice of
our conversation, and thereby they will be permanent to our comfort, and run
parallel with the line of Eterity. We lay gold, because excellent, on all sorts
of metals; Godliness, which is more precious then fine gold, must be laid on
our Naturals, Morals, Intellectuals, all of them must have their virtue and
value from it. The truth is, they all like Ciphers stand for nothing, unless
this figure be joined with them, and put before them.

Believers are commanded to be holy men, Exodus 22. ult. In the Original it is
men of holiness, and ye shall be men of holiness unto me, that is all over
holy; As Christ is called a man of sorrows, because his whole man, body and
soul was steeped in tears, and his whole time from the womb to the tomb was
spent in sorrows and sufferings, full of tribulations. And as Antichrist is
called a man of sin, because he is, as Beza observes well, Merum scelus, Mere
sin, nothing but sin, Isa. 53.3. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. so the children of God should be
men of holiness, mere holiness, made up of holiness, nothing but holiness,
every part of them should be holy, and every deed done by them should be holy;
holiness in their hearts should, as the Lungs in the body, be in continual
motion, and holiness in their life must run through all their words as the Woof
through the whole Web.

The Jews had their daily, weekly, monthly, yearly addresses unto God, to teach
us that we must be always trading heavenward, that there must be an unwearied
commerce, an uninterrupted intercourse betwixt God and our souls. Saints lives
are therefore compared to a walk, and called a walking with God, or a walking
before God; they must still walk as in company with him, and tread every step
as under his eye, Genesis 5.22. and 17.1. The Planets because of their wandering
nature, are sometime nearer to, sometime further from the earth, yet always
within the Zodiac, the highway of the Sun. So the Christian, though he be
sometimes stooping to the earth in his particular calling, sometime mounting up
to Heaven in the immediate Worship of God, yet he must always be in the path of
godliness; The highway of the Sun of Righteousness. Be thou in the fear of the
Lord all the day long, says Solomon, Prove. 23.17. Whether a Christian be
eating, or drinking, or buying, or selling, or plowing, or sowing, or riding,
or walking, whatever he be doing, or wherever he be going, he must be always
in the fear of the Lord; Godliness must be his guide, his measure and his end;
as the salt it must be sprinkled on every dish to make it savoury. Thy life, O
Christian, must be so led that it may be a continued serving of God.

The Precept is full (though if a true Christian thou will esteem it thy
privilege) that whatsoever thou do, thou art to do all to the glory of God,
1 Cor. 10.31. God must be the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end of all thy
actions, thy duty is to pass the whole time of thy sourjourning here in fear, 1
Pet. 1.17. Every moment must be devoted to God; and as all seasons so all
actions must be sacred. There is a Prophecy, that in Jerusalem, in that day
shall there be upon the bells of the horses, Holiness to the Lord, and the pots
in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before the Altar, yea every put in
Judah and Jerusalem shall be holiness to the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 14.20, 21.
Mark, the same Inscription is to be upon the bells of horses, and on every pot
which was on the High Priests mitre, Holiness to the Lord: to teach us, That
every thing though but of common use should be sanctified to Gods service; Vt
quicquid aggrediatnr homines sit sacrificium. Calv. in loc.
That every ordinary enterprise (says Calvin) should be a sacrifice.

In the prosecution of this Exhortation, I shall First, Speak to the nature of
this duty, and Manner how a Christian must exercise himself to Godliness in the
whole course of his life, and in every part thereof.

Secondly, I shall lay down some Means for the accomplishing this duty.

Thirdly, I shall annex some Motives to encourage the Reader in this holy Trade
and calling.

First, As to the Manner, how a Saint may in every passage of his life follow
this Trade, I shall divide my Discourse into these several Heads.

1. How a man may make Godliness his business in religious actions, or the
Worship of God in general, as also in his carriage, in hearing or reading, in
Prayer, at the Lords Supper, and on the Lords day in particular.

2, How a Christian may make Religion his business in his natural actions of
eating, drinking, sleeping and clothing.

3. In his Recreations.

4. In his particular vocation or calling.

5. In reference to his Relations and Family.

6. In his dealings with all men.

7. In all conditions, whether of prosperity, or adversity.

8. In all companies, whether good or bad.

9. In solitariness, or when he is alone.

10. On a weak-day from morning to night.

11. In his visiting the fick.

12. Upon a dying bed.

CHAP. XI. How a Christian may make Religion his business in spiritual
Performances and religious Actions.
FIrst, Make Godliness thy business in religious Duties. I shall put that first
in order which is first in nature and excellency; and truly Friend, thy special
care must be here; thy greatest diligence will be little enough when thou
come solemnly into Gods presence. Cleanly men, wash their hands and brush
their clothes every day, but when they are to dine with a King, they will wash
and scour their hands, they will brush their clothes over and over again, that
their hands may be if possible clean from the least dirt, and their garments
from the least dust: The true Christian is in all company and in the whole
course of his life, every day careful to keep his soul clean, and his
conscience clear, nay to increase his Godliness, but when he draws nigh to
God, and he has more special care and extraordinary caution; though Tradesmen
are all the year long doing somewhat at their callings, either casting up their
accounts, or gathering in their debts, or amending something in their
commodities which are amiss; and therefore have no time for idleness, yet at
some times of the year they are full of trading, their shops are crowded with
customers, they are all the week either sending out or taking in wares; now
this time calls for their greatest diligence and watchfulness.

The time of sacred duty is a Christians market day, wherein he is much
imployd, and therefore it calls for his greatest diligence. He that leaves his
Shop, or loyters in it at such a time, must expect that his Shop will quickly
leave him. The Husbandman has his seasons to Plow and Sow in, which if he be
heedless and careless about, that either his seed be smutty, or his servant
slothful, he can look for but a mean and poor harvest. The hours of praying,
and reading, and hearing, are the Saints opportunities and seasons of grace; if
he be not then careful and conscientious to Plow up the fallow ground of his
heart, and to sow to the Spirit; his return will be very inconsiderable, he
will Reap but a thin crop. But truly friend if thou have no respect to thy
souls good, God has to his own glory, and though he stoop to thee, ingiving
thee leave to seek his face, and hear his voice, yet he will not be slighted by
thee. He is a glorious and jealous Majesty, and esteems it a disparagement to
him, for any to wait upon him without their best attire; Though Vzzah be dead,
yet he speaks to thee to take heed how thou touchest the Ark.

A Prince may be pleased, if his Kitchen be but indifferent neat and handsome,
but he looks that in his Parlour (where he gives entertainment to his friend)
all things should be in Print. Where Gods special walk is amongst his
Candlesticks, and amidst his Myrtle Trees, there Godliness must be our special
work, Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord for ever. Psa. 93. ult. Godliness
does always suit the back of a Saint: This gracious garment is a glorious
ornament to him, whatever he is doing or where ever he is going; but the
apparel does become him best in his approaches to the holy God. No Hangings, no
Tapestry becomes Gods house so well as Holiness; and no place is so proper as
the House of God for this costly, comely furniture.

God is more honored or dishonored in our Religious actions, then in all the
actions of our lives; in them we do directly and immediately pretend his Honor
and Service, and therefore if we do not walk in them watchfully, and intend
them seriously the greater is our sin. For a trespass committed against holy
things, the Jews were to bring a Ram to be valued by the shekel of the
Sanctuary; for a trespass against their brethren, a Ram was required, but no
such valuation expressed; whence Origin infers, Aliud est peccare in sanctis,
aliud extra sancta: It is one thing to sin in holy things, another thing to sin
beside them, and he urges that place in Samuel, 1 Samuel 2.25. If a man sin
against another man the Judge shall judge him, but if a man sin against the
Lord, who shall entreat for him? Lev. 5.15. and 6.6. When men are some way off
in a Kings eye, they will be comely in their carriage; but when they come into
his Presence Chamber to speak with him, they will be most careful: Because
Saints are always in Gods sight, their constant deportment must be pious and
seemly, I have kept thy precepts, for all my ways are before thee, Psalm.
119.68. But because the Ordinances of God are the very face of God, and they
who worship him therein do solemnly appear before him, therefore at such
seasons they are bound to be most holy and serious, Exodus 23 17. Psalm. 42.2.
The saying of the Sage Orator has some weight, Isocrat. ad Demon.
Worship the gods at all times especially in public; that is in their
sacrifices. God is very curious how men carry themselves in his Courts, and
commands thee Reader, be to eminently pious when thou appearest in his
presence. Do but observe under the Law how choice he was about all things
relating to his Worship; the Tabernacle must be made of the best wood, the
purest gold, the finest linen, and every part and pin of it done exactly
according to Gods own precept; the persons called to set it up must be rarely
gifted and singularly endowed for that very purpose. He that offers sacrifice
must be without blemish, For whatsoever man he be that has any blemish, he
shall not approach, a blind man, or a lame man, or he that has any thing
superfluous, or a flat nose, or he that is broken faced, or broken handed, or
crooked backed, or a Dwarf, or that has any blemish in his eye, or the scurvy,
or is scabbed; no man that has any blemish of the Sons of Aaron the Priest
shall come nigh to offer the Offerings of the Lord made by fire, he has a
blemish, he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God, Levit. 21.17,
18, 19, 20. So the sacrifice also must be perfect without spot, If it were
blind, or broken, or maimed, had a wen, the scurvy, or were scabbed, Levit.
22.19, 21, 22, 24. It must not be offered, it must be a male without blemish,
of the best of the flocks, nay the best of these beasts, the fat (even all the
fat) which covers the Inwards, Lev. 3.3. And what is the substance of all
these shadows, but this, That God will be served by holy men in the purest,
holiest manner; that we must be very exact both as to our persons and
performances when we are in his presence; that he expects the best of living
Sacrifices, the hearts and spirits of men, nay the best of the best, all the
heart, and all the soul, and all the strength, Prove. 23. Joh. 4.24. Matthew.
22.37. O how much is an ordinary, slight performance below and unsucable to so
great and glorious a Prince. Religion is as tender a thing as the apple of
thine eye; by playing with the eye it may be put out; by dallying with duties
thou may spoil all.

If the Egyptians did reverence Mercurius Trismegistus so much, that they did
forbear, out of respect to him, to pronounce his name rashly; what respect
should thou bear to Ordinances which are the name of God? Exodus 20.24. How
fearful should thou be of taking the name of God in vain.

The blind Heathen were choice and devout in the service of dumb Idois; they
served them in white, an emblem of purity. They thought nothing too good for
those false Gods, for whom the worst was not bad enough. Solon, the Athenian
Lawgiver, enacted, that none should serve the Gods, Obiter, or by the by; that
their sacrifices should be all select and chosen, and that the Sacrificers
should purify themselves some days before hand. Lycurgus had made a law that
no man should be at any great charge in a sacrifice, least he should grow weary
of Divine service, yet when Phidias the famous carver advised the Athenian, to
make the statute of Minerva of marble rather then Ivery 1. Because it was more
durable, this reason was approved. 2. Because less chargeable; at the mention
hereof, with much rage and wrath, they commanded him silence. They had an
higher respect for those lies and falsehoods, then many have for the true God.
Eras. praef in adag.
When they were going to offer sacrifice, their Priest cried (...) who is here.
Those present answered (...) many and good. Were they so choice and chary in
the service of their dunghill deities; and wilt not thou friend be circumspect
and conscientious in the service of the living God? did they think nothing
costly enough for inanimate creatures, and will thou offer to the Lord thy God,
that which cost thee nothing? Can thy box of precious ointment, though it be
worth never so much, be bestowed better then on thy dearest Savior, and can
thy care and caution, thy love and labor be employed better then in his
service? Or do thou think that the false Gods were more affected with their
dishonor, or more to be feared in their displeasure, then the living true God.
Do thou not know that he will be sanctified in them that draw nigh to him,
Lev. 10.3. great persons are impatient of contempts and affronts, especially
when they are offered to them in their own houses: God will sooner overlook thy
forgetfulness of him in thy trade or travails, then in his Tabernacle. When
thou drawest nigh to him, there he will be sanctified, either in thee or upon
thee. If thou refuse to give him glory in his service, believe it, he will get
himself glory by thy suffering; His Worship is his face, and look for his fury,
if thou dare him to his face.

The waters of the Sanctuary, are like the waters given to a suspected Wife, if
she were innocent, it witnest her honesty, made her fruitful if barren, and did
her good; but if she were guilty sweld her belly, rotted her bowels, and did
her hurt. If thou make godliness thy business in the ordinances of God, thou
may get much spiritual good, thou may meet Christ in them, receive grace
through them, and thrive as the babe by the breasts, in health and strength,
but if thou like the horse in the Mill, only go thy round in Religious
duties, never minding the true end of them, nor thy carriage in them, thy
prayer will be an abomination, the word a savor of death unto death, and the
very sacrament a seal of thy damnation. It does therefore nearly concern thee
to hearken to that counsel which I shall give thee from the word, to prevent
thy miscarriage in the duties of Gods worship; For preparation to duties, I
shall speak, when I come to treat of sanctifying the Lords day.

First, Be heedful and watchful over thy self, when thou art about religious
duties. Heedless service is fruitless service; What measure of care we give God
in duties, the same measure of comfort we may expect from duties, Eccles. 5.1.
Keep thy feet when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready to hear
then to give the Sacrifice of fools. Thine heart like Dinah, is apt to wander
abroad, especially from the way and Worship of God; it behooves thee then to
have a strict hand over it, if thou would keep it at home: Observe, consider,
thy feet, so the word signifies.

The feet of the Harlot abide not within her house, neither will thy affections
easily within the House of God; does not experience tell thee that they love to
be gadding, and therefore require a strong and vigilant guard. Parents set
their Children before them at Church, and have their eyes much upon them,
because otherwise they will be toying and playing; truly so will thy heart, if
thine eye be not on it. Alas thy heart in duty is like one that looks through
an Optic Glass on some small object, with a Palsy hand, its long before he
can discern it, and as soon as he has found it, so unsteady is his hand that
he has lost it again; therefore it behooves thee to keep it diligently, and to
watch it narrowly: There is a bottomless depth of deceit in thine heart, how
unwillling is it to a duty? how much wandering in a duty? how soon weary of a
duty? The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who
knows it? Jer. 17.9^. Take notice of the center of the poison, the heart is
deceitful; a deceitful hand is nothing so dangerous as a deceitful heart, when
poison gets to the very seat of life, in what danger is a ^oul of death. Here
is also the measure of the pollution; The heart is deceitful above all things,
the best part is unspeakably poisoned. The Prophets expression has a three
fold gradation. First, there is deceit in man's heart, it is a word used of ways
Isa. 40.5. which are full of windings and ^urnings, and therefore are hard to
be found; so is man's heart full of nooks, and corners, slights and craft, and
so does easily supplant us, it has not only weakness and proneness to be
deceived by others, but also an activeness and aptness to deceive it self.
Secondly, there is the degree of its deceit, and indeed it is beyond all
degrees. The heart is deceitful above all things; No creature so sly and subtle
as man's heart; Nothing in this World can equal it for tricks and wiles; Nay as
this deceit of man's heart is so great that none can match it, so also it is so
deep that none can find it, none can fadom it, Who can know it? The largest,
the longest line of man's understanding, can never search to the bottom of this
Sea. Thirdly, Here is the danger of it, The heart of man is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked. It is not deceitful in such a degree, so much
through weakness as through wilfulness, it is desperately carried toward
deadly courses. It devotes it self wholly to deceive and destroy. How many
pretenses will it have to make thee to omit holy performances? if thou overcome
them how subtle will it be to make thee heedless and heart-less in the service
of God? It will fill thee with cares and thoughts of the World, purposely to
choke the good seed of the Word; if at any time thou wind it up to any
seriousness in an ordinance, how quickly, and how swiftly like a Clock or a
Jack, does it run down. Surely Reader, the Master that has such a cozening
Servant, must look narrowly to him, if he would not be cheated by him. If thou
do not watch at the Altar, the Birds will devour the Sacrifice.

Those that were before the Throne day and night, were full of eyes behind and
before and within, Rev. 4.6, and 8. Extraordinary heed is necessary when we
come into Gods House. We had need to have our eyes about us, when we come to
deal immediately with him who is of purer eyes, then to behold iniquity. The
Athenians in time of their Sacrifice, had a Monitor to bid them be serious,
calling on them, Hoc agite, mind the work ye are about, Plut. Cyprian observes
that in the Primitive times, the Deacon often cried out to the people, Sursum
corda, lift up your hearts; and the Pastor stird them up with, Oremus,
attendamus, Let us pray, let us attend; Commanding their greatest attention
when they were about Religious actions.

Eutychus was Drowsy while he was hearing which had like to have cost him his
life, God will not be slighted when he is speaking to the children of men.
Christ commands thee to take heed how thou hear. Luke 8.18. The heart is
needful in hearing more then the ears. We read of those that had ears and yet
heard not, Audientis corporis sensu non cordis assensu Aug.
Isa. 6.9, 10. Mat. 13.13. It is one thing to hear, and another thing to heed a
Sermon; Let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the Churches,
Rev. 2. When the word passes through both ears, as waters through a leaking
Vessel, no wonder if it be unprofitable. Least it should do so, let us give the
more diligent heed says the Apostle, Heb. 2.1. If men be told of the dreadful
end of sin, and the great danger of their precious souls, and they mind it not,
will they ever strive to prevent it? Our proficiency by the Word depends not a
little upon our earnest attention to the Word, Luke 19.48. Its said there, the
people were very attentive to hear him. They hanged on Christ, as if their ears
and minds had been tied to his tongue, or as eagerly as the little Bird, on the
Dams Bill for Corn.

In prayer also be heedful, watch unto prayer, Mark 13.33. Nehemiah when
building, did work and watch, watch and work, because of his Enemies; when thou
art at prayer, temptations without will be waiting, corruptions within will be
working; and therefore its requisite for thee to be watching.

Those that perform their duties, as Papists say their Pater nosters, and
Musicians play their Lessons with their Fingers, when their minds are busied
about other things, will make but harsh and displeasing Music in Gods ears, O
God, says the Psalmist, thou art terrible out of thy holy places, Psa. 68.35.
The Sanctuary or place of Worship was divided into three parts, thence called
thy holy places; now out of them God was comfortable to his watchful and
diligent Servants, but terrible to the slothful and negligent. He is terrible
not only in the high places of the field, but also in the holy places of the
faithful.

How can thou expect that God should heed thy prayers, when thou do not
heed them thy self; Would thou give Alms to a Beggar that by his carriage
and language should slight both thee and thy bounty? If a condemned malefactor
were suing to a Prince for his life, and in the midst of his entreaties should
see a Moth or a Fly, and leave his suit and follow after that; would this
wretch deserve a pardon. And is it not as unreasonable that God should grant
thy requests, if thou wilfully follow those foolish objects which thy heart or
the Devil offer to thee in the midst of thy prayers; monstrous compositions,
wherein is the face and voice of a man, the heart and feet of a beast, must
needs be odious to God; O bind thine heart to its good behavior, when thou
go into Gods House. Men put Locks and Fetters on Wild Horses, whom no
enclosure can keep in. This watching the heart in duties, will fasten and tie
it, as with cords to the Altar.

Secondly, Act grace in duties, the acting of grace in a duty, is the grace of
a duty. The Christian must attend on the means of grace, in a gracious manner;
the manner of performing duties, Non tantum considerandum est id quod agimussed
etiam quibus circum ^anti^s Ca^et in Thom. 1 (...) quest. 9.
is the most spiritual part of them, and therefore must most of all be minded.
God made a breach on them who sought him, not after the due order, 1 Cron.
15.13. If the matter of thy performance be according to the word, and thou
wilfully fail in the manner, thou will instead of a blessing, meet with a blow.
God had Sacrifices from the Jews of his own appointment for the matter, and yet
they were unsavory to him, Isa. 1.13, 14, 15. It is the manner which makes or
mars every action, that is the form which specificates all our devotion; grace
is Gods own Image, abundantly amiable in his eye, and that must be Stamped on
all our Coin of duties, or they will never be current with Heaven. Kings suffer
no Coin to go in their Dominions, but what has their own stamp. Tamberlane
would not own a pot of gold which his Soldier found and brought him, because
it wanted his Fathers impression. Christ will own no performances unless they
have his Fathers Picture, somewhat of his Image on them.

Indeed the Christian has no natural power for these spiritual performances,
but God gives him his Spirit for this purpose, that he might be enabled to do
sacred duties, with suitable graces; we know not how to pray as we ought, but
the spirit helps our infirmities, (...).
Romans 8.26. Man is impotent, but the spirit is an able assistant, helps our
infirmities. The word is either an allusion to a Nurse which helps her weak
little Child to go, so the spirit affords his hand and helps us to go to God in
duties, or (as the composition of the word imports) its an allusion to those
who lift at a weighty piece of Timber, too heavy for one alone, one man tugs
and pulls hard, but he cannot wag it, till one stronger then he comes and helps
him, then he bears it away cheerfully; so the Christian be pulls and hales at
his own heavy heart in a duty: to perform the duty aright, and yet makes
nothing of it till the spirit comes and helps him, and then he goes along
comfortably through the duty. As to Preaching there is required external
mission, so to every prayer and performance there are required internal
motions; therefore we find the spirit of grace and supplication joined together
Zach. 12.10. Samsan when his lock was cut off, became like another man, the
Christian when the spirit withdraws, that grace be not acted, he performs
duties like a carnalman. It is the b^eath of the Spirit of God in a duty, which
is so sweet and savory to God, gifts may do somewhat as to the outward part of a
duty, as a Carver may make an Image with the external lineaments of a man, but
unless grace and spiritual life be in it, it is but the counterfeit, the
resemblance of a true duty.

The two special graces which I shall speak of to be acted in Religious
exercises are fear and faith, upon these two feet David walked into Gods House.
I will go into thine House, in the multitude of thy mercies, there was his
faith; and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple Psa. 5.6. here is
his fear. The Christian like a Net, must have both the lead of an holy Fear,
and the cork of a lively Faith, if he would catch any thing out of the waters
of the Sanctuary; if the cork of Faith was without the lead of Fear, the Net
would lie too high; if the lead of Fear were without the cork of Faith the Net
of the Soul would fall too ^ow^ and so nothing would be caught; but both
together lay in the likest place for a good draught.

1. Fear and awful apprehensions of Gods infinite Majesty, is requisite in our
religious actions; This must he the handmaid to wait upon the Mistress of the
soul in all its addresses to the King of Heaven. Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling, Psa. 2.11. God allows an humble familiarity in the
walks of Obedience, yet he will always have the children of men to know their
distance. And though this habit of Fear must be ever in our hearts, as fire was
constantly on the Altar, yet he expects that it should be blown up and flame
out at the time of offering sacrifice. ^^od non netur co^^^m u^, and quod ^tem^
^ur (...) ^li. ur. Act. de ira c lib. 8.
Our greatest reverence is then most needful, when we approach the great God in
his Ordinances. God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of his Saints, and
had in reverence of all them that are round about him, Psa. 89.7.

When God intended to give the Law to Israel, Exodus 19.11, 12, 14.
the Jews must sanctify themselves three days beforehand; and when God came on
the third day to deliver his pleasure to the people, with what pomp and terror
was proclamation made? He descends in his Royal robes with a noble Retinue of
Saints and Angels; and with the dreadful ensigns of his Power, Majesty and
Jealousy. Deuteronomy. 33.2.
The Lord came from Sinai, and rose from Seir, he shined forth from mount
Paran, and he came with ten thousand of Saints, from his right hand went a
flery law for them. Exo. 19.16, 18
Then were there thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount; and
the voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people that were in
the camp trembled. And mount Sinai was altogether in a smoke because the Lord
descended upon it in fire, and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a
furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly; and why is all this? Why does the
Mighty possessour of Heaven and earth, appear at that time in such state and
royalty, and magnificence, with such a rich Train of Heavenly Courtiers, with
such Thundering Valleys of Shot, with the Mountain Smoking under him, and
Trumpets sounding before him? but to assure us that he is not so contemptible
as to be slighted by any; that he is not impotent, but able to revenge himself
on all that affront him; nay to teach us that he will be feared and reverenced
in all them that draw nigh to him. Therefore he will make even Moses whom he
knew face to face; Heb. 12 21.
at such a time exceedingly to quake and fear.

Civil or natural difference amongst us here below, commands proportionable
reverence; the Subject must fear his Sovereign, 1 Pet. 2.17. The Servant must
obey his Master with fear and trembling, Ephesians. 6.5. the Wife must see that she
reverence her Husband, Ephesians. 5. ult. If there be such reverence due from one
creature to another, when they were all made of the same course earthly mold,
and must all be buried in the bowels of their common Mother; when there is no
essential, but only an extrinsecal difference between them; what reverence is
due from poor dust and ashes, to the God of the Spirit of all flesh? the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, between whom and his creatures there is an
infinite distance?

It behooves us, The worship of God is called (...) a partic (...) and (...)
valde pavere (...) qu^d est more canis ad pedes alicujus tanqua m domini totum
sese prost^rnere subjectionis gratia. ^anch.
said Bernard, to enter into the celestial Court (at prayer time) where the
King of Heaven sits on his Starry, stately throne, environed with an
innumerable company of glorious Angels, and crowned Saints, with great
reverence and fear; Ah with what humility should a poisonous poluted Toad,
creep and crawl out of a Ditch into the presence of so glorious and dreadful a
Majesty? The holy Servants of God, were anciently called Nephalim (from Nephal
to fall down) Prostrates, or fallers, because in the Worship of God thy usually
fell on the earth.

The Elders of Israel trembled at the coming of Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.4. and shall
not we tremble when the great God comes to us in his Ordinances.

Every Relation in which men stand to, God calls for awfulness and dread of
him. If I be a Father, where is mine honor? If I be your Master, where is my
fear? Mal. 1.6. but especially in the Saints approaches to him, they must stand
in aw of him. When God appeared to Jacob at Bethel, where he saw nothing but
Visions of love; he cries out, This is none other but the House of God; How
dreadful is this place? Genesis 28.17. The great Turk when he goes into his
Temple, lays aside all his state, and has none to attend him but a
professor of the Law.

Therefore Reader, Deuteronomy. 28.58.
be persuaded to fear that glorious and fearful Name, the Lord thy God. That
Name which is the greatest prop of thine affiance, commands thy fear and
reverence.

When thou hear; In the fear of God give audience to his word; Act. 13.16.
Poor peasants must be trembling when this Prince is speaking. With meekness
receive that word which will damn or save thy soul. Alas with what fear should
a condemned Prisoner attend to his King, when every word he speaks is life or
death. It becomes the greatest Persons ^o be awful in Gods presence.
Constantine the Great, when hearing a Sermon, Eusebius de v^t Constant. l. 3. c 17.
would start out of his Chair of State, being ravished with the word, and stand
up for a long time; and being minded by his Courtiers, that such a posture was
unbecoming his high place, he would not hearken to them. Eglon though a fat
unweildy man, as soon as Ehud told him that he had a Message from God to him,
rose up to hear it, Judge. 3.20. Abraham, who had the honor and favor to be
Gods friend, yet when God spoke to him fell on his face, Genesis 17.3. Moses
though high in the heart of God, yet is hun^ble when he hears from God, He
boweth his head to wards the Earth and Worships, Exodus 34.8.

When thou prayest, put up thy petitions to him with awful apprehensions of
him. The vulg. Lat. read that Psa. 84.11. abjectus in domo Dei mei, to be cast
upon the Earth, to lie prostrate in the House of God. The Eastern Christians
when they called on God, threw themselves on the ground. Luther prayed with
confidence, as to a Father; but with reverence, as to a God. Remember when thou
take upon thee to speak unto the Lord, yet thou art but dust and ashes, Genesis
18.27. Thou art at best but a Beggar, and a proud heart will not suit a Beggars
purse. The poor must use entreaties, Prove. 18.23. The twenty four Elders, fell
on their faces and worshipped, Rev. 4.16. So did Jesus Christ himself in
prayer, Mat. 26.39. O come let us Worship and bow down, let us kneel before the
Lord our Maker, Psa. 95.6. The Elephant that could not bow nor kneel, was no
fit Beast for a Sacrifice.

Go to the Sacrament, Mat. 28.8.
that representation of Christ's suffering, as the Disciples went from his
Sepulcher, with fear and great joy; The Fathers call it, misterium tremendum,
the nearer we draw to God in any Ordinance, the greater must be our reverence.
In a Sermon we draw nigh to him, as Pupils to their Tutor; In prayer, as
Children to their Father, but at a Sacrament we talk with God face to face; We
Sup with him, and he with us. If Angels vail their faces in his presence, much
more cause have we to serve him with fear and trembling in every ordinance. In
a word, Let us have grace whereby we may serve him acceptably with reverence
and godly fear, for our God is a consuming sire, Heb. 12.28, 29. Mark the way
to serve God acceptably, is to serve him reverently. As the Quaver adds a
grace to the Music, and makes it more acceptable to us, so an holy trembling
graceth our performances, and makes them more acceptable to God.

2. Perform religious duties with Faith as well as Fear; Fear will keep the
heart awful, and Faith will make it cheerful in the service of God. Let us draw
nigh to God with full assurance of faith, Heb 10.2^. In Ordinances man draws
nigh to God, but if he would do it with acceptance he must do with affiance,
with faith; By Faith Abel offered a more acceptable sacrifice then Cain, Heb.
11.4. Faith does instrumentally justify both our persons and performances,
because it looks up to, and lays hold on Christ, who justifies both
meritoriously. God is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; now there are many
sins in our best services; we must therefore carry all our sacrifices, (as the
Israelites did, Exodus 28.38.) to our High Priest, who will take away the
inuqitie of our holy things, and procure their acceptance with the Lord; He
shall purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
offering in righteousness, then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, Mal. 3.2, 3, 4. It is a prophefie of Christ. He shall
purge away the dross from our duties, and then they shall be pleasing to God.

It was a sacred Law among the Molossians, that whosoever came to the King with
his son in his arms should be pardoned whatsoever offense he were guilty of:
The Athenian General therefore, when banished his Country, fled to Admetus King
of the Molossians his deadly enemy, and prostrated himself before him with his
Son in his arms, and found favor. God and man are enemies, there is no
appearing before this dreadful King without his Son in our arms, and with him
there is no fear of a repulse; In him we have boldness and access with
confidence by the faith of him, Ephesians. 3.12. As God and man are angry, Christ
is medium reconciliationis, he makes them friends; as God and man are
reconciled, Christ is medium communionis, he is the means of their fruition of
each other. Therefore Reader whatever thou do, whether thou prayest, or
hear, or singest, or read, do all in the name of Christ, Col. 3.17.
Consider thy admission into Gods presence is by Christ: No man comes to the
Father but by the Son, Joh. 14.6. Through him we have access unto the Father,
Ephesians. 2.18. It is his blood which has purchased thee this gracious privilege.
He alone has turned the seat of Justice into a Throne of Grace. When thou
approachest God, he would be a fire to consume thee, not a Father to embrace
thee, were it not for his Son. Consider also thy assistance in duties is from
Christ; Without him thou can do nothing, Joh. 15.3. O how dull and dead is
thy heart in the most solemn duty, unless this Lord of life quicken it. Though
thou have a real principle of spiritual life, yet unless Christ draw thee, give
the quickening and enciting Grace thou can not run after him in a duty.

Further, Thine acceptance in the Ordinances of God is through Christ. O how
unsavory would thy best duties be were it not for the odors of his most sweet
sacrifice. The golden Censor and the Incense under the Law typified that all
our performances must be perfumed and presented by Christ, before they can be
accepted with God. The smoke of the Incense must ascend with the Saints prayers
before they can be pleasing. The incense (which signified the merits of Christ)
is the pillar of smoke in which the believers performances mount up to Heaven,
Rev. 8.3, 4. No wonder that David begged so hard Let my prayers come before
thee like incense. The Priests when they went into the Tabernacle to sacrifice
were commanded to put off their own, and to put on the holy garments provided
for them, Exodus 28.43. intimating, that none must approach God in the rags of
their own, but in the robes of Christ's Righteousness. The Ark which was a
special type of Christ (without of Shittim wood, speaking his Humanity, within
of wrought gold, typifying his Deity) did signify thus much to us; it covered
the two Tables, so Christ the Law; there God gave his gracious answers, and was
propitious to his people, so God accepts the persons and prayers of men in
Christ, Ephesians. 1.6. If the Patriachs were welcome to Pharaoh it was for Joseph's
sake; and if the people of God are welcome at any time to him, it is for Jesus
sake.

Faith in Christ is the eye which ravisheth the heart of God; Thou have stolen
away mine heart with one of thine eyes, Cant. 4. Of all the Virgin-Graces none
find such favor in his sight. This, this is the Hester on whose head he sets
the Crown; when she appears before him, though it be contrary to the Law of
Works, he constantly holds out the golden Scepter of Grace: He is so delighted
with her beauty, so ravished with her comeliness that he grants her request
(be it) to the half or whole of his Kingdom. Therefore Reader when thou go
to God be sure to take Christ along with thee, as ever thou would speed. Let
thy prayers and petitions be in his name with an eye to his promise; Whatsoever
ye shall ask the Father in my name, I will do it, Joh. 14.13. Let thy Praises
and thank^givings be in his name, according to his precept, Giving thanks
always, and in all things unto God and our Father, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5.20. To be short, As an holy Priest offer up all thy
spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, If thou would make Religion thy bufiness in holy duties, Perform
them to give God glory by them, and to receive grace through them: Ordinances
must be used both as a testimony of our subjection to God, and as the way of
communion with God. God is present in his Ordinances. 1. In majesty and beauty,
and in that respect our end in them must be to give him glory. 2. In
communication and bounty, and in that respect our end in them must be to
receive Grace from him, Psalm. 27.4. Rev. 2.3, 6. Exodus 20.24. Gods eye is very
much on our ends in duties; he takes notice when he is neglected, and self
exalted; When ye fasted and mourned even these seventy years, did ye all fast
unto me, even to me? And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat
for your selves and drink for your selves? Zich. 7.6, 7. God sees when
self-credit, or self-profit is the end of a performance, Matthew. 6, 1, 2. Hos.
7.14. He weighs all our actions by our aims. Now as duties are considerable
in a twofold respect, so a Christian must have in them a twofold end.

1. Duties are considerable as services, in relation to the command; and so a
Christian must mind them, that he may testify his obedience to God, and his
dependence on him, Thou have commanded me to keep thy precepts diligently; O
that my ways were directed to keep thy commandments, Psalm. 119.5, 6.

Warn the unruly, comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient
toward all men, rejoicing evermore, pray without ceasing, in every thing give
thanks; For this is the will of God concerning you, 1 Thessalonians 5.14, 15, 16, 17,
18. God required the Israelites to bring a sheaf in a Ghomer, about a pottle,
for all their increase of the fruits of the earth, Lev. 23.10. whereby they
acknowledged that they receive all from him. Though man be unable to satisfy
Gods Justice by all his devotion, yet God will be owned and acknowledged in
holy duties. Copyholders though they have the profi^s of their Houses and
Lands to themselves, yet pay some small Quit-Rent, and at certain times do suit
and service to the Lord ^f their Manor, acknowleding thereby that the
Fee-simple is his, and they enjoy the^ through his favor. The earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof, He is the mighty possessor of heaven and earth,
and though he gives the earth by leases for lives (as it were) and copies to
the children of men, yet the Fee-simple and original right is still in himself,
and he has appointed seasons daily and weekly for duties, wherein Christians
should acknowledge that they hold all of him, and enjoy all through his grace
and good will.

The worshipping of God in his Ordinances is the homage, which as creatures, we
ow to our Maker, and as Christians, we owe to our Redeemer; God allows us the
comfort of our mercies, but he reserveth to himself the credit of our mercies,
and has appointed the hours of prayer to be the set times for the payment of
this small Quit-rent (infinitely inferior to our engagements) to his sacred
Majesty.

Truly Reader, This end must be minded in thine attendance on the means of
grace, namely to give God glory by acknowleding his Sovereignty over thee, and
bounty to thee; or else when thou bendest the bow of thine heart, and shootest
thy spiritual arrows thou will never hit the mark.

2. Duties are considerable as means, in relation to the Promise; and so they
are channels cut out by Christ to convey grace into the hearts of men,
therefore thine end in this respect must be to derive grace from the God of all
grace, through the means of grace. The place of Ordinances is called by some
The door of Heaven, because there Christ gives his alms, his dole. Others call
it The Celestial Exchange between God and his people; God does there exchange
mercies for duties, and they exchange Glory for Grace. At the Tabernacle, says
God, I will meet with the children of Israel, and it shall be sanctified by my
glory: And I will dwell aamong the children of Israel, and will be their God
Exodus 29.43 45. When God comes to his house, he never comes empty handed. If
Paul comes with the fullness of the blessings of the Gospel of Christ, with what
clusters of blessings is the true Vine laden? with what a train of Graces and
Comforts is this great King attended; I will meet with the children of Israel
there. When Jacob met Joseph they kissed and wept, Genesis 46.29. But when God meets
the Believer, they have a merrier meeting, they kiss and rejoice.

And I will dwell among them; Who can imagine the house which God keeps, where
he dwells, the dainties, the delicates which he provides for his friends and
Family. Great Princes have great provision in their Courts, answerable to their
quality; but what provision does the great God make? surely answerable to his
infinite majesty.

The table in the Tabernacle was furnished with so many loaves as there were
Tribes in Israel, Moses unveyled, c. 27. p. 10
signifying that God keeps a constant and plentiful table in his Church for all
Believers.

Ordinances are canales gratiae, Conduit-pipes whereby the water of life is
derived from Christ into the hearts of Christians. As the light and beams of
the Sun is the vehiculum or chariot to convey the heat and influence of the Sun
to the world; so the Ordinances of God are the chariots whereby God conveyeth
the heat of his Grace, and the influences of his Spirit to men and women.
Saints behold his face in the gla^^ of Ordinances, and are changed into his
image from glory to glary, 2 Cor. 3.18. Those Divine graces which are for meat
to satisfy and for medicine to heal the soul, are found growing only upon the
banks of the waters of the Sanctuary; Clark M^r. part. 2. p. 213.
therefore go to Ordinances, as the Viema^ lim, a bird in America flies to the
fields, for the dew which falls down from Heaven, thereupon which it lives.

Socrates one day meeting Zenophon the Son of Corillus in a certain Port Town,
^^og of ae^ in vi^.
stopped him with his staff, and asked him, Where was the place where several
commodities were to be had? He answered readily, In such a place: Then says
Socrates, Where is the place that a man might be made good? Zenophon answered,
he could not tell. Then follow thou me, says Socrates, and thou shall learn;
and from that time he became Socrates Scholar. The Ordinances of God are the
places for both, there true riches and virtue may be had; the Temple is both
the Exchange for traffic, and a School for learning. The good Mast^r teaches
his Scholars there those lessons which make them wise to salvation.

Reader, the Ordinances are the food of the soul (milk for babes, and meat for
men) do thou feed on them to get spiritual health and strength; It is a shame
for a Christian to be like an An^^busie about a molehil and never to grow
greater: Go^o those wells that the vessels of thy soul may be filled with
living water.

David longed (as a Woman with Child, so the word signifies) to see the beauty
of the Lord, and receive of his bounty in the Sanctuary, Psa. 84.2. and 63.1,
2. and 27. Thou go to the Market to supply thy bodily necessities, and art
ashamed to come home empty? Do thou not come to the Ordinances of God for the
releif of thy soul indigencies, and art thou not greived to come away poor and
beggarly? Merchants take in some goods from one part, some from another part,
and at last come home richly laden; do thou get some true riches at prayer,
some from the word, and then how comfortably may thou conclude thy duties.

Do not rest in the formal performance of duties, as the Harlot that cried out,
Prove. 7.14.
I have had my peace offering to day, and therefore all must be well; but as
the people when Moses went to speak to God for them, Exodus 33.8,
they all looked after him to see what speed, what success. After thine
attendance on Ordinances, long and look for the fruit of them; If a man present
a Petition to a King, he gives attendance to see whether it will be granted or
no. It is a contempt both of Gods Majesty and Mercy, for thee to throw down thy
prayers before him, and then to run away not caring what becomes of it. When
thou have been speaking to God hearken what God will speak to thee, for he
speaks peace to his people, and to his Saints, that they return no more to
folly. Let down thy Net into the Waters, and expect to catch somewhat which may
feed thy soul; if thou fish all night and (as the Disciples) catch nothing,
look for the coming of Christ in the morning, and that purposely to give thee a
good draught of fish.

Reader, remember thine errand at ordinances is to get grace, thou have Gods
promise to them, and his power and faithfulness, both engaged for its
performance, and its thy fault and folly if thou go hungry from a full
table, and empty from a free and large treasure. Be as wise for thy soul as
others are for their bodies. The Country Tradesman wants commodities, he goes
to London* where is a Merchant that has variety and abundance; when he comes
there, he does not spend his time in seeing fashions, and visiting friends, but
in going to this and that Warehouse as his occasions require, to buy Wares;
and you see sometimes what considerable quantities he sends home: Go thou and
do likewise. Thou complainest that thou want grace, go to Christ who has
variety and sufficiency for thy supply; but do not go to see men, or to be seen
of men, but to see God, and to be transformed into his likeness; go to this and
that duty, as shops (where Christ sits and sels) and buy Wine and Milk without
Money and without price, little do thou know, were this but thy business, how
certainly, how liberally he would satisfy thee? Why should the Tradesman be a
better Husband for corruptible wares, then thou art for durable riches? Alas,
alas, Christ is more willing to sell, then thou can be to buy; to give, then
thou art to ask.

Balaam, as bad as he was, when he had prepared seven Altars, and offered seven
Sacrifices could expect to meet God, and can thou, O Christian, contentedly
miss him, surely he is a pitiful beggar that can go to the gate of a bountiful
Peer, where is plenty of provision for the poor, and come away willingly
without his Alms.

A good wish about religious Duties in general, wherein the former Heads are
Epitomized.
THe immediate Worship of the infinite God, being a work of the greatest weight
that ever I did, or can possibly undertake, yea that men and Angels are capable
of; I wish therefore that I may never enter rashly upon it, but may ordinarily
take some pains before hand, The Introduction to the directions analised.
to aw my heart by a serious apprehension of the unconceivable greatness,
jealousy, and holiness of that God to whom I am approaching, (how he is
resolved to be sanctified either actively or passively, Preparation.
in every one that draws nigh to him,) and by a savoury consideration of the
unspeakeable consequence of the duty in which I am engaged, how it concerns
the unchangeable welfare of my never dying soul in the other World. I wish that
all the time of the duty, I may look as narrowly to my heart, Attention.
as ever keeper did to that prisoner for whose escape he was to dye, and bind
it to the Altar (as they of old, their Sacrifice) with the strongest cords of
all watchfulness, and circumspection imaginable. Acting grace.
I wish that I may perform each part of the duty with suitable grace; and to
this end, that all my graces may be upon the wing, ready upon the least call to
mount up to Heaven; as several strings of a Vial, wound up to their due height
and pitch, each in their place, upon the least touch (as occasion shall be) to
make M^si^k in the ears of the Lord my God; O that while my beloved sits at
his Table, my Spikenard may send forth a pleasant smell. In particular, Fear
I wish that I may be so sensible of the infinite distance which is betwixt the
incomprehensible Lord of Heaven, and me a poor worm, who lie grovelling here on
earth, that I may both in my carriage and language, affections and expressions,
behave my self throughout the ordinance with all godly fear, humility and
reverence. I wish that I may be so truly affected with the sins and
unworthiness of my person and performances, and my Saviors infinite
meritoriousness, that I may carry all my Sacrifices, to the High Priest of my
profession, beleiving assuredly, that they being perfumed with the odours of
his death, Faith
and presented by his hands, shall be Offerings of a sweet smelling savor to
my God. The end of duties.
Finally, I wish that all ends of pride, merit and self, set a side, I may
therefore attend on duties, that I may by my poor Peppercorn, acknowledge those
millions of eternal obligations by which I am bound to my God, and also that by
those Buckets (O that they might never come up empty to me) I may draw water
out of the Well of Salvation, Amen.

CHAP. XII. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godliness in Prayer. And
first, of Prayer in general; and of the antecedents to it.
THe infinite and glorious God, though be be so high, that he humbles himself
to behold things in Heaven, and so holy that the Heavens are unclean in his
sight, is yet so gracious that he condescendeth to, and converseth with poor
sinful dust and ashes; amongst all those ways which he has appointed the
children of men to walk with him in, Prayer is one of the fairest and
pleasantest. In this duty the children of God whisper him in the ear, open
their minds, and unbosom themselves to him, as his intimate friends and
favorites. He has been pleased to command it, not only out of his Dominion
over them, and for his own glory (He that offers praise glorifieth me) but
also out of his compassion to them, and for their good, that by prayers (as men
far distant do by letters) there might be a constant and uninterrupted
intercourse and correspondence betwixt Heaven and earth.

Men by discoursing together come to be acquainted at first, and continue their
acquaintance by sending to and hearing from one another. Prayer which is the
speech of man with his Maker, is a special means whereby he comes to be
acquainted with God, as also to increase and continue this acquaintance. Prayer
indeed brings Heaven down to man, and prayer carries man up to heaven; It is
the chief duty wherein all the graces meet, they shine brightly like so many
glorious Stars in this Firmament.

Of all graces, faith obtains the crown, above all take the shield of faith;
Other jewels are of great value, but this is the fairest sparkling Diamond.
Among all duties prayer seems to challenge the garland of honor, Concerning
the work of my hands command ye me. This is the Favorite in the Heavenly
Court, to whom the King of Kings can deny nothing. This duty is of such weight
that it is frequently put for Gods whole worship, Seek ye the Lord seek his
strength, seek his face evermore. Psa. 105.4, 5. Gods Temple which was the
beauty of holiness, the habitation of the most high, was baptized by God
himself with this name, My House shall be called of all Nations an house of
prayer, Isa. 56.7. Gods people which are higher then the Kings of the Earth are
known to be nobly born by this practice. This is the generation of them that
seek him, that seek thy face O Jacob, Psa. 24.6. Nay God himself is pleased to
wear prayers Livery, and to be distinguished by the royal Robes of his relation
to this duty, O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come, Psa.
65.1, 2. Pearls of a very high price, are never set but in gold, the choicest
metal. The Worship and people of God are more worth then all this World, but O
how much is God worth! yet all these glister gloriously in the ring of prayer.

There is no duty in my observation which has so many precepts for it, or
promises to it, as prayer, and sure I am, there is no duty which gives more
honor to God, or receives more honor from God then prayer.

Prayer has a twofold pre-eminence above all other duties whatsoever. In
regard of the universality of its influence, and opportunity for its
performance. The universality of its influence. As every sacrifice was to be
seasoned with Salt, so every undertaking, and every affliction of the creature
must be sanctified with prayer; nay as it shows the excellency of gold, that
its laid upon silver it self, so it speaks the excellency of prayer, that not
only natural and civil, but even Religious and spiritual actions are overlaid
with prayer. We pray not only before we eat or drink our bodily nourishment,
but also before we feed on the bread of the Word, and the bread in the
Sacrament; prayer is requisite to make every providence, and every ordinance
blessed to us; Prayer is needful to make our particular callings succesful,
prayer is the guard to secure the fort royal of the heart, prayer is the Porter
to keep the door of the lips, prayer is the strong Hilt which defends the
hands, prayer perfumes every relation, prayer helps us to profit by every
condition, prayer is the Chemist that turns all into Gold, prayer is the
Master workman, if that be out of the way, the whole Trade stands still, or
goes backward. What the Key is to the Watch, that prayer is to Religion, it
winds it up and sets it a going. It is before other duties in regard of
opportunity for its performance. A Christian cannot always hear, or always
read, or always communicate, but he may pray continually. No place, no company
can deprive him of this privilege. If he be on the top of a House with Peter,
he may pray, if he be in the bottom of the Ocean with Jonah, he may pray, if he
be walking in the field with Isaak, he may pray when no eye sees him; if he be
waiting at table with Nehemiah, he may pray when no ear hears him. If he be
in the mountains with our Savior, he may pray; If he be in the prison with
Paul, he may pray; wherever he is, prayer will help him to find God out: Every
Saint is Gods Temple; And he that carries his Iemple about him, says Austin,
may go to prayer when he pleases. Indeed to a Christian every house is an
house of prayer, every closet a chamber of presence, and every place he comes
to, an Altar whereon he may offer the sacrifice of prayer.

Prayer is an humble lifting up the heart, or pouring out the soul to God in
the name of Christ: It is a crying Abba Father. As Scripture is Gods Letter
wherein he opens his mind to man, so Prayer is man's Letter wherein he opens
his mind to God. It is fitly resembled to Jacobs Ladder, the bottom of which
was on earth, but the top reached to Heaven: A thought can fly speedily to the
uttermost parts of the earth, so can prayer in a moment to the highest heavens.
One of the Fathers compares it to a chain, one end of which is tied to man's
tongue, the other end to Gods ear. Another, Ascensus mentis ad Deum, A lifting
up the mind to God. Paul calls it a making known our requests to God, Phil. 4.
Jamblicus a profane writer calls prayer, Rerum divinarum ducem and lucem and
copulam qua homines cum Deo conjunguntur; The guide and light of Divine truths,
the band whereby God and man are joined together; Clavis instarqua Dei
penetralia aperiuntur, Like a key that opens Gods secrets. Austin calls it,
Dei sacrificium, diaboli flagellum. and Christiani subsidium; A sweet savor to
God, a terror to the Devil, and a shelter to a Christian. Bernard calls it,
Vinculum invincibilis, ^he Conqueror of him who is invincible. Luther says, It
is omnipotent. Archimedes made such an engine that says he, Could I but find
where to fasten it, I would not doubt but to remove the whole earth with it.
Such an engine is Prayer. By prayer fire has been quenched, waters divided,
the mouths of Lions stopped, iron gates opened, the bottles of heaven opened
and stopped, the course of nature overturned, diseases removed, health
restored, sin subdued, grace bestowed, Kingdoms supported, Church enemies
scattered, the blind restored, the dead enlivened, devils dispossessed, and the
blessed God himself conquered. The Jews have a proverb, Sine stationibus non
staret mundus, alluding to their standing posture in prayer; the World would
not stand without prayer.

When a great fire in Constantinople had fastened on a great part of the City,
took hold of the Church, flamed in at several of the windows, the Bishop ran
into the Church, fell down on his knees, and would not rise from prayer till
the fire was vanquished. And as prayer has hindered fire, so it has brought
down water: The Legions of Christians under Aurelius in a time of drought
entreated rain of God and prevailed, for which they were called The lightening
Legion.

Prayer is the Midwife to bring all those mercies into the world to the
Believer, which are conceived in the womb of the Promises. It is the Christians
messenger which he sends to Heaven for the supply of his necessities, and like
Jonathans bow it never returns empty. Oftentimes as the Echo doubleth the
voice, so does the answer the prayer; when the soul, like Gehezi asks but one
talent, God, like Naaman, forces two upon it. The Lord is rich unto all that
call upon him, Romans 10.12. Prayer is the Thames in which all sorts of
commodities are brought up for the releif of the Citizens of Zion. Some say of
Cornucopia that it has all things necessary for food in it. Prayer has in it
all things pertaining to this life and a better.

It is said of the Pope, He can never want money while he can hold a pen, His
writing of Pardons and Indulgencies fills his coffers. It is more true of the
Christian, he need never want if he will but pray. Prayer is a key to Gods own
coffers wherein there are infinite, and all sorts of comforts. I have no
friends, said a good woman, but I have a prayer, and so long as I have a
praying heart, God will find a pitying heart and a helping hand. It is but ask,
and receive; seek, and find; knock, and it shall be opened. Matthew. 7.7, 8. The
child presents his petition to his Father, and at the foot of it there is
Fiat quickly written.

Prayer is like the Spaniards Plate fleet which returns home worth thousands
and millions. A Courtier will sometimes get more by a petition to his Prince in
a morning, then some Tradesmen do all their lives. A regenerate person being in
favor at Court gains more by a morning (...), then a wicked man, though he
works hard, gets while he lives. I never said to the seed of Jacob seek ye me
in vain: Some asked but the cure of their bodies, when God healed their bodies
and souls too; he has forced many an unexpected favor upon an upright fervent
prayer.

Prayer, is not only a Storehouse of mercies, but a Fort-royal to defend the
soul against miseries; as some write of the herb Panaces, it is good for all
diseases. When Satan entered the field against Paul, the Apostle held up this
shield of prayer to defend himself against his fiery darts; For this I besought
the Lord thrice, 2 Cor. 12.7. Prayer has stormed and surprised more Cities,
conquered and routed more Armies, then old men's heads or young men's hands, then
all the policy and power on earth.

Prayer is like the ring which Queen Elizabeth gave to the Earl of Essex,
bidding him if he were in any distress send that ring to her, and she would
help him: God commands his people if they be in any perplexity to send this
ring to him; Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will hear thee, and thou
shall glorify me, Psa. 50.15.

O what a privilege do thou enjoy Reader, in having freedom of access to the
Throne of Grace. The Persian Kings took state upon them, and enacted that none
should come uncalled upon pain of death: But the gates of Heaven, as the
Aediles at Rome are always open: Thou have liberty night and day of presenting
thy petitions in the name of christ to the King of the whole earth, and needst
not fear (so thy prayers be according to Scripture directions) so much as a
chiding for thy presumption: The poets say that Litae, Prayers, are Jupiters
Daughters, and always about the Throne. If it be esteemed such a favor to have
an earthly Princes ear, what a favor art thou invested with, that have the ear
of the blessed and only Potentate? Elisha offered his courteous Host a great
kindness, when he asked her, will thou be spoken for to the King? 2 Kings 4.13.
Some purchase that liberty, as the chief Captain his Roman freedom, with a
great sum, but thou may speak to the King of Kings thy self, and be welcome,
and needst not be at the charge of having either Saints or Angels thy
mediators, or any of those Heavenly Courtiers, to bring thee into the Kings
presence. The Son of God himself will do it for thee gratis. In him we have
boldness, Ephesians. 3.12. (...) liberty of speech, freedom to speak all thy mind,
to lay open thy very inwards to God. If thou art in doubts about thy spiritual
estate, and about thy title to the inheritance of the Saints in light, thou
may by prayer go to him who is mavelous in counsel, and have his advice for
nothing. If any disease appear in thy soul, which (thou fear) may endanger
its life, at least hinder its peace and health, thou may by prayer knock up
the true Physician at midnight, and prevail with him to hasten to thy help and
cure. If thou art surrounded with many and bloody Enemies, that thou know
not what to do, nor where to go, thou may by prayer send post to Heaven, and
thou needst not fear but Christ will meet the Messenger half was, and come in
timely to thy rescue. If thou art bound wi^h the bond of iniquity, and like
Peter watched narrowly night and day, nay though thou art encompassed round
with the black guard of Hell, lest thou should make an escape, yet prayer
without ceasing would knock off thy chains, break open the Prison doors, and in
spite of all the Legions of Devils that kept thee, set thee at liberty. If
thou art like the Psalmist overwhelmed with sorrow, this sighing into Gods
ears by prayer will ease thy heart. When the Glass of thy soul is so full of
those strong spirits, fear and grief, that it threatens to burst, thou may
give it vent by prayer to God and there will be no danger. Whilst thou art in
this valley of tears, thou art encompast with Enemies, have many and urgent
necessities, doubts and dangers, but prayer, like Moses, will go before thee
(engage him on thy side that will) overcome them all, and guide thee all the
way through the Wilderness of this World, to the very borders of Canaan, and
never leave thee till thou come to enter into the place of prai^e.

But Reader, the more richly this Vessel of prayer is laden, the more careful
and skilful must the Pilot be that steers it, lest it suffer Shipwreck. Queens
that have great heirs in their wombs, must be tenderly used, lest they
miscarry. If prayer be so bountiful a friend (as thou have heard) thou ought
to be the more fearful of abusing it. Princes who allow firourites their ears,
yet expect that they should know their distance, and ask in such a ma^^ as they
appoint, and such things for the matter as will be consistent with their honor
to give, or else instead of a grant they may meet with a repulse, and a sharp
reproof. Haman though he were so intimate with the King, that he had his Hand
and Seal at pleasure, found by woeful experience what it was to abuse the Kings
favor, by desiring the satisfaction of his own lust, in that which was
exceedingly to the Kings loss.

The Incense under the Ceremonial Law was a tipe of prayer; Let my prayer come
before thee like Incense, but if it had not been made exactly, both for matter
and manner according to Gods own prescription, (who himself gave special
direction about it, Exodus 30.34.35, 36.) as sweet as the Spices were, it had
been loathsome and unsavory to him, the burning of Incense had been but as the
blessing of an Idol, Isa. 66.3. I shall therefore for thy right management of
this duty which is of such weight and importance to thee, speak to these three
particulars.

1. To the Antecedents, or those things which must go before prayer.

2. To the Concomitants, or those things which must accompany prayer.

3. To the Consequents, or those things which must follow after prayer.

1. To the Antecedents of prayer. Preparation is necessary before prayer.
Zopher acquainteth Job how his prayers might come to be prevalent. If thou
prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hand unto him, Job 11.13. The heart
is the Forge where these Vessels for the Sanctuary are formed and fashioned,
and made in secret; the tongue is but the thop wherein they are exposed to
public view; therefore the heart must do its work well before the tongue can
commend its ware; the heart must indite a good matter, before the tongue will
be as the pen of a ready writer.

God commands us both to look to our hearts and mouths when we are in his
house; be not rash with thy mouth to utter any thing before God, and keep thy
feet when thou art in the House of God, Eccles. 5.1, 2. The former is a bridle
for our mouths and expressions, the latter is a guard for our hearts and
affections.

In reference to the Antecedents. 1. Some things which will further the duty
must be used. 2. Some things which will hinder the duty must be refused.

First, Those things which will further the duty, are meditation, and the
stirring up of grace. Meditation will be helpful to the matter of prayer; The
quickening and stirring up of grace, will be hel^ful to the manner of the duty.

First, Meditation; Meditation fits the soul for supplication. Meditation fills
the soul with good liquor, and then prayer broaches it, and sets its a running.
David first mused, and then spoke with his tongue, Lord make me to know mine
end, Psa. 39.3.4. Nay to ass^re us that meditation was the Mother which bred
and brought forth prayer, he calls the child by its parents name, Give ear to
my words, O Lord, consider my meditation, Psa. 5.1. Meditation is like the
chargeing of a piece, and prayer the discharging of it. Isaac went into the
field to meditate. Genesis 24.63. The Septuag. the Geneva translation, and
Tremelius (in his marginal Notes on it) read it to pray, and the Hebrew word
Suach used there, signifies both to pray and meditate, whereby we may learn,
that they are very near a kin, like twins they lie in the same womb, in the
same word, meditation is the best beginning of prayer, and prayer is the best
conclusion of meditation. When the Christian, like Daniel, has first opened
the windows of his soul by contemplation, then he may kneel down to prayer.

Prayer is a building which reaches up to Heaven, meditation lays in all the
costly materials which are requisite for this building. He that would make any
riddance of his work, must take care that all his materials be brought in
beforehand; if they be to fetch when he comes to work, he will make long and
tedious Churchwork indeed.

Something thou art to meditate on, relating to thy self, something relating to
God.

Those things which relate to thy self, are thy sins, wants and mercies; There
are three parts of prayer (though I know some reckon the first rather an
adjunct) Confession, Petition, and Thanksgiving: Now meditation gives each of
these the work which they are to do, like a faithful Steward it gives every one
their proper and peculiar portion. Meditation on our sins helps in
confession; Meditation on our wants helps in petition; Meditation on our
mercies helps in thanksgiving. A Christian ought to keep a Catalogue, at
least in the Table book of his heart of these three particulars, David did so:
He Registered his unrighteousness, or the wrong he had done to God, my sin is
ever before me, Psa. 51.3. He thought much upon his wants and sufferings; He
often cries out, I am poor and needy, Psa. 109.21. Psa. 25. my sorrow is ever
before me. Psa 38.17. And for Gods mercies he did not write them in the Sand,
but he treasured them up in his memory. Thy loving kindness is before mine
eyes, Psa. 26.3. And though some of them were stale (ancient mercies) yet they
were not sour to David's taste, he did not throw them away as Old Almanacks out
of date, I will remember the days of old, the years of ancient times, Psa. 77.
Rather then God should not be paid his thanks, for favors to his Forefathers,
David would take the Debts from their score, and set them upon his own File.

Confession of sin must be with shame and sorrow; petition for mercy must be
with faith and fervency; Thanksgiving must be with admiration of God, and
delight in God; Now it is meditation of our sins, wants and miseries, which
provides fuel for the fire of these graces to work upon, and which they break
out into an Heavenly flame.

Meditate on thy sins; Thy duty in prayer is to Indict, Arraign, and Condemn,
and Execute those Malefactors and Transgressors of the Royal Law, which can
never be done till they are apprehended. If thou will kill those Foxes that
spoil the Vine, those lusts which hinder thy regenerate part from thriving; thy
care must be by meditation to hunt them out of their lurking holes, and take
them. Thy wounds which stink and are so unsavory to God, must by serious
consideration be searched and felt, before they can be healed. When thou art
going to prayer, do as Jehu when he went to sacrifice to Baal, send out and
f^^ch^n all thy false Worshippers; those Enemies of the true God, that deny his
supremacy, and bowed the knee to the World or the flesh, and then by an humble
penitential confession, and self judging, cut them off. Who ever bewailed his
sins, that did not know their sinfulness, or who ever was ashamed that did not
see his own nakedness. When the Jews came to know that they were the betrayers
and Murderers of the Lord Jesus, then they were pricked to the heart; O do that
for thy self which God will do for many others, set thy sins in order before
thine eyes, thine original and thine actual, thine omissions and commissions,
thy personal and relative, thy secret and public, thy sins about natural,
civil, or spiritual actions, thy sins under mercies and against afflictions.
Say to thy conscience as Samuel to Jesse, Are all thy Sons here; Are all thy
^ins here; if any be wanting to thy knowledge, cause it to be sent for, and
brought, and sit not down to Sacrifice before it come; when this is done, put
them all into their own colors, accent them with their several aggravations,
consider what light, what love, what motions of Gods spirit, what convictions
of thy own spirit, they were committed against.

Above all, meditate on the infinite Majesty, Purity and Mercy of that God
against whom thou have sinned. Those three Attributes duly weighed would like
Moses three strokes fetch water out of a rock: Ah could thou that have heard
of this God by the hearing of the ear, but see him with the seeing of the eye,
thou would quickly abhor thy self in dust and ashes. How ugly, how loathsome
would sin be, could thou behold the Glory, Holiness and Grace of that God
whom thereby thou have offended? Ah how great an evil must that be which is so
opposite and offensive to the greatest good? Think also on the blood of the
dearest Jesus, which was let out by thy lusts; and surely when thou beholdest
those knives before thee which made those bloody mortal wounds in his blessed
body, Anger and Grief will both strive within thee for the mastery.

Meditate on thy wants. He that is ignorant what he ailes cannot complain, at
least so as to be relieved. The messenger who knows not the errand upon which
he comes, must expect to be sent back as wise as he came. Do as the good
Huswife when she is going to market where provision is to be had does; First,
she considers with her self what her family needs, what food, what clothes,
what her Husband, what her Children, what her self, and accordingly disposes
her mon^y at Market; so when thou art going to God by pr^yer, who is able to
supply all thy necessities, consider what thou want, what pardoning mercy,
what purifying mercy, what sin thou did lately foil, and art afraid it will
recover again, that thou may beg strength to pursue the victory; what l^st
lately got the better of thee, that thou may entreat pardon of it, and power
against it; what grace thou art defective in, either in reference to thy
calling, or relations, or any condition, that thou may request God to bestow
it on thee; what new providence has befallen thee, or new work is laid upon
thee, that thou may beseech God to give the suitable grace and power.

This consideration of thy wants, with the weight of them, will make thee more
urgent and instant with God for supply; they that feel hunger how hard will
they beg for bread? poor prisoners that are ready to famish for want of food,
how earnest are they for relief? Bread, bread for the Lords sake; Remember the
poor prisoners for the Lords sake. Confideration of thy soul-necessities, and
of what infinite concernment the releif of them is to thee, will make thee feel
thy wants, and then thou will be importunate with God for mercy. A man that
considers not his indigencies, is like a full stomach that loathes the honey
comb.

Consider thy Me^cies, meditate on the several particular passages of Gods
providence toward thee from thy birth to this moment; how many devils thou
have been delivered from, how many journeys thou have been preserved in that
seasonable succor God has sometimes sent thee in dangers, what suitable
support he has afforded thee in distress, what counsel he has given thee in
doubts, what comforts he has vouchsafed thee in sorrows and darkness. Make
past mercies, by meditation present with thee. How many years have thou lived,
and every moment of thy life have breathed in mercy? Do not forget former
favors bestowed on thee or thine. The Civet box when the Civet is gone still
retains it scent; the vessel when the liquor is gone has still a savor of it:
So when thy mercies are past and spent, thou should still have the scent and
savor of them in thy spirit.

Meditate upon the number of thy present mercies, personal, domestical,
national, temporal, spiritual: How many are the mercies which thou enjoyest in
bed, at board, at home, abroad? Thy house, thy barns, thy children, thy body,
thy soul, are all full of blessings; thou have many positive, many privative
mercies. Many, O Lord, my God are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and
thy thoughts to us ward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: If I
would declare and speak them, they are more then can be numbered, Psalm. 40.4.
Think of them particularly; meat swallowed down whole does not yield such
nourishment as when it is cut into small pieces. If jewels are bundled up
together, their riches and worth are hid, they must be viewed and considered
one by one, then their value will appear.

Meditate on the nature of them how freely they are bestowed: When thou wast
Gods enemy he fed thee, and clothed thee, and maintained thee; as when a man
turns his back upon the Sun, the Sun even then refreshes him with his beams;
so when thou did depart away from God, he even then followed thee with
goodness; like the fountain, he gives his pleasant streams to thee gratis. For
alas thou art less then the least of all Gods mercies, worse then any loathsome
Toad, or poisonous Serpent: This will be an excellent file to set off the
mercies of God in their lively, lovely colors: that David so great a King
should do so much for such a dead Dog as Mephibosheth, did exceedingly affect
his heart, 2 Samuel 7. So do thou think with thy self, What am I, and what is my
Fathers house, that the Lord should do so much for me.

Meditate upon the fullness and greatness of thy mercies: What distinguishing
mercies are thy Body-mercies? they are more then God owes thee, and more then
he bestows upon others. Alas, many want health, liberty, food, raiment,
sleep, limbs, senses, reason, and possibly thou enjoyest them all. But Oh! of
what concernment are thy Soul-mercies, the image of God, the blood of Christ,
eternal Life, the Gospel of thy Salvation, Sabbaths, Sacraments, and seasons of
grace: God has not dealt so with every people, as with this Nation; nor with
every person, as with thee: Thou art, as the Psalmist phraseth it, laden with
benefits, have such a weight, such a burden of benefits upon thy back, that
thou can hardly stir or stand under them. Have thou not blessings of the
womb, blessings of the field, blessings of the Throne, blessings of the
footstool, blessings in thy going out, blessings in thy coming in, which way
can thou look and not see blessings? where can thou tread and not stand on
blessings? thy whole life is in this respect a bundle of blessings; these
thoughts before prayer may stir thee up to bless the giver. If thou should
bless men when they curse thee, much more should thou bless God, when he
blesses thee.

Meditate on the God to whom thou art to pray, Consider his Majesty and
greatness, Nehemiah calls him, The great and terrible God, Nehem. 1.5. He is so
great, the Heavens and heavens of heavens cannot contain him, that the Earth,
Heavens and Ocean, are in comparison of him as nothing; yea, less then nothing,
and vanity. Think of his attributes and infinite excellencies. God is in Heaven
and thou art on Earth, therefore let thy words be few, Eccles. 5.2. As God
rises in our thoughts self falls. That Sun discovers all our dust. O how
are we ashamed of our drops, when we stand by this Ocean. This serious
apprehension of thy distance will quicken thee to reverence. Gods greatness and
man's vileness, are both arguments to make man humble and wary in the Worship of
God. Could thou behold God in Heaven, in what Majesty he there appears on
his Throne of glory, how his heavenly Courtiers vail their faces in his
presence, lay their Crowns at his feet, and serve him, though joyfully, yet
humbly and awfully, with what reverence and holy fear, would thou go to
prayer?

Meditate on his mercy and goodness, what promises he has made to prayer, how
bountiful he is to his suppliants. He does more then they can ask or think, he
gives liberally without upbraiding. It was said of Severus the Emperor, that he
was more troubled that men asked nothing, then that he gave much. God
delights both to be sought and found. This is necessary to strengthen the
faith. He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. He that would pray and
obtain a blessing, must believe Gods being, that he is, and Gods bounty, that
he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Meditate on his rich bounty,
Abraham asked but one Son, God gives him seed like the Stars in the Heavens for
multitude; the Debtor desires but forbearance, and he freely forgives the whole
Debt. The shekel of the Sanctuary is double to the ordinary shekel.

God delights to see men joyful in his house of prayer, Isa. 56.7. to see
their countenances commend his cheer: now meditation of his Royal bounty, how
he gives like a King, like a God, will help thee to this hearty cheerfulness.
Believe before thou prayest, that thy hand of prayer shall not knock at Heavens
gate in vain, that God will not send thee away sad. It is reported of the
Emperor Flavius, that he should say, I am sorry that any man should present a
petition to me as if he were offering meat to an Elephant, with a trembling
hand. Consider not only his habitation, which art in Heaven, but also his
relation to thee, Our Father; before thou call he will answer, and when thou
speak he will say, here am I, Isa. 65.24. Thus when thou have by meditation
cut the Sacrifice in pieces, put the wood in order, and laid all upon the
Altar, thou may by prayer put fire to them, and offer up a Sacrifice to God
of a sweet smelling savor.

Secondly, As Meditation, so the stirring up of thy graces is needful to
further this duty. Meditation will do much toward it (as thou have heard) I
shall therefore speak the less to it. Every person that has grace does not
always pour out his prayers rightly. Graces must be exercised in our duties.
Grace may lie as fire under ashes upon the hearth of thy heart, and be so far
from flaming, that it may not so much as glow, and how then can thou expect
any warmth from it, thy duty is therefore to stir up the coals, and endeavor
that the fire may blaze out. It is the language of Canaan, communication
seasoned with grace, which only is savoury to God. Cato being asked why he was
so diligent to learn the Greek language in his old age, answered, I hear, the
Gods speak Greek, and I would willingly speak to them in their own language,
All the words of God are gracious, Its said of his Son, Grace is poured into
thy lips Psa. 45.2. Those therefore that would not speak to God in an unknown
language, a tongue which he understands not, must accent all their expressions
to him with grace. It is the smell of the spice of grace in the Israelite, not
of Garlic and Onions in the Egyptian, which is so pleasant and fragrant to
God, Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness like Pillars of smoke,
perfumed with Myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the Merchant? Cant.
3.6. Some take the words to be the voice of the Angels, those friends of the
Bride groom, admiring the Churches gracious expressions and continual
assentions of her soul, in her prayers to God, others take them to be the words
of Christ, being ravished with the odoriferous smell of those graces which his
Spouse acted in her Sacrifices he stood amazed at the beauty of her person, and
the sweetness of her breath, the graciousness of her petitions: What lovely
Lady, what woman is here? (so the Hebrew) What peerless Paragon is this, which
sends up such Spiritual Sacrifices, such sweet Incense, kindled by the fire
of Gods own Spirit; laid upon a meritorious Altar, ascending and fuming up like
the rowllings and agglomerations of smoke to the Lord himself, and more welcome
and grateful then all the costly evaporations of myrrh and frankincense, and
all powders of the Merchants. The Angel which ascended to heaven in the flame
of the Altar, is said to do wonderously, Judge. 13.19, 20. It was wonderful both
to Christ and his friends, to behold the acceptance of his Spouses gracious
performance, how it ascended to Heaven, elationibus fumi, like pillars of
smoke, and came up for a memorial before God. The desire of nature in prayer,
is like sparks which fly out of the tunnel of the chimney, and then vanish; but
the desire of grace in prayer, is like pillars of smoke, which mounteth up to
the highest Heavens.

When Jacobs sons went down to Egypt to fetch corn, they carried some along
with them to support them by the way; when the Christian goes to Christ by
prayer for more spiritual food, he must carry some along with him to strengthen
him in the duty: A little water poured into the pomp, will fetch up much: a
little grace acted in a duty, may help thee to much more. As the ship is
sometimes wind-bound, that it cannot move toward its haven; so without the
exercise of grace, the soul is wind-bound, there is no stirring toward Heaven.
A graceless man in prayer (as was said of Alcibiades) may talk much, but
speaks little.

2. Some things which will hinder the duty must be refused.

All sin in general, sin regarded in the soul, makes prayers disregarded of
God, If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer, Psa. 66.18:
He that expects pardon, must throw down his Weapons of Rebellion. The Child
that asks forgiveness of his Oaths, must not desire it of his Father with
Curses in his mouth? When dust clogs the Wheel of the Watch or Clock, they
cannot strike true; when sin hampereth and clogs the Wheels of the affections,
the mouth will never speak true or right in its Petitions. He that turns away
his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be an abomination, Pro.
28.9. It is high impudency, for him that will not hear God, to look that God
should hear him.

When the sin of the petitioner is before Gods eyes, his petitions cannot enter
into Gods ears. The wide mouth of sin out-cryeth the voice of his prayers; as
the Fish called the Remora, though it be but little, will stop a great Ship in
its full career, truly so the sinallest sin loved and liked will hinder the
course of prayer, though it be never so instant and vehement. The Lords ear is
not heavy that it cannot hear, but your iniquities separate between you and
your God, Isa. 59.1, 2. Men by falls sometimes lose their speeches, men by fin
lose their prayers.

When the Ninivites prayed and turned from their evil ways, then God granted
their requests, Jonah 3. The Israelites cried to God but in vain (he bid them
go to the Gods whom they had served) till they put away the strange Gods from
among them, then his soul was greived for the misery of Israel, Judges 10.10,
to 17. Reformation is a good usher to go before supplication. When the Duke of
Saxony prepared War against the Bishop of Magdenburg, the Bishop hearing of it,
falls to praying and reforming, saying, At ego curabo ecclesiam meam and Deus
pugnabit pro me, I will take care to reform my Church, and God will take care
to fight for me. When the Duke heard this, he Disbanded his forces with this
speech, I am too weak for him that caningage God on his side.

Be sure Reader to put away iniquity far from thee, when thou art drawing near
to the throne of grace, then shall thou make thy prayer unto God, and he shall
hear, Job 22.23, 27. Prayer is (as it were) a plaster to heal a man that is
wounded. Now as a plaster to one peirced with an Arrow or Bullet will do no
good, till the Dart or Bullet be taken out of the body, so prayer will not be
healing and prevalent till sin (in regard of love and delight) be taken out of
the soul.

As all sin in general most be laid by, so Worldly thoughts and wrath in
particular. Wrath; Anger like Leven sowreth the acrifice; I will that men lift
up holy hands without wrath, 1 Timothy 2.8. He that beggeth peace at Gods hands,
must not do it with war in his own heart. How can thou think that God will
forgive thee many millions, when thou will not for give thy b^other one mite.
God is peremptory that he will reserve for them his wrath, who will not remit
their wrongs, Mat 6.15. Cont. Vig^l.
Hierom confessed of himself that when he had been angry, he durst not enter
into the Church, but totum animo and corpore contremuisse, he did tremble very
much both in body and mind: Christians must be singular as in their principles,
so in their practices; It is more comfortable to love a friend, but this an
Heathen may do, it is more honorable to love an Enemy, and this every
Christian must do.

There are two things in forgiving those that wrong us. First, An inward
remission of the fault, so much as it concerns us, or a removal of wrath and
revengeful desires toward the person wronging us; and this if we do not, we
lose our prayers. A stormy troubled Sea, casts up mire and dirt, so when
there is a storm of passions in the soul, the heart foameth up its own shame in
prayer, it bubleth up a great deal of filth. Secondly, In forgiveness there is
an outward profession of this inward remission, and this must be done when the
party acknowledges his fault. If the offender say, I repent; the offended mast
say, I remit: Surely did men but consider the infinite wrongs they do, and
affronts which they offer to the glorious God every day, and yet how they
expect to be pardoned, they would, when abused say, as Francis the first King
of France (to one that begged pardon for a friend of his, who had used ill
speeches against his Majesty) Let him for whom thou art a Suitor learn to speak
little, and I will learn to pardon much. The Spouse of Christ is compared to a
Dove, which (some say) is sine-felle, without Gall; The very Heathen when they
offered Sacrifice, threw the Gall of the Beast away; and Reader, would thou
offer to God the Gall of malice, revenge wrath and bitterness with the
Sacrifice of thy prayers? Remember where the Gall is broke the flesh tastes
bitter, and when the strings jar, the Instrument will make but harsh Music,
Mat. 5.24.

Worldly thoughts must also be laid by. Our Savior when he taught us to pray,
by the preface to the Petitions tells us where our affections in prayer
should be; Our Father which art in Heaven. Our hearts in prayer must be in
Heaven, the eyes of our minds must look up thither, as well as the eyes of our
bodies. The Mahometans in India when they begin their devotion stop their ears,
and fix their eyes, that nothing may disturb their minds, or divert their
thoughts. When the meat is fly-blown, it quickly corrupts; when our petitions
to God are blown upon by worldly thoughts, and mingled with mental discourses
with men, they lose their sweetness.

Some poor people whose houses are troubled much with Vermin, have sometimes a
great part of their small provision eaten up of Rats and Mice; truly, sometimes
a poor Christian loses half a meal by these Vermin of Worldly thoughts, they
devour sometimes half his prayer. Resolve before thou prayest to watch thy
heart narrowly, that these may not hinder thee in prayer.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Concomitants of Prayer.
SEcondly, I come now to the Concomitants of prayer; and herein I shall speak,
1. To the matter of our petitions. 2. To the person that prays. 3. To the
properties of our prayers.


1. To the matter of our prayers: Gods Word and Will must be the rule of our
prayers, what we must ask of him, as well as of our practice what we must do
for him: Subjects must set bounds to their desires, and take heed that their
petitions do not encroach upon the Prerogative Royal. Divine precepts, what God
commands us to act; Divine promises (what God engages himself to do for us;)
and Divine prophesies (what God has foretold shall come to pass) are to be the
bounds of our prayers; he wandereth to his loss, that in his requests goes
beyond these limits. ^alaam would needs ask leave of God, that he might be the
Devils Chaplain to curse Israel, but mark the issue, he has an ironical
concession to go to his own destruction; the sharp razour indeed of his tongue
would not pierce the Israelites, who had armor of proof, but the sword of the
Israelites soon entered his body, and sent his soul to receive its wages of that
Master that set him a work. The Israelites on a sudden are all in a hurry for a
King, God gave them a King in his anger for their punishment, rather then for
their protection (and how soon were they sick, like children, of that which
they cried so loud for) the King and people, at least many of them, perished
together. O how much better is a favorable denial, then an angry grant of such
prayers, but immodest desires never have profitable answers.

And as some err in the matter of their petitions, so others in the matter of
their tha^ksgiving. We read of them, that when like Thieves they had robbed
others, looked up to Heaven and blessed God for a good booty, that they had
prospered in their calling: Thus says the Lord God, feed the flock of the
slaughter, whose possessors slay thee, and they that sell them say, Blessed be
the Lord I am rich Zach. 11.5, 6. That spurious Brat the Devil begot upon their
cursed hearts, they lay at Gods door, as if he were its Father.

Take heed Reader, of exceeding the limits of prayer: those Beasts which will
not be kept within their bounds, are soonest caught, and killed. Israel had their
wish to their woeful cost, when they cried out, Would God we had dyed in the
Wilderness, Numb. 14.27.28, 29. Be not unwise, but understanding what the Will
of the Lord is, Ephesians. 5.17. Indeed the Christian may have any thing of God, if
he do but in his prayer secure Gods honor; but he that exalts his own will
(not minding Gods) like a proud beggar, will be a chuser, and therefore he
shall be sent away either without an Alms, or else with the Serpents which he
desired, instead of the fish which he denied. The Christians Charter is wide
enough, he has no cause to defire its enlargement: And this is the confidence
that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears
us, John 1.5, and 14.

2. The Petitioner must be a justified and regenerate person, or the prayer
will never be prevalent. He must be a favorite at Court, that presents his
supplication with confidence of success. Others must pray and may speed through
Christ, but where there is no faith, there will be much fear about the event.
The precept is to all, but the promise is only to the beleiver: The righteous
cry, and the Lord hears, and deleivereth them out of all their troubles. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry,
Psa. 34.15, 17. Strangers may howl, and we take little notice what they ail, it
is a venture whether we relieve them or no, but if our children cry being in
great distress, we hasten to their help. Our relation to God may well
strengthen our hope, that our desires shall be heard. He that can cry Abba
Father, may be confident of the success of his suit, and that God will deal
with him as a Son.

Faith in Christ is essential to prayer, as I showed in religious duties in
general (and therefore omit it here:) now an unbeleiver goes to God without
the blessed Savior, and therefore may well come away without an answer. The
Israelites in their prayers were still to mind the Temple, either to pray in
it, or toward it; which Temple was a type of Christ, the alone Altar upon
which our prayers must be offered, if ever they be accepted, 2 Chronicles. 7.38.
Dan. 6.10. Kings will not gratify or pardon Traitors, whilst they continue in
their Treasonable designs. A sinner even while he is wooing God for mercy, is
warring against God; when his voice is the voice of Jacob, his hands are the
hands of Esau, and therefore with what face can be expect favor; I will says
Paul, that men lift up holy hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. meaning in prayer. Where the
hands are unholy and wicked the heart is worse, and God cannot abide a stinking
breath. Some write of Diacletes, that it has many excellent virtues in it, but
if it be put into the mouth of a man without life, it loses all. Prayer, (as I
showed before) has many rare and incomparable qualities, but being in the
mouth of one that is dead in sins and trespasses, it loses them all. When a
vicious man propounded in the Roman Senate, a most excellent Law, they rejected
the motion because it was made by a bad mouth. When the face is comely, the
person beautiful through Christ, then only the voice will be pleasant, Cant.
2. Eccles. 14.

When Godfrey of Beloign was demanded (in the holy War) by an Ambassador from
the King of the Sarazens, How he became so strong to fight, and to do such
exploits? He answered, Quia manus semper habui puras, Because I kept my hands
always as clean as I could from the filth of sin. A pure hand in prayer is ever
prevalent, through Christ, to conquer the strongest Enemies: But it is a
principle in nature, that God hears not a sinner, John 9.31. The prayers of a
natural man are like Jehoshaphats ships which were made to go to Tarshish for
gold, but were broken by the way; they come short of that merchandise which is
better then silver, and that gain which is more precious then choice gold, for
which they pretended to lanch forth: But the prayers of a regenerate person are
like Solomon's Navy, which were sent forth to Ophir, went through with their
voyage, and brought from thence four hundred and twenty Talents of gold:
Unsearchable are the riches which the vessel of his prayer returns fraught
with, 1 Kings 22.48. 1 Kings 9.28.

3. The properties of our prayers; they must be Humble, Hearty, Fervent and
Constant.

1. Our prayers must be humble: Prayer is one of our nearest approaches to God
on this side Heaven, in it we speak to God mouth to mouth, and therefore must
be poured out with much humility. Rebecca, though she rode along on the road,
mounted upon a Camel, yet when she drew near to Isaac, she lighted off her
stately beast, puts on her vail, and presents herself to him in an humble
posture. Humility ought to be a Christians c^nstant clothing (Be ye clothed
with humility) butit never fits him better, then when by prayer he does
solemnly draw near to God. We are then most careful to put on our best raiment,
when we go to speak with great persons. Subjects present their petitions to
their Sovereigns upon their knees. O come let us Worship and bow down, let us
kneel before the Lord our Maker, Psa. 95.6. Princes must have silken words
given them as the mother of Artaxerxes told one, Our words to the great God
must be submissive.

The special end of prayer, is to exalt God, and debase man; he therefore that
is proud in that performance, does wholly thwart Gods end in its institution,
and may be confident that God will thwart him in his petitions. When we go to
God in this duty for grace and mercy, we do not go to him as those that go to
market to buy or relieve; but as those that go to a rich man's door to beg an
alms: And surely of all persons beggars, who live wholly upon another charity,
have least reason to be proud. The proud beggar never got any thing at Gods
door.

It is observable, how the children of God though they were never so rich in
grace, were poor in spirit, and humble in language and carriage, when they
approached the Lord of glory: Every one of them, notwithstanding the greatness
of their spiritual stock, sued in forma-pauperis: Behold now I have taken upon
me to speak unto thee Lord, who am but dust and ashes, says Abraham, Genesis
18.27. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, which thou have showed
to thy servant, says Jacob, Genesis 32.10. I am a worm, and no man, says David.
So foolish was I, and ignorant, even as a beast before thee, says Asaph. I am
more brutish then any man, I have not the understanding of a man, says Agur.
O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, for our
iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespasses is grown up unto
the Heavens, says Ezra. I am a man of unclean lips, says Isaiah. They all
have learned the same Lesson, as Scholars in the same form; they all speak the
same Language, as children of the same Father.

It is reported of Aristippus the Cynick, that he used to fall on the ground
before Dionysius, when he presented a petition to him. O what posture is low
enough when we go to the infinite and incomprehensible God in prayer. He
humbles himself to open his eyes upon us, well may we be humble when we open
our mouths and hearts to him, Job 14.3.

Reader, if thou would have thy prayers heard, let them be humble. God loves
to walk in the low valleys: Lord thou have heard the desires of the humble,
thou will prepare their heart, and will bow thine ear, Psalm. 10.17. Though God
behold the proud afar off, and disdains so much as to open his eyes, or give
them a look, yet he will be sure to draw near to the humble, and vouchsafe to
open his ears, and his very heart to them, Psalm. 138.6. Isa. 66.^2. He that can
have his face shine, and take no notice, is a fit person to go up into the
Mount and converse with God.

2. Thy prayers must be hearty: Thy tongue and heart must keep time and tune;
Give ear to my prayer that goes not out of feigned lips, Psalm. 17.1. If in
prayer thou art as Ephraim, a silly Dove without an heart, and give God only
the calves of thy lips, they will be as unacceptable as Jeroboams Calves at Dan
and Bethel, which provoked the Lord to anger. The Jews have this Sentence
written in their Synagogues, where they meet to pray, A prayer without the
heart, is like a body without a soul. What a deformed, loathsome spectacle, is
a body without a soul? truly so is thy prayer without thy heart. God respects
the heart in prayer above any thing; men mind the expressions most, but God
minds the affections most: Let us draw night to God with a true heart; let us
lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the Heavens, Heb. 10.22. Lam.
3.41. God looks not so much to the Elegancy of thy prayers, how neat they
are, nor to the Geometry of thy prayers, how long they are, but to the
sincerity of thy prayers, how hearty they are. Senec. lib. 1. henefic. cap 8.
Socrates made more account of poor Aeschines, for giving himself to him, then
of Alcibiades, and other rich Scholars, who gave him large presents: God
esteems infinitely more of an heart-sprung (though broken) prayer, then of
dissembling petitions, clothed with, and dressed up in the neatest and most
gaudy expressions.

The heart is the metal of the bell, the tongue is but the clapper: When the
metal of the bell is right and good (as silver) such will the sound be; if the
metal of the bell be cracked, or lead, the sound will soon discover it to a
judicious ear. God can see the diseases and spots of the heart upon the tongue:
O it is dangerous to do, as some Princes with their neighbors, who set on foot
a Treaty of peace for their own ends, but resolve beforehand that it shall
never be brought to any period. As Jacob said to his mother, If I dissemble, my
Father will find me out, and I shall meet with a curse instead of a blessing:
So say I to thee, if thou dissemblest in prayer, thy God will find thee out,
and thou will meet with a curse, a blow, instead of a blessing. There is no
going to God, as Jeroboams wife thought to go to the Prophet, in a disguise.

Under the Law, Notandum illud est quod quae offeruntur in Holocaustan
interiorasunt quod exterius esi, Domino no: offertur, ^tpel li, Hom. 5.
the inward parts were only to be offered to God in Sacrifice: The skin
belonged to the Priests; whence Origin infers, That truth in the inward
parts, is that which is most pleasing in a Sacrifice. Indeed others compass God
about with lies, and therefore highly provoke him: They did flatter him with
their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongue, for their heart was not
right with him, Psalm. 78.36, 37. Hosea 11.12. It is sinful for thee to tell a
lie to thy fellow Creature, but how abominable is it to tell a lie to the
Almighty Creator? Thy prayer without thy heart will be Sacrilege, not a
Sacrifice.

When the heart is Rector chori, chief leader of the Quire, then the voice is
pleasant indeed in Gods ear. The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, to all
that call upon him in truth, Psa. 145.18. When the Wife gives the Husband her
heart, and defiles not the Marriage bed, he will (if wise) bear with many
infirmities in her. When the heart in prayer is devoted to God, he is pleased
out of his grace and goodness, to pardon and pass by many imperfections in the
duty; but if that bed be prostituted to any other, he gives a divorce to the
Sacrifice, and puts it away, for he is a jealous God. Jacobs small present
could not but be acceptable to Joseph, because it was the best of the Land. The
heart of man is but little, yet it is the best of man, and therefore taken
kindly by God. The main enquiry at prayer is concerning the heart; As Jonadab
was asked by Jehu, so is the Christian by God, Is thy heart right as mine is?
Then come up into my Chariot; then come to the Throne of grace and welcome.

Thirdly, thy prayers must be fervent: Prayer is a duty which consists not in
words or expressions, but in the working of the affection; therefore it is
called a crying to God, Out of the depth I have cried to thee, Psa. 130. a
renting the heart, Joel 2.13. as if the heart were by prayer torn in pieces;
and a pouring out the soul, as if the body had been left without life, the soul
being departed and ascended to Heaven in holy petitions. The true Beggar is
ever earnest for spiritual Alms, he will not let God go without a blessing,
Genesis 32. Paulus Aemilius, being to fight with the Macedonians, would never give
over Sacrificing to his God Hercules, till he had some sign of victory. The
Christian is more urgent with the true God, then the Heathen is with his God of
clouts. When Daniel prayed, with what force were his words uttered? with what
fire was his Sacrifice offered? O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord defer not
for the Lords sake. That wine is best which is fullest of these heavenly
spirits; Winter fruits are sour and unplesant to men, and so are cold
petitions to God, Dan. 9.13. Reader when thou art praying for pardon, how
should thou even pour out thy soul! Alas when thou considerest if God do
not pardon, I perish eternally; if sin be imputed, I am damned, how should thy
heart cry out, Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy loving kindness,
after the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out mine iniquities; (again)
Wash me from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin; (and again) Hide thy
face from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities; (once more) Deliver me from
blood guiltiness. O God, thou God of my salvation, Psa. 51.1, 2, 11, 14. When
thou art begging grace and purity, with what earnestness should thou pray?
beleiving how destructive sin is to thy precious soul, and how offensive to the
jealous, just and Almighty God, and in what absolute necessity thou stand in
of holiness, without which thou can never see God. As when the Clock strikes,
the Wheels within move notably, we may hear them run round, so when thy tongue
is pleading with God for remission of sins, and repentance toward God, for the
Son of God, the Spirit of God, and thine everlasting Salvation, how should
thine heart move? what work should there be among thine affections, to enforce
those weighty petitions? This fervency is necessary to prepare thy soul for the
mercy thou desire: What men get lazily, they spend lavishly; but that food
which a devout woman longs for, she prizeth much, and eats with most
delight. When one whispered Demostenes in the ear that he was beaten, and
desired him to plead his cause, the Orator would not believe him, till at last
the man cried out. Now, says he, I feel your cause.

It is the intension of the Spirit, which gives efficacy to our petitions: It
is not the length of the arm, but the strength of it, which draws the bow, so
as to make the arrow fly fast and far. Fervency to prayer, is as wings to the
Bird, by which it mounteth up to heaven: The effectual, fervent prayer of the
righteous prevails much, James 5.16. When prayers are drivel'd, like rhume
out of a man's mouth, they fall down at his feet. The Mother will let the child
alone, if it only whimper and whine a little in the cradle, but when it cries
outright, then she hastes to take it up: This poor man cried (was not dull and
drowsy, there is his fervency) and the Lord heard him, and delivered him out
of all his troubles, Psalm. 34.9. here is his prevalency. There is no getting to
the Indian Mines by the cold Northerz Seas, though because it is a shorter cut,
some have attempted that way, but they lost their labor. Other duties are a
serving God, Prayer is a seeking God: Now they that seek him early shall find
him, Prove. 8.17. A low voice does not cause a loud echo, neither does a lazy
prayer procure a liberal answer. Sleepy requests cause but dreams, mere fancied
returns. Where there is a cushion of ease under the knees, and a pillow of
idleness under the elbows, there is little work to be done.

When Daniel had been fervent all day at prayer, an Angel is sent to him at
night with an answer. Importunity prevails with an unjust Judge, much more
with a righteous and gracious God: Though God be Almighty, yet a fervent prayer
(through his grace) has held his hands: Let me alone, Exodus 32. Who holds
the Lord? says Austin. Moses earnest cry was the cord, which I may speak with
reverence, fastened Gods hands.

Prayer is a sword to wound both sin and Satan, but fervency is the edge of it,
doing the execution, Zeph. 18.2 Cor. 12. For this I besought the Lord thrice,
When a man strikes his Enemies with his full strength, then the wounds are made.

The lack of this fervency, is the loss of many prayers. The lazy petition
tires, before it comes half way to Heaven: indeed it is eaten up (as the cold
honey of Wasps and Flies) of wandering thoughts; when fervent prayers, like
honey boiling over the fire, is free from such ill guests. An idle prayer, like
a lazy beggar, wandreth and gaddeth up and down, and as a rolling stone,
gathers no moss. The working of the affections in prayer, like David's harp,
allayeth those Devils which would disturb the Christian in this duty. When a
man is intent upon the God to whom he prays, and eager after the mercies for
which he prays, though the World whisper him in the ear, he cannot hear;
though Satan jog him by the elbow, he will not heed him.

But here a caution will be seasonable: The fire of thy fervency must be from
Heaven; not such strange fire as Nadab and Abihu. offered to the Lord: I mean,
it must not be the voice of nature, an earnest cry for the enjoyment of
creatures; but the voice of the Spirit, an importunate desire for conformity
to, and communion with the Lord Jesus Christ. We read of those that howled upon
their beds for corn, and wine, and oil, Hosea 7.17. Many, like children, roar,
are much out of quiet, disturb others with the noise they make, but it is for
clouts for a Babey: Who will show us any good? The voice of a Saint must be, as
of a wise son at full age, for the inheritance; Lord lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon me.

The Petitioner herein must be very careful; he that rides apace, had need to
be sure that he is in the right way, or else the freer his horse is, the more
he wandreth to his loss. The greater the fire is, the more watchful we must be
that it be kept within the chimney; the more earnest our affections are, the
more we must mind what our petitions be: The promises of God must be the
foundation of our prayers. What he promises to give, I may pray to receive:
Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope,
Psalm. 119.49. but its dangerous for the building to jet out (upon the Kings
highway) beyond the foundation; this may cause the house to fall, or be taken
down. Because godliness has the promise of this life, I am bound to pray, Give
me this day, my daily bread. Temporal good things must be part of the matter of
my prayer; but because God promises these things conditionally (so far only
as he sees fit for his honor, and my comfort) therefore I must pray for them
conditionally. The Apish child that cries and squeeketh for the knife, to be
its own carver, and will not be satisfied with its Parents feeding it,
deserves the rod; our prayers both for the matter and the manner, must run
parallel with Gods promises. Prayer is a putting Gods promises into suit; but
he that sueth a Bond, must mind the condition in it, or the verdict will be to
his cost and damage. That which boils gently over a small fire, may be of use
to us, which if it should boil hastily, and run over, it may raise ashes enough
to spoil it self. The way to lose our requests for temporals, is to be as hot
and hasty for them as if they were our all, even our eternals.

That incomparable pattern of prayers, the Lords Prayer (which is like a
Standard-measure in a Corporation Town, for present use, and an example for
others) has five petitions for Spirituals, and but one for Temporals.

God has promised spiritual things absolutely, therefore thou may desire
them absolutely: For pardon, and the image of God, and the blood of Christ, and
fullness of joy in the other World, thou may be as earnest (so humble and
reverent) as thou will. And O! what a mercy is it that God, though, like a wise
father, he deny us leave to cry for the candle, which would burn, and the
thorns which would prick our fingers; yet he gives us liberty to, nay
commands us to besiege and storm Heaven, to follow him up and down, to cry
day and night, to give him no rest, to be instant, urgent, and fervent with
him, that our persons may be justified, our natures sanctified, and our souls
and bodies glorified eternally.

Fourthly, Thy prayers must be constant: Thy duty is to give thy self to
prayer, as a servant devoted to, and at the command of his noble Master. This
fire, like that on the Altar, must never go out day nor night; Night and day
praying exceedingly, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. Paul speaks, as if his practice had been
nothing but prayer; he did that so much, that he seemed to do nothing else.
Prayer is a Saints breath, which he constantly draws, Ephesians. 6.18 Praying
always, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints. Those that work in Iron
Mills, keep a continual fire; though they suffer it sometimes to slack or
abate, yet never to go out: A Christians prayer may have an intermission, but
never a cessation.

Our blessed Savior besides his set times for ordinary, did pray whole nights:
David was a good Husband, up early at it, mine eyes prevent the dawning of the
morning, Psa. 119.147. At night he was late at this duty, at midnight will I
rise to give thanks to thee, Psa. 119.62. this surely was his meaning, when he
said he should dwell in the House of the Lord for ever, he would be ever in the
House of Prayer.

Gregory writes of his Aunt Trucilla, that her Elbows were as hard as an horn,
by often leaning upon a Desk when she prayed.

J^^chim, the Father of the Virgin Mary, used to say, that prayer was his meat
and drink.

There is no duty enjoined a Christian for his constant trade, so much as
prayer; Pray always, pray continually, pray without ceasing, pray with
perseverance, pray evermore. But why is all this? would God have his people do
nothing else but pray? must they cast by their callings, cast off all care of
their children, and shut themselves up into some Cell or Cloister, and there be
always upon their knees at prayer, as the Euchites fancied. No, I shall
therefore give a brief description of this praying without ceasing.

1. Thy soul must be ever in a praying frame. The Soldier has his Weapons
ready, though not always in fight with his enemy. Thy heart must be ever in
Tune, and ready upon the least touch to make heavenly Music. The Churches lips
are compared to an honeycomb, Cant. 4.11. The honey comb does not always drop,
but it is always ready to drop. The beleivers spirit is like fire upon the
Hearth, though it do not blaze, yet its ready upon any opportunity, to be blown
up into a flame.

2. No considerable business must be undertaken without prayer. Thou art Gods
servant, and thy duty is to ask his leave in all thou do, Ephesians. 4.6. In all
things let your requests be made known to God. When thou risest up or lie
down, when thou go out or come in, prayer must still be with thee. Prayer
is the way to prevent evil. The Worlds poison may be expelled with this
antidote. Joh. 17.11. He that converseth with God by prayer, dwells in
Heaven, and to such a one the earth is but a small point. Prayer is both a
Charm to inchant, and a scourge, to torment Satan. It ingageth Christ in the
combat with the Devil, and so assures the soul of conquest. When the Saint is
fighting and like to be foild, either by the World, the Flesh, or the Wicked
one, prayer is the Letter which he sends Post to Heaven for fresh supplies of
the spirit, whereby he becomes more then a conqueror. Prayer is the way to
procure good, he that will not speak, must not expect to speed. It sanctifies
our food, raymont, sleep, callings, and all our enjoyments to us. The Christian
like the Chemist extracteth all good things out of this one body of prayer.

3. He that prays constantly, has set times every day for prayer; The
Morning and Evening Sacrifice were called the continual Sacrifice. Numb. 28.4.
The Christian has his set meals for his soul every day, as well as for his
body. With the Mary-gold he opens himself in the morning, for the sweet dews of
Heavens grace and blessing, and he does at night (though his occasions hinder
him in the day) like a Lover find some opportunity to converse with his beloved.

He is most free and fresh in the morning, the top of the milk is the cream,
and he does not think his best too good for God. His evening fare is sometime
extraordinary, like the Jewish feasts which were at Supper. The spiced cup is
best at the bottom. Prayer is the key of the morning, to open the door of
mercy, and prayer is the bolt at night to shut him up in safety. The Jews
prayed in the Temple the third, sixth, and ninth hour of the day; our
privileges under the Gospel are enlarged, and I know no reason why our prayers
should be lessened.

He that prays continually, does upon all occasions in the day time, whatever
he be about, put up his supplication to God. He has his ejaculations his holy
Apostrophes, wherein he does turn his speech (at least internal and
inarticulate) ^^om man to God. This liberty is a great privilege, and this
practice turns to wonderful profit. When Jacob was blessing his Sons, he takes
breath with, I have waited for thy Salvation O Lord, Gen 49.14. Nehemiah when
at the Kings Elbow, would not open his mouth to the King, till he had opened
his heart to God. Neh. 2.6.

When Noah was cursing Cham: he had a short ejaculation for a blessing on
Japhet, God shall persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem, which prayer
has been answered, and will be to the end of the World; We Gentiles fare the
better for that prayer: Christ upon the Cross darted up a short ejaculatory
prayer, for his Murderers, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do,
and as an answer to it, we find some thousands of them presently converted.

Truly Reader, I would commend these ejaculations, as an excellent receipt for
all companies, and in all conditions. If thou art a stranger to it, thou do
not know the virtue of it. It is as some write of the herb Panaces, a universal
remedy for all diseases, a special though cheap preservative both against the
evil of sin and suffering. This is the best way to avoid dangers, to overcome
difficulties, and to prosper us in our lawful designs, Genesis 24.12.

When thou receivest a sudden mercy, hear unexpected good news, thou may
presently rear an Altar, and offer up a Sacrifice of praise to God. If thou art
protected through grace from any transgression, in which thou wast falling, or
afflictions of which thou wast afraid, thou may suddenly dispatch a
Messenger to Heaven with thanks, who will be more welcome there, then thou art
aware of. So did a good Servant, Genesis 24.26. and a godly Soldier and
governor, Judge. 7.15. I will bless the Lord at all times says David, his
praise shall be continually in my mouth. When thou art in a sudden plunge,
thou may dart up a thought to God for counsel or protection: these short
breathings, would prepare thee for a long race.

There are indeed some seasons for prayer, which must by no means be slighted;
when the Spirit of God stirs in thee, and comes for thee, then make haste
to God. Courtiers watch for convenient seasons to present their petitions to
their Kings, and will be sure to lay hold of such seasons. If the King himself
offer any discourse relating to their requests, then they will close and strike
in: When the Spirit of God in a morning or evening, or in the day time,
commands thee to go and cry to God for pardon and life (I speak of regular
motions, for no other come from the Spirit) then is a fit time to present thy
requests, he sends for thee for that end: Take heed of delaying or denying;
Thou said seek ye my face, my heart said, thy face Lord will I seek. Suitors
have their mollissima tempora fandi, their special times of wooing. Hester
waited once and again for a fit time to beg her life, and the lives of her
people, of the King; and when Ahashuerus put her upon it, gave her an
opportunity, she then did it, and prevailed.

Whatsoever actions thou entrest upon, whether Civil, Natural, or Religious,
let prayer be to thee, as the Baptist to Christ, the messenger to prepare the
way before thee. Bonaventure, that Seraphical Doctor, being asked by Aquinas,
How he got such Divine knowledge? pointing to a Crucifix in his study, said,
Ille est liber meus, by praying to that Crucifix: A Christian by praying to
God, in the name of a crucified Christ, may get saving knowledge. Be confident
of this, those mercies will be most savoury, which come flying to thee upon the
wings of prayer. Those favors are suspicious, which steal in at a window, and
come not in at the door of prayer. How sweet was that water to Sampson, whieh
streamed to him in the channel of prayer, Judges 15.19. he called the name of
it En-hakkore, the well of him that prayed. Jacob saw God smiling, in Esau's
smooth countenance, because prayer was the Sun which scattered and cleared that
sky. When thou can say of the mercy which God gives thee, as Hannah of
Samuel, For this child I prayed (says she) he is the travel of my soul, as
well as of my body; he is the fruit of my heart, as well as of my womb; when
thou must say, For this blessing I prayed, many a time did I weep and make
supplication, and lo I have prevailed. Such a mercy will be a double mercy, a
Samuel indeed Asked of God, and Dedicated to God.

As Jesus Christ was more welcome to Mary his Mother, when she and his Father
had sought him sorrowing; so those blessings, especially spiritual, will be
received with most joy, which were sought with most sorrow: What thou winnest
with prayer, thou will wear with prayer.

But it may be Reader, thou art one that art so far from constant praying, that
the garment of the Atheist will fit thy back very well: They call not upon God,
Psalm. 14.4. if so, bethink thy self, for thou live like a Beast, as
Nebuchadnezzar did, though thou have the shape of a man: They are become
brutish, and have not sought the Lord, Jer. 10.21. Brutes are like Mutes: O it
is a dreadful condition, to be possessed with a dumb Devil. When men once grow
speechless, its a sign death is hard by. If that bloody Butcher can but muzzle
thy mouth, and with cords hinder thy crying, expect the stroke of the ax: Or
possibly that livery which Eliphaz made for Job, though it was much below him,
yet will become thee, Thou restrainest prayer before God, Job 15.4. The pulse
of thy soul faulters; thou layest by thy prayers, as some do their best
clothes, till they go to Church again, or for some Holy Day. O this is a sad
sign that prayer, which should be thy element, is thy torment. Friends that
love one another, long to converse together, and take all opportunities of
sending to, and hearing from each other: Had thou any love to the blessed
God, it would be so with thee. But as painfulness in speaking, often argues
unsound inwards, so thy inconstancy in praying, gives thee cause of suspecting
thy spiritual unsoundness and insincerity.

CHAP. XIV. The Subsequent duties after Prayer.
THirdly, I shall speak to the consequents, or those duties which must follow
after prayer; and they are principally two, Watching and Working.

1. Watching for an answer: Pious prayers are precious commodities; and who,
unless a mad man or a fool, will throw away what is of value and worth? When
thou have shot thine arrow, observe where it lights, and how near it flew to
the mark. Wise men when they have delivered their petitions to their Prince,
watch and wait sometimes a year together, all the while longing and looking for
an answer: Thy requests to God are of infinite concernment, thy Heaven, thy
eternal happiness is involved in them; with what holy impatience then should
thou desire an answer? In the morning I will direct my prayer unto thee, and
will look up, Psa. 5.3. The words discover David's posture in prayer, and his
practice after prayer: His posture in prayer, I will direct my prayer unto
thee. Disponam tibi Calvin.
The word is an allusion to an Archer, or to a General, as some observe on it.

1. To an Archer, and then the meaning is, I will be up betimes, and take as
good aim as I can possibly at the mark, and so draw my bow, and direct my arrow
that I may hit it.

2. To a General, and then it imports thus much, I will rise early, and set
my requests to God, as Soldiers in Battalia, in rank and file, in good array:
I will so marshal them, that they be not routed by being out of order: I will
see that they stand in their places, and keep their ground; and what then? his
practice after prayer, And will look up: I will observe what became of the
arrow I shot. Or the word being an allusion to a Watchman, as the former word
to a Commander in chief of an Army, speaks this, When I have marshalled my
prayers in good array, and sent them forth to fight against my spiritual
Enemies, and to wrestle with God himself for his grace and love, I will get up
to my Watchtower, to see what execution they do upon my adversaries, what
power they have with God, whether they get or lose ground, whether they prevail
and win the day. It was the custom in those days, when forces were sent forth
to fight, for the General to command one to watch in some high place, if he
could spy any coming from the Armies with news. So when David's Soldiers were
engaged with Absoloms, the watchman went up to the roof over the gate, and
spied Ahimaaz and Cushi coming with tidings. Thus holy David stood (as it were)
sentinel and watched as a spy, longing every moment to hear and see the event,
issue and success of his prayers.

Men that work for a dead horse, as we say, when their business is done, look
no further, because they had their pay beforehand; but those whose reward is
behind, labor in expectation of it, and after they have wrought, look for it:
An unbeleivers hopes are in this present world, and therefore if he procure but
some earthly profit, it is no wonder if he look no more after his prayers, he
had his pay before hand: But a beleiver whose reward (not of debt but of grace)
is ever behind and to come, while he is upon earth, when he has prayed in
obedience to Gods precept, cannot but expect the performance of Gods promise.

He that ventureth nothing in a ship, save a small parcel of pins, or a few
quire of paper, or something which is little better then nothing, takes little
thought what becomes of the vessel, if it sink or swim, its all one to him, he
loses not a moments sleep for it. But the Merchant who ventureth all he is
worth in a Vessel, and sends it out very richly laden, though it be a long
journey, yet he is impatient to hear of it: many an anxious thought has he
about it, many a time he puts the supposition to himself, What if this Ship
should miscarry? What will become of me, my Wife and Children? He can hardly
eat or drink with comfort, or sleep with quietness, till he hears it is safe. A
wicked man that is worth nothing, ventureth nothing in his prayers, and
therefore whether they miscarry or no, it matters not much with him: when he
prayed for pardon and grace, he counted them little worth, he prized his stock
and his riches at a far higher rate, and so must needs be very indifferent
whether the Vessel wherein things of such small worth (in his esteem) were
hazarded, come home safe or no. But a godly man hazardeth all he is worth, for
this, and the other world, in his prayers: he knows that all his happiness is
involved in the pardon of his sins, in the righteousness of his Savior, in the
love of his God, and the renovation of his nature, all which he beggeth with
strong cries and groans. He esteems these things as the very life of his
life, and the very soul of his soul, and O (thinks he) how richly laden, is
this Vessel which I have sent forth! My precious soul, my dearest Jesus, my
interest in the covenant of grace, my eternal fruition of the ever blessed God,
are all aboard her. If she should miscarry (good Lord) what would become of me?
I am lost, I am damned, I am undone eternally. Was ever Ship better fraught?
Her burden is of inestimable value. My joy, my peace, my love, my delight, my
hope, my heaven, my all, are in her. Oh what should I do, if the Arch-pirate
Satan should seize her? or if she should split upon the rock of my presumption?
or sink in the quicksands of my infidelity? Alas, alas, whether should I go?
where should I appear? Such a soul never failed of a rich return of his venture.

Reader, when thou have prayed, wait and expect an answer. Though thy prayers
were mingled with many imperfections, if they were the travail of thy soul,
(upright I mean) do not give them over for lost.

When Moses Mother could keep him no longer, she made an Ark of Bul-rushes, and
daubed it with Pitch, and put him in, and hid it in the Flags, by the River
brink; and his Sister stood a far off, to see what would become of him. And
Pharaohs daughter came to wash her self, spied the Ark, sent and fetched it,
the babe wept and she had compassion on it: sent for the Mother, gave it her to
nurse, paid for its nursing and the Child became the great deliverer of Israel.
Truly so when the fruit of thy heart, thy tears and sighs, and groans, and
prayers, are ready in the eye of sense to be given over for dead, they lie
floating upon the water, let thy faith and hope be near at hand, to see what
will become of them; the Kings Son may take pity on the weeping babe, pay the
charge of its nursing up, bringing it into favor at the heavenly Court, and
make it serviceable for the conducting thy soul through the Wilderness of this
World, toward the true and celestial Canaan.

Though the Messenger thou sendest to Heaven tarry long, yet wait and expect
his return. Those that send to the Indies for the golden wedges, wait many
months, though they long every moment for their arrival.

If after thy expectation, thou find little fruit of thy petitions, do not
therefore lay aside that calling, Continue in prayer, and watch in the same,
Col. 4.2. Anglers, though they have fished many hours and caught nothing, do
not therefore break their Cane, and Line, but draw out their hook, and look
upon their bait, which (it may be) was fallen off, or not well hung on, and
mend it, and then throw it in again; So when thou have been earnest in prayer,
and yet received no answer, reflect upon thy prayers, consider whether
something were not amiss, either in thy preparation for the duty, or in the
matter or manner of thy petitions; it is possible thou might desire stones
instead of bread, or fuel for thy lusts, or did forget to deliver thy
petitions to the only Master of Requests, the Lord Jesus, that he might
present it to the Father, if any of these were the fault, no wonder if they
failed; what ever it be, be diligent to find it out, amend it and fall to thy
work again with confidence, that thou shall not work at the labor in vain. The
Archer if he shoot once, and again, and miss the mark, considers what the
reason was, whether he did not shoot too high, or too low, or too much on the
right hand, or too much on the left hand, takes the same Arrow again, only
reformeth his former error, and wins the wager.

Secondly, Working is necessary after prayer, as well as Watching. Begging and
Digging must go together. Thy duty is to pray, as knowing assuredly that thou
can do nothing of thy self, and yet to work as if thou were to do all by
thine own power. He that does not endeavor in a lawful use of those meant
which God affords him to attain the mercies he needs and asks, does
tempt, not trust God, and may expect a rod sooner then releif. A good use may
be made of that story; A Carter having over-thrown his Cart, sat in the way
crying, help Hercules, help, (Hercules was counted by the Heathen a God for his
strength) O Hercules help. At length one appeared to him in Herculus shape,
with a good Cudgel in his hand, and beat him handsomely; saying, Ah thou silly
lazy fellow, do thou call to me for help, and sit still thy self, arise and
set to thy shoulder, do thy part, and I will do the rest.

If thou prayest for thy daily bread, be thou diligent in thy calling, or else
expect a crop out of the Ocean. If thou prayest against some particular sins,
avoid the occasions of those sins. If it be against Drunkenness, avoid evil
company; If it be against Pride, avoid and discourage such as will flatter
thee, for otherwise thou do as he that runs into the fire, and prays to
God that it may not burn him; such a man mocketh God, but himself most; if thou
prayest for Holiness and Grace, hear, read, meditate, watch, use the means, and
expect a good issue from God.

Observe David, his prayer was, Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, keep the
door of my lips, Psa. 141.3. But now because he had committed the main charge
of this unruly prisoner, his tongue, to God, desiring him to lock the double
doors of his lips and teeth fast upon it, and to have a main guard always
watching before the doors, least it should break through and attempt an escape,
does he therefore sleep himself, thinking the prisoner was safe enough? no, he
himself would be upon the guard. I said I will take heed to my ways that I sin
not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth with a a bridle while the wicked is
before me, Psalm. 39.1, 2. David as he desired God to put a good bit into the
mouth of this wanton beast, so he would himself keep a strict hand and rein him
in.

A good Wish about prayer, wherein all the forementioned particulars are
epitomized.
PRayer is one of my nearest and solemnest approaches to the most high God, The
Introduction to prayer analyzed.
and one of my choicest privileges on this side the place of praise: wherein I
may go to my God at all times and acquaint him what I ail, where it is well,
where it is ill with my poor soul: I wish in general that I may never suffer
this key (to Gods own treasury) to rust for want of use, nor to be ineffectual
to the opening of the Divine bounty by my unskilfulness in turning it, that
neither by my unfitness for the duty, miscarriage at the duty, nor misbehaviour
after the duty, I may demean my self unworthy of so great a favor, so high an
honor, and so good a Master. In particular, I wish that I may (at least morning
and evening) before I enter upon this ordinance, The antecedents to prayer, 1.
Meditation Of sins.
whether in my closet or family, make a privy search for those Barabasses which
have moved sedition in my soul, and murdered my dearest Savior, and that I
may have such a sight of them all, in their horrid nature, and bloody color,
that I may arraign them at the Tribunal of God with confusion of face, and
contrition of heart, and may with all possible ardency plead for their
execution. Of wants.
I wish that my necessities may ever be in my memory, that as the sick child,
I may point readily to the place of my pain, when ever I go to make my moan to
my heavenly Father, and that affected with the weight and importance of them, I
praying feelingly, may pray the more fervently.

I wish that the many and weighty mercies which I unworthy Wretch enjoy, Of
mercies.
may be written so firmly in my mind, and presented to me before prayer, in
the various and lively colors of their freeness, fullness and seasonableness,
that I may never steal the custom of thanks from my God (which is all he
desires) for those rich and full vessels which he sends me in every day: but
may pay him this impost of Praise and Glory, with all uprightness and alacrity.

I wish that my Graces may never be, like Jonah, Quickening of grace.
asleep, when I am to call upon my God, but as the Heavenly Host they may be
moving in their several places, and fighting in their courses against my
spiritual Enemies; O that like holy Bradford I might never leave confession,
without sorrow for sin, petition, without some sense of the worth of mercies,
nor thanksgiving, Laying as^^^ what may hind pr^y^^.
without some solace and joy in God, the Author and Fountain of all my
happiness. I wish that I may draw nigh to God with a pure conscience, and
before I go to desire the lovely portion of his friends, All sin in general.
give a bill of divorce to all my lusts and (at least) banish from the bed of
my heart those enemies of his which would not have him to reign over me. I wish
that I may never desire mercy at his hands with the least degree of malice in
my heart, Anger.
but may love (as Saints, because they are Christ's seed, so) sinners, and them
that hate me, for Christ's sake: and as a special medicine against that poison,
whatsoever friend I should forget in my prayers, I wish I may resolve before
hand to remember in particular my Enemies, to beg of God that he would pardon,
sanctify, and save them. I wish that my affections may not as Saul's person,
Worldly thoughts.
be hid among the stuff of Worldly affairs, when I should be busy about the
concernment of an eternal crown; but that I may leave those servants always at
the door behind, while I go in to speak to the King of Nations, Concomitants of
prayer.
and may all the time of the duty serve and seek the Lord my God without
distraction. I wish that I may be specially careful to look up to the Master of
requests, Person must be justified.
the Lord Jesus Christ: First, for the justification of my person, and then for
the acceptance of my prayer, and that I may be so enabled with the hand of
faith, to put on the glorious robes of his perfect righteousness, that neither
the nakedness of my person nor performance, may appear to my shame. The matter
of prayer.
I wish that all the flowers which I present to my God, in the posie of prayer,
may be gathered out of his own garden, the Scriptures; I mean, that I may never
exceed those bounds which he has set me, for the matter of my prayer; but may
use much caution that all those spices which I make my incense of, may be of
his own prescription: and O that to this end, his holy spirit who knows his
mind fully, Properties of prayer.
might draw up all my petitions for me. I wish that my prayers may be ever
presented upon the bended knees of my soul, Humble
and also in regard of my body in the lowest and most submissive posture; Ah
how humble should dust and ashes be, when he takes upon him to speak to the
most High God. Hearty
I wish above all that I may never mock the most jealous God in this duty, by
speaking Parrot like, what I neither mind nor mean, but whatsoever dish be
wanting on the Table, to which I invite my God, my heart which I know he loves
above all, may be there, and that my prayer may be the travail of my soul, and
not the labor of my lips. I wish that I may so feel my spiritual wants, that
my bowels may so pinch me, that as the hungry and almost starved beggar, I may
cry aloud for the bread of life, yet not so much, Fervent
in regard of the extension of my voice, as the intension of my spirit. When I
am petitioning for pardon and grace, I wish I might beg as earnestly and
beseech God as importunately as if it were in the power of my prayer, to change
his mind, and procure the blessing, but when I am asking temporals; Caution
I would not as the dry earth, cry, and cleave, and gape, for corn and wine and
oil, but willingly be at my fathers allowance, and desire no more then what his
infinite wisdom sees needful to hear my charges, till I come to my blessed and
everlasting home. Constant
I wish that I might observe that standing law: according to which Heavens
bounty is dispensed: In all things to make my requests known to God, and never
expect, though the mercies of God be never so ripe, that any of them should
fall down upon me in mercy, unless I shake the tree by prayer. I wish that
every mercy may come flying to me upon the Wings of prayer, and may fly back to
God upon the Wings of praise; that prayer may be the Mother to breed and bring
forth all my blessings, that not one child of them but may be named Samuel
asked of God, that when I first open my eyes in the morning, I may then in some
ejaculatory prayer, open my heart to my God, that at night prayer may make my
bed soft, and lay my pillow easy, that in the day time prayer may perfume my
clothes, sweeten my food, oil the wheels of my particular vocation, keep me
company upon all occasions, and guild over all my natural, civil and Religious
actions. I wish that after I have poured out my prayer in the Name of Christ,
Subsequents of prayer.
according to the Will of God, having sowed my seed, Waiting
I may expect a crop, looking earnestly for the springing of it up, and
beleiving assuredly that I shall reap in time, if I faint not; yea, that though
the promise may stick long in the birth, yet it will at last bring forth, when
God will give me large interest for my forbearance. Finally I wish that (though
before sorrowful) having opened my mind to God about any suffering, my
countenance like Hannahs, may be no more sad; that I may never busy my self
about Gods work, the success and event of things, nor like an idle lazy beggar,
Working
be careless about my own work, but may in my place and to my power be
industrious in the use of all those lawful means which his providence affords
me, for the enjoyment of my desires, that as I did lift up my heart in praying,
so I may lift up my hands in working, to God, who dwells in the Heavens.

CHAP. XI. How a Christian may exercise himself to godliness in hearing and
reading the word, and of preparation for hearing.
THe blessed God as he appoints the Children of men their ends, namely to
serve him here, and to enjoy him hereafter, so he does also afford them
directions about the way, how they may attain and accomplish those ends. He is
our Master, and cutteth out that work for us, which he expects we should make
up. He bestows on all the starlight of nature, which though it be but small
and dull by reason of our first fall, yet it rules and commands the night of
the Pagan World, and is sufficient to leave them inexcusable, for not working
and walking by it. When Heathen shall be thrown into the Goal of Hell, and
bound with chains of everlasting darkness, their own consciences will hinder
them from the least thought of commencing a suite against God for false
imprisonment, because they are judged not by the Law Moral, written in Tables
of stone, but by the Law Natural, written in the Tables of their hearts.

But out of his infinite favor, he is pleased to give some (in those places
where he intends to gather a people to himself, for his eternal praise)
beside the twinkling Starlight of nature, the clear and perfect Sun-light of
Scripture, to guide their feet in the ways of peace; Which word is one of the
most signal mercies, that ever he bestowed upon the Sons of men, the whole
World without it, being but a barren and rude Wilderness.

The Word of God, is a Spring of living water, a deep Mine of costly treasure,
a table furnished with all sorts of food, a Garden wherein is variety of
pleasant fruits, the Churches Charter, containing all her privileges, and her
deeds, many infesting her Title to the purchased possession. It has pious
precepts for the Christians reformation; and precious promises for his
consolation. If the Saint be afflicted, it can hold his head above water, and
keep him from sinking, when the billows go over his soul, there are Cordials in
it rich enough to revive the most fainting spirit. If the Saint be assaulted,
the word is armor of proof, whereby he may defend himself manfully, and wound
his fo^s mortally. If the soul be unholy, this word can sanctify it, ye are
clean through the word which I have spoken to you, Joh. 15.3. this water can
wash out all the spots and stains: if the soul be an heir of Hell, this word
can save it; From a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able
to make thee wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Other writings may make a man wise
to admiration, but this only, can make him wise to Salvation.

This word which is of such unspeakable worth, God has deposited as a special
treasure, into the hands of the Children of men, that they might obey his will,
and know the just one. And Reader, it is thy duty to search and study this
book. When Kings send out their Proclamations, either concerning acts of grace,
or some Law which their Subjects ought to obey, they expect that all should
take notice of them, and give them the reading and hearing. What an affront
do thou offer to the King of the whole World, if thou turnest thy back upon
his word? I must tell thee, it is no less then crimen loesae Majestatis. He
that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he
that despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke 10.16. Thou may think
(possibly) that by neglecting to hear, thou do only contemn the Preacher,
but believe me, it is a contempt of thy Maker, Ministers are Gods Ambassadors;
Now to deny an Ambassador audience, is one of the greatest disrespects which
can possibly be offered him, nay it is an affront to his Prince on whose errand
he comes, and whose person he represents, and what is the conclusion usually
of such bad premises but a bloody War? Confider what thou do, when thou
refusest him that speak from heaven; for if thou shuttest the windows of
thine eyes from reading, and the door of thine ears from hearing, God may clap
such a padlock of a judiciary curse upon them both, that thou shall never open
thine eyes nor ears, till thou come, as the rich Glutton, to see Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his bosom, and to hear and bear thy part in those dreadful
screechings and howlings which are in Hell.

It is a mercy that the Tree of Knowledge, the Word of God, is not forbidden,
but commanded fruit; nay, that it grows in the very path to the Tree of life:
O why should thou then like the Pharisees, reject the counsel of God against
thy own soul? If thou art a child of Adam, I am sure thou have thy deaths
wound; now by neglecting the Word, thou like a frantic Patient, throwest away
that plaster which only can cure thee.

Do not say thou wast not warned of thy danger and duty: I do here show thee
the hand and seal of the King of kings to that Warrant to which I require thy
obedience. The Scripture is the Word of Christ, and God commands thee upon
thine allegiance to hear him, Colos. 3.16. Matthew. 3.17. The Word is the Cabinet
in which thy Savior, that Pearl of infinite price, is laid up; and therefore
thou art commanded to look into it for this Jewel, Search the Scriptures, for
they are they which testify of me, John 5.39, The Word is (...), and speaks
such a diligent search as covetous men make for silver; they spare for no
labor, that they may attain their Deified Treasure: What should not thou do
for durables Riches and Righteousness?

But Reader, if thou art a child of God, I doubt not but thou delightest to
look into thy Fathers will, and weightest every Word in it, as knowing, that in
his Testament there is a great charge committed, and a great legacy bequeathed
to thee. It is thy daily Companion and Counselor; thou dare not go without
thy cordial, being liable every day to faint; nor without thy weapons, being
called every hour to fight. The Scriptures are the light by which thou walk,
and the tools with which thou workest. Let me persuade thee to persevere in
this gracious practice: Take the counsel of the Author of it, who is fittest to
give Laws for thy carriage toward it: Let the Word of Christ dwell in you
richly, Colos. 3.16. The Word is (...), and signifies to keep house with you:
Do not leave thy Bible, as some do, at Church, and hear nothing of it all the
week long; but bring it home to thy house, let it dwell with thee: Let not the
Word be as a wayfaring man, to tarry with thee but for a night, and so be
gone; but let it be an inhabitant, one that accompanies thee to bed and board,
and with whom thou conversest continually as thy familiar and intimate friend:
Make thine heart (as Jerome says of Nepotians, by his assiduous reading and
hearing the Scriptures) Bibliothecam Christi, The Library of Jesus Christ. I
cannot but think that thou have found the Bible so bountiful a Guest, to pay
thee so liberally for its board, that thou have bid it heartily welcome, and
would not part with it for the whole world. Agesilaws is commended, says
Xenophon, because he never went to bed, nor rose up, before he had looked into
Homer, whom he called his Sweetheart: Advise thou with a Divine, at least, as
often as he did with a profane Author. Kings have their Counselors, and great
men their Remembrancers: Let Gods testimonies be the men of thy council, Psa.
119.24.

Let not others negligence abate the least of thy diligence, but rather by an
Antiperistasis, let their extreme coldness double thine inward heat. As the
fire is hotest, when the weather is coldest; so David's heart boiled with zeal
after it, when the waters of others affections to it were frozen: They have
made void thy Law, therefore I love thy Commandments above gold, yea above fine
gold: Therefore I esteem all thy Precepts, concerning all things, to be right,
Psalm. 119.126, 127, 128.

O consider what love the Saints of God have ever had to his Law. Luther said,
That he hated the Books he made, and could wish them all burnt, lest the time
spent in reading them, might hinder the reading of the Scriptures. O how love I
thy Law! says David. The godly have meditated therein day and night; they have
esteemed it above the sweetest honey, and the finest gold; the Martyrs in
England have given much of their Estates for a few leaves of it, and they laid
down their lives, before they would lose the precious fruit in it. The French
Protestants (says their Historian) burnt in zeal to the Word, whilst the
bloody Papists burnt them for the Word. Scipio Africanus was applauded, for
having usually in his hands the books of Xenophons Institutions of Cyrus: O let
this Book of books be often before thee, and always in thee, let it be thy
mediation all the day. One would think, that he who knows and believes the
contents of the Word, should hardly ever let a Bible be out of his hand, at
least, he will lay it up (as the two Tables in the Ark) in his heart. Scriptura
est cor and ipsa anima Dei. Greg.
One of the Fathers calls it, The heart and soul of God. Indeed as a man by his
word discovers his mind and will; so God by the Gospel, which is his Word,
reveals his eternal good will to men: It is the Copy of his everlasting love,
of which his Decree is the Original, containing all his pecious thoughts
(before the foundation of the World) of redeeming miserable man with the blood
of his Son, and making him an heir of the eternal weight of glory. Those
gracious and mysterious purposes of his, which were hid in the night of many
ages, when the Sun of Righteousness once appeared in the Horizon of the Gospel,
were visible and legible to every eye: He has brought Life and Immortality to
light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10.

The Apostle calls it, The grace of God; and, The word of his grace, Tit. 2.11.
Acts 20.32. not only because the rain of the Word goes by coasts, as a gift
of grace, Psalm. 147.19, 20. ( He causes it to shower down upon one City, and
not on another, Amos 4.7.) and not only because like a seal, it stampeth
grace, the image of God upon the soul, Acts 2.37. but chiefly, because on the
stage of the Word, the grace and favor of God to mankind is fully displayed:
The Gospel presents us with the whole method of Gods grace and love to poor
sinners. This world is the Theater in which Grace acts its part (the Triumph
of Justice is reserved for the other World) and the Gospel is the Throne on
which Grace sits, and from whence it holds out its golden Scepter. The language
of the Law is no less then a sentence of death; but the Gospel allows a Psalm
of mercy, and in it Grace reigns, (...), plays the King, commands in
chief, unto Justification of life, Romans 5.17, 18, 21.

But the more precious this Water of Life is, the more fearful thou should be
of spilling it. Kings cannot endure that their Acts of Grace should be tampled
under foot: Abused favor, turns into greatest fury. Men surfeit soonest of
the greatest Dainties, and further their Misesery, by that which was given them
as in Mercy.

Our Savior therefore commands, Take heed how ye hear, Luke 8.18. There are
two special Lessons which Christ commends to his Scholars: The first
concerns the matter of their hearing, Take heed what ye hear, Mark 4.24.
Ministers are Christ's Ushers, Christ himself is the head-Master; now Christ
forbids the pinning our faith upon our Ushers sleeve. The Bereans have an
honorable crest put into their coat of Arms by God himself, to distinguish,
them in nobility from others, for bringing the coin offered to them to the
touchstone of the Scripture, to try whether it were true gold or counterfeit;
And these were more noble then those of Thessalonica, because they received the
Word of God with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things were so, Acts 17.11. Men must not like Children take down
whatever their Nurses put into their mouths, whether meat or poison, but know
how to distinguish between good and evil. Our faith must not stand in the
wisdom of men, but in the Power of God. All weights and measures must be
compared with, and tried by the Kings Standards. The Copy is no farther
authentic then it agrees with the Original Deed.

The second Lesson concerns the manner of their hearing, take heed how ye
hear. The richest Cordial may be lost as it may be taken. It will be requisite
therefore to give thee some prescription, how thou may take this costly
Physic to thy greatest profit.

In reference to which duty I shall speak, 1. To thy preparation for it. 2. To
thy carriage at it. 3. To thy behavior after it.


1. As to thy preparation for hearing the word, I shall request thee from God
to mind these ensuing particulars.

1. Empty thine heart of evil frames, and prejudice. Evil frames. The dish must
not be sluttish, into which we put these spiritual dainties. If the stomach be
cloged with filth and phlegm, it cannot digest and concoct our food. The light
of the Sun, as pleasant and delightful as it is to sound, is yet offensive and
painful to sore eyes. This part of preparation is enjoined us by the Spirit of
God. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and all superfluity of naughtiness,
and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls,
Jam. 1.21. If the body be feverish, the sweetest Syrup will taste bitter; If
any ill humor or lust be predominant in thee, like the full and foul stomach
thou will loath even the honey comb. The Table book of thine heart must be wiped
clean, before any new thing (as the Law of God) can be written in it. Briars
and Thorns must be stubbed up before the ground be capable of the grain.

As evil humors because of the Doctrine taught, so prejudice against the
person teaching, must be removed. Prejudice against the Preacher, is the
greatest prejudice to the Hearer. A condemned person will esteem a beggar when
he brings a pardon. How beautiful are (not the lips only and hands, but the
meanest parts) the feet of them that bring the glad tidings of peace; I confess
it is a mercy to be related to a Pastor who has both parts and piety, gifts
and grace; and if thou art to chose a dwelling, I would wish thee to bear with
many outward inconveniences, to sit down under such a Ministry. But suppose thy
teacher, at least in thy thoughts, is a man of mean parts, will thou thence
conclude, his pains will yield thee little profit Truly should thou gratify
Satan so far, it would be the speediest way to find a truth in what thou do
fancy. Friend, friend, does the efficacy of the ordinance, depend on the parts
of man, or on the power of God? May not a costly treasure be brought to thee in
an earthen Vessel? Consider, thou may light thy candle as well (it may be
better) with a brimstone match, as at a great fire. Christ taught his Apostles
by a little Child, Mat. 18.2. A small damsel was instrumental for Naamans
recovery both of his spiritual and corporal leprosy. And who art thou that
none must instruct thee, but such a one as like Saul is higher then others by
head and shoulders in gifts and abilities; I wish it be not from the pride of
thy spirit, that none is worthy enough to teach thee thy Grammar Lesson, but
some head of the University. A picking stomach (I am sure) argues a diseased
body, and then a squemish heart and itching ear, cannot argue a sound soul. The
industrious Be, Plut.
sucks honey from the Thime, an harsh and dry herb. The Meat is as good in a
Pewter, as in a Silver Dish.

It may be thou go to Table only for the sauce, to Church for the style and
elegancy of the language; if so, I dare be bold to tell thee, that thine heart
is not right in the sight of God. Do thou not know that it is the naked sword
which does the Execution, that a crucified Christ is the great conqueror, not
a pompous gaudy Messiah, which the Jews dreamed of. Paul is commanded to Preach
not with Wisdom of words, least the Cross of Christ, should be made of none
effect. 1 Cor. ^.17. so (...) verse 27, 28.

Truly, if thou lustest after the Quails of some new dish, it is a sign that
thou louthest Manna, the Bread of Heaven; and what a condition is thy poor soul
in then? They that have the Green Sickness, care not for solid food, but hanker
after trash: They have souls sadly sick, that neglect the good Word of God, and
long after the fancies and wit of men.

God does by the foolishness of preaching, save them that believe, that he
alone might have the glory of their salvation, That the excellency of the power
may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. When men nibble at the bait of Humane
Eloquence, and are caught, the skill of the Angler is applauded; but when men
bite at the naked hook, the simplicity of the Gospel, all will grant this to be
a miracle, and say, This is the finger of God.

Do thou not see, that as Daniel and his companyons thrived better, and
looked fairer, with feeding upon pulse, then the other Captives who fed on the
Kings dainty provision? Optimi concionatores ad vulgus sunt, dixit Lutherus,
qui puriliter, trivi aliter, populariter and sim liei^ sime d^cent. Melch. Adam
in vita.
So those Christians (in every Parish, look abroad where you will) thrive more
in holiness, and are fairer in Gods eye, who feed on plain, naked Scripture,
then those whom no dishes will please, but such as are curiously cooked for a
Kings Palate. Thou will not believe but that thy face may be seen in a glass,
where the sides are not gilded; thou will choose an horse, not by its trappings
and fine furniture, but by its usefulness and serviceableness: Why should
thou be so childish, as to be in love with no garments, but what are daubed
with Silver lace, when other plain raiment will warm thy body as well.

Reader, if the fault be not thine own, thou may gain much (nay I must say)
most good by plain preaching. Those that dwell by the Sea side gather up those
precious commodities (bequeathed to the Sea, at the death or wrack of the ship)
when the Sea is lowest, which they cannot do when the waters are highest: I do
not here plead for vain repetitions, and tedious circumlocutions; nor for them
that dress their meat so slovenly that their Guests loath it. I know its below
the Majesty of a King, when he is delivering his mind by his Ambassador, to
play the Orator; but it is not below him to speak sense and reason. Wise men
love a neat, compact discourse, but it must be more full of matter then words,
convincing the judgment, and working upon the affections. Plain, solid
Sermons, are most acceptable to pious and serious souls: There is a vast
difference between washing the face of a Discourse clean, and painting it; the
former is lawful and commendable, the latter sinful and abominable. Ministers
must mind the capacities of their Auditories, and not put that meat into their
mouths which their teeth cannot chew, nor their stomachs concoct: Their
Sermons of quiddities, haeccieties, and School nicities, may (in the opinion of
giddy men) tend to their own praise, but never to their hearers profit: Such
men when their children ask bread, give them stones which may choke them, but
will not cherish them. It is pity he should ever teach School, that will not
speak to his Scholars, so as they may understand him.

But the worst supposition is, Thy Teacher may be untaught himself; his life
may give the lie to his lips. As to this prejudice, 1. Remember, That an
accusation must not be received against an Elder, except under two or three
witnesses; thy charity, O Christian, and the Dignity of his Calling, must both
move thee to be slow to believe. As it is sinful to raise up an evil report (
Constantine the Emperor said, That if he saw a Bishop committing uncleanness,
he would rather cover that foul fact with his Imperial robe, then suffer it to
be divulged to the dishonor of the Gospel) so it is sinful to take up an evil
report, whoever laid it down ready for thee. But secondly, if thy Pastor, like
a wooden Vessel, gives that wine to thee which he never tastes, nor savoureth
himself, be not therefore wholly discouraged: If it be true, that thy Minister
is false to God and his own soul, that he only wears Christ's livery, that he
might the more unsuspected do the Devils work: I confess it is matter of great
lamentation (the good Lord take care either for their conversion or ejection)
for certainly they being listed under Christ's colors, and false to their
Captain, do his adversary the Devil double service. The sins of Teachers are,
the Teachers of sins; they who forget their Sermons, will remember their sins,
to patronize their own: But if the providence of God should bind thee to such
a Pastor, which is no small unhappiness; consider, that God fed Elijah by a
Raven, and surely he can feed thee by an unclean creature. He increases
sometimes his Enemies gifts that they might be instrumental to increase his
peoples graces. It is unquestionable in my judgment (though some I know doubt
it) that a sinner may convert a soul; and my reason is this, because the
operation of the word does not depend upon the piety of the Preacher, but upon
the free grace and power of the Lord. Yet I must also confess that I believe
that God does not so often vouchsafe to his enemies as to his friends, that
honor and happiness. But as bad as he is, God may use him to do thee good. As
the best Ministers Sermons are not to be received for their good lives sake, so
the worst Ministers Preaching is not to be rejected because of their evil
practices. A blind man may hold a Candle to give light to others, whilst he
himself remains in the dark; the Sun of righteousness may convey the light of
holiness into the house of thine heart, through this sluttish Window. Thou
may derive water from the Fountain of life, through a leaden pipe; A deaf
bell may be useful to call a Christian to Church, and he that never heard so as
to live, may call a soul to Christ. Wholesome Sugar may be in a poisoned Cane.

The Egyptian Jewels were helpful to the Tabernacle; David made the spoils of
the Gentiles, service able to the Temple; and surely the son of David can make
the parts and gifts of an Egyptian, an Enemy to God serviceable to thy soul.
The Pharisees in the days of Christ, were many of them vicious persons, yet
they fitting in Moses Chair, Christ does not deny them audience, but commands
his Disciples to distinguish between their words and their works; he does not
forbid them to hear their Doctrine, but enjoin them to forbear their doings,
Mat. 23.2, 3.

2. The second thing requisite to preparation is this;

Before thou go to hear, labor to affect thine heart with the necessity,
excellency and efficacy of the word. There was half an hours silence in Heaven
before the seventh Trumpet sounded; thy duty is to weigh the nature and end of
the word, before thou go to hear that Trumpet sounded by one of the Angels
of the Churches. Consider its necessity; Mary minded the one thing necessary
(indeed she gave the word her heart, but the way to it was this, she gave it
her ear) She sat at Christ's feet and heard his word. The custom even in those
days, was for the Teacher to Preach either out of a Desk or Pulpit, or some
place above the people; hence their hearers sitting below them, are said to sit
at their feet. Urge thy soul with this, The word which I am going to hear, in
regard of the ordination of God, is absolutely necessary to my spiritual and
eternal good. I am dead, and it is the word that must enliven me; I am blind,
and it is the word that must enlighten me. It is absolutely necessary that I
know my sins and misery; now the word must do this, and is therefore called a
glass, Jam. 1. It is absolutely necessary that I know my Savior, and the way
of my recovery; now the word must do this, and is therefore called faith and
life, Joh. 6. Romans 3. It is necessary to open mine eyes to see Christ, to open
my heart to receive Christ, and that Heaven hereafter may be open to my poor
soul. My soul is sinful, and its the word that must sanctify it; My soul is
sick, it is the word that must heal it; My soul is hungry, and its the word
must feed it, or I shall starve; My soul is thirsty, and its the word that must
satisfy it, or I shall die for thirst; whatsoever conditions of misery I am
in, it is the word that must give suitable consolations to support me;
whatsoever relations of life I stand in, it is the word that must give suitable
exhortations to direct me; whatsoever service I am called to, whether of doing
or suffering, it is the word which must relieve me with suitable supply. O, of
what concernment is this word to my well being, in this and the other World! I
must be sanctified, or I can never be saved; I must turn to God, or burn in
hell; and the word must do this for me, or it will never be done; good Lord how
should I hear! Men are careless about things which are indifferent, but they
are careful about things that are absolutely necessary; Necessity makes men
strive oftentimes beyond their strength. None work so hard as they that have
necessity for their Master.

Consider its excellency. It is the Word of God; though thou dalliest when men
are speaking, yet surely it becomes thee to be serious when the great God is
speaking. It is of divine inspiration; All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God. The Ephesians cried up their Idol Diana, because it was the Image which
fell down from Jupiter, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; O how should ^^ou
prize and prepare for the Word, when it came down from the great God: Men were
but the Organs through which the Almighty God spoke; Non vox hominum sonat; It
is the voice of God, and not of man. It is of Divine operation; I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God to salvation, Romans
1.16. What wonders has the great God wrought by his Word? He has given eyes
to the blind, feet to the lame, ears to the deaf, life to the dead, by his
Word. What legions of Devils and lusts has he unkennel'd and cast out with his
Word? Hannibals Sword.
Some write of the Weezel, that it does aure concipere and ore parere, conceive
in the ear. etc. He has caused many a soul to hear and live by his Word; he
has awakened many a soul that was asleep in sin, by the voice of the
Scriptures, and caused them to arise and work out their own salvations:
Thousands of poor creatures, who were sinking into the bottomless Hell, have by
Gods hand, stretched out in his Word, been delivered from going down to the
pit, and lifted up to Heaven.

It is a Word of Divine Institution, and of Divine Benediction, Revel. 1.3. It
is the Word in which the Father speaks, John 6.45. Every one that has heard
and learned of the Father, comes to me. It is the Word of Christ, Heb. 12.25.
Col. 3.16. In it the Spirit speaks to the Churches, Rev. 2.11. The pearl hid
in it (the Scriptures are they that testify of Christ, John 5.39.) the price
paid for it (both Testaments are sprinkled with the blo^^ of Jesus, Heb. 9.27.)
do fully speak the excellency of it.

Now Reader, think with thy self thus, I am going to hear that Word which has
God for its Author, Jesus Christ for its matter, and Eternal Life for its end:
Shall I like a beastly Swine, trample these invaluable Jewels under my feet?
shall that which is infinitely more precious then fine gold, be esteemed by me
as dirt? It is the picture of Gods own excellencies; how chary should I be of
the picture, for the Persons sake? Ah, how tender should I be of that glass,
which has wine in it more worth then Heaven and Earth? Would it not be a
thousand pities that I should suffer the Flies of my wandering thoughts, to
corrupt and spoil this Box of Precious Ointments.

Consider the efficacy of it: The revealed Word is like the essential Word; for
the fall, as well as for the rise of many in Israel. As there is nothing so
evil, but a serious holy person may get good out of it, like some Creatures we
read of, he may digest and fetch nourishment out of Serpents; so there is
nothing so good, but a careless, graceless heart may pervert to his hurt; like
the Spider, he may suck poison out of the sweetest Rose. The Word will work one
way or other; if it work not for thy salvation, it will work for thy damnation;
if it be not a savor of life to life, it will be a savor of death to death:
As the rain comes down and waters the earth, and returns not thither
again; so shall my word be that goes forth out of my mouth, it shall not
return unto me void, Isa. 55.10, 11. The Word is compared to fire: Fire does
either purify the metal, or consume it; the Word will either convert thee, or
confound thee. The Sea sinks some Vessels, and lands others safely; the
Scripture will either further thee toward Heaven, or toward Hell: The ways of
the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them; but the transgressors
shall fall therein, Hosea 14. ult.

Mark Reader, what an Engine is here to screw thee up to the greatest attention
to the Word which is possible? It is like strong physic to a person exceeding
sick, which either mends them, or ends them. Think thus with thy self, I am
going to hear that Word which will not be in vain, but will either kill me, or
cure me; this Sword of the Spirit is sharp and keen; if it does not defend me,
it will destroy me: O it is bad jesting with such edged tools! How sad will it
be for me to find death about the lips of Christ, to fall into Hell with a
stumble at the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven? How exceedingly am I concerned
to set my heart to all the words which I shall hear this day? for it is not a
vain thing, but it is for my life, Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47.

Urge thy soul in earnest with these particulars. As Elisha stretching himself
upon the young dead child, at last got life and quickening into it; so thou
forcing and stretching, as it were, these things upon thy heart, may quicken
it, how dull and dead soever it is.

Thirdly, if thou would prepare thy self for the Word, entreat God to bless
it to thee: The operations of the Spirit must accompany the administration of
the Word, or it will be ineffectual: It is the Spirit that quickneth, John
6.63. The fire burns naturally, and the water cools naturally; but if the
fire of the Word ever burn up thy corruptions, or the water of the Word refresh
thee with real consolations, it must not be by its own nature, but by a Divine
power. If thine eye be opened by that eye salve of Scripture, to see Christ in
his native beauty, or thy self in thy natural deformity, God must anoint thine
eyes therewith; therefore David beggeth this favor at Gods hand, Open mine
eyes, that I may see wonderful things out of thy Law, Psalm. 119.18. As good
sight as David had, he could not read in Gods Law, without Gods light. If the
door of thine heart be opened by this key, to give admission to the King of
Glory, Gods hand must turn the key. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that
she attended to the words of Paul, Acts 16. Paul might have preached his heart
out, before Lydia's heart would have opened to let the Word in, if God had not
undertaken the work.

If the Sword of the Word pierce thy soul, hack and hew, and slay thy most
beloved sins (those enemies within thee, which would not have Christ to reign
over thee) the arm of the Lord must weild it: The weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds,
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10.4. Surely that voice of Thunder must come from
Heaven, which can pluck up the strong trees of thy natural unbelief and
senslessness, and pull down the high Towers of pride and self. If the Word,
which is called a Seal ( Romans 6.17.) ever imprint thy Saviors Image on thee to
thy Regeneration, God must add weight to the Seal, or it will make no stamp:
He has of his own will begotten you by the Word of Truth, James 1.21. He that
made the Watch, can make it strike right; and he that made the Word, can make
it strike home, even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, Hebr. 4.12. If the Word which is called life ( John 6.63.)
quicken thee to thine eternal Salvation, God must breathe on thy dry bones, and
bid thee live: I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, which is the power of
God to salvation, Romans 1.16.

It was the Angels troubling the waters, which made the Pool of Bethesda
medicinal to the diseased people: And it is not the water of the Word which can
heal thy soul-sicknesses, unless the Angel of the Covenant work in it, and with
it.

Elijahs mantle could not divide the waters of Jordan, but the Lord God of
Elijah did it: The Preacher may show thee thy Lesson, but God only can help
thee to learn it.

Reader, before thou hear, Remember it is Gods prerogative to open thine
ear: Mine ear have thou boared, Psalm. 40.6. There is a thick film in thine ears
naturally, which hinders thine hearing; thine ears are stopped, that Sermons can
have no passage: Now God alone can with his Seringer dissolve the wax congealed
there, and break through the skin, whereby thou may come to hear, and live.
Remember, that the seeing eye, and the hearing ear, the Lord has made them
both, Prove. 20.12. Therefore entreat him to open thine eyes, that thou may
see his comely face, in the Glass of the word, and to open thine ears that thou
may hear his lovely voice in the word, and to open thine heart that thou
may receive grace from him through the word. Say as David, Show me thy way O
Lord, teach me thy paths. Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, so
shall I talk of thy wondrous works, Psa. 25.4. Psa. 119.27. And be not
discouraged either at the misteriousness of the word, or at thine own dullness;
for he that made the lock, can help thee to a key that will fit all its wards.

But be sure thou forget not to commend thy Minister to God. As thy duty is to
beg a door of entrance for thy self, so a door of utterance for thy Pastor.
Withal praying for us, that God would open to us a door of utterance, to speak
the mystery of Christ, Col. 4.3. Ephesians. 6.19. Thy profit by him will be not a
little furthered by thy prayer for him. He that loves his child, will often
remember the Nurse that feeds it. He that loves his precious soul, will often
mind the Preacher that prepares and brings its spiritual portion. I have
known some to praise their Cooks highly, when they would prevail with them to
dress a Dish curiously for their palates. I am sure thy way is to pray for thy
Pastor fervently, if thou would have him provide such food as may be for thy
souls pleasure and profit. Starve the Mother, and you starve the child in her
womb. If the Heavens do not favor the Hills with shours, they cannot fatten the
Valleys with their chalky streams. If the Pipes be broke which convey water to
our houses from the River, we can expect no supply.

4. Let thine end in going to hear, be to please God and profit thy soul.
Propound a good endin hearing, if thou would have a good end of hearing; Some
go to Church for nothing, like the Athenians, the greatest part knew not
wherefore they were met together, Act. 17. They have as much as they come for;
They come for nothing, and they often go away with nothing. Others go to carp
and catch at the Preacher; as the Herodians went to Christ to entangle him in
his talk, Mat. 22.15. These go not to hear Gods word, but to do the Devils
work, and he will pay them their wages. These fly to the carcass, not to
defend it, but to devour it. A third sort go to hear wit and parts, neat
expressions, and an affecting graceful pronounciation, like the Jews to hear
Ezekiel, Lo thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that has a
pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument, Ezekiel. 33.32. These go to
hear man, not to hear God. They hear out of curiosity, not out of conscience;
they desire to have their ears tickled, not their hearts touched. They hear and
do not, verse. 33. Such go to Church, just as they who go to a noise of
Musitions, only for the pleasant sound, for nothing but to hear.

Reader, take heed of these and other finful ends, least God answer thee
according to the Idols of thine heart. Children go to Fayrs for babies, and
rattles, but men go for some serviceable commodities, for the supply of their
own, and their Relations necessities. Though foolish men go to Church to
quarrel with the Person teaching, or to admire at some fine cadencies or
allusions in the Doctrine taught; do thou go to the word for the releif of thy
spiritual wants; As a new born babe defire the sincere milk of the word, that
thou may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. Here is a good end of a good action, not
to gaze upon the people or Pastor, but to grow by his Preaching. Some men go to
Gardens to gather Gilly-flowers or Roses, merely to smell to them, or look on
them and in a short time throw them away, when a good house-wife goes to her
garden for a better end; she gathers them to make a precious conserve or
syrrup of them, which she keeps constantly by her to comfort her in a time of
sickness. Though too many go to a Sermon, merely to look on the gaudiness of
its dress, or to sent the wit and fancy of the preacher, which sight and sent
are quickly gone; do thou gather those flowers which grow in Eden, the garden
of the Lord, that thou may by faith make such a cordial of them as may be
ever ready at hand to revive thy spirit in each fainting fit, whether of death,
or any civil or spiritual danger, whilst thou live.

Lastly, If thou would prepare thy self to hear or read the word rightly, leave
thy Worldly thoughts behind thee. It is written of Bernard, that when he came
to the Church-door he would say; Stay there all my earthly thoughts Say to the
cares of this life (when thou art about reading or hearing) as Abraham to his
Servant; Abide you here and I will go yonder and Worship, Genesis 22.5. If thou
should suffer those weeds, they would hinder the springing up of the good
seed, the word. They are like Thieves never dogging thee at this duty but to do
thee a mischief, either to steal thy comforts, or to wound thy conscience.

Christ sharply reproves the Jews for turning his Fathers house, which should
be called an house of prayer, into a Den of Thieves; but how did they do this?
By buying and selling, and changing Money in the Temple If thou Reader should
in thine heart be buying in thy provision, or selling out thy commodities, or
hankering after thine hoards and heaps of Corn, or Wares, or Money, when thou
art in Gods House, thou turnest the House of prayer into a Den of Thieves;
therefore thy best way is to keep them out, and if they come in afterward (as
Christ did) to whip them out.

When men hear with their Harvest ears (meditating and musing on their flocks,
or shops, or fields) no wonder if the word be ineffectual to them. If the wits
of men be a wool-gathering, the Word of God will be like water spilt on the
ground, which cannot be gathered up again. Some Garden Seeds are mingled with
Ashes when they are sown, and thereby they spring up the better; but this Seed
must not be mixed with Dust and Ashes; if it be, it will not spring up at all.

It is reported of one of Englands Lord Treasurers (some say Cecil, others say
Burleigh) that though by reason of his Office he was crowded with business all
day, yet when he was going to rest at Night, he would throw off his Gown and
say, Lie there Lord Treasurer; What he did going to Bed, we must do when we go
to this heavenly Banquet; though the concernments of our families and callings
throng us at other times, yet when we go to hear or read the uncomparable word,
we must lay them by, with Lie here all my thoughts of this lower beggarly
World. Thus I have dispatched the first particular, Preparation for the Word.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Christians duty in hearing.
SEcondly, I come now to the second, which is thy carriage at the word; in
reference to which I shall commend to thee these three things.

1. When thou art hearing or reading, set thy self seriously as in the presence
of God. God sets before thee in his word, and offers to thee life or
death, blessing or cursing, his infinite favor or fury, Heaven or Hell; and
friend, are these things to be jested with? Imitate Cornelius in his carriage,
when he was to hear Peter; We are all here present before God, to hear all
things that are commanded thee of God Act. 10.33. The piety of this Centurion
appears in the ground and motive of his hearing; he came not to hear men, but
God; to hear all things which are commanded thee of God, 2. In the gracious
manner of his hearing; he does not say, we are all here present before thee,
but we are all here present before God.

When the heart is awed with the apprehension of a Divine presence, the iron
gates of the ears will fly open of their own accord, and give the Word a free
passage. The Creature dares not but hearken diligently to the speech of that
God, on whose breath depends his life and death, when he sees him immediately
before his eyes: I can speak it by experience, says Erasmus, that there is
little good to be got by the Scriptures, if a man read or hear it cursorily and
carelessly; but if a man do it out of conscience, and as in Gods presence, he
shall find such an efficacy in it, as is not to be found in any other Book.
This setting thy self seriously, as in Gods presence, is like the Masters eye
to his servant, which will make him ply his work whether he would or not; or
rather like the fire to the Smiths bar of iron, which does so mollify it, that
he striking whilst it is hot, may beat it into what form and mould he pleases.

This temper of soul in the Thessalonicans was so great a favor, that Paul
thought he could never praise the Author of it sufficiently: For this cause
thank we God without ceasing, that when ye heard the word of God, ye heard it
not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. The
Apostle knew his children could not but thrive, when they received their meat
in such a manner as the Word of God. It is the speech of Seniclaeus concerning
Diarius the Martyr, Methought when I heard him speak, I heard the Holy Ghost
himself preaching to me.

Truly the want of this, is one main cause why the Word of God does so little
good. The Devil is very diligent at duties: he is every Lords Day the first at
Church: The Children of God never gather together, but Satan is amongst them.
His great design is, to render this Engine of the Word fruitless, whereby the
Strongholds of his Kingdom have been battered and broken down. Therefore as a
Jailer will sometimes let his prisoners have their hands and feet at liberty,
so long as the doors of the Prison are barred and bolted, that they cannot run
away; So he will let thee have thy hand at liberty for some acts of charity,
and thy feet at liberty to walk in some path of civility, so long as he can but
have the doors of thine ear and heart locked fast, that thou can not get from
him: He knows Christ waits at the outward door of the ear, that he might
thereby come to the inward door of thy heart, and deliver thee a poor Captive
out of his hands: For this cause, if it be possible, he will keep the street
door shut, he will hinder thee from hearing as in Gods presence, he will find
thee other work to do then to hear; it may be he will get thee to play and toy,
as he does many great ones; or if not, to be talking to thy pew-fellows, or to
be reading (possibly somewhat finful, at least somewhat unseasonable) or to
have thy heart in thine own house, whilst thy body is in Gods house; or as a
child, though thou art at thy book, he will make thee look off, if but a
Butter-fly come by; he will set thee about some business or other, unless thou
art serious as in Gods sight, that thou shall never have so much leisure as to
hear, even when thou art in the Church.

It is reported of Henry the third, King of France, that in a solemn Procession
at Paris, hecould not be without his Jester; who walking between the King and
the Cardinal, made mirth to them both; in the mean time there was brave
devotion. Alas, they that hear in jest, will find Hell to be hot in earnest:
Were not men Indians and Infidels in English habits; did they but believe the
invaluable worth of their souls, the consequence and weight of their
unchangeable estates; what a searching, trying time the hour of death will be;
and what dreadful, terrible things will be seen at the day of Judgment; Good
Lord, how would they hear! The Minister need not call to them to attend to the
Word of God, they would of themselves give it their ears, and minds, and
hearts, and think all too little for it.

2. Apply the Word to thine own soul: The Word is a salve of sovereign virtue.
Some talk of the Weapon-salve, that it heals at a distance; but the Word will
not; it must be applied to the sore, or it will never cure. The Word is seed,
preaching is the sowing of this soed; application of it to thy heart, is the
harrowing of this seed into the earth: If the seed be thrown on the ground, and
not harrowed in, we can expect no harvest.

A good hearer is said to eat the Word: Thy words were found by me, and I did
eat them, Jer. 15.16. Eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have
mingled, Prove. 9.5. It is not the bread in the cupboard of the Bible, or on the
table of a Sermon, which will nourish thy soul, unless it be by application of
it to thy self, eaten and taken down into thy stomach: The glass of wine in
thine hand, will not make thy heart glad; the precious promises in thine ears
will not rejoice thee, they must by application be drunk down, then they will
refresh and comfort thy Conscience.

Faith is both the mouth to receive in, and the stomach to digest this
spiritual food. It is worthy thy observation, how frequently the Holy Ghost
attributes the famous effects, and heroic acts of the Word, to this Commander
in chief, under whose courageous and wise conduct it warreth. The Word fights
boldly, and works miraculously under Faiths banner: The Gospel of Christ is
the power of God to salvation to them that believe, Romans 1.16. It pleased God
by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. so also
2 Timothy 3.15. Application is the life both of preaching and hearing.

If the Threatenings and Curses of the Law are preached, faith is to them as the
powder to the bullet, causing them to make grievous havoc, and to do great
execution upon the lusts of a man. Faith turns those stones, as I may speak,
into bread, and helps the Christian (like Sampson) to fetch meat out of the
eater.

If the Precepts and Commands of the Law are preached, Faith is the eye to see
the Equity in them, and the Excellency of them, and Faith is the hand to put
them into practice.

If the Promises and Comforts of the Gospel are preached, Faith is to them as
Induction to a Minister, it gives him actual possession of them, it makes them
his own. Faith in the Threatenings, causes Humiliation; Faith in the Precepts
causes Subjection; and Faith in the Promises works Consolation.

If at any time thou go from hearing dead and undone, thou may say to
Faith, as Martha to Christ, If thou had been here, my soul had not dyed. The
unbeliever, like a man in a swoon, shuts his mouth against those life-recalling
Cordials which are before him in the Gospel. Other sins wound the soul, but
Unbelief, like Joab, strikes under the fifth rib, and kills outright.

Unbelief spoileth all. An Unbeliever is dead, he cannot hear Christ in his
Word; he is blind, he cannot see God in the Gospel; like Hagar, though a
Fountain be before him, he beholds it not. Unbelief makes the Word like rain
upon Rocks, wholly useless and fruitless. What is said of the Essential Word,
is true of the Revealed Word, It can do no mighty works, because of their
unbelief. Unbelief is a Bulwark whereby sin secureth it self, against all the
darts and shot which the Word discharges at it. What was the reason that the
Word was not helpful to the Jews, Heb. 4.2. The word preached did not profit
them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it. Unbelief was the crack
in the Glass, through which this inestimable Water of Life did leak out, and so
was lost.

Nay, What made the Word hurtful to them? This leaven of Unbelief sowred all, 1
Pet. 2.8. That Rock on which Faith builds an house which reaches up to Heaven,
Unbelief stumbleth at, and tumbleth the soul into Hell.

3. Let the Word come with Authority and Power to thy Conscience: This is one
of the chiefest ingredients that goes to the composition of a Preacher, that
he speak as Paul did, in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. 2.4.
By this force wherewith he spoke, and execution which he did, that incomparable
pattern of Preachers, the Captain of our Salvation, was distinguished from the
Pharisees, who in discharge of this holy Ordinance, only made false fire: He
taught as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes: And the people were
astonished at his Doctrine, Matthew. 7.2, ult. ver. He is the best Soldier, who
in this Warfare makes bloodiest work amongst our spiritual Enemies. This is
preaching to purpose.

This is also the best disposition requisite in a Religious hearer; For our
Gospel came not to you in word only, but in power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.15. When the
Word of God comes like a mighty rushing wind, rooting up the tall Trees of
thy sins, bringing down high thoughts, overturning all before it; when as fire,
it burns within thee, consuming thy lusts, and turning thee into its own
likness, making thee holy, spiritual and heavenly: O this is excellent hearing,
this is hearing to purpose.

The word is Preached to many, and not to their profit. They hear the Minister
as Chickens hear the Hen; the Hen calls to the Chickens to come to her, they lie
scraping in the dust, still many times and will not hear her, till the Kite
come and devoureth them. So God endeavors in his word by his Ministers to
cluck sinners to himself. Wisdom cries, understanding puts forth her voice.
But they lie scratching, and digging in the earth, and will not hear him, till
at last the Devil comes and destroys them; but when the word comes with
power, the soul hears it as Peter heard the Cock; He goes out and weepeth
bitterly, when he hears of the boundless mercy which he has deserted, and the
matchless misery which he has deserved; and the infinite love which he has
abused, and the righteous law which he has transgressed, he is cut to the
heart, he goes out and weeps bitterly.

The word is compared to rain Deuteronomy. 32.2. now the rain falls upon flints and
does no good; makes no impression. Ministers drop it on many to as little
purpose as Bede did when he Preached to an heap of stones. They spend their
strength in vain, and labor in vain; nay like many highways and low grounds,
they are the worse for these showers. But this rain falls on others to much
advantage; My Doctrine shall drop as the rain, and my speech shall distill as
the dew, as the small rain upon the tender grass, and as the showers on the
herbs. Deuteronomy. 32.2. The fine soft showrs of the word, soaks into their
affections, softeneth their hearts, and makes them fruitful in holiness.

The Naturalists observe of the Salamander, that though she live in the fire
constantly, yet she is never the hotter. How woeful is the condition of
thousands who live all their days under the Word of God, in which is kindled
the heavenly fire of Gods infinite love in Christ to poor sinners, and the
hellfire of the hideous horrid nature of sin, yet they are never the hotter!
neither warmed with the former, nor scorched with the latter; nay though these
fires are sometimes by the workmen who divide the word aright, heated (as I may
say) seven times hotter then ordinary (by discovering the freeness (without,
yea against desert) fullness (a known; unknown love) and fastness (whom he
loves he loves to the end) of this divine affection, and by declaring the
ugliness and loathsomness of corruption, in its contrariety to a righteous law,
and a gracious Lord; and in its opposition to the souls happiness and
perfection, that the very Ministers who take them up, to put them into this
fire, are themselves with the extremity of its heat, turned into a live Coal,
or all in a flame of love to the blessed God, and hatred against his and their
enemy, sin; yet these hearers like the three Children are not touched with all
this fire, their garments are not so much as singed, nor the least smell of the
fire on them. O woeful wonder!

What little comfort can poor Ministers take in their lives, when they converse
with such dead carcasses, though they cut them with the laws curse, pierce them
to the quick (one would think) with the terrible day of judgment, and the
unquenchable fire, yet they ail nothing, feel nothing, and complain not at all.

Reader, when thou art hearing, let thy care be, that thy soul may be changed
into the similitude of the Scripture, that the word may come with power. When
the threatenings are shot off, do thou fall down before them with fear: My flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy righteous judgments; When
God thundered, Josiahs heart trembled. When thou viewest the precepts and
patterns in the word, labor to resemble them; It is said of the Earl Elzearus,
one much given to passion, that he was cured by reading and hearing of Christ's
patience.

When the glad tidings of peace are Preached, let thine heart leap with hope. O
let the nearer approach of the sun call forth, and ripen thy fruits of
righteousness. When the law comes like a corrosive eating out thy festered
flesh and corruption; when the Gospel is like a lenitive both refreshing and
refining thee, then they come with power; when the threatenings like wine search
the wound, and the promises like Oil heal it, then itcometh with authority and
majesty. If search be made by a reproof for thy beloved sin, do not like Rachel
hide it, neither do thou fret when thy sore is touched, but hold thine arm
forth to that knife which should prick thy vein, and let out thy bad blood. Be
not angry when a Prophet smites thee in the Name of the Lord; Believe it, he
that hates thy sins most, loves thee best. If thou favor thy lusts so much as
to keep them safe from the Sword of the spirit, it will prove like Jorams
respect to Jehu, thine own destruction. Their hearts surely were very rugged,
which cried out Prophecy unto us smooth things: Those feet are very sore or
gouty which cannot go but in downy, mossie walks, where the ground yields to
them. Let a reproof be welcome for his sake that sends it. Thy father knows
that a bitter potion sometimes, though not pleasant, yet is profitable to thee.

As the working of physic kindly and well, commends both the Physician, and
body of the Patient; so the powerful operation of the Scriptures, whether of
the purging potions of judgments denounced, or cordial julips of mercies
discovered, do highly applaud both the skill of thy Savior, and state of thy
soul. It is written of Philetus a Disciple of Hermogenes the Conjurer, that
going to dispute with St. James the Elder, the Apostle Preached Christ to him
so powerfully, that he returned to his Master, and told him, Magus abieram,
Christianus redeo; I went forth a Conjurer, but am come back a Christian; O how
happy will it be for thee, if whatever thine end were in going to Church; yet
when thou returnest, thou can upon good ground say; I went forth proud, but
am come home humble; I went to Church a bondslave of Satan, but am returned a
free man of Christ; I went out earthly, carnal, a malicious and obstinate
sinner; But for ever blessed be the most high God, I am come back, an heavenly,
spiritual, and gracious Saint.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Christians duty after Hearing.
THirdly, I proceed now to the third thing, which is, Thy behavior after
Hearing or Reading; and I must tell thee, that it concerns thee now to be
very watchful; for many Birds wait to peck up the corn, as soon as the
Husbandman has sowed it. Our Savior tells us, He that received seed among
thorns, is he that hears the word, and the care of this World, and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, and he becomes unfruitful, Mat. 13.32.
As Highway men watch the honest Countreyman, as he comes from the Fair, where
he has sold his Cattle, and filled his purse, and then set upon him, and rob
him: So do the cares of the world dog the honest Christian, as he comes from
the Word, where he got some Spiritual treasure, and then fall upon him to
plunder him.

Besides, Satan is so subtle, that he will be sure to haunt the soul after
reading or Hearing the Word: When any one hears the Word, then comes the
wicked one, and catches away that which was sown in his heart, Mat. 13.19. The
season (then) is worthy our observation: When the Christian has made a good
meal, then the Devil tries all his wiles and tricks to make him vomit it up
again. Servants when they carry full cups of wine in the midst of unlucky boys,
must be wary and watchful, or they will spill it. Some people take physic, and
though it does them some good at present, yet all is quickly marred by their
neglect of those rules which should be observed afterward: The Word (possibly)
when thou heardst it, made some work among thy affections; the beauty of
Christ's person was displayed before thine eyes, and thy heart began to fall in
love with thy Savior; the extremity of his passion was described to thee, and
thine heart began to loath the cause thereof, thy sins: Well now then, thy
conscience is a little warmed and awakened, and the pores of thy soul opened;
should thou go into the cold presently, all would come to nothing. If water
be taken from the fire, when it is a little warm, it cools quickly; he that
would have it boil, must rather increase the fire.

There are two things which God requires of thee after hearing and reading the
Word, namely, Prayer and Practice.

1. Prayer; Petition for a blessing upon the Word, and Thanksgiving for the
blessing of the Word.

Petition for a blessing upon the Word: After the seed is sown, the influence
of Heaven must cause it to spring up and ripen, or otherwise there will be no
harvest. Paul may plant, and Apollo water, but God must give the increase, 1
Cor. 3.6. The Minister preaches, thou hear, but it is the Lord who teaches
to profit. Thou may, like Mary, have Christ before thee in a Sermon, and yet
not know him, till he discover himself to thee. The Eunuch could read of Christ
in the Prophet, but could not reach Christ till God came to his Chariot. There
is a twofold light requisite to a bodily vision, light in the eye, and light in
the air, the former cannot (as we experience in the night) do it without the
latter. There is also a twofold light necessary to Spiritual sight; beside the
light of understanding which is in a man, there must be Illumination from the
Spirit of God, or there will be no beholding the Lord in the glass of the Word.

When the Disciples had heard Christ's Doctrine, they were not able to
understand or profit by his preaching; and therefore they cry to him, Lord open
to us this parable. When thou have read or heard the Word, go to God, and say,
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes; Give me understanding, and I shall
keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart. Make me to go in the
path of thy Commandments. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not unto
covetousness, Psalm. 119.33. to 37. Entreat God to write his Law on the fleshly
tables of thine heart. Bernard observes, bodily bread in the Cupboard may be
eaten of Mice, or moulder and waste; but when it is taken down into the body,
it is free from such danger: If God enable thee to take thy soul-food down into
thine heart, it is safe from all hazards.

Thanksgiving. Consider what a distinguishing mercy, what a precious treasure
the Word of God is; how without it thou had for ever been both unholy, and
unhappy; how by it thou may eternally be both gracious and glorious; and
without question thou will find cause to bless the giver for such a rare and
profitable gift. The Apostle ranketh this favor amongst the blessings of the
highest form: What advantage has the Jew? or what profit is there of
Circumcision? Much every way; chiefly that unto them were committed the Oracles
of God. And the Psalmist mentioning this differencing-Mercy, concludes it
with, Praise ye the Lord, Psalm. 147.2. ult.

The light of the Sun, Moon and Stars is of such concernment to men, that
without them the beauty of the old Creation would be buried in darkness; and
therefore the children of God have given the Most High the credit of those
greater and lesser Candles, Psalm. 136.7, 8, 9. nay, they have seen eternal love
by those luminaries. The light of Gods Law and Word is of infinitely more
worth; for by it the glory and beauty of the new Creation, and that curious
piece of man's Redemtion is seen and known: What honor then does God deserve for
this favor.

Ptolomy King of Egypt was at great cost and charge to have the Law of the Jews
translated by the Septuagint into Greek. Eusebius. Hist. lib 5. cap. 8.
Thou have the Old and New Testament both at a cheap and easy ra^e: Thou
may read thy Fathers Will, in thy Mother Tongue; thou have in it a suitable
Medicine for every Malady; seasonable succor in all thy Miseries; the
costliest Cordials, and choicest comforts, without Money, and without Price;
and surely all this deserves thanks and praise.

Did thou but know the misery of those places and persons who want the Word,
surely thy heart could not but be affected with thy mercy in the enjoyment of
the word. It is sometimes described by Famine; I will send a famine, not of
bread and water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord, Amos 4. How dreadful are
the concomitants and consequents of Famine! what shrivel'd cheeks, hollow eyes,
pale visages, fainting hearts, and trembling limbs, have men in a famine! they
seem rather like walking Ghosts, and moving carcasses, then living creartures.
The tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the roof of his mouth, for thirst;
the young child asks bread, and no man breaks it unto them. Their visage is
blacker then a coal, they are not known in the streets, their skin cleaves to
their bones, it is withered, it is become like a stick. The hands of the
pitiful Women, have sodden their own children, they were their meat in the
destruction of the daughter of my people, Lam. 4.4, 8, 10. These (friend) are
the woeful fruits of a bodily famine, but a soul famine is the sorer famine. How
many starve for want of the bread of life! Thou sit (it may be) at a full
Table; but could thou conceive what millions famish for lack of this
spiritual food, thou would pray to God earnestly to pity such places, and
praise him heartily for providing so plentifully for thee. Their misery is
sometimes set forth by darkness, and the shadow of death; Darkness is dreadful
though but external. It Was one of the greatest plagues which befell the
Egyptians. When Job would curse his day with a witness, what is his wish? Let
darkness and the shadow of death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it, let the
blackness of the day terrify it. Job 4.4. It was sad when Paul and his
companions saw neither Sun nor Stars in many days; but O how sad is it when men
see not the Sun of righteousness shining in the Heavens of the Gospel all their
days! Such may enjoy the light of Gods providence, but they enjoy not the light
of his countenance. How can they work that want the light of the word to direct
them? or how can they walk? surely they that walk in the dark stumble, (the
dark corners of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty) and fall even
into Hell. Where no vision is, the people perish. O Reader, what infinite cause
have thou to bless the Lord, that thou art not in their condition! If thou have
any compassion for the poor, dark, dead souls be instant with the Lord; pray, O
send out thy light and thy truth, that thy ways may be known upon earth, and
thy saving health unto all Generations. If thou have any affection to thy own
soul, praise God for his Law; Blessed be the Lord who has shown us light.
Procopius reports that nigh to the Pole where the night endures for many
Months together, the Inhabitants in the end of their long night, get up to the
top of the Mountains, striving who shall have the first sight of the Sun, and
as soon as they see it, they embace and hug each other, crying out, Ecce, Sol
apparet; Behold, Lo, the Sun, the Sun appears. This poor Island had a long
night of darkness, when the people in it served dumb Idols and Devils; blessed
for ever be the unsearchable goodness of God, the Sun of the Gospel has
appeared amongst us. Nay as its said of Rhodes, it may be said of England, The
Sun always shines on it. What shall we render to the Lord for this benefit.

On the town house of Geneva is written upon a Marble Table, in letters of gold,
Post tenebrass Lux. After darkness light. In remembrance of, and thankfulness
for their deliverance from the pride, power, tyranny, and abominations of the
Pope, Anno. 1535. I doubt not but we in these parts of the World, have as much
cause to set up a Monument of praise and thanks to the blessed God, for
bestowing upon us the light of his glorious Gospel, and freeing us from the
power of that man of pride, who exalts himself above all that is called God.

Reader, Is it not a privilege for thee, to sit by the fire of the word, when
many poor souls are freezing in the cold! for thee to walk in the light of the
word, when many sit in darkness, and the shadow of death! for thee to be
clothed out of the rich Wardrobe of the word, when many have their nakedness
appearing to their eternal shame! nay what an advantage have thou, that when
thousands and millions, have none to give them bread, but starve and famish,
thou have a Table fairly spread, and fully furnished with all sorts of food,
both for necessity and delight! yea, and if sickness hinder thee from coming
down to Dine or Sup with thy brethren; and sisters, upon that day of
exceedings, the Lords day, thy God is so tender of thee, that he sends thee
somewhat up to thy chamber (allows thee his Bible and blessing at home) for
thy nourishment and comfort; O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
and his wonderful works to the children of men.

2. Practice; when the Preacher has done in the Pulpit, the Hearer must begin
in his practice; He hears a Sermon best who practices it most, what one
says of Psa. 119. I may say of the whole Scriptures, They are verba vivenda,
non legenda, words to be loved, more then to be read or heard. A Christians
life should be a legible comment on Gods Law. The strokes in Music must answer
to the notes and rules set down in the Lesson.

It is observable that the blood was to be sprinkled on Aarons right ear, right
thumb, and great toe of his right foot, Exodus 29.20. the first did note his
right hearing the Word, the second and third his working according to it, and
walking in it. The doing, not the hearing or reading Christian, goes away with
the blessing; And he said, yea rather, blessed are they that hear the Word of
God and keep it, Luke 11.28. The occasion of the expression is confiderable;
one of Christ's hearers, having tasted, was so taken with the lusciousness of
his Doctrine, that she could not before all the company forbear commending the
tree for the fruits sake, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps
which thou have sucked; Yea rather (says Christ) Blessed are they that hear
the Word of God and keep it; In which words he does not deny her assertion, but
her inference, or the foundation of it. Mary though happy, yet was not so happy
in bearing the essential, as in keeping the Written Word of God. She was rather
blessed in having Christ formed in her, then in having him formed of her; It
was her greater honor and happiness to be a member of Christ, then to be the
Mother of Christ. The Porter is not so rich by carrying a bag of Gold, as the
Merchant that owes it. The Christian only that keeps the word of Christ, is
truly related to Christ the Word, Matthew. 12. ult.

It is reported of the Nobles of Polonia, that when the Gospel is read, they
lay their hands upon their Swords, and begin to draw them; intimating thereby
that they will defend it with the hazard of their lives: Saints must be ready
to die for the Gospel, but a Christian may defend it as truly by an holy life,
as by a bloody death. A scandalous conversation, is an offense to Religion, and
opens the mouths of its enemies; but as fire is a good defense to a man in a
Wilderness, against the fury of ravenous beasts, so the heat of grace flaming,
and the light of holiness shining in the lives of professors, defends the
word against its opposers. A Sermon practiced, is a Sermon in print, and by it
the hearer teaches all the Week long.

The Romans were commended for obeying from the heart, (...)
the form of Doctrine delivered to them. Romans 6.17. In the Original it is
whereunto they were delivered; A good hearer, as I said before, is one that
eats the word; now as meat eaten becomes one with the body, and takes the same
form with it, the body and meat are so much the same, that they are one, and
you cannot know them asunder: So the Word is well heard, when it becomes one
with the Christian, when they are both of the same form; the hearer is
delivered up into the likeness and form of the Scripture; the Word of God may
be read in every leaf, in every line of the volume of his life.

Our blessed Savior describing good hearers, tells us, they are such as bring
forth fruit, some thirty, some sixty, some an hundred fold, Mat. 13.23. And
elsewhere he compares the obedient hearer, to the man who built his house upon
a Rock, which stood firm and immovable in the midst of all winds, waves, and
weather; and the man that hears and does not practice, to him who built upon
the sands, which house quickly fell, when the winds blew, and the waves beat,
Mat. 7. latter end. His meaning and intention (Reader) was to quicken thee and
me to mind subjection to the Word, without which we must perish. Suppose thou
art never so great an hearer, yet if not a doer, thou deceivest thine own soul:
Alas, what will become of the frequent hearer, when the non, or negligent doer
shall be thrown to hell!

I have read a story of two men, who walking together, found a young Tree laden
with fruit, they both gathered, and satisfied themselves at present: One of
them took all the remaining fruit; and carried it away with him; the other took
the tree, and planted it in his own ground, where it prospered, and brought
forth fruit every year; so that though the former had more at present, yet this
had some when he had none: They who hear the Word, and have large memories, and
nothing else, may carry away most of the Word at present; yet he that
(possibly) can remember little, who carries away the tree, plants the Word in
his heart, and obeys it in his life, shall have fruit when the other has none:
The practical memory, is the greatest mercy.

It is reported of a good man, that coming from a Lecture, and being demanded,
Whether all were done, he should fetch a deep sigh, and say, All is said, but
all is not done.

Reader, when thou have heard the word, consider, though the Sermon be at an
end, yet there must not be an end of the Sermon. Practice, which is the heart
of hearing, is still behind. Observe the properties of those persons to whom,
and their posterity, God will be propitious: The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting, and his righteousness to childrens children: To such as keep his
Covenants, and remember his Commandments to do them, Psalm. 103.17, 18. They are
described by their act; they lay the word up, they remember his Commandments;
and by their end, to lay the word out in their lives, to do them. A good
husband having received a bag of money, locketh it up safe, that none may rob
him of it, and as occasion is, fetches it down, and lays it out, some for
food, some for clothes, some for rent, some for servants wages, some for this,
some for that, as his necessities require: So (Friend) do thou lay up the
precious Treasure of the word safe in the Cabinet of thine heart, and bring it
out as thy occasions call for it in thy life: Art thou in adversity, fetch out
the Promises for thy comfort; broach that strong liquor, which was purposely
tunned up for thee against a groaning hour: This is my comfort in mine
affliction, for thy word has quickened me, Psalm. 119.15. Art thou in
prosperity, bring forth the precepts for thy carriage: Look to that Card and
Compass by which thou may sail eavenly and trim, notwithstanding those high
winds, and swelling waters: Thy Word is a light to my feet, and a lamp to my
paths, Psalm. 119.4. Would thou resist and conquer Satan's Temptations? The
word is a Shield, which (as they say of Vulcans Armor) is full proof against
all thrusts and darts: By the words of thy mouth, I have kept my self from the
paths of the destroyer, Psalm. 17.4. Nay, fetch but this Sword of the Spirit
out of Gods Armory, and the Devil will run like a Coward; he is more afraid of
it, then Leviathan his namesake is of the Sword-fish, which some write he
dreadeth more then all the fish in the Ocean. Thy Savior gave Satan such a
wound with the Sword of the word, that he feels it to this day If thou
would overcome the worlds insinuations, d^ but feed on the word, and thou will scorn the scraps of the world. As the Greeks in their sailing to fetch the
Golden Fleece, when the Sirens endeavored to inchant them with their Songs,
found help against those assaults, by harkening to Orpheus pipe: So when that
Harlot the World striveth to bewitch thee with her pleasant voice, and
poisonous breath, thereby to hinder thy pursuit of the Golden Crown of
Righteousness, do but hearken to those Spiritual Songs, that ravishing Music,
those high and noble delights which are in the Gospel, and thou will find
assured help. That thy corruptions within thee may be subdued, let still the
Word of God be consulted: Thou may find in it such a bit and curb, as will
bridle thy youthful most headstrong lusts: By what means may a young man
cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy Word, Psalm 119.11. If
thine evil humors be never so many and filthy; yet the Word, like the
Catholicon Drug, is instead of all purges. That thy Relation duties may be
performed, the holy Scriptures must be fetched out, and minded. Whether thou art
an Husband, or Wife, or Parent, or Child, or Master, or Servant, to defray the
charge of all those duties, thou may take enough out of the Word of God. It
is a well drawn Picture, that looks on all that look on it, and it guides thee
by its eye how to order and govern thy feet; on what ground soever thou
stand, whether on the higher ground of a Superior, the plain even ground of
an equal, or the lower ground of an Inferior. He that lays up the word for
these purposes, and brings it out in these practices, is the right profitable
hearer; for he Remembers the Commandments of God to do them.

Some hear and jear, they go to a Sermon as to a Stage Play, to laugh and be
merry. Others hear and fret and fume, as those that live under the Torrid Zone,
curse the very Sun. Others hear and forget what would do them most good, their
memories are true to the flesh, but treacherous to the spirit; they are like
Vessels made of Ivy, which (some say) if wine and water be poured into them,
will leak out the wine, and keep in the water. Others hear and admire; but
Reader if thou would not have the word to witness against thee, when thou
shall be judged by it, for thine everlasting life or death, do thou hear and
amend. Charles the great did set his Crown upon the Bible, intimating thereby
that his Crown, his carriage as a King, should be according to the commands of
the word. O do thou hide this word in thine heart, that thou may hold it
forth to thy companions, by the hand of an holy conversation. Walk according to
this Rule.

A good Wish about the word, wherein the former heads are epitomized.
THe holy Scriptures being of such authority, The Introduction.
as the hand writing and heart of God himself, and so singular a mercy to me,
that by the guidance of this Star I am directed (as the wise men) to Jesus
Christ; I wish in general that I may set an high price upon every part thereof,
(that every piece may be current with me) for his sake, whose Image and
superscription it bears. O that my carriage before, at, and after hearing,
may witness to God and my conscience, Preparation for hearing.
that I esteem the law of his lips above thousands of Gold and Silver; In
particular, I wish that as the Jews when they went to hear the law, Preparation
for hearing, by laying aside evil frames.
sanctified themselves, and washed their clothes; so before I go to read or
hear the word, I may sanctify my soul, and wash my heart from all superfluity
of naughtiness, and with meekness receive that ingrafted word which is able to
save my soul. Prejudice,
I wish that like Jehoshaphat I may prefer one Micaiah, before four hundred
false Prophets; yet that I may ever make a difference betwixt an evil Ministers
Preaching and practice, and even when the Minister is full of grace, may so
distinguish between the treasure and the vessel, as not to vallue the Message
for the Messengers sake, but to bid the workman welcome for the words sake. I
wish that I may be so sensible of my owninability, to profit by this holy
ordinance, By prayer.
and of the speakers impotency to Preach home to my conscience, that I may cry
mightily to my God, that he would open my heart to receive the word with all
affection, and so direct the Arrows, which the Preacher takes out of the
quiver of Scripture, that they may hit and pierce my dearest corruptions.
Consideration.
I desire that the consideration of the words excellency may cause me to prize
it highly: Of its necessity, may make me to improve it diligently, and of its
efficacy may move me to go to hear, (as a Prisoner going to a bar) to be tried
for my everlasting life or death. Good ends in hearing.
I wish that the weight of the word may sink so deep into my heart, that I may
never hear Sermons to pick flowers of Oratory, or to please my fancy, but to
receive virtue from Christ, for the drying up my issue of sin, and that I might
cleanse my ways by taking heed thereto according to Gods Word; Worldly thoughts
laid by.
That the noise of the World may never hinder me from hearing the voiee of my
God: At hearing.
I wish that when I come into the place of worship I may set my self solemnly
as before the Judge of quick and dead, Seriousness as in Gods presence.
and as in the presence of the Lord, with fear and awe, give audience to his
word. If I were hearkening to an earthly Prince, I would be serious; O with
what reverence should I hear from the blessed and only Potentate! Because
without application the word will be unprofitable. Application of it.
I wish that I may never draw a curtain before my own Picture, but overlooking
others, may see my own face in the glass of the law. O that by faith I may so
take down the hook of the word, as to be caught and taken by it. Renovation by
it.
My prayer is that the Gospel may come to me, not in word only, but in power
also, that I may go to it as clean paper for any inscription, as soft wax for
any impression, which my God shall be pleased to make upon me. O that I might
behold the Lord so effectualy in that glass, as to be changed into his Image,
from glory to glory! In special I wish that my sins may be placed by me in the
front of this spiritual battle ( as Uriah) purposely to be slain; and that
those smooth stones which are taken out of the silver streams of the Sanctuary,
may be thrown by so skilful and powerful a hand, that they may sink deep into
the foreheads of those uncircumcised ones, After hearing. Petition for a
blessing.
to their death and destruction. I wish that after the seed is sown I may beg
that the showers of Heavens blessing may accompany it, that it may spring up in
the fruits of righteousness, to the glory of my God, and good of my precious
soul. And because the Gospel is a dish which is not set on every Table,
Thanksgiving for the Word.
though free grace bestows it on me, I wish that I may rise from this
spiritual food, before I have given thanks to the Master of the feast. Practice.
I desire finally, that as I looked like a Saint in hearing, I may live like a
Saint after I have heard; that those blossoms of good purposes, which sprouted
forth while the Minister was preaching, may ripen into practice; that
whatsoever characters others are known by, to be Christians, I may be known by
this ear mark, to be one of Christ's sheep, even by hearing his voice, so as to
follow him wheresoever he goes. Though others, like petty Chapmen, deal only
in some particular commodities, and those such as will serve their own turns, I
desire that I may deal with the Word by wholesale, and esteem all Gods
Precepts concerning all things to be right. O that I might order my whole
conversation aright, and at the last see the salvation of my God! Amen.

CHAP. XVIII. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godliness in receiving
the Lords Supper; and 1. Of the Nature of that Ordinance, and preparation for
it.
When God had caused his everlasting Decree to fall in labor, and had
delivered it by giving the world a being; and upon infinite consultation had
formed Man to be his Viceroy over all the works of his hands, he embarked him
(with all abilities needful for such a voyage) in the bottom of the Covenant of
Works. Adam set forth fully furnished with skill, and richly fraught with all
the Fortunes, Hopes and Happiness of Mankind, but he had scarce lanched out of
sight, before Satan, who knew very well the worth of the prize (envying man the
Haven of bliss to which he was sailing, and envying God (who was the owner) the
honor of such of a venture) raised a storm, whereby the Vessel, through the
unfaithfulness of Adam the Pilot, ran upon a Rock, and miscarried. O what a
joyful spectacle was that to Satan! What a doleful sight to Adam! to behold
himself and all his posterity, sinking into the boundless, bottomless Ocean of
destruction and misery, through his falseness and treachery: When lo, on a
sudden the Glorious God, out of the superabundant riches of his mercy
(resolving that the Devil should never rob him of the honor of that manifold
Wisdom, unsearchable Goodness, and Almighty Power which had been manifested in
the work of Creation) did provide and cast out the Covenant of Grace, a plank
sufficient for his poor shipwrackt Creature, to swim safe to shore on.

As all the Rivers meet in the Sea, and all the lines in the Center; so do all
the comforts of Mankind meet in this Covenant. The whole Scripture is sincere
milk, but this Covenant is the Cream of it: All our mercies are contained in
it, all our hopes are sustained by it, and our Heaven is at last attained
through it.

The blessed God does not only enter into a Covenant of mercy, but out of
compassion to our infirmities, has been pleased to confirm it by his hand and
seal: By his hand, in his word; by his seals, by the privy seal of his Spirit,
and by the broad-seals of the Sacraments, that by these immutable things, in
which it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, who
have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us, Heb. 6.18.

The Lords Supper is a sign and seal of the Righteousness of Faith, or the
Covenant of Grace, Romans 4.11.

When the blessed Savior was taking a doleful farwell of an ungrateful world,
as a lively resemblance of his sufferings for his, and as an undeniable
evidence of his love to his, he instituted this Supper: 1. As a lively
resemblance of his passion for his people. A crucified Christ is the sum of the
Law, and the substance of the Gospel; the knowledge of him is no less worth
then Eternal life. Now as he was crucified by the Jews and Soldiers actually,
and by unbelieving Gentiles who live amongst us interpretatively; so he is
crucified in the Gospel declaratively, and in the Sacrament representatively.
This Cup, says Christ, is the new Testament in my blood, 1 Corinthians. 11.25. The
Old Testament was sprinkled with the blood of Beasts, but the New Testament
with the blood of Christ, Hebr. 9.15, 19. This precious blood, which was the
costly price of man's Redemption, which is the only path to Eternal Salvation;
which was promised to Adam, believed by the Patriarchs, shadowed in the
Sacrifices, foretold by the Prophets, and witnessed in the Scriptures, is
drunk, received, signified and sealed in the Supper.

Christ instituted this ordinance also to be a standing evidence of his
affection to his. The same night that he was betrayed he took bread. The
dearest Jesus, kept his best wine till the last. He knew his Disciples would be
full of sorrow for his departure; he therefore provided his strongest cordial
against their saddest fainting fits. After the Passover he took bread and
instituted the Sacrament. After Supper then comes the Banquet, the Sweetmeats.
At the Lords Table Christ kisseth his Spouse with the sweetest kisses of his
lips, and ravisheth her heart with his warmest love. In other Ordinances he
Wooeth her; in this he Marries her. In other Ordinances she has from him the
salutes of a loving friend; but in this the embraces of an Husband; Other
duties are pleasant and wholesome food, but this is the costly delightful feast.
In this Christ brings his beloved into his Banqueting house, (a storehouse
of all sweet delights, of variety of delicacies) and his Banner over her is
love, Cant. 2.4.

A certain man made a great Supper, Luke 14.16. I may truly say so of the
Sacrament. This is a great Supper, in regard of its Author: The great God is
Master of the feast. He gave his own Son for the life of the World. 2. In
regard of the matter of it, which is the flesh of Jesus Christ; Men set bread
and wine on the Table; but Christ sets his own body and blood there. In this
ordinance we eat not only (Panem Domini, sed panem Dominum) The bread of the
Lord, but the bread which is the Lord. The gods (say they) are come down in the
likeness of man; behold here God the Son comes down in the likeness of bread
and wine; he himself is eat and drunk by faith. Is not this a rare banquet? 3.
In regard of the great price of it. Banquets are costly; but O what did this
feast cost? Beasts are slain before they can be food for our bodies; but, Lo,
here the Lord of life was put to death, that he might be food for our starving
souls. Cleopatra dissolved a pearl worth 50000. l. in Vinegar, and drunk it up
at a draught; but as costly as her liquor was, it was much worse then puddle
water, in comparison of the precious blood of Christ, which the beleiver
drinks at this great Supper. 4. In regard of its great effects; It seals
pardon, peace, and salvation, to the Saint; it conveyeth the Image and love of
God, nay God himself into the soul; Through the golden pipe of this Ordinance,
is conveyed the golden Oil of divine influence. There is Manna indeed in this
pot. Well may it be called a great Supper. The Elements are of small value, but
the Sacrament is of infinite worth. A conveyance of land fairly written in
Parchment with wax fastened to it, is of little price, but when it is signed,
sealed, and delivered to the use of a person, it may be worth much, it may
convey thousands: A little bread and a spoonful or two of wine, are in
themselves of very small value; but when received according to Christ's
institution, and accompanied with his benediction, they will be of unspeakable
value, they will convey thousands and millions to the beleiver.

The Lords Supper is indeed like an Elixar, which is small in quantity, but
great in value, and efficacy, having in it the spirits and substance of many
excellent things; In prayer all the graces are exercised, and so also at the
Supper; but not only all the graces, but most of the other Ordinances of God
are invited to this feast. The Word, Prayer, Singing, do all meet at the Table,
and contribute their help, to carry the Christian up to Heaven. I premise these
things Reader, purposely to make thee more wary. The corrupting of the best, is
worst of all. Poison in Wine is much worse then in Water; Kings expect that
their Children should be respected, though their officers be refused. Surely
says God, They will reverence my Son, Mat. 21.37. The very work about which he
comes, will make him welcome. Though they refuse my Servants, yet they will
reverence my Son. The Casuists, say Sacramentum and articulus mortis
aequiparantur; A man must be looked upon at the Sacramental board as if he were
on a bying bed; Friend, thou should be as serious when thou art going to the
Lords Supper, as if thou were going into the other World.

He that comes carelessly, gets nothing from Christ; It is one thing to take
the Supper of the Lord, and another thing to taste the Supper of the Lord. Not
one of them which were bidden, shall taste of my Supper, Luke 14.24. Many crowd
near a Kings person, on some days, when he shows himself in public, who
never enjoy his gracious presence. Hundreds receive the Elements, but few
receive the Sacrament.

If a Beast did but touch the Mount (when God solemnly appeared on it) it was
to dye: What then will become of thee, if thou should touch the Table of the
Lord with a brutish heart? If any did eat of the Passoever in his uncleanness,
he was to be cut off from Israel, Exodus 12. which some interpret of a violent
death by the hand of the Magistrate; Others, of a cutting off from the
privileges of Gods people on earth, and their possession in Heaven: Surely it
is as dangerous to eat the Supper in thy pollution, as the Passoever.

It is evil to dally with the Jealous God in any duty; but worst of all in
this, where the great affection of the Father in giving his Son, and the
grievous Passions of Christ (to satisfy Gods justice for sin) the most serious
things which man's heart can conceive, are represented. Melancthon tells a
story of a Tragedy which was acted of the death of Christ (but it proved a
Tragedy indeed at last; for) he that acted Christ's part on the Cross, being
wounded to death (by one that should have thrust his sword through a bladder of
blood) fell down, and with his fall killed one acting a woman's part, and
lamenting under the Cross: His brother who was first slain, slew the murderer,
for which himself was hanged by order of Justice. Cyprian speaks of an
ancient woman, who had denied the Faith, and yet ventured to this Heavenly
Feast; but it proved her bane; for as soon as she had received the Elements,
she fell down dead. O it is sad jesting with the Sufferings and Ordinances of
Christ! Friend, let others woe be thy warning: Take example by others, lest God
make thee an example to others.

I shall lay down two motives to quicken thee to a serious preparation for this
Ordinance:

1. Consider Christ's diligent inspection: The Lord Jesus will take special
notice what respect thou have for his Body and Blood: And when the King came in
to see his guests, he saw there a man which had not on a Wedding Garment, Mat.
22.11, 12, 13. Jesus Christ observes all his wedding guests, whether they come
with the Wedding Garment or no. Though there was but one, yet he could not lie
hid, and escape in the crowd; the King quickly spied him.

The King of Saints takes exact notice, in what manner thou come to his
Supper; whether thou examinest thy Regeneration, and provest thy self to be one
of the family, before thou offerest to eat of their food; whether thou carriest
the Gold of thy Graces to the Touchstone of the Scripture, and triest their
truth, before thou tenderest them to him for current coin. He observes with
what sense of thy misery thou runnest for refuge to the spring of mercy: He
knows whether when thou art going to this Heavenly Feast, thou have the mouth
of Faith; with what resolution against sin for time to come, thou go for
pardon of sins past: He sees whether thou go to this Gospel-Ordinance, in a
Gospel Order; if not, both thy preparation for the Sacrament, and thy carriage
at it, and after it, are eye-services to Jesus Christ: How holy therefore
should thou be in them? Would thou trample upon the picture of thy dear
Friend, or of thy lawful Sovereign, before their faces? Will thou tread under
foot the infinitely precious blood of the Son of God, as if it were the blood
of a Malefactor, or of a Dog, and that while he himself stands by, and
looks on? Can thou (Friend) find in thine heart to offer such an
abominable affront to thy best Friend, and that before his face? Truly, if thou
art not faithful in thy preparation for it, thou do all this. Think with thy
self, I am now to sit down at the Table of the Lord, amongst his own children:
I know beforehand that the King will come in to see his Guests; even that King
who is too just to be bribed, too great to be slighted, too wise to be
deceived, and too good to be forfeited. O, my soul! what solemn provision will thou make for so sacred a presence? If in any time of thy life thou would be
extraordinarily serious, this is the season. O let thy preparation be such for
this glorious Supper, that the Master of the Feast may see that thou art tender
of his honor, watchful of his eye, and fearful of his anger.

2. Consider the dreadful condition of those that receive the Lords Supper
unworthily: Their sin, They are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; Their
suffering, They eat and drink their own damnation; 1 Cor. 11.27, 29.

1. Their sin: They are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: The unworthy
receiver is a Christ murderer. He that tears the Letters, or defaceth the
Picture, or clippeth the coin of a Prince, offers the indignity to his
person. The Romans when they would dishonor a person, would disfigure the
statue which was erected to his praise. The same wickedness of heart which
carries a man out to profane the Sacrament, would carry him out to kill the
Savior.

When one shoots at another to slay him, though he miss, he is a murderer; the
error of the hand does not wipe out the malice of the heart. Joseph's Brethren
were guilty concerning their Brother, though they did not lay violent hands
upon him, Genesis 42.21. When Julian shot darts up to Heaven, his cruelty and rage
were as bad, as if he had hit Christ's body. Besides, men may be guilty of
murder, by approving it after it is committed, Mat. 23.35. What does the
unworthy receiver less then justify Judas and the Jews in all their
treacherous and barbarous carriage toward Jesus Christ!

Consider therefore what thou do, when thou go unpreparedly to the Lords
Table; Thou art guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Simple murder is a
crying sin: The voice of thy Brothers blood cries to me from the earth, Genesis
4.10. It is one of those sins which will give God no rest, till he take
vengeance on the actor and author of it, and is therefore called a crying sin.
The light of Nature taught the Barbarians, that Vengeance would not suffer a
murderer to live, Acts 28.4. The Scripture acquainteth us, that no
satisfaction shall be taken for the life of a murderer; for blood defiles the
land, Numb. 35.31, 36. But the murder of a Superior is a far greater sin.
Cicero tells us, He that kills his Father, commits many sins in one; he
kills him that begot him, and brought him up; he sins against many
obligations. To kill a King is High Treason: Who can stretch his hand against
the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9. But what is it to murder
the Son of God? no tongue can tell, no pen can write the horrid, heinous nature
of Christ-murther. He is thy everlasting Father. It made a dumb child speak to
see another stabbing his Father; and will thou imbrue thine own hands in thy
Fathers blood? Jesus Christ is thy King, and will thou stretch forth thy hands
against thy Head, thy Sovereign? Had Zimri peace, who slew his Master? Nay,
Jesus Christ is thy Redeemer; and will thou put him to death, who is the Author
of thy life? He gave thee thy being; and would thou deprive him of his being?
He is the only Physician that can cure thee; and will thou kill him? Once
more, Jesus Christ is God, and will thou lift up thy hand (I would say a
thought) against the blessed God? God deserves infinitely more love then thou
can possibly give; and shall thine heart be so full of hatred, as to let fly
against the God of Heaven? Oh! say with David, (when Abishai persuaded him to
slay Saul) The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the
Lords anointed. When Satan, or thy own heart, would persuade thee to be slight
in the examination of thy self, and formal in thy humiliation for sin, that
thou might be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, let Conscience cry
out, God forbid that I should stretch out my hand against Jesus Christ, the
Lords Anointed; And truly Friend, if after such warning as God gives thee in
this head, thou should dare to receive unworthily, thou would find it
hereafter to thine unspeakable hurt: As Reuben told his Brethren, when they
were in distress, Spoke I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child;
and ye would not hear? therefore behold his blood is required, Genesis 42.22. So,
if thou now dare to approach the Lords Table, in thy sinful unregenerate
estate, in thy filth and pollution, when thou come to lie under some smart
rod, or on thy dying bed, or at least in the other World, Conscience will fly
in the face, Did I not speak unto thee, saying, Do not sin against the holy
Child Jesus, and thou would not hear? therefore behold his blood is required
at thy hands! O Friend, Friend, what will thou do in such an hour! If on him
who slew Cain, vengeance should be taken sevenfold; what vengeance shall be
taken on him who slays Jesus Christ? How dreadful will thy perdition be, if
the only Savior be thine Accuser, and that blood which alone can procure thy
pardon, shall cry for thine eternal punishment!

O think of it seriously, Have thou never had hard thoughts of the Jews for
their cruelty to the Son of God? and will thou do worse thy self! The Jews
crucified him but once, but thou by continuing an unworthy receiver, crucifiest
him often: The Jews did it ignorantly; Had they known, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. but thou know him to be the Son of
God, the Savior of the World: They crucified him in his estate of Humiliation,
but thou in his estate of Exaltation: They had not not thee for a Warning, when
they put him to death; but thou have them for a Warning to thee: They crucified
him when he was to rise again the third day; but thou so crucifiest him, that
he might never rise more, were it in thy power. O take heed what thou do, and
be not worse then a Jew.

Thy suffering: He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, 1 Cor. 11.29. Some I know are offended at the translation
of the Greek Word (...), Damnation; but I see little reason for it; for
Damnation is the end of every sin, though it be not the end of every sinner.
Paul speaks of Believers indeed; but as it may be truly said of one that
drinks poison, Such a man drunk his bane, though by the help of a Physician
such an Antidote may be given as may prevent the Patients death; so it may be
truly spoken of a Believer who receives unworthily, He eats and drinks his
own damnation; though, through the Grace and Help of Jesus Christ (no thank to
himself) he is recovered out of that sin, and saved. Beza, and the Geneva
Translation take it in this sense. So the word is taken, John 3.17, 18. Romans
3.8. and in several other places.

Now what an argument is here, to dissuade thee from going rashly or
unpreparedly to the Table of the Lord. That which is a worthy receivers meat,
will be thy poison; the same red Sea of Christ's blood, which is salvation to
others (they pass safely through it into the land of promise) will be damnation
to thee. King John, Speed.
as our English Croniclers write, Sim^s Eccks. Hist.
was poisoned by a cup of Wine. The Emperor Henry the seventh was poisoned by
the bread in the Sacrament, through the treachery and treason of a Monk. The
Israelites did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink, but with many of them God was not well pleased, for they were
overthrown in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.5. Those that eat and drink in
Christ's presence, were punished with everlasting perdition, Mat. 7.23. And do
not please thy self because thou feel no such poisonous operation at present
in unworthy receiving, that therefore thou needst not fear it. They that eat
Italian Figs, carry their death about them, though they fall not down dead
suddenly.

Therefore Reader, take some time and pains to commune with thy own heart,
before thou go to the Sacrament. Charge it upon its allegiance to God, to
hear thee patiently, and to carry it self sutably. If I receive this Supper
with an holy preparation, it will be a seal of, and an help to my eternal
salvation; it will be an earnest of matchless love, and an entrance into an
endless happy life; but if I eat and drink unworthily there is death in the pot
death in the cup; I eat and drink my own damation. O how doleful is that one
word Damnation! What a dreadful sound does it make in mine ears! What fearful
sighs does it cause in my soul! Damnation is no trifling business. God
threateneth it in earnest. The damned feel it in earnest, and shall I jest with
it? Surely I were better eat the bread of affliction, and drink the water of
adversity, then eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily.
Can thou be so bloody as to stab thy self, and thy Redeemer to the heart with
one blow! O my soul, bestir thy self, awake out of sleep, and do not dally
about the concernments of eternal life and death, let thy care and conscience
be such; in fitting thy self for this sacred Ordinance, that thy Savior may
see, thou have an high respect for his precious blood, and a tender regard to
thine own everlasting good.

For thy help about this Ordinance, I shall speak, 1. To thy duty before the
Sacrament. 2. To thy duty at the Sacrament. 3. To thy duty after the Sacrament.


First, To thy duty before the Sacrament; and herein my counsel is, that thou
would prepare thy self solemnly for this Ordinance. The Jews had their
preparation for their Passover, John 19.24. It was the preparation of the
Passover. Nay, they took their Lamb the tenth day of the month, and did not
kill it till the fourteenth, Exodus 12.3. (and as some of their Writers observe,
they tied it all the while to their bed posts) that in the interim they might
prepare themselves for it. Our Lord Jesus when he was to eat the Passoever, and
institute the Supper, would have so much as the house in which he would do it,
prepared beforehand, Mark 14.15. The ancient Fathers, and primitive Christians,
used to sit up whole nights at prayer, before the Lords Supper, which they
called their Vigiliae.

Reader, thy care must be to trim thy lamp, and make sure of oil in the vessel
now thou art going to meet the Bridegrom. Samuel spoke to the inhabitants of
Bethlehem, Sanctify your selves, and come to the Sacrifice: so say I to thee,
Sanctify thy soul, and then come to the Sacrament, 1 Samuel 16.9. Joseph
prepared himself, by shaving himself, and changing his raiment, before he went
unto Pharaoh; And wilt not thou prepare thy self, by putting thy soul into the
holiest posture thou can, when thou art to go in unto the King of Heaven and
Earth? He that would make a good meal, even when he is to feast at another
cost, must prepare his stomach beforehand by moderate fasting, or exercise. God
expects that the hands be pure, but especially that the heart be prepared:
The good Lord (says Hezekiah) pardon every one that prepares his heart,
though it be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary. 2
Chro. 30.18, 19. the King speaks of those who came to the Passover with some
ceremonial pollution, yet had moral purity; and his words are to this purpose,
Lord, though several of my people have failed, in regard of external
purification; let it please thee to pardon them, if they have minded internal
preparation. Friend, there is no hope of remission, without this
heart-preparation: The Devil himself would not come into an house, till it was
ready swept and garnished, Mat. 12. And do thou think that Jesus Christ will
come into thy heart, while it lies nastily and sluttishly, before the filth of
sin be swept out, and it be garnished with the Graces of his Spirit. Surely
that room had need be richly hung, with the embroidery of the Spirit, in which
the glorious and blessed Potentate will sup and lodge. Where thy expectation is
great from a person, there thy preparation must be great for him. Do thou not
look like Herod, to see some miracle done by Jesus, some extraordinary thing
for thy soul? Therefore I say to thee, as Joshua spoke to the Israelites,
Sanctify your selves, for to morrow the Lord will do wonders amongst you,
Josh. 3.5. O sanctify thy self, and to morrow (on the Sacrament-day) the Lord
will do wonders for thee; he will feast thee at his own Table; he will feed
thee with his own flesh; he will give thee that love, which is better then
wine; he will embrace thee in his arms, and kiss thee with the kisses of his
mouth; he will delight thine eyes with the sight of his beautiful Person;
ravish thine ears, with the sound of his precious promises; and rejoice thine
heart, with the assurance of his gracious pardon. O do but sanctify thy self,
and to morrow the Lord will do wonders for thee: This preparation consists in
a serious examination of thy self, and a sincere humiliation for thy sins.

Thy serious examination of thy self, must be, First, Of the Good in thee.
Secondly, Of the Evil done by thee.

Let a man examine himself, and so (and no otherwise) let him eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup, 1 Cor. 11.28. Examine himself, (...): Some take
it to be a Metaphor of a Goldsmith, as he tries Gold in the fire whether it be
pure or no; so thy duty is to try thy graces, by the fire of the Word, whether
they be true or not: So the word is used, 1 Pet. 1.7. Others take it as an
allusion to Ministers who are tried whether they are fit for their office or
no, 1 Timothy 3.10. so thou ought to try thy self, whether thou art fit for
this Ordinance or no. This examination must be;

First, Of the Good in thee, Thy duty is to examine thy self in general,
concerning thy Regeneration, or spiritual life. The Sacrament is childrens
bread, and it must not be given to dogs: Dogs must be without doors, not
within, snatching the Meat from the Table; Men must prove their right to the
Purchase, before they take Possession? He must have an interest in the Covenant
of grace, who will finger the seal of the Covenant; It is high Treason to annex
the Kings broad Seal to forged Writings.

Thy Navel is like a round Goblet which wants not liquor, thy belly is like
an heap of Wheat, set about with Lillies, Cant 7.2. The words are Christ's
praise of his spouse, for her fruitfulness in bringing Children forth, and her
faith fullness in bringing them up. By the Navel Expositors agree that Baptism
is understood, by which (as children by the Navel) the members of the Church
are nourished, even then when they are so feeble that they cannot feed
themselves, but their whole sustenance is conveyed to them by others. By the
belly is meant the Lords Supper; Now observe the provision, how the Table is
furnished, and the persons which are to sit at it. For the provision; Thy belly
is like an heap of Wheat. Ainsworth on the words observes, that in those
times, they brought their Corn in and stackt it up in heaps, so that as the
belly distributeth to every part of the body its proportion of nourishment, and
as an heap of Wheat satisfies the hunger of, and affords strength to a whole
Family, so does the Church by this Sacrament bestow on all her children,
(through Christ) that food which is needful for health and strength. The
persons which are to eat of this Wheat, set about with lillies; They must be
Saints and are compared to Lilies. First, For their innocence, they are
Lilly-white. Secondly, for their glory and Nobility. Mat. 6.29. Pliny tells
us that Lilies are next to the Rose for Nobility; Plin. l. 22. c. 5.
Christ is the Rose of Sharon, the plant of most renown, but his Church is next
to him. Thirdly, for the savor, Cant. 4.12. The graces of beleivers are like
sweet perfumes, and sented as far as Heaven. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament
not of Regeneration, but of sustentation; When the Prodigal came to himself,
then the fatted Calf was killed for him, Luke 15. Men must have natural life,
before they can eat natural meat, and men must have spiritual life, before they
can eat spiritual meat. It was an ancient abuse of the Sacrament, cast out by
the Carthaginian Council, to give it to dead men. The invitation is not to
Enemies but friends, Eat O friends, drink abundantly O beloved, Cant. 5.1. The
waters of life is only for the thirsty, and the bread of life only for the
hungry; the Shewbread under the Law was to be eaten only by the Priests, Lev.
24.9. so the bread of the Sacrament is to be eaten only by such as are
spiritual Priests unto God, as Saints are, Rev. 1.5.

Reader, examine thy self therefore whether thou art born again or no. Look
into the Word of God, and compare thy self with the Characters which are there
given of new born Creatures. They are sometimes described by their hearts. God
is good to Israel, to such as are of a clean heart. Psa. 73.1. Their hearts are
clean, not with a legal cleanness, which denies the being of sin in them; In
that sense none can say I have made my heart clean (this spotless robe is
reserved for the Saints wearing in the other World) but with an Evangelical
cleanness, which denies the dominion of sin over them (this cleanly garment is
the Saints ordinary attire in this world.) We call River-water clean water,
though there be some kind of illness and impurity in it, because it will not
(like pond water) mingle with it, and suffer the filth to rest there, but
works it out, and seadeth it forth in its scum and froth. Now how is it with
thee Friend? Does sin rest quietly in thee? or is it resisted by thee? Do
thou love sin or loath sin? Do thou count it thy pleasure or thy poison? When
the body is dead, Vermin crawl in it without opposition. When the soul is
dead, lusts abound in it and reign without any considerable disturbance. An
unclean heart is quickly overcome by sin. As when a Chimny is foul, it is apt
to be fired by every spark that flies up, whereas when it is clean, though
many fly up it remains safe; so when the heart is unclean, Satan can no
sooner throw in his fiery Darts, but presently it is in a flame; whereas a
clean heart is like wet tinder not so soon burning when he strikes fire. Godly
men as they have clean hearts, so they have clean hands, Job 17.9. The hand is
the instrument of action; by clean hands, the Spirit of God means clean and
holy actings.

Saints are described by their lives. They walk after the Spirit. They order
their conversations aright. Per brachium fit judicium de cord, was Galens
rule. Physicians feel the pulse of the Arm, that they may know the state of
the vitals; Now how beats the pulse of thy conversation? according to that,
judge of the soundness or sickness of thy constitution. Do thou walk in
reference to thy self soberly, in reference to others righteously, in reference
to God religiously? Romans 8.1, 5. Tit. 2.12.

Thy duty is to examine thy self in particular also of those graces, which are
specially requisite in a Communicant. Of thy knowledge to discern the Lords
body. There is a competency of knowledge needful if thou would receive
acceptably. Do thou know the threefold estate of man? His Innocence,
Apostasy, and Recovery. What a pure piece he was, how holy when he came out of
Gods hands! what a miserable polluted creature he has made himself by
disobeying God, and harkning to the Tempter! what a glorious remedy God has
provided to restore man to his primitive purity! Do thou know God as he
discovers himself in his works, but especially as he is represented in the
Glass of his word? Do thou know Jesus Christ, his two Natures, his three
Offices, how he executes them, both in his estate of humiliation, and
exaltation? Do thou know the nature and end of the Lords Supper?

An ignorant person can no more discern Christ's body, then a person stark blind
can discern the bread. God has expressly forbidden lame and blind Sacrifices,
Mal. 1.8. The Hypocrites Sacrifice is Lame, for he halteth in Gods Way. The
ignorant persons Sacrifice is blind, for he can give no account of his own
work. When the Leprosy was in the head, the Priest was to pronounce the party
utterly unclean, exclude him the Camp, Lev. 13.44. Do not say, though thou art
ignorant, yet thy heart is good, when God himself says; Without knowledge the
mind is not good: Fish stink first in the head, and then the whole body
putrifieth.

Examine thy Faith. This grace is thy spiritual taste, without which thou can
relish nothing on the Table. This is the Bucket, and if it be wanting I may say
to thee as the Woman to Christ, The Well is deep, and thou have nothing to draw
with. This is the hand to receive Christ, Joh. 1.12. This is as the Arms
whereby we embrace Christ. They embraced the promises by faith, Heb. 11.13. As
loving friends that have been a great while asunder, when they meet together,
hug and embrace each other in their Arms; so the Christian who longs to see
Jesus Christ in the promises, when at a Sacrament he meets him, huggeth and
embraces him in the Arms of faith.

Examine not so much the strength as the truth of thy faith. The wings of a
Dove may help her to mount up toward Heaven, as well as the wings of an Eagle.
Try whether thy faith be unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. What price do thou set upon
Christ? To them that believe, Christ is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. An unbeleiver
(like the Indians) sees no worth in this golden Mine, but prefers a piece
of Glass, or a few painted Beads, mean, earthly things before it; but a
beleiver (like the Spaniard) knows the value of it, and will venture through
all storms and tempests that he may enjoy it. Do thou prise the precepts of
Christ, the promises of Christ, the people of Christ, the person of Christ (is
that altogether lovely in thine eyes) and the passion of Christ? Is thy
greatest glory in Christ's shameful Cross? Do thou esteem it above the highest
Emperors most glorious Crown? One of Englands Kings, bestowed as much on a
Crucifix, as the revenues of his Crown were worth in a Year. God forbid (says
Paul) that I should glory save in the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14.

Does thy faith purify thine heart? Having their hearts purified by faith,
Acts 15.9. The hand of faith which opens the Door to let Christ into the
heart, sweepeth the heart clean. Faith looks to be like Christ in glory and
faith; labors to resemble Christ in grace. An unbeleiver (like a sluttish
Woman) though he keep the room of his life a little clean, which others daily
observe, yet he cares not how dirtily those rooms of his inward man lie, which
are out of their fight; unbeleiving and defiled are joined together, Tit. 1.15.

Examine thy love, The primitive Christians kissed each other at the Supper,
which they called Osculum pacis, A kiss of peace. They had their feasts of
charity, Jude v. 12. The bread which we eat, is it not the Communion of the
body of Christ? As the bread is made of many grains, and the cup of wine of
many grapes united; so is the body of Christ of many members, united under one
head. Eating together was ever a sign of love and friendship. Joseph hereby
showed his love to his brethren. The Sons of Brutus, Plutarch. in vita Publico.
and the Vitellii when they conspired with Tarquins Ambassadors, against the
Consul, drank the blood of a man together, to confirm their amity. Even Beasts
have been brought to agree, by feeding at the same Rack.

Now Reader what love-fire have thou for this lovefeast?

Do thou love the brethren as brethren, because they are related to God, and
because they have the Image of God? Or do thou love them only for the
natural qualities in them, and their courtesy to thee? this fire I must tell
thee is Kitchen fire, which must be fed with such course fuel; the former only
is the fire which is taken from Gods Altar? Do thou love Christ in a Cottage
as well as in a Court? Do thou love a poor as well as a rich Christian? Do
thou love grace in rags, as much as grace in robes? Is it their honor or their
holiness which thou do admire?

As thy duty is to examine thy self concerning thy graces, so also concerning
thy corruptions. Before a Sacrament there should be a through search for all
thy sins. The Jews before their passover searched all over their houses for
leaven, nay they searched every corner and Mouse-hole with a wax Candle (as
some write.) There is a threefold leaven; First, a leaven of Hypocrisy, Beware
of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy, Luke 12.1. Secondly, a
leaven of Heresy, a little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump, Gal. 5.9.
Thirdly, a leaven of Enormity or scandal, purge out the old leaven, 1 Cor. 5.7.
Thy care must be to make a diligent enquiry for all this leaven. The iniquities
of wicked men will find them out, but good men will find out their iniquities.
I know mine iniquites, says David, Psa. 51. When evil humors lie hid in the
body, they hinder the strength it might get by food. When sins lie undiscovered
in the soul, they will hinder its digesting spiritual meat and drink.

At a Sessions there are some indictments read, and (it may be) some execution
done; but at an Assize there are many Malefactors arraigned, and many
executed, the Goal is then cleared of those vermin; A Christian should keep a
petty Sessions in his heart every day, do what he can for the conviction and
condemnation of his sins; but before a Sacrament, he must keep an Assize, there
must be a general Goal delivery; all his sins must be sought after, indicted
and executed; the room of his heart must be cleared of those vipers.
Particularly examine thy self of thy sins since the last Sacrament; how
forgetful thou have been of the Oath of the Lord, which thou did then enter
into; be not slight or formal in searching after thy sins, like some officers,
that willingly overlook the Thieves they search for; but be as diligent to
find them out, as thou would be to find out the Murderers of thy father or
best friend.

But be sure thou compare thy heart and life with the Law of God. O how many
spots will that glass discover. When the woman has swept her house and
gathered the dust up altogether, she thinks there is none left, but when the
Sun does but shine in through some broken Pane of Glass, she sees the whole
House swarm with innumerable Motes of dust, floating too and fro in the Air.
The light of Gods law will make innumerable sins visible to thee, which without
it will lie hid.

2. There is requisite as a serious examination of thy self, so also sincere
humiliation for thy sins. The cleanly Dame is careful always to keep her Peuter
and Brass clean, but against a good time, she is very curious to have her
Vessels not only clean but bright, and for this end she will not only wash
them but take much pains in scouring them; Christian, Now is the good time
before which thou should scour the vessel of thy heart, that no dirt (if
possible) may stick to it. This true humiliation consists partly in mourning
for sin, partly in turning from sin.

1. In mourning for sin. The Pharisees would not eat their common bread with
unwashed hands, least they should transgress the traditions of their Elders.
Friend, if thou should eat this sacred bread with an unwashed heart, thou will horribly transgress the Commandment of thy God. The Jews did eat the
Passover with bitter herbs, and truly we Gentiles must eat a broken body with
broken bones. The more bitter sin is to thee before, the more sweet thy Savior
will be to thee at the Sacrament; Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall
be comforted, Mat. 5.3. A wet seed time will bring a Sunshiny and plentiful
Harvest. One of the Fathers observes that David the greatest mourner in
Israel, was the sweetest singer in Israel. Beans thrive best if steept in
water before they be sown, and truly so will thy soul if steept in godly
sorrow before thou go to the Sacrament. Give strong drink to him that is
ready to perish, and wine to these that are of heavy hearts. Prove. 31.6. When
thy heart is heavy under the sense of thine unholiness, and thou art ready to
perish under the weight of thy wickedness, then Jesus Christ will give thee
that wine, that blood which will refresh and make thine heart glad.

Those Trees shoot highest in Summer, that shoot lowest into the earth in
Winter; No Christian usually rises so high in consolation, as he that is cast
down lowest in Evangelical humiliation. There are two in the New Testament
famous for their contrition, and they are famous for Gods respect and affection
to them. Mary was a great mourner, We seldom have a view of her in Scripture
without dew on her face, and tears in her eyes, Luke 7.38, 39. Luke 23.27, 28.
Joh. 19.25. and 20.11, 15. But she had the special honor and favor of seeing
the best sight which ever mortal eyes beheld before all others; even the
blessed Redeemer in the first step of his exaltation. Now when Jesus was risen
early the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalen out of whom
he had cast seven Devils, Mark 16.9. Mary had sinned greatly, and sorrowed
greatly, and was upon it greatly respected by God. Peter wept bitterly; A look
from love broke his heart in pieces; but Christ took special care to bind up
this broken heart, to pour Oil into his wounded conscience, and therefore when
a messenger is dispatched from Heaven to acquaint the World with the joyful
news of the Saviors resurrection, no name is particularly mentioned in his
commission but Peter's. God gives him an express command, that whosoever should
remain ignorant of those happy tidings, he should be sure that Peter have
notice of it. Go your way (says the Angel) Tell his Disciples and Peter, that
he goes before you into Galilee, there ye shall see him. When a King has some
extra-ordinary good news, and sends a Courtier to acquaint his intimate
friends with it, but charge him, Tell them all of it, but be sure such an
Earl have notice of it; whoever you forget, remember him; All will conclude
this is the favorite; Peter thought that because he had forsworn Christ,
therefore Christ might justly forget him; but Christ took such care that if but
one in the World besides those two Women at the Sepulcher, had notice of his
Resurrection, penitent Peter should be the man. O the Rhetorique, the power of
an unfeigned tear! Repentance has more prevalency with the blessed God, then
all the robes, riches, crowns and Diadems of the greatest Potentates in the
World.

O Reader, if thou would have heavenly music at the feast, mind this holy
mourning; when Joseph's brethren were sensible of their sin in selling him, then
and not till then he made them a feast. Jesus Christ made the best wine that
ever was, of water. The Be ( Naturalists tell us) gather the best honey of the
bitterest herb; God has solid joy for the broken bones, the contrite spirit;
cast up the accounts betwixt God and thy soul, see how infinitely thou art
indebted to his Majesty, Abhor thy self, with Job, Bemoan thy self, with
Ephraim, and judge thy self (as Paul enjoyneth his Corinthians, in relation to
this ordinance) as ever thou would have God at the Sacrament to seal thee a
general acquittance.

Sacrament-days are sealing days; God does then seal his love and stamp his
Image more fairly on the soul; now if thy heart be melted into godly sorrow,
and made thereby like soft wax, thou will be fit for this seal and stamp. The
Heart in grasing kills and eats a Serpent whith so inflames her, that she can
have no rest till she drink of the water brooks. Repentance will make thee feel
the scorching nature of that Serpent, sin, and thereby long for and relish the
water of life.

2. There must be a turning from sin. Thou can never communicate with true
comfort, if thou do not communicate with a clear conscience. Purch. Pilgrim.
vol. 2. p. 1477.
The Mahumetans before they enter into their Temples, wash their feet, and when
they are entering in put off their Shoos. As thy duty is to wash thy soul in
godly sorrow, so also to put off thy sinful affections, before thou entrest
into Gods house to partake of this Ordinance. If God takes it ill when men take
his Name into their mouths, who hate to be reformed, how ill will he take it,
if such take the body and blood of his Son into their mouths! Christ's body was
not to see corruption, neither will it mingle with corruption. He lay in a new
womb, in a new tomb, and he will lie in a new heart. When sin is cast out, then
Jesus Christ will enter into thy soul. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to you. But mark how they must prepare themselves, who would approach the Lord,
Cleanse your hearts ye sinners, and purify your hands ye double minded. Ja.
4.8, 9.

The Jews before the Passover cleansed all their Vessels, which they feared
might have Leaven sticking to them, burnt all the Leaven they could find, and
cursed all in their houses whether found or not found; as their Antiquaries
inform us. Truly when thou go to the Supper, it concerns thee to cleanse
thy soul of the leaven of sin; by an high indignation at it, and hearty
resolution against it. Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new
lump; for Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the
feast not with the old leaven, nor with the leaven of malice and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Reader, It
would be a trampling under foot the blood of Christ, and counting it as an
unholy thing, if thou should go to the Table of the Lord with love to any
lust; For the Lords sake, and for thy souls sake, take heed of padling in the
blood of Christ as if it were Kennel water. Alas, thou do little less if
thou partakest of the Sacrament without anger and indignation against every
sin. True repentance implies an aversion from sin. If they shall humble
themselves, and turn from their evil ways, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. The burnt Child will
dread the fire. The man that has smarted for surety-ship, will by no means be
persuaded to come again into bonds; Urge him to it never so much, he will tell
you he has paid dear for it, and therefore you must excuse him; he is
resolved, nay has vowed against it, and though he be never so much entreated,
is still inexorable. The Christian who has truly repented, is so sensible of
the weight of sin and wrath of God, that he is resolved never more to meddle
with those burning coals; Alas they are too heavy for him: David that had
repented of his sin, would not drink of that water which had but been the
occasion of hazarding men's lives, though before he could drink the blood of
Vriah. Penitent Peter though before he was so full of self confidence, that he
preferred himself before the other Apostles; Though all deny thee, yet will not
I; yet afterward, though occasion were offered him of commending himself,
forbears it; Peter, love thou me more then these? Lord thou know I love
thee. He says, not more then these. O Reader, It was Esaus expression, The
days of mourning for my father are coming, and then I will slay my brother
Jacob; so say thou, The days of mourning for the death of my dear Savior, and
everlasting father are come, and now I will slay my most beloved lusts; now
will I be revenged of them for their endeavor to rob me of my spiritual
birthright, to wrong me of my eternal blessing.

This repentance exercised before the Sacrament, would prepare thy stomach for
the Feast, it would cleanse it, and cause it to savor the dainties there; It
would make the hungry, and hunger is the best sauce. Artaxerxes flying for his
life, fed on barley bread, and a few dried figs, and said, It was the best meal
that ever he made.

When thou have thus prepared thy stomach for this heavenly Banquet, take heed
of relying upon thy pains, and preparation, either for a right performance of
the duty, or for thine acceptance in the Ordinance. Many a poor creature I am
persuaded goes with much humiliation for sin, and comes away without any
consolation, because they made a Savior of their sorrow. Praise thy Physician,
if he have made the sensible of thy sickness, but do not provoke him by making
thy pain to be the plaster for thy cure. Alas, thy preparation it self needs
much pardon; if God should deal strictly with thee, thy prayers would be found
dung, thy sighs unsavory breath, thy very tears puddle water. Reflect on them
thy self, and compare them with the Law of God, and thou will find cause to
pray over thy prayers, to weep over thy tears, to be ashamed of thy shame, and
to abhor thy self for thy self abhorrency.

Do not think with thy self, I have examined my heart faithfully, and find that
I do not come short of the grace of God; I have acknowledged mine iniquities,
and been sorrowful for my sins, and therefore I cannot miscarry at this
Sacrament. Such a trusting of thy self, would be a tempting of thy Savior, and
would certainly hinder the success of the Sacrament: It would be to thee, as
the cutting off Sampsons locks was to him: Judge 16.20.
He thought to have gone forth as at other times, and shake himself: And he
wist not that the Lord was departed from him. Thou may think after such
self-confidence, to go to the Lords Supper as at other times; but alas, what
will thou do? for the Lord will depart from thee; and then what sport will
Satan and sin, those uncircumcised ones make with thee?

Reader, let me persuade thee when thou have been diligent in the trial of thy
spiritual estate, and have with many tears bewailed the pollution of thy
nature, and transgressions of thy life, to cast thy self wholly upon Jesus
Christ for assistance in the duty. As Jehosaphat when he had 50000. men ready
Armed for the battle, cried out, O Lord our God, we have no might against this
great company, 2 Chronicles. 20.6
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are unto thee. So after thou have
made the greatest preparation possible, as beleiving the weight and worth of
the supper, the purity and Majesty of the Master of the Feast, do thou look up
to Christ and say, Lord, I have no ability, no might for this great supper, for
a right performance of this great ordinance, neither know I what to do but my
eyes are unto thee. When Asa had an Army of two hundredand fourscore thousand
men of valor to fight with the Ethiophians, he prays and trusts to God, as
if he had not one man. Lord, it is nothing for thee to help, whether with many,
or with them that have no power. Help us O Lord God, for we rest on thee, 2 Chronicles. 8, 1.
and in thy name we go against this great multitude. So do thou say, Lord, I
have no power for this holy Supper; help me O Lord my God, for I rest on thee,
and in thy name I go to this great and weighty Ordinance. Truly could thou
after all the provision thou have made, disclaim it wholly in regard of
dependence, and cast thy self on Christ for assistance, I durst be the Prophet
to foretell a good day. The gaudy flower which stands upon its own stalk, does
quickly wither, when the plain Ivy that depends upon the house and leans on it,
is fresh and green all the year; He that trusts to his own legs in this duty,
is as sure to fall as if he were down already; the weak child walks safest
that all the way holds by, and hangs upon its parent.

If thou were now going to receive, be advised to write after David's Copy. He
looked up to God, both for assistance and acceptance; I will go in the strength
of the Lord, I will make mention of thy righteousness, yea of thine only, Psa.
71.16. Let thy practice be suitable to his, when thou go out of thy house;
And let thy prayer be the same with the Spouses when thou art entering into Gods
house; O then look up to heaven and cry mightily, Awake thou Northwind, and
come O South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out. Let my
beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4. ult.

CHAP. XIX. How a Christian may exercise himself to godliness at the Table.
I Come to the second particular about the Lords Supper, Secondly,
and that is thy behavior at the Table, or in the time of receiving. In
reference to which I would advise thee, 1. To mind the suitable subjects which
are to be considered at it. 2. To observe the special graces which are to be
exercised in it. There are three principal subjects of meditation when thou
approachest the Table, in order to the three graces which must then be acted.
The Subjects of meditation are Christ's passion, his affection, and thy own
corruptions. The three graces are Faith, Love, and godly sorrow. Christ's death
is sure footing for Faith. Paul never desired better, 1 Cor. 2.2. it is not
only an elect and precious, but a tried stone and a sure foundation on which
whosoever beleiveth shall never be confounded. Isa. 28.16. Faith picks
excellent food from this heavenly carcass. The love of Christ displayed in his
death, causes and calls forth the love of a Christian. Faith brings the
soul (that is like a dead coal) near to the live coals of Gods burning love, in
giving his only Son, and Christ's burning love in giving himself, and by these
it is turned into fire, all in a flame of love; as the Echo answers the
voice, it returns the love it receives. Our own sins meditated on, stit up
the third grace, which is godly sorrow. Though indeed this liquor will run from
any of the three Vessels, if they be but peirced. When Christ hung upon the
Cross under the weight of Gods wrath, water came out of his sides as well as
blood. Who can think of his sufferings without sorrow? and of his blood without
tears? His love in its heat, may well thaw the most frozen spirit; but sin the
cause of his sufferings will like a knife cut and prick to the heart indeed; but

First, I begin with the subjects of meditation, and among them in the first
place with the passion of Christ.

First, Meditate now on the suffering of thy Savior; the wound of Christ out
of which came precious balsom to heal all thy sinful sores, ought never to be
forgotten; but the remembrance of them is never so seasonable as at a
Sacrament. One end of the institution of this Ordinance, was the commemoration
of Christ's death; As often as ye eat this brrad, and drink this cup, ye show
forth the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27. The Sacrament is a lively
crucifix, wherein Jesus Christ is evidently set forth, crucified before thine
eyes. When thou see the bread and wine consecrated and set apart, consider
how God the Father did from eternity set a part his only Son for his bloody
passion, and thy blessed redemption. Consider he was a Lamb slain before the
foundation of the World. When thou see the bread and wine upon the Table,
consider that as the Corn was ground in the Mill, to make that bread, and the
grapes squezed to make that wine, so thy Savior was beaten in the Mill, and
Wine Press of his Fathers wrath, before he could be meat indeed, and drink
indeed, to nourish thee unto life everlasting. When thou see the bread broken
in pieces, think how the body of Christ was broken for thine iniquities. It
pleased the Lord to bruise him (as Spice is beaten small in a mortar with a
Pessel, so the word signifies, Isa. 53.10.) Well might he cry out, I am feeble
and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart, Psa.
38.8. When thou see the Wine poured out, meditate on his precious blood,
which was shed for many, for the remission of sins. O consider his wounds and
his words, I am poured out like water, and all my bones are ont of joint, my
heart is like Wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels, Psa: 22.14. Consider
the doleful tragedy which he acted from first to last; Meditate on his
incarnation. For the Son of God to become the Son of man; for him that lived
from all eternity to be born in time; for him that thundereth in the clouds, to
cry in the Cradle; for him that created all things, to become a creature, is a
greater suffering, then if all the men and Angels in this and the other World
were crowded into an atome, or turned into nothing. This was the first and
greatest step of his humiliation. Consider the manner of his birth; he was
born, not of some great Princes, but of mean and indigent Parents; not in a
Royal Palace, but in a place where Beggars and Beasts are entertained, a
Stable; he was no sooner born, but sought after to be butchered. He fled for
his life in his very swaddling clouts, and was an early Martyr indeed. When he
grew up, though he was of ability to have swayed the Scepter of all the Empires
in the World, to have instructed the greatest Potentates and Counselors in
the mysteries of wisdom and knowledge; though to him Adam and Solomon, yea and
Angels themselves were fools; yet he lived privately with his supposed Father
many years, and suffered his deity to be hid as light in a Dark Lanthorn near
thirty years, save that once it darted a little out, when at twelve years of
age he disputed, which confuted the great Rabbis of the Jews, Luke 2.46.

When he entered upon his public Ministry, he is no sooner ascended the Stage,
but all the Devils in Hell appear against him, and he is forced to fight hand
to hand with them for forty days together, and when they left him, they did not
take their leave, but departed only for a season, Luke 4.13. His whole life
was a living death. How poor was he, when he was fain to work a miracle to pay
his Tax! The Foxes had holes, and the Birds of the Air had Nests, but the Son
of man had not where to lay his head, though he were heir of all things, Mat.
8.20. What did he suffer in his name, when the worst words in the mouths of the
Jews were thought not bad enough for him? He is called the Carpenters Son, a
Glutton, a Drunkard, a Blasphemer, a friend of Publicans and sinners, a
Samaritan, a Devil, nay the Prince of Devils. What hunger, and thirst, and
weariness did he undergo? He that feeds others with his own flesh, had many an
hungry belly. He that gave others that water of which whosoever drinks shall
thirst no more, had his own veins sucking and paining him for thirst. He that
is himself the only Ark for the weary Dove to fly too for rest, did himself
take many a wearisom step, and travail many a tiresome journey. Well might the
Prophet call him, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with greifs, though he had
suffered no more then what is already written, but all this was but the
beginning of his sorrows. The dregs of the cup were at the bottom. Doubtless
many an aching heart had he (as a Woman with Child) beforehand when he thought
of the bitter pangs, sharp throws, and hard labor, which he was to suffer at
the close of his life. O Friend, Remember this Son of David and all his
troubles; but to come to his end which is specially represented in this
Ordinance; I will take him in the Garden, where he felt more then I can write
or think. Consider his body there, it was all over in a goar blood; Ah what
suffered he when he did sweat clods of blood. To sweat blood is against nature,
much more in a cold season, most of all when he was full of fear and terror,
then the blood retreats to the heart to guard it, and to be guarded by it.

But behold, Reader, thy Savior for thy sake, and under the weight of thy
sins, did sweat blood in a cold night, when he was exceedingly afraid: Ah, who
would not love such a Savior; and who would not loath sin! But the sufferings
of his body were nothing, to the sufferings of his soul; these were the soul of
his sufferings. Observe his expression, My soul is exceeding sorrowful: My soul
is sorrowful unto death. Unto death; not only Extensively, seventeen or
eighteen hours, till death ended his life; but chiefly Intensively, such sorrow
as the pangs of death bring, surely far greater. Again, Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me: Wise and valiant men do not complain of
nothing. Ah, how bitter was that cup which Valor and Resolution it self seemed
unwilling to drink! The two most tormenting passions which are, Fear and Grief,
did now seize upon him in the highest degree: He began to be sorrowful, and
very heavy, says Matthew, Chap. 26. verse. 37. He began to be sore amazed, and
very heavy, says Mark, Chap. 14. verse. 33.

Reader, follow him farther; One Disciple sells him at the price of a Slave;
another Disciple forsweareth him; all of them for sake him, and fly; the greedy
Wolves lay hold on this innocent Lamb; the bloody Jews apprehend him, bind his
hands like a Thief, and hale him away to the High Priest; then they hire
persons to belie Truth it self: But when their testimony was insufficient, upon
his own most holy confession, a sentence of condemnation is past upon him.
Consider now how the servants smite his blessed cheeks with their fists, and
spit on that beautiful face with their mouths, which Angels counted their honor
to behold; the Masters flout him with their scornful carriage, and mock him
with their petulant language: He must be the sink into which they fling all
their silth. Afterward they carry him to Pilate; he sends him to Herod;
Herod with some scorns and scoffs sends him back: Thus is he, like a
foot-bal, spurned up and down between those inhumane wretches: Pilate tears his
flesh with wounds and wails, and presents him to the people with a crown of
Thorns on his head, to move pity; the people thirsting after his blood, can by
no words be persuaded, by no means be prevailed with, to let this innocent Dove
escape. Though he be put in competition with a Murderer, yet the Murderer is
preferred before him; and as the worst of the two, he is at last condemned as a
seditious person, and a Traitor against Caesar's Crown and Dignity, to be
crucified without the gate, lest the City should be polluted with his blood.
Now, Reader, come along like the beloved Disciple, and behold thy Savior
bearing his own Cross, and going to the place of execution, to dye the death of
a Slave; for no Freeman was ever crucified; therefore Julian in derision called
him, The staked God. He is no sooner come to the dismal place of dead men's
skulls, but they tear off his clothes (and some think skin and all) glued to
his back with their bloody scourgings. Now they stretch his body, as cloth with
tenters, and rack it so that his bones start out of his skin: ( I may tell all
my bones, Psalm. 22.17.) in nailing his two hands to the two horns, and his feet
(those parts so full of nerves and sinews, and so the most sensible of any
parts of the body) to the stump of the Cross: (They dug my hands and my
feet:) and hang him up between two Thieves, as the most notorious Malefactor of
the three: He was numbered among the Trangressors. His bloody, watching,
fasting, scorched, wracked body, is oppressed with exquisite pain, and his
anguish so vehement, that he cries out, I thirst; to quench which, they give
him vinegar and gall, and spice it with a scoff to make it relish the better;
Let us see whether Elias will come and save him. But Oh! who can imagine what
he suffered in his soul, when he hung under the weight of men's revenge, Devils
rage, the Laws curse, and the Lords wrath! Men revile him, wagging their heads,
and saying, Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days,
save they self: He saved others, himself he cannot save: To him that was
afflicted, pity should have been shown; but they added affliction to the
afflicted, and forsook the fear of the Almighty. All the Devils in Hell were
now putting forth their utmost power and policy (for this was their hour, and
the power of darkness) to increase his sufferings, that if possible, they might
provoke him to sin, thereby to have separated his Humane nature from his
Divine, that it might have perished eternally, and all mankind with it; but
the sting of his death is yet behind. The head of that arrow which pierced his
heart indeed, was the frown of his Father: That his Kinsmen, the Jews, whom he
came to sanctify and redeem; (for he was the glory of his people Israel)
should deliver him up to be crucified, was not a small aggravation of his
misery: That his Apostles that had been eyewitnesses of his miracles, and
earwitnesses of his Oracles (to whom he had spoken so pathetically, Will ye
also forsake me? and who had told him so resolutely, We will go with thee into
prison, and to death, Luke 22.33. Mat. 26.35.) should now in his greatest
extremity turn their backs upon him, added some more gall to his bitter cap:
That his Mother should stand by the Cross weeping, and have her soul pierced
through with the sword of his sufferings, was far from being an allay to his
sorrows; but that his Father, of whom he had often boasted, It is my Father
that honoreth me, My Father loves me, I and my Father are one, should now in
his low estate, in his day of adversity, in his critical hour, not only not
help him, and leave him alone, as an harmless Dove, amongst so many ravenous
Vultures, to contest with all the fury of Earth and Hell; but also pour out the
Vials of his own Wrath upon him, and (though the Union was not dissolved, yet)
suffer the beams, the influences to be restrained, that he might fully bear the
curse of the Law, and feel the weight of sin; this was the hottest fire in
which the Paschal Lamb was roasted; this caused that Heartbreaking,
Soulcutting, Heaven-piercing expression, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken
me! O how! how justly might he have cried out with Joh. Have pity upon me my
friend, have pity upon me, for the hand (not only of my Enemies and my
friends, of multitudes of men, and of Legions of Devils, but the hand) of God
has touched me. How truly might the Husband have taken up his Spouses
lamentation. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the
Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger. Ah who can write or
read such a tragedy with dry eyes.

Friend, when thou art at the Sacrament, think of these sufferings, and believe
it, they will make work among thy sins. When thou take the cup of wine, do
not forget the cup of Wormwood, which thy Savior drunk for thy sake; he drank
of the Brook in the way, he drank the cup of his Fathers wrath infinitely
imbittered with the curse of the law, that thou might drink the cup of
blessing. At the Table obey his own command, Do this in remembrance of me.

Secondly, Meditate on the affection of Christ. We will remember thy love more
then wine, says the Spouse, when thou see the wine; think of that love which
is better then wine. Belevie it, if ever there were a love-feast, this is it.
Men testify their love in bestowing food on their hungry friends, but ah what
love was that which gave his blessed body and precious blood to feed his
starving enemies. He that considers what Christ suffered, and for whom, may
well think he was little else, but a lump of love; His compassion is infinitely
visible in his passion. What love was that which moved him to lay down his life
for thee! Friend, if ever thou had hard thoughs of Christ, take a view of him
in the former subject of meditation, and consider whether his heart be not set
upon sinners, when he shed his heart blood for their souls. The redness of the
fire discovers its heat. O how did the redness of this Rose of Sharon, the
blood which issued from his head, and back, and hands, and feet, and heart, and
whole body, speak his burning, his fiery love! Well might the Apostle John join
and pair those Turtle-Doves; Who has loved us and washed us in his blood, Rev.
1.5. In every drop of his blood there is an Ocean of love. Well might the
Apostle Paul p^oduce this as an undeniable testimony of the truth of his love,
Who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. His bleeding passion was such
a full demonstration of his dearest affection, as the whole World never saw the
like before, nor ever shall again. In it his love was dissected and ripped up;
you may tell all its bones. Judas gave him to the Jews, out of love to money;
The Jews gave him to Pilate to becondemned, out of love to envy; Pilate gives
him to the Soldiers to be Crucified, out of love to self interest; but Christ
gave himself out of pure love to save souls. The great and glorious God does
things that are singularly eminent for the manifestation of his attributes.
When he would evidence his power, he produces with a word the whole creation
out of the barren Womb of nothing; He did but will it, and the whole world
presently started into a being. By this he often proves his deity, Isa. 45.12.
Isa. 43.11. As shadows represent the figure of those bodies from whence they
are derived, so do the creatures manifest the power of their Maker.

When he would manifest his Justice, he lays the dark vault of Hell, and
lays in, and storeth it with fire, and brimstone, and chains, and blackness
of darkness, and gnawing worms, and pure wrath, and Devils, and all the
instruments of eternal death, Romans 9.22. When he would make known his wisdom,
he finds out a fit Mediator, and thereby reconcileth those attributes which
before were at ods, his justice and his mercy. When man was fallen, justice
pleaded for his deserved damnation, according to the threatenings of the law;
mercy pleads for his gracious salvation, he being deluded by the Devil. Now
it would have non-plust the heads of all the men and Angels in the World, had
they been united in a consultation, to have found out a way to satisfy both
the demands of justice, and the entreaties of mercy; but God did it; he causes
mercy and justice to meet together, pity and righteousness to kiss each other;
therefore the Mediator is called the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.14 and the
finding out this way is called the manifold wisdom of God, or the embroydered
Wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. Its an allusion to a curious piece of Needle Work,
wherein there are various expressions of Art. So in this way of man's recovery,
there are various and curious expressions of divine wisdom. But when God would
proclaim his love, that attribute which like Oil swimmeth at the top of them
all, which is most in favor, which he delights so exceedingly in, what will
he do? Why, he lays down his life, greater love then this has no man, then
that a man lay down his life for his friends. Joh. 15.13. Jacob showed his love
to Rachel by enduring the heat of the day, and the cold of the night for her.
But Jesus showed his love to his beautiful Spouse, by undergoing the cursed,
painful, and shameful death of the Cross for her. O what love was that? It is
storied of the Pelican, that when her young ones are stung with some poisonous
Serpent, she beats her breast with her beak, till the warm blood gusheth out,
which they suck and recover. We were all stung mortally by the Old Serpent the
Devil, but behold the love of this heavenly Pelican, he lets out his heart
blood to recover us. In his birth and life he manifested his love, the midst of
that Chariot in which he drew his Spouse before, was paved with love; but his
death wrote his love in the greatest Print, in the largest Character, though all
in red letters, for his whole body was the book, his precious blood was the
ink, the nails were the pens, the contents of it from the beginning to the end
are Love, Love. There is nothing else to be read, but Love, Love in this was
manifest the Love of God (says the Apostle, 1 John 4.9.) His love before was
glorious, yet hid as the Sun under a cloud, but at his death it did shine forth
in its Meridian Splendour, in its noonday brightness, with such hot beams and
refreshing rays, that every one must needs take notice of it. The Jews say of
Esdras, that if the Lamp of Love were quite extinct, it might be lighted again
at his brain: How true is this of Christ? If Love were quite lost amongst all
the Creatures, all might be found in Jesus Christ: His name is love, his nature
is love, all his expressions were love, all his actions were love, he brought
love, he bought love, he preached love, his lips dropped love; he practiced love,
he lived in love, he was sick of love, nay he dyed for love; 'twas love that
took upon him our natures, 'twas love that walked in our flesh, 'twas love that
went up and down doing good, 'twas love that took our infirmities; 'twas love
that gave sight to the blind, speech to the dumb, ears to the deaf, life to
the dead; 'twas love that was hungry, and thirsty, and weary; 'twas love that
was in a bloody agony; 'twas love that was sorrowful unto his own death, and my
life; 'twas love that was betrayed, apprehended, derided, scourged, condemned,
and crucified; 'twas love that had his head pierced with thorns, his back with
cords, his hands and feet with nails, and his side with a spear; 'twas love
that cried out, Weep not for me, weep for your selves: Father, forgive them,
they know not what they do: Love left a glorious Crown, and love climbed a
shameful Cross: O dearest Savior, whither did thy love carry thee!

Reader, I could lose my self in this pleasant Maze of Christ's love: Methinks
thy heart should be ravished with the sense of this love. The truth is, it is a
bottomless love, none can sound it; the Apostle might well call it, A known
unknown love, Ephesians. 3.19. It is well thou can find it, but I am sure thou
can not fadom it. One Disciple may show his love to another, by giving a cup
of cold water; but the Master showed his love to his Disciples, by broaching
his heart to give them a cup of warm blood. The Sacraments, as Calvin
observes, did flow out of the sides of Christ: When the Soldier pierced his
side, there came out Water (for Baptism) and Blood for the Supper.

Reader, when thou beholdest the broken bread, and remembrest the bruised body
of Christ, do not forget his love, which is the best sauce to thy meat. I must
tell thee, though there be never so many dishes at the Table, this love is the
Banquet. Consider his willingness to be wounded for thee, because his heart was
so deeply wounded with love to thee. Thou have heard of such indignities and
injuries offered to him, as the Sun himself was ashamed to behold, and hid
himself from them; yet Christ was ready for them, and willing to them: The Lamb
of God did not struggle, when he was led to the slaughter, but did bear his own
Cross: He was his own Priest, as well as his own Sacrifice and Altar. His death
was violent, in regard of others; but voluntary, in regard of himself: He cried
to his Father, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.4. When his sinless
nature had a reluctance against it (though when he was in a bloody sweat) he
soon corrects it with, Not my will, but thy will be done. He went to the place
which Judas knew, John 18.2. He struck them (that came to apprehend him) down,
to show that he could, if he had pleased, have struck them dead. Rather then
they shall want proof for his condemnation, he will confess himself guilty of
the charge: He might (if he had listed) have commissionated twelve Legions of
Angels for his Lifeguard, but he forbore it: He laid down his life, he gave
himself: He gave up the Ghost: He had a Baptism to be baptized with, and he
longed to have it accomplished. But Friend, what think thou was the lump of
sugar which did so sweeten this cup (notwithstanding all its bitter
ingredients) to make it go down so glib and pleasant? truly nothing but love.
Love to Dinah made Sechem willing to be circumcised; love to Christians, made
Christ willing to bleed, and be buffeted, and crucified. The Mother can toil
and moil all day with her child, and count it a pleasure (when another had
rather go to plough all day;) but what is the reason? nothing but her love.
Jesus Christ delighted in the work of man's Redemption; I delight to do thy
will, O God, which would have broke the backs of the very Angels; and why?
because of his love.

It is observed, the myrrh which is let out by the incision of the tree, is
precious; but that which flows of its own accord, is most choice and
precious. Christ's veins were indeed opened by others incision, when Pilat
scourged his back, and the nails his hands and feet; but one drop of this blood
is more worth then millions of World; for even at these times he bled
voluntarily, as well as in the Garden, when the myrrh of his blood dropped of
its own accord: O, of what infinite value is his blood! O, how much did he
love his, when the very oil which consecrated him to those unknown sorrovvs,
was the oil of gladness to him! Remember this love more then wine:

Thirdly, Meditate on thy corruptions: As his love was the inward moving
cause; so thy sins were the outvvard procuring cause of his sufferings: He was
wounded for thy transgressions, he was bruised for thine iniquities, the
chastisement of thy peace was upon him, Isa. 53.5. When thou art at the
Sacrament, which fitly represents Christ's sufferings, consider with thy
self, What was that which brought the blessed Savior into such a bleeding
condition! It was my sin, I was the Judas which betrayed him, the Jew which
apprehended him, the Pilate that condemned him, and the Gentile which
crucified him: My sins were the thorns which pierced his head, the nails
which pierced his hands, and the spear which pierced his heart: 'Tvvas! that
put to death the Lord of life: He dyed for my sins; He was made sin for me, who
knew no sin; his blood, is my balm; his Golgatha, is my Gilead. O what a
subject is here for meditation! He suffered in my stead, he bore my sins in his
body on the tree, he took that loathsome purging physic for the diseases of my
soul: When he was in the Garden in his bloody agony, grovelling on the ground,
there was no Judas, no Pilate, no Jew, no Gentile there, to cause that
unnatural sweat, or to make his soul sorrowful unto death, but my pride, my
unbeleif, my hypocrisy, my atheism, my blasphemy, my unthankfulness, my
carnal-mindedness, they were there and caused his inward bleeding sorrows, and
outward bloody sufferings, (Ah what an heavy weight was my sin to cause such a
bloody sweat in a frosty night!) My dissimulation was the traiterous kiss; My
ambition the thorny crown. My drinking iniquities like water made him drink
Gall and Vinegar; My want of tears caused him to bleed; My forsaking my Maker,
made him to be forsaken of his Father. Because the members of my body were
instruments of iniquity, therefore the members of his body were objects of such
cruelty; because my soul was so unholy, therefore his soul was so exceeding
heavy. O my soul what have thou done!

We do not say the Executioner kills a man for theft or murder; but his theft or
murder, they hang him; so in this case, it was not so much the Jews, or
Soldiers (for they were the Executioners) that put Christ to death, as our
thefts and murders, and breaches of Gods Law, which were imputed and laid to
his charge.

There is a story of a King of France named ladoveyus, that when he was
converted to Christianity, one day hearing Remigius the Bishop reading the
Gospel of our Saviors passion, he presently fell into this passionate
expression, O that I had been but there with my Frenchmen, I would have cut
all their throats; little considering that his and others iniquities were
Christ's greatest and most cruel enemies. Reader when thou art at the Table,
think of those sins which caused such sufferings. Consider the deepness of that
stain, which the blood only of God could wash out. Ah what a sickness is sin,
when nothing less then the blood of the Son of God can heal it!

Secondly, as at the Table some Subjects must be considered, so some graces
must be exercised; A Sacrament is a special season, a spring time for those
trees of Gods own planting, to bud, blossom, and put forth their fruit. Now
Reader, if ever, rouse up thy spirit, and stir up the gifts of God which are in
thee. Call aloud to thy graces which may possibly be sleeping, as David. Psa.
57.8. Awake my glory, awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake early.
Awake my graces, can ye not watch with my dearest Savior one hour? Awake my
faith, love, and Repentance, I my self will awake presently. It is not the
Ha^wk which sits hood-winkt on the fist, but the seeing, flying Hawk which
does the service, The Clock which stands still, is of no use; it is the
going, moving Clock which attains its end: Grace acted will now do thee eminent
service, and help thee to attain the end of the Sacrament.

First, Act faith; Dormit fides and dormit Christus, says Austin; If faith
sleeps, Christ sleeps. Call forth first that Commander in chief, and then
the private Soldiers, the other graces will all follow. Faith must be the eye
whereby thou see Christ, Zach 12.10. They shall see him whom they have
peirced, and mourn; Faith is the mouth by which thou feedest on Christ, John
6.53. Faith is the feet by which thou go to Christ, John 6.35. Faith may say
to thee as Christ did, Without me thou can do nothing; without me thou can
do nothing for thy own welfare, nothing for Gods honor at this ordinance; It
is said of the Indian Gymnosophists that they will lie all day upon their backs
gazing on the beauty of the natural Sun. Friend, at this Ordinance if at any
time of thy life, view the beauty of this true Sun. As Pilate when he had
scourged him in such a bloody, barbarous manner, brings him forth to the Jews,
with, Behold the man. So when thou considerest the bread and wine, Behold the
man; Behold the broken bruised Savior. A man without faith, like the
unbeleiving lord, sees the plenty, but does not eat of it.

There is a threefold act of Faith to be put forth at a Sacrament. First, Faith
must look out for Christ. Secondly, Faith must look up to Christ for grace.
Thirdly, Faith must take Christ down or receive him and grace.

1. Faith must look out for Christ: Consider that Jesus Christ is the very soul
of the Sacrament; without him it is but the carcass of an Ordinance. Christ and
the Scripture bring comfort; Christ and prayer cause spiritual profit; Accedat
Christus ad elementum, and fiet Sacramentum. Christ and the elements make a
Sacrament. Christ and the Sacrament make a rare feast. Therefore be sure thou
look out for Christ; Rest not in the bread and wine, but look farther. When
thou sit at the Table, let the speech of thine heart be, Saw ye him whom my
soul loves? Turn to God and say as they to Philip, Sir, I would fain see
Jesus; Lord I would fain see Jesus Christ. Let neither word nor prayer nor
elements, nor all things content thee without Christ. As Isaac told his Father;
Father, behold here is the wood and the fire, but where is the Lamb for a burnt
offering? So do thou look up to thy Heavenly Father; Father, behold here is the
Preacher, and here is the Scripture, here is the bread and here is the wine,
but where is the body and blood of my Savior? Lord where is the Lamb for a
Sacrifice? Father, Father, Where is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the World? If the Angels that are present at the Sacrament, should speak to
thee, give them occasion for the same language, which they gave the Woman at
the Sepulcher, We know whom thou seek, thou seek Jesus which was
Crucified: come see the place where the Lord lay. Come see the promise, see the
elements in which the Lord lies, Mat. 28.5, 6.

If the Spirit of God seeing thee so eager and earnest for a sight of Christ,
should put by the hangings, behind which the Lord Jesus hid himself, (purposely
to be sought) and present him to thee with his glorious retinue of graces and
comforts, with the precious fruits of his grievous passion, and bespeak thee
thus, Cheer up poor Christian, behold the Lamb of God; Behold King Jesus with
the Crown of thorns, wherewith his foes crowned him in the day that he was a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with greifs. Behold King Solomon with the crown
wherewith his Father crowned him, in the d^^ of his Espousals, and in the day
of the gladness of his heart. O Friend, what would such a sight be worth to
thee? I am confident thou would value it above all the silver in the World.
Well, be of good comfort, do but look for him, and he will look after thee; Say
to him as the Spouse, Make haste my Beloved, be thou like the Heart and Roe upon
the Mountains of Spices: Make no tarrying, O my God; and doubt not but he will
answer thee almost as he does his Spouse (in a sense of mercy, not of
judgment) Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to thee
according to thy faith.

Reader, act Mary's part, and thou shall meet with Mary's portion. When Mary
went to the Sepulcher, John 20.13. she looks into it, sees the linen, but
not the Lord, and presently falls a weeping: O, says she, they have taken
away my Lord! They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid
him. Jesus Christ could now no longer absent himself; he heard the voice of her
weeping, and gave her a gracious meeting: Mary, says Christ; Rabboni, says
Mary. Now her heart cleaves to him, and her hands clasp about him; and she
hears that golden Message, Go to my brethren, and tell them, I go to my Father,
and your Father: So when thou come to the Table, and see the linen, and
not the Lord Jesus, be not satisfied; O dart up thy complaints to Heaven, Lord,
I came not to see the linen, I came not for the bread and wine, I came to see
Jesus Christ: O Lord! what shall I do? they have taken away my Lord, and I know
not where to find him: Ah Lord, wh^^ is the Word to me without Christ, but as
a conduit without water? and what is the element to me without Christ, but as a
cup without wine? O, what will thou give me, if I go from thy Table Christless!
Thou might be confident that Jesus Christ would hear such sighs, and would
hasten away to bless and kiss thee.

2. Faith must look up to Christ for grace: Look up to Christ as a Treasury of
grace, for the supply of all thy necessities, and put thy hand of faith into
this Treasury, and thou shall take out unsearchable riches. Austin puts the
question, how a Christian may put out a long arm to reach Christ in Heaven? and
answers, Creed and tenuisti; Believe, and thou have taken hold of him. Christ
is a full breast, faith is the mouth which draws and sucketh the breast, and
gets spiritual nourishment out of it. The blessed Savior is a precious and
deep mine; but faith is the instrument whereby we dig the gold out of it. As
the Spanish Ambassador said of his Masters Treasury, in comparison of that
Treasury of S. Mark in Venice, In this, among other things, my Masters Treasury
differs from yours, in that my Masters Treasury (alluding to his Indian
Mines) has no bottom, as I see yours to have: For thy comfort know, that the
riches in Christ are inexhaustible, and his bags are bottomless: He can supply
all thy needs, Philip. 4.13.

When thou art at this Ordinance, look on Christ as a Fountain running over
with the Water of Life; and the Sacrament as a Channel cut out by Christ
himself to convey Living Water to thy soul. Thou art diseased; go in this
Ordinance to Christ as a Physician to heal thee. Thou art an indigent beggar go
to Christ's Door, I mean the Sacrament, with an expectation of a large dole. Do
not sit down in despondency (as the Patriarchs in a scarcity of food;) but
since thou have heard there is corn in Egypt, bread enough in thy Fathers
house, sufficiency of grace in Jesus Christ, go make haste to this son of
Joseph, who is Lord of the Country, and has the command of all the store
houses in the Land, and will load thee with more then thou can desire. Are
thy wants many? he has infinite wealth. Have thou no Money to buy, no Merits
to offer? why, he sells without money, and without price: They that bring
Money, have it returned back in their sacks, for he takes none: Whosoever will,
may drink of the Water of Life freely, Revel. 22.17.

The Sacrament is as a Conduit, which receives water from the River; therefore
when thou have brought the Vessel of thy soul to the Conduit, thy work must be
by faith to turn the Cock, and then it will run freely, and fill thy Vessel; be
sure that thou mind the promise, This is my Body: This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood. Thy faith will be celestial fire to extract the
quintessence and spirits of the Promise.

3. Faith must receive Christ, and apply him to thy soul; When thou put
forth the hand of thy body to take the bread and wine, do thou put forth the
hand of faith to receive the body and blood of Christ. This is one principal
act of Faith, like Joseph of Arimathea, to take Jesus down from his Cross, and
lay him in the new Tomb of thine heart; Like Thomas, put thy finger of faith
into his side, and cry out, My Lord, and my God; Be not discour aged O penitent
soul. Are thy sins many? His mercy is free. Are thy sins weighty? His merits
are full. Thou come for bread, and will thy Savior give thee a stone? He
took notice of thy ferious preparation for this Ordinance, and will he
frustrate thine expectation at it? Did he ever send hungry soul empty away? The
law of man provides for the poor in purse, and will not the Gospel of Christ
provide for the poor in spirit? Is not his commission to bind up the broken
hearted? and can he be unfaithful? Why should thou mistrust truth it self?
Let me say to thee, as the Disciples to the blind man, Be of good cheer, he
calls for thee. See how he casts his eyes upon thee (with a look of love)
as once upon Peter. Observe he stretches out his Arms wide to embrace thee.
He boweth down his head to kiss thee. He cries to thee as to Zacheus, I must
abide at thy house, in thy heart to day. O make haste to receive him, and make
him a feast by opening the doors of thy soul, that the King of Glory may enter
in. Say to Christ, Lord, though I am unworthy that thou should come under my
roof, yet thou art so gracious as to knock at the door of my heart, and to
promise if I open, that thou will come in and sup with me, (and then call to
him as Laban to Abraham's Steward) Come in thou blessed of the Lord, why
stand thou without? I have prepared lodging for thee. Genesis 24.

Truly Reader, should thou having mourned unfeignedly for thy sins, now by
unbeleif hang off from thy Savior, thou woulst much dishonor him, and
disadvantage thy self. Christ's greater things are for them that believe: If
thou will now believe, thou shall see the glory of God. I am very consident, if
thou had been by the Cross (broken heart) when thy Savior suffered, and
should have kneeled down before him, and said, Dearest Savior, Why art thou
now wrestling with the wrath of Heaven, and rage of Hell? He would have
answered, To satisfy (poor soul) for thy sins. Again, Why do thou dye such a
cursed death? He would have said, To take the curse of the law from thy back,
that so thou might inherit the blessing. Once more, Let not my Lord be
angry, and I will speak this once; Blessed Redeemer, Why did thou cry out I
thirst, and drink Gall and Vinegar? Thou might have heard such a reply, To
assure thee, Thirsty sinner, that I am sensible of thy thirst, being scorched
with that fury which is due to thy sins, and that thou might drink of that
love which is better then Wine. But stay O weary, thirsty soul but a while, and
by and by thou shall see this side opened, and blood issuing out to quench thy
thirst. O put the mouth of faith to that wound, and what thou shall suck
thence, shall do thee good for ever. Reader, I have read that the Soldier who
peirced Christ's side, was blind, and that the blood flying out upon him
recovered his sight. Sure I am, that this blood sprinkled on thy conscience,
will purge it from dead works, to serve the living God. O therefore bathe thy
soul in this blood; when thou art at the Sacrament, say to God as the Eunuch to
Philip; Here is water, what hinders but I may be Baptized? Lord, here is
blood, here is a fountain, what hinders but I may wash in it? Romans 3.24. 1 John 1.7, Heb. 9.14, Gal. 6.14. Heb. 12.13.
True Lord, my person is unrighteous, but thy blood is justifying blood. My
heart is polluted, but O Christ, thy blood is sanctifying blood. My lusts are
many and strong, but thy blood is mortifying blood. My soul is lost, but
sweetest Savior thy blood is saving blood. This Justifying, Sanctifying,
Saving blood, I drink, I apply for these ends. O let this blood be upon me and
my children for ever.

AWay despair, my gracious Lord does hear,
Though Winds and Wave assault my keel,
He does preserve it, Herbert the bag
he does steer;
Even when the Boat seems most to reel.
Storms are the Triumph of his Art,
Well may he close his eyes, but not his heart.
Have thou not heard what my Lord Jesus did?
Then let me tell thee a strange story?
The God of power, as he did ride
In his Majestic robes of glory,
Resolved to light, and so one day,
He did descend, undressing all the way.
The Stars his tire of light, and rings obtained,
The Clouds his bow, the fire his spear,
The Sky his Azure mantle gained,
And when they asked what he would wear,
He smiled and said as he did go,
He had new clothes a making here below.
When he was come, as travelers are wont,
He did repair unto an Inn;
Both then and after, many a brunt
He did endure to cancel sin,
And having given the rest before,
Here he gave up his life to pay our score.
But as he was returning, there came one
Who ran upon him with a Spear;
He who came hither all alone,
Bringing no man, nor arms nor fear,
Recio'd the blow upon his side,
And straight he turned, and to his Brethren cried,
If ye have any thing to send or write,
(I have no bag, but here is room)
Unto my Fathers hands and sight
(Believe me) it shall safely come;
That I shall mind what you impart,
Look you may lay it very near my heart.
Or if hereafter any of my friends
Will use me in this kind, the door
Shall still be open; what he sends
I will present, and somewhat more,
Not to his hurt; sighs will convey
Any thing to me. Heart-despair away.
2. The second Grace to be called forth is love: And truly if thou have acted
thy faith in his Passion for, and affection to thy soul, I shall not in the
least doubt but thy love to him will play its part. The Creatures (some tell
us) follow the Panther, being drawn after her by her sweet odours: When Jesus
Christ, out of infinite love, offered up himself a Sacrifice for thy sins,
surely the sweet savor thereof may draw thy heart after him: Because of the
savor of thy good ointments, therefore the Virgins love thee, Cant. 1.4. There
is nothing in Christ, but what may well command thy love: He is the fairest of
ten thousand: He is altogether lovely. But his bloody sufferings for thee, and
his blessed love to thee (one would think) are such Loadstones, that if thou
were as cold and hard as steel, would draw thy soul both to desire him, and to
delight in him: Meditate a little more on his love to thee. Publicans and
sinners love their friends who love them; and will thou be worse then Publicans
and sinners? Consider seriously, Jesus Christ loved thee when thou wast in a
loathsome estate, Ezekiel. 16. when thou wast wallowing in thy blood, when no eye
pitied thee, then was his time of love; he passed by thee, and said unto thee,
Live: yea, when thou wast in thy blood, he said unto thee, Live: And will thou
not love him?

Ponder the heat of his love; possibly the greatness of that fire may warm thy
heart, and thou may reflect some heat back again; for indeed, love is a
Diamond, which must be written upon with its own dust. He loves thee as a
servant, surely this is a favor; for he has thousands of glorious Angels, who
count it their honor and happiness to serve him: To be made one of his hired
servants, was the great privilege desired by the Prodigal; Ye call me Lord and
Master, and ye say well, for so I am, John 13.13. but though this may be
somewhat, it is not enough for him. He loves thee as a friend: Ye are my
friends, John 15.15. I have not called you servants, but friends. Friends love
entirely, witness Jonathan and David: Jonanathan loved David as his own soul.
Friendship is one soul in two bodies, says the Philosopher: This is much; but
his love to thee is more then so; he loves thee as his Brother: He is not
ashamed to call them brethren: I will declare thy name unto my brethren, Heb.
2.11. Some Brethren are knit very close in the bond of love. Camh. Brit.
In Queen Elizabeth's Reign, in a fight between the Earl of Kildare, and Earl of
Ter Owen, two of the Earl of Kildares Brethren were slain, which he took so
heavily, that he dyed shortly. Some write, that there is no such love in the
World, as between Foster-Brethren in Ireland: This love is great, but his love
is greater. He loves thee as his child; the stream of love descends most
swiftly from Parents to their children: He shall see his Seed, Isa. 53.10. How
tender is the Mother of her child: Can the Mother forget her child that
sucketh her breast? The Mothers bowels will yern toward her child; the
Mothers breasts will (put her to pain, if not drawn, and thereby) mind her of
her child: But though the Mother may prove a Monster, and like the Ostrich,
leave her young to be destroyed; yet will I not forget thee, says the Lord:
Thou art engraven upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are ever before me,
Isa. 49.13, 14, 15. Children, have you any meat? If not, lo here is my body.
Thou may say of Christ's love to thee, as David of Jonathans, Thy love to me
is wonderful, it far surpasses the love of women; for he loves thee as his
Spouse: Men do, or at least should love their wives above all relations; For
this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his wife. But who
can conceive Christ's love to his Spouse? Thou art all fair my love, thou have
ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse: How fair is thy love my Sister, my
Spouse! Cant. 4.8, 9, 10. The nearest affinity is Spouse, and the nearest
consanguinity is Sister; to show that his affection is like that of the nearest
relations. If this be not enough, Reader, he loves thee as himself, nay above
himself; he did, as it were, hate himself out of love to thee. He denied
himself, displeased himself, and gave himself to be buffeted, scourged,
condemned, wracked, crucified, and to be a sacrifice for thy sins. Well, is it
possible for thee to read of this infinite love without love! When wood has
been laid a sunning, it takes fire presently: Have not thou been so fitted by
the warm hot beams of this Sun, that now upon the very thoughts of Christ, thou
art all in a flame! Truly it would be as great a miracle for thee to be in such
a furnace of love, and not fired with love to him, as for the three Worthies in
Daniel to be in the midst of the fiery furnace and not burnt. Christ loved thee
so unspeakably as thou have read, as a servant, as a friend, as a brother, as a
child, as a wife, as himself, nay above himself, and all this when thon wast a
sinner, without strength, yea his enemy (which threefold gradation the holy
Ghost takes special notice of, Romans 5.6, 8, 10.) and will thou ever give him
cause to complain of thee, as Paul of his Corinthians, the more I love, the
less I am beloved! Love him dearly, love him entirely, love him above all, love
him more then all; say with the Spouse, Stay me with flagons, comfort me with
apples, for I am sick of love; and with holy Brandford, sprinckle thy trencher,
thy food with tears, that thou can love so loving and so lovely a Savior no
more.

3. When thou art at the Table, Exercise repentance; what sorrow for, and anger
against thy sins should the sight of a crucified Savior cause? Some tell us
that if the murderer be brought near and touch the body slain by him, it bleeds
afresh. O when thou (who art indeed the murderer of the Son of God) do touch
and taste his body and blood, should not thou fall a bleeding, a weeping a
fresh; Behold his broken, bleeding body with an eye of faith, and thine eye
cannot but affect thine heart with grief: I am confident thou can not see it
with dry eyes. Was his soul exceeding sorrowful, heavy even unto death for thy
sake, and is not thine, friend for thy sins? Did he drop so much blood, and
can thou drop never a tear? the very rocks were rent at his sufferings, and
is thy heart harder then those stones? Is it possible for the head to be so
pained and peirced, and the members not be affected with it? surely, Deep
calls unto Deep. Deep sufferings in Christ, for deep sorrow in thee, O
Christian. If his body were broken to let his blood out, thy soul may well be
broken to let it in. They shall see him whom they have peirced, and mourn for
him as one that mourns for his only Son. Zach. 10.12.

His love may make (as David's kindness) even a Saul to lift up his voice and
weep. It is so great and so hot a fire, that (one would think) it would distill
water out of thee, were thou never so dry an herb; When Christ sat at Supper in
the Pharisees house, Mary washed his feet with her tears. When Christ and thy
soul are supping together, thou may well weep in remembrance of thy
unkindness and wickedness.

But the chiefest reason why I mention repentance now to be exercised, is not
so much for thy contrition or sorrow for sin (though when the sweet sauce is a
little sharp with Vinegar, the meat will relish the better for it) as for
thine indignation and anger against sin; When thou considerest that thy dearest
Savior in a cold night lay grovelling on the ground all over in a bloody sweat,
that thy best friend in the World was so inhumanely used, so barbarously but
chered, thou should cry out (as David) in a holy passion, As the Lord lives,
the (man, the) sin that has done this thing shall surely be put to death. When
Antonius (after Caesar was Murdered in the Senate house) brought forth his Coat
all bloody, cut, and mangled, and laying it open to the view of the people,
said, Look here is your Emperors Coat; and as the bloody-minded Conspirators
have dealt by it, so have they dealt with Caesar's body; Upon this they were in
an uprore, and cried out to slay the Murderers, and took Brands, and ran to the
Houses of the Conspirators, and burnt them down to the ground, and as they
apprehended the Murderers put them to death. Reader, thou see at the
Sacrament, the wounds and blood of thy blessed Redeemer, the dreadful painful
death which thy Sovereign underwent. O what can thou do less then vow to be
revenged on his Murderers, thy corruptions; and in an holy anger, endeavor
their speedy execution: if thou would have a full sight of sins filth and
sinfulness, go to Mount Calvary, and behold thy Savior hanging upon the Cross,
and good Lord what thoughts will thou have of thy lusts! Physicians in unseemly
convulsions, advise their Patients to look into a glass, that beholding their
deformity, they may strive the more against it. The world never had such a
glass as the sufferings of Jesus Christ, for the discovery of sins loathsome,
ugly features, and its horrid, hideous, hellish face; now how should this light
provoke thee to loath and hate sin! O what Child would not abhor those weapons
which murdered his dearest Father!

It was the glory of Alexander, that as soon as ever he had opportunity, he
slew the Murderers of his Father, upon his fathers Tomb. Truly Reader a
Sacrament day is a special opportunity, and thou will show but little love to
thine everlasting Father, if thou do not now put his Murderers to death, upon
those Monuments of his passion. Now thou art at the Table, think of thy
unthankfulness, ambition, hypocrisy, covetousness, irreligion, and infidelity,
and the rest, how these crucified the Lord of glory, and resolve through the
strength of Christ, that these Hamans shall be all hanged, that these sins
shall be condemned and crucified.

CHAP. XX. What a Christian ought to do after a Sacrament.
I Shall speak to thy duty after the Supper. Thirdly,
Which consists mainly in these two things, Thankefulness and Faithfulness.

1. Thankefulness. After such a Banquet as this is, thou may well give
thanks. The Jews at their Passover, did sing the hundred and thirteenth Psalm
with the five following Psalms, which they called the Great Hallelujah. A
Christian should in every thing and at all times give thanks; but at a
Sacrament, the great Hallelujah must be sung; then God must have great thanks,
then we must with our souls bless the Lord, and with all within us paise his
holy name. O Reader, call upon thy self as Barak and Deborah did; Awake, awake,
Deborah; Awake, awake, Barak, utter a song and lead captivity captive thou son
of Abinoam, Judge. 5. Awake my love, awake my joy, utter a song; a feast is made
for laughter, and wine rejoices the heart of man. Friend, is not this a rare
feast? where is thy cheerful face? Is not here good wine, a cup of Nectar
indeed, the blood of the Son of God? what mirth, what music have thou to this
Banquet of Wines? Anciently it was the beginning and ending of Letters, Gaudete
in Domino, Rejoice in the Lord. It will be an excellent conclusion of this
Ordinance, to rejoice in the Lord. O let thy soul magnisie the Lord, and thy
spirit rejoice in God thy Savior, Luke 1.46, 47.

The cup in the Sacrament is called the Eucharistical cup, or the cup of
blessing; let it be so to thee. Let thy heart and mouth say, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his people, Luke 2.

Can thou think of that infinite love which God manifested to thy soul
without David's return, What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits!
His heart was so set upon thy salvation, His Love was so great to thy soul,
that he delighted in the very death of his Son, because it tended to thy good.
It pleased the Lord to bruise him, Isa. 53.10. Valde delectatus est, Junius
reads it, He was exceedingly delighted in it. Surely the mind of God was
infinitely set upon the recovery of lost sinners, in that (whereas other
Parents (whose love to their children in comparison of his to Christ, is but as
a drop to the Ocean) follow their children to their graves with many tears,
especially when they dye violent deaths) he delighted exceedingly in the
barbarous death of his only Son, in the bleeding of the head, because it
tended to the health and eternal welfare of the members: Friend, what manner of
love has the father loved thee with? He gave his own Son to be apprehended,
that thou might escape; his own Son to be condemned, that thou might be
acquitted; his own Son to be whipped and wounded, that thou might be cured
and healed; yea his own Son to dye a shameful, cursed death, that thou might
live a glorious, blessed life for ever. Glory to God in the highest, peace on
earth, and good will to men. Alas how unworthy art thou of this inestimable
mercy. Thou art by nature a child of wrath as well as others, and had been
now wallowing in sin with the worst in the World, if free grace had not renewed
thee, nay thou had been roaring in Hell at this hour, if free grace had not
repreived thee. Thy conscience will tell thee that thou do not deserve the
bread which springs out of the earth, and yet thou are fed with the bread
which came down from heaven; with Angels food. O infinite love! May not thou
well say with Mephibosheth to David. What is thy servant, that thou should
look upon such a dead dog as I am? For all my fathers house were as dead men
before my Lord, yet did thou set thy servant among them that did eat at thine
own Table; Lord, I was a lost, dead, damned sinner before thee, liable to the
unquenchable fire, and yet thou have been pleased to set me among them that eat
at thine own Table, and feed on thine own Son. O what is thy servant that thou
should take such notice of such a dead dog as I am!

Look abroad in the World, and thou may see others refused, when thou art
chosen; others past by, when thou art called; others polluted, when thou art
sanctified; others put off with common gifts, when thou have special grace;
others fed with the scraps of ordinary bounty, when thou have the finest of the
floor, even the fruits of saving mercy. As Elkanah gave to Peninnah and to all
her sons and Daughters portions, but to Hannah he gave a worthy portion,
because he loved her; So God gives others outward portions, some of the good
things of this life; but to thee O Christian, he gives a Benjamins mess, his
image, his spirit, his son, himself, a worthy portion, a goodly heritage,
because he loves thee.

Others have a little meat, and drink, and wages, but thou have the
inheritance. Others, like Jehosaphats younger Sons have some Cities, some small
matters given them, but thou like the first born, have the Kingdom, the Crown
of glory; others feed on bare elements, thou have the Sacrament; others stand
without doors, and thou art admitted into the presence Chamber; others must fry
eternally in Hell flames, and thou must enjoy falness of joy for evermore. O
give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. To
him that chose thee before the foundation of the World, for his mercy endures
for ever. To him that called thee by the word of his grace, for his mercy, etc.
To him that gave his only Son to dye for thy sins, for his mercy, etc. To him
that entered into a Covenant of grace with thee, for his mercy endures for
ever. To him that has provided for thee an exceeding and eternal weight of
glory; for his mercy endures for ever. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is
good, for his mercy endures for ever.

Remember the poor on that day; Gods bounty to thee in spirituals, may well
provoke thy mercy to others in carnals. The Jews at their Passover released a
Prisoner in remembrance of their deliverance from Egyptian bondage. Surely at
the Lords Supper, when thy heart is warmed with Gods compassion to thee, thy
hand should be enlarged in contribution to the poor, in remembrance of thy
redemption out of slavery to sin and Satan. The Primitive Christians had their
collections for the poor, and the Lords Supper, both on a day, On the first day
of the week: Because the Saints like the wall being then heated by the Sun,
should reflect that heat on the passengers, on others, Acts 20.7. 2 Cor. 16.1.
Thy cup runs over, O let others drink with thee; Thy Charity may make thy
Coffer lighter, but it will make thy crown heavier. It was a notable expression
of one, who having given much away, was like to want, and asked, what she would
do? I repent not of my charity, for what I have lost in one World, I have
gained in another.

2. Faithfulness. The Sacrament is a strong engagement to sanctity; Sacramentum
est juramentum. At the Lords Supper thou take a new Oath of Allegiance to the
King of Saints, whereby every wilful iniquity after it becomes perjury. (...);
Septuam, a Hedge.
The Greek word for an Oath, comes from a word signisieth an Hedge, to show
that an Oath should keep men in, and prevent their wandering out of the field
of Gods word. It is the character of an Harlot, She forgets the Covenant of
her God. Prove. 2.17. I know that the Devil will come to sit with thee after
Supper. Flies love to settle on the sweetest perfumes. When Israel had drunk of
the Rock which followed them (which Rock was Christ) then Amalek fought them.
When Jesus Christ had received the Sacrament of Baptism, then the Devil pursued
him with his fierce assaults. When thou have been at the Table, expect the
Tempter. That subtle theif will hear of the new treasure of grace which is
brought into thy house, thy heart, and will use all his policy and power to
rob thee of it; thy care must be by stronger Bolts and Locks then ordinary, by
greater diligence and watchfulness then before, to secure it.

Surely Reader, If thou did but find the Savior in the Sacrament, thou can
not but fear sin after the Sacrament. Thou have seen what sin cost Christ;
did thou not at the Table see the Lord Jesus hanging on the Cross? Did thou
not thus bespeak thy soul? Look O my soul, who hangs there! Alas, it is thy
dearest Redeemer. See his bloody head, bloody hands, bloody back, belly, his
body all over bloody, But O his bleeding soul! Do thou not hear his
lamentation. My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? What think thou, is
the cause of all this? Ah it is thy sins which is the source of all these
sorrows. And can thou join with them, or love those lusts that hate the Lord?
Can thou wound him whom God has wounded, and crucify the Lord Jesus afresh.
Has not thy Savior suffered enough already! O here is a Medicine instar
omnium, instead of all, to kill those diseases of thy soul. It is said of the
Soldiers of Pompey, that though he could not keep them in the Camp by any
persuasion, yet when Pompey threw himself upon the ground and told them, If ye
will go, ye shall trample upon your General. Then says Plutarch (in the life
of Pompey) they were overcome. Truly if nothing will dissuade thee from sin,
yet this consideration, that it is a trampling upon thy blessed Savior, should
prevail with thee. Though thou should be marching never so furiously, yet (as
Joabs Soldiers, when they saw the dead body of Amasa, stayed their march and
stood still) when thou see the mangled, wounded, peirced, crucified body of
thy Savior, thou should stop and proceed no further.

How many arguments may thou find in this ordinance, to be close in thy
obedience! The greatness of Christ's love calls for graciousness in thy life.
The love of Christ constrains, 2 Cor. 5.14. Other Motives may persuade, but
this compels. If deliverance from the yoke of Pharaoh were such a bond to
obedience, what is deliverance from sin, and wrath, and hell? may not thou
Reader, say with the Jews, After such a deliverance as this, should I again
break thy Commandments, woulst thou not be angry with me till thou have
consumed me? Ezr. 9.13. They that receive such courtesies (if any men the
World) sell their liberty, and ought to be Christ's servants, (...) Friend, has
God wiped off the old score? and will thou run again in debt? did Christ speak
peace to thee at the Table, and will thou turn again to folly? O Reader, when
thou art tempted to sin, say with the Spouse, I have washed my feet, how shall
I defile them? I have washed my soul, how shall I pollute it with sin? I have
given my self wholly to God before Angels and men, and how can I do this great
wickedness and sin against my God, against my Savior, against my Covenant.
There is a beast (some write) which if she be feeding, and does but turn her
head about, forgeteth what she was doing. O do not thou after thou have fed on
the bread of life forget what thou wast doing; but as at the Sacrament thou
have remembered Christ's death, so do it after by dying to sin all the days of
thy life. O do not use this ordinance, as Papists do the Popes Indulgences, to
purchase a new license to sin. Judas went from the Supper to betray his Master;
Absalom as arrant a dissembler as he was, pretended to hate such ingratitude;
Is this thy kindness to thy friend (says he to Hushai) why have thou left him?
when thou art by any finister carriage departing from Christ, give conscience
leave to ask thee, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Ah why do thou leave
him, and serve him thus? thy sins will be more sinful because God is more
merciful to thee then to others; The children of Israel have ( only the
Seventy read) done evil from their youth up, Jer. 32.30 As if there had been no
sinners in the world but they; their privileges being greater then others,
their provocations were more grievous. The unkindness of a friend has much of
an enemy in it. David was not much troubled at Shimei's railing, but Absoloms
rebellion pierced his very soul; My son that came out of my bowels has lifted
up his hands against me. Will thou give thy Savior cause to complain, He that
did eat bread with me has lift up his heels against me? Psalm. 41.3. He that
did eat at my table, nay eat of my flesh and drink of my blood, he has lift up
his heart, and his hand, and his heel against me? It was an aggravation of
Saul's fall, he fell as though he had not been anointed, 2 Samuel 1. And it will
be a sad aggravation of thy fall, if thou should fin as if thou had not
been at a Sacrament.

It is reported of an Elephant that being fallen down, and by reason of the
inflexibleness of his legs, unable to rise, a Forrester came by and helped him
up, with which kindness the Elephant was so taken that he followed the man up
and down, did him much service, and never left him till his dying day. Reader,
the moral is plain, thou wast fallen, and never able to rise of thy self: The
Lord Jesus Christ forsook his Father in Heaven and his Mother on Earth,
suffered unconceivable sorrows to help thee up; what love should thou have to
him? what service should thou do for him? Thou can not do less, since he
has redeemed thee out of the hands of thine enemies, then serve him in
holiness and righteousness all thy days. As the Hop in its growing follows the
course of the Sun from East to West, and will rather break then do otherwise;
So should thou in all thy actions follow the course of the Sun of
Righteousness, and rather dye then deny him.

When Moses came from the Mount where he had been conversing with God, his face
shined, Exodus 34.30. When thou go from the Table where thou have had sweet
communion with thy God, The face of thy conversation must shine so with
holiness that others may take notice of it.

Its said of the High Priest and Elders that observing the language and
carriage of Peter and John, They marvelled, and they took knowledge of them
that they had been with Jesus, Acts 4.13. So thy words should be so gracious,
and thy works so exemplary after a Sacrament, that all those with whom thou
have to do, may marvel and take knowledge that thou have been with Jesus; that
at the Table thou did sup with Christ, and Christ with thee.

I shall only answer a doubt or two from a troubled Conscience; and conclude
this Ordinance.

Object. 1. But possbly thou will say (O penitent Soul!) I have been at the
Sacrament and found little joy, what shall I do?

Answ. Though thou did not find any ravishing comfort at the Table, yet it
may be thou might receive more grace from Christ. When thou did not spring
upward in Joy, thou might root thy self more downward in Humility. Here is no
loss; Heaven is the proper place for comfort, Earth for Grace. I expect my
reward in another World; if I can but do my work well here, I shall be
satisfied. A serious Christian may well be contented with solid peace without
ecstasies. Therefore be not discouraged.

Object. 2. But I find no peace, no calmness of spirit. I fear my heart was so
dead and dull, that I did neither act grace in the ordinance, nor receive grace
through the ordinance, for I saw never a smile in Gods face all the while.

Answ. Did thou not go in thine own strength? if so, no wonder that thou art
disheartened. Jacob told his Wives, I perceive that your Fathers countenance is
not toward me as at other times; but what was the matter; This Jacob, say
Labans sons, has taken away all that was our Fathers, he has got his riches.
The glory of God (as I may say) is his Wealth, his Treasure, The riches of his
glory, Romans 9.23. Now if thou did rob God of any part, of his treasure by thy
self-confidence, it is no marvil that thy fathers countenance was not so
pleasant toward thee as at other times. In brief, I would wish thee to reflect
both upon thy preparation for, and carriage at the Ordinance, and if thou
find thy self faulty, confess and bewail it; hereby thou may yet attain
the efficacy of the Ordinance. When Physic is taken down, and does not work,
Physicians often give their Patients something to quicken it, and it proves
exceeding instrumental for the diseased persons good; A sincere lamentation of
thy negligence before, or carelessness at the Table (supposing that thy heart be
right with God) will much help forward the operation of the Sacrament. If thou
find that thou wast faithful in the discharge of thy duty, then by no means
despond, but wait. Food does not nourish as soon as it is taken into the body,
there must be time allowed for concoction. The strongest meats are longest in
digesting, but they give the most and the best nourishment. Faith and Prayer
will at last, like skilful Midwives, deliver the promises safely of those
blessings which did stick for a time in the birth. It is good that thy soul
should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of God. There is light
sown for thee, O thou child of light, who walk in darkness, and be confident
it will spring up.

A good Wish about the Lords Supper, wherein the sormer Heads are Epitomized.
THe Lords Supper being one of the greatest mysteries of the Christian
Religion, The Introduction.
a lively representation of my dearest Saviors bleeding passion, and blessed
affection, and a real taste of that eternal Banquet which I shall hereafter eat
of in my Fathers house at his own Table, I wish in general that I may never
distaste the person of my best friend by abusing his picture; that I may not go
to the Lords Table as Swine to their trough, in my sin and pollution, but may
receive those holy elements into a clean heart. Motives to preparation. Christ's
inspection.
O that my lamp might be flaming and my vessel filled with oil, when ever I go
to meet the Bridegroom! I wish in particular that my soul may be so thoroughly
affected with Christ's special presence at this sacred Ordinance, that I may
both prepare for it, and proceed at it with all possible seriousness and
diligence. O let me never be so unworthy and impudent as to defile that holy
Feast before the Authors face.

The unworthy persons dreadful condition guilty of Christ's death
I wish that my heart may have an infinite respect for the blood of my Savior,
the stream in which all my comforts both for this and a better World come
swiming to me, which has landed thousands safely at the Haven of eternal
happiness, one drop of which I am sure is more worth then heaven and earth;
that as all murder is abominable, being against the light of nature, so
Christ-murder may be most of all abhorred by me, as being directly against the
clearest light of Scripture, and the choicest love which ever was discovered to
the children of men. Good Lord, whatever I jest with, let me never sport or
dally with the death of thy Son! Let me not give him cause to complain of me (
as once of Judas) he that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, is the same
that betrayeth me! Let me never buy a Sacrament (as the Jews the Potters field
with the price of blood) Deliver me from blood-guiltiness O God, thou God of my
Salvation, and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy loving kindness.

I wish that true self-love may be so prevalent with me, Of his own damnation.
that since I believe the profanation of the most precious things will be most
pernicious to my soul (as the whitest Ivory is turned by the fire into the
deepest black, and the sweetest wine becomes the sharpest vinegar) I may
tremble and fear before I receive, lest I should poison my self with that
potion which is intended for my health, and cut the throat of my precious soul,
with that Knife wherewith I may cut bread, feed on it, Preparation, which
consists in Examination of the good in us.
and live for ever.

I wish that I may prepare my heart to meet the God of Israel at this holy
Ordinance; and to this end that I may be impartial in the search and
examination of my soul, whether I come short of the grace of God or no. Of the
truth of grace.
Physicians judge sometimes of the inward parts by the tongue. The Roman
Emperor Tiberius when one pretended to the Crown of a Kingdom, discovered him
to be a counterfeit, by feeling his hands, and finding that they were not soft,
as of a person tenderly bread, but hard as the hands of a Mechanicke. I desire
that both by my tongue and hand, by my words and works, I may know the state
and condition of my heart. In special, my prayer is, Of Faith
that I may never fail to try my faith which is to the soul, what the natural
heat is to the body, by virtue of which the nutritive faculty turns the food
into nourishment, but may make sure of an interest in the Vine, before I drink
of the fruit thereof.

I wish that before I go for a discharge, Examination of the evil in us.
I may look into the book of my conscience, cast up my accounts, and consider
how insinitely I am indebted to my God, that I may consider whence I am fallen,
Humiliation
and Repent, and like Tamar, though I am ravished and defiled by force, may yet
rent my garments, my heart I mean with godly sorrow, and self-abhorrency. O
that my soul might be so searched to the bottom, that none of my wounds may
fester, Reformation
but all may be discovered and cured. I pray that I may not dare to turn the
Table of the Lord into the Table of Devils, by receiving the Sacrament in the
love of any known sin, but may go to it with an hearty detestation of every
false way, and an holy resolution against every known wickedness. Dependence on
Christ.
I wish that after all my pains in preparing my self, I may look up to Christ
alone for assistance, as knowing that I am not sufficient of my self so much as
to think any thing, but my sufficiency is of God; Blessed Savior, be thou
surety for thy Servant, and bound for my good behavior at thy last and loving
Supper.

I wish that when I come to the Table, At the Table Subjects to be considered.
Christ's passion.
I may like the beloved Disciple, behold the wounds of my Savior, and see that
water and blood which did flow out of his side, that as in the Gospel I read a
narrative, so in this ordinance I may have a prospective of his sufferings; how
he emptied himself to fill me, and to raise my reputation with his Father, laid
down his own; how he humbled himself, though he had the favor of a Son, to the
form of a servant, and though he were the Lord of life, and glory to the most
ignominious death, even the death of the Cross.

I wish that in his special passion I may ever take notice of his affection,
Christ's affection.
and esteem the laying down his life, as the Hyperbole of his love, the highest
note that love could possibly reach. Ah how near did this High Priest carry my
name to his heart, when he willingly underwent the rage of Hell, to purchase
for me a passage to heaven. I will remember thy love more then Wine. Our own
corruptions.
I desire that when I see Christ crucified before mine eyes, in the breaking of
the bread, and pouring out of the wine, I may not forget the cause, my
corruptions, but may so think of them, and my Saviors kindness, in dying to
make satisfaction for them, that as fire expels fire, so I may be enabled by
the fire of love to expel and cast out the fire of lust.

I wish that however my body be attired, Graces to be exercised. Faith
my soul may by faith put on the Lord Jesus Christ at this Heavenly feast; that
I may not only look up to him ( as the Criple to Peter and John) expecting an
alms, but may receive him by beleiving, and so banquet on his blessed body,
and bathe my soul in his precious blood; that my spirit may rejoice in God my
Savior, whilst I am assured that though the pain were his, yet the profit is
mine; though the wounds were his, yet the balm issuing thence is mine; though
the thorns were his, yet the Crown is mine; and though the price were his, yet
the purchase is mine. O let him be mine in in possession and claim, and then he
will be mine in fruition and comfort; Lord I believe, Love
help mine unbeleif! I wish (since love is the greatest thing my Savior can
give me; for God is love, and the greatest thing which I can give my Savior)
that his love to me may be reflected back to him again, that my chiefest love
may be as a fountain sealed up to all others, and broched only for him who is
altogether lovely, that I may hate Father, Mother, Wife, Child, House and Land,
out of love to him; that many waters of affliction may not quench this love,
but rather like Snuffers make this lamp to burn the brighter. Beasts love them
who feed them. Wicked men love their friends and benefactours; My very clothes
warming me, are warmed by me; again, and shall not I love him who has loved
me, and washed me in his own blood! O that I could groundedly cry out with
Ignatius, My love was crucified; and meet this Lord of Heaven, as Elijah went
up to Heaven in a Chariot of fire, in a flame of love; Repentance
I desire that I may follow Christ at this Ordinance, as the Women did to his
Cross, weeping, considering that my sins were the cause of his bitter and
bloody suffering; and O that as Saul eyed David, I might eye them all from that
day forward, to slay and destroy them.

When my soul has been thus feasted with Marrow and fatness, After the
Sacrament. Thankfulness
Lord let my mouth praise thee with joyful lips. Ah what am I, and what is my
Fathers house? that when others eat the bread of violence, and drink the wine
of deceit, I should eat the flesh and drink the blood of thine own Son! What is
man that thou art so mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou do thus
visit him? I wish that I may show my thankefulness to my God and dearest
Savior, for these benefits (the worth of which men and Angels can never
conceive) by the love of my heart, the praises of my lips, Faithfulness
and the exemplariness of my life. At the Sacrament Christ gave his body and
blood to me, and I gave my body and soul a living Sacrifice to him, and that
before God, Angels, and Men; the Sacrament was Beersheba, the Well of an Oath.
Shall I pollute that heart which was solemnly devoted to God, and profane that
Covenant which I have seriously contracted with the most High? Should I like
Sampson, break those bands asunder and fetch that Sacrifice away from the
Altar, which was tied with such strong cords of Oaths and Covenants; must I not
expect to bring the fire along with it! O let me never start aside from my vow
like a deceitful bow. Lord I have sworn and will perform, that I will keep
through thy strength thy righteous judgments. Lastly I desire that I may not
only differ from them who like the Habassiness, In Prester John's Country.
will not fpit on a Sacrament day, but will spue the next day; deny sin at
present, but afterward Deifie it; that I may not only be faithful to my Oath
of Allegiance, but also fruitful in obedience; that as Elijah walked in the
strength of one meal forty days, I may walk in the strength of that Banquet,
serving my Savior, and my Soul, all my days. In a word, I wish that I may ever
after walk worthy of my birth, having Royal, Heavenly blood running in my
veins; worthy of my breeding, being brought up in the nurture of the Lord, fed
at his own Table with the bread of Heaven, clothed with the Robes of his Sons
Righteousness; and that my present deportment may be answerable to my future
preferment: O that I might in all companies, conditions and seasons, walk
worthy of him, who has called me to his Kingdom and glory! Amen.

CHAP. XXI. How to exercise our selves to godliness on a Lords Day.
BEcause the Lords Day is the special time for Religious Duties, I shall
therefore Reader, give thee here some particular directions for thy
Sanctification of it, and Edification by it.

As of all actions, none call for more care then holy duties; so of all seasons
for those actions, none commands so much caution and Conscience as the Lords
Day.

The first Command teaches us the object of Worship; the second, the matter of
Worship; the third, the manner of Worship; the fourth, the time of Worship.

That God is to be worshipped, Time of worship is juris naturalis, one of seven
is juris positivi.
that some time must be set apart for that work, is Moral, Natural, and written
on the Tables of all our hearts; but that one day of seven must be consecrated
to this end, is Moral, Positive, and written on the Tables of stone.

All Nations have had their seasons for Sacrifice, even the Heathen who
worshipped dumb Idols, had their Festivals and Holy days. It is reported of
Alexander Severus, Emperor of Rome, that he would on a Sabbath Day lay aside
his Wordly affairs, and go into the Capitol to Worship his gods. Among those
that acknowledge the true God, the Turks have their Stata tempora, set times of
devotion, nay, they have their Friday Sabbath.

But to keep the Lords Day upon a conscientious ground, and in a religious
manner, is peculiar to the true Christian. In the primitive times, the
observation of this day was esteemed the principal sign of a Saint. Indeed our
Sanctification of it, is by God himself counted a sign that he has sanctified
us, Exodus 31.13.

It is observable, that God has fenced this Command with more hedges then
ordinary, to prevent our excursions:

1. It is marked with a Memento above other commands, Remember the Sabbath Day,
to keep it holy; partly, because of our forgetfulness; and partly, because of
its concernments.

2. Its delivered both Negatively, and Affirmatively, which no other commands
is, to show how strongly it binds.

3. It has more Reasons to enforce it then any other Precept; Its Equity, Gods
Bounty, His own Pattern, and the Days Benediction.

4. Its put in the close of the first, Est caput Religionis and totum Dei
cultum continet. Willet in Exodus 35.1.
and beginning of the second Table, to note, that the observation of both
Tables, depends much upon the Sanctification of this day.

It is considerable also, that it is more repeated then other of the Commands,
Exodus 20.31. and 14.34. and 24.35. and 1.19. Levit. 3.28.30.

God would have Israel know, Omni tempore Sabbato debere cessare, Aug. in Exodus
quaest. 160.
in those forequoted places, that their busiest times, earing and harvest, and
the very building of the Tabernacle, must give way to this Precept.

On the Lords Day we go into Gods Sanctuary, and his pleasure is, that we
reverence his Sanctuary, Levit. 19.30. The Jews indeed made a great stir about
their outward reverencing the Temple: Willet in loc.
They tell us, they were not to go in with a staff, nor shoes, nor to spit in
it, nor when they went away, to turn their backs upon it, but go sideling,
Ezekiel. 8.16. but certainly Gods meaning is principally, that we do with inward
reverence and seriousness worship him in his Sanctuary.

Reader, I desire thee to take notice, that the more holy any action is, the
more heedful thou ought to be about it: Upon which account, the duties of
this day require extraordinary diligence; for they have a double die of
holiness upon them, they are double gilt: Thy task on that day, or the
exercises thereof, are of Divine Institution, and so is the time, the day: Thou
have Gods hand and seal to the duties, he commands thee to pray, hear, sing,
meditate, receive the Sacrament; and thou have also Gods hand and seal to the
day, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Revel. 1.10. It is considerable, that in the
fourth Command, God does not say, Remember the seventh day, to keep it holy;
but, Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy; this Zanchy takes great notice
of: further, the seventh, or a seventh, is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; so
then the morality of that Command is one day of even. The Jews seventh day was
buried in Christ's grave, though its shadow walked a little while after. Take
heed how thou observest this day, Gods eye is very much upon thy behavior in
his house; therefore in the Tabernacle, the place of public worship, it was
commanded, Ne putes te in domo Dei male posse conversari, and occultari.
Oleaster.
Exodus 25.37. Thou shall make seven lamps, and they shall light the lamps that
they may give light: to teach us, that nothing there escapes his sight, for in
his house there is always light: His eye beholds all thy commission of evil,
and all thine omission of good there: In his Sanctuary thou can not sin in
secret; there are seven Lamps to discover thy miscarriages in the Lords house,
and therefore it behooves thee to be very pious in that place. Afterward, when
the Temple was built, and became heir to the Tabernacle, as that succeeded this
in the Celebration of Gods Worship, so also in Gods observation of all the
works done there: Mine eye (says God) shall be there perpetually, 1 Kings 9.3.
There is a threefold eye of God present in the Assemblies of his people.

1. There is the eye of observation and inspection: God sees what uprightness
and seriousness there is in thy prayers and performances; God eyeth and takes
notice, what integrity and fervency thou have in thy services and sacrifices:
Mine eyes are upon all their ways, Jer. 16.17. Whether thou art praying, or
reading, or hearing, or singing, his eye is upon thee; and whether thou
performest thy duties slothfully and sluggishly, or dutifully and diligently,
he observes thee: His eyes behold, and his eyelids try the children of men.

2. There is the eye of favor and benediction: Gods eye can convey a blessing
as well as his hand: I will set mine eyes upon them for good, Amos 9.4. And
Gods eye can speak his good will as well as his heart: Mine eye and my heart
shall be there; that is, in my house, 2 Chronicles. 7.16. The affection of the
breast is seen at the brows, Mine eye shall be upon the faithful of the Land,
Psalm. 101.6. Gods eye is in his house, to approve and bless thee, if thou
sanctify him in Ordinances. Friend, keep the Lords Day with care and
conscience, perform thy duties with suitable graces, and Gods eye will be upon
thee, thou shall see his love in his pleasant and gracious looks. Jesus Christ
beholds and approves the gracious performances of his people; he seems to say
to them, as Paul to the Colossians, Though I am absent from you in the flesh,
yet am I present with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your order, Col.
2.15.

3. There is the eye of fury and indignation: Gods looks will speak his anger,
as well as his blows: His fury is visible by his frowns; Mine eyes shall be
upon them for evil. Gods sight can wound as deeply as his Sword. Job speaks of
him, He sharpneth his eyes upon me, Job 16.9. Wild Beasts when they fight,
whet their eyes, as well as their teeth. An Enemy enraged, looks on his
Antagonist, as if he would look through him. He sharpneth his eyes upon me, as
if he would stab me to the heart with a glance of his eye; so an Expositor
glosseth on it. If thou wait on God irreverently, Worship him carelessly, and
prophanest his Day, either by Corporal labor, or Spiritual idleness, thou
may not expect his eye of favor, but of fury: If ye will not hearken unto
me, to hallow the Sabbath, then will I kindle a fire, which shall devour the
Palaces of Jerusalem, and none shall quench it, Jerem. 17. ult. Ezekiel. 22.26,
31. Gods severity has been remarkable on the Prophaners of his Sabbath. The
first blow given the German Churches, was on the Lords Day, which they
carelessly observed; on that day Prague was lost. When men disturb Gods rest,
God does usually deprive them of rest. The day of the Lord is like to be a
dreadful day to them that despise the Lords Day.

Truly God is as jealous in his Courts under the Gospel as he was under the
Law. Christ, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, walks in the midst of the
Golden Candlesticks throughout the World; He observes how holy duties are
performed, and how his holy day is sanctified; When two or three are gathered
together in his name, he is in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. He is in the
midst of us, to behold our inward and outward carriage in his Courts; he
observes in praying, what confessions are made of sin, with what confusion of
face, and contrition of heart, what petitions are put up for grace and pardon,
with what integrity of spirit, and fervency of affection. He observes in
hearing, whether men hear with attention suitable to that word which is able to
save their souls, whether men receive the truth in the love of it, whether they
resolve on subjection, and to give themselves up to that form of Doctrine which
is given down to them, or whether men hear Sermons as Children turn over books
merely for the gays that are in them; He goes down into the garden of Nuts, to
see the fruits of the Valley, Cant. 6.11. He sees the rotten bough of
Hypocrisy, the leaves of profession, without the fruits of an answerable
conversation, He sees all thine unripe, sour, indigested duties.

Reader, If I were to counsel thee how to spend a Market day so, that thou
might gain much wealth and treasure, I doubt not but thou would hearken to
me; I am now to advise thee how to spend the Lords day, the Market day for thy
soul, so, that thou may get the true treasure, durable riches and
righteousness; I pray thee to hear and obey the directions which I have to
deliver thee from the Lord, for that end.

First, Make preparation for the day. There is scarce any work which admits of
any considerable perfection, but require some previous preparation. In works of
nature, the ground must be dunged, dressed, plowed, harrowed, and all to
prepare it for the seed. In works of Art the Musician tuneth his Viol, screwing
up some of his strings higher, letting some down lower, as occasion is, and all
to prepare it for his lesson, and indeed without this he would make but sad
M^sick. Truly Friend thus it is with us in matters of higher moment; hearts,
like soil, must be prepared for the seed of the Word (how many a Sermon has
been lost, because this was wanting!) and the Viols of our souls must be tuned
to praise God, or otherwise they will sound but harshly in his ears.

The Priests were to wash in the Laver, when they went into the Tabernacle, and
when they came near to the Altar to Minister upon pain of death, Exodus 30.19,
20. Signifying that to holy performances there is required holy prepartion;
Suitable to which is David's speech, I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I
compass thine Altar, Psa. 26.

When the Temple was to be built, the stones were hewn, and the timber squared
and fitted, before they were brought to the place where the Temple stood; there
was neither ax, nor hammer, nor any use of them in the Temple: And what does
this speak, but that the Christian must be pollished and prepared to be a
spiritual Temple, an habitation for the God of Jacob, and also fitted for his
worship, which was then in the Temple.

There is no duty but requires some previous dispositi on. A little breakfast
quickens the appetite to a good dinner; duty fits the heart for duty; Consider
prayer. The Christian must be poor in spirit, that would prevail in prayer for
spiritual riches. The vessel must be empty before it can be filled. O Lord, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear, Psa. 10.17. for
hearing; the weeds must be plucked up before the grain be thrown into the
ground; Wherefore laying aside all malice and all guile and Hypocrisies, As new
born born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. In singing;
the lungs must be good, the inwards clean, before the voice will be sweet and
clear. O God, my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
praise, Psa. 57.7. So for the Lords day, the Israelites had their preparation.
It was the preparation, that is, the day before the Sabbath, Mark. 15.42.

The preparation for the Lords day, consists partly in care so to order
Worldly businesses, that they may not incroach on the Sabbath; Some expositours
observe that the word Remember, in the fourth Command, enjoyneth a provident
foresight and diligent dispatch of earthly affairs on the day before, that
nothing may remain to disquiet us in, or disturb Gods day of rest; There is an
observable place, If thou keep thy foot from my Sabbath, Isa. 58.13. that is
from treading on my holy ground with the dirty feet of earthly affairs, or
affections. The Jews preparation began at three of the clock in the afternoon,
Inritibus Pagan
which the Hebrews called the Sabbath Eve; The ancient Fathers called Caena
pura, from the Heathen (say some) whose Religion taught them in their
Sacrifices to certain of their Gods, to prepare themselves by a strict kind of
holiness, at which time they had a Supper consisting of meats holy in their
opinion.

The Jews were so careful in their preparation, Buxto^^. Syna gog Iud. c. 10.
extalm^d.
that says mine Author, to further it, the best and wealthiest of them, even
those that had many servants, and were Masters of Families, would chop herbs,
sweep the house, cleave wood, kindle the fire and do such like things. The
mariner that intends a voyage, puts his Ship off from Land; so truly,
Friend, if thou woulst lanch Heavenward upon a Lords day, there is a necessity
that the Vessel of thy heart be put off from the earth. When our blessed
Savior was teaching the people, he was disturbed by one that told him, Behold
thy Mother and thy brethren, standwithout desiring to speak with thee, Mat.
12.47. So when thou art hearing, or praying, or about any Religious Ordinance,
what an hinderance, what a disturbance will it be for thy heart to suggest to
thee, Man, thy calling, thy companions, or such and such things which lie upon
the spoil through thy negligence in the weekdays, they all stand without
desiring to speak with thee. If thou would avoid distraction, prevent the
occasions; As Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Set thine house in order against thy
deaths day; So I say to thee, Set thy house in order, and thy heart in order
against the Lords day.

The main preparation of the heart for a Sabbath, lies in removing the filth
of Sin, Accedentiad divina mysteria deique contemplationem deponenda sunt
calceamenta, i.e. passiones, affectiones simul and rations humanae and
terrenae. Cor. a Lapid. in Exodus 3.
and in quickening, and awakening grace, sin must be removed; If the stomach be
foul, it must be purged before it be fed, or the meat will nourish and
strengthen, not nature, but the ill humors; If a man purge himself from these
(It is true of evil affections, as well as evil persons) he shall be a
Vesselunto honor, sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto
every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21.

Superfluity of naughtiness, must be laid aside before we can receive the word
with meekness, James 1.21. When the Vessel is unclean, it sowres quickly the
sweetest liquors powered into it; when the heart is unclean, it loses the good
it might receive by the truths of God.

As sin must be cast out, so grace must be called up; Grace is like fire apt to
be deadish and dull, thy duty is beforehand, therefore to blow it up; Most
people upon a Sabbath adorn their bodies, with their best clothes; but, Alas,
who almost attireth his soul as he ought on this day, when he is going to meet
the blessed Redeemer!

Reader, Suppose thou were a person of great quality and estate, and the King
should send thee word, that he would dine with thee to morrow, what preparation
would thou make for his entertainment? would not thy first work be to cleanse
thy house, by causing the dust to be swept out, the flores to be washed, nay
rubd, every thing to be neat and cleanly? Would thou not put up thy choicest
Hangings, lay on thy richest Carpets, bring out thy best plate, adorn thy room
with thy costliest furniture, endeavor that all things should be in print,
somewhat suitable to the dignity of so great a Prince. I tell thee, that the
great King of all the World, does give thee notice in his Word, that on such a
day, being the Sabbath, he intends to sup with thee: Now friend, what
preparation will thou make, to testify thy respect to this blessed and only
Potentate? Can thou beforehand do less then sweep out the dust of sin, and
wash the room of thine heart clean, adorn it with the best furniture, the
Graces, the embroidery of the Holy Ghost. Truly unless this be done, Christ
will not think himself welcome, nay all thy pretended entertainment of him,
will be not only infinitely unworthy of, but also provoking to so jealous and
glorious a Prince.

Believe it, thy profit by a Sabbath, depends not a little upon thy preparation
for the Sabbath; till the matter be prepared, how can it receive the form, Job
11.12, 13. Thou have enjoyed many Lords Days, and it may be got little
soul-saving good: Thou go to the House of God, where a table (in the
preaching of the Gospel) is set before thee, spread with all the dainties of
Pardon, Love, Grace, Peace, and Eternal Life, at which others sit and feed,
their Souls are filled with Marrow and Fatness, and their mouths praise the
Lord with joyful lips; but thou have no stomach, can eat little, and savor
nothing: I dare be the Physician to tell thee the cause and cure of this; the
cause is, Thy stomach is foul, thy heart is unclean; and therefore as a man
that has a cold, or some disease predominant, cannot relish his meat, but
complains sometimes of the meat, sometime of the Cook, when the fault is in
himself; so thou can taste no goodness in the best meat, neither Prayer, nor
Scripture; neither Sermon, nor Sabbath are savoury to thee, yet it may be thou
blamest the Preacher, he does not dress the meat to thy mind, when the fault is
in the foulness of thy affections: Thy cure must be, to purge out this old
leaven, to take some pains beforehand in cleansing thy heart. When the stomach
is clean, as after purging or fasting, how sweet is a piece of bread! So if
thou would but in secret search thy soul, vomit up thy filth, by a penitent
confession, cleanse thine heart by sincere contribution, and would then
frequent the public Ordinances, thou would find prayer sweet, preaching
sweet, the Sacrament sweet, every service sweet: O how would thou love the
habitation of Gods House, and the place where his honor dwells!

Prepare to meet thy God, O Christian; betake thy self to thy chamber on the
Saturday night, confess and bewail thine unthankfulness for, and unfruitfulness
under the Ordinances of God; shame and condemn thy self for thy sins; entreat
God to prepare thy heart for, and assist it in thy Religious performances;
spend some time in consideration of the infinite Majesty, Holiness, Jealousy
and Goodness of that God, with whom thou art to have to do in sacred duties;
ponder the weight and importance of his holy Ordinances, how they concern thy
salvation or damnation, thine everlasting life or death; how certainly they
will either further thine unchangeable welfare, or increase thine endless woe;
meditate on the shortness of the time thou have to enjoy Sabbaths in, how near
thy life may be to an end, how speedily, and how easily God may take down thine
earthly Tabernacle, how there is no working, no laboring, no striving in the
other World, to which thou art hastening, and continue musing and blowing, till
the fire burns; thou can not think the good thou may gain by such
fore-thoughts, how pleasant and profitable a Lords Day would be to thee, after
such a preparation. The oven of thine heart thus baked in (as it were) over
night, would be easily heated the next morning; the fire so well raked up when
thou wentest to bed, would be the sooner kindled when thou should rise: If
thou would thus leave thine heart with God on the Saturday night, thou
should find it with him in the Lords Day morning.

Secondly, Possess thy soul in the morning with the greatness of thy
privilege, in the enjoyment of a Sabbath, and such seasons of grace: Look upon
thy work that day, as thy reward; thy duty on that day, as thy greatest
Dignity. O what a favor, what an honor, what happiness does God vouchsafe to
thee, in affording thee such a golden season! David, though a King, the Head of
the best people in the World, esteemed it an honor to be the lowest Officer in
Gods House; to be a Doorkeeper there, to fit at the threshold, as it is in the
Hebrew, Psalm. 84.10. If the Queen of Sheba could say, when she saw the wealth,
and heard the wisdom of Solomon, Happy are these thy men, happy are these thy
servants, which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom; and
blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which delighted in thee, to set thee on the
Throne of Israel; because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore made he
thee King, 1 Kings 10.8, 9. may not thou when thou beholdest the beautiful
face of thy Savior, in the glass of Ordinances; and hear the sweet
delightful voice of Jesus Christ, a greater then Solomon; when thou see the
delicate and plentiful provision, the feast of fat things, of wine on the lees
well refined, which he makes for his people, upon better ground say, Blessed
are thy servants that hear thee daily, watching at thy gates, waiting at the
posts of thy doors, Prove. 8.34. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they
will be still praising thee: And blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which
delighted in thee, to set thee on the Throne of Israel; because he loved Israel
for ever, therefore has he made thee King.

The Ordinances of God are called an appearing before God; the fruition of them
is a seeing his face: Capernaum, because of them, was said to be lifted up to
Heaven. Who can tell what honor it is to appear in the presence of this King;
or what happiness it is to see his comely countenance! Those that enjoy this,
are lifted up to Heaven.

Israel was an unparalled people, because of this incomparable privilege;
For what Nation is there so great, which has God so nigh unto them? Deuteronomy. 4.7.
In the Ordinances of God, the Christian has sweet communion, with ravishing
delight in, and enflamed affection to the blessed God; in them he tastes God to
be gracious, has the First Fruits of his Glorious and Eternal Harvest.

Well might the French Protestants call their place of public meeting
Paradise: Well might David cry out, Psalm. 84.1, 2. and 27.4. How amiable are
thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! At the Tabernacle God did meet David: Who can
tell what joyful greeting there was at that holy meeting; what sweet kisses,
what loving embraces God gave his soul?

As the Ordinances are Heaven in a glass; so the Lords Day is Heaven in a map:
This is to be valued at an high rate, because therein we enjoy all the means of
communion with God, in the highest degree and measure, without interruption.
The Hebrews call thee Week days profane days, but this is an holy, pious day.
The Greeks call them working days, but this is a day of sweet rest. Other days
are common and ordinary handmaids, but this is fitly termed by the Jews, the
Queen of days: Many Daughters have done wisely, but thou have excelled them
all: Many days, as Lecture-days, Fast-days, Thanksgivingdays, have done
virtuously, have done valiantly; but thou, O Queen of days, have excelled them
all: They, like Saul, have slain their thousands of Spiritual Enemies; but thou
have slain, as David, thy ten thousands: They, like the people, must worship
afar off, but thou, like Moses, may draw near, go up into the mount: There
is none like thee, whom God knows face to face. Well may other days say to
thee, as the people to David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us: Well might the
good Soul run to meet thee in the morning, and salute thee with Veni Spousa
mea, Come my sweet Spouse, thee I have loved, for thee I have longed, and thou
art my dearest delight.

Take heed of counting the Sabbath thy burden, and thine attendance upon that
day on the Ordinances of God, thy bondage: It argued spirits full of froth and
filth, to cry out, When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell our corn;
and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, Amos 8.5. Count Religious duties,
not thy fetters, but thy greatest freedom.

Think what the Phaenix is amongst birds, the Lion among beasts, Fire among the
Elements, that is the Lords Day among the days. Ordinary days, like wax in a
shop, have their use, are worth somewhat; but this like wax to some Deeds, or
which has the Kings Seal to it, is worth thousands. What is said of that Day
of the Lord, may in a gracious sense be spoken of the Lords Day, There is none
like it, before it, neither shall be after it. Upon this day Christ carries
the Soul into his Wine-cellar, and his Banner over it is Love: Upon other days
he feeds his members upon this day, he feasts them; they have their ordinary
every day, but upon this day exceedings; Upon this day he brings forth his
living water, his best Wine; On this day, he gives the sweetest bread, the
finest flower, the true meat, his own body. On this day he met the two
Disciples and made their hearts warm, and even burn within them by the fire of
his words; On this day, Saints that slept, arose out of their beds, their
graves; Mat. 27. On this day, the Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles; On this
day, the Lord brought forth the light of the World in Creation; On this day,
Christ brought forth the light of his new Heavens and new Earth by his
Resurrection; On this day, St. John had his glorious Revelation, containing the
Churches state to the Worlds dissolution; On this day, he visited his dear
Apostles with grace and peace; saying to them, Peace be unto you, behold my
hands and my feet. On this day, he burst asunder the bands of death, he broke
in pieces the gates of Hell, he led captivity captive, trampled upon
Principalities and Powers, and and triumphed over, grave, sin, the curse of the
law, and Satan; Upon this day, he still rides triumphantly in the Chariot of
his Ordinances, conquering and to conquer, casting down high thoughts, and
subduing sinners to himself. It may be said of the Sabbath as of Sion, This and
that man was born in her and the highest himself shall establish her. The Lord
shall count when he writes up the people, that this man was born then, Selah.
Psa. 87.56. O blessed day, how many thousands souls have known thee the day of
their new births! How willing have the people been in thee day of Gods power in
the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning, thou have the dews of
thy youth. Blessed art thou among days, from hence forth all generations shall
call thee blessed. Blessed be the Father who made thee; blessed be the Son who
bought thee; blessed be the Spirit who sanctifies thee, and blessed are all
they that prize and improve thee. Reader, thou have not a drop of true
holiness, if thou do not bless God (as is reported of the Jews) at the coming
in, and going out of this holy and blessed day.

Thirdly, Consider there is a present price put into thy hands, to get and
increase grace, and therefore improve it. The wisdom of a Christian consists
in observing his seasons; the High God sends man to School to the silly Ant, to
learn this Art and piece of good Husbandry, Go to the Ant thou sluggard,
consider her ways and be wise, which having no Guide, Overseer, nor Ruler,
provideth her food in the Summer, and gathers her meat in the Harvest, Prove.
6.6, 7, 8. The Ants are a feeble folk, but famous for their forecast, and
deserve says one, to be fed with the finest of the Wheat, for the pattern they
give to man. They labor not only all day, but even by Moonlight they gather
huge heaps together, lay it out a drying in a warm day, least it should
putrify, and bite off the ends of the ends of the grain least it should grow;
but observe the season of this care and diligence; She provideth her food in
the Summer, and gathers her meat in the Harvest. Then that time is the Ants
opportunity; if she do it not then, she cannot do it at all; therefore she
makes use of that season. O that Friend, thou were but as wise for the bread
which came down from Heaven, as this poor Pismire is for the bread which
springs out of the earth! Christians are called Doves. The Turtle Dove is
called in the Hebrew Tor, of the Original Tur, and thence comes our Latin
Turtur, which signifies to observe or search, for so this Bird observes her
time of going and coming, Jer. 8.7. for she departs before Winter into some
warm climate. The Lords day is the Summer, thine Harvest time; Labor now for
Christ and grace, or thou art lost for ever. The Farmer that loyters at other
times, will work hard and sweat in Harvest. If he do not reap then, he knows he
can never pay his rent and feed his Family, but is ruined. Reader, if thou do
not on a Lords day gather in grace, how will thou do to lay out grace in the
week days? nay how will thou do to spend grace upon a dying bed, when thou art
to step into the other World! He that gathers in Summer, is a wise son; but
he that sleeps in Harvest, is a son that causes shame, Prove. 10.5. The Jews
might gather no Manna on the Sabbath, but Gentiles must then especially get the
bread of life. The Water-man must observe when Wind and Tide are for his turn,
and then bestir himself, or otherwise he must come short of his Haven. It
concerns thee to mind Sabbaths; then the gales of the Spirit blow fair for thy
voyage; then the waters of Ordinances run right for the port to which thou art
bound; therefore do not then laze and loyter, but labor for thy God, thy soul,
and thine everlasting life; Therefore shall every one that is godly, seek thee
in a time when thou may be found. Psa. 32.6.

The Musician must play his lesson whilst the instrument is in Tune, because
the weather may alter. The good Husband for his soul must buy of Christ gold to
enrich him, and raiment to cloth him, while the Fair lasts, for it will
quickly be over. Esau came too late and lost thereby the blessing; many come
too late and lose their souls by it. To every thing there is a season, says
God, Eccles. 3.1. The Lords day is thy season when grace and mercy are tendered
to thee; how will thou escape if thou neglectest (or carest not for, as the
word (...) signifies) so great Salvation. Heb. 2.3. Open unto Christ when he
knocks at the door of thy heart with the finger of his Spirit. Do not bid him
come to morrow, lest that morrow never come,

Its good (we say) to make Hay while the Sun shines, for the Heavens may be
cloudy. Its good to embrace a present opportunity, for time is bald behind;
thou can not assure thy self of a second Sabbath. Seasons of grace are not
like Tides, that a man may miss one and take another. What Christ said of
himself, is true of Sabbaths; The poor ye have always with you, but me ye have
not always. Time thou have always with thee while thou live, but the Sabbath
thou have not always. Nay within a shorter time then thou imaginest; God may
deprive thee both of time and opportunity, both of Week days and Lords days;
and if thou art now sleeping and snoring when thou should be waking and
working, what a cut will it be to thy heart to reflect upon the Sabbaths which
thou have had and lost, enjoyed and misspent! Jerusalem in the days of her
affliction and of her misery, remembered all her pleasant things that she had in
the days of old, Lam. 1.9. So Reader if thou should neglect to improve
Sabbaths now in the day of thy misery, or rather in the everlasting night of
thine affliction in hell, thou will remember thy Sabbaths seasons of grace, and
all thy pleasant things which thou had in the days of old. Good Lord, what a
rueful woeful remembrance will it be to call to mind the means, the mercies, the
helps which were afforded thee to have avoided Hell, and attained Heaven, and
yet thou like a fool or rather a mad man, did dally about them, and delay
till the Market was done! Now is the time for thee to accept of grace, because
now is the only time that grace will accept of thee. O that thou would know
in this thy day, the things which concern thy peace, before they be hid from
thine eyes.

Fourrhly, Esteem the public Ordinances the chief work of the day, and let
thy secret and private duties be so managed, that thy soul may be prepared for
them, and profited by them. Duties in thy closet and family are of use, and
have their blessing; but to put God off with these, and neglect the public
Worship, is to rob God of a greater sum, to pay him a lesser: The Sacrifice of
the Jews on that day was double; they offered Sacrifice in the Tabernacle,
besides their Lambs for the daily Sacrifice. It is worthy our observation, that
the Sabbath and public Service are by God himself joined together, and
therefore let no man put them asunder: Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence
my Sanctuary, I am the Lord, Lev. 19.30. They that despise Gods Sanctuary,
cannot observe Gods Sabbath.

Every thing is beautiful in its season: Private duties are beautiful, and in
season every day; but public Ordinances are never so lovely and beautiful,
because never so much in their prime and season, as on a Lords Day.

In public Worship, God receives the highest praises: I will praise thee in
the great Congregations, Psalm. 29.9. In his Temple does every one speak of his
glory. I had gone with the multitude to the House of God, with the voice of joy
and praise, with a multitude that kept holy day, Psalm. 42.4. The gracious God
is pleased to esteem it his glory to have many Beggars thronging at the
beautiful gate of his Temple for Spiritual and Corporal alms. What an honor is
it to our great Landlord, that multitudes of Tenants flock together to his
house, to pay their rent of Thanks and Worship for their All which they hold of
him! How loud and lovely is the noise of many golden Trumpets! Good Lord, what
an echo do they make in Heavens ears! Deus pluris facit preces in Ecclesia
quam domi factas, non ob locum sed ob considerationem multitudinis fidelium
Deum communi consensu invo. cantium. Riv. in Cath. Orth.
When many skilful Musicians play in consort, with well-tuned and prepared
Instruments, the Music cannot but be ravishing to God himself. Methinks its a
notable resemblance of the sweet melody which is made by the Celestial Quire
above, Psalm. 68.26. Bless ye God in the Congregation, even the Lord, from the
fountain of Israel: for he loves the gates of Zion, above all the dwellings of
Jacob, Psalm. 87.2.

As in public God receives the highest praises, so there he bestows the
richest mercies: Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach
unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts: We shall be satisfied with the
goodness of thy House, even of thy holy Temple, Psalm. 65.4. Here is David's
Position, and its proof: His Position is, That the Templer, or Inhabitant in
Gods House, is an happy man; Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest
to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy House: The proof of it is from
the quality and quantity of the provision, which God makes for them that are of
his Household: For the quality of it, it is not only good, but Goodness; which
word signifies, not only the good will which God bears to, but all the good
things which God bestows upon his people; Pardon, Peace, Love, Grace, every
good thing; all good things are in the womb of that one word Goodness: Gods
provision for his people is beyond all their knowledge or apprehension.

There be four ordinary ways by which men come to the knowledge of good things;
either by hearing them immediately themselves, or by hearsay from others, or by
the sight of the eyes, or by discourse of Reason: But from the beginning of the
World, men have not seen, nor heard, nor perceived by the ear, nor has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive, what God has provided for them that
love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. Isa. 64.4. The love discovered there, is an unknown love;
the joy bestowed there, is unspeakable joy: All the costliest dainties prepared
for Heavens Table, the fullness of joy and pleasures for ever at Gods right
hand, are expressed by this one word Goodness, Psalm. 31.19. So that the quality
of the provision is beyond all exception, it is Goodness. For its quantity, it
is to satisfaction: We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even
of thy Holy Temple: The Saint shall have enough of this luscious fare to
content him: Indeed the Christians full meal is reserved for him, till he comes
to eat bread in the Kingdom of Heaven; but here he has enough to stay his
stomach: He is very well satisfied, that his allowance in this World is
sufficient. God calls him in the other World to greater work, and so will give
him a greater allowance for suitable strength; but God does not in this World
underkeep him. He feeds proportionable to their employments, nay to their
satisfaction and contentment, all that are in his inferior family: His children
have till they leave.

But Reader, Where is the place of this good, this great provision? is it not
in Gods House, in his holy Temple, in the public Worship? Great Princes
bestow their Largesses, and show their Bounty, Glory, and Magnifience before
much people: If thou would know where Believers have seen their best sights,
where they have heard their most ravishing sounds, where they have made their
most delightful meals; it was in the House of God: They have seen thy goings, O
God, in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 68.24. They have heard the joyful sound of thy
Word: They have been abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House.

Do but consider David's tears and grief for want of, and his fervent prayers
for the fruition of public Ordinances, even then when he had opportunities for
private performances; and surely thou will esteem the Ministry of the Word no
mean mercy: See his sorrow when he was driven from Gods Sanctuary; When I
remember these things, my soul is poured out: for I had gone with the
multitude, I went with them to the House of God, Psalm. 42.3, 4. My soul is
poured out; that is, I am overwhelmed with grief, and even ready to dye, when I
compare my present condition with my former happiness, in the fruition of
Religious Assemblies. There is an Elegancy in the phrase Poured out; the word
is applied to water, or any liquid thing, and in Scripture signifies
abundance, Joel 2.28. My life is ready to be poured out as water upon the
ground, which cannot be gathered up again, when I remember my former mercies,
and consider my present misery. How bitterly and passionately does he plead
with Saul? If the Lord has stirred thee up against me, let him accept an
Offering; but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before the Lord;
for they have driven me out this day from the Inheritance of the Lord, 1 Samuel
26. and 19. How pathetically does he bemoan it to his own soul? Woe is me, for I
dwell in Meshech, and my habitations are in the Tents of Kedar: The loss of his
Father, Mother, Wives, Children, Lands, Liberty, nay of his very Life, would
not have gone so near his heart, as the loss of public Ordinances: As his
sorrow was great for the want, so was his suit most earnest for the enjoyment of
them; How many a prayer does he put up for the liberty of the Tabernacle? Psalm.
43.3, 4. and 27.4. It is the one thing, the principal special request which he
begs of God: One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that
I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life; and verse 8. how
hard does he pray for this privilege: Thou said, Seek ye my face; my heart
said unto thee, Thy face Lord will I seek: To seek the face of God in a general
sense, is taken for the substance of Religion, or to seek God, Psalm. 24.6. but
by the face of God in a strict sense, is meant the Ark of God, and place of his
residence: Now David at this time being deprived of this inestimable benefit,
in the ardency of his zeal presses God, with all the arguments he could
devise, to restore him to that happiness; among the rest, he urged God with his
own words, Thou have commanded me to worship thee in thy Tabernacle, to appear
before thee, that is my desire and delight, my heart would seek and see thy
face there: Thus he presses God for performance on his side, that he might be
enabled to obey Gods precept.

Where God denies public Ordinances, there he himself will be a little
Sanctuary to his chosen, Ezekiel. 11.16. But where he affords them, he expects
that they should be attended: Christ himself went often into the Synagogues.

Peter and John went up into the Temple at the hour of prayer, Acts 3.1. On the
Sabbath we went out of the City by a rivers side, where prayer was wont to be
made, Acts 13.23. and Paul reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath, Acts 18.4.
Those that by their practices contemn public Worship, have neither Christ nor
his Apostles for their pattern.

One of the Jewish Rabbis has a saying, He that dwells in a City where there
is a Synagogue, and comes not to Prayers, Merito dicitur vicinus malus, is
deservedly styled a bad neighbor. Beader, if thou forsakest the Assemblies of
the Saints, how useful soever thou may be to others bodies, yet thou art a
bad neigbour in neglecting soul-service.

The Lord Jesus Christ as he was faithful as a Son in his own house, took
special care to provide and prepare such public servants, as might give every
one their meat in due season. The Ministers of the word are his public
Officers appointed by himself to have the oversight of his Saints. They are
both Fathers to beget, and Tutours to bring up his Sons and Daughters. They are
his Stewarts to dispense publicly the mysteries of the Gospel of peace. But
little do they think, who set light by public Ordinances, what a price Christ
paid, that he might enable and qualify them for his Churches profit. The gifts
he bestows on Pastors are not the least sign of his good will to his people.
Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts to men. And he
gave some Apostles; and some Profits; and some Evangelists; and some Pastors;
and some Teachers. For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity
of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature, of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.8, 11.12, 13. As
Kings on the day of their Coronation, usually appear in all their Majesty and
magnificence, and do some famous act (as of a general pardon or the like) which
may speak their love and respect to their Subjects. So Jesus Christ when he
rode Triumphantly in the Chariot of his ascension into Heavens glorious City,
to sit and reign there at the right hand of the Majesty on High, gave abilities
to Ministers, endowed them with answerable gifts and graces, that they might
dispense the Ordinances of God powerfully, and profitably, as a special fruit
of his passion for, and a singular testimony of his affection to his Church.

I would wish thee therefore to be present at, and to continue to the end of
public Ordinances. David would be a Doorkeeper in the House of God. Because
a Doorkeeper is first in, and last out. Friend, if thou were feasting some
Noble person thou would not rise from Table, unless necessity forced thee,
before all were taken away, and thanks returned. I must tell thee that when
thou art feeding with the blessed Potentate, it is much below good manners, to
turn thy back upon him, without his leave and blessing.

Fifthly, If thou would make Religion thy business on a Lords day, Tune thine
heart to spiritual joy and delight therein. Holy alacrity and joy is not only
a crown and credit to, but also a special part of Christianity. The Kingdom of
God consists not in meats and drink, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. Gods ways are not so bad, but that the
Travelers in them may be cheerful; His work is good wages, and therefore its
no wonder that his Servants are so joyful.

Because beleivers have ever cause of comfort, therefore they are commanded
always to rejoice, Phil. 3. Whether their sins or sufferings come into their
hearts, they must not sorrow as they that have no hope; In their saddest
conditions, they have the spirit of consolation. There is seed of joy sown
within them, when it is buried under the clods, and appears not above ground.
But there are special times when God calls for this grain to spring up; They
have some red letters, some holy days in the Calendar of their lives, wherein
this joy as Wine at a Wedding, is most seasonable, but among all those days it
never relisheth so well, it never tastes so pleasantly as on a Lords day, joy
suits no person so much as a Saint, and it becomes no season so well as a
Sabbath. Joy in God on other days is like the Birds Chirping in winter, which
is pleasing, but joy on a Lords day is like their warbling Tunes, and pretty
notes in Spring, when all other things look with a suitable delightful aspect.
This is the day which the Lord has made (he that made all days, so especially
of this day, but what follows) we will rejoice and be glad therein, Psa.
118.24. In which words we have the Churches solace or joy, and the season or
day of it. Her solace was great. We will rejoice and be glad. Those expressions
are not needless repetitions, but show the exeuberancy or high degree of their
joy. The season of it. This is the day the Lord has made, Compare this place
with Mat. 21.22.23. and Act. 4.11. and you will find that the precedent verses
are a prophetical prediction of Christ's Resurrection, Sic. Arnob.
and so this verse foretells the Churches joy upon that memorable and glorious
day. And indeed if a feast be made for laughter, Eccles. 10.19. Then that day
wherein Christ feasteth his Saints with the choicest mercies, may well command
his greatest spiritual mirth, A thanksgiving day has a double precedence of a
fast day; On a Fast Day we eye Gods anger; On a Thanksgiving-day we look to God
favor. In the former we specially mind our own corruptions. In the latter Gods
compassions, therefore a Fast Day calls for sorrow, a Thanksgiving day for joy.
But the Lords day is the highest thanksgiving day, and deserves much more then
the Jewish Purim, to be a day of feasting and gladness, and a good day.

On this day we enjoy the Communion of Saints and shall we not delight in those
excellent ones, Psa. 16.3. On this day we have fellowship with the blessed
Savior, and shall we not fit under his shadow, with great delight? Cant. 1. On
this day we are partakers of the Ordinances of God and shall we not be joyful
in the House of prayer? Isa. 56.7. On this day we have special converse with
the God of Ordinances, and who would not draw water with joy out of the Well of
Salvation? Isa. 12.3. Surely whilst we are in the midst of so much Musk, we
must needs be perfumed. Who can walk where the Sun shines so hot, and not be
warmed?

It is Gods precept (as well as thy privilege) to make Gods day thy delight,
If thou call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, Isa. 58.13. Delights,
Tremel reads it. Thy delicate things according to the Septuag. Whether thou art
meditating on Gods works, or attending on Gods Word, which are the two
principal duties of the day, they both call for delight and joy.

If on this day of rest thou considerest the work of creation, and Gods rest,
it behooves thee to follow David's pattern, Thou Lord have made me glad through
thy works, I will triumph in the works of thy hands, Psa. 92.4.

If thou considerest the work of Redemption, and Christ's rest, surely out of
the carcass of the Lion of the tribe of Judah, thou may get some Honey as may
delight thy soul, and force thee to sing, My soul does magnify the Lord, my
spirit rejoices in God my Savior, Luke 1.46, 47. The babe in the womb leapt
for joy of him before he was born. The heavenly host sung at his birth, and
wilt not thou at his second birth, his resurrection from the dead. O let the
Primitive Christians salutations be thy consolation, The Lord is risen.

If thou meditatest on glorification, and thine own rest can thou do less
then rejoice in hope of glory, what Prisoner shackled with Satan's temptations,
and fettered with his own corruptions, in the dark Gaol of this World, can
think of the time when his Irons shall be knocked off, and he enjoy the pleasant
light and glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and not be transported with joy?
What heir in his minority, banished from his kindred and country, can think
without comfort of his full age, when he shall have the full fruition both of
his estate and friends; doubtless friend, the Sabbaths of the holy, are the
Suburbs of heaven. In heaven there is no buying, no selling, no ploughing, no
sowing, nothing but worshipping God, communion with him, fruition of him, and
delight in him; There remains a rest for the people of God. There they rest
from their labors; If thou on a Lords day turnest thy back upon the World, and
go up into the mount, conversing with, and rejoicing in the blessed God,
what do thou less then begin thine eternal Sabbath here. Such a Lords day can
be no less then Heaven in a looking glass, representing truly, though darkly,
thy future eternal happiness; There is no perfume so sweet to a Pilgrim, as his
own smoke.

When thou art attending on the word, truly that Aquavitae, that hot water may
well revive thy spirit. Thy testimonies are my delight, says David, I have
rejoiced more in thy testimonies, then in all manner of riches, Psa. 119.24,
77. The Word of God is sometimes called a treasure, and what beggar would not
rejoice in a treasure; sometimes fire, and truly Reader thine heart is frozen,
to purpose if this fire do not heat it; Solomon tell us, As cold water to a
thirsty soul, so is good news from a far Country, Prove. 25.25. The Word of God
contains the best news that ever ears heard. Peace on earth, good will toward
men; and the glad tidings of the Gospel come from Heaven a far Country. What
can thou say then? why they should not be as welcome and refreshing to thee
as cold water to a thirsty soul.

Variety of things that are excellent is not a little ground of complacency in
them. Variety of choice voices please the ear, variety of curious colors
delight the eyes; variety of dainties are acceptable to the taste. Nero
promises rewards to them that invented new pleasures. God has for that purpose
disht out his worship into several and various duties, that it might be more
pleasant to us. Sometimes we speak to God, sometimes we hear from God,
sometimes we are praying for supply of our necessities, sometimes we are
praising him for his infinite excellencies, sometimes our mouths are open to
sing, sometimes our ears are open to hear the Sermon, sometimes our eyes are
open to see the Sacrament. The same meat is dressed several ways to make it the
more welcome, and so the more strengthening to us. Hippocrates observes that
that food which nature receives with delight, though not so good in it self,
affords better nourishment then that which is more wholesome, against which
nature has a reluctance. Reader, thy delight and pleasure in the sacred
Ordinances of the Lords day will help to make them more profitable to thee.
Some colors which do delight, do also strengthen the sight.

Sixthly, if thou would make godliness thy business on a Lords day, Let no
duty satisfy without communion with God in it. Ordinances are the Galleries
and Gardens (and for that end appointed) wherein God and thy soul may walk
together. For this cause they are called a glass, because therein the Christian
beholds the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. As Zacheus climbed up to the
Sycamore Tree to see Jesus, and when he once had a sight of him, he came down
joyfully; so go thou up into the Trees of duties for this purpose, that thou
may see God in Christ; and unless this be granted thee, come down
sorrowfully. When men go to meet a friend at a certain place, and they miss
him, how discontentedly do they go away?

Alas, what are the Ordinances without God, but as a Table without meat, from
which a living soul must needs depart thirsty and hungry? David loved the
habitation of Gods house, but it was because it was the place where Gods honor
dwelt, Psa. 27. David longed for the courts of God, more then for his Crown
relations or possessions, or any outward comforts, but it was because God
afforded there his gracious presence; Gods glorious presence is in his Church
Triumphant, but he is graciously present in his Church Militant. My soul
longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh
eryeth out for the living God, Psa. 84.2. His desire was as eager and earnest
as of a longing woman with child, who is ready to faint away and dye if she be
not satisfied: Sometimes he compares his desire to thirst, of which creatures
are more impatient then hunger. Psa. 63.1. Sometimes to the thirst of an Heart
after the waterbrooks, which creature being naturally hot and dry, in a very
great degree, is exceeding thirsty; but the object of his desire, of his
thirst, was God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, O when shall I
come and appear before him! Psa. 42.1, 2. To see thy beauty and glory, as I
have seen thee in the Sanctuary. It was communion with God in his life and
love, in his graces and comforts, which the Psalmist so much longed for. The
sweet smiles of Gods face, the honey dews of his Spirit, were David's Paradise
of pleasure, his heaven upon earth.

They that come to duty merely for duty, know not what it means to meet with
God, and therefore though they neither see his face nor hear his voice, yet are
contented, like those that were born in some dark Dungeon, and never yet saw
the Sun, they are well enough satisfied without it; but those who have seen it,
and know that that light is pleasant, if they look up to the heaven of
Ordinances, and see not the Sun of righteousness, its no longer day with them;
The true Disciples met together the first day of the week, and enjoying Jesus
among them, rejoiced indeed; but they are only glad in duties, when they had
seen the Lord, John 20.20. They were glad when they had seen the Lord.

Reader, when thou go to the Ordinances of God, go to meet God in the
Ordinances. As Moses, go up into the Mount of duties to converse with thy
Maker. Go to view the beauty of his face when thou inquire into his holy
Temple. When thou go to prayer, let it be in hope to get thy heart nearer to
heaven.

When thou go to hear, mind communion with him that speaks from heaven, and
then only rejoice in the word, when as the star to the wise men, leads thee to
the place where Christ is. It is God in the Word which causes efficacy, it is
God in prayer who causes prevalency, it is God in the Sacrament who causes
alacrity, it is God in a Sabbath who causes complacency.

When thou go to the waters of the Sanctuary, say as Elisha at the waters of
Jordan, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? Where is the God and Father of my Lord
Jesus Christ? Why is thy Chariot, O Son of righteousness so long a coming! Why
tarry? what clogs the wheels of thy Chariot? O when will thou come unto me,
Psa. 101.2. When thou come from the Ordinances, and have not met God in them,
though thou have showed never so great parts or gifts, or outward devotion, say
as Absalom, All this avails me nothing, so long as I may not see the Kings
face. 1 Samuel 28 15.
Saul himself was sad and sorrowful, when he enquired of the Lord, and the Lord
answered him not; and can thou O Saint be joyful when thy beloved has
withdrawn himself!

Look upon performances as boats to ferry thy soul over, and give it a passage
to God, and take heed of going contentedly from God without God; Psa. 43.3, 4.
let thy prayer be, O send out thy light, and thy truth; let them lead me, let
them bring me to thy holy hill, to thy Tabernacle; then will I go unto the
Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy.

Seventhly, Sanctify the whole day to Gods service; Be early up in the
morning, and as late as thy body will permit at night. The Israelites when they
were to batter down the strong holds of Jericho, rose up early in the morning,
Judge. 6.15. Upon the Lords day thy work must be to batter down the strong holds
of sin; rise early, lose no time. Do not lose the least moment (if it be
possible) of this sacred day. The very filings of Gold are of worth; The
smallest part of this holy day is of great price; The word Shamur to keep (the
Sabbath) Lev. 19.30. signifies to keep with care and diligence as a great
treasure, of which a man would lose none. When men beat Ginger, they will (if
good Husbands) be careful that little fly out of the Mortar; but if they beat
pearl, they are extraordinary watchful, that not the least of that be lost,
because a little of that is of great value. Reader, if thou art a good Husband
for thy soul, I doubt not but thou esteemest thy time in the week days at so
high a rate that thou dare not sqander it away in doing nothing, or in that
which is worse then nothing; but O what worth, what price will thou set upon an
opportunity upon a Lords day? How diligent will thou be to improve the least
piece of that day? God gives thee six whole days for thine own works; do not
deny to him one whole day in seven. Let thy conscience be Judge; Is it not
unrighteousness to buy by one measure which is greater, and sell by another
measure which is lesser? when the day is consecrated to God, as the goods of
Ananias, it is dangerous to keep back any part of it for our own use.

Do thou all the day long live and walk as it were in the other World; Make it
a Sabbath, a day of rest. 1. From sin and wickedness, this is thy duty every
day, but especially on this day; Every sin on a Sabbath is double, the season
is a great aggravation of the sin. The wicked indeed are like the raging Sea,
which cannot rest, but every day bubble up mire and dirt, Isa. 57.20. 2. From
the World and the works of thy calling; Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore,
for it is holy unto you. Every one that defiles it, shall surely be put to
death; for whosoever does any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from
among his people, Exodus 31.14. The Jews were to rest from works of least
importance, as gathering sticks (he that fetched in sticks, was sent out of the
World with stones) and of greatest concernment, as building the Tabernacle; and
though the Christian now has more liberty, yet he has no leave at all to
pollute the day by wickedness, or to profane the day by any earthly work which
might have been done before the day, or may be done as well after it.

May I not say to thee of this day, as Elisha to Geehezi? Is this a time to
receive money and garments, and sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
maidservants? 2 Kings 5.26. Is the Sabbath a time for civil affairs? The
Sabbath day is therefore called a day of restraint, Deuteronomy. 16.8. because then
men are forbidden all work, says Junius. As none were ever losers by laying
afide their own works to attend Gods Worship; he took care of Isreal's safety
whilst they were in his service, that none of their Neighbors though bitter
enemies, should so much as desire their Cities, Exodus 34.24. so none I am
confident were ever gainers by inching in some part of their callings
unnecessarily at the end of Gods day, and by setting God aside to serve
themselves; the very time will be a Canker to consume their estates; And as
they that take Crocus into their stomachs, bring up not only ill humors, but
that also which would prove good nourishment; So some have had experience that
their profanation of Gods day to increase their estates, has forced them to
vomit up the whole, God has given thee days enough for thy calling, space
enough to mind it in, thou needst not trespass upon his holy day, upon his holy
ground. It was no small aggravation of Adams sin, that though he had choice of
fruits, he would eat of the forbidden fruit; so it will much increase thy sin,
if when thou have choice of time for thy trade, thou should meddle with it on
a Sabbath.

Reader, Debet totus dies festivus a Christiano expendi in operibus bonis
Grostead in precept.
as thy duty is to rest the whole day from wickedness and worldly work, so also
to employ the whole day in Gods Worship, be either praying, or reading, or
hearing, or singing, or meditating, or discoursing with others about the Works
or Word of God: Be always taken up, either with public, Hoc sensu loquitur
propheta, Sia primo mane incipimuslauda. re d^um, continuandas esse ejus
laudesad ultimam noctis partem. Calvin in loc.
private or secret duties. In the 92. Psalm, that Psalm for the Sabbath, v. 1,
and 3. we are exhorted to show forth Gods loving kindness in the morning, and
his faithfulness at evening. Now we know that in Scripture sense the morning
and the evening are the whole day; The whole day is Gods by ordination, and why
should not it be his by observation; God has dedicated this day wholly to hsi
own Worship, now every devoted thing is most holy to the Lord. Lev. 27.28.

The Pope and Church of Rome have half holy days, as St. Blacies day, which is
holy in the forenoon only; but God and the Church of Christ have no half holy
days. Observe how exact God is in expressing a whole natural day. From evening
to evening you shall keep the Sabbath, Lev. 23.32. Their days were reckoned
from evening to evening, from the creation; but ours (because Christ rose in
the morning) from morning to morning.

If thou have any sincere delight in God, and esteem of the true riches, I
cannot but think that thou will be covetous of the smallest part of Gods day,
and wish as R. Jose, Jewish Antiq. l. 3. c. 3. Ex Buxtorf. Comment mas.
that thy portion may be to begin the Sabbath with those of Tiberias, because
they began it sooner then others, and to end it with those of Tsepphore,
because they continued it longer then others. If thy soul ever met God on a
Sabbath, thou will surely be ready to say with Joshua, Thou Sun stand still in
Gibeon, Josh. 10 12.
and thou Moon in the valleys of Ajalon; O that the day were longer, that I
might have more time to fight the Lords battles against my spiritual enemies!

Eighthly, If thou would make Religion thy business on a Lords day, Meditate
therein on the word and works of God. Consider his works; This is part of the
work of the day. David in that Psalm for the Sabbath, gives thee a pattern, O
Lord how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep, Psa. 92.5. Is a
dishonor to a workman, to make excellent pieces, and to manifest abundance of
Skill and Art, and ingenuity, and then not to have them taken notice of. God
has done his mighty works to be remembered, and wondered at. Its said of
Pythagoras, that he lived sequestered from men in a cave for a whole year
together, that he might meditate on the abstruse points of Philosophy. I wish
thee to an easier and pleasanter task, to sequester thy self some time every
Lords day, to ponder the infinite perfections which appear in the operations of
his hand. God will be both admired and magnified by his people on earth as well
as in Heaven, which none can do but those that seriously consider his works;
Men have been much wondered at for some peculiar rare works, though in them a
Christian should look farther, even to God the Author of their skill and
wisdom. The very Greeks acknowledged somewhat like this, that all Arts come
from God, in making Minerva the Daughter of Jupiter, and to have had her
generation in his Divine brain; but alas the choicest pieces of men to the
smallest Works of God, are but as childrens houses of dirt to the stateliest
Courts of Christendom. Archites was much extolled for causing a Dove of Wood to
hang in the Air, being equally poised with its own weight; but what is this to
the work of God in hanging the earth upon nothing? Job 26.7. The earth is the
heaviest and lowest Element. A little piece of earth held up and let fall, will
never cease moving till it come to rest upon some solid body; and yet behold
the great mass of earth with innumerable bodies upon it, hangs fast in the
midst of the open Air, having no visible Pillar nor foundation to rest upon.
Well might God reckon it to Job among his wondrous works, Job 38.4, 5, 6. Upon
what be the Sockets of it fastened? Aristotle himself could not but admire it.
Archimedes was famous for contriving the motions of the Sun, Moon and Stars in
his Horology; but alas what is this to the glorious heavens themselves, which
God stretched out like a Curtain, and to the Noble Host of great and glittering
bodies, keeping their Rank and File, and being not only incredibly swift, but
also regularly and orderly in their motions! The Heavens declare the glory of
God, and the Firmament shows his handy work. There is so much of God
appearing in the Heavens, that many have taken them for God, and given them
divine worship. Naturalists tell us that the head of Nilus cannot be found, but
many sweet springs issuing from it are discovered. Though thy finite capacity
can never reach fully the fountain and head, Gods infinite Being and
Excellencies; yet thou may find many refreshing streams which flow from it.
A little River will lead thee to the Ocean Ohow much of the goodness, power and
wisdom of God appears in the work of creation! The Rabbis say that in every
Apex of the Law there is a Mountain of sense; sure I am that in the smallest
Creatures there is abundance of the Creator; How does the Wisdom of God shine
forth in the exquisite workmanship, variety, order, subordination, and
serviceableness of the Creatures one to another, that David might well cry out,
O Lord, how mavelous are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all.

Pontanus, Scultet. Annal.
Chancellor of Saxony, propounds to be viewed and weighed the most beautiful
Archwork of Heaven, resting upon no post but Gods power, and yet standing fast
for ever. The clouds as thin as the liquor contained in them; behold, says he,
how they hang and move though weighty in their burden, thy salute us only, or
threaten us rather, and pass we know not whither; How does his goodness appear
in furnishing the World so richly for the supply of his Creatures! the earth is
full of thy goodness. Luther in his Colloquia Men's. tells us that God is at
more charge every day to maintain Sparrows, then all the yearly Revenues of the
King of France are worth; but especially toward man, in making him so
excellent a Creature, and in making so many excellent creatures for him.

His power is also evident both in creating such great and noble creatures of
nothing (he used not the least tool or instrument in making the Heavens and
earth) and in having them all at his beck and bidding, at his call and command;
the greatest do him homage, and the smallest do him service. The Sun as strong
and swift as he is (moving as some write every hour 16000 Miles) yet he flies
back like a Coward if God speak but the word, Josh. 10.12. Job 9.5, to 10. He
armeth Flies and Lice; and what Execution did they do upon the Egyptians?

Cambden tells us the Arms of the Shagburies in Warwickshire, being Stars,
Camb. Britain.
are found engraven in the very stones within their Manor of Shagbury; Whether
that be true or no, I know not; but sure I am that the Arms of the Infinite
God, his eternal power, manifold wisdom, and matchless goodness, are so plainly
written on his works in the World, in that first volume of Creation, that he
that runs may read them. Solomon tells us, God has set the World in men's
hearts; namely, that the skilfulness of the Workman may be admired in the
exactness of his works, Eccles. 3.11.

I might draw thee farther, and show thee (but that I would not be so large)
how these glorious perfections of God are Printed in a larger letter, in a
fairer character, in the second volume, the work of Redemption. This is the
object of Angels admiration, and ought to be of thy meditation.

Truly thy duty is to read God in the first book, the book of the creatures;
and more especially in the second, in Jesus Christ upon his own day.

Thy meditation of Gods works, as it will give honor to God, so it will not a
little further thy spiritual good; When David considered the work of creation,
^a. 8.1. to 4
he falls presently upon exalting God, and debasing himself. When I consider
the Heavens, the work of thy hands, the Moon and the Stars which thou have
made, O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth, and thy
glory above the Heavens; there he sets God up high; but then be casts himself
downlow, What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that
thou do thus visit him!

When thine heart is like Wax hardened, bring it by meditation to the warm
beams of this Sun, and they will soften it.

So when David considered the work of Redemption, how does he magnify God, and
vilify himself. What am I! and what is my Fathers House, that thou have
brought me up hitherto! and yet this was a small thing in thine eyes O God; for
thou have also spoken of thy servants house for a great while to come, 1 Chronicles.
16.16, 17. O Friend, as rubbing the Limbs with hot Oils is a great means to
recover them when they are benumbed; so when thy heart is dull and dead, on a
Lords day, if thou would but ply it with the meditation of the infinite love
and goodness of God in sending his Son to dye for thy soul, it would be a
Sovereign means to quicken and revive it.

Consider also the Word of God which thou have heard on that day; Do thou like
Mary, ponder it in thine heart. Meditation to the word, is what fire is to
water; though water be naturally so cold, yet put fire under it, and it will
make it hot and boiling; so though thine heart be cold in regard of affection
to the word, put but this fire under it, and it will boil with love to it; O
how love I thy law! there is his heat of affection (the expression is both by
way of interrogation and acclamation, showing the fervency and intension of his
love) but what was the fire which caused it? it is my meditation all the day,
Psa. 119.

The reason why some men profit so little by the word, is, want of meditation.
If a man eat his food, and as soon as it is in his stomach vomit it up again,
it is no wonder if he get little strength by it, or if he pine and consume
away. Truly, if Sermons enter in at one ear and out at the other, making no
stay with thee, I shall not marvail if they work no change in thee.

CHAP. XXII. Brief Directions for the Sanctification of the Lords day, from
morning to night.
REader, beside those general directions which I have largely insisted on, I
shall annex here some short directions, how thou may spend a Lords day from
the beginning to the end of it, as may be most for the honor of God, and the
furthering thine own everlasting good.

1. Be sure thou take some pains with thy heart the afternoon (or evening at
least) before, to prepare thy soul for the ensuing Sabbath. As our whole life
should be a preparation for death; yet the nearer we draw to the night of our
dissolution, the more gloriously (as the setting Sun) we should shine with
holiness; so in the whole Week we should be preparing for the Lords day; but
the more the day does approach, the more our preparation must increase. The
bigger the Vessel is, the more Water may be carried from the Fountain.
According to the measure of the Sacks which the Patriarchs carried to Joseph,
so were they filled with Corn by Joseph; preparation does not only fit the
heart for grace, but also widen the heart that it may receive much of the
Spirit of God. Some Servants when they are to bake in the Morning, put their
Wood in the Oven over night, and thereby it burns both the sooner and the
better. Men make much the more riddance of their work, who being to travail a
great journey, load their Carts, or put up their things, and lay them ready
over night. If thou art a Christian, thy experience will tell thee, that after
thou have on a Saturday called thy self to account for thy carriage on the
foregoing Week, bewailed thy miscarriages before the Lord; in particular, thy
playing the Truant on former Lords days, when thou should have been learning
those Lessons which Christ has set thee in his Law, and have been earnest with
God for pardon of thy sins, and a sanctified improvement of the approaching
Sabbath; I say thy experience cannot but teach thee that thy profit after such
preparation will make thee abundant amends for thy pains; and that thou have
the best visits, the sweetest kisses, when thy lips, thy heart, are thus made
clean beforehand.

2. If the weakness of thy body do not hinder rise earlier on the Lords day
then ordinary. When the Israelites were encompassing Jericho; on the seventh
day, they rose early in the morning; and according to many Expositors it was on
the Sabbath day the walls of Jericho fell down, Josh. 6.15. One main work which
thou have to do on a Lords day, is, to batter down the strong holds of sin, to
conquer those Canaanites which would keep thee out of the promised land; do
thou rise early for this end. He that rises and sets out early, goes a
considerable part of his way before others awake. Its sordid to lie lazing and
to turn upon thy bed as a door on the hinges (and never the farther off) upon
any day, butmost sad and sinful on a Lords day.

3. When thou first awakest, turn up thy heart to God in praise for his
protection the night past, for the light of another day, especially of his own
day; and in Prayer for the light of his countenance, and for assistance in
every duty, and his direction throughout the day. As thou art rising, if no
other more profitable Subject offer it self to thy thoughts, Meditate how the
night is spent, the day is at hand; it concerns thee therefore to put off the
works of darkness, and to put on the armor of light. When thou think on the
nakedness of thy body, how unseemly it would be for thee to walk up and down
without raiment do not forget the nakedness of thy soul by sin, and how
uncomely thou art in the sight of God, without the robes of Christ's
righteousness and the graces of the Holy Ghost.

4. When thou art dressed, let nothing hinder thee from thy secret devotion. When
thou art in thy closet consider of the price which God has put into thy hand,
the value and worth of a Lords day, the weight and concernment of the duties
therein, and the account thou art ere long to give for every Sabbath and season
of grace. These thoughts, as heavy weights on a clock, would make thee move
more swiftly in the work of the day. After some time spent in meditation, in
some short, yet reverent and hearty petitions, entreat Gods help in the present
and subsequent duties of the day; After which read some portion of the
Scripture and pour out thy soul in prayer. Get thy heart effectually possessed
with this truth, That God must work his own work in thee and for thee, or it
will never be done; that as the Spirit moved on the waters at first, and then
the living creatures were formed; so the Spirit must move upon the waters of
Ordinances, before they can produce or increase spiritual life. Hereby thou will be stirred up to more fervent supplication for, and more importunate
expectation of help from heaven; In thy prayers remember all the assemblies of
the Saints that they may see Gods beauty, power and glory, as they have
sometimes beheld them in his sanctuary. Entreat God to cloth his ordinances
with his own strength that they may be mighty through him for the bringing in,
and building up many souls. In special, when thou art at prayer, think of the
Preachers of the Gospel; Conceive that thou hear every one of them speaking
to thee as Paul to his Romans, I beseech thee for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake,
and for the love of the spirit, that you strive together with me in your
prayers to God for me, Romans 15.30. Their work is of infinite weight, it is
Godwork, Soul-work, Temple-work; Not one of them but may say (with Nehemiah) on
a Lords day, upon much greater reason, O I am doing a great work. Nehem. 6.3.
Their opposition is great The Devil will do what may be to hinder them; the
world hates them, their own hearts will distub them; Their strength is small,
their graces are weak; Alas what can they do! O therefore pray for them.

5. After thy secret duties thou may (if nature require) refresh thy body
with convenient food. Thy God allows thee to cherish, though not to
overcharge thy outward man, I shall speak to thy carriage about eating and
drinking in the twenty third chapter, and therefore omit it here. Vide Family
duties in Cap. 27


6. In the next place it will be fit that thou call thy family together and
enter upon family duties. Namely to read the word of God, to call upon the name
of God, and to sing to the praise of God.

7. Let as many of thy family as can conv^^^enny be spared accompany thee to
public Ordinances. Vide more of this in Cap. 27.
Remember the command, Thou, thy Son, thy daughter, thy manservant and
maidservant, and all within thy gate. Do not pamper their bodies, and starve
the souls of thy household; It is Recorded of Dr. Chaterton, Mr. of Emannel
College, that he never caused any of his Servants to stay at home on a Lords
day, barely to dress meat; be able to say with Cornelins, (who feared the Lord
with all his house) we are all here present before God.

8. As thou art going to the place of public Ordinances, consider with thy
self that thou art going to converse, not with men, but with God; even with
that God who searches the heart, who will not be mocked, and who is of purer
eyes then to behold iniquity, that thou may hereby be quickened unto
uprightness, and seriousness, and to dart up some ejaculatory prayer to God for
aid and assistance.

9. In every part of public worship, carry thy self with reverence, humility,
love, faith, and sincerity. Hear, sing, pray, receive the Sacrament as one that
does all in Gods sight, as one that is working for his immortal soul, and as
one that within a few days shall enter the gates of death, and never have a
season more for such sacred duties. Depart not from the Church till all be
done. In a Court of civil Judicature, thou willt stay till the Court rises; If
thou would have Gods blessing with thee, do not leave it behind th^^^^ As
thou come from the Church, meditate on what thou have heard, chew that meat
which the Minister has put into thy mouth, thereby thou may get much
spiritual nourishment.

10. When thou art come home, usually let nothing hinder from prayer, either in
thy family or closet, wherein I would advise thee to turn the heads of the
Sermon and Chapters read, into Petitions, as also to beg pardon of thy
wanderings in the Worship of God, and beseech him who with his own hand wrote
the Law in two Tables, that he would write the word Read and Preached in the
Tables of thine heart.

11. At Dinner take heed of excess, whereby thy body will be unfitted to serve
thy soul; yet do not pinch or punish thy body, because the day is a day of joy
and delight; I would wish thee to watch thy heart and tongue all the day long,
but especially at meals, that thou may not think thine own thoughts, nor
speak thine own words. If thy self or others start any unseasonable or earthly
discourse at Table, give conscience leave to speak to thee, as Judas to the
Apostles, What needs this wast? What needs this wast of precious time, of
so rich a treasure as every part of this day is. Let the first dish at Table be
Gods, I mean when a blessing is desired, let presently some savory discourse be
offered; hereby fin may be prevented; The Jews had two notable defeats on the
Sabbath day, because they would not defend themselves; Josephus l. 12. c. 8.
and l. 14 c, 8
the first defeat was by Antiochus, the second by Pompey the Great. Reader if
thou would not have Satan to foil thee on a Lords day, keep a strict watch
over thy thoughts, words, and works. After Dinner, as time will give leave,
either Sing, or Pray with thy family, or repeat what thou have heard, or busy
thy self in Godly conference chiefly about what was Read or Preached that
morning.

12. Neglect not afternoon Ordinances. Some Persons are like some Physicians,
Fore-noon men; they must be sought to in the morning only, if you would find
them about Religious duties. Friend, If thy soul ever met thy Savior in
public duties, thou can not but love and prize them at an high rate. In the
close of the day sometimes God sends in the chief blessing of the day. A
Sabbath Tide has brought in many a good draught of Fish. Be present at, and
serious in public Ordinances. As an error in the first concoction can never
be mended in the second, so an error or carelessness in public, cannot be
mended by carefulness in private.

13. When thou returnest from public Ordinances, take some time to meditate
on the word or Works of God; thou may read over the eighth particular in the
twenty one Chapter to help thee therein.

14. Do not lessen thy secret or private duties on that day; let them rather be
increased then diminished. The Offerings under the Gospel were Prophesied to be
greater then under the Law. Under the Law one Lamb was to be offered; Under the
Gospel six Lambs, Numb. 28. Ezekiel. 46.

15. Call thy Children and Servants to account what they have learned that day,
and explain what they understand not; hereby thou will benefit both thy self
and others. Chemnitius observes that our blessed Savior in the 4. of Mark,
and 14. of Luke, Examen de dieb fest.
after he had instructed the people as a public Preacher on the Sabbath day,
did examine and teach his Apostles as a private Master of a Family.

16. At Evening, Sing, Pray, and (if thou can) repeat (the heads at least of)
both the Sermons. Plutarch reports of a River which runs sweet in the
morning, and bitter at night; Let it not be said of thee, that thy Morning was
like Nebuchadnezzars Image of Gold, and thy evening like the feet of it, of
clay.

17. Before thou go to rest, examine thy self what thou have got or lost
that day. Reflect upon the carriage of thy heart in the several duties, as also
what welcome thou had at the Throne of grace; what covered dishes were
brought thee by the spirit from Gods own Table; that accordingly thou may beg
pardon or return praise. If thou have been melted with Gods affection, obtained
any strength against thy corruptions, or received any degree of grace, take
heed of ascribing the glory to thy self; In Justinians law it was decreed, That
no Workman should set up his name within the body of that building which he
made out of another man's cost. If thou did pray, or hear, or sing, or read,
or meditate with any life or delight, seriousness or sincerity, in any measure
agreeable to his Word and Will, all was from God; there was not a stone used by
thee toward this spiritual building, but it was taken out of his Quarrey. As
he is the Author, so let him have the honor.

18. Be watchful over thy self at the latter end of the day, with all
imaginable circumspection, that the last part of the day, may be the best part
of the day; Some Soldiers prevail in the day, but lose all again at night,
because they are slothful when their Quarters are beaten up by their Enemies.
Some lose at night what they got in the day; like Hannibal, they know how to
obtain a Victory, but not to improve a Victory. Usually the Evenings are cold
though the days are hot.

19. As Orators at the close of their speech, use all their Art and Skill to
move the affections of their Auditors, so at the close of the Lords day, put
forth all thy grace and spiritual strength, to prevail with God for a blessing.
Say of the Sabbath, as Jacob to the Angel, I will not let the go without a
blessing.

20. Labor to keep the influence of Lords day Ordinances warm upon thy spirit
all the week after; let not thy devotion pass away with the day. Some Children
when they put on new Shoes on a Sabbath, are very careful to keep them clean,
are unwilling to set their feet to the ground for fear of dirt, but in the week
days will run up to the Ankles in Water or Mire. O let not childrens play be
thy earnest, but endeavor that thy practices in secret and private, in thy
calling and in all companies on the Week days, may be answerable to the great
privileges which thou did enjoy, and the grace which thou did receive on
the Lords day.

A good wish about the Lords day, wherein the former heads are Epitomized.
THe first day of the Week being of divine institution, The Introduction.
and Baptized by God himself with that Honorable name of the Lords day, partly
in regard of its Author, This is the day which the Lords has made; partly in
regard of the blessed Redeemer, who rose that day and Triumphed over the Grave,
the Devil, the Curse of the Law, and Hell; it being a day Sanctified for the
glory of my Savior, of which I may say as of Jacob, The Lord has chosen it to
himself for his peculiar Treasure, Psa. 135.4. and a day set apart for the
spiritual and eternal good of my precious soul, wherein I may enjoy communion
with my God in all his Ordinances, without interruption, I wish in general that
as the Spirit may be in me in the week days, so that I may be in the Spirit on
the Lords day, filled therewith, and enabled thereby to have my conversation
all the day long in Heaven. O that my care in fitting my soul for it, my holy
carriage at it, and my suitable conversation after it, may testify that I had
rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God, then to dwell in the Tents of
Wickedness; and that I esteem one day in his Courts, better then a thousand
elsewhere. I wish in particular that I may prepare for it, Preparation
as for a Wedding day, wherein Christ and my soul are to be espoused together,
and to that end before it comes, may be careful, so to order my earthly
affairs that they may not incroach upon this Holy ground; and so open the door
of my heart, and adorn it with spiritual excellencies, that the King of Glory
may enter in, and think himself a welcome Guest in my soul: O that I might
never give my God cause to complain of me, as once of the Jews, Your Sabbaths
and solemn feasts I cannot away with, for your hands are defiled. As Nehemiah
shut the Gates of the City, that no burdens might be carried in on the Sabbath
day, so let me secure the Gate of my heart, that no Worldly things may disturb
me in Sabbath duties. O let me not like Martha be careful, and troubled about
many things, but on this day especially, sit at Christ's feet, mind the one
thing necessary, and choose the good part which shall never be taken from me. I
wish that I may long more for it then ever a Bridegroom did for his Bride;
that when it is come in, I may bid it heartily Welcome, and that as my Savior
rose early, that morning to justify me, so I may rise early on this day to
glorify him.

I desire that this holy day may be an high day in my account, both because the
Lord of the Sabbath has separated it to sacred uses, and because it is the day
of his resurrection, whence so much good comes to my soul. Esteem the day as a
privilege.
By his passion he laid down the price of my redemption; but by his rising
again (the Judge of Quick and dead sending his officer, an Angel, to roll away
the stone, open the prison door, and let him out) he manifests to the world
that the debt is discharged and the law fully saatisfied: O of what value
should this day be to me! My Redeemers humiliation indeed, was like Joseph's
imprisonment, but his delivery out of the grave, like Joseph's enlargement and
preferment, whereby he came into a capacity to advance and enrich all his
relations.

I pray that I may look on this day as a special season to sow to the spirit
in, and improve it accordingly. A price to get and increase grace.
I believe that my God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name or
spends his day in vain. O let me not like a foolish child, play by that candle
which is set up for me to work by, lest I go to the bed of my grave in the dark
of sin and sorrow. Public Ordiuances to be esteemed the chiefest work of the
day.
I wish that I may not neglect either secret or family duties on this sacred
day, but yet that I may so perform them, that they may be helps, not
hindrances to public Ordinances; that since God loves the gates of Sion
above all the the dwellings of Jacob, I may set an high price upon, and have an
ardent love to the habitation of Gods house, and the place where his honor
dwells; Delight in it
that as a true child of my heavenly Father, I may love most, and like best,
that milk which is warm from the breasts of public ordinances: I wish that I
may call the Lords day my delight, it being a day wherein I enter into the
suburbs of the holy City; and begin that work of praising, pleasing, and
enjoying my God, which I hope to be employed in to eternity; that it may be my
meat and drink to do the Will of my God. O that I might so savor the things of
the Spirit, and so taste the Lord to be gracious, that love may be the Loadston
to draw me to my closet, family and to Church; and season every service I am
called to upon the Sabbath; Sanctify the whole day.
Because every part of this day is of great price, more worth then a whole
World, I desire that not the least moment of it may be squandred away, but (as
the Disciples after the miracle of loaves) I may gather up with care and
conscience, the smallest fragments, that nothing be lost. My God gives me good
measure, heaped up, pressed down, shaken together, and running over; why should
I be niggardly to him (to my self indeed, for it is my profit, not his) when he
is so liberal, so bountiful to me. I wish in regard the blessed God is not
only the Master, Communion of God in Ordinances.
but also the Marrow of his day, that no Lords day may satisfy me, without the
Lord of the day. Alas what is the best time, without the Rock of eternity?
what is the best day without the Ancient of days? what are the Ordinances of
God without the God of Ordinances? what are Sabbaths, Sermons, Sacraments, and
Seasons of Grace without the dearest Savior, but as broken Cisterns, glorious
Dreams, or gilded nothings? I have read of a good soul who answered his
Friend, Speak to me while you will, no words can satisfy, except you mention
Christ; write to me what you will, it will not satisfy, except in your Letters
I may read Christ. O that in no Sermon I might be contented till I hear Christ,
and that in no Chapter I might be pleased till I can read Christ; that as the
Needle touched with the Lodestone, never rests till it turn to the North, so
my heart may be re^^ less in holy duties, till it turns to, and has
fellowship with the Lord of Heaven. The Lords day is an excellent resemblance
of my future blessedness, wherein I shall enjoy my Savior fully, and my God
shall be all in all to me; Lord, let never this day pass without some taste of
those celestial pleasures. Meditation on the Works and Word of my God, being a
duty most in its prime and season on a Sabbath day, I beg that what time I
spare from public, private, or secret performances, I may employ to this
purpose, that I may behold my God to be infinite in wisdom, power, and goodness
in his footsteps of creation, and stand amazed at that rare Workmanship, those
curious contrivances of his (which Angels look into with admiration) that
appear in his Master-peice, that work of Redemption: and for his word, let my
heart be able to say with David, O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all
the day.

I wish that I may watch over my thoughts, words, Watchfulness.
and actions all the day long; in special, that as when the holy things
belonging to the Sanctuary were to be removed, they were covered all over, lest
any dust should soil them; so I may cover my heart with such circumspection
that no dust of sin may cleave to it. O that I might be so wise and watchful,
that there may not be the least minute of the day wherein I may not either do,
or receive some good. Lord, let no Sabbath pass without some saving good to my
precious soul.

I desire Finally, Conclusion of the day.
that I may not lose the heat of the day in the cool of the Evening; I mean,
that what good, If gain from my God, through his Ordinances in the day, may not
be lost by my negligence at night; but that as a wise Commander, I may then
double my Guard, and expect with much importunity some evening dews of comfort
and grace. O that I might so keep the Sabbath of my God, choose the things that
please him, and take hold of his Covenant, that I might so turn away my foot
from the Sabbath, from doing my pleasure on his holy day, Is. 56.4, 5. and
58.13.
and call the Sabbath my delight, the holy of the Lord; that I may have (with
the Eunuch) within the House of my God, a name better then of Sons and
Daughters, even an everlasting name that shall not be cut off. Amen.

A Good Wish to the Lords day.
HAil thou that art highly favored of God, Luke 1.28.
thou map of Heaven, thou golden spot of the week, thou Market Day of souls,
thou Daybreak of eternal brightness, thou Queen of days; the Lord is with
thee, blessed art thou among days. I may say to thee what the Angel said to
Daniel, Dan. 9.23.
O day greatly beloved. Psa. 45.
Thou art fairer then all the Children of time, grace is poured into thy lips;
God, even thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of gladness above thy
fellows. Of the Jewish Sabbaths and other Festivals, in comparison of thee it
may be spoken, They perish, but thou remainest, and they all wax old as a
Garment; Heb. 1.11, 12.
And as a vesture have thou folded them up, and they are changed, but thou
shall (maugre the malice of men and Devils) continue the same and thy years
shall not fail. As the Temple succeeded and exceeded the Tabernacle; this was
fleeting, that was fixed; so do thou all former Sabbaths, they were but
morning stars to usher in thee, the Sun, and then to disappear. Other Festivals
in all their Royalty are not arrayed like unto thee. All the graces triumph in
thee, all the Ordinances conspire to enrich thee; the Father rules thee, the
Son rose upon thee, the Spirit has overshadowed thee. Thus is it done to the
day which the King of Heaven delights to honor. Thou have not only a common
blessing with other days by the law of nature, but a special blessing above all
other days, from the love of thy Maker. Let thousands mark thee for their new
birthday; Exodus 12.42
be thou a day (as it was said of that night to the Jews) much to be Remembered,
much to be observed to the Lord, for bringing many out of worse then Egyptian
bondage; Esther. 8.16.
be thou to them a day of light and gladness, of joy and honor and a good day.
On thee light was created, the Holy Ghost descended, life has been restored,
Satan subdued, sin mortified, souls sanctified, the Grave, Death and Hell
conquered. O how do men and women flutter up and down on the Weekdays, as the
Dove on the waters, and can find no rest for their souls, till they come to
thee their Ark, till thou put forth thy hand and take them in! O how do they
sit under thy shadow with great delight, and find thy fruit sweet to their
taste! O the mountings of mind, the ravishing happiness of heart, the solace of
soul which on thee they enjoy in the blessed Savior! They are sorry when the
days shorten for thy sake, they wish for thee before thou come, they welcome
thee when thou art come, and they enjoy so much of heaven in thee, that thence
they love, and look, and long the more for their eternal Sabbath. Go forth, O
thou fairest among Women, and be thou fruitful in bringing forth Children to
thy Maker and Husband. Genesis 24.60.
Be thou the Mother of thousands and of millions, and let thy seed possess the
Gate of them that hate them. Do thou, like Rachel and Leah, build up the House
of Israel, do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be thou famous in Bethlehem. Gird
thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou mighty and gracious day, and in thy Majesty
ride prosperously, because of meekness, righteousness, and truth, let thy right
hand teach the terrible things; let thine arrows be sharp in the hearts
spiritual enemies, whereby the people may fall under thee. Psa. 132.
The Lord has chosen thee, he has desired thee for his habitation; Thou art
his rest for ever; in thee he will dwell, for he has desired it. Let him
abundantly bless thy provision, and satisfy thy poor with bread; let him
cloth thy Priests with salvation, and let thy Saints shout aloud for joy; lot
thine Enemies be clothed with shame, but upon thy head let the Crown flourish;
let Nations bow down to thee, let Kingdoms fall down before thee; Let all the
Kingdoms of the earth become the Kindomes of thy Lord and of thy Christ; be
thou honored as long as the Son and moon shall endure, even throughout all
Generations Thou art like Joseph a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough, by a
Wall whose Branches run over the Wall. The Archers have sorely greived thee,
and shot at thee (endeavoring to weaken thy morality) and hated thee, but thy
bow abode in strength by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, from thence is
the Shepherd, the stone of Israel; Even by the Lord of Sabbaths who shall help
thee, and by the Almighty who shall bless thee with blessings of Heaven above,
blessings of the deep that lies under, blessings of the breasts and of the
womb; the blessings of this day have prevailed above the blessings of all other
day; let them be continued and increased on the heads of this holy and
honorable day, and on the head of that day which is separate from it brethren.
Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after thy hurt, let them be turned
back and put to confusion that desire thy ruin; let all those that seek thee
rejoice and be glad in thee; let them that love thy sanctification say
continually, Let the Lord be magnified who delights in the prosperity of his
Saints, and therefore has set apart his Sabbath for their soul good; Thou (
like Jacob) have got away the blessing from the other days, yea thy God has
blessed thee, and thou shall be blessed, Blessed are they that bless thee, and
cursed are they that curse thee; In a word, The Lord be gracious to thee, and
delight in thee, and cause the light of his countenance to shine upon thee; let
all thine Ordinances be clothed with power and be effectual for the conversion
and salvation of millions of souls; Let thy name be great from the rising of
the Sun to the going down of the same. Finally, farewell sweet day, thou cream
of time, thou Epitome of eternity, thou heaven in a glass, thou first fruits of
a blessed and everlasting harvest did I say farewell? A welfare I wish to thee;
but O let me never lose thee, or take my leave of thee, till I come to enjoy
thee in an higher form, to see the Sun of righteousness (who early on thy
morning rose and made a day indeed while the natural Sun was behind) face to
face, and to know thy Maker and Master as I am known of him when I shall be a
pillar in the Temple of my God, and shall go out no more but serve him day and
night, to whom for the inestimable dignity and privilege of his own day, be
Honor and Glory for ever and ever, Amen, Amen.

CHAP. XXIII. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godliness in natural
actions. And first in eating and drinking.
AS thy duty is to make religion thy business in religious, Secondly,
so also in natural actions. A good Scrivener is not only careful how he makes
his first and great letters, his flourishes, but also the smallest letters, nay
his very stops and comma's. A Scribe instructed for the Kingdom of heaven, is
heedfull not only that the weightest actions of Gods immediate worship, but
also that the meaner passages of his life be conformable to Gods law. A wise
builder will make his Kitchen as well as his Parlor, according to rule. A holy
person turns his natural actions into spiritual, and whilst he is serving his
body, he is serving his God. It is said of a Scotch Divine, That he did eat,
Non semper ore non semper meditor, sed vestio dormio, edo, by bo; haee omnia si
in fide fiunt, tanquam recte facta, divino judicio approbantur. Luth. in Genesis
33.
drink and sleep eternal life. Luther tells us, that though he did not always
pray and meditate, but did sometimes eat, and sometimes drink, and sometimes
sleep, yet all should further his account; the latter as truly, though not so
abundantly, as the former: And indeed it is our privilege that natural actions
may be adopted into the family of religion, and we may worship God as really at
our tables as in his temple.

Saints must not like brute beasts, content themselves with a natural use of
the creatures, but use them as chariots to mount them nearer, and cords to bind
them closer to God. Piety or Holiness to the Lord must be written upon their
pots, Zac. 14.20. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.^31 Philo observes that the ancient Jews made their
feasts after sacrifice, in the temple, that the place might mind them of their
duty to be pious at them. It is a memorable expression Exodus 18.12. And Aaron
came, Sancti manducant et bibunt in conspectu Dei Origin in loc:
and all the elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses father in law before God.
In which words we have the greatness of their courtesy, and the graciousness
of their carriage. For their courtesy, though Jethro were a stranger, and no
Israelite, yet the elders honored him with their company. And Aaron and all the
elders came to eat bread with Moses father in law. But mark the graciousness of
their carriage, they came to eat bread with him before God; that is, In gloriam
et honorem Dei, to the honor and glory of God, says Calvin. They received
their sustenance, as in Gods sight, and caused their provision to tend to Gods
praise.

God takes it ill when we sit down to table and leave him out, Zach. 7.6. When
ye did eat and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for your selves, and drink for
your selves? He sends us in all our food, we live at his cost; and therefore
our eating may well be to his credit, who is the Master of the feast.

The Jews according to some, had officers at every feast, whom they called
Praefecti morum; their work was, the inspection of the guests, that none should
disorder themselves: I must tell thee, Gods eye is upon thee every meal, he
takes notice whether thy behavior is as becomes a Saint.

And truly friend, It behooves thee to use religion as a bridle in thy mouth, to
hold thee in, when thou art eating and drinking. Thy throat is a slippery
place, and sin may easily slip down; Its no hard matter to sin, whilst the
thing thou art about is not sinful. How many feed without fear, and thereby
fatten themselves to the slaughter, Jude ver. 12. We read of some whose tables
are snares, in which they have been caught by Satan, Psalm. 69.22. Job feared
his Sons had sinned in their eating and drinking, Job. 1.5. There are more
guests every meal then thou invitest to thy table. The devil lies in ambush
behind the lawful enjoyment, and will certainly surprise thee before thou art
aware, if thou art not watchful. The fatal wound he gave Adam at first was in
his throat; By getting him to eat, he brought him, and us all to die. If Adam
strengthened with his perfect original purity, was yet caught with this hook;
sure I am, it concerns thee to beware of the bait: Have a care lest the quinsie
in thy throat kill thee. Satan is a subtle angler, thou art a poor filly fish;
be careful lest he take thee by the teeth and send thee to the fire.

God has given thee a rule, as for his table, when thou art eating of that
body which is meat indeed, and drinking of that blood which is drink indeed, so
for thy table when thou art feeding on ordinary creatures. He sends in thy
provision, and he gives thee direction according to which, and no other, thou
may use it. A tenant who holds lands of his Lord, may not use them, otherwise
then according to the conditions on which his Lord let them to him, If he do,
the premises are forfeited. Now the great God, who is Lord of the whole earth,
gives his creatures to thee conditionally that thou make use of them according
to his will revealed in his word; if thou usest them otherwise thou make a
forfeiture, and may expect every moment that he should take possession.

For thy direction, I shall here set down the conditions upon which God gives
thee thy food. That thou use it sacredly, soberly, and seasonably.

First, Thy duty is to eat and drink sacredly. Piety must be mingled with all
thy provision, or else twill be poison. Grace must spice every cup, and be
sauce to every dish, or nothing will relish well: Water taken from the
fountain quickly corrupts, and becomes unsavory, but in the fountain its sweet
indeed. Godliness will cause thee to enjoy the creatures in God, the fountain
of them, and thereby they will be pleasant to thee.

The daily bread which the Israelites did eat was made of the same corn with
the show bread which was always before the Lord; to teach us, B. Babington in
loc:
that we should be holy as in Gods sight when we are eating our ordinary bread,
Exodus 25.30. Therefore Saints are said to eat to the Lord, Romans 14.6. As they
eat by him, so they eat to him.

Thy piety at meals consists, in begging a blessing before thou eatest; in
holy expressions and affections when thou art eating; and in thanksgiving after
thou have eaten.

1. In begging a blessing upon thy food. The creatures on thy Table are Gods
creatures, and I must tell thee that thou art more bold then welcome, if thou
make use of his goods, without asking his leave; He expects though not to
be satisfied for his mercies, yet to be acknowledged and sanctified in his
mercies. Every creature of God is sanctified by the Word of God and prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. By the word: All the creatures were polluted to us by the first Adam,
but they are purified to us by the second Adam. Psa 8.
The word of promise to Christ, the heir of all things, is our warrant, and
speaks our permission. And prayer; The word gives us leave to use them, and
prayer brings down a blessing upon them. The word shows our right to them
through Christ, and prayer acknowledges Gods right ( Genesis 9.3.) to them and us.

Gods blessing only is the staff of bread, Exodus 23.25. Man lives not by
bread alone, but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God, Mat.
4.4. Bread does not nourish us by its own power, but by Gods Word of promise;
He can easily withhold his blessing, and then bread will strengthen no more
then chips of bords. And when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women
shall bake your bread in one Oven, and they shall deliver your bread again by
weight, and ye shall eat and not be satisfied, Lev. 26.26.

Even Heathen Princes begun their solemn Feasts with Sacrifices. The Israelites
would not eat before Samuel came, because he used to bless the Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 9.13. Our blessed Savior though he were Lord of all, yet would not feed
before he had looked up to Heaven and blessed the fish, Mark 6.41. Paul though
amongst many Infidels, yet before meat, would desire a blessing in presence of
them all, Acts 27.35. He is worse then an Ox or Ass, who will not acknowledge
his owner, Isa. 1.5.

Reader, God can give thee sour sauce to thy sweet meat, if thou do banish
him thy Table; he can make thy meat lie so hard and heavy at thy stomach,
either by sickness, Job 33.20. or sorrow, Psa. 107.17. that thou shall never
digest it whilst thou live. When thou art at thy merriest meeting, he can
send such a mournful terrible message (as to Belshazer carousing in his cups)
that shall make thine ears to tingle, and every joint thou have to tremble. He
can make thy feast to end either as Adonijahs in a fright, or as Absoloms
sheep-shearing, in a funeral. When thine heart is merry with Wine, he can
summon thee as Ammon into the other World; Thy wisest way therefore is to
beseech his company, whomsoever thou want.

The fruits of trees under the law, were the three first years unclean, the
forth year offered to God, and after that free for the owners. All thy comforts
are by reason of sin unclean and cursed to thee; if thou would have them
clean and blessed, they must be sanctified by the Word of God and prayer. The
Elephant is said to turn up toward Heaven the first Sprig that he feeds on.
O Friend, will thou be worse then a beast? For shame be not so Swinish as to
feed on the Acorns, and never look up to the tree that bears them.

2. In holy expressions and affections when thou art eating. Whilst thy body is
filling, thy soul must not be forgotten. Though it be not unlawful at meals to
talk of other matters, yet its pity Saints should ever meet to eat earthly
bread, and not have some discourse of their eternal. Heavenly banquet. How
often did our Savior at such a meeting raise the hearts of his company to
better meat? Luke 5.31. As their outward man was feeding, he feasted their
inward man. When the Publican was at much cost to make him a great feast, he
entertains him and the rest too with better cheer; The whole neeed not a
Physician, but the sick; I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. When one of the chief of the Pharisees invited him to his Table,
observe how he teaches the Guests humility, and the Master of the Feast
charity, Luke 14.7, 8, 12, 13. His Lips dropped Honey to sweeten and make all
their Dishes savoury. One of the Fathers writes that the Primitive Christians
were so holy in their talk at their Table, that one would have thought they had
been at a Sermon, Non tam caenam caenant quam disciplinam. Tertul. Apologet.
cap. 39
not at a Supper. Plato gives rules for the writing down the Table Talk of men,
thereby to make them more serious; Luthers Colloquia Mensalia, Printed in a
large Folio, do abundantly prove that he was not idle when he was eating, but
that his Table was his Pulpit, where he read many profitable Lectures; There is
scarce a meeting of ungodly men to eat, but the Devil has his Dish among them.
Psa. 35.16.
The Drunkards have a song of David to sugar their Liquor. The Gluttons have
some Taunts to fling at Saints as Sauce to their meat. At Herod's Birthday
Banquet, one Dish served in, was the Baptists head.

Should not (friend) God have his dish at thy Table? When thou art eating
bread, let thy meditation and expression be like his who sat at Table with
Jesus Christ, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God, Luke
14.15.

Consider Gods bounty and mercy in feeding thee, and clothing thee, when many
hungry bellies and naked backs are abroad in the World; how many would be glad
of thy scraps! when thou have asked God leave for his creatures, thou may
taste his love in the creatures. May thou not gather and conclude if the
Streams are so refreshing and satisfying, what refreshment and satisfaction is
there in the well of living waters? If bread be so savoury to an hungry body;
how sweet, how savoury is the bread which came down from heaven to an hungry
soul! Lord, give me evermore that bread.

Do as the Jews, They did eat and delighted themselves in thy great goodness,
Nehem. 9.21. When thou art feeding thy body, delight thy soul in Gods great
goodness; Thus (like Mary when Christ was at meat) thou may break thy box of
precious Ointment and perfume the whole room with its fragrant smell.

3. In returning thanks when thou have eaten; Thy duty is to begin thy meals
with prayer, and to end them with praise. Thou can not give God his due price
for mercies, but thou may give him his due praise. Though thou art never able
to buy them of him, yet thou art able to bless him for them. If thou did Dine
at thy Neighbors Table, thou would think thy self very unmannerly to turn
thy back upon him without any acknowledgment of, and thankfulness for, his
courtesy. Every meal thou make, is at Gods cost; for shame be so civil as to
thank him for his kindness; Saints are compared to Doves, Isa. 60.8. especially
for their eyes, Thou have Doves eyes, Cant. 5. Now Doves after every grain they
peck, look upward as it were giving thanks. When God opens his hand, thou may
well open thy lips; When thou have eaten and art full, Joel. 2.26.
thou shall bless the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 8.10.

Do not like the fed Hauk forget thy Master, or like them that go to the Well,
as soon as they have filled their Buckets at it, turn their backs upon it; Why
should thou forget God, when he remembers thee? When thou shall have eaten
and be full, then beware least thou forget God, Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12. Let not thy
fullness breed forgetfulness; you think him a surly beggar, who if he receive
but a small piece of bread, shall fling away from your doors, and give you no
thanks.

The Primitive Christians did break bread from house to house, and did eat
their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God; Some understand
it of Sacramental, others of Corporal bread, Acts 2.46, 47. The Lord Jesus was
known by his actions or expressions in giving of thanks, Luke 24.31. Nay the
Heathen would acknowledge their Dunghill deities, in those outward mercies, Dan.
5.4. They drank Wine and praised the gods of Gold, and of silver, and of brass,
of iron, of wood, and of stone. Wilt not thou do as much for the true God, as
they for their false Gods! O let him have all thy praise, who sends in all
thy provision. God takes it very ill when we do not own and honor him as the
Author of our Meat and Drink. Because Israel was so prided with her Pronounces
Possessives, My bread, and my water, my wool, and my flax, mine oil, and my
drink, God turns them all into privatives; For she did not know that I gave
her Corn and Wine and Oil, therefore will I return and take away my Corn in the
time thereof, and my Wine in the season thereof, and recover my wool and my
flax, Hosea 2.5.8, 9. Trumpeters love not to sound in those places where they
are not answered with a considerable Echo; God delights not to bestow mercies
on those persons who will not return him suitable praise; those that return
things borrowed without thanks, must expect the next time they need, to be
denied.

I have read a story (in the writings of an eminently pious Minister, who was
an eye and ear witness of the truth of it) of a young man who lying upon his
sick bed, was always calling for meat, but as soon as he saw it was brought to
him, at the sight of it he shook and trembled dreadfully in every part of his
body, and so continued till his food was carried away; and thus being not able
to eat, he pined away, and before his death acknowledged Gods Justice, in that,
in his health he had received his meat ordinarily without giving God thanks.
The despisers of Gods benificence, have been patterns of his vengeance. He has
remembered them in fury, who have forgotten his favors.

Some write of the Jews, that in the beginning of their Feasts, the Master of
the House took a cup of Wine in his hand, and began its consecration after this
manner; Blessed be thou O Lord our God, the King of the World, Ex P. Fagi. in
Deuteronomy. 8.
which createst the fruit of the Vine; this they called Bircath hajaiin, the
blessing of the cup (possibly to this David alludeth in Psa. 116.13, 14. What
shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits! I will take the Cup of
Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord) after the cup, the Master of the
House took the bread and consecrated it thus, Blessed be thou O Lord our God,
the King of the World, which bring forth bread out of the Earth; this they
called Bircath halechem: At the end of the Feast, the Master called to his
Friends, Let us bless him who has fed us with his own, and of whose goodness
we live; and concluded with a large Thanksgiving, wherein he blessed God, First,
For their present Food. Secondly, For their deliverance from Egyptian bondage.
Thirdly, For the Covenant of Circumcision. Fourthly, For the Law given by the
Ministry of Moses; And then he prayed, that God would have mercy On his people
Israel. Secondly, On his own City Jerusalem. Thirdly, On Sion the Tabernacle of
his glory. Fourthly, On the Kingdom of the house of David his anointed.
Fifthly, That he would send Elias the Prophet. Sixthly, That he would make them
worthy of the days of the Messiah, and of the life of the World to come. After
this prayer, the Guests with soft and low voices said unto themselves, Fear ye
the Lord all ye his holy ones, because there is no want to them that fear him.
The young Lions want and suffer hunger; but they that seek the Lord shall want
no good thing.

Alas, alas, how few Gentiles spend half that time in devotion at their
Tables, which the pious among the Jews did! Many go from their food as the Cow
from her fodder, taking no notice of the Author of it, and like the Idolatrous
Israelites, they sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play, Exodus 32.6.
They sit down to Eat and Drink, and rise up to play the Beast, to play the
Atheist.

Remember every creature of God is good, if it be received with thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4.4. but this thanksgiving must not be only in thy words, but also in thy
works; thy unblameable conversation, and thy charitable contribution, must
speak thy thankfulness. When the Master has fed the Servant, he expects that
he should go about his business, and do the work appointed him. That strength
which thou receivest from God, must be improved for God; Its good to bless God
with thy lips, but best of all to bless him with thy hands and in thy life; God
will judge of thy thankfulness by thy conversation. Think thus with thy self,
This is the God that feeds me, that satisfies me with good things; how
sweet, how comfortable are his mercies! What sweet refreshment have I had from
the creatures, when some better then my self want food, Others have it, but
their lives abhor bread, and their souls dainty meat. Job 3.20.
Why should I not love fear, and trust, and serve this God! I will walk before
the Lord in the land of the living. O be ashamed to live at Gods cost, and to
do Satan's work; Be not like the young Mulets, which when they have sucked their
fill, turn up their heels and kick at their Dam. Further, thy duty is to
manifest thy thank fullness by supplying the wants of the needy. Job would not
eat his morsels alone, but the Fatherless had a share with him, Job 31.16, 17.
The forementioned Author observes, that the Heathen were not forgetful (when
they were feeding) of their absent friends. Gods hand is open to thee; why
should thy heart and hands be shut against the hungry bellies and naked backs?
Thy goods extend not to Gods Person, therefore they must to Gods poor, Psa.
16.2. Have a Monitor within thee, to call upon thee when at meals, Remember the
poor, Remember the poor; Remember poor Christ, and hungry Christ, and naked
Christ; by this test he will try thee for thine eternal estate, and upon the
neglect of this, he will sentence thee to the eternal fire, Mat. 25.41.

If thou art a rich person, do thou frequently mind this duty. Great
Housekeepers, must be Good House keepers; All must contribute (according to
their abilities) to the poors necessities; but where God gives much, he
requires much; he expects an harvest suitable to the seed he sows. It is
credibly reported of Mr. Sutton, Founder of Suttons Hospital, that he used
often to repair into a private garden, Fullers Church Hist. of Brit.
where he poured forth his prayers unto God, and amongst other passages was
overheard, frequently to use this expression, Lord, thou have given me a
liberal and large estate; give me also an heart to make a good use it. I am
confident an heart to use wealth aright, is a greater mercy then the greatest
heap of wealth; I had rather have a little, with an heart to improve it for
God, then much, then millions without such an heart. Make thee friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, that when that fails thee, thou may be received into the
Celestial habitation. Justin lib. 51.
When Dionysius the Syracusian Tyrant, saw what heaps of gold and silver his
Son had hoarded up in his closet, he asked him what he meant to let it lie
there, and not to make friends with it, to get the Kingdom after his death; O
Son, says he, thou have not a spirit capable of a Kingdom. The rust of many a
rich man's weal^h will eat his heart with pain and torment in the other World,
and the Apostle calls upon such to weep and houl for the miseries that are
coming upon them, James 5.1, 2, 3, 4. God finds fault with them that could
fare on the finest bread, and fattest flesh themselves, and yet forget the
afflictions of others, Amos 6.5.

How many riotous rich men are there, that though they cannot eat and drink all
with sobriety, will rather spoil it by gluttony and drunkenness, then let the
poor have part with them; like Children who will rather crumble away their
food, then impart any to their fellows! O how justly was the rich man denied a
drop in the other world, when he denied a crum in this world; Willet. Hexap. in
Levit.
How many covetous Muck-worms, like Hogs are nourished only to be destroyed!
they are good for nothing whilst they are alive; the Hog is neither good to
draw as the Ox, nor to bear as the Horse, nor to cloth us as the Sheep, nor to
give milk as the Cow, nor to keep the House as the Dog, but good only to be
killed. Such are these scraping wretches, good for nothing, till they come to the
Knife. Like barren trees they do but cumber the ground, and serve for no use
till they are cut down for the unquenchable fire. And truly their hearts will
never bewail him dead, whose bowels did not bless him alive. His life did not
deserve a prayer, nor his death a tear, who laid out that to serve his pride,
which God laid in to serve the poor.

Reader, if God have dealt thee a considerable portion of outward good things;
consider that thou art but Gods Factor, he is the Merchant. The Factor knows
that the goods transported to him are his Masters goods, and he must dispose
them according to directions from his Master. All thine estate is Gods; thou
art but his servant, his Factor; he gives thee order in his word to dispose it
thus and thus to such poor members of Christ, so much to one, and so much to
another, and he will shortly reckon with thee how thou obeyest his directions;
and if thou forbearest charity now, thou will then be counted and found as real
a theif, before the whole world, as ever servant was that put hundreds into his
own purse which his Master appointed him to pay to other persons. Withhold not
thy goods from the owners thereof, Pro. 3.27. from them to whom it is due,
either by the law of justice, or by the law of love, Romans 13.8. And truly
Charity is the best way to plenty; He gets most that gives most; He that sows
liberally, shall reap liberally.

I have sometimes considered with my self and wondered why Nabal should be so
exceeding churlish to David as not to spare of his superfluities to supply
David's necessities, when David had been so exceeding civil to him as to
preserve his flocks in safety from the rage of hungry Soldiers; But when I
marked well the story, I quickly found the cause of Nabals covetous carriage;
He looked upon himself as Master of his estate, and not as Gods servant to
improve it for his profit and praise; Shall I take my bread, and my water, and
my flesh, and give it to men whom I know not whence they be? 1 Samuel 25.11. Had
he but had so much grace as to have called it Gods bread, and Gods water, he
would have disposed it according to Gods word, and not have denied a poor
persecuted Saint; but because he counted it his own proper wealth, therefore it
must be disposed according to his own pernicious will.

Reader, look upon thy self in regard of thine estate, only as a servant in
trust, which thou must shortly give an account of, and then to do good and to
distribute thou will not forget, as knowing that with such sacrifices God is
well pleased, Heb. 3.16.

Secondly Thy duty is to eat and drink soberly. The grace of God which brings
salvation, has appeared to us, teaching us to live soberly in this present
evil world, Tit. 2.12. This sobriety respects both the quantity and the
quality of thy diet.

First, Thy duty is to be temperate as to the quantity of thy diet. Reason is
content with a little, Religion with less. Although no certain proportion of
food can be prescribed to men, for those showers which drown the clay valleys,
do hardly quench the thirst of the sandy hills? Neither the bodies of men, nor
their stomachs are all of a size; yet this is a certain rule, for a man to eat
or drink so much as to oppress nature, and to unfit himself for prayer, is a
degree of intemperance. God gave man food to further, not to hinder him in his
general, and particular calling; and surely they sin who feed till like fatted
horses, they are unfit for service. Turtull. speaking of the carriage of the
Primitive Christians at their meals tells us, Non prius discumbitur quam oration
ad deum praegustetur; editur quantum esurientes cupiunt; b^bitur quantum
pudicis est utile, ita saturantur ut qui meminerint eti am per noctem sibi
adorandum deum esse. Tertull. Apologet.
They do not sit down before they have prayed; they eat as much as may satisfy
hunger, they drink so much as is sufficient for temperate men, are filled as
they that remember they must pray afterward.

Christians may cheer nature, but they must not clog it. It is a great
prviledge in the charter granted us by the King of Kings, that we should have
dominion over the creatures; but it will be a sorbid bondage if we suffer them
to have dominion over us, instead of being our servants to become our Masters,
Psa. 8.5, 6, 7. God in the very framing of man, intended him for temperance by
giving a little mouth, with a narrow throat, and a lesser belly then other
creatures; And in man's charter which speaks his leave to slay the beasts in
Gods forest, observe in what tenure it runs; Every living thing that moves
shall be meat for you (There is the general concession) even as the green herb
have I given you all things (here is the special limitation,) That is, says an
Expositour, to use them soberly and moderately, Wilet Hex. in genesis
not to gluttony and excess.

It is an abominable shame to a Saint to be a slave to the beast in him, his
sensitive appetite. He that striveth for the mastery, is temperate in all
things. Beasts seldom surfeit at their food, never sin. Epicurus who esteemed
man's happiness to consist in pleasures, was yet very temperate, as Cicero and
others observe. Socrates was wont to say, That evil men live that they may eat
and drink, but good men eat and drink that they may live.

Some of the heathen did very much hate excess, either in eating or drinking.
The old Gauls were very sparing in their diet, and fined them that outgrew
their girdles. Drunkenness, by Solons law, was punished with death, The
Spartans brought their children to loath drunkenness by causing them to behold
the beastly behavior of their servants when they were drunk.

But how many nominal Christians, in regard of temperance, come short of
heathens! Woe to the drunkards of Ephraim, of England (God has a cup of red
wine, of pure wrath, and these must drink the dregs thereof) how does this
iniquity abound! men drink healths so long till they drink away their health
and their heaven too? Some mariners observe that as the waters grow shallower
(the sea losing) about the coasts of Holland and Zealand, the waters grow
deeper (the sea gaining) about the English coasts. Whether drunkenness ebb in
Holland or no, I know not, I am sure it flows in England. We may complain, as
Diogenes Laertius of his country men, that when they went to sacrifice to
health, they did then most riotously abuse health.

There was a street in Rome called Sobrius vicus, The sober street, because
there was never an Alehouse there: But how few towns have we which may be
called sober towns, because there are no drunkards there!

Reader if thou art one guilty of this sin, for the Lords sake bethink thy self
speedily; do thou know what thou do?

Thou wrongest. thy body. Vermin abound, as ^ats and mice, where there is much
corn; and Diseases abound in bodies given to excess. Too much wood puts out the
fire. Meat kills more then the Musket; The glutton digs his grave with his
teeth, and the drunkard drowns himself in his cup. Stratonicus spoke fitly of
the Rhodians, They build their houses as if they were immortal, but feed as if
they intended to live but a little while.

Spare diet is the best cordial of nature; Moderate fasting is the best
physic. He that rises with an appetite, Camb. Brit. Eliz.
secures his digestion: It was said of Queen Elizabeth, That she ever rose with
an appetite, and that Edward the sixth was wont to call her, his sweet sister
Temperance, and she lived seventy years. Gallen lived 140 years, and almost all
the time without any sickness, and this natural reason is given, that he did
never eat his fill.

It wrongs thy estate: The drunkard and glutton shall come to poverty, Pro.
23.21. Their throats are open sepulchers to bury their estates in. Diogenes
when he heard of a drunkards house to be sold, cried out, I thought he would
ere long vomit up his house.

It wrongs thy Soul: After rioting and drunkenness, follows chambering and
wantoness, Romans 13.12. and woe, and sorrow, and wounds without cause, look not
upon the wine, at last it biteth like a Serpent; thine eyes shall behold
strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things, Pro. 23.20. Excess
turns men into swine; and then they are fit for legions of devils.
Intemperance calls off the guard (thy watchfulness) and then the enemies may
enter thick and threefold. They that are not sober, cannot be vigilant, 1 Pet.
5.8.

How unfit is a man in his intemperance for any duty. Ambrose observes, Tabulas
legis quas accepit abstinentia, conteri fercit ebriteas Amh. cap 6 de Ebri.
Aug. Confess: lib 10.
As Moses received the tables fasting, so he broke them when the people had
been feasting, judging them at that time very unfit to hear the law.

It may be thou art not a drunkard, but yet usest to exceed in eating. Austin
avoided the sin of drunkenness, sed crapula non nunquam surrepit servo tuo; he
sometimes transgrest in eating; but Lord, says he, thou have taught me to use
my meat as my medicine.

Let thy rational faculty command thy sensitive; consider how contrary to
reason it is for a man, like a Dolphin, to have his mouth in his maw; and like
the Ass-fish, Epicharmus calls the Assfish (...) such a one as varieth from the
ordinary course of nature.
to have his heart in his belly; and how contrary to Religion it is, to have
the Kitchen for thy Church; a Table for thine Altar, and the Belly for thy God,
Luke 21.34. Take heed lest your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and
drunkenness, and so that day come upon you unawares. God allows us sometimes
a liberal use (as in days of Thanksgiving, and at Marriages) but never a
lustful abuse of his Creatures.

Secondly, Thy duty is to be temperate as to the quality of thy diet. Though
here no certain quality of food can be set down, God allowing something to the
conditions, and much more to the weakly and sickly constitutions of men; yet in
general this must be observed, that we make not provision for the flesh, Romans
13.12. We may preserve the flesh, but we must not provide for the flesh; Our
Enemy is strong enough already, we need not put more Weapons into his hands.
To live after the flesh, is the sign of a sinner, Romans 8.13. Its intemperance
for a person in health to study and strive how he may gratify his palate. The
Spirit of God calls it a sowing to the flesh, Gal. 6.7. The Husbandman plots,
contrives and labors, how he may sow his seed to his best advantage. A
Fleshmonger will be meditating in the morning before he rises, with what art
his dinner may be so sauced and dressed, that if possble he may excel a beast in
carnal delights; he is sowing early, that he may reap liberally. The Christian
may take his food, but his food must not take him. Its sinful to be given to
our appeties. Its not un lawful to eat dainties, but it is unlawful to set the
mind upon them. We may receive them into our stomachs, but not into our hearts:
When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently what is before thee,
and put a Knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite; be not
desirous of his dainties, they are deceitful meat, Pro. 23.1, 2, 3. In which
words we may take notice. 1. Of a supposition, If thou be a man given to
appetite; For a man to be given to Wine, it notes his extraordinary love to,
and likeing of that liquor; For a man to be given to Women, it speaks his
excessive care and endeavor to enjoy that brutish and ungodly pleasure. For a
man to be given to prayer, Psa. 109.4. it speaks prayer to be his trade, his
employment, the work which he chiefly minds and putsueth. For a man to be given
to God, Romans 12.1. it notes the soul to be wholly at Gods service, to go when
God bids him go; to come when God bids him come; so for a man to be given to
his appetite, it implies that all his projects are to please his palate, he is
a caterer for the flesh, wholly subject to that sense, altogether at the
devotion of his appetite; our appetites are given to us, but we must not be
given to our appetites; as Heliogabalus who was served in at on meal with 7000.
Fish, and 5000. Fowls: And 2. here is an imposition, Be not besirous of his
dainties; this is a disswasion from the former irregular affection. We may eat
and digest dainties, but we may not crave and desire dainties; God made man not
for fleshly dainties, but for spiritual delights; It is a beastly principle and
practice, to be at the command of provender, as Apicius the Roman, who wrote
ten books of directions how to set forth a feast with all sorts of dainties,
and its said the expenses of his Kitchen amounted to two millions of Gold. 3.
Here is a position. For they are deceitful meat. The desire of dainties is a
deadly desire. There is murder under the meat; Ordinary (nay Manna
extraordinary) fare would not satisfy the sweet-tooth'd Israelites; they
lusted for quails, but God gave them their desire, they had flesh and death
together. Some read the former verse thus, Thou put a knife to thy throat,
if thou be a man given to appetite. To pamper the body, is the way to destroy
soul and body too; Dainties entice to excess. He that erreth in the quality of
his food, will quickly exceed in the quantity. They that plot night and day to
please the flesh, declare publicly that they have nothing of the spirit;
sensual, not having the spirit, Jude v. 19. The flesh and the spirit are like
two Buckets in a Well, as the one mounts up, the other falls down. There is a
flat opposition between sowing to the flesh, and sowing to the Spirit, Gal.
6.7. Nay the Apostle is express in the mention of this kind of intemperate men.
They serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, Romans 15. All the
Servants of Christ, are Sovereigns over the flesh. Ordinances are ineffectual
to persons that are sensual; Rain falls off, as it falls on, upon an Oyled
post. When the waters of the Sanctuary flowed, the Miry places (that is sensual
hearts) could not be healed, Ezekiel. 47.11. Behemoth lies in the Fens, that is,
says an Expositour, the Devil in fleshly men, Job 40.21. Epicurus, says one,
whilst he favors his fleshly palate, does neglect the heavenly palace.

There is a distinction of diet to be considered, in regard of bodies, in
regard of estates, and also in regard of times; all which piety and prudence
must direct the Christian about: But sure I am it is a duty to keep under the
body, (...) I club it down, beat it black and blue.
and to bring it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27. They that acquaint us with the
Jewish customs, tell us that their Ordinary meals were neither many in a day,
nor costly; they were called Arucoth, which signifies such ordinary fare as
travelers have in their journey.

The feast which Moses made for his Father in Law, and the Elders of Israel, is
called bread. Exodus 18.11. So also the entertainment of Christ at the House of
one of the chief of the Pharisees, Luke 14.1, 2. and the daily fare of the
Disciples, Acts 2.46, 47. Elijah could be content with a Raven for his Cook.
Daniel sed and thrived upon Pulse, he looked fairer by it, then those that did
eat of the Kings fare. Brown bread and the Gospel are good cheer, said the
Martyr. John the Baptist could live upon locusts and wild honey. The Apostles
had some ears of Corn for a Sabbath days Dinner. Though God is pleased out of
mercy to afford us better provision, yet our work must be to mind moderation. O
how great a curse is it for thee like Cham to be a servant of servants, a
servant to thy belly, which should be a Servant to thee! Thy soul in such a
body, is but a bright Candle in a greasy Lanthorn; How much was that speech
below a rational creature, which Philoxenus uttered, I wish that I had the
throat of a Crane, that the pleasure of my taste might last the longer! The
Spider is little else save belly, but she is full of poison.

Besides, it will be a poor account which such men can give for their expenses
this way at the great day. God give thus our wealth for necessaries,
conveniences and moderate delight, not for prodigality and luxury;
Heliogabalus made whole meals of the tongues of Singing-Birds and Peacocks, and
brains of costly creatures; He used to say, That meat is not savoury, whose
sauce is not costly. Many men have sold all their Lands for their Kitchen.

What a pattern does the heir of all things give us of providence, Joh. 6.12.
Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.

Some indeed are Debtours to their bellies, they pinch and pine them with
penury, not allowing them what nature requires, whose Gold is their God. They
are worse then Cannibals, eating their own flesh. He that is cruel to his
flesh, troubles his own house, Prove. 11.17. But the bellies of most, are
debtours to them, receiving much more then is fit or due, as if they had been
born to bow down to, and worship their bellies.

If Esau had the Title of profane for selling his birthright for a mess of
pottage when he was hungry, Heb. 12. How profane then are they that sell their
estates, and reason, and health, and souls, and Savior and salvation, and all
for a a moments brutish pleasure, intemperate eating or drinking.

Our Lord Jesus commands his Disciples not to be curious about their diet;
Whatsoever is set before you eat, Luke 9. If it be wholesome, though it be not
toot-some, accept it. The Turks will drink no Wine, because Mahomet their false
Prophet fordids it. Reader, be thou temperate both in regard of the quantity
and quality of thy food, because the blessed Jesus; the true Prophet of his
Church commands it.

Thirdly, thy duty is to eat and drink seasonably; We read of eating in due
season, Eccles. 10.17. As there is a season for spiritual actions, when they
are most profitable, so there is a season for natural actions, when they are
most proper; Its a foul fault, not to observe fit hours for our food. Our diet
is unseasonable, when we begin the day with it. There is a woe to the Nation
whose Princes eat in the morning, Eccles. 10.17. and a woe to the persons that
rise up early in the morning to follow strong dring, Isa. 5.11. It is a bad
sign when men leap out of their Beds into their Butteries; and like Children
call for their breakfasts as soon as they are up. The Servant must wait on his
Master till he has fed; After him is manners. The body must wait on the soul
till that has broke its fast, and had some spiritual refreshment with the
blessed God. The bodies place is after, not before the soul. The first of the
day must ordinarily be given to the ancient of days; God hops to hear from
men, before either their Butlers or Cooks hear from them. He expects that we
should serve him before we serve our selves, though indeed our serving of him
is the only serving of our selves. Moller. pinsal. 5.3.
Mollerus observes that David thence pleaded for early protection, because he
was early at his petitions. He was early in the morning at his prayer, and
therefore he hoped that God would not come late at night with his answer.

Food is unseasonable when one meal treads upon the heels of another, like Jobs
Messengers. The Holy Ghost speaks of some that are early up at it, and
continueat it till night, Isa. 5. Some make but one meal (as it were) all day;
If either meat or drink be offered them, they can no more refuse it, though
they were full before, then a Dog his bones. Like Children and Chickens, they
are always feeding: Too much Oil puts out the Lamp.

Men eat and drink unseasonably, when they turn the night into day; and when
God and nature call them to rest, they ordinarily like the Roman glutton, spend
that time in pampering their bodies. I have read of one that boasted he had not
in so many years seen the Sun.

The Dutch will sit at a Wedding Feast, from eight at night, to four in the
morning, rising in the interim two or three times to ease nature, and then to
their dainties and Sweet-mea^s again. They are industrious on the water, and
Gluttonous on the land. Reader, I hope though they are prodigal, yet grace has
taught thee to be more provident of thy time.

CHAP. XXIV. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godliness in his Apparel
and Sleep.
Apparel and Sleep being of less concernment then some other subjects, I shall
speak but little to them; yet because in these things we must walk by the rule
of Gods Word, I shall not wholly omit them. And first for Apparel. The Saints
outward, as well as his inward clothing must be sacred; Spiritual Priests do
all wear (in a sense) holy Garments. Sin may cleave to our clothes; The
Leprosy was not only in the Israelites houses, but also in their Habits, Lev.
13. Some persons carry the plague up and down in their Raiment, their Garments
are spotted with the flesh; with pride, and wantonness, and prodigality. A
Christian may manifest grace in his Garments; he may clothe his soul in
covering the nakedness of his body; his Garments may smell of Myrrh, Aloes and
Gassia, Psa. 45. Exodus 19. Numb. 11.
As under the Law the clothes of Gods people were washed and purified
Ceremonally; so our apparel under the Gospel (if we observe Gods Counsel about
it) may be clean and pure spiritually. For thine help herein Reader, I shall
speak briefly,

1. To the ends of Apparel, which must be minded.

2. To the sins about Apparel, which must be avoided.

3. To the virtues (in Apparel) which must be manifested.

First, To the ends of Apparel, which are four.

1. To cover our nakedness. Innocence at first was man's comely Robe, in
comparison of which the richest clothes are but nasty rags; Ah how lovely did
he look in that Heaven-spun attire! In his primitive splendour, the most gaudy
and costly apparel, would have been but as a Cloud over the face of the Sun, or
a course Curtain over a beautiful Picture. But sin caused shame, and shame
called for clothes to cover it, Genesis 3.7. They knew that they were naked, and
they sewed Fig Leaves together and made themselves aprons.

2. To defend our bodies from cold. Clothes are a great shelter against the
sharpness of the Air, and Weather. Some men's Coats are Pistol-proof, all men's
clothes should be Weather-proof; God knew that Adams Fig Leaves were as far
from keeping his body warm, as from hiding his soul-wickedness; and therefore
made him a coat of skins, Genesis 3.21. This end of Apparel is mentioned, Pro.
31.21. She is not afraid of the Snow for her Household, for all her shoushold
are clothed with scarlet.

3. To adornus. Clothes render men more comely. A decent habit is handsome,
naked Ghosts are frightful. Those members of the body which we think to be less
honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant honor, Vi^e Decd^^ in l^c. v. ^.
and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness, 1 Cor. 12.23.

4. To distinstuish Sexes and persons. One end of Apparel is to difference
Sexes; The Law of nature, and the custom of all Nations, do teach a
distinction between the Habits of Men and Women. God himself in Scripture does
expressly command it. The Woman shall not wear that which pertains unto a man,
neither shall a man put on a woman's Apparel: for all that do so, are an
abomination unto the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 22.5. Those that have worn the Apparel
of women as Caligula, Clodius and others, have been noted for the worst of men.

Another end of Apparel is to distinguish persons. The Nobility among the
Romans, were anciently distinguished from the meaner sort by their Ornaments
about their Shoos; As God has made a difference among men, some are high, some
are low, some are rich, some are poor; so does he also allow a difference in
their Apparel, Behold they which are gorgeously apparelled, are in Kings
Houses, Luke 7.25. Robes and Rich attire become Judges, and Justices. They are
honorable additions to their Office, and cause reverential apprehensions of
their persons. The habits of men should be suitable to their conditions and
honors, Dan. 5.29. Ester 8.15. Genesis 45.42. As it is sinful for men to go above
their abilities, so it is sordid for men to go much below their estates and
places; such draw contempt on their persons. Charles the fifth Emperor of
Germany, being to make a Royal entrance into Millane, there was great
preparation made for his entertainment, the Houses and Streets were beautified
and adorned, the Citizens dressed in their richest attire, Li^ ^xem.
and a Golden Canopy prepared to be carried over his head, and a great
expectation to see a glorious Emperor: but when he came into the City in a
plain cloak and with an old hat on his head, the people would not believe,
their eyes but still asked which was he, and laughed at themselves for being so
much deceived.

Secondly, The vices about our apparel, which must be avoided, 1. Pride. Pride
is a moth which is soon bred in fine garments, but a Christian will consider,
that the meanest apparel is natures garment, and the best but sins garnish; The
pedigree of our raiment must be remembered to allay our pride. Our richest
clothes are characters of reproach; and as Adams livery, they are an implicit
confession of our sin and shame. The dim-sighted person is not proud of his
spectacles; nor he who has lost one eye, of the plaster which covers it.
When the thief looks on his fetters, he thinks of his felony, which was the
cause of them; When we behold our habits, we may well be humble, reflecting
upon our apostasy, the cause of them; Before the Fall, Adam and Eve were both
naked, and were not ashamed, Genesis 2. ult. A murderer has as much reason to be
proud of his halter, as a man of his habit.

Beside the matter of our clothes is considerable; We are beholden to the
beasts for them, what are they but the skin, hair or wool of beasts? and the
finest but the spittle of the silkworm? Alas, what a pin is this to pierce the
Bladder of pride, and abate its swelling? One would think if this weed should
grow, it must be like the miscletos out of the rocks; for here is not the least
earth to breed or feed it, not the least cause for it.

This pride consists inwardly in men's valuing themselves the higher for their
habit, which indeed is Childish: They discover their want of wit whose spirits
rise with their garments, as the boat with the waters. The dogs that kept
Vulcans temple, fawned upon a good suit; but if a man came in ragged apparel,
they would tear him in pieces. They are brutish who judge either themselves or
others to have real worth from the bravery of what they wear. Pride is
manifested outwardly, by men's readiness to follow new fashions. It is no
commendation to English men that they are French men's apes. A la mode de
France, is most in the Gallants mouths: But they who borrow (says one)
fashions of Egyptians, may meet with their botches and boiles. They who
affected the Babylonian finery, had with it the Babylonian fetters, Ezekiel.
23.15. I will punish the Princes, and the Kings children, and all such as are
clothed with strange apparel, Zeph. 1.8. God speaks of them, who in their
clothes imitated the Egiptians, Oh what enemy of thine has taught thee so much
vanity? said Mr John, Fox to his son, returning from his travails, and attired
in a loose outlandish fashion. Hist of modern Divin.
or the Babylonians. Though they were never so high, (Princes and Kings
children) yet being vain in their habit, they were sure to feel the weight of
Gods hand; I will punish them. Idolaters are no fit measure for Gods people to
make their clothes by. The prophet Isaiah draws up an Inventory of the Ladies
wardrobe in Jerusalem, and pronounces both a sharp objurgation and severe
commination against them for their twinkling with their eyes, and tinkling with
their feet; for their lofty gate, and stately garb, Isa. 3.18, to 24. We may
read there what strange fury God has for strange fashions. The daughters of
London (says one) do in pride of countenance and earriage, for exceed the
daughters of Sion. Willet Hexa. in Levit.
Alas how many men are dressed like Poppets in a play, and women like Bartholmew
babies. Some that are professors, by their antic habits (which are the covers
of their shame) become a shame to their profession. Prodigus est animi vitio re
tinenda Profoudens.


2. Prodigality in our apparel must be avoided. A man must cut his suit
according to his cloth. I mean, his apparel must not be above his rank and
estate. Some men famish their bellies to make their backs fine; others turn
their rents into ruffs, their riches into robes, Prodigi singulis auribus bina
aut terna perdent patrimonia. Senec.
their lands into laces, and hang (as Seneca says) two or three Lordships in
their ears; that when they have their best clothes on, we may say of them, They
are in midst of all their wealth.

Even those whose honor may allow richer garments then the vulgar, ought to
distinguish between prodigality, and what is suitable to their places.
Alcisthenes had a costly cloak, sold by Dionysius to the Carthaginians for an
120 talents. Heliogabalus had rich apparel, yet never wore it twice, his shoes
were embellished with diamonds, his seats were strewed with musk and amber,
his bed was covered with silver and gold, and beset with pearl. But Augustus
Caesar was much on the other hand, and wore no other garments then what his
wife, Sueton.
his sister, or his daughter, made him; and being asked the reason, answered,
That rich and gay clothing was either the ensign of Pride, or nurse of luxury.
So Alaxander Severus, Emperor of Rome, Lips. Exem. p. 184.
did always cloth himself in ordinary apparel, saying, That the Empire did
consist invertue, not in bravery.

The ancester of us all was clad in leather, Genesis 3.21. and so were the Lords
worthies, of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.37. Though now every
servant forsooth must be clad in silk, and for gallantry outvie their Lady. It
is recorded as a piece of high presumption, of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury,
Speed.
that when King John had put his courtiers into a new livery, he put his
servants into the same; but in our days presumption and prodigality exceed; for
peasants can be more gaudy then their Prince. The Peacock has more gayfeathers
then the eagle the King of birds.

A wise man that dwells in an hired house, having no certain time of abode in
it, will so far take care of it, that it may be a shelter to him against the
weather, and possibly that it be neat and handsome; but he will not be at the
cost of curious ornaments or rich pictures, because he knows not how soon he
may have warning to be gone. Our bodies are the houses of clay in which our
souls dwell; we know not how soon death may seal a lease of ejectment and turn
our souls out of doors; it is prudence to fence our bodies so well with
garments, that they may be defended against the cold, yea to be clothed
somewhat suitable to our conditions; but it is extreme folly to be prodigal in
garnishing our earthly tabernacles, when (it may be) this night our souls shall
be required of us. Confident I am that Tailors long bills, and their poor
neighbors short coats (who have scarce enough to cover their nakedness) will
be little for many rich men's credit at the day of Christ. Reader, if thou art a
wealthy man, remember this note whilst thou live, That one plain coat
bestowed on the back of the poor, will become thee better at this day, and
yield thee more comfort at the last day, then twenty silver laced ones, on thy
own back.

There is another thing to be avoided about Apparel, Vestium curio^^tas, morum
and mentium deformitatis indicium est. Bern.
and that is curiosity and wastful expense of time. Excessive out ward neatness
is often accompanied with excessive inward nastiness. Seneca speaks of some
that spend all their morning, inter pectinem and speculum; between the comb and
the glass, and are more troubled at a tangle in their hair, then at a disorder
in the Commonwealth. How many in our days spend the whole Forenoon in decking
their dying bodies, and leave no time to dress their immortal souls, they spend
that precious time between the comb and the glass, Cultus magna tura, virtutis
magna incuria Cato.
which should be spent between Prayer and Scripture; These painted carcasses
will tell us, that if they can but dress themselves by dinner time, it is as
much as they desire. Alas poor souls, what will they do when they come to enter
into their eternal estates, when time shall be no more! A dying bed (if their
consciences be but awakened) will teach them to value time at an higher rate,
and make them know that a commodity of such worth is not to be wasted.

3. I shall speak to the virtues in Apparel which must be manifested.

1. Modesty. One end of Apparel is to cover our shame and nakedness; those
therefore that discover their naked necks and breasts, cross this end, and
glory in their shame. Such women proclaim their wantonness. Lascivious habits
are unhandsom and unholy; That Women adorn themselves with modest Apparel, with
shamefacedness and sobriety, not with broydered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or
costly array, 1 Timothy 2.9. Modesty is a woman's special beauty, and a needful
virtue in them that are the weaker Vessels. As some tempt men to folly by their
tongues, so others by their attire; this the very Heathen were so sensible of,
that Zalucus the Lawgiver of Locris enacted, That no woman should be attended
with above one Maid in the Street, except she were drunk; that she should not
wear embroydered nor undecent Apparel, but when she intended to play the Whore.

2. Gravity, Ancient men, those that are in seats of justice, and professors,
must not take up every new-fangle fashion. Clothes of light colors on their
backs will not be comely. Joseph a child might be handsome enough in a
parti-colored coat, but not so a man. When a grave Roman Petitioned the
Emperor for a favor, and was denied, and had afterward colored his hair,
shaved himself, and in light clothes requested the same courtesy, he was
wittily answered by Caesar, who understood the fraud, I denied your Father
yesterday; and should I grant it you to day, he might take it ill.

Christians must be much guided by the credit of Religion. Whatsoever things
are of good report, is both a general and a special rule for a Saint to walk by
in all such things.

There may be excellent use of that place, Romans 12.2. be not conformed to this
World (...) Beza translates it; fashion not your selves, I love not affected
singularity; but I like a Christian Gravity, both in countenance, carriage, and
attire.

3. There is another thing which a Christian must have a respect to in his
Apparel, and that is his calling and ability. It is dishonorable both to a
man's person and profession, when God has ranked him among the rich, for him to
rank himself among the poor and ragged. Of Lewis the 11. King of France, it is
written in his Chamber of accounts, Two shillings for fustian to new sleeve his
Majesty's old Doublet; and three half pence for liquor to grease his Boots.
Agesilaus King of Sparta was slighted by the Persians for his over-plain Habit.
Covetous men often please themselves, that they are not guilty either of pride
or prodigality in their Apparel, when it may be often said to them, what
Socrates told the ragged Grecian, A man may see your Pride through the holes of
your Coat. As the Prodigal erreth in excess, so the Niggard erreth in defect.

One of the Jewish Rabbis used to say, That men should apparel themselves
below their estates, that they may thrive the sooner; that they should cloth
their Wives above their estates, that they might live the more peaceably; but
their Children according to their estates, that they might Marry them the
better.

Of Sleep.
I Shall now speak to Sleep, which is the last natural action I have mentioned.
In reference to which three things are principally to be minded.

1. The Quantity of it.

2. The season.

3. The end of it.

1. The quantity of it. Thy Sleep, Reader, must be moderate; but how much, or
how little, thy own prudence, or piety together must judge. No certain time can
be prefixed, though some general rules may be propounded. Seven hours sleep, is
by Physicians judged sufficient for any ordinary person in health; youth
requires more sleep then age; Weak men then strong men. Thy discretion will
much help thee, if thou observest thy constitution. Choleric and Melancholic
bodies need longer sleep then the Phlegmatic or Sanguin, that the acrimony of
Choler may be tempered, and the concoction furthered. To the Plegmatick much
sleep does increase their cold and moist humors, and will in time make their
bodies altogether sickly; The Sanguin are apt to wax gross, and corpulent, and
unfit for action, all which is helped forward by much sleep. Take heed of
immoderate sleep. There is no part of our lives so totally lost, as that which
is spent in sleep. Sleep comes like a Publican, says Plutarch, and steals
away a third part of our time. Laentius.
Therefore the wise Heathen have been watchful against this enemy: Aristotle
used to sleep with a Bullet in his hand, over a brazen pan, that when it fell
out of his hand, he might be awakened with the noise. Pythagoras used with a
thread to tie the hair of his head to a beam over him, that so when he did but
nod, he might be awakened thereby; Christians have more cause for bodily as
well as spiritual watchfulness.

David was so far from sleeping at prayer, that he would break his sleep for
prayer, Psa. 119.62. v. 147. I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried;
I hoped in thy word.

Many are the discommodities of immoderate sleep. It wastes time, a most
precious talent, which is committed to us by God, and must be accounted for at
the great day. A man asleep can hardly be said to live. Sleep is a kind of
death. It injureth the soul, hindering it of time, robbing it of the bodies
service, Pro. 26.13. to 17.
and by blunting its tools, dulling its faculties, that they become unfit for
those ends to which they were designed.

It wrongeth the body by weakening the natural heat, and filling the head with
vapors, by abating the memory, lessening the understanding, and by making the
body heavy, lumpish, and in a word a sink of diseases.

It is an enemy to a man's estate. Solomon diswades from sluggishness, from this
argument, So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an
armed man, Pro. 6.11. Wealth will not come without working. They are deceived
who think to have the pleasure of slothfulness, and the plenty of
laboriousness. The diligent hand makes rich, but slothfulness will cloth a
man with rags. Pro. 10.4. and 23.21.

2. The season of sleep; In general, the day is by the command of God and order
of nature, the time for watching, and the night for sleeping. The Sun
approaching draws forth the spirits from the center to the Circumferent
parts, and opens the pores of the body, both which do provoke to working and
waking; but when the Sun departs, the spirits return to the inmost parts of
the body, which inviteth to sleep; and besides, the natural moisture and
silence of the night, are according to Physicians, very conducible to sleep:
Wherefore to sleep in the day, and watch in the night, is (unless necessity
compels it) sinful, and a perverting the course of nature; They that sleep,
sleep in the night, 1 These. 5.6, 7. Which may be understood literally of a
natural, as well as mystically of a spiritual sleep. That Roman Emperor that
turned the day into night, and the night into day, was abhord as a monster in
nature: Such persons are great hinderers of their own health, and thereby of
their outward happiness; for sleep draws the natural heat inward, and the
heat of the day draws it outward, whereby there arises a fight with nature,
to the ruin of the body. Sleep after dinner in young persons, caufeth
heaviness of the head, dullness of wit, defluxions of humors, lethargies, and
other cold diseases of the brain, and also palsies by relaxing the finews;
Besides it is not to be forgotten, that Ishbosheth lost his life, and David his
chastity, by lazing on their beds in the day time.

The most convenient season (I suppose) for sleep (I confess I speak in
another art) is some considerable time after a moderate supper. When thou have
commended thy soul to God and put off thy cares with thy clothes, then thou
may commit thy body to thy bed. He gives his beloved sleep Psa. 127.2.
Ahashuerus, who commanded 127 provinces, could not command one hours sleep,
Ester. 1.

3. The ends of sleep must be minded; Sleep is given us by God, not for the
solution or weakening, but for remission and refreshing of nature; which would
be not only wearied, but quite tired out by continual labor. The effects of
moderate sleep will speak its ends: Sleep will (if taken seasonably, and not
in excess) help digestion, recreate thy mind, repair the spirits, comfort the
whole body: It concocteth not only the meats, but also the humors. By the
retreating of the heat into the inner parts, the vital faculty is much
strengthened, because the heart is abundantly supplied with blood for the
breeding of spirits.

The ends of sleep will somewhat direct us about the measure: Sleep may be
followed till the concoctions in the stomach and liver are finished, which will
be discovered upon our awaking ordinarily by a sensible lightness of the body,
especially of the head, and the passage down of the meat from the stomach.

Thus I have dispatched natural actions, and discovered how a Christian in
eating and drinking, clothing and sleeping, may serve Jesus Christ.

A good Wish about Natural actions, wherein the former heads are epitomized.
MY corrupt heart being prone to turn things lawful into fuel for lust, The
introduction.
like the spider to suck poison out of the sweetest flowers, and to make what
my God gives me for a comfort, to prove, through the subtilty of the Serpent
(as Eve to Adam) a cross and a curse: I wish in general that whilst I use my
meat, and drink, and sleep, and apparel, I may never abuse them, but that I may
so ensure my right to them through Christ, the heir of all things, so taste the
love of my God in them, and make such an holy and sanctified improvement of
them, that I may have a spiritual title to natural good things; may hold all in
capite, and the things of this life may be whet-stones to quicken my holiness,
and load-stones to draw my affections nearer to heaven. In particular because
the snare in eating and drinking is unseen (and so the less suspicious, About
eating and drinking which must be done sacredly.
but the more dangerous) I wish that I may never feed without fear, but eat all
my bread before the Lord, that I may not as the horse and mule which has no
understanding, drink of the streams, Desiring a blessing.
and never look up to the spring; but may acknowledge my God to be the author
of every favor, and be so sensible of the weakness of the creature to
strenghten me without the influence of the creator, that I may constantly look
up to heaven for a blessing on that food which springs out of the earth.

I desire that my heart may so relish the goodness of my God in the bounty of
his hand, Holy discourse at tabl^.
that whilst I am filling my body, I may by some savoury serious discourse feed
my own and others souls, that by the blessings of the footstool, as by a lader,
I may mount up to the blessings of the throne. Lord, when thou remembredest me
an unworthy wretch above many others, let me not be so sordidly ungratful as to
forget thy Majesty; but as the rivers lead me to the Sea, Thanks after meals
so let common blessings direct me to thy self, the Father and Fountain of all
my mercies; open thou my lips that my mouth may show forth thy praise. O let
not my thanks be only verbal, but cordial and real; Let thy mercy be returned
to thy self again in suitable duty, and thy beneficence by answerable obedience.
If I receive courtesies from men, I esteem my self bound to requite them to my
power; ah why should not I then, since I receive millions of mercies from my
God, improve all to his praise! I desire that I may not as the Israelites
bestow that corn and oil on Baal, (or make provision for any sin with those
favors) which my God bestows on me; but that all those cords of love may
draw me nearer, and bind me closer to himself; I live at thy cost, enable me to
live to thy credit; Let thy loving kindness be ever before me, that I may walk
in thy truth.

I wish that I may not only take my food piously, Soberly.
as from Gods hand, but also use it temperately, as in Gods eye. Excess has
been abhord by mere heathens. Beasts know when they have drunk enough, and by
no beating will be forced to more; and shall I who, beside my reason, have the
help of Religion, perish in the waters like the Swine possessed with devils? O
let my sensitive faculty be such a servant to myrational, and both so
serviceable to my God, that I may use my food as my Physic, receive it
sparingly, and for healths sake, to become thereby more instrumental for the
glory of my Savior. I do not live to eat, but eat to live; why then should I
use my food as if like the Locust, I were all belly, or as some beasts made
only to be filled and fatted for the slaughter? I wish that I may observe the
seasons for feeding my body, Seasonably.
as well as those golden opportunities for my soul; that I may not prefer the
beast before the Angel within me, but may usually every morning serve my God
before my self, and refresh my inward, before my outward man. In a word, I beg
that all my pots may be so spiced with piety, and all my meat so sauced with
religion, that whether I eat, or drink, or whatever I do, I may do all to the
glory of my God; that so when I shall eat and drink no more in this infirm
estate, I may drink of the rivers of his own pleasures, and eat of that tree of
life which grows in the midst of Paradise.

I wish in general, Apparel.
that my clothes as well as my closet may be perfumed with godliness, that the
smell of my garments ( as Isaac said of Jacobs raiment) may be as the smell of
a field which the Lord has blessed. I desire in particular that I may so
observe the ends for which apparel is appointed, that I may wholly forbear those
vices about them which my God forbideth, and truly exercise those virtues on
them which my God commands.

I wish that since garments are given me to cover my nakedness, I may never
discover the lust of my spirit in any lewd or loose attire on myflesh, nor ever
be proud of those rags, be they never so gaudy or costly, which call aloud to
me to be humble, as being the signs of my first and most dreadful sin and
shame. I desire that I may not be of the number of them that wast their wealth
about that which is at the mercy of the moth, yet that I may not through
covetousness offer my self by my clothes to just contempt, but may so walk
between the two extremes, as one who wears the livery of Beligion, that my God
may never be dishonored, nor the Gospel disgraced by any spots in my garments;
O that my soul may so put on the garments of my Elder brother, and the graces
of the holy Spirit, that thereby I may be known (as David's daughters by their
raiment of diverse colors) to belong to the heavenly Court, and thereby be
prepared to walk with my God in the white of glory. Sleep.
I wish that I may observe the ends of sleep, how my God allows it for the
strengthening, not the weakening of nature, that I may not by excess herein turn
my friend into an enemy, and whilst I seem to indulge my flesh, wrong both
flesh and spirit too. O that prudence and piety might both so guide me, that I
may ever be watchful against his incroaching adversary, and not like a Dormouse
live as if I were born to sleep. Finally, I wish that I may be so sensible of
the worth of those narrow streams of time, because of their tendency to the
boundless Ocean of eternity, that like holy Hooper, I may be spare of sleep,
sparer of diet, and sparest of time, that I may redeem it as much as may be
conveniently from those natural actions which are necessary; and that when
eating, drinking, and clothing, and sleeping, and days, and weeks, and years,
and ages shall be no more, I may eat of my Saviors hidden Manna, drink of the
new Wine in my Fathers kingdom, be arrayed with the White Linen of the Saints,
and inherit that rest which remains for the people of my God, for ever and
ever, Amen.

CHAP. XXV. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godliness, in his
Recreations and Pleasures.
THy duty is to exercise thy self to Godliness in thy Recreations; the
Christian in his walking, Thirdly,
as well as in his working, must be furthering his eternal weal. Our Gardens or
places of delights, as well as our Houses, must be consecrated ground; David's
Cimbal, Viol and Timbrel were all useful in, and serviceable to the Tabernacle;
with them he praised God, Psa. 150. Saints outward pleasures must be some way
or other subservient to their inward purity. Bern de bonis disserendis.
It was a witty observation of Bernard on the signification of Isaac (which is
laughter or joy) Sacrifice your Isaac, and your Isaac shall live. It is the
Ram, the rankness and stoutness of your heart which shall dye. Reader,
sacrifice thy recreations, thy joys, thy delights to God, and they shall all
live; it is rankness of them which God desires should be put to death. That
these pleasures are not simply unlawful, is plain; Eat thy bread (says God)
with joy, drink thy Wine with a merry heart; live joyfully with the Wife of thy
youth, Eccles. 9.7, 8, 9. Epicurism is not at all commanded, but moderate
delight in creatures is allowed and commended; He gives all things richly to
enjoy. To enjoy, not to behold, nor to hoard up; He condemns those rich
cormorants that starve at a full Table, and like Asses laden with good
victuals, feed on thistles, Eccl. 6.2, 3. and 2.24. and 3.12. The merciful God
is pleased out of his bounty, not only to allow his creatures what is for
necessity, but also what is for delight. Christian, it is more then God
requires of thee to be always pondering and poring on such subjects as make
thy heart sad, whereby thou thy self art disadvantaged, banishing that
cheerfulness from thee, which is an ornament to Christianity; and others
discouraged, supposing that all who walk in heavens way, must needs be (as thou
art) mopish and melancholy. Piety does regulate, but not extirpate our
pleasures. It is a pruning-knife to cut off the luxuriancy of them, not a
Weeding-hook, to pluck them up by the roots; If thy body be as one of the
Fathers calls it, jumentum animae, The souls Beast, then it must be allowed
some rest and refreshment, or else it will carry thee but heavily along in thy
journey.

It is reported of a Primitive Christian, St. John Cass. Col. 24. cap. 21
that as he was on a time playing with a bird, two or three youths going by,
saw him, and one of them spoke to the other, See how this old man plays like a
child with a Bird, which the good old man overhearing, called him to him, and
asked him, what he did with the Bow in his hand, and how he used it? whereupon
the young man bent his bow, showed him what he did with it, and unbent it
again. Why do you unbend it? says the Old man; because says the youth, if my
Bow should always stand ready bent; it would prove a slug and be unserviceable.
Such is the condition of man, says the Old Christian; If his mind were always
bent and intent about the best things, the wings of devotion would soon flag,
and the arrows of contemplation fly but slowly toward Heaven.

The most I know need a curb in this particular of recreation rather then a
whip; yet some there are that whilst they strive to keep under their bodies,
ride over them, and make them much more unserviceable then they would be.
Whilst they go about to punish their bodies for their former wantonness, and
excess, in the end they punish God and their souls too. Temperies animi
sequitur temperamen^um corporis.
The temper of the soul (Philosophers tell us) follows the temperament of the
body; A dull Knife cannot cut well. A pen worn out will not make good Letters;
he that would do his work well, must see that his tools be right for his turn,
otherwise he will but bungle at the best.

I am confident that it is thy duty to keep thy body in the best plight and
health, vigor and liveliness that thou can for thy souls sake. I must
confess I intend in this head those recreations which exercise the body or
mind, so as to fit them to follow the better our general or particular callings.

A Holy man could indeed wish that his body needed no such diversion, but when
he finds that after long sitting, or much labor, his body clogd and tired,
he is forced to give way to reason. For vain and sinful recreations, Reader, I
must in the Name of God forbid them; I am not about to teach thee how to honor
God by doing Satan's work. They that study the Devils books, will hardly learn
Christ's Lesson. There be some that take pleasure in unrighteousness, Romans 1.32.
Holy things are too good to be sported with, and vicious things are too bad;
things of an indifferent nature are fit to be the subjects of our recreations.
Those sports which are of evil report amongst Saints, or which thou have
experienced to be bellows to blow up the fire of thy passion, or fuel to thy
covetousness, must be avoided. Avoid all occasions and appearances of evil;
sports sinful in the act, like the play between Abners and Joabs Soldiers,
will be bitterness in the end.

When Thespis a Poet at Athens, Plutarch in vit S^l.
made a play which delighted all the Citizens, Grave Solon himself went to see
it; but when the play was ended, wherein Thespis acted a part, Solon called him
to him, and asked him, if he were not ashamed to lie so openly in the face of
the whole City? Thespis answered him, that it was no matter, so long as it was
but in sport. But Solon beating his Staff on the ground, replied, If we allow
lying in sport, we shall shortly find it in earnest, in our bargains and
dealings. Certainly heathens will another day condemn our mungril Christians.
The sober sort of them, seemed to hate and abhor that harlot vice, though
presenting her self upon a stage with her painted face, and most gaudy dress,
when many among us love, and like, and even dote upon her; But such must know
that sins in jest, will bring at last, sufferings in earnest. Men laugh, and
jest, and mock at sin; its asport to a fool to do mischief, Pro. 10.23. but
surely they will find hell a serious thing; for God will not be mocked: They
pretend now that they have time to spare, and if they should not spend it at a
playhouse (I had almost said a whorehouse) they should spend it worse. Alas do
they not know that God gave them time to provide in for their eternal felicity,
and not to squander it away in such foolish vanities. If time be a drug that
hangs on their hands to their trouble, God may take it off, before they are
willing or aware, and send them to their everlasting home. Those were worthily
condemned that took the Timbrel, and Harp, and rejoiced at the sound of the
organ, and therefore said unto God, depart from us, Job. 21.14.

But Reader, thou may be merry and not mad, enjoy thy pleasures without such
poison; thou may have thy recreation, and never be beholden either to sin or
Satan for them; God allows thee choice enough of trees in his garden, though
thou do wholly forbear the forbidden fruit: nay thou may, like a skillful
mariner, make use of this side-wind of recreation to help thee toward the
haven of rest.

The author of the Belgic Commonwealth tells us, Belgic Common wealth.
that printing was first invented by one Laurence Jans when he walked abroad
for his recreation. It is said, of Socrates that he profited his companions by
his recreations, no less then if he had been reading lectures. I have read of
one that by hearing music, Mr. Esty.
tuned his heart to think of, and admire the melody and music in heaven. Truly
I see no reason but a Christian may cause his recreation to do that which
naturalists deny to Odours, Odores non nutriunt.
even both to refresh and nourish him. Only be sure thy recreation be
innocent, neither dishonerable to God, nor disadvantagious to thy neighbor.
Think of that rule, All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient. Some recreations are lawful, which are not expedient, either in
regard of thy age, calling, or the compapany thou art with. He that will do all
he may, will quickly be brought to do what he ought not. It is much easier and
safer for the fowl to pass by the share when she is out, then to get out when
she is once in.

We say Its not evil to marry, but its good to be wary; so say I, Its not bad
to use recreations but its good to be watchful that we do not abuse them;
which that thou may not do, I desire thee to enclose this Common, which many
wander in to their woe, with these three Cautions

First, Mind moderation at them; remember thy recreation is not to be thy
occupation; God made Leviathan to sport in the waters, but God made not man to
play upon the land. Our time here is our pilgrimage, and therefore not to be
spent in pleasures; The candle of our lives is set up, not to play, but to work
by. Spinster is a tittle given to our greatest women in our law language. A man
that builds an house, will not make it very full of windows, for then it would
be weak; neither will he make it without any, for then it would be dark.
Recreations to our natural, are like windows to our artificial houses; Some are
convenient, many weaken the building, and strengthen the Thief, who has the
more advantage thereby to Steal.

Fish that leap into the Air for their recreation, return quickly to their own
element again; Beasts that play up and down in the Fields, in a short time
return to their food. Recreation is like some pleasant house which we may call
at, as we pass on toward our heavenly country, but must not stay, much less
dwell there. Sir Francis Bacon said of Parliaments, in reference to the English
body politic, That they are good purging Physic (to be made use of now and
then) but bad diet-drink (to be taken constantly) the same may be said of
recreations, If used in measure, they are helpful; if immoderately, they are
hurtful. They are good sauce, but bad meat. Diogen. Laert.
Plato reproved a young man for playing at Dice; The young man answered him,
For how small a matter do you reprove me? I but says Plato, the custom is no
small matter.

Those that put their hands to their mouths, when they drank water, were
elected by God to fight his bartels. Those that bowed down to the ground upon
their knees, were rejected, Judge. 7.5, 6, 7. Those that soop their handful of
pleasant waters, are fitter for Gods work, then they that swill their belliful;
God taxes them sharply, who make carnal delights the end of their lives, ye
have lived in pleasure on earth, and been wanton. God allows us pleasures in
our lives, but God does not allow us to live in pleasures, Jam. 5.5. When our
lives are nothing else but a diversion from one pleasure to another, we may
fear our deaths will be the beginning of our pains. Nimrod, Ishmael, Esau, all
vicious persons, are noted to be given up to such pastimes.

The people of Tombutum in Africa, are said to spend their whole time in
singing and dancing. Some persons, especially Gentlemen, spend their whole time
in Hawking or Hunting, or gaming, of whom I may speak as Pliny to his Son (when
he saw him spend his time in talking, Lib. 3. cap. 5.
and walking and neglect his studies) They might put those hours to better use.
Or as the Holy Ghost says of the voluptuous Widow, they are dead while they
live, 1 Timothy 5.6.

Great men think with Galba, Nemorationem otii reddere cogetor Suet. in Gal.
that no man shall be called to account for his idleness, but they will one day
hear of wicked and slothful servants, and find a truth in the German Proverb,
that Gentlemen are Venison in heaven; they seldom come thither.

Reader take heed of the hook that is hid under this bait of pleasures; thou
may nibble at it safely, but if once thou go with open mouth to swallow it
down, thou art caught, and in danger to be undone. The fly that comes to a
glass of sweet Syrrup, and only tastes it, may get away securely; but if once
he bathe his body and wallow in it, he is limed and loses his life. Some drugs
are given to procure sleep, which if taken moderately may give the Patient
rest, and do him good; but if in any great quantity, may cause him to sleep his
long sleep, and send him to the place where the weary are at rest. Weigh thy
pleasures warily in the balance of the Sanctuary, lest thou should eat of
that luscious diet, Invite,
more then ^hon can possibly digest. In a word, follow the advice of reverend
Bid; For pleasures (says he) we must deal with it as we do with honey; only
touch it with the tip of the singer, not with the whole hand, for fear of
surfeit; though a little honey be sweet and comfortable, yet much causes
gripings, and breeds choler: Fragrant Flowers if used moderately, refresh the
brain, but if too much, cause the headache; Light is sweet, and it is a pleasant
thing to behold the Sun; yet a man by staring too long, too much, may dazzle,
nay blind his eyes. Do as Jonathan did; He put forth the end of the Rod which
was in his hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth,
and his eyes were enlightened, 1 Samuel 14.27. His eyes were enlightened; A little
will satisfy, much will surfeit. Though Swine lie night and day in such mud,
do thou as the Sheep which sometimes fall into the mire, but hasten out of it
to the pleasant Medows. Though the necessity of thy body calls thee to thy
recreations for a season, yet let the necessities of thy soul and family call
thee off from them in due time. Let thy recreations be like a Porter whom thou
may use for half an hour, or an hour, as thy occasions are, and dismiss; and
not like an Household servant to dwell with thee constantly. The Lacedaemonians
were so sparing that they are said to be even covetous of their time.

Secondly, Look that thine end in them be right. The end here will speak much
to the specification of the act; thy recreation must be as sauce to thy meat;
we eat sauce to sharpen our appetites to our food, and to make us relish it the
better; so we must use recreations to whet our stomach to our callings, and to
make them the more savoury to us. As music to the Jews did stir up their minds
and prepare their hearts for holy performances; so lawful recreations may be
used by us Gentiles, to fit us for the service of God in our general and
particular vocations. The Saint by the comforts of his life may delight more in
God the life of all his comforts; He may follow these streams so long till he
comes to the fountain of living waters; He may conclude with himself, If
recreations by the creature be so sweet, how sweet is communion with the
Creator.

The Musician does not leave his strings constantly wound up, but sometimes
lets them down, and his end is, that when he goes again to use his Viol, it
may make the better Music. The wise Husbandman will not always cross-crop his
ground but lets it sometimes lie fallow, and his end is, that sowing upon a
Tilt, he may have the greater crop: So the Christian may allow his mind
moderate release, he may afford the ground of his outward man some rest; but
his end must be, that when it comes again to be sowed, to be employed, it may
be the more serviceable to God and his soul; and truly so by going back a
little, he may have this advantage to leap the farther.

O how sordid a thing is it for men to use sports merely to pass away their
time! hence they foolishly call them pastimes. Reader, art thou in haste to
have some part of the thread of thy life cut off, as if it were too long? Will thou never consider that time is a silver stream, running along into the Ocean
of eternity, and that eternity depends on the spending of this moment of
time! Do thou not believe that thy jovial companions now in Hell, would give
a whole world if they had it for one hour; and that when thou thy self come
to dye, and to look into the other World, thou will say with the Roman General
Sertorius (in answer to his Soldiers, who told him it was dishonorable to the
Romans, to pay tribute to the barbarous people inhabiting the Pyrenean
Mountain.) Plut.
Time is a precious commodity to be taken up at any rate. Good God, how much
will thou think a Week, a Day, nay an hour worth!

For thy souls sake weigh thy time, as it stands in relation to thine
everlasting condition, and then I am confident thou will aim at another end in
thy recreations. Though children go to school and work in hope of play, yet men
play to fit themselves for work. Though wicked men have such sordid sinful ends
in their delights, do thou mind more noble and worthy designs; Postotia virtus.
therefore oil the wheels that thou may move the more cheerfully, and run the
more swiftly, in the way of Gods commandments.

Thirdly, have an eye to the season of them. Scholars have their play-hours;
yet if they be found playing when they should be at their books, they must
expect to be beaten; The Master that does not grudge his servant time to visit
his friends, and rejoice with his familiars, yet if he should do it when his
work lies upon the spoil, he could not but take it very ill. God allows us
liberty for moderate delights, but it is only when our general and particular
callings will give us leave. Cardinal Angelot is chronicled for a sordid
person, for stealing away the oats which his man had given his mare; how sordid
are those parents who steal their childrens food, to pursue their own
pleasures! He that neglects his particular calling to follow his sports, is
like him that starveth his son, to feed his swine; And he that omits his
prayers and religious duties to mind his pleasures, is like him that is
condemned to be hanged, and has only three days allowed him to procure his
pardon in, yet he spends all that time in hawking or hunting.

Recreations are like some fruits not always in season, though at sometimes
they are very wholesome, yet at other times they are very hurtful. The wise man
tells us there is a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a time to mourn, and a
time to dance, Eccles. 3.2, and 5. There is a time to weep; Sorrow, is not
always seasonable. Dalilah disparaged her discretion by weeping on the day of
her wedding. There is a time to laugh; Delights are sometime out of fashion. He
forfeits his credit that sports at a funeral? Music never suited with mourning

In general, recreations are then unseasonable when God and men's families are
neglected; that they may be minded when to give them water, we are forced to
make the Mill of our general and particular callings to stand still. O what a
fool is that voluptuous youngster, who having no more horses then what is
sufficient for his ploughing, will yet take one to hunt upon, and thereby cause
the rest to be idle, and his business to be undone! But how mad is that person
who, Esau like, is hunting, and thereby misseth the blessing!

In particular, our recreations are unseasonable on a Lords day, and in times
of public calamities.

1. Recreation are unseasonable on a Lords day; Carnal pleasures must then
vanish, and spiritual pleasures must take place: Our joy must be pure and
heavenly on that day. It is an holy day, and therefore calls for holy delights;
God inviteth the Saint on that day to his own table, provideth for him costly,
curious food, and expects that he should come, and not bring along with him
the worlds course fare. Observe the precept in the Evangelical prophet, If thou
turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day,
and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor
him, not finding thine own pleasures, then shall thou delight thy self in the
Lord. Is. 58.13, 14. Take notice, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; our
pleasures are such as flow from creatures; now the Wine which makes glad the
heart of a Saint on a Sabbath, must be drawn from another Pipe. That which runs
from the World, is too flat, low, and full of dregs, to be served in to the
great King.

When Aristotle was asked what he thought of Music; he answered, Jovem nec
canere, nec citharam pulsare; that Jupiter cared not either for singing or
fidling; he was for higher and more refined exercises. The infinite God does
always overlook our puddle-water, more especially on his own day, when he
allows us to drink of his own richest Wines. They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the
River of thy pleasures, Psa. 36.8. Mark, 1. The excellency of the provision,
fatness of thy house, the River of thy pleasures. The fattest is esteemed the
fairest, and the most excellent food; therefore the Saint was enjoined to offer
the fat in Sacrifice under the law. As God expects the best from us, so he
gives the best to us; this made David when he had feasted so curiously, to sing
so cheerfully. Fatness here is the top, the cream of all spiritual delicacies.
My soul is filled as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee
with joyful lips, Psa. 63.5. But though God keep so noble an house to satisfy
his peoples hunger, what special care does he take to quench their thirst? Thou
shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures. O he drinks to them, and
they pledge him in his own cup. Has the Child then any cause, when his father
keeps so rare and costly a Table, to leave such dainties, and go a begging up
and down the Country for scraps and fragments? O how much do these disgrace
their Parents provision, and their own discretion? But mark Reader 2. the
plenty as well as the excellency of this provision. Here is fatness in the
abstract; a river of pleasures, and so much as that they who enjoy it shall be
satisfied, and abundantly satisfied. A River is overflowing and everflowing, it
communicates its water, and yet is never empty; It is fed with Springs and
Fountains, and therefore its no wonder if it always be full; They that are at
such a Well, need not complain of want; but here is not only Rivers and
fatness, for some have much, and yet cannot feed; but of Gods people its said,
they shall be abundantly satisfied; in the Original it is inebriated, they
shall have not only a sufficiency, but a redundancy of spiritual delights; the
Vessels of their souls shall be filled to the brim, out of that River, whose
streams make glad the City of God. Surely then, they that may have bread in
such abundance, enough and to spare in their Fathers House, made of the Kidneys
of the Wheat, of the finest Flower, need not hanker after the Worlds homely
fare. Our Heavenly Father does not keep so starveling an house, that the Worlds
scraps should go down with us.

Besides, how abominable is it to disturb Gods rest with our sports! Some work
hard on the week day, and play on the Lords day. No melody so delightful to
them as Temple Music, no draughts so sweet as in Temple Vessels, Amos 6.5.
Dan. 5.2. No time so fit for their foolish Triumphs as Gods time. The Heathen
Philistines, when they offered a great Sacrifice to their god Dagon, call for
Sampson to make them sport. These uncircumcised persons, mingle their
Sacrifices to the true and living God with sports, and carnal, nay sinful
pleasures. Week days, like ordinary Virgins, are excused; and the Lords Day,
the Queen of days, must be deflowred.

Reader, If thou art guilty of this fin, know, that to steal time from thy
Family or Master on a week day is theft; but to steal time from thy Maker and
Redeemer on this day, is Sacrilege. Have thou no Metal to disfigure and
embezle, but that which has the Kings stamp on it! Have thou no time to sleep
in thy Cabin, or play on the Deck, but just when the wind blows fair for the
Vessel of thy Soul to lanch forward toward Heaven! I must tell thee, that God
calls thee on this day to be wholly taken up in working out thy salvation, and
not at all in minding thy recreations. It were better, as Austin says (though
that were very bad) to plough all day, Melius toto die ararent, quam toto
d^e^altarem Aug. in tit. Psalm. 92. Justin, lib. 1.
then to play all day. But as Cyrus dealt with the Lydians, when he had
conquered them in Battle, he allowed them liberty for all sports and pastimes,
and thereby subdued them in such a manner, that they became his servants for
ever: So Satan deals with the children of men; when they are his already in
part, by Sabbath bath day pastimes, he makes them his sure and settled servants
altogether, and so they become his for ever.

Secondly, Recreations are unseasonable in times of public calamities: The
Son is very undutiful, who laughs under the rod; and that Daughter very
unnatural, who is sporting when her Mother is dying: A Sword, a Sword is
sharpened, and also furbished; it is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is
surbished that it may glitter: Should we then make mirth? Ezekiel. 21.9, 10.
Should we then make mirth? as if he had said, Such Seasons call for sighing,
not for singing; for mourning, not for mirth.

The Jews tells us, the very beasts abstained from copulation in time of the
Deluge. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 17.
Naturalists tell us of the Bees, that when one is sick, the rest in the Hive
are all sad. Experience tells us, that the very birds, who in Summer sing
division prettily, with diverse tunes and variation of their pleasant voices, in
Winter forbear their notes, and seem to sympathize with the season: And shall
not we humble our hearts when Gods hand is lifted up? How much is he
displeased, when his chastenings are despised! Amos 6.5, 6, 7. In that day did
the Lord God call to weeping and mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with
sackcloth: And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep: And it
was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts; Surely this iniquity shall not
be purged away till ye dye, says the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 22.12, 13. In that
day: When the Persians invaded Gods people, then they minded their pleasures:
The unseasonableness of their laughter, provoked God to anger: Solace in the
day of Jacobs troubles, is like Winter fruits, harsh and sour, Jer. 9.1. The
Church may speak to such, as they did to the Philosopher, Aul. Cell.
who in a great tempest at Sea was asking many trifling questions, Are we
perishing, and do thou trifle?

Our duty is, to sympathize with our fellow members in their sufferings: Weep
with them that weep, Romans 12.15. Now if we give our selves then to take our
ease, we shall hardly feel our Brethrens hard cords through our soft beds.

Alexander, Q. Curt.
though in exteme thirst (when his Army was ready to famish for want of water)
refused the cup of water presented to him, with this excuse, I cannot drink
alone, and here is not enough for every one of my Soldiers to wet their lips.
Surely Christianity lays a stronger obligation upon us, when the Church is
like her Husband, carrying her Cross, to cut our selves short, in regard of
worldly comforts.

Reader, Is thy Mother sick, and art not thou sorrowful? Is thy God, thy Father
pierced and dishonored by sin, and can thou take thy pleasures? Are thy
Brethren and Sisters in great affliction, and have thou no fellow-feeling
affections? When David asked Vriah why he went not to his house after his
journey: He answered him, The Ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my
Lord Joab, and the Servants of my Lord are in the open fields: Shall I then go
into mine house, and eat, and drink, and lie with my wife? as thou live, and
as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing, 2 Samuel 11.10, 11. Truly if thy
flesh should tempt thee to carnal mirth in aday of Zions tribulations, do thou
repel it as he did; The beautiful Spouse of Jesus Christ, the blessed members
of his body are in great affliction, they water their couches with tearts, and
they mingle their drink with weeping; and shall I mind my play, and sports, and
earthly delights! through the Lords help I will not do it. No, by the Rivers of
Babylon, let me sit down and weep when I remember Sion. Alas how foolish is
that man who can laugh and jest, and be merry in his private Cabin, as if he
were safe and secure, when the ship of the Church in which he sayleth, is in a
boystrous and dangerous storm.

Thus I have dispatched the third particular, wherein a Christian must exercise
himself to Godliness, namely Recreations.

A good Wish about Recreations.
REcreation being the intermission of my labor, The Introduction.
and spending of some time in delightful exercise, for the refreshing of my
body and mind, which (by working much) are apt to tire and grow weary, I wish
in general that I may never abuse this favor which my Master affords me (as
some drunken servants) to make me unfit for his work, but may be so
conscientious in observing those cautions about it, which his law prescribes,
that my vigor and strength being thereby repaired, I may after it, follow his
business with the more alacrity and ability. In particular, I wish that my
teeth may never water after forbidden fruit, For the kind it, must be lawful.
that I may not be so prodigal as to lay my precious inestimable soul at stake
by any sinful pleasure. My God has told me how I may be merry and not have the
Devil for my Play-fellow. O let me never defile my Spirit, whilst I am
delighting the flesh, but let my sport for the kind of it, be like Cesars wife,
without the least suspicion of fault. I desire that my carriage at it may be
wholly free from passion and covetousness; and to this end, that I may never
venture what I esteem at any value; my mind hereby would be did urbed, not
refreshed, and so the end of recreation altogether frustrated. Moderation about
them.
I wish that such delights may be used as my medicine, only now and then when
nature requires them, not as my meat constantly every day; let my God of all
consolation lie (as a Wife) in the bed of my heart, in my bosom, be the delight
of my eyes, whom I would by no means have out of my sight; but let these low
pleasures as my servants, always remain in an outward room, and go or come as
occasion shall require, and Religion direct. I wish that I may never mind
recreations for those foolish sinful ends, The end to be good.
of passing away the time, or pleasing the flesh; but as Elijah called for a
Minstrel, that his mind being thereby calmed and cheared, he might be the more
fitted to prophecy: so I may refresh my body for this very end, that it may be
the more serviceable to my soul, and both of them thereby to my dearest
Savior. I wish that my earthly delights may not be unsavory, Seasonable
because (as fish at some times of the year) they are unseasonable; that when
my general or particular occupatition, require my presence, In general they are
unseasonable when particular or general callings are neglected for them.
I may not be absent at recreations. Why should I like the rich fool be talking
of taking my bodily ease, when my soul is in danger of endless pain, or like
profane Esau, be following my carnal pleasures, to the loss of my spiritual
privilege! Finally, I desire that I may not ( as Nero when Rome was o^ fire)
be singing, when the people of God are sighing, but moderate or deny my mirth,
In special. In a time of the Churches troubles.
when the members of Christ are mourning; O let me prefer Jerusalem before my
chief joy. In a word, I wish that I may not disparage my God, by meddling with
drossie comforts, when he calls me to golden Cordials; that I may not disobey
his law, by minding my pleasure on his holy day, but may delight my self, On a
Lords day.
on that day of the Lord, in the Lord of that day; O let me gather 1. from
recreations, with the Holy Father; If ordinary glass be at such a price, how
precious is a true Diamond! If the Worlds trash drain such joy, what joy will
flow from the true treasure!

Lord let my chiefest and constant recreations be to walk with my beloved in
the Garden of thy word, to refresh my spiritual sent and sight with the fair
and fragrant flowers of thy promises and precepts, to do the work which thou
have given me to do, and to enjoy fellowship with thy self in Ordinances, till
I come to that place, where bodies are above such dreggie delights, and souls
above all mediate communion, and thou thy self art all in all, Amen.

CHAP. XXVI. How to exercise our selves to Godliness in our Partiular Callings.
AS Religion must be our business in our Spiritual and Natural, Fourthly,
so also in our Civil Actions, and particular Callings. The Heavenly Bodies
have an influence, not only on men and women, but also on trees and plants:
The holiness of a Saint must be operative, not only in his more nobler
exercises, the Ordinances of God, but likewise in his earthly and inferior
employments. Thy duty is Reader, to mind thy general in thy particular
calling, and to drive a trade in Heaven, whilst thou art following thy trade
on Earth: When thou art called to the Lord, thou art not called from thy
labor; nay, as thou art a servant of Christ, thou art bound to be serviceable
to thy Country, in some mental or manual Calling; but thy diligence therein
must proceed from Conscience, not from Covetousness; from subjection to Gods
Word, not from affection to thy wealth.

As thy particular Calling is the Zodiac through which thou daily passest; so
Godliness must be the Ecliptic line to go through the midst of it: Godliness
must be the key to open the shop; Godliness must be the whip to drive the Cart;
Godliness must be the Cock to call thee up to thy work; Godliness must be the
clock to call thee off from thy work; Godliness must be the principle, the
rule, and the end of thy work; Holiness to the Lord was written upon the
bridles of the horses, Zach. 14.21.

Truly Reader, thy care had need to be great about thy calling, lest it cause
thy ruin: More dye by meat then by poison. By lawful things many perish;
Worldly things will court thee, that they may kill thee: They that dig deep
into the bowels of the earth, have not seldom been stifled with the damps that
arise thence. These things are so subject to defile and destroy us, that God
made a Law that they should not be used, before they were purified, Numb.
31.22, 23. Some are destroyed by those houses which were made to defend them;
like Saul, they fall on those swords which should have been for their safety.
Particular Callings were designed for our good; but how often do they prove our
grief? Are there not those, who like Corah and his company, are swallowed up
alive of earth, and consumed! Pliny observes, Pliny Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 106.
that in Phoselis the hill Chimaera burns night and day: The fire, says he,
is kept burning by water, but quenched by earth: The earth of particular
Vocations, has sometime put out that fire of devotion, which the water of
affliction could not do.

It behooves thee to take heed how thou handlest these thorns, if thou would
not prick thy fingers, and pierce thy conscience. I shall for that end give
thee some Directions out of the Word.

First, be diligent in thy Calling: It is observable, that the Apostle advises
the Romans, Be not slothful in business, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. All the
children of Adam are enjoined to mind their particular callings, by virtue of
that command or threatening to their Father, In the sweat of thy brows thou
shall eat thy bread, Genesis 3. As in the Body Politic, so in the Body Natural,
there must be order; to which three things are requisite, 1. That every part be
in its proper place, each Star in its own Orb. 2. That the parts have each to
other a due proportion. 3. That every member do its duty, and be some way or
other helpful to the Body. Idle persons are like Wens in the face, which
receive of the bodies nourishment, but serve only to disfigure it. Those that
are no workers, in Gods account are disorderly walkers, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. Augustus
built an Apragapolis, a City void of business; but God made not the World to be
a Nursery of idleness. Alex. ab Alex.
The Ethiopians (as the Historian observes) would acquaint their youth, that
they were born to labor, by accustoming them betimes to fling great stones.
Amongst the Turks, every man must follow some Trade, the Grand Seigneur himself
not excepted. The Censores morum among the Romans, were to observe who were
diligent, who were negligent in their Vocations, and accordingly to commend or
condemn them. The Grecians, according to Solons Law, were great discouragers of
them, that like Vermin, lived only to eat what others earn. The Council of
the Areopagites enquired how every man lived, and punished such as they found
idle. The Devils themselves are diligent about their deeds of darkness:
Creatures void of life are serviceable in their places and stations; Angels,
nay God himself is always working. An idle person cannot find either in Heaven
or Hell a pattern. Our lives are therefore called, The lives of our hands,
because they are to be maintained by Gods blessing on our labors.

The Patriarchs, those persons of renown, were eminent for taking pains, they
did not eat the bread of idleness: How frequently, and how ardently does the
Word call upon us to be working in our particular callings? What Precepts does
the Scripture give for it, That you do your own business, and work with your
own hands, as we commanded you? 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. What Promises does God make to
it? He that tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with bread, Prove. 12.11, 24.
The soul of the diligent shall be made fat, Prove. 13.4. That arm which is most
used, grows stronger and bigger then the other: The more the Vine spreads
it self against the wall, the more it receives of the Suns Warmth and
Influence.

Pliny reports of one Oressianus, Lib. 18. cap. 6
who from a little piece of ground got much wealth, and more then his
neighbors could from a greater quantity, whereupon he was accused of
Witchcraft; but to defend himself, he brought forth his servants and
instruments of labor on the day of trial, and said, Veneficia mea Quirites
haec sunt: These, O Romans, are all my Witchcrafts; I say not to my Servants,
Go and do this; but, Come let us do this and that, and so the work goes on.
The keys that men keep in their Pockets and use every day, wax brighter and
brighter; but if they be laid aside, and hung by the Walls they soon grow rusty.
Students who are given to a sedentary life, often waste in their strength, when
others whose time is spent in bodily labor, increase in strength; In all
labor, says the wise man, there is profit.

There is a threefold care mentioned in the Word of God. There is a care of the
head, a care of the hand, and a care of the heart. The care of the head is the
care of providence, this is commendable, Pro. 31.16. The care of the hand, is
the care of diligence, this is profitable, Pro. 21.5. The care of the heart, is
the care of diffidence, this is abominable, Phil. 4.6. Upon which words Zanchy
observes well. God does not say (...), not do nothing, but be careful for
nothing. The two first are commanded, but the last is forbidden. Reader, thou
may as well expect riches to rain down from Heaven in silver showers, as to
provide for thy family and Children without industry in thy calling. Solomon
tells us, the blessing of the Lord makes rich; and the diligent hand makes
rich, Pro. 12.24. and 10.4, 22.

As the nether Millstone is heavy, slow, and of small riddance, yet the upper
Millstone though of greater agility, and quicker dispatch, does not grind
without the nether, but both together make good meal; so the diligent hand of
it self, can do little, nay nothing without the blessing of God; yet the
Blessing of God, though of infinite efficacy, will seldom do any thing without
the diligent hand, but both together make a person rich.

Besides negligence about men's vocations is one great cause of corruption. The
proud person is Satan's Throne, and the idle man his Pillow; He sits in the
former, and sleeps quietly on the latter; when men have nothing to do, the
Devil always sets them a work. As a Bird that wandreth from his Nest, so is a
man that wandreth from his place, Pro. 27.8. By place, the Holy Chost
understands particular callings. Now God had taken care that none should
molest a Bird in her Nest, there she was safe, Deuteronomy. 22.6, 7. but when she
begins to wander, then she is in danger, either to be shot by the Fowler, or
caught in the Snare, or made a prey to other ravenous birds; So a man that is
diligent in his calling, whilst he is employed therein, is in Gods precincts,
and so under Gods protection; but when he wandreth abroad from his calling,
going out of his bounds to sit and talk, he is a weft and a stray, and so
falls to the Lord of the Manor, the God of this World.

Reader, thou may expect to be preserved whilst thou art a working, but not
when thou art wandering. Tertullian speaks of a Christian woman who going to a
play, was possessed by the Devil, and when he was asked by those that came to
cast him out, how he durst possess one that was a Christian? he answered, I
found her in my own place. Friend, they who like Dinah gad abroad, are often
defiled before they come home. Those Soldiers who leave their places in a
March and stragle to pilfer, are many times snapt and slain by their enemies,
when they who keep their places are safe and secure. O mind thy calling in its
place and season, and know this for thy comfort, that whilst thou art about thy
lawful work (observing Scripture rules in it) thou art under Gods Wing.

Secondly, Deal righteously in thy calling. Take heed of unjust gain; believe
this truth, A clear and clean conscience is infinitely better then a full
purse. A little with the fear of the Lord, is better then the possessions of
many wicked men, Psa. 37.15. A little wholesome food is better then a thousand
poisoned Dishes. All the Wealth which is got in Gods way is pleasant; but all
the wealth which is got unjustly by wickedness is poison. The blessing of the
Lord makes rich, and brings no sorrow of heart with it, Pro. 10.22.
Defrauding thy Neighbor, and cheating thy Customers makes rich, and brings
the sorrow of Hell with it. He that resolves to be unrighteous (it is commonly
said) may soon be rich. When the spring of conscience is screwed up to the
highest pin, that it is ready to break, and godliness is locked up fast into an
outhouse, and not suffered so much as to peep into the Shop or Warehouse, to
take notice of what is done there, such a Tradesman may gain silver, but alas
he loses his precious Savior, and his never dying soul. O what a dreadful
gain is it to get earth with the loss of Heaven! He that will be rich in have,
shall be poor enough in Hell. Know y^ not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven! be not deceived, God will not be mocked. 1 Cor.
6.9. Do not think (Reader) though thou can cheat thy Chapmen, that thou can
cozen God; no, he will not be mocked; he sees thy false weights and false
measures, which thou ordinarily usest, though thou have others to bring forth
(for a color) if occasion be, and he will deal justly with thee for thy
injustice, by sending thee to that place where there is judgment without
mercy. I have read of an old rich covetous wretch, that lying upon upon his
deathbed, he asked his Son whether he would not do any thing that his Father
should desire him. His Son answered yea: then says the Father, Hold your
finger in the flame of that Candle an hour. Sir, says the Son, I cannot
possibly endure that. No, says the Father! I must burn for ever in Hell, for
raking up an estate unjustly for you, and yet you will not burn a finger one
hour for me! O Reader, if thou art guilty of this sin, think of it betimes. Thy
ill gotten wealth will breed those worms which will gnaw thee eternally.
Besides, thou may think to raise thy House by such heaps; but God himself
says it is the way to ruin it; He that is greedy of gain, troubles his own
house, Pro. 15.27. Whilst he thinks to feather his nest, he does indeed fire
it. It is an observation of the house of Desmond in Ireland, That Maurice the
first Earl of that family, raised it by injustice; and by injustice Girald the
last Earl ruined it. The crafty Fox in the Fable hugd himself, that he had
cozend the Crow of his breakfast, but when he found himself poisoned
therewith, he wished it out of his belly. Unjust gain like the Italian buttered
Sponge, may go down glib, but it swells in the body, and never comes away
till it has ruined the party, Such men spin a fair thread to strangle
themselves with. The getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed
too and fro of them that seek death, Pro. 21.6, 7. Cornelius a Lapide has a
pretty fable, wherein he compares men unjust in their dealings to Spiders, the
righteous to Bees; The Spider ubraided the Be for going up and down for honey;
Thou stayest at home, says the Be, but in thy working losest thy life; Salis
onus unde veneratillus abiit. Erasm. adag.
How often is that Latin Proverb fulfilled? The burden of Salt, returns to
the place whence it came. The occasion of which was the falling of Salt by the
wrack of a Ship into the Sea, the place whence it came. God often sends some
to squeeze those Muck worms when they have sucked themselves full. Deceitful
dealing (as an huge heap of Ice by the Sun) by the scorching fire of Gods wrath
dissolveth into nothing. As the Patridge sits on eggs and hat cheth them
not, so he that gets riches, and not by right; shall leave them in the midst
of his days, and at his end shall be a fool, Jer. 17.11.

Thirdly, Be careful that thy particular Calling incroach not upon thy general:
Many lose Religion in a crowd of earthly businesses. The interposition of the
earth (as to the Moon) eclipseth the light of their Holiness. It is reported of
the inhabitants of Oenoe, a dry Island near Athens, that they bestowed much
labor to draw in a River to water it, and make it fruitful, but when the
passages were opened, the water came in so plentifully that it overflowed the
Island and drowned all the people. Many that will be rich by their
extraordinary labors, to make their Flocks and Fields fruitful, fall into
temptations and snares, and many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown them in
destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. A Candle that burns well above ground,
when put under ground, does many times burn blew and go out; the light of
holiness which has shined eminently in some profess ors, when they have had
little to do with the World, has been abated in a great degree, when they have
had great dealings. They in regard of much business, have been like those in a
Mill, who cannot hear what is spoken by reason of the clacking and noise which
is made there. Christ calls, and the Spirit of God cries to them, but their
ears are stopped with earth that they hear not.

As we say of fire and water, they are good Servants, but bad Masters; Keep
them within their bounds, and they are exceeding useful, but when they go
beyond their bounds how hurtful are they? What mischief has fire done in
England? what sad work has water made in Holland? The same is true of our
particular callings, they are faithful Servants, but they are dreadful Masters;
Keep them within their limits and they are helpful to our selves, our
relations, and our neighbors; but suffer them once to transgress their bounds,
and they will make miserable work; they will rob God, wrong the soul, nay often
ruin it eternally. When those that were born slaves and servants, come once to
be Kings and Commanders, they are ever the worst Tyrants.

Now if thou would not have thy particular calling to incroach upon thy
general, take heed that it steal not away thy heart, nor thy time.

1. Take heed that thy particular calling steal not away thy heart from thy
general calling. If the Mistress keep her distance and maintain her authority
over her maidens, she may find them obedient and serviceable; but if she grow
fond of them, and familiar with them, they will grow saucy and incroach upon
her; Reader, keep thy inward distance, and maintain that authority which God
has given thee over the things of this life, and then all will be well; butif
once thou doatest on them, and delightest in them, expect to have them thine
hindrances in all holy exercises; The World may have thy hands, but it must
not have thy heart. Thy actions may be about thy particular calling, but thy
affections must be above it. Set your affections on things above, and not on
things below, Collos. 3.2. Thy occupation is as the first Adam of the earth,
carthly; but thy conversation must be like the second Adam (the Lord from
Heaven) heavenly. A Christian should follow the things of this World with such
a slightness and indifferency of Spirit as Wicked men do the things of a better
World. The holy Angels behold our earthly affairs but as strangers to them. It
is happy for him that can carry himself toward his own estate as if it were
another man's. An heathen could say, I do not give but only lend my self to my
business. Surely then a Saint should go through th World as one in a deep
study, Rebus non me trodo sedcousmodo Senec de benef
his mind being the whilst intent upon a better object. Brutish Horseflies
fasten on Dunghils, Swallows make their nests of earth. They who have no Heaven
hereafter, may give their hearts to the earth; but, Christian if thou love
thy soul, though riches increase, set not thine heart upon them. Love not the
World, nor the things of the World, Psa. 62.10. This is a certain truth, the
hotter thy love is to the World, the colder it is to the Lord. When the sap of
Worldliness is in a man, he will never flame well heavenward. The Ship may sail
in the water and be safe, but when the water gets into the Ship it sinketh
it. Thou may work about thy earthly affairs and all may be well; but if thine
affairs once work themselves into thee, then thou art in danger. Thy God
allows thee to warm thy self at the Sun of creature comforts, but not to turn
Persian and worship it.

The Riviers lightly salute the earth as they pass along, and make no stay, but
pass forward to the Ocean. Thy affections should but slightly touch the earth,
weeping for worldly crosses as if thou wepst not, and rejoicing for Worldly
comforts as if thou rejoycedst not, and so pass on to the Ocean of thy
happiness; Its said, Germanicus reigned in the Romans hearts, Tiberius only in
the Provinces. Thy general must reign in the City, in thy heart; thy particular
calling only in the Suburbs of thy hands. Reader, if the World ever get into
the throne of thine inward man, fare well all Religon. I have read of a custom
among the Germans, to know whether their children be bastards or not, to throw
them in Fluvium Rhenum, into the River Rhine; If they floated above, then they
acknowledged them to be their own; but if the waters carried them away, then
they esteemed them as Bastards; Truly Reader, if thou can float above the
waters of thy worldly employments, thou art a child of God, but if that carry
thee away by lying near thy affections, look to thy self and fear thy
condition. It is not the greatness of man's estate or employment so much as the
nearness of it to his heart which will hinder holiness. A small hat held near
our eyes, will hinder our sight of the Sun, which a great mountain a far off
will not do. A little near the affections will hinder our sight of Christ, when
thousands far from the heart may, as employed, further it. Besides the closer
we lay the flowers of our earthly mercies to our breasts, the sooner they
wither. A nosegay in the hand will continue fresh and sweet; (as is generally
observed) much longer then when it is stuck in the bosom.

2. That thy particular calling may not incroach upon thy general, be careful
that it steal not away thy time. Thy piety Reader, and thy prudence is so to
order thine affairs relating to heaven and earth, to God and thy family, that
they may not interfere or cross each other. A wise foreceast will much help
thee in this particular. As to the winding a skein of silk, he that begins at
the right end, will make quick riddance of it; so to the dispatching of Wordly
employments, that they may not prove heavenly impediments, he that has
discretion to forecast them well, may do very much. However thy duty is to give
the affairs of thy soul, and thy God, precedence. I know the Devil and thy
corrupt heart will often justle and quarrel with thy Closet and Family duties,
by suggesting to thee that they must of necessity be omitted, because otherwise
such and such concernments of thy calling (upon which the welfare of thy self,
Wife, and Children does depend) will be neglected. As when Moses spoke of the
Israelites sacrificing to God, then Pharaoh spoke of work to put them off; so
when thou art thinking of entering upon the performance of duties, whether in
secret or private, thy back friend (the evil one) will send thee a message,
either by thy Wife, or friend, or thine unregenerate part, that some other
affairs of weight call for thy company elsewhere, and therefore a dispensation
must be granted thee at present, as to thy solemn devotion. Friend, if thou
love Jesus Christ, take heed of hearkening to such temptations; let the flesh
but once obtain such a conquest over thee, and thou shall hear of it again, it
will pursue its victory to purpose. Sins is a subtle Sophister, it will bring
Arguments and Reasons for all it does; as is plain in Saul's sparing Agag, and
the best of the flock: The beasts were to be Sacrificed to God; and in
Jeroboams Calves, they were set up to save the Jews those tiresome journeys to
Jerusalem; but take heed that thy heart be not hardened through the
delightfulness of sin. Remember, Piety is the best path to outward prosperity.

Aristotle though a blind heathen, (...), etc. Arist Poli. lib. 7. cap. 8.
could see and say, Make Religion thy first and chief care that thou may
prosper. The Mahometans are so sensible of this, that what occasion soever they
have, they will pray five times a day; Because the Jews suffered Gods house to
lie wast, therefore God blew upon their heaps and wasted their wealth.

He that steals away time from his general for his particular calling, like a
thief in the Candle wastes all; our work on earth is done best, when our work
in heaven is done first. Religious duties in reference to our Worldly
occasions, is like sharpening the tools, which helps our work forward with
more speed and ease. Mass and Meat hinder no man's thirst, was a truth visible
in the dark night of Popery. He that neglects the service of his God, for the
following his trade, may put what he gets into his eye (as our proverb is)
and never see the worse; nay like the gold of Toulouse, or the Vineyard of
Naboth to Ahab, the profit will be the perdition and ruin of the possessor.
They who want time to do Gods Work, must want an eternity to receive Gods
reward. If men are so busy as not to attend their souls, God will be so busy
as not to bestow salvation. I know, Farms and Oxen and Wives do hinder many
from holiness: and I know also that they will hinder many from Heaven, Luke
14.24. Mat. 22.5. That German Prince who would not part with his silver to pay
his Soldiers, lost thereby his Empire and treasure too; He that will not spare
time from his present business for his future blessedness, is like to lose both.

How much time do thou squander away in long meals, in vain sports, inidle
discourse, in superfluous sleep, and yet have thou the face to tell God that
thou have no time in a whole day to seek his favor, and to mind thine eternal
felicity! The truth is thou do not so much want time as waste time.

Do not think that it will be a sufficient excuse at the last day to tell God,
that thy devotion was neglected, because thy earthly occasions abounded and
pressed upon thee. If thy servant should tell thee, when he has neglected thy
business of concernment, that he could not help it because he had business of
his own to look after, a Friend called him to the Alehouse, would thou think
that a sufficient plea? Believe it, thy defense is far worse when thou omittest
the service of God for thy particular calling.

The Philosopher could say, Aristippus apud Plot. de tranq. a nimae.
that he would rather neglect his means then his mind, and his farm then his
soul. The very Turks though they work their Slaves hard, will yet allow them
time every day for food and rest. Will thou Reader deal worse with thy precious
soul, then the Turks do with their Gally-slaves? For shame man be not so cruel
to thy best part.

A Good Christian if business crowd in upon him so much, that he cannot wait on
them, and Worship God daily in his Closet and Family as he ought, will rather
like a wise Mariner (when the ship is overburdened) cast some overboard, then
endanger the loss of all and himself too. Times of earing and harvest were very
busy times with the Israelites, yet then God would not allow them to make bold
with him, Exodus 32.21.

He that is a faithful and wise Steward, will give every one their portion,
their meat in due season; as he will give his body and his family their portion
every day, so he will give his God and his soul their portion every day; surely
he is not faithful who atteneth the lacquey all day, and neglects his Lord;
much worse is he who feeds his flesh and starveth his spirit. Reader take
notice that there is a time for all things; as there are plowing times, so
there are praying times every day; as there is daily time for thy shop, so also
for thy Closet. When the Jewish daily sacrifice was intermitted as in the days
of Antiochus, it was the abomination of desolation

I am the larger in this particular, as observing that professors are
exceeding faulty in suffering the Canker of their particular callings to devour
and eat up the gold and silver of their general callings. Sometimes they will
wholly omit family duties, because the world will not permit them to be at
leisure, but too too often when they perform them, they turn them off with a
short cut, in a hudling manner, (as a Physician his poor patients, though their
business with him concern their lives, when rich men stand without, expecting
to be called in) because the World stays at their doors to speak with them.
Friend, as a special help against this soul-hinerance, let me persuade thee to
be early in the morning at thy Religious duties. Some men must be spoke to
betimes in the morning, or not at all; their public affairs take up the whole
day, and would if it were twice as long. The Devil has a thousand divices to
make him an Athiest all day, who neglects morning duties. Be not so hasty
about thy calling in the morning, as to forget to take God along with thee.
Remember this one note, If the World gets the start of Religion in the morning,
religion seldom overtaketh it all day. Something warm in the morning, before
men go to work is very wholesome. A warm prayer, warm communion, with the
blessed God, in meditating or reading, will help thee to work with more comfort
and courage, and may prevent infections from ill fumes and vapors in the day
time. Job had a large family, much Cattle; he had besides his domestical, much
civil business, for he was a Magistrate; Job 1.5.
yet Job rose up early in the morning to offer up Sacrifice, and thus did Job
continually. In the day time also, or at evening, let nothing put by the
concernments of thy God, and thine everlasting estate; what company soever thou
art in, say as a devout soul I have read of, when his hour of prayer was come,
you must excuse me, I must be gone, a friend (meaning his God) stays to
speak with me.

Cato repented of three things, one of which was, Plut. in vit.
That he had spent a whole day idly. Truly friend, if thou neglectest thy
general calling, how busy soever thou have been all day long about thy
particular, I must tell thee (though an hour cannot be bought with the revenues
of the whole earth) Thou have spent a whole day idly, and thou have much cause
to sigh out with the Roman Emperor at night when he had neither done
norreceived any good all day, Hodie diem perdidi, Today I have lost a day.

Fourthly, If thou would exercise thy self to godliness in thy particular
calling, look up to God for a blessing upon thy labors therein. Creatures may
be the object of thy diligence, but God alone the object of thy confidence. Thy
supplication must be to God, and thy expectation from God. Thou can as soon
by thine own power add a cubit to thy stature, as a penny to thy purse. Thou
shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to get
wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. All thy endeavors without Gods blessing are but (as Caesar
said of Senecas works) arena sine calce, Sand without Lime, they will not hang
together; if God bless them they prosper, if he blast them they perish. The
Devil himself was so far Orthodox, Job. 1.10. Thou have blessed the work of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the land. Alas the whole course of
nature turns only as it is moved by the hand of God. It is not in the frame
of nature as in frames of Art; when a watch is made, it may go though the
workman be many miles off, or though he be dead; but there is not the least
wheel in the frame of nature which does not depend upon God for its motion
every moment. As the vapors exhaled by the Sun, depend so much upon it, that
if that withdraw its influence, they fall to the earth; so do the Creatures
depend on God; if he withdraw his influence from them, they presently come to
nothing.

Take notice, Reader (to instance but in one calling) how the genealogy of
Corn and Wine, by a Concatenation of causes, is resolved into Jehovah: I will
hear the Heavens, and the Heavens shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall
hear the Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and they shall hear Jezreel, Hos. 2.21, 22.
God has the key of food under his own girdle, Psalm. 145.16. Hence some call
the Earth Gods great Purse, which he opens for man's profit, and shuts for
man's punishment. The Jewish Rabbis call the Earth Alma Parens, A kind Mother;
and the rain her Husband, because the showers do foecundate and make that great
Mother of plenty fruitful: But as likely a Mother as the Earth is to bring
forth, she is barren unless God open her womb: 1. The plowing and sowing of the
ground is from God; the hands of men cannot do it, without his protection and
providence; and the heads of men would not have thought of it without his
direction and assistance, Isa. 28.24, 25, 26. to the end. 2. When the ground is
plowed and sowed, it must be watered, or the grain will quite dye; this also is
from God alone. The Monarch of Mexico was wont to take an Oath at his
Coronation, that it should be what weather he pleased; but, Can any of the
vanities of the Heathen cause rain? Jer. 14.22. God alone can unstop those
bottles of Heaven; they are all above man's reach: The most spungy clouds distill
not one drop, no more then a rock, till God give the Word of command: He
decrees rain, Job 28.26. He prepares rain, Psalm. 135.7. and he pours down
the former and latter rain, Deuteronomy. 28.12. Joel 2.21. Job. 5.10. He also covers
the body of the Earth with the white mantle of snow, whereby the corn is
warmed, and the ground mellowed, Psalm. 147.16. 3. The Stars, those purses of
gold (as one calls them) out of which God throws down riches, which good
men gather, and bad men scramble for, are all at Gods beck and bidding, Psalm.
19.4, 5. Mat. 5.45. Job 38.32. 4. The fruitfulness of the earth after it is
ploughed, sowed, watered with the clouds, and warmed with the influence of the
Sun and Stars, is wholly from God: Thou crownest the year with thy goodness,
and thy paths drop fatness, Weems Cerem. Law.
Psalm. 65.11. Heb. 6.7. This some of the Heathen acknowledged by the light of
Nature; and therefore when they went to plough in the morning, they did lay one
hand upon the plow (to speak their own part to be painfulness) and hold the
other hand up to Ceres, the Goddess of Corn, to testify their expectation of
plenty to be from their supposed Deity. How easily can God blast all the corn
in the field, or blow upon it in the barn! if he do but will it, it is done.
The whole Creation indeed is but a glass without a bottom, which cannot stand
of it self, but as God is pleased to hold it up. The Philosophers tell us, the
Sun and man beget a man; the Sun and the earth bring forth corn; and speak of
the Sun in every thing as a principal efficient; But the Divines tell us more
truly, God and the Heavens, God and the Earth cause harvest; God by the
Creatures does all things, God is the only principal efficient; the Sun it
self, and all other Creatures, are but liveless instruments, moved and acted by
God according to his purpose and pleasure: Except the Lord build the house,
they labor in vain that build it: It is in vain for you to rise up early, to
sit up late, and to eat the bread of sorrows; Psalm. 127.1, 2. Apricock trees
that depend upon their own strength, leaning on nothing (as experience teaches
us) bring forth little or no fruit, when they that lean on the wall abound in
clusters: The way to thrive in thy trade, is not to trust to thy own head or
hands, but to trust in the Lord for a blessing on thy endeavors.

Fifthly, If thou do prosper in thy Calling, let God alone have the praise:
Do not Sacrifice to thy own net, Hab. 1.10. (as the Jews did) as though by thy
skill and wisdom thou had met with such a draught; but consider, the
providence of God has brought in all thy profit: Beware when thy herds and thy
flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, lest thine heart be
lifted up; and thou say in thine heart, My power, and the might of my hands
has gotten me this wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.14. to 18. Man is apt to make himself his
Idol, and to attribute all to his own pains and prudence. Men boast, says
Luther, Hoc ego feci, Luther in Psalm. 1.7.
and hoc ego feri, and show themselves to be mere feces: They brag, This I have
done, and this I have done, and thereby appear to be nothing but dregs. God
took it ill that Tyrus should say, By my traffic and my wisdom I have
increased my wealth; and tells her, That she had set her heart as the heart
of God, Ezekiel. 28.3, 4, 5.

The Israelites were commanded to bring their first ripe fruits to God, whereby
they acknowledged him the owner and author of all their increase, Exodus 23.16,
19, Levit. 23.10.

The very Heathen were somewhat sensible of this: Strabo Geog.
The Metapontines after a plentiful Harvest, which had much enriched them,
dedicated an Harvest cut in gold, to Apollo their God. Praise the Lord, O
Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion: For he makes peace in thy borders, and
fills thee with the finest of the wheat, Psalm. 147.12, 13, 14. When God
sends thee in profit, thy duty is to give him praise. Do not bury Gods
mercies as the barren earth the seed, that when once its thrown into the
ground, we hear no more of it: God expects, as the trees by their leaves in
Autumn pay their tribute of thanks to the Earth, the Mother of their
fruitfulness; so that we should honor him when he heapeth favors on us.

Some men are like Fishermens weels, wide to receive in mercies, but there is
no passage out for the returning of praises. Those places where the Rivers are
shallowest, make the greatest sound; those where they are deepest, are most
silent. Men while they are poor, sound with prayers, make a great noise for
mercies; but when God blesses them with wealth, they are silent in regard of
thanks; they are lifted up with pride, but look not up to God with praise.

It is reported of Willigis a Wheelers son, Calius lect. Antiq. lib. 13. c. 1.
that being made Archbishop of Mentz, and one of the Prince Electors in
Germany, he did constantly acknowledge Gods great providence in his great
preferment; and therefore gave in his coat of Arms three Wheels, with this
Motto (written in his bed chamber in great letters) Willigis, Willigis, Recole
unde veneris: Willigis, Willigis, remember from whence thou came! Thus holy
Jacob in his prosperity remembered both his former poverty, and his present
plenty to its Authors praise: O God of of my father Abraham, I am not worthy of
the least of all thy mercies, and all thy truth which thou have showed unto thy
servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two
bands, Genesis 32.9, 10. So do thou Reader; when God blesses the work of thy
hands, ponder his goodness, that thou may give him his praise, and think of
thy own unworthiness; thereby thou may be preserved from pride. It is
reported of that noble Captain Iphicrates, that being enriched, he should cry
out, From how small, to how great an estate am I raised!

Sixthly, Labor for contentedness, and an holy composedness in all conditions:
Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with such things
as ye have; for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb.
13. Thy duty is, to have the scales of thy mind equally poized in all
providence; not rising in prosperity through lightness, nor sinking in
adversity under the heaviness of the load. As the tree bends this way and
that way with the wind, but still keeps its place; so thou may yield
according to the gales of providence, but still retain and keep thy standing,
thy piety. If thine estate decrease, let not thine heart despair; if the World
flow in, let not thine heart flow out: O it was an excellent Lesson which Paul
had learned, I know in what state soever I am to be content; I know how to be
abased, and I know how to abound; I know how to be full, and how to be empty,
Phil. 4.11. Paul was not like a musical Instrument out of tune with every
change of weather; but like the Cypress tree, which no storms (Naturalists tell
us) can alter; and like the Hill Olympus, above all winds and weather.

Some men are like the leaves of a tree, which every wind sets a shaking and
trembling; or like a bone out of joint, which a man cannot stir without pain;
if the World do but frown upon them, you may see it in their faces, they are
quite dejected with sorrow: O how heavy presently are their hearts, as if they
had lost their Heaven! It is to be feared that bough is rotten, which breaks
if but a little weight be hung upon it. A godly man should be like a Rock,
immovable, though high winds, and boisterous waves of Providence blow and beat
upon him; and like a Die, however he be thrown, always to fall upon a square.
The Traveller need not murmr, though his Inn afford him but mean fare, and an
hard bed, when he knows that he must be gone next morning. The Ox is not
happier which has two or three mountains to graze on, then the Be which
feeds upon that dew which falls daily from the storehouse of Heaven: If
thou have secured thine ever lasting estate, the boundless God is thy portion,
and surely then thou may be like a spring full, under the most scorching
Providence.

It was a worthy speech of Mr. Bradford the Martyr (to one who asked him
whether he should petition the Queen for his life) If the Queen will take away
my life, I will thank her; if she will give me my life, I will thank her; if
she will banish me, I will thank her; if she will burn me, I will thank her;
let her deal with me how she pleases, I will thank her. So Reader, thy heart
will be in an excellent frame indeed, if thou can thank God when he enricheth
thee, and thank him when he impoverisheth thee; if thou can thank him when he
smiles on thee with the light of his countenance, and thank him also if he
frown by some sad Providence; if thou can thank him when he is at Addition,
and thank him when he is at Substraction; thank him giving to thee, and thank
him taking from thee: O here is an heart worth gold indeed; Truly the want of
this calmness and composedness of mind, is a great impediment to Christians.
Alas, when their spirits are like some men's flesh, no sooner razed with a pin,
but they rankle and fester; no sooner touched with a light affliction, but they
faint, and are dejected; how unfit are they for Religious actions! as men in
extremity of pain, they rather chatter, then pour out a prayer. Either men must
use the World, as if they used it not; or they will serve the Lord, as if they
served him not: He who knows that nothing can befall him whilst he is
diligent in his calling, but what is the fruit of bottomless love, and the
result of infinite wisdom, may certainly be steady in the greatest storm:
Thrice happy is that soul who has so much care of doing his work, and such an
eye to the recompense of reward, that the allurements and affrightments of the
World (though they may assault the outworks) can never surprise the Royal Fort
of his heart.

The only way, Reader, to find thine own will, is, to lose it in Gods will:
Those that grumble at his doings, and quarrel at his dealings, do but like a
Bull in the net, and the silly Bird among the lime-twigs, by struggling entangle
themselves the more. Unsubmissiveness to Gods will, is the fountain of all man's
woe; the quiet resignation of our persons and portions to Gods pleasure, is the
only sleeping pill which can give rest to the soul. Christian, let me ask thee
this question, Did thou give up thy self to Christ for Temporal, or for
Eternal comforts? Did thou enter upon Relien to save thine Estate, or thy
Soul? O why then should thou be so sad, when thy Eternal happiness is so
safe! For shame live like a child of God, an heir of Heaven; and let the World
know, that thy hopes and happiness are in a better World; that though thou art
denied those Acorns which thy Father gives to his Hogs, yet thou have the
Childrens bread and expectest thine inheritance when thou come to Age.

Thus I have dispatched the fourth particular how a Christian may exercise
himself to Godliness in his particular calling.

A good Wish about Particular Callings, wherein the former heads are Epitomized.
MY particular calling being a peculiar and distinct station, The Introduction.
wherein I am bound to be serviceable to my country, and family, and wherein
also I have this privilege, that I may further my general calling, if I mind
it out of conscience to the Lord, and in obedience to his word, I wish in
general, that I may never cross the wise providence of my God (in the
government of the World) by neglecting it, or thinking lightly of it, but since
I am listed under the Captain of my salvation, may serve him faithfully, not
only in general as a Soldier, but also in that place or office to which he
has chosen and called me. I wish in particular, Our general callingsmust be
followed with diligence.
that what my hand finds to do, I may do it with all my might; that I may be
of the number of them that spend themselves with labor, and not of them who
wast with rust and laziness; my diligence herein is some help against the
temptations of the Devil. The sluggards heart is like his field overgrown with
weeds. Lord let me rather wear out with work then consume (like a Garment laid
by with moths) for want of use. Yet I wish that I may not by my industry make
more have to be rich then good speed, With righteousness.
I mean that I may never increase my riches by dealing unrighteously in my
calling, knowing that unjust gain is a morsel which the strongest stomach in
the World cannot possibly digest, but may esteem a penny got by the blessing of
God upon my honest labor, at a far greater price then thousands of pounds by
rapine and robbery, and may weigh all my wares in the Scales of loving my
neighbor as my self, by the standard of that royal Law, Whatsoever you would
that men should do unto you, do you even so unto them; for this is the law and
the Prophets. O that I might not upon any pretense whatsoever, either by taking
advantage of the buyers ignorance, or by putting unserviceable wares into his
hands, or by false weights and measures, or by defrauding my neighbor any
other way, consult shame to my house, Hab. 2.10.
and sin against my own soul, but when I am in my shop or warehouse, or
instructing my servant how to sell, I may hear the sound of that dreadful
threatening against unrighteous dealers in mine ears, Job. 20.15.
He has swallowed down riches, he shall vomit them up again; God shall cast
them out of his belly; He shall suck the poison of Asps, the Vipers tongue
shall slay him; the increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall
flow away in the day of his wrath. They must not incroach upon our general
calling.
I desire that I may watch my calling (as they who make powder do their fire)
with my greatest care to keep it within its own bounds, that I may so give to
the World the things of the World, as to give to my God the things of God. In
stealing away either out love.
To this end I wish that I may not like Demas, embrace this present world, but
how deep soever I wade in earthly affairs, may be sure to keep my head (I would
say my heart) above water, least I sink and perish in them eternally. Lord,
though I possess outward things, yet let outward things never possess me; I am
married to thy sacred Majesty; though I converse with my calling as a friend,
yet let the bed of my heart never be defiled therewith, but reserved only for
thy blessed self to lodge in. Or time.
My prayer is that my earthly traffic may never be suffered to play the
thief, and to steal away that precious treasure of time, which at least morning
and evening my heavenly trade requires in my Closet and family; but though
like the Eagle I stoop to the earth for my prey, my outward provision, I may
not dwell there, but mount up again to heaven; O that I might be deaf to all
the vain excuses; which the World will plead for the total omission or
shortning of Religious exercises, and even when a real necessity, not through
any negligence of mine, appears by some sudden providence, I am denied time
to draw the long sword of solemn devotion, I may be then so affected with my
duty and danger as to draw the short Dagger of ejaculatory petitions to defend
my self against my spiritual enemies. My God never intended that my trade
should be my trouble, or my calling like the clouds to impede my sight of the
true Sun; therefore if so much business lie upon my hands, that if that be
attended my soul must be neglected, let me rather as a wise Traveller, ease my
self of some part of my burden, then permit it to hinder me in my journey to
heaven.

I desire that I may be so sensible that good things here below come from the
most high God, Prayer for a blessing.
and the success of my labors depends more on his providence then my
diligence, that I may never in a morning open my shop, or lift up a tool, (as
my trade is) before I have opened my heart and lifted up my soul to my God for
his blessing upon my endeavors. All creatures in the hands of my God, are as
dead tools in the hands of a living workman, by whose force and influence alone
they act. Lord, let me never look upon second causes as more then the order in
which, and the means with which thou art pleased to work. Thanks to God for
success.
I wish that if God shall by my calling increase my wealth, I may not sacrifice
to my own nets, nor burn incense to my own drags, but may be so spiritual as to
acknowledge my God the Author of temporals, and receive them so thankefully
from his hand of bounty that I may improve them faithfully as may be most for
his glory. The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof; He is the owner of
all I enjoy, I am but his Steward, and must shortly give account of my
Stewardship. O let me make me friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that I may be
trusted with the true riches; let my whole estate be employed according to thy
word, for the furtherance of my own everlasting weal.

Finally, Contentedness in all.
I wish that I may sail trim and even in all waters; that when it is full tide
in regard of outward comforts, I may not swell with pride; nor when it is low
water, grumble through peevishness; murmuring is the music of Hell; holy
contentedness is the foretast of Heaven. Why should I rejoice my worst enemy,
and dishonor my best friend by being fretful at that which the only wise God
sees to be fit and needful: The lean Ox is fitter for service then the fatted
one. The true Israelite may well be satisfied in his journey to Canaan with his
Homer a day, with his Statute measure, and his Fathers allowance. What though
my Father deny me that entertaintment at present, which he gives to strangers,
yet I have his love now, and the inheritance hereafter shall be mine: My God
will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that
walk uprightly. Lord, let me never discredit thy Housekeeping, by my grumbling
carriage, or frowning countenance; but so by the Prospective-glass of Faith,
behold those things which are invisible, that I may in all things give thanks;
like some Birds, sing even in Winter; and as clothes dyed in grain, retain my
color in all weathers; that when the Fig Tree does not blossom, nor the Vine
yield her fruit; when the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields yield
no meat, then I may rejoice in the Lord, and be glad in the God of my
salvation. In a word, I wish that I may, like the wise Merchant, sell all I
have to buy the Pearl of great price; the gold tried in the fire, that I may be
rich; the white raiment, that I may be clothed, and drive such a constant
trade with my God in the other World, hearing from thence, and sending thither
daily, that when the King of Terrors shall give me a Writ of Ease from my
particular calling, I may dye in the Lord, rest my labors, and have my works
following me through free grace, into an exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
Amen.

A good Wish about the Calling of a Minister; wherein the several Properties
and Duties of a Conscientious Pastor are Epitomized.
THe Ministry of the Word being a Calling above all others of greatest weight,
The Introduction.
as set up by the ever blessed God, for the payment of himself the deserved
praise of his Curious, Eternal, and Infinitely wise purpose; and for the
payment of the Lord Jesus Christ, the precious fruits of his bloody Passion; by
the turning of sinners from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to
God: In which he is pleased to commit to men (duly qualified, and rightly
called) the Word of Reconciliation, and commands them in his name, as his
Ambassadors, to offer terms of peace, and to persuade and beseech rebellious
sinners, with all earnestness and faithfulness (as they would not have the
blood of their peoples souls required at their hands) to accept of, and submit
to those Articles of Grace and Pardon. I wish in general, That since my God
has counted me faithful, put me into the Ministry, and entrusted me with that
which so nearly relates to his own glory, and which so highly concerns the
Eternal felicity of precious souls, Acts 20.28. The properties of a Minister.
He must be, 1. Gracious.
That I may take heed to my self, and to all the flock over which the Holy
Ghost-hath made me Overseer, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood. In particular I wish, That I may know experimentally, what
Regeneration means, before I travel with others till Christ be formed in
them; that I may dissuade from compliance with sin, and persuade to an hearty
acceptance of the Savior, not by hearsay, or at second hand, but upon my own
knowledge of the bitterness of the former, and the goodness and sweetness of
the latter. Let me not like some Cooks, dress that meat for others, which I eat
not of my self: Let not my Sermons be (as Minerva) the children of my brain,
but the travel of my soul, that I may serve my God with my spirit in the Gospel
of his Son; and as a true Vessel of the Sanctuary, have within me a savor of
that water of life, which I pour out to others. It is doleful to fall into
Hell, from under the Pulpit: But ah how dreadful is it to drop thither out of
it! Does not my heart tremble to think, that it is possible for me, like the
unbelieving Spies, to coast the Heavenly Canaan, to commend it to others, and
yet never to possess it my self! that whilst I preach to others, I my self may
be a Castaway! Lord, let me so exalt thee in my heart, as my chiefest good; in
my life, as mine utmost end; and preach so effectually to my own soul, and to
others, That I may both save my self, and them that hear me.

I wish that the Spring of my motions and principle of all my work, may be love
to my Master, That he may act from a right principle, love to God;
and not expectation of any Temporal reward: That I may never be so sordidly
sinful, as to sell the incomparable Savior for a little corruptible silver; to
turn my Fathers house, into an house of merchandise; and to cry up my God, as
the Ephesians their Goddess, because by that Craft they had their wealth; but
that unfeigned affection to the bleeding head, and tender compassion to his
blessed members, may be all the oil to feed that lamp wherewith I enlighten
others in the way to life. O that that pathetical, affectionate expression of
my dearest Redeemer, might sound often in mine ears, and pierce my very soul,
If thou love me, feed my Lambs: If thou love me feed my Sheep!

I desire that my ends in the Ministry, may be purely to exalt the glorious
name of my God, And for right ends, the glory of God and the salvation of sou^.
in the conversion and edification of his precious and chosen ones. That I may
not use preaching, as a Theif a Picklock, to open men's Coffers; but as a Key to
open their Hearts, that the truth of God, and the God of truth may enter in.
Why should I profane so pious an Ordinance, by so poisonous an end; and serve
my self, like the Eagle, by having my eye to the prey, whilst I soar aloft,
and pretend to the World that I serve my Savior! Let me not like Balaam,
Divine for money, nor through covetousness, with feigned words, make
merchandise of inestimable souls, which Christ thought worth his precious
blood. O that I might seek, not my peoples goods, but good; not my own profit,
but the profit of many, that they might be saved. Lord, let this design lie at
the bottom of my heart, in every act of my Office; that I may, as Abraham's
Steward, provide a Wife for my Masters Son; and enable me through thine help,
so to set forth the beauty of his Person, the excellency of all his Preceps,
and the vastness of his Portion: that I may woo to purpose, and prevail to
present my People, as a Chaste Virgin, unto Christ.

I wish, Able.
That because the work I am occupied about is great, in regard it is not for
man, but for the Lord, that I may (as Bezaleel and Aholiah for the Service of
the Sanctuary) be singularly gifted and endowed by my God, for the building of
his Spiritual Temple; that as a wise Builder, I may lay the foundation of Sound
Doctrine, raise it upon strong Pillars of convincing Reasons, and cover it with
useful and powerful Application. I would not like some young Shopkeepers, for
want of stock, set out Pictures of Wares instead of Parcels; but be so
thoroughly furnished unto every good work, that I may upon all occasions bring
out of my Treasury, things both new and old. Lord, let a double portion of thy
Spirit be poured on me, and let thy Blessing so prosper my Studies, that I may
be an able Minister of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit;
a Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of truth, 2
Cor. 3.6.

I wish that since I am a steward of the mysteries of Christ, and that it is
required of a Steward, Faithful.
that he be found faithful, that I may upon no pretense be false to the souls
of my people, that I may not daub with untempered mortar, or sow pillows under
men's elbows for any gain or advantage, but may be a Barnabas, a son of
consolation to the Penitent, a Boanerges, a son of thunder to the Presuptuous,
that knowing the terror of the Lord I may persuade men, and give to every one
their particular and proper portion, in due season. O let me not be curious to
provide meat toothsom for polluted pallats, to the feeding of their distempers
(like Ahabs 400. Trencher-Chaplains, who sold their Lords life, at the Cheap
rate of a lie) but as Micaiah be careful to distribute food that is wholesome
and suitable to their several spiritual constitutions. Though my patients may be
angry at present, when I search their festered wounds to the bottom, and
thereby put them to pain, yet when upon my faithful dealing they recover, they
will give me hearty thanks. It was the saying of Mauritius the Emperor when he
heard that Phocas was a Coward, If he be a Coward, he is a Murderer; if I be
fearful to tell men of their sins, I murder their souls. Lord, when I am
visiting my Parishioners in private, or preaching to them in public, cause me
to hear thy voice behind me; When I say unto the wicked, Ezekiel. 3.18.
that he shall surely dye, and thou give him no warning, nor speak to warn
the wicked from his wicked way, that he may live, the same wicked man shall dye
in his iniquities, but his blood will I require at thine hand.

I desire that I may not be obnoxious to the censure of a wicked and slothful
Servant; Industrious
not of wicked, by hiding my sins in the cloak of excuses; nor of slothful by
hiding my Talent in the Napkin of idleness: but may mind the work of the
Ministry, and make it appear that both in my preparation for, and execution of
my office, I labor in the Word and Doctrine. My time, and parts are not mine
own, but (under God) my peoples, and to be improved for their profit. If men
dye for robbing single persons, what shall befall me, should I be such a thief,
as to rob the poor, the rich and indeed the whole parishes stock! My prayer is,
In preparation for his Office.
that I may not offer to the Lord my God, that which cost me nothing, that my
meat which I set before the family committed to my charge, may not be (like
Ephraim half-baked) raw or rude, and so unmeet for their stomachs to concoct,
because of my negligence in preparing it; 1 Timothy 4.13.15.
that I may give attendance to reading, meditate on those things; give my self
wholly to them, that my profitting may appear to all men. They that spend upon
the main stock where it is but small, will quickly prove bankrupts. My layings
out are considerable; my comings in, had need to be answerable. Surely if any
in the World should feed high, should study, read, and pray hard, those should
do it who carry so many in their wombs, or give so many suck. I wish that I may
be industrious as well in rearing the Temple, In the execution of his Office.
as in providing materials; that I may cheerfully spend, and be spent in the
service of Christ. My Savior was taken to be fifty, when he was little above
thirty; by reason of his excessive industry, his very countenance was aged. O
my soul follow thou this blessed pattern, do not play, but work the work of him
that sent thee in the Lord; Improve all opportunities to the utmost, be instant
in season and out of season, serve thy God with all thy strength; Like fuel
consume thy self in burning to warm the spirit of the Saint, and to thaw the
frozen heart of the sinner. Thy work is of infinite consequence; Thy time is
exceeding short, thy reward is glorious and eternal, up and be doing; and like
the silkworm wear out thine own bowels to hide others nakedness, waste thy
self to prevent thine own and others endless woe. Be thou a fruitful mother to
conceive and bring forth new creatures, though thou conceivest with sorrow, and
bring forth with much pain, and thy labors at last should cost thee thy
life.

I desire that I may be tenderly affected to all the souls in my charge,
Compassionate to souls.
as knowing their worth, and beleiving of what concernment their unchangeable
estates are in the other world; Lord what melting bowels should I have toward
them, when I consider that every one of them must dye within a few days, and
either live in Heaven, or fry in Hell to all eternity! My Savior was a
faithful and merciful High Priest; he had compassion on the multitude, when
they had nothing to eat, and would not send them away empty, least they should
faint in the wilderness. O that I had but that pity for the souls, which he had
to the bodies of men! Nature will help me to pity a body without a soul; why
should not grace teach me to pity a soul without a God? Lord when I behold
wounded, bleeding, dying souls, let mine eyes affect my heart with sorrow, that
both mine eyes and heart may be up to thee, with the greatest importunity for a
blessing upon my most diligent endeavors for their recovery. Make me so tender
and affectionate a mother, that I may patiently bear with the frowardness, and
willingly go through with the burden of instructing my children. Though others
nurse children for the love of wages, let me nurse mine for the wages of love.
Let all my actions toward them flow from sincere affection to them, and not
only my counsel and comforts, but even my rod of reproof, like Jonathans, be
dipped in this honey. When I am rebuking them cuttingly, and frighting them from
sin with the fear of the unquenchable fire, let all my bitter pills be given in
this sweet syrrup of love, that they may know and acknowledge my greatest anger
against their sins to proceed from a tender respect and love to their immortal
souls.

I wish that being a sworn Soldier of the Lord of Hosts, Full of courage.
whatsoever trials and tribulations I meet with in my holy warfare, whatsoever
dangers and death shall look me in the face, I may never fly from my colors
or forsake my Captain, but endure hardshipas a good Soldier of Jesus Christ.
When I first listed my self in his Muster-Roll, I understood the grievous
hardships, and various hazards, which all his Army, but especially his Officers
must encounter with, that to Preach the Gospel is as Luther says, to draw the
hatred of the whole World upon a man; yea that Earth and Hell would both
conspire and plant their strongest batteries against the Bulworks of the Church
(under God) the Ministers of the word, notwithstanding all which, I entered my
name as a Volunteer, and promised to live and dye in his quarrel, and shall I
now because the enemies appear numerous, and the Bullets fly thick, like
Peter, deny my righteous cause, and disown my glorious Captain. Lord let me dye
with thee rather then deny thee; Enable me through thy strength to be ready not
only to be bound, but to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus. My only safety
consists in keeping close to my Savior. Should I through cowardliness run
away, I must expect Marshal law; If any man draw back, thy soul will have no
pleasure in him. If I, like Jonah, should run from thy presence as unwilling to
deliver an unwelcome message, I must expect a storm to follow after me, and
either the waves to swallow me up, or the Whale to swallow me down; I should
but go out of thy blessing into the warm Sun: If the service of my God be not
in all respects the best, why did I choose and like it? If it be, why should I
refuse and leave it? My cause is good, I fight against sin and Satan, the
desperate and bloody enemies of my soul; My Crown is better; after a a temporal
conflict, follows an eternal Crown of glory. (O my soul be thou faithful unto
death, and thou shall have a Crown of life) but my Captain is best of all, he
looks upon me, goes before me, fights for me, and as he leads me on to
this trial, so he will not, like the Devil and the World, who leave their
servants and Lovers in the lurch, but bring me off with triumph, either safe on
earth, or safe to heaven: Lord, whatsoever dirt of calumny, shall be thrown in
my face; whatsoever dart of cruelty, shall be stuck in my body, Act. 20.22.
for keeping the word of thy patience in an hour of temptation, yet let none of
these things move me, neither let me count my life dear unto me, so that I may
finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the grace of God.

As to the preaching of the Gospel, The several duties of a Minister, 1. To
preach the Gospel.
which is the principal work of the Minister, as being the main Engine in the
hand of God, wherewith he undermineth and overturneth the strongholds of sin,
and the Kingdom of darkness; I wish that I may prepare for this work
diligently, ever handle this weapon warily, deliver the message of my God
soberly (as may be most for his glory, and my peoples good) not with the
enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of
power. To this end I desire, His Sermons must be the fruits of servent prayer.
that all my Sermons may be like Monica's son, children of many prayers and
tears, and thereby the more unlikely to perish. Luther says, He that prays
hard, studieth hard. Lord, let all my Sermons as dew, be Heaven-born, that they
may drop down upon my people, like rain upon the mown grass. Let prayer be the
key to open the mysteries of Christ to me; and let prayer be the turning of the
key, to lock them up safe within me. Let prayer open and shut all my Books,
form and write, begin and conclude every Sermon. Ah, how should he pray both
for his preaching, and before he preaches, who by every Sermon, preaches his
beloved Neighbors into Eternal burnings, or Eternal pleasures!

I wish also, for the furtherance of the former ends, Preached over first to
his own soui.
That I may preach over every Sermon to my own heart, before I preach them to
my hearers: That I preaching feelingly, may preach the more effectually; and
the milk of the Word coming warm out of the Mothers breasts, may be as more
natural, so more pleasing and nourishing to the children. Why should I, like a
Lawyer, plead the cause of my God (for my fees) and (...) have my own person
concerned in it! O let (...) rather, as a Physician, drink of those potions my
self, which I prescribe and administer to my Patients.

I desire, He must preach the Word, 1. Purely.
That I may never dare to play the Huckster with the Word of God, to
sophisticate or adulterate it by my additions to it; but that I may receive
from the Lord, what I deliver to men; and feed all my charge with the sincere
milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby. If it be Treason to counterfeit
the Kings Coin, what High Treason is it for me to imprint the King of Kings
stamp on my brass Money? O that as I am an Ambassador, I might keep close to my
Instructions; and as a Builder, may lay every stone in his Temple by the line
and rule of his Word; and as a Physician, may never try experiments upon the
souls of my people; but hold fast to the form of wholesome words, and ever
prescribe those tried and approved receipts, which the Great Physician has left
me under his own hand. Because my work is to touch and pierce my hearers
hearts, (...).
and not to tickle and please their ears, I wish, That I may preach a crucified
Savior, in a crucified style: That I may not blow up my Sermons (as Butchers
some joints of meat, to make them show fairer) with a windy pomp of words; but
by using all plainness, and stooping to the lowest capacity, may become all
things to all men, that I may save some. I am a Barbarian to my people, whilst
I preach to them in an unknown language: I starve their souls, whilst I give
them such meat as they can never digest. Let me not read Authors, as the
Butter-fly goes to flowers, only to gild her wings; but as the Be, to gather
honey, and bring it home to the hive for the supply of her young. Lord, let me
never be guilty by painting the windows, of hindering the light of thy glorious
Gospel from shining powerfully into the hearts of men and women.

My prayer is, Prudently.
That I may not strengthen the hands of sinners, nor sadden the hearts of the
godly; but be able to distinguish between the vile and the precious, and
accordingly give them their several portions: That I may give milk to babes,
and strong meat to stronger men; order my prescriptions suitable to their
particular constitutions; use the needle of the Law, to make way for the thread
of the Gospel; and lead my sheep, as Jacob drove his flock, as they were able
to bear it; and as Christ taught his, as they were best able to hear him.
Powerfully.
O that I might not only preach prudently, but also powerfully: That my
Sermons may be delivered, not as Prologues to a Play, as matter of sport or
pastime; but as the Message of an Herald, with all imaginable seriousness and
fervency, as containing Conditions of Life and Death. The Word is an hammer,
but it will never break the stony heart, if lightly laid on: What is preached
coldly, is heard carelessly. Lord, let me not, like the Moon, give some light
without any heat; but cause me to lift up my voice like a Trumpet; to give (as
fire) heat as well as light; to be eaten up with the zeal of thine House; to
beseech poor souls to be happy, with as much fervency, as if I were begging for
my life; and to preach so successfully, that I may raise up much spiritual seed
to my Elder Brother.

I wish, To pray for his people.
That all my Parishoners, without exception, may have so deep a share in my
affection, upon a Religious account, that without ceasing, I may make mention
of them always in my prayers: That my hearts desire and prayer to God, both in
secret, private and public, for poor and rich, may be, that they may be
saved. O let me daily offer Sacrifice for them, confess their iniquities,
bewail their misery, and cry mightily to God for mercy. Lord, let me prevail
with thy Majesty, to speak to their hearts, and I shall prevail with them to
hearken to thee, yea, I shall stand before thee at the last day with courage,
and say, Behold, here am I, and the children which thou have given me.

Because the small keels of children are quickly overturned (when they meet
with the high winds of temptations, To cathechise.
as they sail along in the Sea of this World) if they be not ballasted with the
principles of the Oracles of God, I pray, That I may be a diligent Instructor
of babes, and a faithful Teacher of the simple: That I may season, through Gods
help, those new vessels, with the precious water of life, that they may retain
their savor to their old age: That the younger amongst my people may from
their childehood know the holy Scriptures, be wise to salvation, through Faith
which is in Christ Jesus.

I wish, To administer the Saments.
That in the Administration of the Sacraments, I may have an impartial regard
to the fitness and meetness of the subjects, lest I set those precious Seals of
the Covenant of Grace to blanks, whereby they should signify nothing,
especially that about the Lords Supper, as I would not be partaker of other
men's sin, nor be an instrument of furthering their eternal suffering, I may be
tender, and walk altogether by the rule of Scripture. O let me never pollute
that Sacred Ordinance, by giving it to profane persons; nor be so prodigal of
my dearest Saviors blood and body, as to give those holy things to Dogs, and
to cast those Pearls before Swine, who will trample them under their feet. Ah,
it is much better that such scandalous sinners should be angry with me on
earth, for my wholesome severity, then curse me for ever in Hell for my foolish
pity, and soul-damning flattery.

I wish, That like a faithful Shepherd, To visit his flock, and to admonish,
advise and comfort as occasion shall be.
I may often visit my flock, and warn every one night and day with tears; and
not as a careless non-Resident, expose them to the rage and cruelty of the
devouring Wolf, by my absence from them, or by my negligence when present among
them; lest another day, when its too late, they cry to me, and complain of me,
Sir, if thou had been here, our Souls had not dyed. The Priest under the Law,
visited the suspected or leprous houses, enquired how it was with them; and as
he found it, so gave sentence. O that I might under the Gospel, visit diseased
hearts, and diligently enquire how things stand betwixt the great God, and
their poor souls, and give them suitable, savoury and profitable advice. Though
I therefore desire a great Auditory, because among many Fish, there is the
greater probability that the baits of the Gospel will take and catch some; yet
therefore I should desire a small Parish, because thereby I am in the greater
capacity to deal with every one in it in particular, about the concernments of
their everlasting peace. Lord, let thy strict Command frequently come into my
mind, I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach the Word, be instant
in season, and out of season, Reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering
and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.

I wish, To give a good example in his conversation.
That I may be as the Baptist, both a Burning Light in my Sermons, and a
Shining Light in my Conversation, lest my works give the lie to my words:
Whilst I as Mercury direct others in the right way, but walk not in it my self.
The Priests under the Law had their Vrim and Thummim, signifying purity of
Doctrine, and sanctity of life, a bell and a pomgranate, a Bell and a
pomgranate, typifying that Preaching and practice must go together. O that I
might preach as powerfully by my life, as by my lips; and like a faithful
nurse, avoid the scandals of distempers (and even forbear those meats which I
love, though lawful in themselves, when not expedient) not only for my own
sake, but also for their sakes to whom I give suck; Nazianzen says of him that
was the voice of one crying in the Wilderness; That he was all voice, a voice
in his habit, a voice in his diet, a voice in his conversation. 2 Titus 7.
Lord enable me in all things, so to show my self a pattern of good works to my
people, 1 Timothy 4.12.
to be such an example to beleivers in word, in conversation, in charity, in
spirit, in faith, in purity, Phil. 3.17.
that I may be able to say to my flock as Paul to his Philippians, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Brethren be followers together of me, (and to his Corinthians, Be followers of
me as I am of Christ) and mark them which walk as ye have me for an example.

I wish that though my labors should prove unfruitful, Not to be discouraged
for want of success.
when I in the discharge of my trust am faithful, that I may not be
discouraged, knowing that I shall be a sweet savor to my God, as well in them
that perish, as in them that are saved; and though Israel be not gathered by
me, Isa. 6.10.
but I spend my strength in vain, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and
my work with my God; yet O that I might not be sent about that dreadful message
to make the hearts of any people fat, to make their ears heavy, and to shut
their eyes, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears and
understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed, but that I may turn
many sinners from the errors of their ways, save many souls from death, and
hide a multitude of sins.

I wish that as Joab when he took the City of Rabbah with David's Soldiers, To
give the glory of success to God.
was willing to have the Crown set on the Kings head; so when my God has
enabled me by his spirit, to cast down imaginations, and high things that
exalted themselves against the knowledge of him, and to bring into captivity
many sinners to the Obedience of Christ, that I may set the crown of glory upon
the head of God alone, and not suffer the least part of his honor to stick to
my singers; I am but the instrument, he is the principal efficient; I am but
the pipe, he is the spring whence the water of life flows; I do but lay on
the plaster, he made the precious salve of the word, and bestows also
healing virtue on it. O that I might never be so ungrateful (when he is pleased
to honor me) as to dishonor him by thinking of my self above what is meet,
but that all my services may be as so many Scaffolds ^erected purposely for the
raising of his his name, and the setting up of his praise.

Finally, The conclusion 1 Timothy 4.16. 2 Timothy 4.5.
I wish that I may take heed to my self, to my Doctrine, to my life, be
watchful in all things, endure affliction, make full proof of my Ministry do
the work of a faithful Pastor, Mat. 7.21.23.
least (as they who prophesied in Christ's name, and in his name cast out
Devils) I be cast to Devils as a worker of iniquity, and find that gate of life
which I opened to others, shut against my own soul. O let me not as Porters in
great Houses lodge without my self, whilst I let others into Heaven; Let it
please thee O God of all grace to fill me with the fruits of thy spirit, that I
may feed thy people with knowledge and understanding, Take the oversight of
them, not by constraint, but willingly: 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4.
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not as being a Lord over Gods
heritage, but as being an ensample to the flock, that so when the chief
Shepherd shall appear (on the great day in which the Sheep shall be separated
from the Goats) I may receive a crown of glory which fades not away. Amen.

CHAP. XXVII. How a Christian may exercise himself to Godliness in his Family
as the governor thereof.
IT is thy duty to exercise thy self to godliness in thy Family and relations.
Fifthly,
A Christian must not like the Israelites Pillar in the Wilderness, be light on
one side, and dark on the other; be diligent in one relation, and negligent in
another; but as a candle in a Chrystial Lanthorn, be lightsom quite round it,
be holy in every Relation in which he stands.

Reader, I shall consider thee as Governor or Governess of a Family, and herein
direct thee what thou should do for the faithful discharge of thy trust in
that relation.

Houses under the Law were to be dedicated to God at their first setting up:
Deuteronomy. 20.5.
Which was done (says Ainsworth on the place) with singing and praising God,
Psalm. 30. vide Title.
as well as feasting. David's Psalm at the dedication of his House, is worthy
our imitation. Hezekias upon the Law touching the fanctifying an house to God (
Levit. 27.14, 15.) gives this Exposition, That to dedicate or sanctify an
house to God, is for the Governor to be careful for the instruction of his
Family, and the Religious Conversation of his Household; that his house may be
Gods house; and his children, Gods children; and his servants Gods servants.

A Family is a natural and simple Society of certain persons, having mutual
relation one to another, under the private government of one head, or chief.
Aristotle calls Families the first Society in nature, and the ground of all
the rest. Before the Flood, the whole form of Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government, was confined within the Precincts of private Families. A Family is
the Epitome of a Kingdom and Commonwealth in a little volume. The way to make
godly Parishes, and godly Countries, and godly Kingdoms, is to make godly
Families. When sin as a plague speadeth abroad, it begins in Families: One
Atheistical Family, defiles and destroys many; it sends a son into one
house, a daughter into another, a servant into a third, and every of them, like
infectious persons, poison those with whom they converse: Like a nest of Foxes,
they destroy and devour all the Country over. As one House on fire, often
burns down many, so one profane Family injureth many; one godly Family on
the contrary, does good to many: As one stock of Bees sends forth swarms and
honey, into many parts of the Country; so one Religious Family sending
Religious Children and Servants abroad (they come in time to have Families of
their own) may bring much honor to God, and be helpful to the eternal welfare
of many souls.

A Godless Family, like a Gun or Cannon, kills at a distance, as their
swearing children, and drunken servants come to spread abroad. A gracious
Family, like the Weapon-salve, heals at a distance, as the pious Relations in
it, come to be dispersed in other places. Solomon was a Religious Housekeeper,
and it is observable his servants were so seasoned by him with godliness, that
their children five hundred years after, were recorded by the Spirit of God, to
be the most eminent in their time for Religion, Ezra 2.58. Solomon being a
godly Governor of his Family, did good after he was dead, at so great a
distance. Theodosius being asked, how a private person might be a public
good: answered, By ordering all things well at home. The way to make our
Orchards good, is to look well to our Nurseries.

It concerns thee therefore, Reader, nearly, to exalt godliness in thy house,
as well as in thy heart; nay, I will be bold to tell thee, if there be in thee
the truth of Religion, thou will propagate it amongst thy Relations: Thou will
not be like the Whirpool, to suck all into thy self, but be diffusive for the
good of others. A good Christian is like a needle touched with the Loadstone,
which being drawn it self, will draw others along with it. When Christ had
drawn Philip, he presently draws Nathaniel, 1 John 43.45. The Bird has no
sooner found an heap of corn, but she chirpeth and calls her fellows, and
will be sure to carry some home to her nest. A Saint should endeavor the
conversion of his neighbors, that they may eat of the bread of life with him;
but he should have a special regard to his own family, that all in it may feed
on Christ by faith, and live. Nature has taught the Bevers to help one another
in swiming; and the Cranes flying over the Mountain Taurus, when the foremost
is weary in beating the air, that the next should succeed, and so in order
every one to labor for the safety of them all. Christians are taught from
other creatures, to be helpful one to another; but the Master of the family,
like the Sun, must outshine all in respect of public influence.

Plutarch says of the neighbor Villages about Rome in Numa's time, That
sucking in the air of that City, Niceph.
they breathed righteousness. Thy Family ought to be a wholesome air for others
to breathe in. It is reported of Andronicus the elder, that he was Mr. of such
a Family as was the shop of Virtue; Enar. in Hos. Prael.
and therefore it was called (...), The Sun of the Earth. Tremellius, who for a
time sojourned in Bishop Cranmers Family, tells us, that it was Schola vel
Palaestra Pietatis and Literarum; The School or Nursery of Piety and Learning.
The houses of the primitive Christians were little Churches, in regard of the
Worship and Service of God: To the Church that is in thine house, Philem. v. 2.
Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.9. Colos. 4.15. Though many a man's house is so far from
being Gods Church and Temple, that its the Devils stye and kennel, that God may
say to the Master of the Family, as in Rev. 2.13. I know where thou dwelleft,
even where Satan's Throne is: Nay, though they are civil abroad, then they will
have some rags to cover their naughtiness, they are sordid at home, and
discover there all their nakedness and nastiness. David on the contrary,
whatever steps he might take awry, and whatsoever slips he might meet with in
his public walking, would be sure to look to his feet in his private
dwelling: I will walk in the midst of my house with a perfect heart, until thou
come unto me, Psalm. 101.2. David was no Hypocrite, he did not put on his best
clothes when he went out, and put them off when he came in; but Purity was his
livery, as abroad, so at home.

Imitate that pious Governor (who though he had the burden of all the
Israelites, Civil and Military affairs lying upon his shoulders, yet could say,
I and my house will serve the Lord.

Reader, I shall offer two thoughts to quicken thee to this necessary duty, and
then give thee directions for the management of it.

1. Consider, that Religion in a Family is the way to procure Gods blessing on
thy Family. The holy family alone is the happy family. The Lord blessed the
house of Obed-Edom for the Arks sake, 2 Samuel 6.11. If the Ark be in the house;
that is, Religion, God is there, for the Ark was a type of Gods presence; and
can thou need any comforts when thou have Gods Company?

The Philosopher could say, Though he had few goods in his house, yet he had
the Gods in his house. Though thou have a poor dwelling, yet if Godliness be
there, thou shall have Gods blessing. His presence will make the habitation of
thy righteousness prosperous, Job 8.6. Thou may say of thy house as Jacob of
Bethel, The Lord is in this place, this is none other but the House of God.
Basil speaks that in some Countries they draw other Pigeons to their
Dove-houses by anointing one of their Pigeons wings with sweet Ointment. If thy
house be anointed with the Oil of godliness, it will allure the blessed God to
it, and then what evil needst thou fear, or what good can thou want? It is
observed of the Palladium in Troy, that whilst that remained amongst them,
their City was safe. The only way to have a destroying Angel pass by thy
house, is to have the door-posts sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ.
Through wisdom is an house builded, and by understanding it is established; And
by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all pleasant and precious
riches, Pro. 24.3, 4. Here is true wealth, and the right way to enjoy it. 1.
The true wealth, thy chambers shall be filled with all pleasant and precious
riches.

Righteousness is the best way to riches. 2. The way to this, by wisdom an
house is builded, and it is established by understanding. By wisdom and
understanding, Godliness is understood; And unto man he said, Behold the fear
of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding, Job 28.
ult. This wisdom is the best foundation for any house to stand upon. When
Religion lays the foundation, raises the walls, and covers the roof, such
a house is built upon a Rock, and will stand against all the Winds and Waves,
wrath and rage of men and devils. Some Families had lasted longer, says
Luther, if they had been holier.

Religion will bring a blessing on thy estate, Job 1.10. Blessed is he that
fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his Commandments; For thou shall
eat the labor of thy hands; happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with
thee, Psa. 128.1, 2. It will bring a blessing on thy Children. God will be a
God to thee and to thy seed after thee, Genesis 17.7. Pro. 20.7. The branches will
fare the better for the sap of grace which is in the root. It will bring a
blessing on thy name, Pro. 10.7. Holiness will make thy house truly honorable;
It will bring a blessing on all thine affairs. In a word, that day in which
Religion is set up in thy house, I may say to thee as Christ to Zacheus, This
day Salvation is come to thy house.

2. Consider, A Family without Religion is a cursed family. That house which is
not Bethel, an House of God, but Bethaven, an house of vanity, is Bethany an
house of sorrow and misery. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the
wicked, Pro. 3.33. Whatsoever Cordials or comfors, dishes or dainties are
there, the curse^ of God, like the wild gourd, which the sons of the Prophets
put into their pottage, will spoil and poison all. As a little Leven, a little
of this curse of God will sour the whole lump of thy family-blessings. I have
seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly I cursed his habitation, Job 5.3.
The words are not a malediction from Eliphaz private spirit, but a prediction
from Gods spirit, as if he had said I was neither malicious against his person,
nor envious at his prosperous condition, but by the help of the Holy Ghost, I
foresaw his destruction, that though his house was built high, yet his
unholiness would lay it low. Thou may possibly presume that though thou
live without God, yet thou art beyond the reach of his rod; thou can mote
thy house round against the fire of divine fury, but thy confidence shall be
rooted out of thy tabernacle, and brimstone shall be scattered on thy
habitation. God will unkennel all such foxes, and drag them to their deserved
destruction. When Dioclesian the Persecutor retired from the Empire to a
private life, Fuseb. l^b. 5. De vit. Constant.
after he had feathered his nest, fire rained down from Heaven and consumed his
house. When Nicephorus Phocas had built a mighty Wall about his Palace for his
defense, he heard a voice in the night saying, Though thou buildest thy walls as
high as heaven, sin is within, and that will pluck it down. The Leprous house
must be pulled down. God will have every Brick, Stone, Tile, and piece of Timber
down. Where is the House of the Prince? and where is the dwelling place of the
wicked? Job 21.28.

Atheism in thy house will bring a curse upon thy calling, Job 5.2, 3. The
works of thy hands will fare the worse for the wickedness of thy heart: On thy
children (its ill to be related to a Traitor) diseases, and so destruction may
be hereditary. Children may inherit both their Parents riches and ruin, Job
5.4, 5. Isa. 14.20. His seed are far from safety, they are crushed. When a
wicked man pulls down his house upon his head, many in it perish with him; as
when Sampson pulled the house down upon the Philistines.

The curse of God will be a moth in thy Wardrobe, murrain among thy cattle,
mildew in the field, the plague to thy body, wrath to thy soul, will indeed
make thy house a very hell upon earth. The highest Family in the World without
godliness, though never so rich and ruffling, is but like Golgatha, a place
full of frightful skulls; and like a Churchyard, full of carcasses, gilded,
rotten, and golden Damnation.

I shall now lay down some Directions how thou may exercise thy self to
godliness, as the Governor of a Family.

First, Be careful whom thou admittest into thy Family: Art thou unmarried, and
to choose an Husband or Wife? Do thy occasions call for a manservant, or a
maidservant? Be careful where thou fixest; for believe it, not only thy grace
will appear in a good choice, but also godliness will be much hindered or
furthered by thy choice: One sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 9.18. One man
may pull down that house, which many with much care, cost and pains did set up.
We read, that wicked men have been the better, for taking godly men into their
families, as Laban and Potiphar; but we never read that godly men were ever the
better for having wicked persons into their families; nay, how much have they
been the worse, and by such been brought to great wickedness! As black corn,
they smut and sully the good corn; as rusty armor, they injure that which is
bright, by being near it. The Lacedaemonians were so sensible of this, that they
would not suffer a stranger to abide among them above three days, lest by his
evil example, he should corrupt others. And will thou, Friend, take them into
thy house to dwell with thee, that will bring the plague along with them, and
thereby probably destroy the bodies and souls of others? Can thou think it
safe, for a little Worldly advantage, to be nigh them who are under Gods fury,
and next door to eternal fire? Shall thy House be as Noah's Ark, abounding in
Creatures clean and unclean, when God commands thee to worship him uprightly,
with thy whole family? I hope, Christian, betthings of thee. It was written
over Plato's door, (...), There is no man may come hither, who is not a
Geometer. Let it be written over thy door, None may expect to dwell here, who
will not make Religion his business.

Magnus a Roman Orator complains of St. Hicrom Epist. Tom. ^.
Hierom that he brought many uncircumcised Greeks into the Temple, and defiled
Candorem Ecclesiae sordibus Ethnicorum, the unstained chastity of the Church
with the impure Sentences of Heathen Authors. Take heed that thou do not
defile the Church of God (for such thy house should be) with Heathen themselves
in Christian Habits.

If thou want a Wife, consider before thou choosest: Take heed whom thou
take into thy bed, into thy bosom, lest thou meetest with a Yoke Fellow that
will draw as strongly toward Hell, as thou do toward Heaven. It is rendered
as the reason why one of the Kings of Israel was so wicked, because he had to
Wife the daughter of Ahab. There is little work to be done, when the second
horse in the teem is always drawing back. The Devil can make use of Eve, to
draw thee to undo thy self and posterity: He can make use of the rib (says the
Father, alluding to that part of man out of which the woman was taken) to break
thy head. The Heathen tell us, that every man when he marries, brings a good
or an evil Spirit into his house, and thereby makes his house either a Heaven
or a Hell.

Be sure that wickedness do not woo for thee: Do not send the unclean Spirits
either of lust or covetousness, or pride, to make the match. When men do as
those Sons of God, Genesis 6.1.
who saw the Daughters of men, that they were fair, and took them Wives of
them, Genesis 6.1. hand over head; it is no wonder that they are married and
marred together. Consider, a Wife or a Husband, is the greatest outward comfort
or Cross in this World; and let prayer be the messenger thou imployest about
it: A good wife is from the Lord, Prove. 19.14. It is Gods special gift, and
therefore do thou go to him for it. Peter Martyr says, That Adam in that deep
sleep in which God formed Eve out of him, was then praying for a meet help: And
Isaac went forth to pray, when he had sent forth for a Wife. He had need to
have good counsel, who is to take one to be his constant companion. When Joshua
entered into a League with the Gibeonites, and never asked counsel of God, how
sad were the effects of it! If thou entrest into a League with a man or a maid
(for I know not what Sex thou art of) and do not ask counsel of God, expect a
sad consequence of such rashness. Why should thou, as our Proverb is, for a
little land, take a fool by the hand; sell the comfort of thy life, for a
little perishing wealth, and make thy whole time on earth bitter, out of a love
to a little fading Treasure.

It was the advice of the late Earl of Salisbury, in his Book of Precepts to
his Son, That he should be exceeding careful whom he matched with, because as
in a project of War, when an Army is foiled by the Enemy, they seldom recover;
so to err once in the choice of a Wife, is usually to be undone for ever; and
the more cause there is of special care, because he that seeks out for a
wife, goes to a Lottery, where he shall meet with ahundred blanks for one
prize.

But I am persuading thee to circumspection in this particular, not upon a
Politic, but a Conscientious principle, as thou would exalt Religion in thy
habitation. Next to thy self, thy Wife will be the best friend, or worst foe,
that Godliness can have in thy Family. Nay, possibly, and probably too, if thy
Wife should be wicked, though thou art at present like a sound Apple, thou
may quickly be speckt, by lying near one that is all over rotten: The nearer
the relation, the easier and speedier is the infection. He that could overcome
a Lion to his glory, was himself overcome by a woman to his sin and shame. The
most perfect man, Adam; the strongest man, Sampson; the wisest man, Solomon;
were all betrayed by their Wives into the hands of their spiritual Enemies; the
meekest man, Moses, hearkened so much to his Wife, that it was like to have
cost him his life. Some Expositors give this reason why Satan spared Jobs Wife,
when he slew his children, not to comfort him (surely the Devil did not love
Job so well) but to cross him, by provoking him to curse God: The Devil knew
that none was so fit to present that poisonous potion with success to Job, as
his Wife; that if he ever took it, her fair hands must give it, and her sugared
words sweeten it. Solomon says, Woe be to him that is alone; surely it is also
true, Woe be to him who is not alone, but has a wicked wife like a snake in his
bosom.

Reader, Do thou want a Servant? choose for God, not for thy self: Let not
thy main quaere be, Whether he can do thy work; but, Whether he will submit to
Gods Word: Though the former must not be neglected, yet the latter must be
preferred. It may be for advantage sake, thou receivest a drunken or swearing
person into thy house; but do thou consider that he will be an Achan, a
troubler of thy Family? Can thou think to do Gods work with the Devils tools?
Put off thy disguise of Christianity, if thou esteemest thy particular calling
above thy general. Besides, Do thou know what thou have done? thou have taken
into thy house an Usher to instruct thy children in the black Art of Hell:
Believe it, thy children will catch sins as soon as vermin, from those that
are of Satan's ragged Regiment: Thy Sons and Daughters are like Polypus in
Aelian, that turns to the color of that rock, or weed in the Sea, which
lies nearest. Once more, thou will be frustrated in the end, of thy
entertaining such a servant; for they will never be faithful to their Master,
who are unfaithful to their Maker. Constantius, the Father of famous
Constantine, gave out, That all such as would not deny the faith, should be
deprived of their honor and offices: Whereupon several forsook the Faith,
others stuck close to the Truth: Whereupon the Emperor when he had discovered
those halting, hypocritical persons, turned them all out of their places,
saying, That they who were false to God, would never be faithful to man: I do a
little question his policy in the premises; but his piety in the conclusion is
out of question; for they who will rob God of his glory, will (if opportunity
serve) rob men of their goods and good name too. It is recorded to the credit
of Queen Elizabeth, that she would suffer no Lady to approach her presence, of
whose dishonesty she had the least suspicion. Friend, mark and follow the man
after Gods own heart. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that
they may dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. He
that works deceit shall not dwell within my house; he that tells lies shall
not tarry in my sight, Psa. 101.6, 7.

As thou would have Gods company in thy family, do not entertain his enemies
into thy family. What communion has God with Belial. As thou would make
Religion thy business, avoid those quench-coals, those hinderers of holiness,
Bid the workers of iniquity depart, if thou would keep the commandments of
thy God, Psalm. 119.115.

Secondly, Mind holy performances in thy family; Every Master of a Family is a
Priest, and his whole family should be a royal Priesthood, offering at least
morning and evening sacrifice to God, Ita ha^eto solicitudinem D^musut aliquam
tamen vacationem animae tribuas Hier. ad Celant.
acceptable through Jesus Christ. The Jews had sacrifice in their Families, as
well as in the Tabernacle, Exodus 12.2. Let me go I pray thee, for our family
has a sacrifice in the City, says David to Jonathan, 1 Samuel 6.20.

It was prophesied that in the days of the Gospel, the spirit should be poured
down upon men, and they should see Christ, and mourn every family apart, Zac.
2.10. It was the advice of Hierom to a pious Matron; So take care of thine
house as always to allow liberty and time to thy soul; the Governor has the
cure of the souls, as well as of the bodies in his family; and if he mind
their outward man and neglects their inward, he is but a brute in humane
shape, for beasts feed the bodies of their young.

As the School fitteth young men for the University; so holy performances in
private, prepare servants and children for, and help them to profit by the
Ordinances of God in public. A foundation well laid by the Master of a
Family, is a great help to the Minister, when he goes to rear and raise the
building: Confident I am, our work would not have half that difficulty which
now it has, if Masters of Families would but do their duties; he that finds
his timber ready hewn to his hand, has a great advantage in setting up an
house, of him that must fell, bark, season and hew it himself. It is no wonder
that an Apprentice is so backward to his work, and so bungling at it when he is
wholly unacquainted with it, and a stranger to it; If Children and Servants
were accustomed to religious exercises at home, Sermons would not be so
tedious, nor Sabbaths so tiresome to them as they are.

The ordinary duties in Families are prayer, reading the Word, with instructing
Children and Servants out of it, and singing.

1. Dr. Bernard in his life and death.
Prayer must be in families; Its said of Bishop Usher, that he had Family
prayer four times a day. At six in the morning, and eight at night, and before
dinner and Supper in his Chapel, David returned to bless his house, 2 Samuel
6.21. that is, say Expositors, to bless God with his Family, and to beg Gods
blessing on his family. He ster prayed and fasted with her Maidens, Hest. 4.16.
The holy Ghost enjoyneth Husband and wife, to dwell together as fellow-heirs of
the grace of life, that their prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7. Our blessed
Savior is to be our pattern, now he prayed with his family of Disciples; And
it came to pass as he was alone praying, his Disciples were with him, Luke
9.18. He was alone, not secretly, to exclude all society, but privately, to
include only his own family. Our Houses are Gods Houses, and in Gods House
there must every day be morning and evening Sacrifice; I will that men pray
every where, surely then in private as well as in secret, and in public, 1 Timothy 2.8. Families need direction in the day, and protection in the night, and
truly either of them is worth a prayer. Thy family sins must be pardoned, thy
family wants must be supplied, and if they do not deserve a prayer they deserve
nothing. Horses kneel before they lie down at night, and when they rise up in
the morning; and shall thy house be worse then a stable of beasts!

They that will not beg family supplies, and bless God for family mercies, may
well be branded for ungodly and ungrateful wrethces. Prayer and praise are like
the double motion of the lungs; what we suck in by petition, we breath out in
thanksgiving, and without this, Religion cannot live in a family. What dangers
are thy family liable to every day, and without prayer thou have no guide, no
guard? Origin going once to comfort a Martyr was himself apprehended and
constrained either to have his body abused by a Blackamore, or to offer to the
Idol; which latter he did, but bewailing it says, I went out that morning
without prayer, which I know was the cause of that evil.

Its said of the Egyptians, that there was a great cry at midnight, for in
every house there was one dead. Reader, are there not dead souls in thy family,
Children and servants dead in sins, and trespasses, and shall there be no cry,
no complaining to God there! I must tell thee thy house is worse then a
Pesthouse, for thou have infected, and dangerously diseased souls in it, and
not so much as Lord have mercy upon us, written on thy door. Heathens, and
families without prayer, are fitly joined together, Jerem. 10. ult. The truth
is, such persons are English in their language, but Indian in their Athiestical
carriage. They feed and cloth their bodies like English men, but they starve
and go naked in their souls, like Indians. Only herein they differ, that they
cannot be prayerless in their Houses at so cheap a rate, but must expect an
hotter Hell, because they sin against a clearer light. Many families are the
picture of Hell, one may hear twenty Oaths for one prayer; the Master will
often curse but seldom or never bless his family; he loves cursing, so it will
come to him, and as he delighted not in blessing, so it will be far from him.

Do not say, thou can not pray. Had the father of spirits ever any dumb
children. Every beggar at thy door who is pinched with hunger, will tell thee,
that sense of misery will teach thee to be earnest for mercy. If thou were
condemned to be hanged, thou would not want words to p^en for a pardon.
Surely eternal death to which thou art liable is far more lamentable, and if
ever God make thee sensible of it (which must be done or thou art lost for
ever) thou will quickly follow him with prayers and tears for grace and life.

Thy affections in prayer, if right, will abundantly make up thy want of
expressions: A sanctified Heart, is better then a silver Tongue. Though thou
have not the gift of prayer, yet if if thou can act grace in prayer, all will
be well.

Pray much in secret, and thou will quickly learn to pray well in private: Use
at any Trade, will make me prompt and perfect.

Rather use a form out of a Book, then omit the duty. They who cannot dress
their meat themselves, must be beholden to their Neighbors to do it for them:
Set upon it presently, it is thy honor, thy privilege, and use crutches till
thou art able to go alone; only do not content thy self with them (Alas, who
ever was proud of stilts!) but labor to gain knowledge in spiritual things, by
reading, secret praying and conference, that thou may throw them away.

2. The Word of God must be read in thy Family, and thy Household instructed
there: As by prayer thy duty is to acquaint God with thy family-wants; so by
reading some portion of Scripture daily, thy duty is to acquaint thy family
with Gods will. An house without light, is in a dreadful, lamentable condition;
Thy household without the Word, sit in darkness, and thereby in the shadow of
death. The Commandment is a lamp, and the Law is Light, Prove. 6.23. Alas, how
can thy servants or children do their heavenly Masters and Fathers work, when
they are wholly ignorant of his will. The weeds of sin grow of themselves, but
the ground must be ploughed, and sown, and harrowed, and watered, before good
Corn will spring up.

God expects that thou should be both a Priest to offer up Sacrifice for,
and a Prophet to instruct and teach thy Family. A good Housekeeper is like that
Nobleman, who had for his impress two boundles of ripe Millet, with this Motto,
Servare and servari meum est; for the nature of Millet is (say some) to guard
it self from corruption, and that which lies nearest to it. The Word of God,
and holy instructions to a Family, are as salt which is helpful against
putrefaction, Mat. 5. Ye are the salt of the earth. Masters must be sure to
have salt in themselves, and for their families: Its said, that the Hammanients
in Cyrene made their houses of salt hewn out of their hills in manner of stone.
Hierom counseled Leta, Let thy children daily give thee some account of some
choice flowers gathered out of thy Bible. Teach thy children to remember their
creator in the days of their youths. It is too late to season flesh when it
crawleth with worms; Do it therefore betimes. Bishop Rider read and expounded
the Psalm 101. (which treats the good Government of Families) often to his
household, and hired them with money to learn it.

Abraham had letters testimonial from Heaven of his sincerity, and the favor
to be trusted with Arcana imperii, Gods secrets, because of his faithfulness in
this particular. And the Lord said shall I hide from Abraham the things which I
do? For I know him that he will command his Children and his House hold after
him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord, Genesis 18.17, 19. O how few
Abraham's are there in England? Many teach their Families the works of the
Devil, but few teach them the way of the Lord; many lop their trees, prune
their plants, break their horses, train their hauks, yea teach their dogs, yet
never instruct their children.

Friend, consider the worth of thy children and servants souls, and the weight
of their everlasting estates, and how in the dark of ignorance they must
unavoidably stumble into Hell; and for the Lords sake be persuaded to instruct
them in the knowledge of the true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John
17.3. Naturalists tell us that bees carry small gravel in their feet to poise
their bodies as they fly through stormy Winds. If thou would not have thy
little ones blown away with the Winds of temptations, do thou labor to poise
them with the principles of the Oracles of God, Ah what pity is it that men,
like silly Doves, without hearts, should sit in their Dove-coats, see their
Nests destroyed, and their young ones killed before their eyes, but the old
Manslayer the Devil, and never stir or offer once to rescue or revenge them!
Good Lord, what unnaturalness is is many Parents and Masters! Cardan speaks of
one that had a receipt for the certain dissolving the stone in the bladder, and
I question not (says he) but he is damned for not discovering it before his
death: Thou know the word under God must cure the persons in thy family of
the stone in the heart, and will thou neglect to acquaint them with it, but
suffer them to dye eternally. O Reader, be not guilty of such horrid and
barbarous cruelty. Do as that holy Bishop of Armagh, who one day in every week
did Catechize his family. It is reported of Lewis the ninth of France, that he
was found instructing a poor Kitchen Boy, and being asked the reason, answered
piously, I know the meanest in my family has a soul as precious as my own, and
bought with the blood of Jesus Christ. Our Savior taught his Disciples often
in private as their Governor, and according to their capacities, Mar. 4.33.
Mat. 16.17, 18. It is an honor to the highest prince to teach his Household
Gods precepts. O let thy words in thy family, as the waters of Nilus, often
overflow to make others fruitful. The Papists confess that all the ground which
we have got of them is by Chatechising and instructing our youth.

3. Singing of Psalms must be used in thy family. The Lord Jesus and his family
did practice this duty, Mat. 26.30. And when they sang an Hymn, they went out
into the Mount of Olives. David in that Psalm, at the dedication of his house
speaks that his glory should sing praise to God and not be silent, Psalm. 30.
Title, ver. 4. and ult. Our tongues are called our glory, not only because by
our speech we excel beasts, but chiefly because therewith we should glorify
God. It is observable that most of those places which prophecy the Gentiles
conversion, do mention their worshipping the true God by singing, Psa. 108.3.
and 100. Psa. 66.4. Isa. 54.1. and 52.8. The Holy Ghost when he commands that
the word should keep house with us, does also enjoin us to teach and admonish
one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs (which are the titles of
David's Psalms, and the known division of them expressly answering to the Hebrew
words, Shurim, Tehillim and Mizinurim, by which his Psalms are distinguished
and entitled, as the learned observe) singing and making melody with grace in
our hearts to the Lord, Col. 3.16. Ephesians. 5.19. Basilde Virt and laud. Psa.
Tom. 1
Jam 5.13. Basil speaks high in the praise of praising God by this holy
exercise. Chrysostom speaks of some in his time who always concluded their
suppers with singing a Psalm, and says he, they lived like Angels.

This ordinance will much quicken holy affections, and help a Christian to
serve God with more cheerfulness. When the Israelites were singing the hundred
and thirty six Psalm at the bringing in the Ark, the glory of the Lord filled
the House, 2 Chronicles. 20.22. The sweet singer in Israel was the man after Gods
own heart.

Only Reader be careful to sing David's Psalms with David's spirit, and not like
a Nightingale to sing by rote; I will sing with my spirit, and I will sing with
understanding, also making melody with grace in the heart, is the best tune to
set all David's Psalms with.

Thirdly, Set a good pattern to thy family. The fore-horse in the Team had need
to go right, because all the rest follow in the same road. If the Commander be
treacherous, how soon may he betray his Soldiers, who follow him at the heels,
into the enemies hands!

A governor of a family, must like Moses, be mighty both in word and deed.
Patterns are very prevalent both to good and evil. Precepts teach, but examples
draw. Why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? Gal. 2.14. Peter
did not compel them by his Preaching, but by his pattern. His example was so
powerful, that even Barnabas (as well as others) was drawn away therewith. It
is observable that Jeroboam seldom appears in the Heaven of Scripture, but in
the form of a Blazing Star, with a tail after him, Jeroboam the son of Nebat
who made Israel to sin; by his precepts he commanded them to sin, but by his
pattern he compelled them to sin. As examples are attractive to evil, so also
to good. That if any believe not, they may be won without the word by the
conversation of the wife, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. If godliness be written in the book of
thy life, in a fair Character, in a large lovely letter, it may invite thy
children and servants to read and like it, who otherwise possibly would not
have taken the least notice of it.

He that rules others, must not be unruly himself. If a ruler hearken to lies,
all his servants are wicked, Pro. 29.12. If a Governor of a family, a father,
or mother be a Drunkard, a Swearer, or an Atheist, their Children will quickly
imitate them; They will as certainly inherit their lusts, as their lands. As
some parents make their Children rich by their Lordships, so they make them
riotous by their evil lives. Observe, Abraham, a good man, denies his Wife;
Isaac is his heir not only in his wealth, but also in that weakness; Isaac
denies his Wife likewise, Genesis 20.2. with Genesis 26 7. Jacobs wives got little
good by the pattern and practice of Laban their father, Genesis 31.19. and 35.1, 2.

The Parents of the Children destroyed by the two she-Bears, were wont to jeer
Elijah in their ordinary talk; What Elijah the bald-pate must be taken up to
Heaven, Forsooth, as well as Elias. The Chidren hearing it spoken by them,
learned it of them, though they paid dear for their learning, for it cost them
their lives, and for ought I know their souls, 2 King. 2.24. O Reader, does not
thine heart ache to read this, and have thou not abundant cause to be heedful,
lest by thy pattern thou should draw thy Children to sin, and to Hell! The
Idolatrous Israelites drew their children to join with them in the Worship of
false Gods, Ezekiel. 18.2.

Plutarch observes of Cato that he was very wary not to speak an uncomely word
in the presence of his Children. Plut. in vit Cat.
This Heathen will condemn many Christians, who will curse, and swear, and
drink and roar, and that in presence of their children; Reader, avoid sin, both
for thy own and others sake. As a stone thrown into the water, makes but one
circle at first, but that one begets many; so though the sin in thee at
first be but one, ye it may cause many both in thy children and servants. The
sin of a Master or Mistress is like an infectious Air, which others breathing in
are infected by it. Thy servants will as readily put on thy lusts as thy
livery, and thy Children will be proud of such a patronage, such a cloak for
their villainy. A dark eye benights the whole body. Weigh all thy words and all
thy works, considering how many followers thou have, he that sins once,
sins twice if he sin before others.

Be serious and diligent about the concernments of God and thy soul, that
others may take example by thee. The biggest Stars are brightest and give light
to those that are of a lesser magnitude; Thou who art the greatest, should be
the most gracious in the family; if the Sun shine not on the mountains, it must
needs be set in the valleys. If thy children and servants behold thee careful
of thy language, and conscientious in thy carriage, when they see thee humble,
fervent, constant and serious in holy duties, they may learn by thee and write
after thee; such a patten may tend exceedingly to thy spiritual profit.

It is observed of Caesar by Cicero, that he would never say to his Soldiers
Ite sed Venite, Go ye, but, Come ye, marching before them himself, and giving
them a pattern. Do thou Reader, go before thy Family in Sobriety and Sanctity,
as their faithful Captain, and they may sooner then thou expectest follow after
thee.

Naturalists tell us of the Mulberry tree, that there is nothing in it but what
is Medicinal in some sort or other; the fruit, the root, the bark, the leaf,
all are useful. Truly, so it ought to be with thee: All thy expressions, all
thy actions should be instructions to thy Inferiors. Thy behavior in private,
in public toward God, toward thy Wife, toward thy Children, toward thy
Servants, toward thy Neighbors, should all be Lectures to teach others
Religion and Righteousness; that you may be able to say to your Children, as
Seneca to his Sister, Though I can leave you no great portion, yet I leave you
a good pattern.

Besides, one work required of thee (as I shall show thee before the conclusion
of this Chapter) is, to admonish and reprove others in thy family for their
faults; which with what face can thou do, or with what hope of success,
unless thou art free thy self? It was a shame to Plutarch that his Servant
should say, My Master writes falsely; he says it is unbeseeming a Philosopher
to be angry, and ipse mihi irascitur, and he himself is angry with me. If thou
reprovest thy child for not praying, and thy servant for drunkenness, and art
guilty thy self, though thou acquaintest them never so much with the wrath of
God, which will certainly seize upon Atheists and Drunkards, they will never
believe thee; for they know thou do not believe thy self. Thy words would
seem to draw the nail of sin out, but thy works are such an heavy hammer, that
they drive it in to the very head. When the rude Soldiers saw the Roman
Senators sit gravely, and discourse soberly, they took them for gods, and were
awful of them; but when they perceived one of them to grow waspish, they took
them for men, and spoiled them. Herod feared John's reproof, knowing that he was
a just man, Mark 6.20. Where there is piety in the person, there is majesty
and authority in the reprehension. Let the Righteous smite me, Psalm. 141.5. The
Snuffers of the Sanctuary were of pure gold: He that would reprove others
dimness, and make them shine brightly with the light of holiness, had need to
be irreproveable himself.

Reader, walk unspottedly; otherwise when thou threatenest thy children or
servants with the judgments of God against fin, thou do, like David, pass a
sentence of death and condemnation against thy own soul.

Fourthly, Be careful and diligent that thy whole Family may sanctify the
Lords Day: When the Israelites were to sacrifice to God in the Wilderness, they
went with there little ones, and all their households, Exodus 12. When Elkanah
went up to sacrifice to the Lord, all his house went with him, 1 Samuel 1.21. Thy
duty is, according to these examples, to see that all thy family (unless
necessity should hinder) serve the Lord in public. Do not suffer any of thine
to be playing idly in the Churchyard, when they should be praying earnestly, in
the Church; nor to be talking vainly of the World, when they should be
harkening reverently to the Word. O what pity is it, that they should be
sucking poison, when they should be sucking milk out of the breasts of
Consolation! The fourth Commandment does fully speak thy duty, not only to be
careful that they forbear thy work, but also that they mind Gods Worship. Thou
know not, but that thy child or servant, by missing one season, may miss of
salvation. Possibly they are wrought hard in the Week days, and have very
little time for their souls, so that their only time of improving their
spiritual stock, by trading toward Heaven, is on a Sabbath Day. Or it may be
they are careless of their main work (of providing for the other World) all the
Week, that if thou should neglect them on the Lords Day, they will he left
under a necessity of perishing: Surely they who have but one good meal in seven
days, and are robbed of that, are unconceiveably wronged. When David came to
his Brethren to the Camp, Eliab said to him, How came thou down hither? Where
is the flock? and with whom have thou left those few sheep in the Wilderness?
(1 Samuel 17.28.) I know the pride, and the haughtiness of thy heart. Give not
God cause to greet thee thus at Church, How came thou hither? Where is thy
flock, thy Family? With whom have thou left those few sheep, thy Children, and
thy Servants? I know thy pride, they are not good enough to come along with
thee, or to be minded by thee: or, I know thy covetousness, thou have employed
them about earthly businesses: or, I know thy carelessness and Soul-cruelty,
thou carest not what becomes of them, whether they be saved or damned for
ever. I tell thee Friend, some Gentlemen by going abroad alone without their
servants, have lost their silver; and for ought I know, by thy going to Church
without thy company, thou may lose the blessing and efficacy of the
Ordinances. How can thou expect that God should have any care of thy soul,
when thou tramplest the precious souls of others under thy feet, which he has
given thee special charge of?

O Reader, think of it; Are not thy children and Servants strangers to God, and
alienated from his life, through the ignorance that is in them? And is not the
Ministry of the Word appointed to turn men from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan to God? How shall they be converted, if the Ordinances of
God be neglected? Though a person be dangerously diseased, if he observe his
purging days, according to the advice of his able Physician, there may be hopes
of recovery; but if he neglect the means, if he perish, it will be no marvel:
If thy children and Servants are holy, can thou expect the fire of Grace
should continue or increase, whilst thou take away the fuel? Do thou think
that Spiritual Life can be maintained without Spiritual Meat?

In private also be watchful over thy Family, that all under thy charge be
present at holy duties, as Singing, Praying, repetition of Sermons, and the
like: Thou art careful that in the Week days they do work diligently; and why
should thou not be as careful that they do Gods work on his day? Is thy work
of greater concernment then Gods? or do thou love thy self, the poor
withering World I mean, above the blessed God?

Examine those who waited on the Word of God in public, what good they have
got, what lessons they have learned from the great Master of Assemblies? Our
Savior after Sermon, asked those of his Family, Have ye understood all these
Sayings? Mat. 13.5. Hereby thou will make them more attentive in public
Ordinances, and better their memories; as also, by this means, thou may
quicken thy own affections.

Suffer none of thy house to spend any part of the day either in idleness,
pastimes, or worldly business. Thou art accountable to God as well for sins of
permission, as for sins of commission; and it will another day be imputed to
thy charge, if the day be profaned by thy carelessness: If thou would not
suffer for others, do not suffer others in sin.

Fifthly, Let Discipline be set up in thy Family: When Jacob would dedicate his
house to God, he commands all his Family to change their garments, and put
away their strange gods: Their change of garments, did signify that change of
heart and life which he desired should be his households livery, Genesis 35.1, 2.
As the Governor of a Family must be a Priest to pray, and a Prophet to teach,
so also a King to rule; to be a terror to evil doers, and an encouragement to
them that do well in his family: Let not wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle,
Job 11.14. Zophar means not a natural or personal (though so the word is
sometimes taken, as 2 Cor. 5.1.) but a domestical and civil Tabernacle. Though
sin may come into thy house by children or servants commission, yet it must not
dwell there, but be cast out by severe reprehension. Wickedness is a bold
guest, it will come uncalled; but it must be more bold then welcome; it must
not dwell in thy Tabernacle. It is said of Cato, he would bear with faults any
where rather then at home. Bishop Jewel at night called his servants to an
account how they had spent the day, and after prayer, admonished them
accordingly.

Thy duty is to warn the unruly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. to acquaint them of sin (how
near and dear soever to thee) with the dishonor they bring thereby to God, the
disgrace to the Gospel, and the disadvantage and destruction to their own
souls. If the fault be the first, or of infirmity, or not so great a sin as to
waste the conscience, and poison thy family by its pattern, let the medicine
thou appliest for its cure be mild: Earthen glasses must be tenderly washed,
when iron vessels must be scoured with wisps: Of some have compassion, making a
difference, Jude v. 22. Who would that is wise, give the same physic to an
infant, which would purge a lusty grown person? Isa. 28.27, 28. For the fitches
are not threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned
about with the Cummin; but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the
Cummin with a rod.

If the crime be crimsom, and scandalous, or repeated, or justified, rebuke
sharply; hard knots must have strong and sharp wedges: Others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire, Jude v. 23. In such a case, weak physic will
only stir, not remove the disease, and thereby leave the Patient in a worse
condition then it found him. Nettles touched gently, sting the more: A prick
with a rapier is more dangerous sometimes then a wound with a sword, because
the latter wideneth the orifice, and thereby makes the place more open to the
plaster which should heal it. It is much better for them to be preserved in
brine and pickle, then to rot in flesh-pleasing and fondness. Kindeness, and
bearing with such in thy family, is like the kiss of Judas to Christ, a
betraying them; and like Joabs salutation to Abner, destroying and killing them.

Be sure therefore not to bear with any under thy charge in sin: Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. He
is a drone unserviceable to his house, his hive, who has lost this sting of
reproof. Pious Asa would not suffer sin in his own Mother: Asa removed his
mother Maachah from being Queen, because she made an Idol in a grove; and Asa
cut down her Idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron, 2 Chronicles.
15.16. Patient Job would not suffer sin in his own Wife; Thou speak like a
foolish woman, Job 2.6. Plain-hearted Jacob would not suffer sin his his own
Children, Ye have troubled me, to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the
Land: Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was
cruel, Genesis 34.30. and 49.7. David would not abide sin in a Servant, Psalm.
101.7. nor Edward the sixth in his own Sister.

Let thy reproofs against sin be mingled with, and so managed, that they may
manifest love to to their souls. When the nail is dipped in grease, it enters
without renting the board: When reprehension is dipped in, and tipped with love, it
will probably enter the heart without cutting it in pieces with rage and
revenge. Prudence may do much toward the advancement of the offenders profit
in this particular.

Though thy words should be soft, yet thine Arguments should be hard against
the sin committed: To this end, let thy reproofs be as near as may be in
Scripture phrases, that the offender may see it is not so much man as God, who
rebukes him for his fault. The Word is a hammer, if well laid on, it will
drive the nail of reproof to the head. If the oil of reprehension be gently and
prudently bathed in by the hot fire of the Word, it may abate very great
swellings. But be sure to perform this duty: The Magistrate who spares a man
slayer, Spencer, 182.576.
is guilty of his second murder: Plato seeing a child commit a fault, went
and corrected his Father. The Master of a family who allows any in sin, is
partaker of their sin: We perpetrate those sins which we may, and do not
prevent; we shall answer one day for sins of communion, as well as for sins of
commission. O how miserable will thy condition be, when the provocations in thy
Family (which thou know of, and winkest at) shall all be charged upon thee!
Naturalists tell us, that if a Serpent eat a Serpent, it becomes a Dragon: If
thou to thy own sins, add the sins of thy children and servants, what a
Monster in sin will thou be? Are not thy own sins heavy enough? do thou want
more load upon thy precious soul to sink thee deeper into Hell! Is not thy
iniquity (already) great, and thy wickedness infinite? as Eliphaz said to Job,
Job 22.5. Great for the nature of thy sins, and infinite for their number; and
will thou like one that is pressing to death, cry and call for more weight.

Maintain thy power and authority in thy Family: A wise, grave carriage will
sharpen the weapon of reproof, and make it pierce the deeper. Foolish
familiarity blunteth the edge of it. He that would throw a stone forcibly to do
execution, must stand at some distance.

Encourage small beginnings of good in any in thy family: Shine with a
lightsome countenance, cast a warm influence upon the blossoms of holiness,
hereby thou may do much toward their ripening. David's eye of favor was
upon the faithful, Psalm. 101.6. A Governor of a family must like a Gardener,
pluck up weeds, but cherish and tender the good flowers and plants.

Sixthly, Take care that all in thy Family be well employed: Not to permit
idleness in thy house, is one way to prevent ungodliness. There is employment
suitable to every person in thy dwelling: Servants should be diligent in the
discharge of their duties: Jobs Servants were about their work, when the
Sabeans and Chaldeans fell upon them, and sent them into the other World, Job
1.14, 17. Jacob served his Master Laban with all his might, Genesis 31. and 5.
Apelles painted a Servant with Hindes feet (to show that he should be nimble in
dispatching any errand) with broad shoulders (signifying, that he should
contentedly bear hard usage) and with his hands full of tools, because he
should be always at work. Children also (if at home) must be employed in their
places; if young, in Learning; if elder, in some Calling. Plutarch in vita.
Solon the Athenian Lawgiver enacted, That the Son should not relieve his
Father in his old age, who had brought him up idle, and without a trade. The
Patriarchs, though principal men in their Generation, brought up all their
Children to some Calling; their tender Daughters were not exempted from
Household business: Rebeccah (the Mother of Prophets and Princes) was not
ashamed of her Pitcher, and drawing water therewith for her Fathers Cattle.

Those dainty Dames who plead her pattern for their earrings and bracelets,
will hardly plead it for a pitcher and painfulness. Augustus Caesar brought up
his daughters in Carding and Spinning. Gentlemen though they are not bound to
bring up their Children to low or mean callings, yet are bound to keep them out
of the snare of idleness, and to take care that they be in some lawful
business, serviceable to themselves and others. The Wife as well as Servants
and Children ought to be industrious in her station. Spinster is a term given
to the greatest woman in our Law. It is said of the good housewife, She seeks
Wool and Flax, and works willingly with her hands, she looks well to the
ways of her household, and eats not the bread of idleness, Pro. 31.13, 27. A
Womanswork consists in sowing and doing somewhat her self, and overseeing
others, as appears in the forequoted place, besides the charge of her
children; hereby a wise woman is said to build her house, Pro. 14.1. As a
Carpenter lays the platform of an house in his head, and so studieth that
none of his stuff be cut to waste; So a good Housewife does so overlook the
affairs of her family, and so contrive and order things by a prudent provident
forecast, that there may be no waste, but all things disposed for the best.
Hence it is that though the Husband is called the guide of the Wife, yet the
Wife is called the guide of the House, Pro. 2.17. 1 Timothy 5.14. And for this end
they are commanded to be keepers at home, Tit. 2.5. They that gad much abroad,
do their families at home but little good; such are according to the
signification of the second Wife of Lamech, Zillah's, the shadows of Wives; The
Grecians had a custom when the new married Bride was brought home to her
Husbands house, to burn the Axeltree of the Chariot or Cart in which she was
brought, before the door; to teach her that she must abide at home. But the
main work lies upon the governor of the Family; Be thou diligent to know the
state of thy flock, and look well to thy herds, Pro. 27.23. He that is far from
his work, is not far from want. The Jews have a Proverb The Masters foot makes
his ground fat; which speaks thus much, that if the Master be not forward with
his own hands, all things will go backward in his house. Io Manlii Loc. Com.
(...), The Master is the greatest servant in the house. Its said of Albanus
Bishop of Scotland, Stotswood History of the Church of Scotland.
that he was never idle, nor ever suffered any in his family to be so.

Reader, this particular of overseeing, that all under thy roof mind their
proper work, will be some help to godliness, and a great stop to wickedness.
Polym. Stratag. Lib. 3.
Iphicrates would never let his soldiers be idle in their Garrisons, but would
set them to lop trees, or dig, or carry burdens: saying, That if they had
nothing to do, they would mutiny or commit some villainy. The bird that sits
still, is a fit mark for the murderer of souls, when the flying Bird is safe.
As corrupt blood is the cause of all natural, so is idleness of all spiritual
diseases. When persons in a family neglect their task, then is their hour of
temptation; Idleness is often the cause of Drunkenness. They leave their
workhouse who run to the Alehouse, Amos 6.2. Uncleanness is the Daughter of
Idleness; Lust will easily creep in upon those that are lazy, as did appear
sadly in ^odom, Ezekiel. 16.49. Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus; hence
fellow servants commit uncleanness together. Idleness is the mother of
unrighteousness. They who neglect their tasks turn thieves; they must not
starve (they say) and will not work, therefore they must steal, 2 These. 3.12.
When Servants are idle, many times they rob their Masters; Talebearing also is
one of the fruits that grows upon this tree. When Servants are idle, they run
tatling from house to house making difference amongst Neighbors, 1 Timothy 5.13.
Pro. 11.23. Carping Momus was never found working. Truly Friend, thou can not
think the wrong thou do thy family, if thou suffer them like Milstones to
consume themselves thus for want of work. Mr. Graenham in his works.
St. Greenham (as Bishop Hall calls him) when a Woman tempted much by the
Devil came to him for advice, gave her this direction; Never be idle, but be
always well employed; for in my own experience I have found it, when the Devil
came to tempt me, I told him that I was not at leisure to hearken to his
temptations, but was busy in my calling, and thereby resisted his assaults.

Seventhly, Maintain peace and love in thy family. Contentions will hinder
Religion; Strife like fire is wholly opposite to the water of grace. As in
times of warring the laws of men are silent in a state, (inter arma silent
leges) so in jarring families the Laws of God can be little heard. God was not
in the tempestuous rough wind, nor in the fire, but in the still low voice, 1
Kings 19.12. Live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you, 2
Cor. 13.11. If thy house be in a flame, it is time for thy best friends to be
gone. Thy House should be a lesser Heaven; in it thy God must be worshipped and
glorified, but in heaven there are no storms; tempests ascend no higher then
the middle Region. Where God is served with perfect purity, there is perfect
peace. As in the Ringing of Bells where every one keeps its place, and time,
and order, they make an harmonious sound, and delight the Daughters of Music;
but when they jar and strike against each other, their noise is harsh and
distastful. The holy performances of Families that live in love, are Heavens
music; but brawlings in houses (make prayers ungrateful, and) have too much
resemblance of the yellowings in Hell. When the wind of contention is high, the
smoke of thy incense cannot ascend, it will be beaten down again. In stormy
weather, one but a little way distant sometimes cannot hear his Neighbor
calling; storms of passions will hinder Gods hearing thy petitions.

Its said that in Cimmeria there is no light; and truly its more sad that in
some Families there is no love. The Husband is against the Wife, and the Wife
against the Husband; Master and Servants, Parents and Children are ever
quarreling. Seven Devils could agree in one heart, nay a Legion (which is seven
thousand six hundred twenty two, if Varro may be believed) in another; and yet
seven persons cannot agree in one house. The language in it is usually like
Billings gate, and the carriage often like Bedlam; But the hand of the Devil is
in all this, who knows his best time to fish, is when the waters are
troubled. When there is a tempest raised in the spirits of men, we may quickly
know that Satan was the Conjurer to raise the high winds. He knows one way to
take an house is by firing it.

Truly Satan has a mighty advantage against an Idle and a brawling family; As
the Dog, he devoureth the sheep in pieces, which he could not do whole. When
Cyrus came near Babylon with his great Army, and finding the River by reason of
its depth unpassable, he divided it into many Channels, whereby the main River
sank so on a sudden, that his Army went over and took the City. Thus by
division does Satan conquer and surprise families.

There is mention made of a dispute betwixt Mars and Pallas, Ioh. Bodin.
Method. Hist. c. 6.
which of them should have the honor to give the name to the City of Athens;
at length is was resolved, that he should give the name, who could find out
that which could most conduce to the benefit of the City. Hereupon Mars
presented them with a stately Horse, signifying Wars and divisions; but Pallas
came in with an Olive Branch the emblem of peace. Upon which the City chose
Pallas to be their Guardian, as knowing that unity is the way to prosperity.

Godliness in a family ebbeth and flows much, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2.
according to the wranglings or love in a family. As the Lapis Tyrrhenus, Pliny
speaks of, which being entire swimmeth; but broken, every part of it sinketh
to the bottom. Truly thy family may float above water while it is whole and
undivided, but if it be in pieces it will quickly sink.

But I must especially commend this duty to the governors of families,
Husbands and Wives. Children are seldom so impudent, and servants may either be
made quiet within, or be turned out of doors; but if the chief strings jar all
the melody is marred. Observe how the Holy Ghost gives this particular
precept, in order to the promotion of piety in a family; The Wife must be of a
meek and quiet spirit, and the Husband must give honor to the Wife as unto the
weaker Vessel, as heirs together of the grace of life, that prayers be not
hindered, 1 Pet. 3.4, 7. We may consider the injunction, and the reason of it;
the injunction is first to Wives, They must be of meek and quiet spirits; quiet
not quarrelsom, meek not murmuring through peevishness, or mad with passion. A
contentious wife is a continual dropping, says Solomon, Pro. 19.13. The man
would stay at home, but her tongue like rain dropping through the roof upon his
head wherever he sits down, drives him out of his house. Where is godliness
in the mean time? The wise man says again, Its better to dwell in the
Wilderness, (amongst venomous creatures) then with such a Wife, Pro. 21.13.
when she should be praying, she is like a mad Dog barking or biting. Such a
Wife, says Lycophron, is but a cold armful. This made Sylla say, I had been
blessed if I had continued a Bachelor. Upon this ground I suppose Julian the
Apostate (whose mouth was often black with blasphemies) said that Moses instead
of meet-help, might have written meet-hinderer. But certainly whatsoever some
men's perverseness may drivel and utter, or some women's peevishness occasion, a
woman, if of a godly and quiet spirit, is the greatest comfort on earth, and a
great help she may be to her Husband in his journey to Heaven. The Injunction
is secondly to the Husband; he must honor his Wife as the weaker vessel, as his
fellow-heir of the grace of life: He must honor her, not be bitter to her: He
must give her his greatest love, not deny her a good look. Some Husbands are so
Currrish and Crabbed, they are always raging and fretting at their Wives, nay,
like those that are distracted, they sometimes beat and tear their Wives,
themselves; For they two are one flesh: How far are such from obedience to Gods
Law? Let the Husband honor the Wife as the weaker vessel, that is, use her
tenderly: China dishes, and Venice glasses must be tenderly handled, because
they are weak vessels. The Husband must with the mantle of love, cover many
infirmities: An Heathen could tell Sarah, That Abraham was a covering of the
eyes to her, Genesis 20.16. The eye is the tenderest part of the body; God has
provided a special cover to fence it. When God would speak his infinite respect
to, and care of his people, he says, They are as dear to him as the apple of
his eye. Truly, Husbands ought to be as tender of their Wives, as of the apple
of their eyes. But Reader, see the reason of this Injunction of love to
Husbands and Wives, That your prayers be not hindered; as if he had said, Wind
up those weights of meekness and love, or Religion will stand still: Take away
those needful props, and piety will fall to the ground. O friend, as thou have
any love to the honor of God, honor thy Wife as the weaker vessel, if God has
caled thee to that relation: If thou art a Wife, be of a meek and quiet spirit.
If there be not concord in affections, there will be sad discord in petitions.
When there is War in a Kingdom, how are Sabbaths profaned, Ordinances
despised, Prayer and Scripture neglected? men are hurried away in haste to this
and that place, and leave duties behind them: So in a family, which is a
Kingdom in a little volume, Divisions will put Religion behind, and force it
to stand back. Rubenius Celer would needs have it engraven on his Tomb, that he
had lived with his Wife Ennea forty three years, and eight months, and yet
they never fell out.

It is happy where the Husband and Wife are like the two branches in the
Prophet Ezekiels hand, so closed together in one bark, that both made but one
piece: or like Pilades and Orestes, of whom it is said, They both lived but one
life; and where the whole family, like the multitude of Believers, is of one
accord, of one heart, and of one soul in the Lord, Acts 4.32. with the increase
of God.

I have now dispatched what I intended to offer thee, for the advancement of
Godliness in thy Family: If thou art a stranger to this honorable, comfortable
work of worshipping God in, and with thy Family; O that I could prevail with
thee to put the counsel of God speedily into practice! I must assure thee from
the Living and Almighty God, That thou art accountable to the Judge of quick
and dead, for all the souls in thy Family; God has the chief propriety in
every person in thy dwelling. As the flock which Jacob looked after was Labans;
so the family which thou have the oversight of, is Gods: Thy sons and thy
daughters which thou have born to me, Ezekiel. 16.20. God may say to thee more
truly then Laban did to Jacob, These sons are my sons, Genesis 39.43.
and these daughters are my daughters, and these servants are my servants, and
all that thou see is mine. Indeed God does in effect say to thee, what
Pharaohs Daughter did to Moses Mother, Take this child, and nurse it for me,
and I will give thee thy wages, Exodus 2.9. Take this Son, this Daughter, and
nurse them for me, in my nurture and admonition: Take this manservant, this
maidservant, and bring them up for me, in my fear and service; and I will give
thee an eternal reward. Friend, thou would be faithful in bringing up
Children or Servants for thy Brother or Sovereign; and will thou be unfaithful
in bringing up Sons and Servants to thy God and Savior? Is it fit that Gods
servants should do the Devils work? Let Conscience judge. Did God give thee
them to be brought up in drinking, or swearing, or lying, or Atheism; or like
so many Heathen, or Beasts, without any knowledge of his Word and Will? Did he
honor and entrust thee with their education, to have thee poison their souls by
thy irreligious pattern, and starve their souls by not giving them spiritual
food? Is this thy love to thy Maker and Redeemer?

Besides, I must tell thee, As Jacob was answerable to Laban for the whole
flock; if any were torn by beasts, or stolen by day or night, he bore the loss
of all, Genesis 31.39. Of his hands it was required: So art thou answerable to God
for every one in thy Family; if any one be devoured and torn in pieces by the
roaring Lion the Devil, through thy negligence, God will require his soul at
thy hands.

O Reader, consider, Death will shortly break up thine house, when thy children
and servants must go to everlasting fire, if they dye without grace, and the
knowledge and fear of God. If thou art now careless about the eternal good of
thy children and servants, that they perish for ever, through thy falseness and
unfaithfulness, how dreadful will thy account be? What will thou do, when the
blood of their souls shall be required of thee? If Christ sentence men to Hell,
for not visiting sick and imprisoned bodies, for not feeding hungry bodies;
what sentence will he pass on thee, for not visiting those souls committed to
thy charge, which were imprisoned by the Devil, and sick unto death; and for
not giving them the bread of life, but suffering them to starve and dye?

If on him that brought a temporal death on Cain, vengeance should be taken
sevenfold; what vengeance shall be taken on thee who tumblest others into
eternal death? Believe it, Reader, these are no jesting things: If therefore
thou have any bowels toward the children of thine own body; if thou have any
compassion toward thy poor servants, whom Christ thought worth his own blood;
if thou have any love to thy dearest Savior, or thine own everlasting
salvation; if thou would leave this withering World with comfort, and look into
the other World with courage, exercise thy self to godliness in thy family,
obey the particulars for that end commanded thee by the infinite God; do thine
utmost that all of thy family, may be of the family of Faith; and all of thine
household, may belong to the household of God; that so when the King of Terrors
shall give a discharge from all relations, thou may with thy family be
translated from living together in one House, to dwell for ever in one Heaven.

Reader, Thou may perceive in the close of the tenth Chapter, that much more
is promised then I have in this Treatise performed; the payment of which,
though I do at present defer, yet through the strength of Christ, I shall not
deny. If thou have any interest at the Throne of Grace, I do earnestly desire
thy prayers, that this part may find acceptance with the Saints, and be
instrumental for the advantage of many souls; and that in the other part I may
receive much assistance from the blessed Savior; thereby I shall be the more
enabled to be serviceable to thine and others salvations.

A good Wish about the Government of a Family, wherein the former heads are
epitomized.
THe Government of my Family being a special talent and trust committed to me
by the blessed God; The introduction.
and being a business of exceeding concernment, both in regard of its influence
upon the whole Kingdom, which is raised or ruined by the good or wicked
management of Families; and in reference to the everlasting estates of the
precious Souls in it, wherewith I am charged; I wish in general, That I may
never like a rotten post, endanger the whole building of Church and State in
any degree, by my unfaithfulness in my place; nor be so unmerciful and
unnatural, as to see that bloody Butcher Satan, drive my children and servants
(like silly sheep) to the Shambles of Hell, and never stir or strive to rescue
them out of his hands: But that my resolution and practice may be according to
Joshua 's religions pattern, that whatsoever gods others serve, whether the
World or the flesh, yet I and my house may serve the Lord. O that I might so
walk in the midst of my house with a perfect heart, that Grace, like Mary's box
of Ointment, may perfume the whole house with its savor; and that in every
corner of it (as it was said of holy Hoopers) there may be some sent of
godliness.

In particular I wish, That I may keep my house so cleanly swept from the filth
of sin, Motives to exalt godliness in a family.
and so curiously furnished with the ornaments of the Spirit, that it may
invite the noblest Guest, the ever glorious God, to take up his abode in it. My
God has told me, Gods blessing will be on a god y family.
That the House of the Righteous shall stand, Pro. 12.7. (though sin rotteth
the timber, and makes the houses of the wicked to fall) that in the house of
the Righteous is much treasure, Prove. 15.6. (even when there is but little
silver) that he blesses the habitation of the Righteous, Prove. 3.33. Surely
his blessing can make my bed easy, my sleep sweet, my food savoury, my clothes
warm, my dwelling pleasant, my children hopeful, my wife a meet help, my ground
full of plenty, and all I set my hands to, to prosper. O my soul, what an
argument is this, to move thee to exalt holiness in thy house! Thy God will
bless it, nay that God whom the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain, will come and
dwell in it. Without question, his coming will ( as to Zacheus) bring salvation
to thy house; the company of this King, will turn thy Cottage into a Court; and
his presence will change thy dwelling, were it a Prison, into a Palace. O! let
nothing be in thy house, which may be distasteful to so great, and so good a
Friend: Let no sin dwell in thy Tabernacle; but let Holiness to the Lord be
written on every person, room and vessel in it; that whatsoever name other
houses are known by, the name of thy house may be from henceforth, and for
ever, Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there.

I wish, Gods curse, will be on a wicked family.
That I may so give credit to the Word of Truth, which says, That the Curse of
the Lord is in the house of the wicked; that the flying Roll of Curses (the
length whereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth ten cubits) shall enter into
the house of the Thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely, (and
shall consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof, Zach. 5.2, 3,
4. and that he will pour out his wrath upon the Heathen which know him not, and
upon the families that call not on his name: That I may tremble for fear that
Atheism should reign in my house, and so it should be ranked amongst the
irreligious, and marked for vengeance. Ala^, what a direadful noise do those
Murdering pieces make in mine ears! The Curse of God will canker all my
comforts, and blast all my blessings, and that both speedily and irresistibly.
But O, my soul, meditate a little upon the latter Text, which is a Prediction,
as well as a Petition. What a bitter potion does thy God give thee, to purge
Atheism out of thy family! Consider its nature, it is Wrath: Pour out thy
Wrath. Gods Anger is terrible, like fire, burning and overturning all before
it; if but a spark of it light upon his own people, Psalm. 99.^. and 85.4.
how pitifully do they roar out! We are consumed by thine anger: Cause thine
anger toward us to cease. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger: There is no
soundness in my flesh because of thine anger. Truly, no wonder that they thus
bewail it; for who knows the power of his anger? Eut his Wrath is anger in
the greatest degree, Anger boiled up to the height: O how scalding is this
boiling Lead! If the wrath of a King be the Messenger of death; What is the
wrath of an Almighty God? This wrath can stuff thy bed with thorns, and appoint
wearisome nights unto thee; it can sauce thy dishes with poison, infect thy
raiment with plague sores, fill thy body with torturing distempers, thy soul
with horrors and terrors; it can waste all thy wealth in a moment, and turn thy
Wife, Children, and all thy comforts into amazing crosses and terrifying
curses. Hell it self is nothing else but this wrath to come; one Spoonful, one
Drop of it will turn an Ocean of the sweetest Wine into Gall and Wormwood.
Would thou be an Atheist in thy family for all the World, to live one hour
under this scorching wrath! Alas it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of thy God, for thy God is a consuming fire. Observe further its measure, pour
out thy wrath; When thy God pours out his Spirit, he gives it in an
extraordinary degree. The persons upon whom it was poured, are said to be full
of the Holy Ghost. If thy family be irreligious, thou may expect this
scalding wrath, not by drops, but by shorews to come pouring down upon it. O my
soul, let this thought soak and sink so deep into thee, that thou may dread
the omission of duties in thy family as much as the unquenchable fire. Let his
favor make thee cheerful in his service, and let his anger make thee fearful
of the least sin in thy house.

To this end I wish that I may use much circumspection whom I admit into my
dwelling; Directions for the exalting godliness in a Fam^ly.
that as those who are to plant an Orch-yard, get the best grafts they can; so
that mine house may be an Eden, the garden of the Lord, a Paradise on earth;
Take heed whom thou make members of thy Family.
I may (as my occasions require) look out for the choycest flowers, the best
and fruitfulest trees, the holiest Christians in the Country. O let me never
make my house a Pesthouse, by taking in irreligious and infectious persons and
such as will bring the plague along with them. One scabbed sheep may wrong the
whole flock, one putrid grape corrupt a cluster; a little Leaven Leaveneth the
whole lump; Lord in the choice of inhabitants for my house, let my eye be not
only upon my own welfare, and their fitness for my work, but chiefly on thy
glory and their willingness to work the work of him that sent them into the
World. Ioh. 9.4. Psa. 26.4, 5. and 119.
Let me hate the congregation of evil doers. Let me not sitwith vain persons.
Let mine eyes be upon the faithful in the Land. Let them that fear thee turn
unto me, and such as keep thy righteous judgments. Let me dwell with them here
on earth, with whom I shall dwell hereafter in the house not made with hands,
but eternal in the Heavens.

I wish that that there may be a Church in my house; and all the persons in it,
Mind holy performances in thy Family.
both Morning and Evening at least, imploved in those holy performances which
my God requires. My house should be a resemblance of Heaven Above; in his
greatest and most glorious house, my God is served without ceasing, and without
sinning. O that though in his lower and lesser house, natural and civil actions
cause intermission of, and the body of death causes imperfections in holy
duties: yet he might be worshipped both constantly and perfectly in a Gospel
and Evangelical sense. I have read that amongst the worst of Turks, the Moors,
it is a just exception against any Witness by their law, Prayer.
that he has not prayed four times in every natural day. ^ Hall Contemp.
I wish that none in my Family may be worse then Turks; but that both all
apart may secretly, and all together may privaetly offer up the Morning and
Evening Sacrifice of prayer and praise to the Lord my God. Daniel would pray
three times a day though he were cast to the Lions for it; and shall my Family
neglect prayer, when the Omission of it will make them a prey to roaring Lions.
It is the honor and happiness of my house, to exalt the Worship of my God in
it; his Service is the greatest freedom, his work is a reward to it self; why
should we be our own enemies, in banishing our best friends out of our family?
The mercies of my God are renewed upon me and mine every Morning; his care and
love is continued to us all the day long, the dews and showrs of his compassion
fall down upon us every Evening; shall we be forgetful of him who is every
moment so mindful of us! O let my Family never be so void of grace and manners,
as not to bid our God Good Morrow and Goodnight upon any pretense whatsoever.

I wish that the word of Christ may dwell richly in my heart and house,
Scripture instruction and Catechizing.
that my whole family may have their set meals every day of this Spiritual
food. How can I expect that Children or Servants who know not the God of their
Fathers, should serve him with perfect hearts? Alas how often are their
ignorant hearts (like dark Cellers abounding in vermin) full of sin! 1 Cron.
28.9.
O that I might so talk of the Word of God in my house, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8.
when I lie down and when I rise up, that it may be written upon the Posts of
my House, and on my Gates, that I may so often water the young plants in it,
that their first acquaintance may be acquaintance with God, and from their
childhood they may know the holy Scriptures, and be wise to Salvation, through
faith which in Christ Jesus. Though others care be to instruct their Servants
only in their own work, let my care be to instruct mine in Gods Will and Word:
Though others labor to leave their children rich, let my endeavor be to leave
mine religious. Lord, enable me so to teach them thy Trade in their youth, that
they may not depart from it when they are old, Prove. 22.6. that their young
years well led, may be like the Sweetness of a Rose, whose swell remains in
the dried leaves.

I wish, That all the voices in my house may tuneably sing Gods praises;
Singing Psalms.
yet that they may not, like Trumpets and Pipes, make a sound, being filled
only with wind; but have hearts fixed and prepared, when they sing and give
praise. O that all the Viols in my house may be so in tune, and their strokes
so true, that singing with grace in our hearts, we may make melody to the Lord.
Drunkards have their Songs in derision of them that are good; Atheists have
their Sonnets in dishonor of the blessed God: Why should not the voice of joy
and rejoicing be in the Tabernacle of the righteous? Psalm. 118.15.
Though my house is a Tabernacle, and all the inhabitants in it Travelers, yet
our work is pleasant: O let us go merrily on, and make Gods Statutes our Songs
in this house of our pilgrimage.

Because my pattern of evil will do more hurt to my family, Set them a good
example.
then my precepts can do good (servants and children being apt to be led more
by the eye then the ear) I wish, That I may take heed to my self, weigh and
watch over all my words and works, not only for my own, but also for the sake
of them that are committed to my charge. Distillations from the head, often
consume and destroy the vitals: My family is like a flock of sheep; if the
first leap through into a ditch, or river, the rest are ready to follow. O that
I might therefore be wary in all my ways, and be so serious in Spiritual, so
sober in Natural actions; so righteous toward men, so religious toward my
God; so faithful in every relation, and so holy and heavenly in every
condition, that I may have cause to say to my children and servants, as Gideon
to his Soldiers, Look on me, and do likewise, Judge. 7.17.

I wish, See that thy family sanctify the Lords Day.
That my house may not only spend some part of every Week day, but also the
whole Sabbath day, in the service of my God. It is a special privilege granted
me by the Lord, for my families profit, wherein I may be singularly helpful to
my own, and my households everlasting happiness. O that not the least part of it
may be lost, or profaned by any within my gate, either by worldly labor,
pastimes, or idleness; but that I may be so mindeful of my charge, as to take
care that my children and servants do forbear what my God forbids, and spend
that Sacred Day, altogether in Sacred Duties: To which purpose I desire, That
all my household, both males and females (if of capacity) may appear before the
Lord in public, and in his Temple give him praise; and that in private I may
whet the Word on them (as the mower does his sith) by going over it again and
again, according to the precept. Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
let my house on thy day, be like thy house, employed wholly in thy Worship;
and let thy gracious presence so assist us in every Ordinance, that the glory
of the Lord may fill the house.

I wish, Discipline in a Family.
That I may manifest my love to the Souls in my family, by manifesting my anger
against their sins. My God has told me, Thou shall not hate thy brother: Thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Lev.
19.17. If it be my duty not to bear with the corruptions of neighbors, much
less of my servants and children. Should I suffer them in unholiness, I should
bring them up for Hell: Those deepest purple sins, many times, are those which
are died the Wool of youth. O the sad aches which many have when they are old,
by falls which they received when they were young! Let me never, like Eli,
honor my sons (or servants) above my God, lest my God judge my house for ever,
for the iniquities which I know, because my children, (or servants) make
themselves vile, and I restrain them not. Lord, let me never be so fand and
foolish; as to kill any in my family with (Soul-damning) kindness; but let my
house be as thine Ark, wherein there may be not only the golden pot of Manna,
seasonable and profitable instructions; but also Aarons Red, suitable and
proper reprehension and correction.

I wish, See that all be well employed.
That I may never expose my family to the suggestions of Satan, by allowing any
in laziness; but may be busy my self in my particular vocasion; and see that
others be diligent in their distinct stations. The lazy Drone is quickly caught
in the honeyed glass, and killed, when the busy Be avoideth that snare and
danger. O that I and mine might always be so employed in the work of our God,
that we may have no leisure to hearken to the wicked one. Adams storehouse was
his workhouse; Paradise was his place of labor. Lord, since thou have
entrusted every one in my house with one talent or other wherewith he must
trade, cause me and mine to labor and work in this, and to look after rest in
the other World.

I wish, Peace and love must be maintained in the family.
for the furthering of holiness and purity in my house, That I may be careful
to keep it in peace. Our bodies will thrive as much in Fevers, as our Souls in
the flames of strife: Satan by the Granado's of Contention, will hope in time
to take the Garrison: Where strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work,
Jam. 3.16. O that love (which is the new Commandment, the old Commandment, and
indeed all the Commandments) might be the livery of all in my family: That
there might be no contention there, but who should be most holy, and go before
each other in the path which leads to eternal pleasures. Because marriage is
a fellewship of the nearest union, and dearest communion in this World; and
because the fruits of Religion will thrive much the better, if cherished by the
sweet breath, and warm gale of love in this relation: Lord, let my wife be to
me as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe; let me be ravished always with her
love: Let there be no provocation but to love, and to good works: Let our only
strife be, who shall be most serviceable to thy Majesty, in furthering one
another eternal felicity: Enable us to bear one another burdens, and so
fulfill the Law of Christ; and to dwell together as fellow-heirs of the Grace of
life, that our prayers be not hindered.

In a word, I wish, That I may like Cornelius, Conclusion.
fear the Lord with all my house: So govern it according to Gods Law, that all
in it may be under the influence of his love, and heirs of everlasting life.
Lord, be thou pleased so to assist and prosper me in the management of this
great and weighty trust, that my house may be thy house; my servants, thy
servants; my children, thy children; and my wife, belong to the Spouse of thy
dear Son; that so when death shall give a bill of divorce, and break up our
family, we may change our place, but not our company; be all preferred from thy
lower house of prayer, to thine upper house of praise; where is neither
marrying, nor giving in marriage, but all are as Angels, ever pleasing,
worshipping, and enjoying thy blessed self (of whom the the whole family in
heaven and earth is named) to whom be glory, hearty and universal obedience,
for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table of the principal Heads contained in this Treatise.
A
HOly affections requisite in Prayer. page, 172, 173 A Christian should be Holy
in his Apparel page, 427 The ends of Apparel are four, page, 428 Sins about
Apparel, page, 430 The Virtues to be exercised in Apparel, page, 435 Natural
Actions, vide Natural, Two helps against Apostasy, page, 4, 5 No Atheists in
Principles, page, 2
B
REligion brings a blessing along with it. page, 520
C
A Christians duty to be godly in his particular Callings, page, 466 Men must
be diligent in their Callings, page, 467 Righteous in their Callings, page, 474
Particular Callings must not incroach upon our general ib. To steal away the
heart, 476 Or time, page, 478 God must be sought to for a blessing on our
particular Callings, page, 484 God must have the glory of success in our
particular Callings, page, 487 Men must be Contented how ever God deals with
them in their Callings, page, 490 A good Wish about a particular Calling, page,
493 A good Wish about a Ministers Calling 497 A threefold Care page, 470
Charity to be minded, 322, 412, 413, 414. Christ's great love to mankind 493, to
499. Christ's sufferings largely described, page, 285, to 293 Constancy required
in prayer, page, 178
D
DRunkenness abouding 417 Its Mischiefs page, 418 Holy Dutys require much
Diligence page, 106 Grace must be acted in Dutys, page, 117, 118 Dutys are
considerable in a twofold respect, and must accordingly be minded for a
twofold end, page, 128, to 135 A good Wish about Religious Dutys, page, 136 No
Duty should satisfy without Communion with God, page, 369 Vide Lords Day.
E
A Christian must be holy in Eating and Drinking page, 401, 402 Christians must
Eat and Drink Sacredly, 403, to 415, Soberly, 315 Seasonably, page, 425 Affairs
of Eternity of great weight, page, 57 Self Examination, a duty, page, 266
F
FAith specially requisite in holy duties page, 120, 125 Faith necessary in
hearing, page, 226 Faith necessary at a Sacrament, page, 271 Faith has a
threefold act 303 Faith tried page, 272 Religion must be set up in Families,
page, 515 Irreligious Families do much hurt, page, 517 Irreligious Families are
cursed, page, 521 Religious Families are blessed, page, 520 Those that would
make Religion their business as they are Governors of Families, must be
careful whom they take into their Families, page, 523 Mind Religious duties in
their Families, page, 529 Prayer must be in Families, page, 530 The Scriptures
must be read in Families, page, 533 Psalms must be sung in Families, page, 536
Governors of Families must give a good pattern, page, 538 All in a Family must
be employed, page, 549 The Governor of a Family must take care that his whole
Family sanctify the Lords day, page, 542 He must set up Discipline in his
Family, page, 545 He must maintain love in his Family, page, 553 Godly Fear
requisite in holy duties, page, 120 Fervency requisite in Prayer page, 172
G
THe things of God are the things of the greatest weight page, 53 Godliness
taken two ways page, 8, 9 Godliness, Vide Religion, Godly men meet with much
opposition in the way to heaven, page, 65 Godliness must be our principal
business, page, 94, 95 In every part of our lives, page, 102, 103
H
A Good Harvest Gods gift, page, 485, 486 It is our duty to Hear the word,
page, 200 Evil Frames hinder us in Hearing, page, 205 Prejudice against the
Preacher must be laid aside by them that would profit by Hearing, page, 206, to
211 The Heart must be affected with the weight, efficacy, and excellency of the
word which we Hear, page, 212 Prayer requisite before hearing, page, 216 Right
ends in Hearing to be minded, page, 221 False ends in hearing to be avoided,
page, 220 Worldly thoughts hinder our Hearing, page, 221, 222 We must hear as
in Gods presence, page, 223 We must pray after we have Heard. Vide the Word,
God looks much after our Hearts, page, 17, 170 Heaven not to be obtained
without diligence and labor, page, 60, to 65 Humility required in prayer.
page, 167, 168
I
IDolaters are zealous and prodigal, page, 418, 419 Idleness, the evils of it,
page, 552 Intemperance a great sin, page, 417 The mischeifs of Intemperance,
page, 418, 419 Joy in God seasonable on a Lords day, page, 364
L
LOrds day of divine institution, page, 337, 338 God takes special notice how
we keep the Lords day, page, 339 Preparation needful for a Lords day, page, 342
Wherein preparation to a Lords day consists, page, 343, to 346 Lords day a
great privilege, page, 348 Lords day a spicial season to get and increase
grace in, page, 353 Public Ordonances chiefly to be minded on the Lords day,
page, 356 to 362 The whole Lords day to be sanctified, page, 372 Brief
Directions for the Sanctification of the whole Lords day, page, 381, to 391 A
good Wish about the sanctification of the Lords day, page, 391 A good Wish to
the Lords day, page, 396 Lords day, Vide Families, and Meditation. Love of
Christ, Vide Christ's Love to Christians tried, page, 273 Love, a help to
Godliness. page, 553
M.
MAn created for Religion, Vide Epistles and page, 39 Good Counsel about
Marriage, page, 425 Meekness requisite in a Wife, page, 562 Meditation needful
before prayer, page, 138 Meditation a duty on a Lords day, page, 377 Ministers
must be godly, page, 6, and 498 A Minister must be industrious, page, 6, 7. 502
People must pray for their Minister page, 219, 220 Ministers must act from
right principles, and for right ends, page, 499, 500 Ministers must be able,
501. Compassionate, 504. Faithful, 501 Full of courage, 505. Ministers must
Preach plainly, purely, prudently and powerfully, page, 507 to 510 Ministers
must pray for their people, page, 510 Administer Sacraments 511. Chatechise,
510. Visit people, page, 512 Ministers must be exceeding tend what example
they give their people, ib. Ministers must not be discouraged if their labors
be not successful, page, 513 Ministers must give the glory of their success to
God, page, 514
N
HOw a Christian in Natural Actions may make Religion his business, page, 400 A
good wish about Natural Actions, page, 441
O
OBedience required, page, 322, 341 Obedience must be in heart and life, page,
17, 18 Obedience must be Canonical, page, 19 Ordinances, their ends and use
page, 130, 131 Ordinances. Vide duties and Lords day,
P
GOd has an extrodinary respect for a Penitent soul page, 277, 278
Perseverance required, page, 35 Perseverance in prayer, page, 189 Pleasures,
Vide Recreations, The excellency of Prayer, page, 137, 138 The Prevalency of
Prayer, page, 141, 142 Prayer has a twofold Pre-eminence above all other
duties page, 138 The Nature of Prayer, page, 140 The Antecedents to Prayer,
page, 147 Meditation, an help to Prayer, page, 148 Meditation of our sins,
wants and miseries needful before Prayer page, 149, to 155 Meditation of God
helpful to Prayer, page, 155 Quickening and stirring up of grace needful to
Prayer, page, 157 Sin hinders Prayer, page, 159, 160 Anger hinders Prayer,
page, 161 Worldly Distractions hinder Prayer, page, 162 Gods Word must be the
rule for the matter of our Prayers page, 163 The Person Praying must be holy
page, 165 Prayer must be Upright, 170. Humble, 167. Fervent, 172 Constant,
page, 178 What it is to Pray Continually, page, 180 A Caution about fervency in
Prayer page, 176 Its an ill sign to be Prayerless page, 184, 185 After Prayer
wait for an Answer page, 186 Means must be used for the obtaining our Prayers
page, 191 Preparation to Religious duties needful, page, 343 Preparation to
Hearing, Vide Hearing, Preparation to the Lords day. Vide Lords day,
R
REcreations are lawful 446. they must not be our occupation, 450 they must be
used for good ends 454. In due season, page, 456 Recreations are unseasonable
on a Lords day, page, 457, 458 and in times of the Churches sufferings page,
461 A good wish about Recreations page, 462 Religion must be our business page,
10 What Religion is, page, 13, 14 The several derivations of the word Religion,
page, 13 What it is to make it ones business, 21. It implies to give it
precedence, 22. To pursue it with industry, 26. To persevere with constancy,
page, 35 Why Religion must be made our business, page, 39 Religion is the end
of man's creation, page, 40 Religion is a work of the greatest weight, 45 to 49.
It is Soul-work, 49. It is God-work, 52. It is Eternity-work, page, 57 The
necessity of making Religion our business, page, 60 to 70 Religion much
neglected, page, 72 The neglect of Religion bewailed, page, 73, 79 Our greatest
care must be about Religious duties. page, 108 Vide Godliness and Duties.
Repentance consists in mourning for sin, and turning from sin, page, 276, 280
S
SAints called Lillies, why, page, 268 Saints shamed by sinners, page, 88, 89,
92, 93 Scripture a great mercy page, 198 Vide Hearing and the Word. Sacrament
of the Lords Supper a seal of the Covenant, page, 251 The Sacrament a
resemblance of Christ's death, 252. An evidence of his love, 253. A great Supper
in four respects, page, 253. The excellency of the Sacrament, page, 255 Much
care about the Supper, page, 255, 256 The danger of receiving the Supper
unworthily, page, 256 to 262 Christ takes notice how men prepare for the
Sacrament, page, 257 Preparation requisite before it, 264, 265. Wherein
preparation for it consists, page, 266, to 279 Our dependence must be on
Christ for assistance after our greatest preparation for the Sacrament, page,
282 Subjects to be meditated on at a Sacrament, 285. Christ's sufferings, 286 to
293. Christ's love, 293 to 300. Our own sins, ib. Graces to be exercised at the
Sacrament, 300. Faith in its threefold act, 303 to 310. Love. 312. Repentance,
page, 315 What a Christian should do after a Sacrament, page, 319, 320 Men to
be very careful in the choice of Servants, page, 526, 527 Sinners very zealous
for sin, page, 87, 88, 89 Sobriety, vide Temperance. Sleep, how to be ordered,
page, 437. Its ends, 440. Quantity, page, 437, Season, page, 439 Soul-work
weighty, page, 49 The welfare of the body depends on the Soul, page, 51 The
Souls excellency, page, 50
T.
TEmperance commended, page, 416 Vide Natural Actions and Eating. Thankfulness
enjoined, 413, 415. For the Word, 236. For the Sacrament. page, 319
U.
Ungodliness brancheth it self into Atheism and superstition, page, 1, 2
Uprightness, acceptable to God, page, 171 Unthankfulness, page, 408
W
GOod Counsel about the Choice of a Wife, page, 525, 526 Word, why called the
grace of God, page, 203 Gods power alone can make the Word effectual, page,
217, 218 When the Word comes with power then it profits page, 229 Its woeful
to live under the Word and not to be changed by it, page, 231 We must bless God
for his Word, page, 237 The Word must be obeyed, page, 240, 241, 242 Word, Vide
Hearing, Worldlings eager for the World page, 74, to 78 Our Worship of God must
be inward and outward, page, 14, to 19 Man made for the Worship of God. Vide
Man God is very choice in his Worship, page, 109, 110 Gods Worship must be
according to his Word, page, 19, 20 God alone the object of Worship, page, 16
Its ill to dally with Gods Worship, page, 112 Much Watchfulness required in the
Worship of God. page, 113
Y
YOuth, Vide Family instruction,
FINIS.

