A LETTER OF AN INDEPENDENT To his Honored Friend Mr GLYN, RECORDER OF LONDON.

Printed, 1645.

A LETTER OF AN INDEPENDENT, To his Honored Friend, Mr GLYN, RECORDER OF
LONDON.
SIR,
WIth what Sympathy and Unanimity we first engaged our selves in this present
cause, I need not call to your remembrance: nor can you forget what lists and
bounds we then set our selves: Reformation was our earnest desire. Petition was
our only way; To live and dye together in one and the same opinion was our
mutual promise; To preserve our Ancient and Fundamental Laws, to purchase
our just Liberties, To conserve the Kings known Rights, were our solemn
Protestations. All these being now like Sampsons cords, broken, I believe my
self disengaged: The Reformation desired is extirpation endeavored; In stead
of Petition, as Subjects ought, we command as Rebels use; The preservation of
our Ancient and Fundamental Laws, is outlawed by new Votes, and illegal
Ordinances; The purchase of our just Liberties, is turned into unjust
licentiousness; And the conservation of the Kings known Rights, is overturned
by unknown wrongs; And our living and dying in one and the same Opinion, is
crumbled away into, So many men, so many minds; of our first Juncto, how many
Presbyterians, how many Independants we both know; of those Presbyterians, how
many are Anabaptists, how many are Jacobins you know not; of those
Independents, how many are Antinomians, how many are Brownists, I know not: And
though we both know what we would not have, yet neither of us know what we
would have.

Would we have no Bishops Sit in Parliament? an Act is passed for it, the King
has signed it. Though I must tell you, that very Act has cancelled one of our
best Fundamentalls; The best part of Magna Charta is thereby dissolved, and
has put the whole into an Ague.

Would we have no imposition of Ship-mony? the like course is taken, and the
like power has confirmed it. Though I must tell you, this very ease of
Ship-mony, has brought a disease upon our Ship-strength; and whereas before we
were well nigh able to cope with all the Navies of Christendom, we have scarce
any more left now then the bare name of a Navy.

Would we have no Monopolies? They are damned too by the like Authority; though
I must tell you, the very taking away of this yoke has made the whole
Kingdom a Monopoly; the several Committees have got a Monopoly of our Coin
and all that is Coynable; The several Commanders have got a Monopoly of our
Cattle, and all that is Edible; some there be that have got a Monopoly of our
Wives and all that is Amiable; others of our Children, and all that is
Delectable; others of our Servants, and all that is Profitable; others of our
Neighbors, and all that is Sociable: The Muster-Roll since our last besieging
of Basing, assures me, we are 21500. weaker then we were; and Major Copley will
witness it with me.

Would we have no Ceremonies lie heavy upon tender Consciences? That has been
offered us too; Though I must tell you, we that stumbled at these Gnats, have
since swallowed Camells; we that would not be imposed upon our selves, do our
selves impose upon others, Burdens too heavy for them, our selves, or any man
else to bear.

Would we have no Papists? we were in a fair way for that too; we might have
forced their children to an education under Protestants: Though I must tell
you, but under the Rose be it spoken, This had been a piece of absolute
Tyranny; and would have been required with the Abolition of all Protestants in
all the World, save England.

What is it we did privatively desire, and the King did positively deny? He was
not weary of Granting, 'till we were shameless and unreasonable in demanding.
To a Regulation of Bishops He consented; He declined only their Extirpation;
would we have no Bishops? Why? because they have not Jus divinum to plead for
them? it remains yet undecided; the Episcoparians affirm it; The
Anti-Episcoparians deny it; and yet grant by consequence, what they challenge
by conclusion. That Episcopacy has Jus Apostolicum for their Advocate. Or is
it because some of them are bad? Upon the same ground would we have no Judges,
no Aldermen, no Knights, no Lords, no Parliaments; All have not been good:
because some are, let their prescription of time forbid the proscription of
their Fanction.

Mistake me not yet, Sir, I am no Patron, no Advocate, no Pleader for
Episcopacy; I am an Independent, I was so when I first entered into this
combination, and so will dye; And such a one were you at that time, though now
you have forgot your first Faith, and are turned Presbyterian, yet still I am,
as I was then, a perfect Bishop hater; but why I am so, I know no more then you
do. Herein we still both agree; In all things else we are at odds: you will
have Presbytery established; I am for Independency; And which of these two are
most consistent with the essence of this Kingdom, I wish you would put it to
the Issue upon a fair and calm disputation betwixt my good Lord Say, who well
knows what the new Directory is, and how to confute it; and your good Earl of
Pembrook, who for three Months (his own words) could not understand it, but now
by the help of Mr Olsworth (it seems) knows it to be the best Nursery of
Devotion in the World, and yet neither understands nor knows how to maintain
it: or betwixt our Learned Mr Goodwin, and your learned Mr Calamy, who yet
never answered that Quotation of his, from the best Astronomers that ever writ,
in the year 1640. plus vel minus, there would be universalis toti^^ Mundi
insania, to which I should have pinned my Faith, if he had but added the whole
Truth, saying with Tycho-Brahe, Erga R^ges: so the words stand, and ought not
otherwise to be repeated: or by determination of the Sword, betwixt Noble
Crommell, our General, and valiant Massey, yours.

But Disputations we have had already, to no purpose, you will confess with
me; For the Episcoparians are the better Scholars, and have confuted us both;
you for too heavy Taskmasters, and us for too easy: And justly; For your
Assembly with the power of your Party in the Parliament, have imposed Oaths and
Covenants contrary to Law and Religion; yes, and imprisoned Lilburne for his
defense of Magna Charta, and refusing the new Oath, Ex Officio, which your
selves condemned in the Ecclesiastical Court: Nay, and beyond this too, diverse
of your Assembly of Divines, have in their Feastmeetings declared, That their
Presbytery being Jure divino, has a Supreme power in Causes both
Ecclesiastical and Civil over King and Parliament, and so instead of ruling
by Law, will rule all by their own lawless Arbitrary Injunctions.

Battles we have also had to as little purpose; For until this last Summer,
the Kings Soldiers were the stronger men, and gained against us both: you know
in what a low Condition we both were, when Sir Thomas Fairfax lay before
Oxford, how tumultuous the Londoners were when Leycester was taken, and how we
were resolved to pass over the Channel, if Nasby fight had gone against us:
And to whom we owe the thankfulness of that, whether to General Fairfax, and
the Presbyterians under him, or to General Cromwell, and the Independents
under him, let our Enemies speak; Their witness will be the best, we may be
partial to our selves.

That we have since taken Bristoll, the Devizes in spite of Lloyd, Winchester
notwithstanding Ogles strength there, and Bazing House, where many of our
Armies were till then crushed; It is well known we owe more to Cromwells Horse,
then to Fairfax Foot, or Dalbeers Engines: And that Dalbeer should have 6000l
for Basing, Fairfax 500l for Bristoll, Massy the like, in Jewels, which they
we are as Badges of Honor, and Cromwell no acknowledgement for all; yes, and
instead of it, you suffer him to lie under an impeachment of Treason suggested
by the Earl of Manchester; is a shrewd evidence to me, That if your Presbytery
be once established, we must look for as little favor as the Episcoparians: And
this you already partly showed, by your selfe-charity in your great care of
Skippon, to cure his wounds which he received at Nasby fight, and suffering all
ours to sink or swim.

Well, notwithstanding all these Successes, are either of us nearer to our
ends? If the King can but live and rub out this Winter, we shall save Him a
labor next Spring of calling in any Foreign Forces: It is resolved upon
amongst us, and for that ancient loves sake which has been betwixt us, I give
you notice of it, that you may return to us, That if the King will give us
Liberty of Conscience, and not subju^ate us to Ecclesiastical Power, we will
submit our selves to His Civil Power; and rather live with Episcopacy to
establish Monarchy, then under Presbytery to pull it down.

Episcopacy may stand, and we enjoy our Consciences, Presbytery will not allow
it; Episcopacy may enjoy their Lands, and we our Farms, not so with
Presbytery; For they intend as well a Reformation of the State, as of the
Church, i. e. of long Gowns into short Clokes, of Lawne Sleeves into fine
Shirts, of Meum and Tuum into Suum, of Godliness into Gain; And our
Copy-holds, if they once come to the question, whether they be as Antichristian
as the Churches Lands, into their own Purses: It is not a Reformation they
seek, but an Alteration; and that Alteration shall but make way for an
Alienation, To bring the Kings Crown under Christ's Scepter, which themselves
will manage, not for Christ, but against Christ; For his Kingdom is not of
this world.

We Independents seek only a Reformation, not an Alteration; we have yet so
much Reason, as to see, The further we swerve from our first Constitutions, the
nearer we hasten to Desolation; The further from our Fundamental Principles,
the nearer to our perpetual Ruin? It is so in the Church, it is so in the
State. I instance only in the State: The first Constitution, and Fundamental
Principle of this Kingdom is, There should be a King, and Subjects; That the
King should Rule, the Subjects should obey: He Rule according to Law, They obey
according to Conscience. That He should secure the Kingdom against Foreign
Enemies; That they should assist him therein; That both should conscientiously
intend the public Peace, and the Kingdoms happiness: we find all this done,
while we had but one King, and many Subjects; And we find all this undone, now
we have many Kings, and no Subjects: To regaine all, we would come to our first
Constitution, and live in subjection under that one whom God has made our
Superior, and not any longer in vassalage under many, whom our selves have
made.

A second or another first Constitution of this Kingdom, is, we should have
Parliaments; that those Parliaments should consist of three States, Lords
Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and the House of Commons; But one of these three,
the Lords Spiritual being found superfluous, we say of two States, the House
of Peers, and the House of Commons; The House of Commons to find out the
Grievances of the Kingdom, and to prepare Redresses of those Grievances for
the House of Peers, the House of Peers to present them to the King, and the
King to sign them with His Royal Fiat for Laws: All this has been done
while the House of Parliament prepared Laws for the King to confirm them; All
this has been undone, since the two Houses have made Laws for the King to
obey them: our Grievances were redressed before, They are increased now; we had
some Liberties then, and hope of all Liberties we could desire: we have no
Liberties now, nor hope of any; we had good Laws before, whereby we knew
sin; we have many sins now, yet know no Law: To regaine our Laws and
Liberties, we would come to our first Constitution, and have two Houses to
acknowledge one King above them, and not one King to acknowledge two Houses
above Him.

It may be you will say, Turpe est Doctori, cum Culpa redar guit ipsum, why
have I hither to took part with the Parliament against the King? with the
Parliament, I confess, I have, but not against the King: For when I first
entered into this Compact, by Protestation, by Vow, and Covenant, it was to
fetch the King up unto his Parliament, out of the hands of Evil Counselors;
That was the only pretended reason for the raising of all our Armies, save the
very last under Sir Thomas Fairfax; He was the first General, that ever
received Command to deny Quarter to any, even to the King himself: And this
was not disclosed until of late, else I had published it, and our resolution
in this point sooner.

But now it is known; and yet I still side with the Parliament? I confess I
do; but not as I did before; Before I did it sincerely; now I do it
politickly; The Parliaments Cause, Rebus sic stantibus, is a good Cause to live
in; For hereby I save mine own stake, and get a good share in other men's; But
now I am weary of it; For now I would manage such a Cause, as I might live and
dye in: live in with Profit, and aye in with Comfort: The course I have
hitherto taken, I profess, I have undertaken for mere gain; The course I
would now take, I profess, I would undertake for mere Godliness; I would not
at my Death renounce a wicked course, as Colonel Sandys did at Worcester, and
Major Abercromye in Buckinghamshire; For then it would be too late, because I
cannot go to Heaven without Repentance; and Repentance cannot be true which
has not this Ingredient, Do good, as well as that, Cease to do Evil: I must
receive the Kingdom of Heaven, The Gospel, into me, before I can hope to be
received into the Kingdom of Heaven, Glory. And you know; To the Poor is the
Gospel Preached; And though I am rich in substance, yet I am poor enough in
spirit, I thank God for it, and would you were so too, to receive the Gospel.

Sir, by this that has been said, you know the Resolution of our Party; There
wants nothing but the Kings offer to invite us, and ere long we intend to
invite Him to that offer, viz.

That we shall be obliged only to honest Conversation by the common Laws of
this Kingdom, and freed from any, and all Ecclesiastical Censures for point
of Religion.

This is all we desire; and if this be granted, we presently declare our selves
for the King, will join with Him, will fight for Him, and either end our
lives, or settle His Crown fast upon His Head, His Sword in His Hand, and
Himself in His Chair.

This we will do, maugre the opposition of all Presbyterians in great
Britain, and the whole World besides: we will make our Army equal with that
under Montrosse, who we hear is already on this side Tweed, with no fewer then
14000 Foot and Horse: The like Assistance he shall have from us, under the
Command of Cromwell, or whom else His Majesty will put in Chief. And let it be
tried then, whether any Parochial, Consistoriall, Provincial, or General
Classis of the Clero-Laicall-Presbytery, dare think to Depose. or whisper, to
Excommunicate the King or any of his Loyal Subjects.

And now, Sir, if you will go on in your Apostasy, Go and perish: If you will
return, Welcome and be safe; with them who say, GOD SAVE KING CHARLES. I leave
you to your Choice; but will be glad to embrace you in the arms of, Sir,

From our Winter-Quarter at Neuten-bushell, December: 14th. 1645. Your Worships
affectionate Kinsman and Servant.

FINIS.

