HYPOCRISY DISCOVERED In its NATURE and WORKINGS.

Delivered in several Sermons, By That faithful Minister of the Gospel, Mr
Cuthbert Sidenham, Late Teacher to a Church of Christ in Newcastle upon Tyne.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Rich. Tomlins, at the Sun and Bible in
Pye-Corner, 1654.

For the Honorable, Sir Arthur Hesilrig, Knight and Baronet.
Sir,
YOu that have so long professed the name of the Lord Jesus, and have been
honored to suffer for him in no ordinary trials, and been drawn out to great
employments, cannot but have met with various workings of your own heart in
these times, especially having gone both through good and evil report, all
which will discover much of that which is within a man to himself; this being
upon our spirits (with the more than ordinary respects you showed to this
precious servant of Christ, the Author of these Sermons) has drawn us out to
prefix your name to this work, as being willing to bear witness to the world
(though he be in his grave) how much he resented your favor and love toward
him. Sir, the matter of this Book you will find very searching, but Gold loses
nothing by the critical examination of the fire but its dross, which no real
Saint but will rejoice to part with. We question not but in the reading of it
you will find special advantages for your spiritual interest for the
teachings of the spirit of that God who has hitherto helped you, who was with
you in the field and covered your head in the day of battle, who made you a
real terror to the enemies of his Son Jesus in this Nation, and did by the
good hand of his providence bring you among us when his enemies were very high
and turbulent by your courage and faithfulness to calm and bring them under,
who also drew out your heart to so signal a proof of your real desire to
serve Jesus Christ every way, in being an Instrument to procure the three
years Commission for propagating the Gospel in these four Northern
Counties. These things we mention as that which has laid engagements upon our
hearts toward you; Oh, that you may yet go on and prosper, and do more
worthily for God and his people, that your enemies may be found liars, that
after your many trials God may clear up your integrity, that you may be as the
light of the morning, 2 Samuel 23.4. Sir, we have this only to beg of you, look
wholly to God in all, and walk humbly and close with him, and learn that of
the Apostle, he is only approved whom God approves, thus will you engage the
Saints more and more, and us to be

Yours in the service of the Gospel. Tho. Weld, Sam. Hamond, Tho. Trurin, Will.
Durant.


To all that profess the name of the Lord Jesus.
THe Apostle, speaking of the last days, calls them perilous times, or as the
word is, difficult times, not so much upon the account of persecution, as the
formality and hypocrisy of many that shall then profess the Gospel, and as
in other prophesies the fullest opening of the book is the event of providence
made out to Saints by the Spirit of God, so in this the sad influences that the
hypocrisy and formality of Professors has had upon the Saints in these last
days, make us to understand where the peril and difficulty lies; and the
reason why the Apostle should make it matter of prophecy and of imminent danger
and difficulty to the Saints who shall converse among them, how soon was Peter,
that great Apostle, leavened with hypocrisy, and Barnabas also carried away
with that dissimulation, (Gal. 2.12, 13.) though men otherwise full of the Holy
Ghost? And have not we ground to think that the sleeping of the foolish
virgins will be no small temptation to the wise to slumber also, as Christ has
prophesied in that Parable, Mat 25. How hard is it to touch pitch and not be
defiled? Oh that the danger of this, so clearly held out by Christ and his
Apostles, might leave a more powerful impression upon the hearts of the Saints
to be very circumspect where they are necessitated, to have their conversation
among the deceitful spirits of these times, we mean, men having the form of
godliness, but not the power of it; whoever of you are observers of your own
hearts, surely you have sometimes found with what insinuating power the
miscarriages of some eminent professors have crept into your hearts, and led
you away into diverse foolish lusts; Can you look back upon your walkings, for
these ten years past, without regret of soul to review the many secret
apostasies of your hearts from Christ? Does not so many of your unholy
walkings, as you may find in the searchings of your souls, put you upon more
through and strict examination, whether this root of bitterness do not spring
up and trouble you? It would stagger a man to consider what an aptness there
is in many professors most sinfully to comply with, if not fully to act the
degenerate miscarriages of this present evil world; should holy Baynes, or
Rogers, or Greenham arise from the dead, and take a view of some of the
now-professors of England, who pretend to far clearer discoveries of the
Gospel than they lived under; would not they bless the Lord, that their
portion was not cast to live in those wicked days? should they see the
loathsome fashions of many of you with powdered hair, painted faces, naked
breasts, and such fantastic garbes, that yet would go for choice Saints and
Christians, would not they mourn in secret over these abominations, and cry
out, oh the hypocrisy and deceitfulness of your spirits, and tell you, your
light is darkness, and that you are those which do hold the truth of God in
unrighteousness? Has not Satan hence taken his ground to oppose the truths of
Christ, and to speak evil of the good ways of God? Does not the Quakers
natural conscience (for that is his light and Christ within him) put him upon
laying aside the ordinances, and diverse other principles of the Gospel,
because he sees so many of you living so much in pride, and lusts of the flesh,
and walking according to the vanity of your minds, yet pleading for them under
a pretense of Gospell-liberty? Does not the Arminian make that one of his great
Arguments for the Apostasy of the Saints, because so many of you pretending to
be such, grow so loose and vain at last, and after you have pretended by the
knowledge of Christ to have escaped the pollutions of the world, are again
entangled therein and overcome, 2 Pet. 2.20. may he not be hardened by this
generation, in his opinion, if that no specificall difference betwixt temporary
and saving grace; because many under the bare authority of restraining grace
come up to as high conformity to the Gospel as you do, who yet would be taken
as the great professors of it? Do not you observe how many, alleging to be
scandalized by your walkings, are turned to embrace the gross Abomination of
Popery? And however the goodness of our God has been abundantly held forth in
continuing that glorious light of the Gospel which has, and does yet shine
among us, yet it is evident that the Lord has given up very many to walk
after their foolish hearts lusts, and to embrace delusions through their not
walking close with God under these discoveries; Oh at what a high rate do you
sin, that are professors, who live thus, and walk carnally under so holy a
Gospel as that of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ. Brethren, though we thus
speak, yet we may not but faithfully witness, to the praise of our blessed
Lord, that our lines are fallen into better places, where our souls are not
vexed with the beholding such folly and abominable wickedness in those that do
profess the Gospel; neither our Congregations pestered with such spots of
vanity: yet our dear Brother, the Author of these Sermons, doubtless not
without a secret impulse of the blessed Spirit, was moved to be so large in
opening the nature and workings of Hypocrisy; for Hypocrisy has its several
forms, and dresses, and may lie for a while undiscovered in the hearts and
duties of the most real Saints, but where it works most secretly and subtly
there it requires a more quick eye, and faithful hand to the anatomizing of
it, which we can without flatery say, God had eminently bestowed upon him, of
whom, to you that know him not, we shall give this brief testimony; He was
trained up under Religious education from his Childhood, which made him often
profess his jealousy of Professors, especially such who had the advantage of a
godly education, through the many experiences of the deceits of his own heart,
his special insight into the mysteries of Christ, as you may observe by his
Sermons upon 1 Timothy 3. ult. published by himself a little before his death;
his judicious and drawing discoveries of the riches of grace, which if the Lord
please we shall hereafter show to you, where you may see his tender bowels
toward the poorest souls under any of the workings of God, his unwearied
pains, even to the visible wasting of his own bodily strength in the work of
the Ministry, and his great care over the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had
made him overseer, all of these did bespeake him a vessel fitted for his
Masters use, and it is not unknown to those in chiefest places his otherwise
usefulness to the people of God in this Nation, thus did he serve his
generation with these many talents his God had furnished him with, and for
these few Sermons we can only say, you have them as they were taken from his
mouth in his ordinary Ministry, without any alteration, which is enough to
excise the often inculcated expressions you meet with in them, they were the
last of his public exercises among us, and now for the usefulness of them we
shall say:

First, That here you shall find out the tracings of the subtillest hypocrite
in all his forms and duties, even to his greatest pretense of communion with
God, for the devil has not had a stronger hold in these days for the carrying
on the most terrible actings of profaneness, as lying, cheating, pride, and
lust, and the like, than by a pretense to communion with God in light and love:
we do not without shame and grief of heart mention those things, but God will
have them searched out.

Secondly, Here thou will find, if a true Saint, how much of the Leven of
Hypocrisy is yet work^ng in thy own heart; and is not this a mercy indeed to
have these spreading iniquities discovered, as Psalm. 139.23. Try me, O God, and
know my heart: prove me, and examine my thoughts, and see if there be any way
of wickedness in me.

Thirdly, Here is a ground of establishment to the most discouraged real Saint
against the fears of hypocrisy, and how necessary is this for poor weak
souls who are (how sincere soever, yet) often tempted to conclude themselves
but very hypocrites; we have but one word more, and that is to those professors
that walk in the fellowship of the Gospel, to put them in mind that the
vessels of the Tabernacle were of pure gold, Exodus 25.29, 31, etc. the dishes,
spoons, bowls, candlesticks, tongues, snuffers, were all by Gods command of
pure gold; and then to read the proph^sie of Church Members in the last days,
Zech. 14.20, 21. The pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before
the Altar, yea, every pot in Jerusalem, and in Judah shall be holiness to the
Lord of Hosts; so will the Lord be served in the beauties of holiness, and his
Churches will be the praise of the whole earth.

T. W.

Hypocrisy discovered in its Nature and Workings.
SERMON I.
Luke 12. latter end of the first verse. Beware ye of the leaven of the
Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.


YOU shall find, in the former Chapter, Christ charging of the Pharisees for
their unsuitable actings unto the rule, notwithstanding all their profession,
and pronouncing woes against them of all sorts of people: And here he takes
occasion upon the address of people, to open those things further, and to
apply what he had said unto them; When he saw a multitude of people, many
people gathered together, insomuch that they trod one upon another, he began
to preach and expound unto them; and this is the first Lesson that he gave
them, an admonition that they should take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees,
which is hypocrisy.

Now by leaven here of the Pharisees, some take the doctrine of them to be
meant: but you know Christ tells them in another place ( Math. 23.2, 3.) they
sit in Moses chair, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do: Yet certainly it may be taken for their doctrine here
likewise, for they did manage their doctrine with hypocrisy, and did not
plainly and clearly open the nature of those things the Law spoke of. But
chiefly and especially is meant here by the leaven of them, i.e. those private
and particular doctrines that they gave out from their own Sect, from their
own particular judgment: For when they expounded the Law, so far as it referred
to Moses, the Lord Jesus gave them a warrant to hear them; but they have
private instructions, and practices that will be as leaven to corrupt you, if
you be not very exact. I need not to comment upon it, for my design is only to
open the nature of hypocrisy, and discover it to you both in the Churches of
Christ, and up and down the world. And I have chosen this example of Jesus
Christ: now it is mighty emphaticall to consider, who are the persons he picks
out, as who are the subjects of this admonition; The Pharisees, the strictest
Sect among the Jews, those that had the greatest name of Religion, that did
most exactly (outwardly) follow all the rules that the Law seems to command;
they were expounders of Moses Law (to give you but a short hint of their life
and actings) they gave themselves up wholly to it: so you shall find up and
down all the New Testament, they were sequestered persons from all sorts of
men, must not be so much as touched by any: For so it seems there when the
poor woman came to Christ, and touched the hemme of his garment, they wondered
that Christ would suffer himself to be touched by her being a sinner; they
were so exact, that they would have no legal pollution upon them, they would
not eat a bit of meat until they washed, especially at a Fast, then some of
them would even go to wash their whole bodies, for fear any pollution should
fall upon them; they were so exact, that they counted all men but themselves to
be sinners: these things you shall find up and down the Scriptures, I need not
name the places; they always were fasting twice a week, would not touch any
meat, so exact that they wore schedules about their arms and necks, whereon
the Law was written, the chiefest and most positive Commandments; so exact
were they, as to outward appearance humbling themselves on purpose, so that
they seemed to be most exact ( Paul was of the same Sect which he gloried of)
and yet the most hypocritical and unworthy generation of men that ever were,
and the greatest enemies of Christ that ever he had, and there is none he gave
that bitter language to as to them.

They did ever endeavor these two things:

First, To entrap and entangle him with with their questions, to make him
speak something contrary to the Law.

Or secondly, To blurr him if they could, to put a public blot upon him
before the people, and such a kind of calumny that they might all hate him;
therefore the greatest woes that Christ pronounces are against the Scribes and
Pharisees.

But to go no further, observe only this;

Obs. The more outwardly Religious men are, without spiritual Principles, the
more dangerous they are to converse withal: there is a leaven in them, there
are no such persons so dangerous to converse with the Saints as these, a man is
gone insensibly, and taken insensibly with these things before he knows where
he is; the authority of the person takes hold on his heart: Can such a person
be so and so? he is rather fit for heaven then earth, and so a man sucks in all
the venom of his spirit and opinions; and so it was with those that went about
to be false Apostles, in 2 Timothy 4 chap. they went about cunningly to deal with
men, and they gained exceedingly; and I am confident that in these latter days
more have been deceived by the seeming profession of men speaking great things,
and lifted up high in esteem then by any otherway, as they speak lies secretly
and with hypocrisy; all their actings, and all they did was but hypocrisy.

But the thing I shall come to, is to open hypocrisy: Now that which I shall
show in the general, is,

First, what hypocrisy is? what the nature of it is? 2. and the several sorts
of it. 3. how it acts? 4. what the characters of hypocrites are, how they pass
through all sorts of duties?

Hyprocrisie may be considered these two ways:

First, as opposed unto the reality of the work of the Gospel in a man's
heart, as opposed unto what is real in a man, that is hypocrisy, when I have an
appearance of what I have not; that is the first thing. I do, it may be,
conceive I have this and that which I have not, and so hypocrisy lies in a
defect of those Principles that should be in a man, it is opposed unto that
real work in a man's soul, when I act those things outwardly that I have no
real foundation for in my own heart, pray, and preach, and hear, and do all
duties that are suitable to the will of God, and no reality of these things in
my own heart, nothing within but the stirrings of my natural affections, and
the like; when as a man has not that clearness of judgment to discern his
own state, and has not that within him that is real.

Secondly, hypocrisy is opposed to that inward simplicity of heart and
intention in a man's spirit, when I do profess that which I do not intend,
that is hypocrisy; when I do that in the Gospel which my intentions are not
real in, and yet my intentions may be real in the things I do, but I have
not a reality in the principle: but this is the grossest sort of hypocrisy,
when it is opposed to that singleness of sincerity and intention; they are as
Stage Players, act the part of them they know they are not. A man does out of
show and vanity faigne himself to be that which he is not; this is the second
sort of hypocrisy, when I would be counted so for strictness and holiness
that I am not, and there is now in the very intention of my soul hypocrisy.
But hypocrisy may be without the intention, where there is not that spoken of
in the 1 Philip. 10. that you may be sincere, (...)
(...), which is a very large word, and signifies that clear judgment a man
should have, as if he were tried by the beams of the Sun. Now though there be
sincerity as to intention, yet there may be hypocrisy as to the defect of the
reality that should be in a man's soul.

So that from these two considerations in general, you may see that hypocrites
may be of those sorts.

First, a man may be an hypocrite and may not know it; he may go on in all
sorts of duties of Religion, and do all things exactly according to the letter
of the Law, and do it with integrity in his spirit, as he thinks, not knowing
that he does it out of any false intention, has not that cunningnesse to
deceive (as I shall show you by and by,) not so cunning a hypocrite as one who
deals from the inward wickedness of his heart, on purpose to deceive: but yet
he goes on, and never had the work of God upon his soul; he follows on the
outward Letter of the Law, goes on in a drudging way, he finds some natural
propensity in his spirit to it from ingenuity, and common principles which are
left in him by the Gospel: so a man may be long in duties, ( Paul was so) he
professes, that what he did was out of Ignorance, 1 Timothy 1.13. he did not know
he was an hypocrite, he had no design to deceive the world, and to deceive
himself, he thought he was an exact man, and carried it as clearly as could
be, he had no design but to propagate his own principles, and he was above all
the Pharisees, therefore he puts down himself as the most zealous of them, and
surely he had a good intention as to his own thoughts, as to design he was, as
it were, an innocent hypocrite. And surely so it was with the foolish Virgins,
Mat. 25. they went on smoothly a long time, and slumbred, and slept, and
thought themselves as pure Virgins as the wise until midnight came. And the
young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19. he came to Christ with a confidence in his
own intentions, that he had kept the Law, or else he would never have come to
Christ as he did, but yet he lacked something, he wanted the maine principle,
he wanted self-denial, never knew what it was to cast himself upon the Lord
Jesus purely: All his hypocrisy lay in that. If there be but a natural
ingenuity and simplicity, and it come under the Gospel, it will be mightily
improved by a man's following the outward Letter of it, he will be as
simple-hearted in all duties, as much as formerly he was by following the
common principles of honesty: therefore when the young man came to Christ,
there was a kind of affection in Jesus Christ to him, and a love to him, and
yet this was his hypocrisy; he did all those things, and had no intention at
all to deceive the world or himself by it, but he wanted the principle that
should have carried him on in all things: So that a man appears to be what he
is not, appears to be a Saint, and does duties well, but is not, this comes
from a want of principles, a defect in that; It is not my intention that makes
me a hypocrite before God, but if I go on in profession, and have not what
should make out that profession to be from God, it is hypocrisy. Only these
are the most to be pitied and bewailed that go innocently to hell; they think
they have grace, and no man in the world can persuade them to the contrary, and
as strong a faith as any in the world, and alas they have not; they think they
love Christ, and would do any thing for him, but they never had that love
flaming in them from the power of divine love, and spiritual
Gospell-principles.

Now the reasons why men go on thus are.

First, because they never had the sight of their own natures; they never were
under the through-convictions of their sinful state by nature, only bred up
fairly and ingenuously in the Gospel; God never showed them their own faces
in the glass of the Law, only they have looked on the Law with their own eye,
in their own prospect; it is impossible, if God showed a man his nature, he
should go without principles in his heart.

Secondly, It comes from a general view of the Gospel, merely from general
considerations of the Gospel, and outward rule, without any particular inward
sense of the spirit and frame that should be in him: men look upon the Gospel
as a History, and never come to see what spiritual frames should be in their
hearts to every duty.

Thirdly, Men do find some kind of comfort in those ways, and they have not
those checks of conscience that others have, because they are not so gross in
their actings, but go on smoothly, without questioning their own state, and
their spirits are pretty well composed.

Fourthly, The maine and the great reason is want of through-examination, want
of diving into the depths of the heart, not putting a man's self to it every
day, men take up merely the imitation, as it were, of others, and the shadow,
and the outward expression, and consider them no otherways, whereas they are
but shows; men never go no further in their own spirits than the outsides,
never search their hearts to lay them open before the Majesty and Authority of
a great God, and so they live and dye securely. And is not this a sad thing,
that a man should think he has grace, and have no intention at all to
deceive? That is, he has not that cunning and desperate frame, but only goes
on and trusts his own judgment, and trusts his own general apprehensions, and
hopes well of himself, and thinks surely he would do no wrong, do no evil,
and this man slips down, and away to the bottom of hell; here is a hypocrite,
though not a professed one, he is deceived, though he intend not to deceive,
for here is that I would have you look to.

It is not your thinking and saying you have grace, you may be hypocrites for
all that, if you are not what you appear to be: you are a hypocrite whatsoever
you seem to be, and whether you think so or no. God thinks so, and know's so,
and you will find it so one day, when you come to have the veil taken off from
your eyes; Paul wondered what he was a doing when God opened his eyes, what he
had been doing all this while. Therefore you had need be trying your hearts
every day, daily fearing your hearts, and jealous over your spirits, and
suspecting every motion, until you have tried your hearts by Law and Gospel,
yea, and waited upon the Spirit for a new trial.

Now there is a second sort, and they are such as are conscious to themselves
of their hypocrisy, that they are not yet sound in the maine, and yet go on in
their profession from their education, or for some design, and cannot leave
it, have many stirrings of God in their hearts under Ordinances from light
convictions of the Lord upon their Spirits. And this is exceeding common, many
go on a long time in profession and cannot leave it, but have many motions of
God in their souls, and many sharp reproves from God, and yet cannot see a
through work upon their hearts, yet go on and profess, and hope it may be, but
take themselves for Saints continually, and must have their names enrolled for
Saints in Churches, and yet have a jealousy of their own hypocrisy, and go on
so for many years under many regrets and wounds of spirit; they have many
twangs that pierce them sometimes, and yet the Conviction is not so strong as
to show them their miserable and vile estate, or to press them on to the
through work of the Gospel upon their hearts. And you shall find those
persons very high in prayer, and very able to speak well in their converse
with Saints: But they never met with God in duties, never had Gods assistance,
never found that spiritual strength; when they hear men Anatomising of
souls, they are only for keeping up the glorious outside, and the glory of
outward forms; they have been some ten or twenty years, and knew that Christ
never appeared to them, and yet they cannot leave off duties, conscience and
the outward rule lies upon them still: this is very common: And so it was with
Saul, he knew in his own heart that God had forsaken him, and yet he would be
doing something, he would have Samuel to pray for him, but God had left him: he
knew in his own conscience he was unsound, and had not done the will of God.
And so a man may go up and down a great while, having a conscience and ability
as to outward actings, and yet never be sound: God improving a natural light
so far as to outward actings, that he cannot choose but do those outward duties,
and yet he knows in his conscience that he never met with God, and if he do, it
is only to tell him thou art not sound, and sometimes he breaks out in
extravagancies; these can find nothing in their hearts, but conscience will be
pressing them on still to keep up the form. This is a miserable soul.
Certainly some men are self-condemned, and it is impossible if so be a man
have any stirrings of Conscience, and live under the Ministry of the Gospel,
but he will some time or other (if he be a hypocrite) have some discoveries of
his own heart, when he comes to prayer, there is not that working of a spirit
of Adoption; God may leave a man so in a general kind of way, that he may not
at all set out those convictions, but those that have their consciences
convinced of particular acts of sin, when they turn Professors they have often
times conviction, as to those acts, but let a man have never such a daily hint
that he is an hypocrite, yet it is no more to him to strike him off his bottom
and make him to be sound, no more than if a man had a daily sense of sin that
he cannot get mortified, and he finds convictions not so sharp but that he can
go under them and live, (though sometimes they are sore to him) and stop the
mouth of conscience. The Lords power comes not in with the Conviction; and
certainly those souls are mightily startled souls, have mighty sharp
convictions upon their spirits, but it is off again, and they carry a general
kind of fear in their own hearts, but still something or other there is, and
they must keep up: O take heed then.

Look to your own hearts, what secret hints you have of hypocrisy, you that
have lived long under the Gospel, been given much to duties, look to your own
hearts, how many twangs have you had in the night-season in your spirits? You
never met with God in the duty, though you prayed well, and read well in the
sight of men, though you have carried it fair up and down the world: what
inward regret have you had in your own spirits? This is a lamentable condition,
for a man to be so a hypocrite, that a man goes on under the conviction and
cannot get from it, and yet goes on in duties still. Now you have a third and
last sort, which is the grossest sort.

Thirdly and lastly, a designing hypocrite, one that takes up Religion for some
particular design, which he knows the design of in his own heart, as to get
honor, or profit, or the countenancing of some particular last, or whatever it
be; merely that a man may cover some secret lust, merely to follow the
opportunities and seasons of the world: this is the grossest of all:
State-hypocrites, as I may so call them, those that are only making use of the
name of Religion on purpose to deceive, and begin all their evil in the name
of God; these are the grossest sort that can be possibly. And there are
several sorts of these. Some that are more refined, as to be honored among
men, as Simon Magus, he would give any thing that he might have had the gift of
the Holy Ghost, because he thought it was a brave thing to do miracles that he
might be accounted of among men, therefore he was in the Gall of bitterness.

There are a more refined sort, which care not so much for outward kind of
profit or honor, but they do follow on duties and the ways of God, merely to
quiet their consciences upon some special guilt as to former actings, to cover
some kind of corruptions that they may be hushed, and be counted Saints besides:
That is a more spiritual way, for there be some so curious in a spiritual
hypocrisy that no man can find them out, they have some old blot upon their
consciences that they would take off by a new way of acting, take it off from
the sight of others, and be accounted as new: I only give you these in
general, they have some secret corruption that is their darling lust that they
would nourish. This is now to be a Stage Player indeed: when I know I am a
beggar, and yet shall put on the Robes of a Prince, when I know I have that
unsoundness in my heart, and yet would be accounted a sincere Saint, and would
do something that shall cover my corruption, and I would do duties because I
would get such an honor: That is a most shameful way: These are the wickedest
sorts of men in the world; certainly there is none have more shame in their
own souls than these, if they look into their own hearts.

I would therefore now apply this, and leave the rest for some other time.

Applic. I beseech ye therefore every one take in the exhortation of Jesus
Christ, take heed of this Leaven, this Hypocrisy, this wicked venomous poison
that lies in all sorts; most in Churches and Congregations where the Gospel is
Preached, we are leavened before we are aware, take all diligence and care, yet
it comes in: This is that which Christ did advise his Disciples of: take heed
of that above all things; but before I go on, I would leave these
Considerations with you, that you may not mistake.

First know, that there may be hypocrisy in the soul, and yet a man cannot be
called a Hypocrite; There is Hypocrisy in every state; you must not think
that if you find some Hypocrisy you are a Hypocrite: I speak this for the
comfort of poor Saints; if they find any deceit or cunning in their spirits in
their duties, then they say they are hypocrites; they are damned; no, I would
have you to know, that Hypocrisy lies very close in the soul of the best
Saints; but only when the strain of a man's spirit goes on so, then you had
need look to your selves when you find that Hypocrisy predominant.

Secondly, There may be great charges of hypocrisy as to particular actings,
(nay, whole actings may be in hypocrisy) yet not a Hypocrite. Gal. 2.13. as
Paul charged Peter with Hypocrisy, the whole act was done hypocritically, and
he brings in Barnabas as guilty with him, he did dissemble, so it may be with a
Saint; he may dissemble in an action, in a duty, and yet not be so in his whole
state. Therefore judge not of your selves by particular acts.

Thirdly, know that Hypocrisy is not only as to an outward duty, but in every
motion of your spirits you must look; it lies not only in gross designs to
advantage self, but it grows secretly, you know not how it touches upon every
part upon a sudden before you are aware of it; In your love to Christ, strange
Hypocrisy! In your very motion to Saints, and expressions, what wonderful
vailes of hypocrisy. You must therefore look exceeding narrowly, you must put
on Gospell-eyes to try hypocrisy in your own hearts. But I say however,
whatever you do in the world, and whatever you be, be not Hypocrites, Show your
selves to be what you are, let the sense of things so lie upon you, that you
may not deceive. I say not, that profane hearts should vent their profane
thoughts, but lie humbly before God in a deep sense of your deceitful hearts.
And make not the world believe you have such and such enjoyments, and sights of
Christ, yet have none.

Take the best of men in the world, we that preach to you, we are in some kind
Hypocrites: we think we are so and so, and speak nothing but from our own
experiences in our hearts; we may show a perfect rule, and yet be Hypocrites in
many things. Only there is the spiritual intention and reality to honor God,
which is the only comfort; but we are not fully what we appear to be, yet are
endeavoring and pressing on to be so, and that shows we are not hypocrites,
though, in some sense, every man may be called a hypocrite when he is not what
he should be.

Oh! take heed, take heed. But I say, be what the Gospel says, hold forth
what you are indeed unto the world. I had thought to have named several sorts
of persons, that had more need to look into their own hearts about hypocrisy.

First, those that are of popular spirits, that are to converse with many,
these had need look closely to their own spirits, for the most of our garbs
and expressions are but very seldom true, and real, but of the deep sense of
our duties to one another: Take heed therefore, lest we gather up a name of
hypocrisy: it is very hard to have much converse with the World, and not be
much in hypocrisy; without a man be much given up to reality of spirit: you
will find your tempers, in that regard, how they are: you had need have more
wariness in your own spirits.

Secondly, those that are of a natural cunningnesse, a natural craftiness of
spirit, they had need to take heed, especially when they come under the
Gospel, in opening their souls, and conversing with Saints; then that
natural cunningnesse will be mightily improved under the Gospel; if not
mighty wary it will come up to a spiritual hypocrisy, if a man have not an
exceeding care, and it is dangerous dealing with a person that is apt to
cunningnesse. There are exceeding many that are thus in these days.

Thirdly, Those had need to look to their own spirits, whose Religion begins
with some particular occasion in the world; where Religion begins with the
times, it is a thousand to one but such will prove hypocrites, and dangerous
ones too.

Fourthly, Those that are given to an outward strictness and severity to
external things, observance of outward actings, and circumstances of outward
forms, without they be very careful in them, for here lies hypocrisy, in
doing all duties, in being most exact in the outward form.

We shall come to open something hereafter, that if it please God all shall see
if they be hypocrites or no.

SERMON II. Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.
THis is one of the serious cautions of Jesus Christ to his own Disciples; and
to those that had grace; yet he bids them, and all that ever he met with, to
beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which he says was hypocrisy.

Now he calls the Doctrine of the Pharisees a Leaven.

First, Because of the spreading nature of it, there is nothing so spreading as
Leaven: put a little of it in, and it will go through the whole Lump.
Hypocrisy is the most spreading thing in the soul, and goes over all the
faculties, no faculty is free of it; a little Leaven, once it is engendered,
says the Apostle, will leaven the whole Lump, 1 Cor. 5.6. A little Hypocrisy
in a man's spirit it will soon spread (if it be countenanced) over his
affections and faculties; and then

Secondly, he compares hypocrisy to Leaven, because of its insensible way of
spreading, no man knows it; a man puts but a little Leaven and it gives a
Tincture of it presently, so it is in the heart; Hypocrisy works so
insensibly, so closely in a man's spirit, that if you be not exceeding wary and
careful, it will undo your whole soul; It will give you such a Tincture that
you will hardly be able to take off the savor of it without you have a mighty
power from heaven; therefore you had need beware of the Leaven of Hypocrisy.
That is only for the Word.

But you may remember I began last time to open the nature of Hypocrisy, and
showed you that it was opposed to two things.

First, Unto the Truth and Reality of things, as they lay in their own nature.

Secondly, Unto that simulation, that fainedness, unto that sincerity of
intention, faining what a man does.

As it signifies a faining in that,

First, It was opposed unto the truth of things; that is Hypocrisy that is not
according to the nature of things as they are; so he is a hypocrite that is not
reallie sound, though he may pretend he is so, and think he is so; for I
showed you that is the grosser sort of hypocrisy to be fained so; to feign my
self to be a holy person, to feign my self to be Saint when I am not, that is
the grosser sort of Hypocrisy; but there is Hypocrisy lies closer, when I
think I am a Saint and am not so, I am a hypocrite.

So it is opposed to a word in the Greek, oftentimes used and put for
sincerity, (...), and is a word that will express it exceeding clearly.

I shall only speak to the first sense at this time.

To open it more clearly to you.

First, This Hypocrisy is opposed to the truth, the reality, and clearenesse,
the sincerity and soundness of things in their being and nature. As you know
that is a false Jewel and Diamond that has not the proper nature and color
that belongs to it, it is counterfeit, it is not right, though I may think I
am enriched by it; that makes not the thing the truer for that, they are but
all counterfeit. I am not richer if I had many of those glittering Diamonds,
that is my mistake; so it is as to hypocrisy on this first consideration if
there be not a cleanness, a perfection in the kind. If I be not a Saint
reallie in my own Spirit, let my persuasions be what they will of my self, and
others persuasions be what they will be of me, yet I am a hypocrite in the eyes
of God. Let my graces be never so glittering and glorious in the sight of my
self and others, yet if they be not such as can be tried according to that
(...), that sincerity, such that may abide the judgment of the Sun: If they
cannot 'bide the pure sight of God, and his Glory, I shall be found to be
still a person that I am not, I shall be found in another condition.

This is that I would speak unto:

It is not my intention only that will make me a hypocrite, it makes me a
grosser, to feign and dissemble; But it is as well the one as the other: the
want of the real principle, the want of a sound work upon my heart.

Take in the first place this consideration:

First, I appear to my self and others to be what God will not own me to be
at the last day; so there is Hypocrisy in Fundamentals; I say I have grace,
and God says I have none. I say I believe, and God will never own my faith
when it comes to trial. I am as far to seek, and I am as much a Hypocrite,
(for I have a false faith, a false motion after God and Christ) as much as if I
did intend to palliate, to counterfeit my faith on purpose: A man may have the
complexion but not the constitution of a Saint. If I appear not really what I
am before God, I am a hypocrite. Therefore this I say is the great thing that
few in the world do know, that most of Professors are Hypocrites; they are not
thoroughly converted though they have (as they think) the glorious workings of
God upon them, yet if they be not true and real, and will go through the fire
of a divine eye, and the search of that Omnisciencie of the Lord, they will
never hold. I am an Hypocrite, though not so in intention: I am not so as to
the formality of Hypocrisy, but I am so really as to God; therefore consider
of it, consider it; for the most people think, if they have but a good honest
intention in what they do; they think they are perfectly free of all danger of
hypocrisy; they are safe and sound in Religion if they pray and do not
dissemble in their prayers: that is, that their hearts and their tongues do not
jar but do agree, they are then free from hypocrisy: but that is a miserable
mistake. For alas, it is all one whether or no you feign your selves to be
what you are not, or are not what you think yourselves to be; it is all one as
to the thing it self, you will find it so one day in your own spirits: when
you shall find all that ever you have done to be but glorious appearances; What
will it do you good when you can say only, I had a good intention, I thought I
prayed well, and had the strains of the Gospel in my own spirit, what will
this do you good if you be not found so? But this is that I say, that if I have
not the truth in me of what I do profess, though I do sincerely and honestly
profess what I think, it is all one (as to the nature of the thing) as if I
do feign what I am not: For I shall be as well undone by the one as by the
other, and I am not the person I think my self to be, nor others thinks to
be, if God thinks not me to be what I and others thinks me to be; and to what
end should we soulke up and down and not be what we are in our own hearts, but
delude our selves, and not deal faithfull^ with our own spirits.

As now take a Preacher of the Gospel, suppose I preach the Gospel; if I
preach any thing that is untruth, or a lie, though I do it with never so honest
a heart, I shall be damned for it: If I preach against Jesus Christ any thing
that will destroy the fundamentals of the Gospel, I shall be destroyed for all
that, though I be never so honest in my intention; For our intentions are but
natural and common: If I think I have grace, and a work of God upon my soul,
and yet have it not, it is all one as with those that know they have no work
of God and yet profess.

Secondly, there is hypocrisy seen in it likewise, because I take up things
in a general manner, and never try them, nor my own heart by them, that shows
my hypocrisy, though I think I am real in my intentions, I should try them
over and over again. But to make out this a little more clear to you.

Let us consider in the general the power that imagination has upon the
spirits of men: Take ^^y one that is thought to converse with the devil, and
trade with him upon promise of Gold, and Silver, and the like. The power of
imagination will work upon such a man that he will believe on the Devil, that
he has all the riches in the world, the gold of the Indies; this the very
power of imagination will do, he thinks he can want nothing, and yet so strong
is this power of imagination upon him all his days.

Do but take a man in a melancholy strain, he will think really he is what
he thinks any other man to be: If any man be taken in a fever, he will
believe he is so, he will sweat at it. If any one be thought to go mad, he will
be the same; It is the same in Religion; the fancy and imagination of a man
will work as strongly in Religion and the Gospell-perswasion as a melancholy
constitution: I will persuade my self to be in heaven, and see Angels and
glorious Saints, and be in the bosom of Christ, though I never heard his voice
to my own soul, and all this upon the power of imagination, it is so strong
upon our spirits; if there were no more but that, it were enough.

Secondly, in general know this, that you may see it by the contrary of
sincerity; you know that is said to be sincere in the proper sense of it that
is not mixed, that is without any mixture at all; as that is pure wine that is
not sophisticated by any brewing, that is sincere that is not mixed, that is
pure from the grape, shines in its own luster; we call that hypocritical that
is mixed, or has any thing to set it off but its own nature, these things that
come purely from it self; so it is in the soul of a man that is hypocritical
in his own spirit: that is not sincere that has a show of grace, and yet has
it not, that is hypocrisy; he has common and carnal principles, or, if you
will, common grace and carnal principles mixed together, it is ordinary in the
Gospel; man has his natural principles; and some additions of assistance and
power from God, and they are jumbled together, they are not sincere at all, but
hypocritical, nothing shines in its own nature; so it is with most men in the
world: there are other ingredients that are mixed with all their actings, there
is something mixed with it in the Principles, in the very first motions. And
certainly this is that which is suitable to this Text, where he says, Take heed
of the leaven of the Pharisees which is Hypocrisy. You must not think the
Pharisees did preach Hypocrisy, but only their doctrine tended to nothing else
but setting up an outward Religion, without any power, to lead men to holiness
in sincerity: and so they mixed their own interests with any thing of the
Gospel; you must not think they preached hypocrisy, no, they were wise men
and observant, but their doctrine did lead men always to nothing but outsides
of Religion: to be common Professors, and look after nothing at all but the
mere show of the Gospel and of the Law; the Doctrine it self was good, but
they mixed it with some other ends; they had a dash of their own (as I may
say) with what they said, they were never pure and sincere in their actings.
Therefore the same word that is put for sincerity is put for unleavened bread,
that is, pure bread that is made up without any leaven. Now if a soul be not
clear and sound in the principles of the Gospel, in the workings of it, he is
a hypocrite be he what he will.

There may be mixtures in second actings, but if there be mixtures in
principles, that is hypocrisy.

And upon this account all Professors that live under the Gospel, be they of
what height they will, they are Hypocrites, they never had a sound work of
God: if there be a mixture in the principles and the end: They are hypocrites
that never had a through work of God, and pure divine principles acting in
their souls: But have a mixture of other ends in their hearts, that do leaven
and spread through their whole principles, they are Hypocrites.

But for a sincere soul, in principles and actings, they have really unmixt
actings from heavenly and holy principles, to a holy, and spiritual, and
divine end.

How many Hypocrites shall we then find before we have done, if men will but
search their hearts?

But that men may be thus hypocrites, and think they have grace, and yet not
know so, do not believe they are such:

I will give you first some demonstrations.

Secondly, Show you that they may have some sincerity, and yet be hypocrites.

First, That men may be hypocrites, and yet not know it in their own spirits,
take these demonstrations.

First, From the general rule that all Divines give; That whatsoever grace is
in a Saint, the likeness and imitation of it may be in a Hypocrite, and he may
think he has it so; there is a faith in the Gospel like the faith of a true
believer* there is a joy in the Gospel like those that have seen the face of
God; there is a patience in the Gospel like that which comes to the perfect
submission to Gods will: and so I might go over all the rest. And so there is a
likeness of sincerity to that which is flowing out from a pure heavenly
spirit: For look whatsoever God has imprinted, that the Devil can paint; what
God leaves as a Character of the heart of a Saint, that the Devil may strive
to imitate, and from a compliance in a man's own temper form up the same, as
Children do make up Babies in imitation of children which are real: and those
that know not this know nothing.

But secondly, as another consideration and demonstration to make this out,
know, that all those things we call moral virtues, that were in heathens, that
is the very relics and remainders of pure nature that God has left in some
measure: those moral virtues are as much improved in the Gospel without
grace, as any other consideration, principle, or rule. I say, moral virtues,
as the Justice, Integrity, Patience, keeping of corruptions, and the evennesse
of actings unto a Rule, the same are improvable under the Gospel with more
advantage than by any other Rule.

Take Socrates and Seneca, two of the great paterns of morality that ever lived
in the Heathen world; had they been under the Law with Paul, and brought up
under the legal dispensations as Paul and the young man in the Gospel were,
Mat. 19. they would have as easily complied with that Rule, that is, been as
fair, as improved men as ever Paul, or as the young man, that came to Christ,
and said, he did never omit any of those things from his youth.

They did all that the light of nature did show them, and their consciences,
and Paul's conscience did not check him doubtless, as to his exact walking
according to the Rule of the Law: Now as the Law was a higher Rule than the
Light of Nature, because it was expressed and given more positively by God, and
some spiritual addition given to it being writtten by that finger of God; the
other had as it were the whole Copy. So Socrates and Seneca, had they been
under the Law, and brought up as well as Paul was, Pharisees, they would have
taken in as easily those things, and have brought up under it with as much
zeal, and largeness, and refinednesse of their natures as he.

And my reason is this; because outward Rules are as improvable by one as
another, according as a man is but under the knowledge of them; A man can as
well take in the sense of the one as of the other, while he is inured to them
he sees some conveniencie, some goodness in them; so that consider all th^se
things are improvable in the Gospel, and then you will see how nature may be
refined by the Gospel; and if the very mere light of nature imprinted, and
glimmerings in a man's conscience could learn a man so far, how would a man
come to be when he was under the Letter of the Law: and believe it was writ by
the finger of God; and then if a man should pass through the Law, and come to
the Gospel Letter, and believe in a common manner, that this (...) a more pure
and refined Rule, still (...) spirit goes on, and is more heig^^^^^ to a more
bright frame, that a m^^ thinks all these moral virtues even perfectly to be
graces: For a man acts but the same principles, the same faculties still in the
Gospel, only they are changed, transformed: But however there is enough in the
Gospel to suit all these principles, to refine them, and make them more
curious than ever they were by any other principle or Rule.

Thirdly, Add this, the voluntary agency and power of the spirit, and workings
of the Holy Ghost, who works as he pleases, and how he will, and is not bound
to work the uttermost of his strength upon a soul, but he may work upon
nature, and glance upon nature, and leave it still in its own condition, and
yet mightily improved as to those tastings and enlightnings, Heb. 6. there is
even in nature a kind of taste of Heaven and Grace, which will make a man
think he has the power of the world to come, as you have it in the (...) of
the Hebrews.

And, as I told you before, there are:

First, the same (...) that grace is sealed upon, as nature, the same
understanding, the same will.

Secondly, the same kind of motions, as I must know Christ, and will Christ,
and go out to Christ, and breathe after Christ, only they are; they have the
same motion as to will and desire, but not the same principles. And therefore
it is no wonder a man may be deceived in his own spirit, and thinks he knows
Christ, and believes on Christ, and has many motions of him, and all it may be
are of outward considerations of him: never has a pure light shining from
heaven upon his soul, so that, I say, it is a very easy thing to see how a
man can be a hypocrite and not know it: to consider what voluntary motions
there are of the Holy Ghost upon a man's spirit, yet not a saving work; for as
the Spirit blows upon whom he will, is not bound to convert you: so he may
present the outward species of Christ to you, and never change your will, nor
understanding, and yet a man may think he knows perfectly what is the nature of
the whole Gospel in his soul.

For a man has to be improved in the Gospel a rational understanding, the
Gospel can improve as well as any other Rule.

Secondly, There are those passionate love-expressions that will work mightily
upon the affections, as they are taken in with so much fullness and variety as
to think of Christ's dying, that was innocent, and out of love, if it were but
read in a History would work upon the affections, and yet leave nature as
nature; a man thinks he loves Christ, and may weep at the thoughts of Christ's
death, and yet be unsound for all this.

Fourthly, if you consider the variety of Gods workings upon souls in
conversion; how many ways he works, he may think he is perfectly converted,
and yet an unsound man for all this: Alas the ways of God are so mysterious it
is comapred to a new birth, Joh. 3. who knows how a child is borne in the womb?
A man must have a divine light in his soul to see through and through his
soul; Take a Saint himself in his clear light, he can hardly tell how to
discern into the variety of Gods workings: what has been the pure working of
God: where lies the Child; the newborn babe, as it were. It has come and
past through the many varieties of Nature and Grace; and then if I should add,
how apt men are to be persuaded of the goodness of their conditions, and not
know the badnesse of them, and how easily self-love will be trying to set off
what has but a shadow of Religion, with many other deceits: then you will
easily say, A man may be unsound and never know it in his own spirit for a long
while.

Secondly, A man may be sincere, and have honest intentions in all his duties
and actions, and yet be an hypocrite. And that it may be so, I shall
demonstrate it thus to you.

First, There is in some men such a moral, such a natural sincerity (as I may
so say) in their actings, that they are not disposed unto the contradicting of
their principles, and their actings, they are tempered within themselves; they
are not disposed to contradict their actings, so it is said of the sincerity of
Alimelech, as concerning Abraham's wife, he appealed to God in Genesis 20. in
the beginning, Says he, in the integrity of my heart, and innocence of my
hands have I done this: says God, I know thy integrity. Now there is such a
sincerity even in men that have not grace, that they would not do such a thing
if they knew it to be unjust, according to their Principles, they would not do
it for a world: or if they had taken up an opinion, they would not go against
their opinion, there is such a kind of sincerity. Now the same may be in the
Gospel; that is, I go on honestly as I think, able to preach, and pray, and I
have no kind of ill intention to deceive, only I have not a spiritual
principle to act me, there is my misery; I come not so much to be seen of men
as from the intention of my heart; but I come not to have Christ, or to meet
with Christ; so I am a hypocrite, because I come not from the maine principle.
Therefore first know this as a Rule, that you may see this clear: That
simplicity of intention cannot justify any acts of men that are bad, all will
grant that: for as it was with Pilate, he washed his hands, yet that did not
excuse him.

Secondly, My intentions in any action do not make a thing to be true or good
in it self at all; as if I have a Jewel to sell, my intention in the selling
it for a good one may deceive the buyer, it being counterfeit; no act can be
good without a good intention, but my good intention makes not the thing really
good in it self: if the thing in it self be not perfect and good, it is
hypocrisy.

Thirdly, know, that a mere good intention may proceed from the natural
constitution of a person, not from the goodness of his heart. It may be I am
not given so much to cunning and deceit as other men, but have a plain
natural constitution; but if it come to a particular, it may be I have as much
in my intention (if I were put to it) as others.

Fourthly, know this about intentions, and the sincerity of them: That
sincerity that will demonstrate a man to be a Saint, must flow from the pure
and even workings of principles toward their ends: sincerity must flow from
the even acting of faculties within toward their ends: I do not act sincerely
to God though I pray never so much in duties, if I have not a divine spiritual
spring of love to God, A heart impulsed, moved to God from the power of his own
spirit: If I have not graces acting together in a harmony (faith, and love, and
all other graces) purely and really working to God: For sincerity (as I may
say) is but the spiritual tune of the motions of all graces in a man's soul,
it is no more. But I will close up all, there are many things I should have
shown you.

But now for distinction sake, having laid down this: That a man may be a
hypocrite and not know it, think he has grace and has it not: I shall
therefore come and show you the several sorts of hypocrites; I will but name
them.

First, there is a mere formal hypocrite that insensibly drudges on in his
duties, prays, and hears, and comes to Church, and no more, and has no
inward power nor virtue in his own soul, nor is convinced of any thing to the
contrary; as Papists say over their beads whilst they are sleeping; I confess
every Formalist is a hypocrite, but there is a low sort of Formalist that
merely drudges, and that is all, there is something wanting within.

Secondly, there is a zealous hypocrite, and he seems to actuate his Form, a
fiery hypocrite, (as I may so say) one that you would think had life and soul
indeed, and follows on Religion to purpose, and yet it is but his passion and
humor, no grace at all: Some men have taken up an opinion, and are devoted to
a way, and their heat is so much as they follow it on with might and maine, and
spits in the faces of others besides: Such a hypocrite was Paul, as to
zeale-persecuting the Church, I followed them on, I dragged them to prison,
says he: so it is certain, there are some men have taken up an opinion some
way or other, and have no more Religion than the stones in the street; and that
they will follow with fire and sword, and think all Religion is lost if that
be lost, that is their end and Center; That is a zealous hypocrite, I call him
so, for he has nothing at all but that opinion; come to ask him of Faith, and
Christ, and the Work of God upon his soul, and he can tell you no more than a
Heathen: and commonly wherever you find so much zeal and fire there is
hypocrisy; for the fire of the Sanctuary will inflame a soul, there is that:
but it will not scorch the flesh, nor burn the heart; We have enough of those
zealots in our days, that without they have their own opinions maintained,
they do not mind Christ or the Gospel; nor observe how it will go with their
own immortal souls no more than if they were heathens.

Thirdly, There are confident and lofty hypocrites upon thi^ opinion: They are
full of persuasions of the love of God, and grace in their hearts, they have
lived under the bright sunshine of the Gospel, and never came to the truth of
the Gospel, never saw their own souls and hearts, never came to the furnace of
the Law and Gospel; they have met with some good notions of grace and mercy,
and apprehensions of Gods love and joys in their spirits, have had some little
twangs of conscience now and then, which have put them to seek after the best
kind of remedy, and of a sudden, are got to a great height in the apprehensions
of Gods love, those I call lofty, confident hypocrites: yet it is said in Job
8. the hope of the hypocrite shall perish; many souls have great flourishings,
mighty buddings, they think Summer is come and Winter is past, and no more but
an eternal spring in the souls; like the stony ground, they believed for a
time, and immediately received the word with joy.

Ob. How can they receive the Word with joy? That is strange that a man should
receive the Word with joy and wither presently.

Sol. Truly they had some workings on their souls, and pangs in their
consciences, they saw some sins, and had some fears, and lived where (it may
be) they had some sweet notions of the Gospel was, and they had a promise, and
took it in presently before ever they knew the nature of it, and rejoiced, and
were confident of their own estate, and of the love of God, so they go away
merry from Sermons, and duties, and nothing at all of true grace; this is the
highest judgment of God upon souls; in 2 These. 2.11. the Apostle speaks of
giving men up to strong delusions: Though it is taken for delusion of
doctrines, yet it may as well be taken for men's being given up to their own
strong persuasions of that they have. This is a strong delusion, saying, I have
seen heaven, and the face of Christ, and yet deluded in my own spirit. I will
add but one more.

Fourthly and lastly, A demure and stately hypocrite, this is the highest sort
of them: as upon this principle, one that will walk so exactly and curiously,
having conversed with all the notions and rules of the Gospel, that has
sprung up so curiously, and yet is choked with something at the bottom of his
own heart; he goes on with that strictness, that gravity in the Gospel, that
he condemns all others as unfit, as below him, as one above all others, he
has all kind of Artificial motions, one that has a pretty even temper in his
natural constitution; and what through restraining grace, and what with moral
considerations, and enlightnings of the Gospel, he has got some exact forms
of the Gospel; this man walks so strictly, so curiously, that none can
discover him: Such a hypocrite there is in the world. Look to it, this man
walks step by step, he walks so exactly that all the Saints may admire him:
so curiously that none can discover him: But for those glorious converses with
Christ, and through powerful workings he never knew them; he is the fairest to
look upon of all sorts of hypocrites: Now there be many things I should have
shown to you, how to discover those sorts of hypocrisy; As,

First, to show to you that of all sorts and strain, self is the bottom of
all they do, that is the secret of all their motions; and indeed self-love is
the ground of all hypocrisy; for it makes a man persuade himself he is that
which he is not, and feign himself to be what he knows he is not, self-love
is at the bottom: and that works at the heart secretly and closely; there be
two things I would have showed you about this acting of self. That

First, a man acts purely, and moves most strongly from self-love, and
selfe-considerations; and then,

Secondly, Selfe-satisfaction is the uttermost of the desires of the best sort
of hypocrites in the world.

Secondly know this likewise, (that you may discover such an hypocrisy in your
own hearts) that all such sorts of hypocrites, as are known to themselves,
cannot abide to be tried, to be unript, does not love launching and piercing,
he loves not to have his bowels turned up, he cannot endure to think to be put
to the uttermost of his own spirit, that is a perfect sign of such a
hypocrite; These things that go between the marrow and the bone, the soul and
the spirit, he cannot endure that: he would avoid the dints of the sharpest
Arrows in the Gospel, if possible. Look how much flinching you find in your
own spirits so much hypocrisy. A hypocrite cannot abide to be touched fully to
the quick, and laid open: to be ripped at the heart, to have the nail driven
into the vitals, which a gracious heart longs for.

Thirdly, There is ever some secret unmortified lusts under all those seeming
graces of a hypocrite; ever some secret unmortified lust, either pride,
passion, or covetousness, or concupiscence, something or other, which will,
and does break forth some time or other; and look to your selves, you that
have been ten or twenty years under the power of a lust, and it breaks forth
continually upon you: if you be not hypocrites, you are as nigh them as ever
was egg to egg, as to the likeness of them; you that have been known to be
what you are so many years together, I durst denounce such a man a hypocrite
that has lived so many years under a secret lust unmortified; what, is there
no power in Christ? have thou not kept thy lust close all this while? It may be
thou go to prayer afterward, and think that will make it up, but thy
prayer shall show thy hypocrisy more, seeing thy lusts live.

Fourthly and lastly, those are the highest hypocrites of this kind: They
secretly envy the brightness and glories of the gifts and graces of other
Saints that go beyond them; and that is the perfect Character of a hypocrite
where ever it is found, if that be not a hypocrite there is none in the world;
when a soul cannot abide to be outshined, it is a sign that a man never loved
grace for grace, for then he would love it where it is most pure, and shines
most gloriously, and this the Pharisees were vexed at, they hated Christ
perfectly, because he went beyond them, and was a conviction to them: these and
several other Characters I had thought to given you; but to satisfy some
souls that will be apt to say: every one will be a hypocrite if this be so, I
answer:

First, My design is to bid you beware of hypocrisy as Christ does: Try your
hearts, take not things up in ordinary and common ways, be not unbeleeving and
doubting, that is not the thing I would be at, it is not to scare you off the
Gospel; be curious and critical, be serious in the viewing of your own
hearts, and search to the bottom, and trust not your selves with feigned
enjoyments, I would not discourage the poorest looker after Christ for all the
world, only I would have all men to be pure in their spirits, and let every man
put himself to it; let a man have gold that has passed through the furnace;
let a man that will be rich be rich with those precious things that are of an
eternal nature.

Secondly, to answer that, you will find grace will lie but in a little room,
therefore I put you to it, true grace is like a Diamond, very little in bulk,
but of a high price, and mighty value; therefore I beseech you be through in
your own hearts, thou poor looker after Christ, Grace lies in a little room,
more may be in one motion than in all the acts of the world: you may have more
grace than the greatest and gloriousest Preacher of the Gospel, therefore try
thy soul, and be not discouraged though thou art not such a flourishing and
glorious professor as another, yet thou may be a greater Saint.

Thirdly, I would have none taken up with any outside or glorious forms in the
world, but be looking within what inward frames you have in all your duties;
no, I would have no soul taken up with any opinion, with any religion that is
external at all, but that carries out purely to heaven, as the very heart is
meeting with the Lord Jesus, and as he has a spirit acted in every word he
speaks in the Gospel, not to dant you from Religion, that is not my design,
but to keep you only from the leaven of the Pharisees; external dependencies,
that your souls may not be lost with the greatest misery to all eternity.

SERMON III. Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.
I Have endeavored to show you in general what Hypocrisy is, and the last
time gave you a hint of several sorts of hypocrites; for hypocrisy lies not
in one strain.

Now we will lay this down as a foundation, (which was named before) that look
as many sorts of tempers as there are, and humors, and constitutions of men,
and designs that men have in Religion, and as many ways as there are, so many
common workings as God may have upon men; so many sorts of hypocrites may you
have entering upon Religion on those grounds; for look as it is with grace,
where it works effectually, it changes not the faculties, nor constitutions:
A melancholy man is so still though he have grace, and so you shall find; his
actings will show something of his temper and nature, so as to hypocrisy and
demonstrations of hypocrisy, so many sorts of tempers as there are in the
world, when men enter on the ways of Godliness upon unsound grounds, not being
wrought upon thoroughly by God, so many sorts of hypocrites you will have. I
told you of four Sects the last time; now I shall go on and show you more.

Look as a man is by nature of a duller and heavier constitution, and has got
the outward form of Religion, he will be a mere formalist, drudging on in
duties, and no more: nothing of the spiritual nature of it, taking abundance
of pains without sense, go on in his ways, and his duties without any power
at all, and that was the mere formal hypocrite I told you of, he has had
some little touches upon his spirit that moves him, and together with education
has gone on as in a Tract.

If a man be of a hot temper and constitution, fiery in his nature, and enter
on Religion upon such common grounds and ordinary frames (as the most do) he
will be a zealous man, exceeding zealous: Some opinion or other, some
particular form his heart is most in, and he is the zealous hypocrite I spoke
of; he will stick to his opinion and hazard all, and never care for the other
part of Religion if they can but maintain that; so it is with many in these
times, never care how the work of God goes on in the world, or their own
souls, so they have their opinion. So if a man be of a facile and easy nature
to be persuaded, and enter upon Religion, he will easily conclude that all the
promises are his, Take every thing for granted in the Gospel, and apply it to
his own soul, as if he had a peculiar interest to all the promises, and so
grows in a confident secure frame, and that is the hypocrite I told you was
confident, that out of the easiness of his nature takes all things in the
Gospel as his own, though he never saw the need and want of them, and never
knew the worth of them; for I told you, that self-love is the ground of all
hypocrisy in a man's spirit: If a man can get any thing for himself, as
self-love acts, so a man gets into such and such a frame, as it was with a mad
man that sat at a Port, that when all the ships came by, said, this is mine,
this is mine: so does all men say, without either Religion, or the knowledge of
the nature of the promises of the Gospel, challenging them without a need of
them, or a knowledge of the glorious design of God in them.

Then again, if a man be of a more forward and daring spirit, and if he get
into a profession of Religion, he will prove a presumptuous hypocrite, to
presume exceedingly upon the Gospel, and the things of it; he will vent the
opinions he has taken into his consideration, and that he sees most suitable to
the world.

If a man be of a more grave and sober temper, and has got such a custom of
Religion and duties, and taken up the profession of it with a secret inward
desire of applause to be somewhat in the world, he will be most curiously exact
in all his frames, such a man will cut to a hair, and he will observe the least
thing in others that may be as a blot in them, and him I called a stately and
curious hypocrite, he will not be blamed in the world, that is all his design;
he will keep all plots and spots off him, if out of mistake he be wrung, he
will mend it next time; his name lies at the stake for it, and all his comforts
lies only in a fair handsome neat carriage in his duties to the Sons of men,
that he may be able to be blameless in his reputation in the world, and some
men have been so curious in their actings and observances, that they have
shamed many precious people; that was Paul's temper and care always, that he
might be without blame to the world; as to the Law he was blameless, Phil. 3.
and it is as great a thing as a man can speak, and doubtless the Pharisees
had a handsomnesse and neatness in all their observances, that they were very
much admired by the People: A strictness, that they looked at a Point, at a
Latchet, though the great and eternal things lay with no weight on their
spirits: such kind of hypocrites will go on smoothly in the world, that a man
shall admire them, and check his own heart, and say, I am a hypocrite,
certainly I never came up to those frames; This man dazels the eyes of men,
and all his design is to carry on a handsome garb, and go for somebody in the
world. Oh! this is that, that many in these times had need look to their own
hearts in; Tithe mint and cummin, and neglect the most weighty things of the
Gospel; they have handsome apparel without, but never look within to the
eternal workings of their poor souls, and that state that must be before God
for ever.

And again, If a man be of a crafty cunning temper, of a natural subtilty,
and he begin to profess the Gospel, he will play the part of a hypocrite to
purpose, he will shift at every turn, and change every time; he will not be
found at any time unsuitable, he will tell you he must change with providence;
he will be sure to manage all that natural subtilty in Religion to his own
design perfectly: and truly there are no persons so perfectly hypocrites as
these, that out of craftiness begin to be hypocrites; upon subtle principles
are privy to their own deceits, they are out of intention hypocrites, and they
know they can shift and comply with any occasion; there are thousands of these
hypocrites in these times in England, that conclude with the times, that make
use of the time and occasion, and have no more grace in them than Heathens. So
take it as to any other temper, whatever you will, if a man be not thoroughly
converted and enter upon Religion; look as his temper is naturally, so will
his hypocrisy be; and that I may go on a little clearer, take it now as to the
temper of fear on a man, and the workings of God upon him: If a man be apt to
fear, and God lay any thing upon a man's conscience, (for God sometimes keeps
such all their lifetime in fear) you shall find that there will abundance of
hypocrisy appear in those actings, and such a man shall be a terrified
hypocrite; he shall live under terrors, and make abundance of work through
his fears, [for fear may put a man exceedingly on to duties] and be but a
hypocrite all this while: Now of these there be two sorts that live under
terrors, and I will especially speak to these; for many think if they be
under trouble of conscience and terror, they are past the worst, and in the
best frame that can be: Therefore,

First, there are some that are but more generally touched with the sense of
some sin that God meets them with, and lays upon them, and at every turn
checks them for, and lets in glimpses of his wrath now and then upon his
conscience, and they get into a strange kind of temper, of complaining, and
whining, and whimpering in their own spirits, and go on in their duties, (for
they dare not but go to duties) but yet it does not work so much upon them as
to cry out with hideous noyses of damnation, yet are kept under fear, and
bondage of spirit, and cannot get out of it, and all their design is to whine
at it, and complain of it to others abroad: that as we say in grief, (to open
a man's mind is a mighty ease) so you shall find them open their hearts, and
say, they are under these and these sins, talking of their corruptions, telling
how they are under such trials, under such fears of their passions, and tell
you of hypocrisy, and thus they go from door to door, and from Professor to
Professor, and all to no purpose, for they never knew, nor never found the
weight and power of the Gospel lying upon their spirits, never see the depth
of a deceitful heart for all this; But only say, alas! I have such and such
corruptions, I am afraid of my estate and condition; and so take a pleasure in
their complaining. Now there are three ways wherein they show their hypocrisy.

First, By this way of complaining they think to get off from suspicion of
hypocrisy: Such Souls, such creatures are always complaining of their
conditions; and so they think to be free of hypocrisy by this kind of
whining, though they never knew what the hatred of sin was, never knew what it
was to be pierced through with the darts of the Gospel for sin.

Secondly, they think by this to get the pity and compassion of other Saints,
to pity and bemoane them, and we ought (say they) to speak a good word to
comfort them: Though Saints nor Angels cannot speak a good word to souls, yet
they look for it.

Thirdly, they show their hypocrisy by this, They look upon themselves by it
as poor in spirit, always in sense of sin, and under a sense of their lost
condition, and would have others think so too: there is a poor spirit,
nothing but poverty of spirit, never come to him but he has low esteem of
himself.

Fourthly, But the great strain of hypocrisy lies in this, they perfectly
rest in this strain of complaining, and never look after Christ, they get ease
by opening their minds, and if they can but get a good answer to quiet them for
the present, they go away content; I have abominated this frame of any frame in
Professors; A strange ugly whining frame of spirit constantly upon a soul,
which should not be upon a Professor but in the absolutest cases of necessity,
and extraordinary occasion, for he shows he has not been at Christ and opened
his condition to him, but he must have this and that outward help first, and if
he cannot help himself, then go to him. It is common, you shall find people
complaining and speaking strangely of their condition, and by a poor common
word speaking to them they go away content, though they never had the thoughts
of Christ in their hearts, many make a trade of it; you shall find an old
Professor say, I am of a strange passionate spirit, and have been so many
years, of a sullen, ugly, peevish spirit, that none can deal with me, I have
such and such a corruption, and I am afraid that I am a hypocrite. [Aye, so
thou may know thou art one.] They will complain, Oh! what a wicked wretch
am I; give him but one word of comfort in an ordinary manner, they are content,
though the corruption be lying still, be living in the heart still; I told you
the last time, I would pawn my life that he was a hypocrite that lived so long
time under the Gospel under the power of one corruption, having no power
against it, having no grace to balance his corruption, and though the
corruption might act, yet a soul might see there are other glorious graces
besides; and do you think, that complaining of your corruptions, can that
serve your turns? you will come to a Minister, or a serious Saint, and say,
thou art troubled for thy sin or corruption: Art thou troubled with thy
corruption? Then thy trouble would be known, the very bowels of thee would be
seen working out, one way or other; thou would never let Christ rest, but
get pardon, and power to kill thy corruption, and if it should break out, it
would be the constant shame of thy soul night and day before all the Saints;
Never tell me of Religion if it lies not in the vitals of men, and kills the
vital corruptions, and actuates the soul into the eternal workings. And a
man may be found to be a hypocrite for all these things: Art thou troubled with
a corruption and complainest of it, can thou be quiet with complaining? Can
any word comfort thee but the death of it, and the sense of the death of it
every day? Can any promises comfort thee, but as they tend directly to destroy
thy corruption? Is it possible if a soul have any reality of grace in his own
heart: I had rather [saies a gracious heart, says a poor sincere soule] go to
the funeral of that corruption, and see it buried, than be the greatest
Emperor of the world, or in the glorious frame in the world, be it Pride,
Passion, Lust, or whatever it be in a man's soul. But this is the misery of men
taken up with mere complainings: of all Professors this sort goes on most
cunningly, for we commonly judge of men by their sense and sight of sin, and
think they are in the most fundamental way of the Gospel; and they have the
root of the matter, and God has touched them indeed; and yet God has done
nothing for all this.

Secondly, there is another sort that lie under terrors sharply, flaming
terrors, and are scorched, in their consciences for some special sin; and
mighty violent in duty: they will run here and there, and say, I am damned, I
am damned, what shall I do, I am lost for ever, they will come with such
hideous noises and cries to men, and run any where, the flame is so hot; yet
all this while sin not discovered, nor the sense of Christ taken in upon the
souls of men.

Now know these two things:

First, That the greatest unbelief is hid under the greatest terrors.

Secondly, that the greatest hypocrisy is under the sights of sin, and
greatest terrors, [for a man will do any thing to avoid that] that if he be
mightily terrified he will be any thing, do any thing to take off that sin:
herein lies

First, the hypocrisy, that he does nothing but to ease himself, quiet his
conscience, and he lets sin alone: that he may but live quietly, he desires no
more.

So I have known some Professors that have been in mighty terrors for one
half year, and the other half year been as joyful as could be: Going to
others, saying, pity me, save me, do any thing with me and save me, and when
God has withdrawn the violence again from them, when any considerations have
come in, they have fallen to their old corruptions again.

Secondly, Their hypocrisy lies in this, they will snatch at any thing to
comfort them, take any hand as soon as Christ's. But a truly touched soul will
not be comforted; a poor soul indeed cannot be quieted or comforted by any
but Christ, or the manifestations of his love; but as for this terrified
hypocrite, he will snatch at any thing as soon as Christ; give him but a
Promise [though it no more concern his condition than if it were never named,
yet he will have it as if it had been made for him,] he will be sure to catch
at it, if you can divert his thoughts, it shall be as much to him as Christ's
blood: take off the strength of his terrors he is pleased. And the truth is,
most kind of hypocrites are under some kind of terrors or other; they would
never have such twangs of conscience as they have, but that they are under some
terrors of conscience from God upon their souls: But as for this kind of
hypocrite, he may be so carried on, that he may do all duties with the most
zeal and violence: he may pray with great passion, and bemoane his condition,
that it would make a man's heartake [if you could but hear him praying]
sometimes, if you could but be privy to his cryings, which sometimes he makes
loud ones, and every man may hear him; but still his conscience grows more
insensible and his heart hardened, and grows common to him at last. And such a
hypocrite will live in the fire, if he can but get off the violence of
terrors, his heart shall be as black as hell, with the very burnings of
corruption, and certainly that which the Apostle says of a conscience seared
with a hot Iron may refer exceeding much to this, that God may with terrors
sear up a man's heart, for the devil is the greatest hypocrite, and he lives
under the greatest terrors, the flame of wrath has hardened his heart
infinitely against God, that there can be no place of repentance; so these
hypocrites go on by degrees, and only in a general manner find the terrors
of God upon their consciences, and never see the nature of sin and vileness of
it to the soul. So that this I say, do not think, that because you are
troubled in your consciences, or under terrors, that you are free from
hypocrisy; nay, there is most hypocrisy there; plainness of heart is under
clear light, when a man is free from advantage of fear, or terror, and too
much comforts, then is the best time to try a man's heart.

Secondly, Take one in the second place as to Gods workings, one of a natural
capacity, that is, he is capable of understanding of things; he begins to
profess the Gospel, and comes under a kind of enlightening of God, God giving
a man [as he may] a common gift of grace by common notions of the Gospel, here
is one will come to be a most glorious hypocrite; I call a hypocrite, because
the fundamental work is not done, because he is not what he should be, nor
what he seems to be. Now as the former sort his conscience was enlightened with
flames, this man he is enlightened with more calm and sun-like beams; this
man can now see into the Rules of the Gospel, he can be able by degrees and
time to form and work in all the notions of the Gospel into his head, that
he now comes to be a profitable hypocrite unto others, comes to be able to
speak very great things of the Gospel, and can tell you as perfect truths as
any experienced Saint in the world can do; and especially if he have education,
and time, and acquaintance to communicate them to: he will come to be able to
delude any Saint in the world, for now he is not a mere outside man in sight,
but one that brings out of his treasury things new and old, that has got a
vein of discussing and speaking as real things as any man can speak in the
Gospel; how far may this man go? and yet here lies his hypocrisy.

First, All these things go no further than the head; they were never stamped
upon the heart, never upon the breast, they are Artificially formed in the
understanding, never come down to be imprinted in the soul, upon the will and
affections, never had those heavenly influences dropping in the favor, the
sweetness, the power, and the virtue of that knowledge, proportionably working
in their spirits: and there lies their hypocrisy, that all those things are
but artificially formed in the understanding.

Secondly, All that such a man does act in the expression of any knowledge he
has, it is with secret glory; he joys, he takes himself to be somewhat now,
and makes all these things to be his own, as though he received them from
Christ, he glories in them, there is all, shame him, there you make him
miserable, if you hit him there you cut upon his heart vein. And that is the
way of God commonly with those sorts, their parts die, and God withdraws by
degrees, and lets knowledge dye, letting corruption come in so much upon them
as they lose all at last. But it is wonderful to conceive how far these
convictions will carry a man, when he has a Candle lighted by God how far he
may walk in the Gospel; when God shall shine in (as it were) upon nature, how
it will appear before the Sons of men: It lies in the head, and self is
commonly advanced, not Jesus Christ; that Christ may have all the praise and
honor, as it is said in Job of the hypocrite, the heart of him is little
worth; he may have some fine parts and be ingenuous in his understanding, but
his heart is the worst, there is nothing but sin and self together, and inward
secret contradicting and working against God, and the power of Religion; so it
was with the foolish Virgins, they went on gloriously, but at last they said,
our Lamps are gone out, we have lost our light, we have slumbered and slept
away our time, we depended upon our gifts and endowments, and our fair actings
in the world, and our Lamps are gone out, and now we have nothing to show for
all our profession. I will a little set home this with a word or two of Use.

Use. First therefore, if this be so, that there may be so many sorts of
hypocrites and strains, I beseech you examine your own hearts, and put your
souls upon it, find out this Leaven; I told you why hypocrisy was called
Leaven, because of the spreading nature of it, none knows how it spreads;
Hypocrisy has many vizards, many ways, you may go on so fairly, and so
painted, that no man, nor your own hearts can discern you: But look
seriously, look every day what is within you, ask your own souls what is
within; bring your selves before a divine eye, look to every part, to every
motion, let nothing pass you without a divine and exact scrutiny, never be
quiet till you have get a through definition of your own estate, stand
Sentinel to your own hearts; say not, I am a Saint till you have found
clearly, both by Law and Gospel, till it be written with the beams of the
Sun upon your own hearts; Oh! I am afraid the most Professors will be found
hypocrites at the last day; that those that have the fairest faces to us will
have the foulest rippings up before the Lord; many that go so neately now will
have a black Character at last; Oh! for Christ to say, go you cursed, at the
last day, to a glorious Professor, what a word will that be? Appear to what
you are indeed, and strive to be what you should be; take not up ordinary and
common things in your own spirits; lay not the weight of God upon those things
that are not real, that are but mere gilt upon Copper, that will not endure;
men are apt to take themselves up with profession if they have but a fair
face, if they have but a handsome carriage in the world: Oh! that Christ would
have charity to you at the last day, as we must have now: Christ loves those
that are holy, and he loves to make them holy: He must judge you as you are, no
charity after the Gospel is past, therefore look to your own souls; there is
a day when every thing that is hid shall be revealed, there is no halting
before the Almighty, he has an eye on you: Christ will find you out in the
crowd of Men, Devils, and Angels, and pick you out with his eye, and say,
Friend, how came you hither? You never had the power of the work of God upon
your heart: do not think to deceive your own souls by these pretenses.

Object. But you will say, What shall I do then? You make all men hypocrites,
how shall I know whether I be a hypocrite yea or no?

I gave you three things the last time in the general to consider of:

First, I told you my design was to press you on to try your selves, and to
secure your own estates.

Secondly, Grace will lie in a little room, in a very little compass, it lies
not in the flaunting garbes and modes of the times, it is like a Diamond,
little, but of great prize.

Thirdly, I would have no man taken up with shows: It is not my design to make
you Hypocrites, but to discover Hypocrisy to you: Therefore look to your own
hearts that you be not Hypocrites. I would not discourage any poor soul that
is panting after Christ. Therefore

First, know in general, though thou may be no hypocrite, yet thou may
suspect thy self for hypocrisy every day, in every duty, though thou be
none so called, nor so accounted by God, yet thou must suspect thy self.

Secondly, know this in the general, Thou should not charge thy self to be
a Hypocrite for every sight of Hypocrisy: And the more spiritual you grow
under the Gospel, the more you will see of the deceitfulness of your heart
every day.

But I will give you these six Characters, that no hypocrite can ever have in
their hearts, nor attain to: and I hope some poor souls will be comforted,
and they are the poorest things you would think to flesh and blood in the
world: those things that a man would never imagine, especially those high-grown
men in Notion.

First, Can you hate sin as sin, that is, in its whole nature, in every
appearance of it, in its first motion, in the first hints of it, in the sins
that are most dear, that I took most pleasure in? Hypocrisy in its actings
toward sin picks and chooses here and there, it may be angry with some sin
that disturbes it, but it never hates it, no hypocrite can have a hatred of sin
as sin; hate the first of the first as it were, though it comes never so
glorious, never so set as it were, hates it as sin upon no other consideration;
not because it troubles my conscience, and brings me to hell and wrath, and
renders me unsuitable to my relations and designs in the world: He is a Saint,
look to it, the very Embryo of sin, the sincere soul hates, it hates it as
sin.

Secondly, No hypocrite can delight to be ashamed by God in his duties, in his
actings, lie under the shamings of God, and made purely nothing in its own eyes
and others, that the Hypocrite cannot do; and yet a poor simple sincere soul
can do it, a poor soul, that may be can hardly speak two words with sense,
and sutablenesse of expression, yet he can do it; he can delight as well to see
God shaming his soul, bringing him to nothing, humbling of him to the dust, as
if he were to be in the Arms of the Lord, taking pleasure in his humbling
acts; suppose God deny him any assistance in a duty, or in the opening of his
heart, that if he be in company, he is ashamed to look upon his own heart,
here the soul takes pleasure to be ashamed, no hypocrite can endure that, to
be ashamed in his actings and relations; for self-love is the principle of
hypocrisy in the heart of a hypocrite: He cannot endure to be out-shined, that
is the wicked frame of him; if a Saint go beyond him in grace, and communion
with God, he cannot endure it, and therefore cannot endure to be ashamed; Oh!
how do the Saints love to be laid low before God, that they may have the pure
glory of him shining upon their souls. Then

Thirdly, know this as a special one, No hypocrite can bless God, and love
him from his heart, when God smites him in his dearest enjoyments, or nearest
lusts, wherein he has delighted; take away his comforts, take away those
things he has enjoyed formerly, and he cannot love Christ, nor bless him in
his heart; strike him in any thing that the eye and heart of him has been
upon, he secretly hates Christ: Now a Saint can cling to Christ, love him
secretly in his own soul, though he seem to be as an enemy to him, he cannot
but love him for all this; no hypocrite can do this; take away what pleases his
nature, and he cannot love him. Try your hearts by these things.

Fourthly, know this, No hypocrite can love the person of the Lord Jesus
Christ, nor a Saint as a Saint, I put these both together; he cannot love the
person of the Lord Jesus, for he never had the glimpses of his glory on his
heart, he only loves to be pardoned, and have some comfort from him, but he
never finds his heart to work in love to the Lord Jesus; and have an union
with him, as the fundamental ground of all his comforts, for love you know it
longs for union: Nor he cannot love a Saint as a Saint purely: but a Saint so
tempered, so conditioned, he cannot love a poor saint, nor a weak Saint, he
cannot purely close with him, and have his bowels working toward him purely as
a Saint.

Fifthly, No hypocrite can go on in any spiritual work or service for Christ
with any contentment, with any pleasure, without sensible comforts, or outward
respects; pray observe; for if he want inward sensible comforts, yet the wind
of men will fill his sails; but a poor Saint can take pleasure in the mere
mention of Christ, in the poorest work of Christ, wherein he is least seen,
wherein he has hardly a name, only with shame and reflection: this will try a
man, if I had time to open it thoroughly.

Sixthly and lastly, No hypocrite in the world can long to be like Christ, as
to be respected by Christ, either as to inward comforts, or trade in the world.
Or thus, No hypocrite can love the holiness of Christ as the good things he
gets of Christ; he cannot abide to be out of his own form, and in the form
of the nature of the Lord Jesus Christ; but a Saint, if he have never so much
comfort and sweetness, and his soul always drawing honey, with marrow and
fatness, yet if he have not the likeness of Christ, and be like Christ, he is
not pleased; no hypocrite can love the holiness of the Lord Jesus Christ with
a pure love that may destroy his corruption, that may unbottome him, bring him
perfectly out of self, and transform him into that glorious Image.

Try your selves by all these things; I had thought to have shown you wherein
the strains of hypocrisy lie to all sorts of duties, and the spiritual
workings of it in the hearts of men, but I must leave that to some other time.

SERMON IV. Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.
I Have showed you in several exercises what the nature of hypocrisy is, and
have distinguished to you the several sorts of hypocrites under the Gospel:
showed you how cunningly and closely men may act, and yet still have this
leaven in them, passing through all their parts; there is some little thing or
other that is insensible to some men, known to others, whereby they are mistaken
and undone under all their profession.

I shall not be able to repeat any thing: but in the latter end of the last
Sermon I told you of Six things that no hypocrite could do, or attain unto:
and I will add but this one to all the rest.

Seventhly, No hypocrite in the world can desire Christ, that God might be
glorified in the utter shaming of himself, as to all privileges, and to all
enjoyments, and abatement of comforts to himself, pray observe it: this is
that which strikes at self-love perfectly, which is, as I told you, the
original of all hypocrisy in a man's spirit: and I speak this as a trial,
that is very close and narrow to the spirits of men, and likewise to
distinguish in this point between a Saint and a hypocrite.

For I will not go so high as some Christians have often said, and given it as
a Character of a gracious and blessed frame (but I will not go so high) that
they could be content to be damned: that I take is a passionate expression of
Christians not understanding. But as to all enjoyments, all things that
concern not purely the glory of God, and all privileges, and comforts of this
life, either inward or outward, that soul that is a Saint can say, he can be
really willing to part withal, that Christ may be all (if he be but himself,
and have a freedom from temptations, no hypocrite can say it, cut him in his
privileges and enjoyments, there he will fret: But for any Saint to be willing
to be damned for Christ, it is an expression that will never hold weight in the
Gospel, if it be considered.

For first, know this, I cannot desire that which is not Gods will to grant,
nor ought to desire it; it is a sin to desire any thing against Gods will: it
is not Gods will that a Saint should be damned.

Secondly, Damnation is not an immediate act of Gods Sovereignty, but of his
vindictive justice, for indeed, I am damned, because I have sinned, not because
God has willed that I should be in that state, for it follows only sin;
damnation, it does not follow immediately the sovereignty God, who chooses whom
he will, he calls one, rejects another, gives grace to one, leaves another in a
state of damnation: that is not immediately an act of Gods sovereignty, though
it be consequently.

Then again thirdly, it is against nature; God will never desire any thing of
any that is against the constitution of that nature which God has put in him:
that is, to be willing to be separated from God, God cannot command you, nor
give it as a rule to you to will it, that any of his Creatures should desire to
be separated from him. Therefore take it as a flashy expression of a Professor
to say, he can be willing to be damned; and I should suspect that souls truth
of grace that should say so, if I did not know the temper of that person; As
for those expressions of Paul, and Moses, and the like, pray consider of it,
and you will easily find the answer; it is not the meaning that they desired to
be separated from God, for Paul's case, and Moses case was about the People of
God; the Children of Israel they had sinned against God, and God was angry with
them, and would take the outward Ordinances from them, and cast them out of the
privilege of being a Church, (says Moses blot out me rather, let me rather
lose the privileges than they;) but to be desirous to be damned, none could do
it without sin: for it is to desire to be separated from the greatest good,
that I may be perpetually incapacious of serving the living God, or knowing any
thing of his love. Neither does God will it, nor lawfully may a Saint, a Saint
cannot will it, because it is against God, and for God to do it he cannot, for
it is against himself, but that only by the by.

But this is that I say, a Saint can be content and willing if God see it fit
to be abstracted from all privileges, from all enjoyments, from all those
things that are dear to him, if he knows it to be Gods will, and mind, and the
glory of God is concerned in it, from all selfe-willing, though he should never
enjoy any more comforts in the world; for here is self-denial: to be willing
to be abstracted from those things that hinder communion with God, to be
willing that God for the glorifying of his name should leave me in the dark so
long as I have but union with himself, is but only as to the convenience, and
the acting of that glorious love to my self, else it is unworthy for a Saint
to will such a thing. But I say, here is that a hypocrite cannot do, he cannot
be willing that God should shame him to glorify himself, he cannot desire to
be blasted in those things, those comforts which he most gloried in, he will
fret against God, he can never endure it. A Saint, like Jonah, may be pettish
for the present when the Gourd is gone, but he continues not so: But a
hypocrite let him be poor in the eyes of those Saints he converses withal,
and his heart will never submit to God. But I go on now, and come to show you
the strains of hypocrisy in those three things:

First, As to duties in general.

Secondly, In prayer in special.

Thirdly, In converses with Saints, and in the world; we will go as far as we
can at this present.

First, A Hypocrites acting as to duties in general; take all the
Commandments of God, and that in these ten particulars at least, I desire you
to observe them, and try your own spirits.

First, Every one that is an hypocrite has a byas in every duty, something
that turns him always; though he may seem to look at Christ, yet certainly
he looks another way; though he may seem to go to the promises, yet he has
another end than to be sanctified and made pure by them: there is never a
hypocrite in the world but he has such a byas, that cast him which way you
will, that shall lead him, either applause of men, or some secret corruption
that acts within him at the same time if he be faithful to his own heart: and
it is the end rules the action; what a man's aims are, that a man is in his
duties; if nothing but pure grace, and Christ, and glory will be of only
concernment, then it is a sign I am carried out by other principles than
hypocrites act from, but I shall know commonly this at the end, or beginning,
or at the first moving to a duty, or the turn of it what has been that which
carries me on, still there is a byas: after I have done, what is that which
poyses my spirit in the duty, or what moves me to it, or what is that I aim at
in it: If a man's aims in every duty be not primarily the glory of God,
secondarily to desire the enjoyment of God in a man's own heart, it is an
hypocritical act: O it is strange to see, when a man runs on a long time
fairly, evenly, as it were, when the byas comes to have his weight, then you
shall see him at length turn with the byas. As the strength of a man's hand in
throwing a bowl is so much, that there will be no sight at present of a byas,
but when it is set, and the strength of the hand off, then you shall see which
way it will turn: So you may try your own spirits; there is a thousand secret
kinds of shifts that pass up and down a man's spirit so insensibly in duties,
that none knows them but a man's own heart, if he be faithful; if a man be not
high in his aims, and high in his ends, all his duties are lost, they are to
no purpose at all.

Secondly, know this, that you may know a hypocrite in his duties, that he is
most forward and zealous in external duties, more than in internal.

For the opening of that, know there are two sorts of duties.

First, These that are purely the acts of the soul within a man, as
selfe-examination, and meditation, and inward humblings, and mournings of the
soul before God: they are perfectly the workings of the soul within from the
consideration of the things laid before them, as the object is, as the grounds
and reasons of mourning and rejoicing are, so those inward actings are: these
you shall find that a hypocrite seldom takes delight in, or is considerate
about.

Secondly, there is a second sort of duties, which I call external, and they
are of two sorts, and hypocrisy is seen in both: they are external both, but
the one is more public, the other more secret, as to preach or pray among
others, that is more public: Now you shall find a hypocrite is more forward,
more strict in those duties than in secret duties, more in the external than
in the internal. You shall find that hypocrisy it lies in this; first,

There will be a perfect carelessenesse as to these duties that are inward,
seldom examining and ripping up the heart: seldom going to God in the
humbling frame of a man's heart, studying the nature of humiliation, that
mourning and humbling of a man's soul in duty, and for duties, and as to
meditation, to meditate what is Christ, and what I have done against Christ
what is the frame of my own heart, very seldom any of those things at all: And
if it comes to a pinch the man is quiet, or at least he finds a convenience to
turn it off: If upon examination of his heart he finds not things so well as
he would, he will turn off them by some trick: whereas a gracious heart is
never well, never better than when he is ripping up all his bowels, than when
he is in soule-worke, when he can look within, there is his great and mighty
work he looks after: you shall very seldom find that the Closet-hypocrites if
they do these things, and make some trial of them, yet when they come to the
pinch they will have something to divert them from the strength of their
objections.

Secondly, And so now as to external duties, do but compare secret to
public, they are mightily taken with those duties that are most public, will
be mighty curious in them; but if you come to secret duties they slubber them
over, any thing will serve that; if they can but say they have been upon their
knees, or done a duty in their Closet, or in their Families, although no care
of the nature of those things. That is the second thing: and my Brethren, you
should fear and try your own hearts by it, if you have but any consideration,
look seriously into your own spirits what is that that takes you up most,
whether those things that are the immediate things of the soul, those duties
that do so purelie belong to the nature of your condition, those things that
are so within, that they can only be tried by your own spirits, and the spirit
of God in them, or whether you are more choice in externals.

Thirdly, know this as to duties in general, Hypocrites have their exceptions,
and limitations, they have their choice, they will pick and choose, have what is
most suitable to flesh and blood, and what is most suitable to their condition,
what is most plausible, those duties they will close in withal. But it is, my
Brethren, contrary to a Saint; indeed he knows there are the great things of
God that his heart is taken up with. But as David says, then shall I not be
ashamed when I have respect to all thy Commandments; a hypocrite will neglect
his duty if he finds it too redious, or if it be a hinderance to him in the
world, he loves not duty in it self, but he has his choice, and those that
are suitable and convenient, those he follows on; and this you will find to be a
close trial for the best sorts of them, you have some so zealous in some
duties, that you would think their souls were in them, but come to other
duties, they have no sense of them: for if I did love duty in it self, I would
not baulke any thing, be glad of every opportunity, there is Christ and heaven
in this as well as in the other; but few hypocrites ever look after this, they
will pick out duties suitable to the times, and suitable to their own humors,
and fit to the places they live in, but if they come to a duty that will put a
man to it, and wherein a man must be laid in the dust there will be a shrinking
of the soul of a hypocrite; pray consider of it, and apply those things home
to your own hearts; he that does not love every duty, that he knows to be a
duty, and would gladly do it with all his soul, and does not study to know his
duty, he is an hypocrite. Oh, to see some men, and some great Professors, how
fair they will be in some actings and duties, but come to others, they cannot
abide them, they cannot away with them, there are such winsings, such turnings
and deviations in their spirits.

Fourthly, know that hypocrites in their duties make a great deal ado about
little things, and neglect the greater and maine things, and this is one of the
great things Christ charge the Scribes and Pharisees withal, they make a
great deal of ado about little things that are in themselves fit to be done,
but neglect the greater and the more weighty and considerable things, so says
Christ, Mat. 23.16. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, that say,
if a man swear by the Temple it is nothing, but if he swear by the Gold of
the Temple he is a debtor, and Luke 11.14. You tithe mint and cummin, etc. Now
if you find you are curious in your own spirits about outward little things,
(suppose garments) and are not so curious about spiritual things, which should
be acted in a man's soul and spirit, it is a most dangerous sign of
hypocrisy, those things, says he, ought to be done; you ought to be exceeding
careful, even of tything mint and cummin, you ought to be careful how you
carry your selves in every thing in the world, but you ought not to have left
the other undone; to put weight upon this, and the strictness of the Gospel
upon this, and yet do far worse, never looking at the wickedness of your own
hearts within, and the envyings of your own soul, and passions, but you can
for a pin or a point be careful, this is hypocrisy, neglecting the great
things of the Gospel, these ought to be done, but the other ought not to be
undone. An hypocrite deals in small ware, as I may say, he takes care only for
a little outward concernments, and garb of Religion, that is all.

Fifthly, This is a discovery of a hypocrite as to duties in general, wherein
his hypocrisy is seen, that he never minds to get the spirit of a duty, or to
a duty, that is the holy blessed frame of it, but only cares how to act
handsomely and takingly in his duties abroad in the world, (for in truth there
is most of his actings abroad in the world) he cares not to get the frame and
the spirit of his duty, he only cares for a handsome deportment in it.

Now the frame of a duty in the general is thus, to get our hearts in a
posture fit for the nature of the duty we are about; for,

First, The frame of a duty, and the spirit of it, is to get your heart in a
preparation to meet with God, that is one thing which a hypocrite never looks
after; how shall I meet with God? What frame should I be in when I come to meet
with God? What should I meet with God about?

Secondly, The frame of a duty is to get the heart spiritually behaved before
God in a duty: truly few look after it. I wish that the best Saints did look
after it more, but a hypocrite never looks after it at all almost, a spiritual
behavior that lies in that inward proportion of a man's soul before God,
according as he is to act to God, or expect from God; if I go to God in a
mourning frame, to beg something from him, then can my soul behave it self in
that poor and low condition, as one that expects purelie that which I want
from heaven; I ought then to be mighty humble, and in a frame to get that of
God; if I come to rejoice and joy in God, then must I be in that frame that all
the faculties of my soul may rejoice in him, and be in a heavenly spiritual
tune, this should be the frame of my soul, that spiritual behavior which I
cannot tell how to express so well, as in that inward decorum, in that inward
proportion of a man's soul unto God, according to the nature of his duty. And
then

Thirdly, which a hypocrite never looks after, it is to have workings in them
suitable to expectation, and to what I would express to God, and expect from
God, which a hypocrite never has, those glorious desires and breathings in the
vigor of my soul carried out according to the weight and nature of things; so
that I say all those things show you what is the frame of a hypocrite in a
duty: If he can but carry it on handsomely, with quietness, and conveniencie,
and come off fairelie to his own conscience, and to Saints, he little minds
what his soul has been doing, what his heart has been acting all the while.
And then

Sixthly, Pray you observe this: That a hypocrite in the midst of all his
zeal, and glory of his duties, he is secretly weary of them: you shall find it
clear in your own spirits, if ever you have been convinced of the workings of
this sin in your souls, especially if they be duties that do not bring him in
present profit, some internal, or external things he wants. This is that
which God complains of in Malachy, They were weary of the Sabbath, when will
the Sabbath be over that we may go to our buying and selling? For the truth is,
a hypocrite is but a perfect slave and drudge to duties, he is hurried on
either by necessity within, or some lust or fear which moves him outwardly,
but he is weary, it is a burden to him, he has no freedom at all, for no
man can have a freedom that has not a principle; it is against his nature, he
is forced to it, he has weights hang upon him that moves him to it; but it is
not so with a gracious man: thy Commandments are not grievous, he can be
content to do all duties ever, for says David, How do I delight in thy Law, it
is my meditation day and night: but a hypocrite can be willing to be free, if
it were not on some other ground, he thinks them to be shackles of gold at the
best, no more: he cannot be without them, because of those things he lays
before him as his ground, and aim, and end: but he would be glad to be
handsomelie freed of them. Now with a Saint it is not so: his knees may fail,
and his hands hang down, but his heart never: he would do all Gods will, and he
is sorry he can do no more than he does, he is sorry the body should fail when
the spirit lives; a Saint seldom fails in his heart and will, for the most
part the will is present. I would do more, but I have a cloggy body, and I have
a nature which is contrary to it, but I have a real will. Now it is not so
with a hypocrite, he is secretly weary of his duties in the midst of all his
enjoyments.

Seventhly, pray take this along with you: That you have all his Religion in a
few duties, take him out of duties and he is a common man: this will be a
trial to your hearts if you put them to it seriously; take him out of prayer
and preaching (if he be one called to that work) there is all his Religion,
come to any dealing of corruption, there is his best part past, he is no more
religious than he is in these duties; whereas Religion is a life out of duties
as well as in duties, a man is every where going out after God, Religion will
move him and breath in him: but a hypocrite take him out of any duty he is
about, and you have no more Religion, he will be as vain and foolish
afterward as you can imagine; but if ever you would know a Saint, take him out
of his duties as well as in his duties; see how the fear of the Lord is upon
him in every way, in every walking, how the dread of the Almighty aws him; but
a hypocrite it is a wonder to see how flourishing he will be in duties; but
come and take him out of these, he knows in his conscience there is nothing
left, no power, only he was carried out to the duty by something that lay upon
him externallie: therefore lay this to heart.

Eighthly, all duties that hypocrites do are but the colorings of some
corruptions that they keep privately in their own hearts, that they may keep
them more undiscernable from the world, look to it; all their duties do but
cover lusts, do but nourish corruptions, they do pray, and hear, but it is to
keep in ambition, or pride, or lust, or whatsoever it be, that is all they do,
or to keep up a constant kind of correspondency with their relations: and this
advantage a hypocrite makes of his duties, that after he has done with duties,
he takes an advantage to act his corruptions; How many men they go to prayer,
if it be a fast day, they go to fast, and after they have done their duties,
they think they are secure, then they may to their lusts and the world again
more eagerly, they may then give themselves a little more way, they have been
so long in duties, and their hearts are now warm to their corruptions after
they have done their duties: Oh these are the secrets of some men's thoughts and
hearts; I heard of a known Professor in London, who would be all the morning
two hours in prayer, and then he would say, now let the Devil do his worst,
and then play all his rea^s; Oh, the damnable deceits that are in men's hearts,
as to deceits in that regard: and so a hypocrite if he can but shuffle off his
duty, thinks then he may act and speak more freely than if he had not done
his duty: this is a wicked strain of hypocrisy that is found in many men's
spirits. Then again,

Ninthly, herein lies the hypocrisy of men in duties, that they can be content
with the performance of the duty though they have not dealt with Christ in it,
and gotten something purely from him in it: And this, my Brethren, is a
certain vein of hypocrisy, and the common frame of hypocrites, they will be
upon their knees a long time together, and never look for one reception from
Christ, and go off their knees, though they have not had any discovery of God
unto their poor souls at all. A Saint, though he should pray like an Angel,
I mean, speak the most high and and glorious words in the world, and if he
should have all the whole world of Saints to applaud him in his duties, he
would hate himself, and abhor his duties and all, if he cannot meet with
Christ in them it is impossible he should be pleased, for his soul is set upon
it, and it is that which is the object, that which the soul has in his eye,
he cannot be without Christ; The power of a Command will force a hypocrite to
his duty, but the reallitie of the enjoyment is that which a Saint looks
after; If I have not gotten some love-token from the Lord Jesus, if my heart be
not in a spiritual frame through the operation of the spirit, and communion
with Christ, the soul is not satisfied; look to your souls what manner of
frames you have.

Tenthly and lastly, to add no more at this time; A Hypocrite never grows in
or by his duties at all, he is the same man he was to his corruptions and
enjoyments, he may grow more fluent in his expressions, manage them externally
more neatlie, have an easiness of utterance, and a frequencie, but he grows
not at all, as to inward spiritual enjoyments, his corruptions never dye, and
this is a sad symptom to many souls that have run a long time in duties, and
no body can perceive the least sensible growth in the world, nor they
themselves, though they have lived so long under the Gospel of the Lord Jesus
Christ, praying zealouslie with much heartinesse, one would think, and no
fruit, no corruptions mortified, there is no more inward apprehensions of
things, no more growth than if they had never begun the Gospel, now, I say,
that is hypocrisy.

Now some may say, what is it to grow in duties?

First, Then a man grows in and by duties, when a man is more endeared to the
spiritual nature of those things, his heart more affected with the heavenly
nature of what he is about.

Secondly, Then a man grows in and by duties, when the soul finds more
spiritual power to perform his duties, he goes on more easily, more
spirituallie, and more freely.

Thirdly, Then a man grows when a man is fitted by one duty to perform
another: when in one duty, I pray now, I can pray anon in my own heart, as to
the inward frame, I do not speak of the outward expression, for that will grow
by custom, but now I hear, and I can hear better the next time, be more open
to take in the things of God: he grows in it; so it is as to meditation and
self examination, when I can come and try my own heart now, and I can every
day get more spiritual insight into my own soul.

Fourthly and lastly, I grow in and by my duties, when as I get a daily life in
them, an addition, a vigor, and spirit, and life, that whereas I began with a
fainting spirit, and feeble knees, my heart now grows warmer every day, my
spirit grows stronger: and as a Child finds daily strength and vigor of
spirit, so I find a vigor in my spirit. A hypocrite runs his round, he grows
not at all, there is no spiritual motion in him, but just the same as to the
inward frame of his heart; though you and I may think he grows, yet he does
not grow, for all growth is by an addition to the same nature; if you should
see a heap of stones heaped up, you do not say it grows, it is not a growth,
but an adding stones to stones, it must be in the degrees, and spirit, and life
of the same nature, there lies growth.

I should now have come to the second thing, which is hypocrisy of men in
prayer, which is a thing especially to be discovered, for there is nothing a
hypocrite is more excellent in, than in prayer, and nothing he esteems more
than that; and there is nothing by which a hypocrite gets more esteem and a
better opinion in the world than by prayer, for it is a duty so much commended
in the Gospel, that all the worship of God is placed in it. My house shall be
called the house of prayer, it is made the Character of a Saint: behold he
prays; it is that which every Saint has need of every moment, and it is is
that the Saints are most in of any other duty in the world, and there is the
greatest excellency of a hypocrite of any thing, and to discover him there, you
would find him out to purpose; for a man in prayer, if he has got that
curiosity, as some have done, he speaks as if he were wrestling with the
Almighty, and as if he were prompted by some Evangelical spirit, and assisted
by a mighty spirit from above, that a man thinks he is a perfect Saint if he
have a mighty fluencie as to expression. I should in many particulars have
showed you the deceit of this.

But I will conclude all with a word or two of Use.

Use. First, to every soul to look to his own heart in his duties, there is
most hypocrisy in duties, more than in any other way of acting, there is the
closest hypocrisy in a man's duties that can be: there is his pride, and
selfe-ends acted to purpose, all other actings are but gross, a man may see
them easily, but as to duties they are carried so closely no man can know
them; Alas, if a man should be found in his Study always praying, who would
not think him an excellent Saint? yet he may be the perfectest hypocrite in
the world, nothing of God and Christ in his prayer, it is not the length or the
measure you must look after, nor how you have acted them, but how you are
moved and acted in them: Oh, my Brethren, most glorious Professors in duties
will be found another day in strange frames before God. We have preached in thy
name, O Lord, say they, so Lord we have prayed night and day, kept all meetings
in the Town or place where we lived, and been at so many fasts, and kept all
public days, and kept them closely: Yea soul, so thou may: but if you
have no more than that, depart from me, I know you not; you are no better, you
never minded me, you never had the frame of the Gospel in your own spirits,
you never knew what it was to be out of your duties, and have the workings of
my power in your hearts, you never knew what it was to deny your selves in
your duties, to be made nothing for my name and glory.

Secondly and lastly, I beseech you (my Brethren) be not content with any thing
but what is purely of God, what is a reality in the Gospel, pure realities.
Truly, my Brethren, the fairest faces will one day look like death when God
comes to view them; be more afraid in duties than in any other way, the most
spritefull men in duties, that we little think of, will be wrinckled like old
men one day upon a sudden when God comes to deal with them about the things of
the Gospel; be more afraid of your selves in duties than in any other way, for
though you are in the ways of God as to outward actings, yet you are under the
most spiritual temptations that can be, you will wonder to see one day how
many thousands will be placed at the left hand, that have passed through all
the forms of duties to the uttermost; therefore be not content with any thing,
but what you find perfectly real, bring it to the touchstone again, and
again, let it be written with the Sunbeams in your hearts; look to your
principles and ends, mind the vigor and strains of your spirits in duties,
observe at what rate you act, still be looking that way; Oh, to be a sound
Christian is a most glorious thing. Give me that soul that can say, I have
many things that I am ashamed of before God night and day, but I am sound, I am
real, though I were to be searched by God. I have that (...), that inward
sincerity, that is, not only a simplicity of spirit, but such a shining
judgment upon my own condition, that I know how I stand before God, and I know
whom I have believed, and how I have believed, and how I have prayed, and heard
in the Gospel; I know it, the divine spirit was in my bosom in such a place,
in such a corner, the Holy Ghost was in my spirit; I know that I was carried
out in such a duty merely by the life and strength of God, when I had no power,
when I was as weak as water: Oh! this would be a comfort indeed to a poor
soul. Many are glad to be lulled asleep, if they can but be said to be
religious and saints, and follow the things of the Gospel, they think they
are happy. No, soul: thou must have a principle in thy soul, and an eternal
work upon thee; thou must know what God is, and what Christ is, and what God
in Christ is, what it is to have thy corruptions struck at the heart, and be
laid as low as hell in thy own soul, before ever thou enjoy any thing of God
in thy own soul. And when thou have done so, thou must try all over again by
a spirit of fire and burning, and have not only thy own reason to witness, but
the Holy Ghost and Scriptures to witness to what is in thy heart, to what thy
conscience speaks, and all these things will be brought to you one day, though
you look slightly over them now.

Oh that men would be careful to avoid hypocrisy, this wicked leaven that is
in so many souls, to discern the leaven that works in every part so
invisibly: Beg of God a spirit of sincerity, to keep you from your own hearts,
beg of the Lord that he never would leave you under any slight ordinary common
workings of spirit, but put you to it every day, show you your own frames,
never be quiet until you find those real things, and then having a little
grace, yet if in sincerity, you will find your souls in a happy estate: Oh
you souls that have this mercy from God, bless him, and magnify him for
ever, you have the earnest of immortality in your own souls.

SERMON V.
LUKE 12.1. Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.


I Have in many exercises endeavored to open to you the nature of hypocrisy,
what kinds and sorts of hypocrites there are in the world; and the last time
you may remember we showed you the actings of hypocrisy, as to duties in
general, for hypocrisy is most acted in duties; a man may find out his own
deceits in many things more easily than in duties, for in duties there are
such fair colors, no man knows how to discover himself or others, if he be
not careful in his own heart.

But there were three things propounded at the latter end, which we could not
come to: not only as to duties in general;

But first the hypocrisy of men in prayer, and how a hypocrite is discovered
there.

Secondly, as to communion and converse with Saints and godly persons.

And thirdly, as to his carriage in the world, those three we would speak to
at this time.

First, Hypocrisy as to prayer, which is a duty that hypocrites most glory in
of any; that is the duty wherein Saints get so much of God, and have so much
experience of God in, it is a duty that is used as the common way to get
whatsoever a soul would have; let your requests be made known to God,
therefore there is no duty a hypocrite is more exact in than that, for he
imitates a Saint, that is the nature of a hypocrite that he imitates a Saint in
those duties he is most in, that he gets most by: none knows the incomes that
Saints have in the duty of prayer, how much of God is let into them, and how
much their souls are let out unto God, when none know it; it is a duty that
is of that request among those that are godly, that if a hypocrite be not good
at that, he is good at nothing, if he be not very curious there he will be of
little account; for it is common for one to desire to pray one for another, and
with one another, abundance of incomes come by it in a spiritual way; and
therefore that is the care of a hypocrite to do that well whatever he neglects,
and you shall find that as to their parts they never excel so much as in that
duty, wherein they excel and go beyond many Saints, as to the outward
performance of it. I shall show their hypocrisy therefore as to this.

And first in general, know that all that a hypocrite does, as to prayer, is
from an art of it, not from a spirit of it within him; some do distinguish it
thus, between a gift of prayer, and a grace of prayer; but I had rather take it
in these terms, for graces are gifts, and we must come and distinguish again
and again of common gifts, and spiritual gifts, and supernatural gifts, and
supernatural gifts of such a kind, etc. but this is clear, that all that ever
a hypocrite does in prayer is from an artificial motion in his spirit; my
meaning is thus: he has gotten by industry, by imitation, by converse, by
custom, and use in that duty, such an art, that there is nothing either
belongs to prayer, or the exact performance of it outwardly, but he has it
with more abundant curiosity than the best Saint has, that he strives to
perfect himself in exceedingly.

But take this for the general rule, that is rather from an art than from the
spirit prayer, and many times he gets the art so curiously, that he refreshes
many Saints and poor souls by it, though he have little of the sense of it on
his own heart; he acts that part so exactlie and carefully to the sight of
men, that it works much upon the affections of all that hear him, and converse
with him: This I speak now as to those that are most careful. Indeed there be
some sorts of hypocrites that are not so curious, that are rather for a mere
outward form, and are very dead in it, and make it up some other way, but take
hypocrisy in general, it is seen most in prayer.

In the second place, and more particularly to discover this hypocrisy to you
as to the art.

First, know, that the great study of a hypocrite is about his expressions more
than for any impressions, or any real sights of the nature of his condition or
estate; as if he were to mourn for sin, and open his own heart, he studies to
set it out in the most melting way, though his heart be not melted, or if he be
to set out the love of God, he will do it with the exactest expressions, but he
finds not the love of Christ constraining, and those expressions flowing from
that love in his heart.

Secondly, as to that, as his expressions, so his greatest enlargements in
that duty of prayer is when he is most in public, not so much in private and
secret dealings with his own heart; this is now to those that deal with
others, dead at home, enlarged abroad: Oh my Brethren, this is a most wicked
frame of hypocrisy in that duty, when men look at their words, not at their
hearts, to make their hearts speak within them; if I be enlarged in prayer
when I am with others, and dead when I am in private, it is a certain sign I
have nothing in my heart, only some outward gales fill my sails.

Thirdly, as to that know, there is a secret rejoicing in the very manner of
the expressions of a man's wants or of his Petitions, whatsoever he desires of
God, which none but those find that have to deal with those things in their
own hearts.

Fourthly, And which is as to expressions again, know that a hypocrite, in the
fourth place, is more troubled when he wants an enlargement as to expressions,
than when he wants a power of affection to duties, and to God, according to the
whole nature of what he is to act in that duty; a Saint can content himself
more with a sigh and a groan, than all the external enlargements that can be;
if a hypocrite can be enlarged as to gifts, he can easily dispense with some
deadness as to the frame of his own heart, pray you observe that; if you
cannot be in your closet as vehement in sighs and groans as if you were in
company with others, if your inward motions do not prompt you to as much
vehemency of soul to go out to God to beg what you want, and longings after
him to enjoy what he has communicable to your souls, when alone as well as
when before others, it is a dangerous symptom of hypocrisy, it is a sign
certainly that I have somewhat at the bottom that is not sound; therefore
consider that.

Secondly, As to particulars, know, that a hypocrite loves to lengthen out his
duties when he is to perform them before others, and to hurrie them over in
private; truly most Professors are as Papists in that, for they tell over
their private duties as so many beads, till they come to a public Mass, then
they are solemn, but there is nothing of Religion in all those things: if they
come to company, then they do every thing circumstantially, exactly, then they
lengthen them out according to time and every proportion, and this is a very
close discovery of hypocrisy in any soul, that is slight in private, and can
hurry over his duties there, yet can be mighty solemn when he is in a public
place; pray you consider that.

Thirdly, Take this for a Rule, a hypocrite both in private and public
prayers, he flags at last, this will come close to every ones heart, the longer
he prays the worse he is, the heart more dead, best at first, at the beginning
he is zealous: it may be sense of wants presses him, something holds him up,
but the longer he goes on the worse he is. But the contrary is now in a Saint,
the longer he is with God, the more his heart is with him, he grows in his
duties; though he be dead at first, he will be sure to get some review of God,
some quicknings, some enlivenings, though he have been long getting up his
heart to a duty, yet when once it is up, he finds the water flows in, the more
he is with God, the more he gets up his soul, the divine nature gets more
breath and strength by breathing after God, the longer it breaths the stronger
it breaths; a hypocrite has much ado to keep up his affections to the first
start, either privately, or publicly, hardly able to keep in his spirit, but
he is at a loss as to the divine nature of those things as to the glory of
them; therefore he is fain to pumpe and strain for expressions when his
affections are lost; this you will find as a perfect secret in your own hearts
that know and are privy to your own souls.

The Spirit may indeed withdraw sometimes, but takes it commonly and
ordinarily, the soul is never so moved as when it is touched in the heart; but
a hypocrite you shall have his duties done very slightly at the latter end,
when there should be most vigor, but you shall find the duties of Saints, when
once the soul begins to get heat and warmth with the love of Christ, and sense
of wants, and pure thoughts of the love of Jesus Christ, it can pray
everlastinglie, if he had a body fit to his soul he could be always praying;
and though a Saint may fail in expressions toward the latter end, yet his
affections are higher, he can hardly leave Christ, or the thoughts of him, he
would be always with him; there is abundance of ado to get up our hearts to
any frame, but when once it is up, and goes on with the strength of God, then
he finds new assistance every moment coming in; you shall have a hypocrite at
first, like a fountain, flowing in expressions, but he begins to grow low at
last, and just so much water let out as may maintain him for a while, and
turn his wheel and motion: but take a Saint, he is commonly best at last, as
to faith, and spiritual workings in his own heart; And this, my Brethren, will
a little inform you of the nature of hypocrisy as to prayer; for a hypocrite
acts for himself, and from self-strength, and any artificial motion, as a
Clock or so, grows slower at latter end, until it be woond up again; so it is
really with those men.

Fourthly, The hypocrisy of men in prayer is seen in this, that an hypocrite
never goes with an absolute present sense of his needs of assistance, or of
acceptance, either of the Spirits power, or of Christ's intercession; if he go
to Christ for strength, it is to employ it to his own ends. But, my Brethren,
there is no Saint goes to a duty ordinarily and commonly, but he goes with
that deep sense of that perfect need he has of the Holy Ghost to supply him,
he can do nothing; though he have parts, yet he sees he must have his
assistance, else he cannot act, and when he has acted, he sees as much need of
acceptance at last as of assistance at first. A hypocrite acts meerlie from his
own strength; in some extraordinary duty it may be he may cast up his eye,
and say, Lord carry me on in this extraordinary duty, but commonly in prayer
he never fees the need of the Holy Ghost to teach him how to pray, how to move
to God, and what to pray, and that Jesus Christ should hold out his mediation,
and stand between him and the Father to make a perfect atonement; there is
nothing will discover hypocrisy more than this, if you do but consider it
seriously; for there is no hypocrite that ever was unbottomed of himself, his
own strength, that ever saw the eternal constant need of Christ.

Fifthly, That I may not hold you long; a hypocrite in his duties he prays for
those things with seeming earnestness that he never prized, nor knew the worth
of; He prays for pardon, it may be elegantlie, with exceeding affections, as
to our hearing, but he never knew what it was to have pardon, to have divine
incomes in his heart; he prays for enjoyments of Christ, but yet he never knew
the worth of an enjoyment of Christ; and that is ^^scovered in these
particulars.

First, In that he can quiet himself with common hopes of him; I hope I shall
have him, though now I have him not, and so takes his duties instead of Christ
for present; he can pray for Christ, and yet content himself with a general
common apprehension that he will show himself good at last, though he have no
earnest pressing, nor longing for him at present.

Secondly, it is seen in this, that the soul secretly dislikes what he prays
for, as to those enjoyments, as to the power, and spirit, and life of them;
there is no hypocrite, but if he pray for to be transformed, to be made like
unto Christ, and be sanctified, but oh, he has a secret regret, when he comes
to the practical part of it, he could rather wish there were no such thing, or
he had stood upon his own bottom.

Thirdly, and especially it is seen in this, that those things are matter of
petition, but not any ground of endeavor after the enjoyment of them, they are
only the bare matter of Petition: I pray for them, and seek after them, but I
never endeavor for them; I pray for Christ, but never look after him; I pray
to have my sins mortified, but I never take the course to have that virtue, and
that power from Christ that may kill my corruptions: we only put it into our
prayers as complementall acts and no more. Those prayers that are not
accompanied with earnest hearty endeavors to get the things prayed for,
according to the rule propounded, are hypocritical. I pray I may be pardoned,
and I go on in sin, and never look after the mediation of the Lord Jesus, nor
study how these blessed conveyances are made over to my soul; Oh there is a
mighty strain as to that.

Sixthlie, A hypocrite in prayer calls God Father by his own spirit, not by the
spirit of adoption, pray you observe that; by his own spirit, for he has not
the spirit of prayer, which is the spirit of adoption; now that you may know
the spirit of prayer, what the meaning of that is, he calls God Father by his
own spirit, not by the spirit of adoption.

First, He goes not to God from an inward sense of fatherly love, there is no
hypocrite in the world but he has a secret inward frame of spirit, whereby he
looks upon God as an enemy, and judge to him in his greatest enlargements; he
goes not to God from the sense of fatherly love, though he may call God father
with abundance of variety in expression; pray you consider that: no man can
call God father but from the spirit of adoption, but from the sense of his love
shed abroad in his heart in prayer; I go to him, because his love as well as my
needs works me up to go to him, the tastes of the sweetness of that fatherly
love works up my heart, I cannot but go to him.

Secondly, this spirit of prayer lies in that sutablesse of a son-like
affection unto God: that sutablenesse of a son-like affection and nature unto
God, whereby I go as a Son unto a Father. Now that is certain, a hypocrite
has no relation to God, he never minds him as a father, he has not that
inward propensitie, that inward love and affection unto God as a Son, which
lies in the working of the heart inwardly unto God as unto a Father: as it is
in nature, so it is in grace; take a child, and tell him it is his Father, from
once he knows it is his Father, there will be an inward working toward him
more than to any person in the world, there will be some disposition in the
heart that will answer presently your representation of him as a Father; so it
is in the Gospel, when you go to the Father, there will be something that will
answer this; thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us: the soul
must cry Abba, Father: that no hypocrite can do in the world, he cannot act as
to a Father, but his own spirit prompts him: strength either of his
necessities, or the strength of his abilities carries him on.

Seventhly, know this as to a hypocrite in prayer: his heart fails him when
his enlargements fail him, which is contrary to a Saint, which is contrary to
the heart of a Saint; his heart though he can but groan, though he can but
chatter as a Crane, yet his heart is up, if he have any promise, there he
hangs, if he can have any thing to build up his soul in, it keeps up his
heart, any twig to hang on. But nothing but comforts and enlargements can keep
up the heart of a hypocrite; but a Saint from the inward working of the Spirit
can keep up, though he should have nothing else; but a hypocrite in duties, if
he should be but once denied enlargements, he is as dead as a stock. Take but a
Saint under a promise, though he wants enlargements, let God shame me as to
that, I have enough in the promise, and the inward groanings of my soul are
more to me than all enlargements.

Eighthly, take in this too: a hypocrite shows his hypocrisy in prayer, that
he makes his prayer his shift upon every turn, upon every occasion, it is his
prayer bears him up still. After that he has done any thing that is unsuitable
to the Gospel, if he can but go and power out a prayer he is well enough; his
prayer is that which charms him into quietness after guilt; by prayer he gets
his ease, and retires to it; if he have committed some fault in his ordinary
course of life as to his relations, if he can but go to prayer, there is all
his life and refuge, that is all; he licks himself whole by prayer: for it is
a duty man should go to God in, and a duty of drawing a soul to God, and
when I beg of God pardon, I am so quieted, though I never get the ground of
pardon, he cannot be quiet until he has been upon his knees, and then he is
well, this is his common shift: but a Saint can never be quiet, though he pray
night and day, until he has gotten in prayer Christ's blood, and have hold
upon Christ as the atonement and propitiation.

Ninthly, Then especially take in but this, that I may add no more upon this
head; if he can but ninthly get tears in prayer, then he is well, for he makes
his tears to wash away his guilt, and mingles his tears with Christ's blood;
if he can but blubber his cheeks in tears, oh how is he content? how much is
he satisfied? whereas tears are the most dangerous signs of Hypocrisy in the
world, if they be not the juice of a broken spirit, the droppings of a melted
heart, the dews of a soul that has been under the sights of love; there is
the most dangerous signs of hypocrisy that can be possible, that when a man's
prayers are bedewed with tears, then he is well, he has then no need of
Christ's blood, he mingles his tears with his sacrifices, and that is
satisfaction enough at present. You will in these things see enough of your
own hearts, if you have had any dealing with them.

Secondly, Now let us view a hypocrite as to his converse with Saints, his
communion with them, and see how we can trace him there.

First, In the general you must know, he is very careful to keep in, and keep
a correspondencie with Saints: else he would be a profane person, and would not
be respected by Saints, all his strivings are that he may keep in there, and
commonly he steals in so secretly, so closely among them, that none knows how
he is gotten in.

But you shall see his hypocrisy.

First, This is the hypocrisy of men as to converse Saints, that they have
inward prejudices against convincing walking Saints (if there be any such in
the world,) he will be sure to have his heart work secretly against them,
however he carry it to themselves, he has a secret inward regret against close
convincing walking Saints. I would I could speak that word so loud that it
might be understood, for it is hard to find such a Saint in the world; yet take
one that has a watchful and observant eye, he cares very little for his
company, but only for a design.

Secondly, as to converses with Saints, a hypocrite labors always to dress
himself so, that he may be very handsome when he goes abroad: that is his care
always, he cares not how he is at home, how careless, and neglective, how
slight in his duties, how unworthy in his actings, so he may but keep up a
fair correspondencie with those he is still abroad with; he will speak much
of heaven and Christ, tell you of repentance, and experiences abroad: but oh,
not a word of examining his own soul, or a word of God at home, and this is
the most wicked strain of hypocrisy that can be, for all his design is to
gather all the good thoughts of men up and down the world, keep himself so,
that if he should come to fall or falter (as he fears he shall) he might have
abundance of votes of good men for him.

Thirdly, as to converse with Saints, an hypocrite has an affected tone, or
garb, or carriage, whereby a man may be thought to be singular, to have
somewhat more than ordinary of mortification, or spiritual strains of glory:
this is as wicked a strain of hypocrisy as can be; Some men affect a
particular tone of language, or expression, some a whining expression, some so
neatly, and others so seriously, that they would be thought to be grave and
mighty sober men and Christians, and they have an affected tone of their own;
it is the vainest way of hypocrisy that can be to speak of divine things, as
if they were whining them out, and weeping them out, and speaking with such
gestures as may give the world too much ground to make Religion ridiculous,
whereas their natural language is not so, but they have affected such a way
and garb that they would be thought some body; and this, that in praying, and
preaching, and conversing with some persons, they would be thought to be them
alone that take in all the sense of things, and they have no more sense than
Posts.

Fourthly, which is a maine one, as to converse with Saints, a hypocrite has
his heart rising against a close, faithful, nipping reproof of other Saints.
Saul could never endure Samuel after he told him so faithfully about that
business of his Sacrifice, out of my sight, so you have many instances about
the Prophets and the Kings, you have some hypocrites carries it so cunningly,
that they will take a reproof very well, but hate you ever after, have an
evil eye upon you that you must keep out of the way of him; a hypocrite would
not have others know his distempers, he is afraid he shall here something he
knows he is guilty of, and he cannot abide that, he would be thought somewhat
by others, though he knows somewhat by himself: he is afraid he will be put to
it, which he cannot endure, to have his graces questioned; that is a perfect
sign of a hypocrite as any in the world; he would have all men take it for
granted: what, not I a Saint? that have been accounted a Professor so long,
and now be questioned for my graces? yea soul, and be damned for it too: thou
a soul that cannot endure to be reproved? I confess there be some ways of
reproof that would make a man hate reproof, when it is for things that are
common, when it is for poor and vain things, when done out of passion, and
not done with care and tenderness to a person, and with the weight of the
glory of God upon a man, it is hard for the best Saint to take a reproof so;
but when there is faithfulness, and realitie to men, dealing with their
souls, and purely touching their consciences, and risings of heart, and then
cannot endure reproof: I may say, if thou be not a hypocrite, or will prove
one, there is none in the world: it is a sign thou art divelish proud in thy
heart, and love a corruption, and have a lust thou art loath to part with,
and would gladly cover in thy own spirit, thou would live at large, and
not have thy heart known to thy self, nor others; thou would live at large,
thou love some corruption. A Saint desires to have corruption killed every
day: Oh that I did but know wherein the flaw lies of my graces, wherein the
mistake in my own spirit lies, he would be glad of it. Thou art a wicked
hypocrite that love not a scrious close reproof, though it cut thee at the
heart; and then I would say this: that it is the perfect character of a Saint,
if he can take in a reproof in the sharpest manner, from the sharpest tongue
in the world, if it discover his corruption, and strike at it, it is a sign a
man is out of love with his sins, and wants a way only to be rid of them, he is
glad when it is made odious to him by any body.

Fifthly, The strain of hypocrisy, as to communion, lies in this, that a
hypocrite does inwardly slight and contemn Saints below him, and envy Saints
above him, you will find it too true in the hearts of many: he sleights first
any that is below him, he has a poor and low esteem of them, he is a poor
ignorant fellow that understands not any thing of God, though it may be the
breathings of that poor soul unto God are far beyond his: he lives in
himself, and any that are below himself are under some reflections of the
inward workings of his own heart. Then he has a secret envy against them that
are above him, he lives so that he would always be at one stay and frame, he
cannot abide that any should attain more than himself, if they do, they are
proud, or high, or vain; and if they do not come up to him, he thinks him a
poor low professor, though his soul be groaning night and day after Christ.

Sixthlie, Another strain of hypocrisy is commonly in this, that a hypocrite
is mighty censorious and prying abroad into other men's faults, and slight and
careless for the seeing to his own heart for the same thing, or worse; this is
Christ's Charge to the Pharisees, Cast out the beam, thou hypocrite, out of
thine own eye before thou find fault with the mote in thy brothers; he has a
beam at home in his own eye, and he will not charge his own soul before God:
he can see a little thing in another, charge him with all unsutablesse: but to
his own conscience, though he fee many a desperate corrruption in his own
heart, he lets it alone, as if he never were the man guilty of them, Eagle-eyed
abroad, Owle-eyed at home; take heed of censuring, else you had need be very
through at home; it is a dangerous sign of hypocrisy if you be not curious at
home: if a man be thorough with his own spirit he may be thorough abroad,
Christ gives it himself as a sign of a perfect hypocrite; when a soul shall
see a mote in another eye, and leave a beam in his own.

Seventhly, Hypocrisy lies in this as to communion with Saints, that a
hypocrite cannot love Saints but of one size, one that agrees with him in his
own humor and opinion; That you will find in the New Testament, the Pharisees
could not endure them that were not of their own opinion, they would persecute
them to the death; so some men cannot endure any one, though never so much
grace and grace and godliness, if they be not of the same opinion, that is a
sign it is not for holiness or grace in any soul that you affect them.

In the eighth and last place, to add no more as to this, know as to converse
with Saints: Every hypocrite has his secret back door, and vein with carnal
professors, though he have communion with Saints now and then, and make that
his profession, yet he has his private haunts, where he shows himself in his
colors one way or other, some secret ways of iniquity he has with others,
though he professes to be in communion with Saints; that will appear, and does
appear often, for still his vein lies that way, his humor lies that way,
though his eye seems to be this way, there is the humor hid that way in the
man, and there will be as familiar embraces among the one as the other when it
comes, and as hearty kind of rejoycings with the one as with the other. A
secret wicked back door that they take, and they think there will be none to
tell: Now they will be telling of the greatest experiences, and anon in the
greatest wickednesses, at least countenancing of them. I would now come to the
third thing, wherein it is acted as to civil converses and I shall show you.

First, That a hypocrite can put on any face according to any persons or times
in the world; among Saints he will be a Saint, and comply with them, among
others be as suitable, he can take up any form, so Religion be that that may
cover all at last, for he fits his actings to his ends, which are various
according to several parties, and companies; and several Societies shall have
several actings, he will be zealous if the times will admit it, he will be hot
and violent, and if his company will not serve him to that, he will be as dull,
as heavy again, put on a sober temper, and wear gray hairs, be curious, and
critical, and serious in the Gospel; and this is very common, my Brethren,
and this is the politic hypocrite; there are hundreds of these in the world,
they swarm up and down England at this day, men that have no more Religion
than beasts, as to power and principles in their own spirits: turn every way,
and every where with the times.

Secondly, These men show their hypocrisy in this, they make Religion
subservient to every principle of men, and every design.

Thirdly, in converses about civil things, he will wipe his mouth at small and
little things. A little oath sometimes, a covert lies, speaks very demurely,
hardly gotten out, (as it were) he can pass it by as his common infirmity; if
he tell a little lie in a bargain, spare me in this, says he, to go to the
house of Rimmon, he will take his allowance though it be not given him.

Fourthly, He studies perfectly to please men, and he is troubled more when he
displeases men, than when he finds his heart unsuitable to God.

Fifthly, He cares to keep off scandal to his person more than guilt from his
conscience; no matter if he can keep off scandal though guilt lies fast.

Then sixthly and lastly, to say no more, such a hypocrite as this in all his
converses will meddle no more with Religion than may fit his Calling, and his
Relations. As the King of Navar said, he would launch no further into the deeps
than he might come in again with the same wind, no farther then sight of the
shore; so it is with hypocrites, if such a way of God be never so precious and
pure, I will not meddle with it, I must take care to my Family, not to my
soul; therefore the ways of Christ never come into countenance with such men
till it be countenanced by the world, you shall never have them hot and zealous
till the State have made way for them: you shall never have them care for
Religion, where the power must be practiced, till the State do it.

I have done in one word, that is, I beseech you take heed and beware of
hypocrisy, it is that which is in every duty, in every act you do, when you
act fairest you are in most danger of hypocrisy; when you think you are lying
in the dust, you are not free from the most desperate hypocrisy; when you
think you are weeping out your heart for sin, you are not free from that
damnable leaven of hypocrisy; when your contemplations are so high, as you
think you are abstracted from all the world, and the enjoyments of it, that
you imagine you are up in glory, yet you will see that hypocrisy is a secret
spirit that runs through all your actings, it is such a secret thing that it
will mingle with your best duties, and make you hypocrites in the very acting
of them: Oh! that men would but look to it, nothing like pureness, sincerity,
reality, inward integrity, to be true to God and my own conscience, to take my
heart every day and cut it in pieces by a spiritual inquisition, and daily
trial, nothing like it, after every duty to ask my soul what is done, after
every prayer to anatomize every petition again, and know how it was in the
frame and workings, and the answers and returns, and the blessed consequences
of it upon my heart, nothing will do well else; what a dissection will it be
when an old hypocrite will be opened? What that will be none knows yet, what a
consumed Lungs, and Liver, and Heart will there be, strangely eaten out, and
none knows how it comes; the substance of the body will be well liking, all the
flesh fast and sound, nothing but the vitals eaten, strangely eaten as with a
Moath and Canker; It will be so with you, I beseech you fear lest it grow upon
you: Beware of hypocrisy, look to it every day, for it is in every duty; and
above all things look after that clear, pure, sincere temperature, and
integrity of spirit in every duty, whereby you may walk with God.

SERMON VI.
LUKE 12.1. Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.


I Have showed you in several exercises what the characters of hypocrisy is,
what they are in many states, how to trace them in duties in general, in
prayer especially, in communion of Saints, in actings in the world, and civil
respects.

But you may remember, at the first opening of the words, I told you that there
were some sorts of hypocrites that did not so much discover themselves, but
must be discovered by the truths of the Gospel that are propounded, they are
not so conscientious of want of integrity, as they are wanting in principles;
those we have most endeavored to discover.

But in the second place I told you, some there are that know themselves to be
so, at least they have secret conscientious checks of conscience, yet go on in
profession: I would a little speak to them at present, and then make
application of the whole.

There are many, I say, that knows themselves to be unsound in their own
spirits and yet go on in profession, and that you would think strange; and it
is more strange to think a man should be a hypocrite and not know it: than
that a man should know his hypocrisy and yet go on in it.

I shall in the opening of this show you,

First, That it may be so, and that it is often so, and most hypocrites show
themselves to be so.

Secondly, I shall discover how it can be that they can go on in profession so
easily and freely as they do.

Thirdly, Wherein their hypocrisy still lies.

First, That it may be so, and that they do go on so, I shall make it clear in
these particulars; and I beseech you observe.

First, Take the common principle of a natural conscience, which is
enlightened, (for every hypocrite has an enlightened conscience) it is not so
dull as it is in other men, unless it be after a long time of hypocrisy; but
the natural conscience of a man will tell him thus, that this is not right,
you do not this according to this rule, for there is a light left in a man's
conscience till God give a man over to blindness and darkness, there is is a
light will always give a man a check without there be some eminent thing to
silence conscience at the present, as it was with the Heathens in the second of
the Romans, their consciences did naturally accuse, and excuse, them upon the
common principle of that light of nature imprinted on them, this is not just,
this is not suitable; though they had not such written rules before them, yet
there were such dictates suitable to the impression that God left upon their
natural consciences, much more an hypocrite, an enlightened hypocrite under
the Gospel; but a natural conscience will tell a man really, and check him in
a duty, and say, this never came from the mover, this motion of yours did not
run freely in your spirits, this prayer was but pumpt, it comes not from the
fountain, you had some by-end or other; did you not aim at this or that, some
applause or comfort to your selves, never minded Christ? Conscience will speak
if you be not judicially hardened: it will speak very loud to a man, at least
it will give a man such checks as a man shall consider, and by the custom of
it conclude, that it is thus and thus with him: For look as it is with the
Saints under full light, and full evidence, so it is with a hypocrite under the
enlightenings of his conscience: says Paul, I have lived in all good
conscience unto this day, that is, walked according to the principles of reason
and Religion, according to the light I had, lived in all good conscience unto
this day, never strained my conscience.

Now it is impossible for a man under enlightening (if he have not a mighty
secure frame of spirit, or wonderful dexterity of coloring his heart) but
natural conscience will reflect upon him, and say, this was not intended right
though the action was done, this was not so spiritual, nor so firmly acted
before God; you know you had your intention besides the rule. But then

Secondly, Take such a conscience under the Ministry of the Gospel, where
there are Characters given on both sides, where hearts are dealt withal
seriously, and with abundance of clearenesse, where the design is to
anatomize the spirit, to give characters of a Saint, and give distinctions
between common graces, and those graces that are purely sanctifying, changing
and transforming the soul, and those that are common, and work nor the image
of God in the soul, if you have any light (as hypocrites have abundance of
light, otherwise they could never play their tricks so as they do) it is
impossible but the heart should say, this is not right, I find not this right
in my own spirit; it is impossible they should lie under these things and have
no convictions, no checks secretly that he is truly such an one.

Thirdly, He may by reflecting upon himself know it by his getting in his
duties, if he had nothing but that which he gets in duties, when he hears how
Saints get communion with God in duties, how their souls are taken up with
Christ, what glorious enjoyments they have of God, in Prayer, and Sacraments,
what glorious frames they find upon their spirits when they have communion, he
knows he can hardly get from one duty to another; the truth is, a hypocrite is
the poorest, miserablest soul in the world: he never has any thing but what
he gets from hand to mouth, when he comes to dye he is a beggar, nothing at all
to live on, and he knows he never met with Christ so as to humble him and to
lay him low, he knows when he hears other Saints speak of the Gospel, and
the sweetness they have had in the sights of Christ, pardoning and applying
his love to them: he knows he has not these things; when he comes to action he
is as dead, and as low as may be; and as I told you, he is poorest and worst at
last.

Fourthlie, God delights to discover a hypocrite, he delights in that
exceedingly, and commonly does it, and lays it upon a man closely and
wonderfully by wonderful flashes of spirit, and God delights to do it.

First, Because it is a secret that none can find out but himself, therefore
he delights to anatomize a wicked, cunning, deceitful heart.

Secondly, God he delights to do it, because he loves to put a special mark
upon them of all persons in the world, those that have deceived others shall
deceive themselves, he put a mark upon the first hypocrite in the world that
ever was, that he changed his countenance, so that if you had no more, take
them altogether and you shall find, that a man may very well be a hypocrite,
and know himself to be so, and yet go one; nay, it is very hard for a man to
be long a hypocrite under the Gospel but he must lie under the checks of it.
But

Secondly, you will say, how can this be? How can he continue in Congregations,
in Churches? how can he continue all this while and not be terrified, and not
leave off all profession? My Brethren,

In the first place, pray take in these things, know it is the most deluding
sin in the world, the most pleasant sin in the world to a man, as men love by
Art to imitate nature, they are mighty pleased with it to represent Nature in
Art, how men give up themselves and their studies, and are pleased with it;
there is nothing more pleasing to a man as hypocrisy is, that he can turn
himself at any time here and there, and evade all things that are laid upon him
by the Gospel. (It is just as you see with those that are your thieves or
cut-purses, that have a curious art and dexterity to do it; they will take a
man's purse out of his pocket so exactly, that he cannot know it is done, but
they are gone, and when they come together at night, they rejoice and brag who
has done the best feats,) so hypocrites cannot but know in their natural
consciences it is against the rule, but there is abundance of pleasure in it to
cheat themselves, and cheat others, till God work mightily upon them: for to
imitate a Saint in every thing, and do it exactly, pleases a hypocrite, that he
can delude others: when he has been in prayer, cosened and deluded the best
sort of men in the world, as I have heard some say, they could delude all the
Saints in the world, for that is pleasing to a man that nourishes his
self-love, and that does carry him on to act, so as to be well thought of by
others, it shows a man an artificial man that can thus and thus move up and
down the world, and none see him, or take notice of him, all think him a
blessed Saint; I am confident there is no sin so pleasing to a soul as
hypocrisy is, for it will have so many varieties of Artificial motions laid
before it to act by, that a man is not tied to one or the other, but still acted
in variety, and the sense of divine things is not on his heart at all, as I
shall show you in the second place.

Secondly, he may go on in profession though he know himself to be so; he may
go on, because he knows not the nature and vileness of his sin at all, only
sees he is not as he should be, and it is the same with other sins; he may lie
long under a sin, so long as Conscience is not pressed on with an unresistible
conviction, only a general cold conviction is upon him; he sees that he has
done so and so, and he is so and so, but there is not any thing of the power of
conviction upon his soul, for then a soul should not be able to stand under
it, but cry out he cannot endure it; but commonly it is with hypocrisy (such a
pleasing sin) as with other sins; a man sees the guilt by the rule, but not by
the light of a divine conviction, strangely working in his soul and spirit,
and so goes on as those did which the Prophet speaks of, you lie, and steal,
and commit adultery, and yet come and appear before me; they had brazen faces
for all that, they never felt the power of conviction upon their spirits, and
if God should show any man any one sin, he would never act that sin, but he
would abhor the very sights of it; But there are such poor common general
convictions merely from conscience; conscience has a power within a man, but
it never stirs with terror till God anew, as it were, shows his sin, and his
miserable estate by sin, by a light from heaven, and so sets conscience afresh
a working; God then gives it a new Commission to charge his soul, he goes to
duty though he knows himself full of hypocrisy, yet he can go to duty as
quietly as can be; a man may know himself to be a hypocrite and yet go on in
it; because

Secondly, He thinks he shall wear out his hypocrisy by his duties, though
he perform them in it, though he contract guilt by them: and most of his
hypocrisy is in his duties, and that is exceeding strange, but it is most
true, for a hypocrite thinks by his duties to wear out all his deceits; as he
colors his hypocrisy by it, so he hopes to wear it out by it, he hopes it is
a work of time, though he have a bad heart yet he hopes to have a better
heart, though he never looks to Christ for it.

Fourthly, He has something at present that he gets by his profession,
something that is suitable to some end, some lust or other of his own, and that
keeps him up, notwithstanding those general convictions; I know not how to
call them convictions, they are so cold and poor upon a man's heart, but he
hopes to get something, either applause of men to be a good Christian, or
something to be thought of by men, or to get some peace of conscience, that the
violence and desperateness of wrath fall not upon him. Aye, but

Fifthly, which is most of all, that I may show you this; God does judicially
give up those kind of hypocrites that have begun without him, took up
profession without any workings of God upon their souls, he gives them up
commonly unto a reprobate mind, that you have so commonly named in the New
Testament, so injudicious as they cannot understand their own condition, but go
on still, see no more in one condition than another; but that I may speak of
Gods dealing with hypocrites in this way.

First, As I told you, God delights to discover hypocrites, so he has most
judgments upon them of any in the world, and he discovers them commonly, either

First, By some secret giving them up, or withdrawing strength; giving them up
to some corruption, or withdrawing strength from them absolutely, that they
find nothing of former strength at all: so he does many times with those that
have lived upon parts, gifts, and endowments, it is ordinary for God to leave
them, as you have it in John 15. they wither, the life and sap that they were
wont to have is withdrawn, and the spirit is gone, so it is with many; and
certainly that is the Reprobate mind; taking away from the understanding that
common light, that the soul shall only look after the outward part of a duty,
but never knew the life of it, never understands nor distinguishes when he is
in a bad or a good condition. Oh! look after the impression and sense of the
things of God upon your souls.

Secondly, The way that God takes to discover hypocrites, he gives them up to
some eminent corruption to break out as to discover them; as it was with
Judas, he had many gnawings of conscience doubtless under Christ's Ministry
always, and under Christ's eye, but he was never discovered till he gave him up
to that covetous heart, that wicked corruption that lay most in his heart, then
he was discovered presently, then thirty pieces of silver was enough for Jesus
Christ. Either God gives them up to deadness, to be twice dead, that is, dead
in their own hearts, the meaning is, they lost both their natural affections,
and the affections they had on their hearts by common gifts and workings, they
lost both, and now nothing takes hold of them; or else he gives them up to some
eminent corruption, that all the world sees there is one never minded the
Gospel, now it is broke out; or else

Secondly, As to that head, God gives them up unto a despair, which is very
common, and that is twofold:

First, Either secret despair, they tug in duties, may by night and day, when
they are pressed in conscience, and they get nothing, go to Sermons and they find
no blowings of the Spirit, no breathings at all upon their hearts, and so grow
into a secret despair insensibly.

Now there is a secret kind of intermission in Saints, but this soul goes on
and never finds any thing of God or Christ.

Secondly, There is a terrifying despair which sometimes God gives them up to,
whereby they are terrified with the hideousness of the wrath of God, crying
out they are damned, they are damned, and they never commonly get out of it:
you never hear of any hypocrite in the Scripture that ever got out when God
laid a charge upon him; because God would have souls walk so purely and
clearly with him in all their duties.

Now as you see how he may know himself to be so, to be thus, and yet act; so
see the nature of his hypocrisy; and take it in short.

First, though he know himself to be a hypocrite, and to be unsound, yet he is
loath to have it said so, or have it discovered, he cannot abide that, he would
not have any one think so, though he knows it himself, but yet would walk so
exactly as he could; so it was with Balaam, Number. 21.22, 23. all along how
gladly would he have gone to curse the Israelites? but God would not suffer
him: though he knew he was a most wicked notorious hypocrite, and a witch too,
yet how would he pretend to Balack he would go to God; he would gladly have
done it, but God had a mighty check upon him: it was a Prophecy to all the
world, how all dealings with Saints should be, though he spoke good things, and
he could not but speak them, yet he would gladly avoid them for the money, and
still he had an over-awing of God upon him: So it is with many hypocrites,
though they know themselves to be unsound at the heart and bottom, yet they
would have all think well of them, what they want of integrity that they
would make up in the handsomnesse of their deportment and carriage up and down
the world.

Secondly, Though he know himself to be an hypocrite, yet there is none will
be more censorious of hypocrisy in others, even to poor Saints; but that is a
common rule, he will be severe in the censuring of others, and he may think by
that, that others may think him far from hypocrisy.

Thirdly, Nay, what shall I say? in the third place know this, though he know
himself thus to be in that condition, yet he never strives to root out the
wickedness of that frame out of his own heart, but to smother it, and cover
it, and palliate it from the eyes of men some way or other, not to destroy it
in his own spirit, but smother it, so that it may look Saint-like still; but a
gracious heart, as soon as it discovers hypocrisy, as he sees the strains of
hypocrisy in his heart, he looks to root it out as soon as it is discovered.
But to speak no more to that, let us now come to the application of it to all
your hearts.

First, If this be so: I beseech you once again to put your hearts upon the
serious consideration, and examination of your own estates; what are you? Now
you look well, come to hear, you are not in sight so ugly, what are you
within? Have you not strange strains of hypocrisy if you be not hypocrites? I
beseech you look seriously to your own hearts: this is the end of all this
discourse, to put men seriously upon the trial of their own spirits, that
they may not be unsound in the Gospel, that they may not have a rotten spirit
within, that the liver, and lungs, and heart be not corrupted whilst they
deal with the great things of the Gospel; that is, that the faculties of the
soul may be purelie acted to God; there are more hypocrites now in the world,
than in any one Age since the Creation; it was a hard thing to pick out one
formerlie; but God will show many of them in these days, he is a trying the
world, and as he goes along he will try spirits most. Oh, you have trials under
the Gospel, have you got a clearenesse? Can you say you have a glorious inward
freeness with God? Oh, what use have you made of the Gospel? Have you inward
glorious incomes of God from the breathing in of divine frames in your actings
toward God? Let me ask you but these common questions.

First, Cannot you find some time to play with your sins sometimes, so they
bite you not, and sting you? Cannot you take some recreating times for your
sins and corruptions? Pray you consider of it; a hypocrite does so: he dares
not make a trade of it, but he will make a recreation of it now and then, he
loves that he dares not practice, you can now and then play with your wanton
thoughts as long as they do not fly in your face, you can delight your self in
your secret wishes: Oh that I were at it; look to your own souls. Nay, what is
this Religion that men speak of? do you find such kind of things in your
hearts? he that can play with sin for recreation can join himself unto sin for
delight, and to be one nature with him: a Saint hates appearances, he cannot
endure the thoughts of it.

Secondly, Are there not some sins you call little sins, and some duties you
call little duties, and some duties that you never lay upon your conscience?
Look to your hearts in that, you are never humbled for the commission of sins,
or the omission of duties, it is a dangerous symptom of hypocrisy. A
hypocrite will be sure to make distinctions in the Gospel; there be some
secret workings up of corruptions and sins, as vanity of thoughts, distraction
in duties, and secret risings of corruptions, and desires in a man's heart which
he never charge his conscience withal, and some duties he never lays upon
conscience, so long as he can pass thorough the maine body he never cares for
the special circumstances of the Gospel. A gracious and upright heart says:
Shall I call that little that is against the glory of an infinite God? It is
the object makes the sin great, not the act: this duty has as much authority
upon my heart though never so mean, though but to wash a Saints feet, as to
offer the greatest sacrifices before the eyes of all the world.

Thirdly, Let me ask you this, Are you not afraid of trialls, and to be
thoroughly discovered to your own hearts? Do you not endeavor sometimes, if
possible, to evade the strength of a conviction, and the strength of a word
from God that is laid upon your heart, afraid to look into your own hearts and
see your spirits, to be discovered to your selves? do not you many times hush
conscience, and say, be quiet conscience, stay a while to your own consciences,
I will be better, I will strive against it, I will not be thus and thus carried
away? do you not find these things? A dangerous symptom; a hypocrite
endeavors to evade the authority of the Gospel, he is afraid to abide the
power and the glory of it; if he cannot find out prudentiall considerations
enough, he will get spiritual pretenses, he will be sure if he can evade
conviction he will do it, that is a very dangerous sign. And again,

Fourthlie, Examine your own hearts, Is there not some of the fat of the
Cattle, of the sheep, (to allude to that of Saul, for he was an hypocrite) in
the going on in your duties, reserved? Is there not some Agag for honors sake
you would keep up, 1 Samuel 15 read over that place at your leisure: God bids
Saul slay the Amalekites, destroy them all in the third verse, yet he reserved
an Agag, and the best of the spoil, here was the discovery of his wicked
heart, he would have sacrificed some of the fat things, he had a mind to
triumph by Agag: he thought it was too much to destroy all those things, though
God gave a peremptory command to destroy all, I will sacrifice them to God to
make an atonement, only reserved some of the best to carry to my people in
triumph, that they may see the outgoings of God; that lost him his Kingdom,
and discovered his hypocrisy first of any act, he had a secret lust to honor
himself by it; have you none of the fat of your corruptions? Have you never a
lust laid up? Is there never a corruption that your souls have countenanced,
or do countenance?

It is a dangerous sign of hypocrisy, if a man have any thing that the word
of God says is not the mind of God, that he reserves in his heart without
utter hatred. Well, look to it I beseech you, and especially look to that of
the trial of your spirits, whether you can be willing to be tried, for you
shall find a hypocrite will appeal to God and his conscience, but he cannot
endure to be tried by Saints, he will appeal to God if it be not so, yet he
cannot endure to be put to it, to have his heart ripped open. Nay, it is very
common to say, God knows my heart, but if you come to try his heart, and say,
how can this grace stand with this corruption, he cannot endure that, he will
hate the thoughts of it. And if you do try him him about his estate, you must
not debate it with him, but you must take it for granted, else he will try your
graces as well as you try his, and question your state as much as you his: And
then if he be put to it at last, as to trial of his own spirit, he will save
all with a whining confession, and that is all you will get of him; therefore
look to your selves as to these things.

In the second place, I should now have come to have pressed on the exhortation
of the Lord Jesus; beware of hypocrisy, you that are Christians, you that are
real Saints should beware of it, and so to all sorts of professors, take heed
and beware of it, and showed you these things. To have opened the nature of it,
and the hideousness of it.

And first from the danger of it to your souls, it is the most dangerous sin
you can have in your souls, and that, First, because it is the last reserve,
it is undiscernable, a man must search as with a Candle that finds it out: as
the Jews were to search for the Leaven with a Candle, and then curse all the
rest, it is a close sin: indeed there are some actings of it that are very
gross; but as for spiritual secret hypocrisy in duties, compare them with
actings they are exceeding close and undiscernable in the souls of men; a
soul must dig very deep, and be very observant, and have a watch over his
soul every moment if ever he would try his heart; it is so close and so
cunning, that a man will hardly believe it is there, there is such a hidden
motion upon a man, that he cannot tell how it comes.

Secondly beware of it: It is infectious, it is a dangerous infectious
spreading nature, it will be over all the faculties on a sudden: it will
represent you all kind of glasses that can be possible; it can in the morning
give you one glass to look in, at noone another glass, and in the evening
one different from both; take one part of the Law you shall see your selves in
it very fair, it spreads over all: it will, it may be, begin with your
understandings, and give you strange sights and apprehensions of God, then come
in upon your affections upon a sudden, and work them to this end, and to their
end: it will kiss and kill at once; look to it, for it is the most dangerous
sin of any in the world in a man's heart.

For if the soundness be gone from a man's heart, what will he do then? A man
cannot act like a man when the substance of the soul is gone, he cannot act,
neither Scripture, reason, nor his judgment, but a particular close humor.

Thirdly, beware of it: It is the most inconstant in its motions, the most
various in its representations, so many habits, and so many forms it will
appear in to you, and alter upon every occasion, that it is impossible,
unless a man be given up to try his own heart, to find it out: A heart, and a
heart: you shall have a fair heart now, and a wicked heart anon: come and
talk with a Person now, and you shall find them in a good frame, so as if they
were commanded by the power of of it, come an hour after, and you shall find
them in a wicked damnable strain of spirit, speaking like mad men, this is
most common: especially come to talk with a man privately, what abundance of
ingenuitie there is: come to another action, and at another time, and he is not
the same man, hypocrisy will appear, and this is the misery men's souls are
juggled to hell, put in so many forms, they know not when they are right, know
not what is the real complexion they should have in the Gospel, it is so
various and so cunning: it juggles a man's soul to hell.

Fourthly, It is the most odious thing to God of any, it takes his name in
vain most of any, it is against his simplicity, omnisciencie, his purity,
God hates nothing more than this state, therefore he sets himself against
hypocrites of all sorts of people in the world.

I should have come to have showed you how to avoid it, what are the special
remedies of hypocrisy, the special things to keep a man from the evil of it,
the way to preserve a man from this dangerous sin: but I would not leave some
poor souls without some kind of comfort; all this while many will say, Alas,
I am the man: I am the woman: certainly I have been a hypocrite all my days:
I would only speak a little comfort to such poor souls.

First, know this: Jealousy of thine own heart, and severe inquisition into
it, is a good hopeful Character that thou art far off that condition.

There is a twofold jealousy that therefore you may not be deceived.

First, A jealousy on probable grounds, secret and close symptoms, and hints
from actings, which may teach many a soul that hypocrisy may have place in
his heart; for I find this and that when I come to look on the whole strain
of my life, I have not my heart so carried out in spiritual things: I never
minded this and that in my actings: this is a jealousy that may consist with
the knowledge of hypocrisy.

Secondly, there is a jealousy that arises from fear and care lest I should
be such an one, from the hatred of the thing: thou see the vileness of it,
and thou see thou can never be quiet till thou have the clearenesse of
integrity made out to thee: that is good, that is sweet: none more apt to
censure a Saint than himself; you know when Jesus Christ made the question
about his betraying, the hypocrite spoke last, never spoke till he was put to
it; every one said at the Supper, Lord is it I? Is it I? Every one had rather
dye than hear that word spoken; but when it comes to Judas, he was forced to
it at last, and yet he would not confess it; but when the conviction lay upon
him, and he must needs be under it, then he went out, and that was all you
heard of him till he hanged himself.

Secondly, To comfort poor souls, they have no reason to conclude themselves
hypocrites, when they are glad if God by any means discover and destroy their
hypocrisy whatever way it be: for there lies the weight when God shall be
blessed for discovering a man's heart to him: take this for a rule; If a soul
can rejoice and bless God for his convictions of sin, as for his comforts
after conviction it is a sign of a most blessed glorious spirit; though the
sight of hypocrisy be the ugliest sight in the world, yet when he sees it he
blesses God for it.

Thirdly, Never think thou art an hypocrite, if thy heart is set against the
nature of sin, and pursuest the enjoyment, of the nature of God, whilst thy
heart is set against the nature of sin, and followest on the nature of God,
that is, to be really possessed with a substantial enjoyment of God, when the
very nature of sin is against thy heart, and when the nature of godliness is
in thine eye as to enjoyment, to be fully possessed with that.

Fourthlie, know this too: Never say thou art a hypocrite when no outward act
can content thee, though never so glorious, without thou have an inward frame
according to that act, according to the inward spiritualitie of the Gospel, if
thou look to have thy soul in a frame to thy duty, thou need not fear
hypocrisy.

Fifthly, While thy soul is as much troubled for omission of thy duty as for
commission of thy sin, thou need not fear that thou art a hypocrite, while
thy soul is as much troubled for omission of a duty, or an act of faith, or
closing with Christ, or of any outward duty wherein thou have enjoyed Christ,
as for commission of sin, thou need not fear thou art a hypocrite.

Sixthly and lastly, thou need not fear thou art a hypocrite whilst thou
hate thine own strength in thy duties as much as an outward act of sin, or
the most distemper of thy spirit, or a corruption done in the wickedness of
thy heart; I speak only this a little to divert the thoughts of poor souls
that say, I am certainly under this frame of spirit.

But look to your own hearts every one, if you find all these, or any of them
in any life upon your souls, you are free from that state; but if you find not
such an universal opposite nature to sin, but a frame to sin against God, if
you find not such constant pure frames in your own spirits as to principles,
intentions, and ends, you will never be able to free your selves from such a
state and condition.

SERMON VII.
LUKE 12.1. Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.


I Have endeavored in many exercises to open to you the nature of hypocrisy,
and have told you the sorts of hypocrites that are up and down the world, and
in Churches: Now in the latter days they grow more glorious than ever,
therefore Christ's exhortation had need be more pressing; formerlie hypocrisy
was coursely clothed, could hardly step out among the Saints, they were so
prying, and so cunningly careful to observe the dangers of the Devil in
times of danger and persecution: Now when the Sun shines, fair days again,
Religion seems to flourish in the outside of it, and there is a benefit, by the
name of it, men will be very glorious in hypocrisy: and if ever there were
need to press Christ's exhortation, it is now upon all sorts of men and
professors: among his own disciples there was one among twelve, he bids them
beware, take heed: It is a good caution for them all, Saints are subject to the
strains of it many times, without they have an abundant care in their own
spirits.

Therefore that I shall do, is still to press this exhortation upon your
hearts, that it may take some weight and impression: for believe it, however
you look upon your selves, or whatever thoughts others have of you, we had
need to tell you to beware of hypocrisy, the better you are thought of, the
more danger. And you may remember the last time, first I told you, you had need
to look to your own spirits concerning this sin, because of the danger of it
in its nature and workings.

Secondly, because of the ugliness, and vileness of it, of all other sins in
the soul how it is that which is perfectly against the nature of God, his
holiness and simplicity, his faithfulness and realitie to the Sons of men,
how it is that that makes a man like the devil most of any sin: he will
believe, and is convinced of the things that the Gospel speaks of that they
are true: but here lies the greatness of his wickedness, the cunningnesse of
his deceit, that he sets up an art of deceiving in the world, to deceive the
Sons of men that they should not believe the word of God; there is none like
the devil, so perfectly like the devil as hypocrites, I have chosen you
twelve, and one of you is a devil, none is called a devil in Scripture but
he: and there lies the sutablenesse that he is a liar, and hypocrisy is a
perfect lie in the soul.

Then I showed you the ugliness of it likewise, that it does indispose the
soul to every thing that is good, when one is in the best frame, as it were,
that spoils all, it is of a poisonous nature.

I shall go on to show you what is that you must continually look after if you
mean to beware of it, and prevent it, as the care and remedy of this sad
condition.

Therefore first, as to the general, and as the maine thing, if ever you mean
to beware of hypocrisy you must principle your hearts, and farnish them with
all the graces of the spirit, you will never be sincere else, you will never be
sincere till you have all graces, and the workings of them proportionable in
your souls and spirits, Ephesians. 3. he begs of them to go on, and this I pray
that your love may abound more and more in all knowledge, and in all
experience, that you may be able to approve the things that are excellent, that
you may be sincere, Phil. 1.9. A man must have all judgment, a discerning eye,
for sincerity, does not lie only in the intentions of men, but in the real
workings of all the frames of the soul, of all the graces as they are in the
heart, when a man can approve the things that are excellent, that is, he can
judge them, and try them, and act them as they are discovered to be truths,
that is sincerity: for sincerity is not so much a distinct grace as a result
of the harmonious workings of all graces in the soul, there must be a
rectified mind to make a man sincere, for it is not a good intention that will
make an action good, or make you sincere in any action, but as it flows from
inward real frames and principles that are suitable; Peter was an affectionate
man, and he said to Christ when he told him of his sufferings, spare thy self,
do not go and suffer, he did it out of a good intention, but he was rebuked for
it, he had a clear intention, would not have the least hurt come to Christ,
but it was against the design that Jesus Christ came about, therefore he said,
get thee behind me Satan: It was not that sincerity, therefore the Apostle
says, that you may be sincere: Oh that sincerity of soul! it lies in those
two things; that you may be sincere, you must be able to judge and approve
things that are excellent.

First, (...), it signifies such a strain as is without any mixture, has no
composition of any foreign thing in it, when every thing is pure in its
native color, you must prove all things, be able to try all things, and have a
judgment of them: that you may be so unmixt in your actings, that you may have
nothing at all of the corruption of the world in it; for we commonly in our
duties mix our own ends, and our own interests, and engagements in the things
of God, and whatever the intentions be, yet if there be any such mixtures, you
are not sincere; though you may think you do well, and are very exact in the
Gospel, yet you cannot be sincere whilst there is such a mixture in your
principles and ends, 1 Cor. 8. A man is not sincere when there are any
mixtures, when a man is carried on by inward motions of sin: Now, I confess,
there will be many mixtures, but there are mixtures in intentions, and mixtures
in principles, and ends: and these are dangerous, for a man cannot be sincere
if these be predominant over him. As if I go to God, if it be not to glorify
God, and to have communion with him, having the highest end, and do not act
from a spiritual principle of holy love to him, and his glory, if I have any
mixture in my intentions, though other things may come in accidentally, yet if
they be incorporated in the principle, then I am not sincere.

For to make up that sincerity, a man must have that spirit of sincerity that
is pure to act from God to God, from the Spirit unto Christ. Now here is a pure
way of acting, when the soul sees what its own strength is, casts it out, lies
at Christ's feet, is carried out by the assistance of Gods spirit, will not have
any thing but the strength of Christ, when the intentions go along together
with the acting of these things, when there is a pure intention, that I fix but
my eye wholly on one object, for there be many considerations that come in
accidentally, but the eye is fixed upon one object; I must have Christ, and my
soul is working after him, and there I center my heart, that is sincerity
indeed, so we should receive the sincere milk of the word, that is, that milk
that is unmixt with the corruption of men, the sincere milk, 1 Pet. 2.
therefore look to your own hearts, if ever you mean to avoid hypocrisy, you
must be sure that you keep from mixtures, mixtures of unsound principles, and
ends, self-love, selfe-ends, take heed of the air of the world, left that
come in and fill your sails in your duties; take heed of any thing that may
mix with your principles, and your ends; for in acting toward God, you cannot
act purelie, but you must act from single and entire principles in your hearts,
and clear apprehensions of the object, and the end: And however you may
conceive you act evenlie, and your heart is not feigning to be so in a duty;
yet if you be not carried out in such a heavenly harmony of principles and
inclinations, and your ends together, you will never be found to be sincere in
the Gospel.

Secondly, the word signifies that clearness, that perspicuity that should be
in a man's soul in all his actings: so says the Apostle, that you may be
sincere, the word signifies such a clearenesse, as when a man is under the
judgment of the Sun, as under the Sun shining on a man's spirit, you will
hardly avoid hypocrisy till your consciences be under a light, and a
brightness of the glory of divine workings upon your hearts: for when your
conscience lies under darkness and guilt as to the testimony it should give,
you will still have shiftings off of hypocrisy from your spirits, to take off
the weight and misery off from you; but the Apostle would have you to be so
clear in your judgment of the Gospel, as if you were to be judged by the Sun
it self, it should be found that there is nothing but sincerity: a fair
testimony in every duty, that inward whiteness of a man's spirit in a
duties, that it is not mixed with any bribings from without, nor secret
evasions from within. And that shining from the conscience is so bright, that
as the Apostle says, this is the testimony that we have, the testimony of
our consciences: A man should be so clear in his own spirit if he meant to
avoid hypocrisy that if he were to be brought out to be judged before men and
Angels, he might have such an inward brightness in his own spirit, that he
might be comforted and refreshed in the sight of it.

For you find this commonly, take hypocrites in the time of convictions, they
have no testimony of God at all: Now take a sincere heart, though he be under
conviction, yet there is such a light that he judges there is sincerity in
his own heart, convince but a hypocrite of one thing he can give no account of
the other: all comes in upon him, and challenges him, for he has no
brightness within that will testify to his soul at a dead lift; when
conscience accuses, he has nothing to excuse in his conscience from the
clearenesse of the acting of true principles in him: I beseech you, if ever you
mean to avoid hypocrisy, be sincere, and if you will get sincerity, you must
get all these graces clearelie shining and working in your own spirits, for
you will be put hard to it to get sincerity while your principles are dark
and not even; if you find not your principles and ends meet together, and your
eye is singly set upon the Lord Jesus, and your hearts set for the glory of
God, you will not have that inward plainness in your own hearts. Though the
nature of sincerity lies much as to these two things.

First, the clearness of a man's principles and unmixtnesse in them.

Secondly, a plainness and ingenuitie in the actings of them; from these two
flows that which we call that sincerity of spirit: To be free from sembling,
and faigning of things, when I am not mixed, when I am without impuritie in my
motions as to what I act: though there be hypocrisy in some other things, yet
there is not in those maine things. So that the first thing I would commend
unto you, if you would avoid hypocrisy, is to furnish your selves with all
spiritual graces of sincerity, that you may be justified before the Sun, that
as they say of the Eagle, they try their young ones by the Sun, if they can
endure the sight of the Sun they are then true: so you, if these things will
endure the Sun, and the light of God, then you may say you act sincerely.

Secondly, if you would avoid hypocrisy, lie always under the dread of an
omniscient eye, this is that that men are discovered hypocrites by: they know
not what the sights of God are, that allseeing God, if I thought God did look
into my heart, and did see me, it is impossible I should then go on in a way of
sin and deceit to deceive my own soul, for to deceive the omniscient God:
Hypocrites think in the general that God sees all things, but they lie not
under the dread and aw of an omniscient God, no grace keeps a soul so much
from hypocrisy as the fear of God, the awe and dread of God seeing into a
man's heart; for though thy heart be close to others, it is transparent to God,
he sees all the cunning of thy spirit, and veins of thy soul, how thou do
delude thy own heart, therefore if thou would be sound, look after that,
the fear and dread of God: Remember, what is it for me to be well thought of
by others when God sees it not so, the omniscient eye knows I have a secret
cunning heart for to deceive? He sees me, though I speak fair to this and
that person yet God knows I am wrong, he knows I am lying when I speak a word,
though others know it not: Oh, if the eye of God were but thought of by men, if
we thought we had a divine presence with us, Whither shall I go? if I go to
heaven thou art there, Psalm. 139. if a soul were under this consideration,
whither shall I go from thy presence? I may carry this sin closely and
secretly, yet the eye of God is upon me, the Lord sees me: I had better all
the world should see me than God, for he discovers me from the bottom: so much
for that.

Thirdly, If ever you mean to avoid hypocrisy in your own spirits, be
always considering the vanity of this sin of all other sins: A sin which
there is no profit in at all: A hypocrite takes as much pains for all his
cunning deceits as a Saint for all his sincerity; for a man to act as a King
upon a Royal Stage, and the next moment he is in Rags, not a bit of bread, so
here, a hypocrite, take him out of his duties, has nothing to live upon but
what they shirke up and down the Gospel for, and that is so miserable and so
poor a life, that they would give over the ways of Religion, if it were not
for shame; and when a man considers old age is coming on, there is a day of
darkness, a midnight hour that must be upon my soul, God will one day take
off all this disguise, I am well thought of by others now, but what shall I be
then, there is a night up on me, but there is a day upon others, and that which
is the day of the Lord to others will be a midnight to me, and that will be the
time of the discovery of me to be miserable. Better a man had never gone on in
such a hood, and have it plucked off, and to see such an ugly face: Oh, what
hideous cries will one day be! Oh, that I had never made use of the name of
Christ! Oh, that I had been through with my own spirit, that I had never
deceived my own soul, that I had known what my condition had been before I
played with the Gospel, and dallied with the things of Christ; I beseech you
consider, to be clothed in darkness after you have seemed to be clothed with
the brightest notions of the Gospel, it is a vain thing, a man gets nothing
at all, lives upon the air, what men say of him, the good thoughts, and good
words of men, there is all, for he has nothing from Christ as to the
enjoyments of the Gospel in his own spirit, and is not that sad? Again,

Fourthlie, Look to beware of hypocrisy, for it is a dangerous thing if it go
on to a height, hypocrites are seldom converted under the Gospel, the reason
is, they wear out all those principles they knew, they curse themselves under
the Gospel, they have heard over and over again the same things, and they
make little of them in their own spirits; God seldom converts them, only that
conviction that is commonly upon these that are hypocrites, is to show them
their hypocrisy to be their misery, whereas to others the time of their
conviction is the time of their conversion: When God comes to profane men and
strikes them home, it is commonly to convert them, but as to a hypocrite, it
is Gods time to show him his hell and misery, and how he has outrun his
glass, and past the day of the Gospel: Oh that thou had known in this thy
day the things of thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes: God loves to
make such persons examples to the world, if they get a breath at the last day
it is well. Therefore look to it you that begin to be formal, and to play
with your convictions, and take them off now and then, dallying with the Lord,
look to it, it is a thousand to one if ever you be converted, that that
converts others condemns you: And tremble at this, that you should live under
Ordinances and discoveries every day, and yet be no better; if you escape long
without through-improved convictions upon your hearts, it is a dangerous
symptom, it is a thousand to one God has made but an essay upon thy heart.
Where did you find that ever God convinced a hypocrite up and down the Gospel,
that was a professed one, if you look through the whole Bible, but he left his
mark upon them all the days of their lives? It is a dreadful thing; yet
grace is not bound up, it is not limited at all, it may be God may show more
riches of grace upon some souls, but it is not usual: therefore if ever you
would be scared from hypocrisy take heed of that; when a man comes to dye, and
should come at last to refresh himself with the thought that he has served
God faithfully, and sincerely, and finds no comforts of all his duties and
enjoyments, then to be convinced that he has been one that has deceived
himself is very terrible, when he should have God eternally, then to have
that time of times of his everlasting ruin; God will take some time or other
to discover your hearts, and it may be he will discover them and you shall not
be better, only let the world know, and your own hearts know what you have
been, and leave a secret-deadnesse for ever upon your hearts, or fry in the
wrath of it all your days, as you go up and down the world, consume you to
nothing with the sense of wrath; Oh prize a sincere heart, and prize
opportunities, and take heed of puttings off, and delaying time, and being
careless of what you are about, for that is the trick of a hypocrite to put
off, and think it will be better, and hug himself with some considerations,
that time will be otherwise, take heed: the day of the Lord will be a day of
blackness. And that you may be further set against the nature of this sin:
(for that is my design) I beseech you consider the hideous doom upon
hypocrites, the last doom upon hypocrites: when Christ would speak the
uttermost of misery, he says, he will give them their portion with hypocrites,
they shall burn in the hottest fire, they and the devils together shall be
companions in the uttermost wrath, the subjects of the infinite wrath of God,
they shall be most enlarged for wrath, for they are vessels fitted for wrath,
you know, as the Apostle speaks, so prepared, so enlarged for wrath: so is the
soul of a hypocrite that has lived all his days in darkness, and
blackness, only restrained himself as to outward acts: but he is fit for
wrath, he has laid in such treasures there, that he is every day treasuring up
wrath against the day of wrath, that he will be forced to take in the thoughts
of wrath, because he has sinned against the greatest light, and opportunities,
and advantages of the Gospel: Oh, therefore that you would fright your selves
out of hypocrisy, (if you can do nothing else) and formalitie, and mixed frames
of your spirits; scare your hearts with the day of judgment, with the sadness
of the doom, with the misery of the condition.

Secondly, If ever you mean to be free from hypocrisy, you must through with
your spirits night and day, sound them to the bottom, let your line be long,
let it down to the bottom of the well, give conscience leave to speak in the
authority of God every day upon your hearts: beg of God to try you, to search
you, as David said: Go every day to God to search you, and be glad, and beg of
all the Saints to remember thee, for there is deceits of hypocrisy in every
one of our hearts; never come off viewing of your spirits till you have
discovered something or other: if ever you would be freed from hypocrisy you
must do this; always keep a narrow watch upon the secret parts, be not afraid
to look into your own hearts, but ask every motion what it comes from,
whither it moves, try every thing in your own spirits; let not any motion go
free unexamined in your souls, but have a severe censure of it; no duty but
have a jury on it; look into the maine frame of your spirits: try your
principles and intentions first, try your motions, observe your ends, and how
you attain them constantly; if ever men would be sincere and free of
hypocrisy, they must be thus spirituallie severe to their own souls: it is
wholesome severitie, it is blessed; it is the slight common dealing with our
spirits, (that we are formal and cold) that makes so many deceits in men's
hearts which lodges so secretly within; we do not go to purpose with the
search of our own spirits, challenging our hearts in every duty; we ought, I
confess, to be careful how we question the motions of grace in our hearts:
But a watchful Saint, if he will clear himself of hypocrisy, must be eying,
and prying into every thing that he does: observe his setting out in his
duties, the carriage and frames of his soul, observe the tune afterward that
he is in, for hypocrisy will get upon a sudden into a man's heart, and a man
will think himself to be an hypocrite presently if he be not thus strict and
wary; so that if you will lay all these to your hearts seriously, it may be a
precious means to keep you from the danger of this leaven, though it is
impossible for to cure it, but only as you grow in grace, and get sound and
sincere principles in your hearts. So much for the second.

Use 2. However let it be a word of comfort unto some poor souls, that have
all this while been harkening after hypocrisy, charging of their own hearts,
for I would not let any soul go away but with some refreshment. Some will say,
I see so much hypocrisy in my own heart, that I cannot but think my self one
that never had any grace, or soundness in my own spirit: I know not what to
do, or what to say to mine own heart; consider, I say, these things.

First, know, it is good for thee to have thy hypocrisy discovered, it is a
mercy to thee, and a favor of God that he will show thee thy inward parts,
that he will discover the secrets of thy heart, whilst he lets others go in
that estate, and never knows what is within all the days of their lives, only
mind outward acts: this is so far from being a discouragement, that you should
bless God for it, that he has been pleased to show thee thine own heart, the
strains of hypocrisy in a duty; God might have left thee to go on, and
thought thy self what thou art not.

Secondly, Remember, the more thou discoverest the secret workings of
hypocrisy, the more it is a sign thou growest in grace; for this is the great
end of grace, as by the incomings of it to kill sin, so for to discover sin,
and the secrets of it: the more spiritual any heart grows, the more he grows
in the inward sights of his own heart, the more he comes to be acquainted with
those spiritual kinds of wickedness in his own spirit: And be not therefore
troubled at that poor soul, for it is rather a sign of thy grace than
hypocrisy, than of any other impulse, because God does still by degrees show
thee thy own heart, so long as thy heart is against it.

Thirdly, be not discouraged by the sights of hypocrisy as long as thou
find a sincere heart from the discovery of it: that is, so long as thou
lie in wait from the sincerity of thy heart to discover it, and likewise
bewailes it from the sincerity of thy soul; know that it is a true sign of a
sincere heart, he lies in wait to discover his hypocrisy, he lays himself in
secret observances continually to spy out the cunningnesse and deceits of his
own heart. For you shall find those signs of a sincere heart.

First, This will discover a sincere heart, that I may comfort a poor soul,
though he may have hypocrisy in him, yet he will be most impartial to
himself from once he finds it out, it may be he will be charitable to others,
yet he will be severe to himself; if he find out any hypocrisy, he will be
sure to fall on it with all detestation, he will charge his own soul, as if it
were the damned soul, he will rather lay too much weight upon his conscience,
lay it too severe on his own spirit, than any way excuse himself; but
hypocrites will deal gently with themselves, if they have not an excuse at
hand, they will not lay it home too much to heart: but a real Saint will say,
Oh, wretched man: Oh thou unworthy heart, that should live so long, and have so
many advantages to kill this lust, and art thou alive yet? Thou shall never
escape more, I will follow thee night and day with prayers and tears, it will
not say it is my infirmity; it is my failing, but is will call himself a
wretched man, a heart, and a heart, therefore look to your own souls as to
that, and comfort your souls any poor heart of you, that though you find
hypocrisy, yet you deal severelie with it.

A second Character of a sincere heart is, though he have hypocrisy in him, he
is most jealous of hypocrisy: when he finds his heart most calm, and fair,
seems least checked in conscience, has most respect from others, oh then he is
most jealous lest there be some deceit, he is always looking at bottom,
always afraid through a spirit of care and holy jealousy within him, always
afraid lest he be deceived, and when his heart seems to be so calm, so fair,
any body would think his soul to be in a blessed frame, and a man himself
can see nothing upon himself at present as to present actings, yet then he is
afraid of those things that gives most advantage to the actings of hypocrisy.

The third Character is, though he have hypocrisy in him, he loves to be
thoroughly dealt withal, he counts the discovery of his heart to be a precious
means of the saving of his poor soul: Oh how glad is he to see his own
heart, and his hypocrisy, so he may but find it out to kill it, and go to God
against it, making it the burden and mourning of his soul, he loves to find it
out, he cannot abide any pleasing words to him, unless Christ speaks them, he
cannot endure, that though he have abundance of hypocrisy, it will not for all
that give any countenance to it, but earnestly rejoices to be thoroughly dealt
with.

Fourthly and lastly, though there may he hypocrisy, yet a sincere heart will
stand upon a true account, he cannot endure to have any one to commend his
heart, he would not be accounted more than he is, he loves to be ashamed, he
cannot abide others to advance him in their commendations of his heart, that he
sees so much hypocrisy in: so that I say, let this be a comfort to you if you
have no more.

But as to the sincerity of your heart, that you would deal with your self,
and would have a spiritual inspection with fear and jealousy always, that
you may stand upon a true account still, that you cannot endure any body should
commend your heart. There is no Saint but he knows his heart to be the worst
part, he sees so much wickedness there, that he wonders how others can think
well of him, he cannot abide that any one should conceive he has such a heart
that he mournes under night and day.

So that I say, lay all these things together, and though thou do find some
hypocrisy in thy heart, yet be not discouraged, go on still to follow the rule
of Christ, that when you find it you do not lie under it; for that will bring
guilt, and will spread far, but comfort your selves still that there is a seed,
that you do really find that you are pursuing continually growth, that is the
constant study of you, that you may be perfectly sincere, that all your frames
may act so evenly with God, that there be no jarring at all, that your
consciences may be kept continually under the power of the Gospel.

But to conclude all: I beseech you look to it, you that are Professors, you
have heard the nature of hypocrisy, you have heard what deceits there are in
the hearts of men, you have heard the strictness of Christ to his own
Disciples, how pressing he was upon them, now look to your own souls, try your
selves by all these things, examine your hearts over and over again, do not
content your selves with this, that you have names in the world, that you have
abundance of inward kinds of experience, for now hypocrites will be growing up
in the flourishings of the Gospel, they will have an imitation of faith, and
of patience, and of joy, as the Gospel shines forth brightly, they will have
an imitation of adoption, it is a wonderful thing to think how a Professor
will bring himself into the fashion of a most glorious Saint, transforming
himself into an Angel of light, as it were, striving to imitate every thing,
and yet enjoy nothing, is loath to have his name expunged out of glory, out of
the hearts of Saints. But alas the Lord will come and show himself exceeding
dreadful to Professors in the latter days; there is a terror will be upon
you one day, that you have only walked up and down and no more, you have found
no sweetness, you have only cozened your selves and others: Oh that is misery
enough for every poor soul, and therefore remember what has been said, lay
it home upon your consciences, examine your hearts, commune with your own
spirits in the night-season, and remember there will be a day to discover the
hearts of men, and you shall stand naked, uncloathed, and God will set a mark
on you to all eternity,

FINIS.
Reader, these Books following are Printed, and are to be sold by Richard
Tomlins, at the Sun and Bible near Pye-Corner.
THe general Practice of Physic, Fol. The Fortune Book in Fol. English.
Pleasant Notes upon Don Quixot, Fol. Mr Collings his Cordials, first, second,
and third parts, quarto. His Vindiciae Ministerii, quarto. His Answer to Mr
Sheppard, quarto. His Answer to Fisher and Hammond, quar. His Answer to
Boatman, Priane, and Humfries, quarto. Dr Holdsworth's twenty one Sermon. quarto
Euclids Elements in quarto Eng. History of seven Champions, quarto. Packet of
Letters, quarto. Cupids Messengers, quarto. The Birth of Mankind or Women's
Book, quarto. The Perfect Pharisee under Monkish holiness, quarto. The false
Jew, quarto. Mr Collings Five Lessons for a Christian to learn, octavo. His
Faith and experience, octavo. Mr Wincolls Poems, octavo. Excellency of Christ,
octavo. Erasmus Colloquies, octavo. Wings and Libourns Urania Practica, octav.
Velitationes Polemicae, octavo. Perkins Catechism, octavo. Janua Linguarum,
octavo. Brinsley's Cordelius, octavo. Mr Sidenham's Mystery of Godliness, oct.
Watson's untaught Bridegroom, Twelves.

