GOOD COUNSEL WITH A Seasonable Warning TO ALL THE INHABITANTS of WELLS in
Somersetshire and elsewhere.
Read and Consider, and the Lord give you an understanding Heart.
THis day passing by your City, I was moved of the Lord God to come amongst
you, to proclaim the terrible, great and notable Day that is hastening on apace
upon this and other Nations: And since I came from you, I felt a concern upon
my Spirit, to Communicate this and send unto you as Good Counsel; and which may
prove (if duly regarded) a seasonable warning both to Priests, Professors, and
Profane, That you all may be humbled this day under the mighty hand of God,
and unseignedly Repent of the Evil of your ways, and turn therefrom. Oh hasten,
hasten speedily to meet the Lord in the way of his Righteous Judgments, by the
which he is bringing down the haughty looks of proud Flesh, abasing that which
is exalted, and raising up that which is of a low degree; hearken diligently to
his Call, and be concerned to answer him, whilst he cries unto you both
inwardly and outwardly, to be Reformed from those many gross, abominable,
unworthy practices you are found guilty of; for which the Good Spirit of the
Lord strives in you to be Redeemed; and because of which, the weighty vengeance
and fierce wrath of God is ready to break forth upon you: aed though he has
spared long, and may hold it off for a time, yet assuredly at last he will be
provoked; and when it comes, then it is so much the heavier by how much the
longer he has waited to be Gracious; as its said, Because sentence against an
evil Work is not executed speedily, therefore the Hearts of the Sons of Men are
fully set in them to do Evil. Oh! I beseech you in the tender love of God,
consider and follow these things now in time, that belongs to your Eternal
welfare, least they be hid from your Eyes; as it did befall that great City
Jerusalem, over which the Lord Jesus wept, and said, If thou had known, even
thou, at least in this thy day, etc. so they had their day of Gracious
Visitation; but because they knew not the time thereof, so as to be gathered by
him who often would have gathered them, even as a Hen does gather her Chickens
under her Wings, but they would not; and therefore that dreadful desolation
came upon them, as the Consequence of their grievous Rebellion and continued
Provocations. -- Now observe; if you do not regard the Lord in his time of Love
afforded to you, in which you are rendered capable to be Gathered by his Divine
and Almighty Power, out of all the Vanities, Pollutions, Hypocrisies,
Formalities, and Will-worships of the World, into Holiness, and those Virtues
of true Christianity. If you do not now remember the Lord, and heat his Voice,
whilst ^s called to day, I tell you of a certain truth, you may in your own
time (when Distress, Anguish, Terror, Sorrow, Woe and Misery overtakes you) cry
loudly in his Ears, and call earnestly upon him, but not heard or regarded by
him; as its said concerning those who hate the Good and love the Evil, If they
cry unto the Lord he will not hear them, he will even hide his Face from them
at that time, as they have behaved themselves ill in their doings; see Micah 3.
verse 4. and read Prove. 1. 22, etc. Because I have called (says Wisdom) upon
you simple ones, Fools and Scorners, but you refused, I have stretched out my
Hand and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would
none of my Reproof, (mind now what follows) I also will laugh at your calamity,
I will mock when your fear comes, (how comes) even as desolation, and your
destruction as a Whirlwind, you know that is a sudden thing, Then shall they
call upon me but I will not answer, etc. and the sad conclusion of all is,
Therefore shall they Eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their
own devices; for the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the
prosperity of Fools shall destroy them. Certainly such as every one Sowes, of
that must they Reap; wherefore all High and Low, Rich and Poor, Fear the great
God, and give Glory to him; for the hour of his Judgment is come: and Worship
him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Seas and Fountains of Water, whose
overflowing scourge, and dreadful Beasom of his sore displeasure, must pass
over, and sweep away this Profane, Atheistical, Hypocritical, and
Hard-hearted, Persecuting, Perverse and Adulterous Generation of Vipers, whose
Cup now is almost quite filled up with all manner of Abominations, and the
Consumption determined on the Earth must be accomplished; therefore be not
Mockers least your Bands be made strong; and surely the terrible overthrow of
the powers of Death and Darkness is begun, and will more and more appear; so
that all must be overturned and brought to an utter desolation, which opposes
(either through the Rage, Malice and Envy of the Devil, that Grand Persecutor,
or of the Violence and Cruelty of his wicked Agents, who oppress the Lords
faithful innocent People) and would stop the Glorious advancement of the
peaceable Kingdom of holy Jesus, and of his Righteous Government, whose right
it is to Reign and Rule spiritually in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of
Men; and of the increase of whose Peace and Dominion there shall be no End:
Which is over all opposition prevailing, and shall more and more, and that
universally, (in the Lords due time) be exalted, to the great shame and
confusion of all his Enemies, to the unspeakable Joy and satisfaction of the
Righteous, and to the Glory, Praise, Honor and Renown of his worthy. Name for
ever and evermore, Amen.

This is the Word of the Lord God Everlasting, whether you will hear or
forbear, from his Servant, and your sincere well-wisher, and who heartily prays
for the good of all

Robert Sandilands.
Streat near Glastonbury, being the 31 of the 11th month, 1682. For in the hand
of the Lord there is a Cup, and the Wine is Red, it is full of mixture, and he
pours cut of the same, but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the Earth
shall wring them out and drink them.
LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1683.


