AN ANTI-DIATRIBE: OR THE APOLOGY OF Some Ministers and godly people,
asserting the lawfulness of their administering the Lords Supper in a select
company; Proving also the necessity of Examination in our Congregations, in
order to a more holy Church Fellowship.

Wherein a Paper is answered, bearing this title, viz, A Diatribe concerning
the administration of the Eucharist and Examination thereunto precedent.

Together, with A VINDICATION Of the Lords Supper from its manifest abuse by a
general admission; Being an Answer to Mr. Humphrey.

By Humphrey Saunders Minister of Holles-worthy in Devon.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Brewster and are to be sold by Joseph Laughorne
Bookseeler in Truro. 1655.

The AUTHORS PREFACE INTRODUCTORY.
Christian Reader,
I Had the liberty of two days to review this small piece, before it fully
passed the Printers hands. In this time I gathered the Errata which thou see
at the end of this; and have taken liberty to Preface it a little, for thy
better understanding. That which now comes to thy hands was written some years
ago; one part is in answer to a paper sent me by an eminent Gentleman in the
West; who disliking mine, and some other Ministers practice, as to the
Ordinance of the Lords Supper, did hereby put us to vindicate the truth, and
our selves, as to the way walked in. After I had written this, I kept it by me
many months, not suffering any copy to be taken, nor the papers to go farther
then the sight of some dear friends about us. I will not burden thee with
recital of the censures which attended and prevented its coming forth; such
and so many, that had I consulted with flesh and blood, and been tender of mine
own ease, this had been adjudged to silence. I was at length prevailed with to
communicate the manuscript, and so it came into the hands of some reverend
Ministers of London, who thought it worthy of a more public view: Upon a
letter from one of these I consented to a publication, upon this ground (as the
Lord knows) that I apprehended and hoped some good might be done by it. Since
this, these papers have layen in London, expecting the press, and under it,
more then a years space. These circumstances have only this use, to excuse the
delay of the whole, and the unseasonablenesse of a part, viz. that which
relates to Mr. Humfrey, who has since been answered by diverse, and has
himself replied unto one; here is not room for much more; only this. There is
not one Word added to what I wrote at first: I am likely to have occasion to do
somewhat more in this argument, which if the Lord call me unto, I hope to keep
time better, and to amend the defects which shall be shown me in this. This
way of public edifying is new to me, it is the less marvel if I fail somewhat
in matter and manner; though I appear for separation (in a sense,) yet am I so
far in love with Unity, that I hold it my duty to promote it among the godly,
and (what I may) to bring all reformed Churches into it. I know no greater
dishonor lying (this day) upon the Gospel, then our divisions. O let me beg of
thee one sad and tender thought of this grievous evil. I must needs say, that
not a few of the godly seem much more inclined to peace, then they have been;
blessed be his Name who has wrought this. What, is it hard for men of the same
spirit to walk in one way? Does not the Lord speak this to all the godly in
the Land, in the language of Providence? [when they cannot rule over one
another, they will agree;] God has done the one, let us do the other: Shall
lesser differences always divide those who are one in the great things of the
Kingdom of Christ? I am deceived, if ever Church-Reformation and Constitution
prove comfortable and successful among us, unless holding communion with
other Churches, come to be a matter of more weight with us. I have no more but
to commend this poor labor to the blessing of God, and subscribe,

Thine, H. S.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
ONe great Duty of Christians is to be established in the present truths, 2
Pet. 1.12. that is, to be well versed in the matters that are ventilated in
their age and time, but usually the Orthodoxy of the generality of the world
comes an age too short, in all things already recovered from opposition, and
sufficiently established, they hold ought, but in the truths which God brings
upon the stage of the world in their time, they are to seek, being either
blinded by interests, or discouraged by their own weakness, and so dare not
determine any thing, till parties be more agreed, or, which is worse, kept back
by their own laziness from using the helps of Prayer, diligent searching and
conference, whereby (through the blessing of God) they might come to the
knowledge of the truth: and yet herein is our sincerity tried, it is no thank to
us, to own what is already received upon sufficient evidence with public
consent and esteem, but to find out the secret of the Lord, whilst the strife
is depending; and the dust being raised by contention, casts a mist and
darkness upon the truth, that argues most sincerity, because it costs most
labor and self-denial.

The great truths now a foot, are those which concern the constitution and
reformation of the Church, in these days of contention; other controversies are
revived, but this was the first quarrel; and because of our darkness,
mistakes, and oppositions, herein, are other distractions by a just judgment
continued upon us.

Reformation is a great blessing, but we are not worthy of it, as soon as door
of hope was opened, it was presently obstructed and shut up again by the
interposition of many adversaries, yea, the differences among the friends of
Reformation have been no small let and hindrance to the progress of it. A
person lies desperately sick, and the Physicians are not agreed about the
means and way of cure; some would have the corruption taken away by degrees,
lest the cure prove as bad as the disease; others, all at once, and so would
make hasty work of it to the endangering of the body its self: or rather let me
lay it thus, an house, if on fire, some are for pulling it quite down, others
for quenching the flame; and whilst the differences of judgment continue, the
body languisheth the flame increases; just thus, and worse is the present
state of things amongst us; we have been disputing about a remedy, and the
disorders by a long and sinful neglect of discipline are much increased.

Among all others none have deserved worse of the Church of God, in my
judgment, then those that plead for a loose way of receiving of all sorts of
persons to holy things, and by promiscuous admissions prostitute the Ordinance
of God to every comer; I will not say for handfuls of barley, and pieces of
bread (though the opinion looks as exactly calculated for a worldly interest)
but at least out of a judgment much mistaken in the matters which do concern
the glory of Gods house.

One great mischief of the collapsed estate of the Church, was this
prostitution of Church Priviledges, and in the beginning of these contests not
only complained of as a grievance by the godly, but confessed as a disorder by
them through whose neglect it first crept in; and it is strange, that after the
matter has proceeded thus far, any professing godliness, should interpose for
the continuance of this dust and filth, which was in so fair a way to be swept
out of Gods house; And holy communion is the glory of the Church, Holiness
becomes thine House for ever, Psalm. 93.5. Christ would not be the head of an
ulcerous body; yea, a monstrous body, like that of Nebuchadnezzars image, where
the head was pure gold, but the members were made up of brass, iron, clay,
etc. a thing the Lord cannot endure, and therefore by a just providence all
down along he has broken off the branches of the Covenant, when they began to
run wild, and cast off his people, when by the intermission of a vigorous and
strict discipline they have suffered the Church to run into the world, and
the world into the Church: when the door has been too wide, and kept too
open, only mischief has entered in; such a practice may fill the Church, but
heaven will be never the fuller. Carnal men are but hardened in their
senslesnesse and security, whilst by man's charity they are suffered to enjoy
Privileges beyond Gods allowance; and so (as Salvian complained long ago) it
falls out, that Multiplicatis fidei populis fides imminuta est.
whilst the Church is multiplied, the faith is lessened; and though more
profess it; yet with less vigor and power.

To prevent this abuse, it has pleased God to stir up many of his worthy
servants to plead the necessity of a well-tempered Reformation; amongst others
this eminent godly Minister in this book which is now presented to thee, a book
which (if my love to the person and cause deceive me not) will contribute much
light to the ending of this controversy. The Answer to Mr. Humphreys was penned
long since, before any had as yet appeared against him. The other discourse is
in Answer to some Objections of a person of worth and quality in those parts
where the Author lives, concerning the same matter; both might have seen the
light much sooner, had they not been kept private, first by the Authors
modesty, since by some neglect and miscarriage here; but we hope they are not
borne out of due time; the Controversy being returned every day, and men,
either tired with opposition, or out of other reasons, growing faint in the
cause of God, generally now enclining to some remissness, and carelessenesse
in this weighty matter: if these labors of the Author find acceptance, he
will be encouraged (I hope) to go on with that which he has been urged to, to
wit, an Answer to Master Humphreys second Part. The Lord give us understanding
in these and other truths.

I am thine in all Christian Bonds, Tho. Manton.

ERRATA
Reader,
The Press has made much work for thy pen; this if done before thou read,
will prevent thy stumbling: mistakes as to pointing, are infinite, and
therefore not referred: these which mar the sense, crave this correction; the
other, thy common charity.

Page 3. line 13. for showing read strewing p. 9 l. 8 f. intentions r.
inventions p. 20. l. 28. f accept r. expect p 38. l. 19. f. her r this p. 44 l.
8. f. Scripture r. paper, p. 60, l. 5. f. Friars r. Tryers, p. 67, l. 16. f.
calling r. callings, p. 68 l, 27. f. th^mes r. times, p 70. l. 2 f. don r. do
not, p. 76 l 2. for apologicall r. apogogicall, p. 85 l. 14. for in the margent
for mour r. Mr, p. 93 l. 17 for ill r. all. p. 109 l. 2 for Puul r. Paul, p.
137 l. 7 for expressed, r. express, p. 140 l. 1 signate and significate are
noted as adverbs, but amiss, p. 149. l. 17 for must r much p. 161. about l 12
in the marg. for Clem r Clerum. p. 162 l. 8 for provoke, r. promote p. 167 l.
^0 for man r. men, p 109 l. 11 for k^d r. wicked p. 173 l. 24 for freely r.
truly p. 174 l. 8 for and devotion r. but religion, p. 175 l. 4 for of r. in p.
182 l. 14 for commemorate r. commemorative p. 103 l. 22 for expect r. except p.
194 l. 22 for i^ r. into p 19^ l. 24 for to r. in p. 200. l. 28 for creatures
r. her men bers p 202 l. 13 for if r. his Baptism p 203 l. 9 for he r is p.
204 l. 23 after will r. be, p. 205 l. 13. for Prosoproprias r. Prosopopeias, p.
205 l. 26 after they r. so, p. 207 l. 8 for selves r. self p. 209 l. 200 blot
out not, p. 216 l. 11 for gous r. Gods p. 2 7 l. 29 for duties r. duty p. 218
l. 9. for Lily r. Lilly p. 222 l 20-for unworthy r. unworthily.

THE TWO FIRST SECTIONS OF THE Paper.
Antiquitas saecli est juventus mundi,) neither will be any of the froward
retainers of custom, which may be as turbulent a thing as innovation; and
Christ having said that he was Truth, not custom; yet I have learned from
Scripture to make a stand upon the old ways, and then to look about, and
discover what is the straight and right way:

And sure novelty though it be not by and by rejected, yet is always
suspected; and what is settled by custom, though it be not of the best, yet at
least may seem fit; and therefore I remember that not only the Spartans set a
mulct on the Musician that added one string more then ordinary to his Harp;
but the Lycians suffered none to propose a new Law, but with an halter about
his neck, that if the reason thereof were not approved, he might forthwith be
hanged for offering novelties; and therefore I cannot but conclude with Vlpian.
In rebus novis constituendis, evidens debet esse utilitas ut recedatur ab eo
jure quod diu aequum visum est.

If this new way (and I think I may without the hazard of a quarrel take the
liberty to style it so) of administering the Eucharist, and admitting and
excluding Communicants, had ground and warrant from Gods Word, the practice of
the Primitive Church, the demonstration of reason, or did manifestly conduce,
and tend to the advance of godliness and pure Religion, I should not check
with it for the novelty; but when many good, and moderate, and rational men are
much unsatisfied, that it bears any such stamp, or character. And for mine own
part, unless I am blind through infirmity, (whose own heart witnesses to me
that I am not maliciously or wilfully so) I can see nothing to support this new
frame, but popular, not Logical discourses and similitudes, rather then
reasons, adpopulum phaleras, (which is handsomely to paint a house that has no
solid foundations) I cannot therefore but excuse such, that at the sound of
such Music, cannot fall down and worship the Image that Nebuchadnezzar has
set up.

The entrance and sum of the two first Sections.
The Author (showing his way with some flowers of Reading and Rhethori^k)
Apologizeth for himself, as one that dotes not on Antiquity, nor is led by
Envy. And after censures some men to be abettours of a new way, whereon this
character is set, (viz.) being unsatisfactory to many good, moderate, and
rational men; not grounded on the practice of the primitive Church, not
rationally conducing to the advancement of godliness, but supported, and
vindicated by popnlar arguments; that is, (as we take it,) having the paint of
persuasion without any life, or strength of reason: From these thoughts he
concludes smartly, if not bitterly; I cannot therefore but excuse such, that at
the sound of such Music cannot fall down and worship the Image that
Nebuchadnezzar has set up.

SECT. I.
Answering the Preface of this discourse.

Prolegomina, and answer the generalities of this Plea, not forgetting the
particulars: wherein we shall take liberty to speak freely, that we may more
fully convince, and yet carefully, that it may be said, Eccles. 12.10.
That which was written was upright, even Words of truth.

SECT. II.
What is due to Antiquity, and what is true Antiquity.

We heartily embrace that saying,. 2. Quod antiquissimu^ est verissimum.
That which is first is most true, because true: Antiquity is always a friend
to Truth; and though all that is old be not good, (sin and Satan are both very
old) yet every good way is old, and therefore in every good old way we may
safely walk. We are not moved to hear men count, and call good ways new; who
knows not that the Adversaries of true Doctrine have always loaded it with
this title? Nostra omnia ut peregrina, and nova condemna^t. Juel. Apol. Eccl.
Anglic p. 114, 115.
All our doctrines are condemned to be new, and strange. It confirms us to see
the ways of government to have the same lot. So that the principle of
Antiquity yields but a Satis sciunt nihil istis nominibus po^ularius esse aut
in vulgusgratius. Idem. page 116. vol. c8.
popular and fallacious argument; yet it being the firstborn of the Paper,
and the first weapon formed against us; we might say much to it, but that we
think of dispatch. Jerome is condemned by one for desiring leave of Austine to
err with seven Fathers which he found of his opinion. We dare not take, nor
are we willing to give the liberty, as the Scripture says, Luke 17.32. Josh.
chapter 9.
Remember Lots wife; so do we to the pretenders of antiquity, Remember the
Gibeonites. Scripture-antiquity is venerable; but if the antiquity which we
call others to, signify but custom, (as may be guest by some passages, (viz.)
what is settled by custom, line 5. of the Paper,) we may be bold to say of
such antiquity, that in most things it is vetustas erroris, the age of error.
Prove. 16.31. Chapter 20.29.
The gray hairs of opinions and practices are (then) beauty, and a crown,
when found in the way of truth and righteousness. For matter of doctrine, it
must be spoken with thankfulness, that long has the light thereof filled our
Horizon: But the light of Discipline was not so forward and successeful. Truths
of this nature were a long while held by some men in Romans 1.18
unrighteousness; corruptions in worship continued, when corruptions in
doctrine were generally decryed.

Now because the Sun shines not out till twelve, Si ordo in Dominica^ coena
observandus Apostolorum praecepto definitus sit, illi adhaerescendum quem
Apostolica Scripta docent, non quem sequiora secula introduxere. Spanhem. dub.
Evan. Part. 3. p. 237.
shall we say it rises but then, or not at four? Was America a second, or new
creation, because found out but of late? The present light of government
contended for, is elder then the former customs of our predecessors. If any
man can prove it younger then the Scriptures, we will soon cast it out as an
untimely birth; we think it unreasonable and unsafe to look only on the
customs and practices of the next ages before us, while we are sure that they
for a long time worshipped God impurely, not doing as it was written. Josh 1.8.
We may shut up this, only minding the lovers of truth, that they be not
frighted with a notion of novelty from a more excellent way: Mat. 5 47 1 Cor.
12.31.
this being certain, that while we agree with the Word, we never check with
true Anquity.

SECT. III.
Unsatisfactory to many good, moderate, and rational men.

one and the same Spirit within, and rule without. Of all men, we would study
to satisfy good men. It is possible some such may be unsatisfied with our way;
the time is not yet come, Zach. 14.9
which will unite the minds of Gods people, till then, differences in
judgment will continue, but without breach of affections, if we do well. We do
not condemn all that differ from us in these outward things, which may for a
time be hid, where Jesus Christ is revealed in most saving truths. It is
acknowledged that there are many learned and eminent men in parts and places,
not closing with us, some of which we must think godly; there are many no less
godly unsatisfied, but it is upon another account.

As others censure us for going too far, those for not going far enough in our
separation; but as these last are above us, so are they more against our
opponents. To speak freely, who are foremost in opposition to us? they are the
most carnal, and profane in the Country, the scumme of whose choler we often
see and hear: these measurinp us by a fleshly line, find our work defective,
their own large principles not being able to bear the strictness of the Word.

SECT. IV.
Not grounded on the practice of the Primitive Church.

Ifa. 8.20.
and desire it may be sealed on both sides, that what is said shall stand, or
fall, as the Word judges.

SECT. V.
Not rationally conducing to the advancing of godliness.

means it does, and this we take to be rational conducing, otherwise the
cause of our progress in that way must be fastened on the Grace and Spirit of
God. That which shames and restraines sin, must needs conduce to godliness;
But the way pleaded for, tends apparently to this. It advances godliness, 1.
Ephesians. 4.17.5.15.
By engaging such as walk in it to more watchfulness, they being by this
profession exposed to more observation for their ways. 2. Col. 4.5.
In regard of the mutual watchings they submit unto. 3. Heb. 10.24, 25.
Through the benefit of many private exhortations and duties, whose light and
heat may both kindle and cherish gracious affections. God has given sundry of
our meeting so much experience of growth (as to knowledge and affection) this
way, as plentifully confutes this Paradox.


We are sure the old impure way of pelmell tends to so many evils, that it
would fill a large Paper to set them down.

First, Jer. 23.14.
It strenghens the hands of the wicked.

Secondly, Luke 13.26
Blindes them in their wretchedness. While wicked men enjoy the privileges of
the godly, it will be difficult to convince them of their impenitency, and want
of conversion. Let the Minister make them Saints in the Chancel they will give
him leave to make them Devils in the Pulpit till he be weary.

No wonder if such profane ones as have usually received the seals of the
Covenant of Grace, and joined in the highest act of Church Communion, Jer. 7.8.
live in a good opinion of their souls estate, and trust in lying words.

SECT. VI.
Supported, or vindicated by popular Arguments.



We have not given out under our hands any arguments, but in our private
meetings, and public exercises, we have argued the present controversy, of
which some account shall be given hereafter; so that the censuring of our
arguments unseen, is shooting at rovers. God has given us so much skill as to
distinguish between an illustration, and an argument: and we do plainly
discern some reasonings in the Paper before us, to be just of that
constitution. What we find shall be duly weighed, and we hope in this as in
other undertakings, we shall prove our selves to be builders, and not painters;
the rivel'd skin of former customesneeds paint, where the beauty of holiness
wants.

SECT. VII.
I cannot therefore but excuse such that at the sound of such Music cannot
fall down, and worship the Image that Nebuchadnezzar has set up.

Sir,


1. The way which we suppose holy, and Christian, is Nebuchadnezzars Image; we
wish it as free of all defects, as it is of Idolatry: Doublesse the old way
pleaded for, has much more of that Image.

2. The Ministers exhortations moving souls to our society, (as tending to
reformation, and being the rise of some order,) this is Pagan Music, and
somewhat worse then Paul's tinkling Cymbal: 1 Cor. 13.1.
We hope our Music has been no unpleasant sound in Gods ear, while to our
knowledge we sought submission to Jesus Christ, Col. 1.15.
and to no other Image. Toward them that stand off, we have freed our souls,
by expressing our desires of their good, and tendering them the holy means of
spiritual life: We shall not take upon us further to censure their refusing,
though to speak freely, we dare not excuse them.

We must wait till God persuade men, then they will come in. In the mean time
among the refusers, there may be different principles; some may stand off out
of doubtfulnesse, and dissatisfaction, but others (perchance) may be Adders,
Psalm. 58.5.
that stop their own ears, or such as Christ condemns in that reproof of his:
Mat. 11.17.
We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned, and ye have
not wept.

The third Section of the Paper.
THe liberty, The third Section of the Paper.
and profitable use of private conference, in order to preparatory instruction;
yea, or probation of faith and repentance, (which Chemnitius tells us to be in
use in some Lutheran Churches) is not controverted. It is an apt, and elegant
comparison of Quintilian, that men are as bottels, which are sooner and better
filled by taking them in hand one by one, and pouring water into them, then by
setting them together, and sprinkling water upon them.

2. That whereas the Casuists speak, there is violenta suspicio quae moraliter
facit rem certam; for if it be only probabilis suspicio, they will tell you,
that melior est conditio possidentis bonam famam;] but in case of violent
suspicion, that any persons are through ignorance unable to discern the Lords
body; that they may, and are meet to be examined, is not denied. In such a case
the same may be spoken of neglect of probation, as in a lapse into a crime is
said of the omission of reproof, and admonition. A man may be called to an
account for an idle silence, as well as for an idle word; for as evil talk
leads men into evil, so an evil silence leaves them in it.

3. That notorious sinners, and the Casuists say, they can be notorious only
upon this account, cum crimen est manifestum, aut per sententiam in judicio aut
per publicam in eo confessionem, aut per evidentiam talem ut nulla possit
tergiver satione caelari;] that such may, and must be excommunicated is
granted; not so much for prevention of any pollution that others may contract
by communion with them, but to humble and to reclaim the offender, and to keep
the example from having any contagious spreading influence by impurity, as also
to remove the scandal that the discipline of the Church may contract by
remission, and indulgence. And a power to act in such cases, the Ministry need
not complain to want, much less upon the pretense of such want suspend the
celebration, and administering of the Sacrament altogether; for this power is
rooted, and inherent in the keys, and they may assume as large, and free a
power to exclude some such, as they now take to put by, and excommunicate all,
which they do while they (at least the most of them) administer it to none, but
intermit the use thereof altogether. And therefore as one being asked, where he
found the interpretation of, and concerning Constantines Donation, (as another
his gloss upon the Salick Law?) answered, If any looked on the backside of
that Donation, (and so of that Law) there it was to be found; so it might be
more truly said, that from whence they derived the power to excommunicate all
by non-administration, they might fetch a right to exclude persons scandalous,
and apparently ignorant. But our Rhodus, and Saltus, our present question^s,
Whether it be (not only profitable* but) necessary, antecedently to the
communion to examine (not only such, who may well be suspected to be of
incompetent knowledge* but) all indifferently, so as for want of will in any to
submit to this probation, they may justly be debarred the Sacrament; and for
want of power in the Minister to exercise this Discipline, he may lawfully
intermit the administration, or administer it only to such as will subject
themselves thereunto convened, (and not by their proper Pastor) out of distant
places, and several congregations?

SECT. VIII.
Of the liberty, and profitable use of private conference, etc.

1. Some Concessions. 2. The state of the Question.


1. The Concessions are of private conference, examination of some persons, the
excommunicating of others; these we accept of. And to say truth, in some of
these is more granted then is desired; namely the investing the Minister with
power of excommunication, or censuring alone, which many learned men make an
act of jurisdiction, belonging, non uni, sed unitati, (as they express
themselves) to the whole Church, or to the Officers of the Church, but not to
the Minister alone. But he speaks in this the opinion of the Scloolmen, who
seem (to us) to put Churchcensures into the Ministers hands alone. Whilst this
opinion makes rather for us then against us, we shall not contend about it, but
take it for granted, and to be as is affirmed and yielded. That which is
affirmed of suspicious, and scandalous persons, may also pass. But some note
must be set upon that charge of absolute forbearance to administer the Lords
Supper, and of excommunicating all; for we do neither the one, nor the other.

It was our fault (for a time,) and it may be some other men's fault at this
day. We saw cause to be humbled for our omission of this duty among other
offenses, as to the Lords Supper: And we now conceive the institution to be so
strict, as admits of no denial, nor of long delay: For some years past, we
have not been guilty of this forbearance; there has been a frequent use of
this as of all other Ordinances among us, so that all desirous, and worthy with
a little pains might partake thereof. If any defect be, it is but
circumstantial as to the place, and not as to time, or substance. So much for
the Concessions. That which follows is the state of the Question.

SECT. IX.
Wherein of the state of the Question.



First, we do not examine all, as is supposed; such as are more knowing and
willing, do only make profession of their faith and knowledge; some in the
public, others more privately. Many have been admitted without having a
question asked them, and we can truly aver that we examine none, but such as
well may be suspected of incompetent knowledge; so that here is no need of
dispute between us.

Secondly, That of omitting altogether the use of the Sacrament, must have no
place in the question neither; for our practice and judgments oppose it.

Thirdly, About convening from diverse Parishes, this will but confound the
discourse, if mixed with it: For,

1. Most of those admitted were taken in, not without their proper Paster.

2. Such as were admitted of other Congregations, are persons justly offended
with the grossness of their administrations at home, where no separation at
all is made, nor any cherishing of desires that way. The lawfulness of this we
shall assert in another place.

As the Question is stated, there are so many things laid together, as would
make plaustraria argumenta, tedious Syllogismes, and so beget confusion in the
dispute. The state of the present difference may be better expressed in this,
The question stated.
or the like manner; that is, Whether in the reforming of a long corrupted
Church, it be necessary that all the Members thereof do submit to some
examination, or trial of their knowledge, before they be admitted unto the
Lords Table?

This Question we fear not to maintain in the Affirmative. Here we suppose
corruption in our Churches, and therefore with men well satisfied with their
present frame and temper, not looking on them as under any such disorder, as we
suppose, with such we desire not much to dispute; We can accept little of
reason, or truth from men of that mind.

Lastly, It seems to us that this Paragraph agrees not with it self, for it
opposes examination as precedaneous to this ordinance, and yet yields it in
some cases to be practiced. Can the paper allow the keeping back of some, yea
of ignorant, as well as scandalous, and yet absolutely oppose examination (as
previous) without which ignorance cannot be well known? Promiscuous
administering, must either stand, or fall. If stand, then no reformation can be
rationally hoped for. And if it fall, let us be taught how the admission of all
sorts formerly practiced can be redressed without examination, or some
equivalent course. At present we shall bend our selves to maintain the
necessity of examination unto the right use of the Lords Supper in our
Congregations, and that such as refuse to submit thereunto are deservedly
excluded.

When we say, examination should be previous (as the Author speaks) or a
necessary Antecedent, we understand not a Physical Antecedent, as if it were
essential to this duty, or Antecedent sua natura, for then we should examine as
often as we admit, which is not done. Self-examination is a necessary
Antecedent at all times, and Ministerial at some times; an Antecedent it is,
non physice, sed moraliter, and ex hypothesi, that is, upon a supposition of a
general corruption in our Churches. It is morally required as necessary to the
exclusion of the unworthy, according to the mind of Christ. We shall make this
as strong as we can, when we have once answered the Arguments by which it is
opposed, which is our next task.

The fourth Section of the Paper.
IT is St. Basils conclusion extracted from the exordiums of Moses, The fourth
Section of the Paper.
and St. John (in the beginning) (...), to begin at the beginning. In quavis
institutione quod primum est, and principium, and praecipium. Christ Jesus when
he first instituted this Sacrament, made no previous examination of his
Disciples before he administered to them: He showed them the nature, use, and
end thereof, he washed their feet; An emblem of that preparative cleansing by
faith and repentance, purifying of the affections; for, Cum rebus humanis post
a vivitur ubique terr a calcatur ipsi igitur humani affectus, sine quibus in
hac mortalitate non vivitur, quasi pedes sunt, ubi ex humanis rebus afficimur,
as St Augustine moralizeth it; and quia pedes ultima pars hominis sunt, and
debemus per poenitentiam non solum summa quasi flere peccata, sed usque ad
ultimas infimasque conscientiae nostrae parts descendere, intimas quasque
animi nostri cogitationes excutere, and purgare, (as St. Cyprian appliesit;)
but to enable the discharge of this duty, a general exhortation on the
Ministers part is proportionable, without a particular examination; That Christ
admitted Judas to the Communion, is not only the consonancy of the Fathers,
but the very pregnant result of the Text, Luke 22. v, 14, and 21. though he
might look with a face of Religion toward the Apostles, yet Christ whose eye
was upon his heart, beheld him under the notion of an hypocrite, and yet not
excluding him from the Sacrament. I should gladly learn by what authority or
president any that professes Religion, and is innocent of notorious, and
scandalous sins that check with his profession, can be rejected.

SECT. X.
Wherein of the first Argument against examination, drawn from the first
institution in John 13th. Chap.



Object. Christ's example in the first institution of this ordinance ought to be
our rule; But he made no previous examination then: Ergo none is required.

Answ. So far as Jesus Christ may be followed by us, we must stick to his
example. In two things it is impossible, and unlawful for us to follow him,
viz. in his miraculous works, and in the works of his mediation.

In his institutions we may, and must follow the rule and example of Christ,
his example being part of our rule. In these institutions somewhat is
essential, or substantial, somewhat circumstantial.

In the last there is no absolute necessity to adhere: For if necessary to
administer in all circumstances, as then the Sacrament must be given only at
night, or to men only; but in those things we may do so, and we may do
otherwise. Christ's example must be strictly followed in all substantials; 1
Cor. 11.23.
and therefore the Apostle lays down nothing to the Church, but what he had
received from the Lord. For our part, we wish men were in this and all
Ordinances more devoted to the example of Christ, it is the right way to pure
and true worship. Peter Martyr tells of a woman that was her self deformed,
Pet. Mart. loc. com. page 32. Heb. 1.3.
yet conceived very beautiful children, by daily eying some exact pictures in
her Chamber. Christ's example (who is the brightness of his Fathers glory) is
our fair Image; which the more we look unto, the more perfect and comely will
the Ideas and conceptions of our minds be in divine things. Unto the Minor,

Object. But Christ did not examine his Disciples.

Answ. How know you that? the Evangelist tells you, Joh. 20.30.
all that Christ did was not written. For our own part, we know not where to
find it, unless on the backside of Constantines Donation, or some such place,
as you mention. So that this concludes not for you. Argumentum a Scriptura
negative non valet. But you add:

He showed the nature, use, and ends thereof; He washes their feet as a
preparative cleansing by faith; but to enable the discharge of this duty, a
general exhortation on the Ministers part is proportionable without a
particular examination.

This is said, not proved. It appears not to us, that any such thing was
intended by Christ's action of washing, as is affirmed. We are rather satisfied
on the contrary, that no special type, or emblem of Sacramental preparation is
intended, though it may be so applied by those Fathers allegorically and
morally. He that builds arguments upon the Fathers allegories and morals on
Scripture, will come off weakly in his conclusions.

Not to mention that some learned men suppose this set down, John 13th. to be
done after the Sacrament. It is therefore too confidently affirmed, that Christ
shows the nature, See the late Annot. fol. 2. Vol. in loc. To teach love, and
the cleansing by his blood, these are his ends.
use and end of the Sacrament. That which our Savior especially commends to
his Disciples, is humility, which disposes to every ordinance, and to the
whole life of a Believer, If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them,
that is, these things of humility, as from the coherence herence is evident:
Hearken but to these words, I have given you an example; what of Sacramental
preparation? No, But that ye should do as I have done, that is, wash one
another feet, namely be humble, loving, condescending; the mystery of this
action was to be revealed hereafter, as verse 7. Therefore not of obvious
concernment to their preparation. It was an example of humility, as the plain
words of Christ are; although by occasion of that example, other Doctrine was
inferred of our spiritual washing by Christ, once wholly unto regeneration, and
daily of our feet for our daily transgressions. Dr. Fulke on the Rhemish
Gloss, on Joh. 13. p. 164.
See more, John 13. v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Who will believe that these
words, wash one another feet, signify, Examine your selves. Again, you say,
Christ's washing is answered by the Ministers exhortations, (and why not by
their examining as well?) whereas we think that a lesson to examine
themselves, would have stood better, if they had been bid to wash their own
feet. The deficiency of such general exhortations we shall touch upon anon.

Lastly, what if Christ did not examine his Disciples? does it follow that we
may not examine some, or all in our Assemblies? Rather in his administering only
unto Disciples, he teaches us to exclude the ignorant and wicked; these
(admitted) were his choice Disciples, he had the seventy, and several others
besides; but these as more infirm were not called, as a Learned man observes.
Besides, we examine none that are taken to be Disciples; but if we should,
real Disciples will not refuse to satisfy the Church, and encourage weaker
Brethren by a voluntary profession of their says, which is the most Disciples
are put unto. In short, Christ had communicated before with those Disciples in
the Passover, which was the same in substance with this institution; therefore
he needed not examine those that were admitted before.

The most zealous Assertors of Examination press not any to this after their
first, or once admission in a due way.

SECT. XI.
Wherein of Judas his receiving the Sacrament, which is the second Argument.

Judas.

Object. Christ admitted Judas to the Communion, therefore what need of such
prying?

Answ. When this is disputed out to the last, nothing is concluded against our
judgments or practice. The conclusion is, that though Christ saw Judas to be
an hypocrite, yet he admits him. Now what follows? therefore hypocrites may be
admitted. Who thinks the contrary? we are of the same mind, we speak of
excluding profane and ignorant persons, and we are told that an hypocrite was
admitted. It is not in men's power to exclude hypocrites, or secret sinners, but
open. This is truly to paint a house which has no foundation. You must not
expect from us such a president as you call for, while it is most remote from
our thoughts to debar any from Gods Ordinances, who professing Religion are
so innocent in their lives, as you speak.

Were we of your opinion, we should manage this Argument (about Judas) in
another sort, (viz.) Christ knew Judas to be a wicked man, yea, a reprobate,
and yet admitted him; therefore Ministers may not keep back such as they see,
and know to be wicked ones: Thus Mr. Prinne, and the Erastians; and this is
plain dealing, and the conclusion is directly against us. But here also the
argument is weak, and will tremble in its arraignment at the bar of Reason.

As to the admission of Judas, we do ingeuously confess that it is somewhat
doubtful to us, See Mr. Bolton of Heaven in his Book. Tit. 4. Last Things. p.
144.
whether he did receive or not? but we incline strongly to the negative. It is
one of the things that we look to have our knowledge perfected in heaven; as
whether Iephta slew his daughter, or consecrated her to Virginity? or whether
Naaman were a true Convert, or unsound? So whether Judas received the
Sacrament, or not? yet this example of Judas being thought to go far in this
controversy, we have somewhat heedfully searched, and weighed, not only the
texts of Scripture, but the authorities objected. And first we do not find the
consonancy spoken of to be among the Ancients, but see some of them denying,
others doubting of Judas his receiving. It must be granted that diverse of the
Fathers vote with this Paper; but these are balanced by multitudes of the best
Modern Lights, who are of another mind; The Fathers might receive this from
one another, without due looking into the Text. They are conceived to err in
this point, by taking the sop to be the Sacrament, as these words of Austine
discover Number enim mala erat bucella quae tradita est Judae a Domino? absit,
medicus non daret venenum: Salutem medicus dedit, sed indigne accipiendo ad
perniciem accepit, etc. Augustinus in 6. Tract. in Johan.
. Was the Sop evil which was given to Judas by our LORD? far be it. A
Physician does not give poison, etc. where he calls the Sacrament the Sop; now
the Sop was undoubtedly given to Judas.

The Ancients denying this consonancy, Aarons Rod blossoming, p. 451. etc.
are fully and clearly set down by Master Gillespy, to whom we refer the
Reader; but to satisfy them that may not come to see his Book, we have given a
taste of what is more full in him.

Hilary one of the Fathers speaks thus in English: Hilarious, can. in Mat.
Postque Judas proditor judicatur, sine quo etc.
After which words Judas the Traitor is discovered, without whom the feast of
taking the Cup, and breaking the bread was performed, for he was not worthy of
the fellowship of the eternal Sacrament; nor could he drink with him here, who
was not to drink in Heaven. See Theo. in 26. Chapter of Mat. Fol. 33. In Mark 14.
p. 53. quidam dicunt etc.
Another of the Fathers is Theophilact: But some say, says he, that Christ
gave the Sacrament to his Disciples when Judas was gone forth, we have found
this in two places of him. That which lessens his testimony is, that it is only
Quidam dicunt, some say; yet note, 1. If some (then) said so, the consonancy
then falls. 2. Let it be noted, what he inferres in that place of Matthew:
Therefore must we (says he) do the like, and put off evil men from the
Sacrament. Now this shows how much Theophilact valued this (Quidam dicunt)
whosoever they were, he judges them worthy of credit, by making Christ's
practice, according to their interpretation, a rule unto Believers. Doubtless
therefore these (some men) were godly and eminent Divines in, or about
Theophilacts time; we have considered this authority the more, because the
Author is in our hands.


Others we have transcribed only upon the forenamed Authors authority, and
given his references; Clemens says, Clemens, lib. 5. constit. Apost. cap. 13.
Georg. Pachy in his Comment. upon Dionysius Ariopag. de Eccles. cap. 3. part.
3. Sect. 1.
But when he had delivered to us the Antitype, mysteries of his precious body
and blood, Judas not being present. Christ (says another) does cast out,
separate, or excommunicate most justly Judas, who had not holily supped with
him, ( viz. in the common or Paschal supper) for having given to him of a
mystical bread or cup, that is, of the Passover, he gave the mysteries to the
Disciples alone, after he went forth.

It is manifest that Judas went first out, Innocent the third, l. 4. de mist.
missae, c. 13.
before Christ administered the Sacrament (says another). We have examined some
of these by our own books, and find them truly cited, the others must rest
upon the forenamed Authors credit.

As to our latter, and modern men, the most eminent Writers oppose the opinion
of Judas his receiving, at least leave it doubtful.

Their opinion seems to be certain, who deny Judas to be present at the holy
Supper, says renouned Beza in John 13. It is no doubt to me says Musculus; We
have set a full Jury in the Margent of learned men, H. Za^chius. Musculus.
Beza. Danaeus. Piscator. Diodati. Grotius. Dr. Kellet. Gomarus. These two have
written professedly. Rutherford. Gillespy. Scharpius.
hardly to be matched, who would not err with such as these are? And yet these
are not all, we could name more, yea, double to this number, besides learned
Papists not a few. Now judge what the consonancy is worth, which is spoken of
in the Paper: The Reader will see we are not behind for humane authorities.
But if the authorities of men fail to determine, yet the Text (he says) is
pregnant. What Text? Luke 22.14. But is this the only Text to be eyed in this
controversy? He that reads John 13.30. shall find a Text more pregnantly
proving the direct contrary. These Texts do not contradict one another, (thou
that read, beware of that inference.) It is our darkness of mind, which
does hinder our resolution in these matters.

Although we cannot largely dispute these Texts, yet we will study the help of
such as desire light in this point. That whith makes the point doubtful, we
take to be the number of the Suppers, which were about one and the same time.
Some makethese to be three, others but two, viz. the typical, and the
eucharistical. It is probable that there was a third, (viz.) a common Supper.
The order of these Suppers is also controverted. By the grant of all, Judas was
present at one of these. For he sat down with the twelve, some say at the
common Supper only, Aarons R. p. 461.
as learned Gillespy; others, at both the common Supper, and at the Passover,
but not at the holy Supper. Now Judas might be present at one, or both the
former, Joh. Randal. B. D. p. 219.
and yet slinke away, (as the word of a learned Divine is) between the common
Supper and the Passover, or between the Passover and the Sacrament.

As to that Text of Luke 22. Divines do note a transposition, that is, setting
down that last, which was done first, or before.

A thing not strange, being found in other places of Scripture. As in Genesis
the second Chapter. Innocent the third, lib. 4. de Miss. c. 13. See also Beza.
Salmeron. Maldonate. in loc.
You have set down after the sixth day, what was done before. The reasons and
authorities to be brought for this, are many; That Luke after the Cup, speaks
of the Traitor, may be understood by recapitulation (says one.) The reasons
are these.

1. Because Matthew and Mark put that before the institution, which Luke puts
after. See Luke 23. v. 21, 22, 23. compared with Matthew. 26 21, 22, 23, 24,
25.26. verse. and Mark 14.18. so that here are two to one.

2. Luke himself puts the taking of the Cup before the breaking of the bread,
although doubtless it was after.

3. The note of the last Translaters of the Bible is also considerable, who at
the 21. v. set a note of theirs () showing that there begins another matter,
therefore not a continued History orderly set down.

4. Nor does Luke say, that Christ spoke the words after the Sacrament, but
only sets them down.

Now as to that other Text, John 13. which we allege; It proves Judas departed
before the Sacrament was received. Sane Johannes quiddam ejusmodi subindicare
videtur, says Victor Antiochenus, cited by Mr. Prinne.

Another more fully we may gather from hence, Diodat. in locum.
that Judas did not communicate of our Saviors Sacrament.

The force of this reason lies in the word (immediately;) what it signifies,
every Englishman knows, that is, instantly, forthwith.

Now this being granted, as it is, that the Sop was not given at the holy
Supper, but before; how could so remarkable an action as receiving the
Sacrament intervene, and yet Judas be said to go forth immediately?

Truly, neither truth, nor good English will suffer this; to say that
immediately signifies a short time, is a miserable shift, and an abuse of the
word. Therefore learned Gerrard upon second and better thoughts retracted that
gloss, See Gor. Har. c. 171. p. 453.
and he is a good president for others to follow.

He that desires more may consult learned Scharpius and others, Scharpius, in
curs. th. p. 1431.
he by four arguments proves that Judas was not present, and also answers the
Objection from Luke 22. One of his arguments is this:

With whom Christ drank in the Sacrament, Attersol, The New Covenant, p. 486.
with them in the Kingdom of his Father: But not with Judas there; Therefore
not in the Supper.

It is also considerable to observe the different manner of Christ's speaking,
sometime without exception, and sometime with it. When Judas was present, with
exception, John 13. v. 10, 11, 18. afterward without exception, most sweetly,
See our English Divines in their large Annot. in 2. Vol upon the place.
and generally, Matthew. 26.29. Luke 22.28, 29, 30. See John 13. After Judas
going out, how his speech varies; If Judas were present, then these speeches
must be applied to him, which may not be granted. Ambrose and Gerrard expound
these words of Christ, (That which thou do, do quickly) as a casting out of
Judas. As if he had said, Get thee gone from the company of my Apostles, and
out of my sight. Now these words were spoken before the Sacrament.

Lastly, Evangel. commun. by Ph. Goodwin, p. 118.
should it be granted that Judas did receive, yet much were not gained. Judas,
as one says well, is but a bad porter to let in men to the Sacrament. There
was nothing in him discernable (by men,) contrary to his profession. There was
no visible cause for his exclusion. The Apostles thought as well of him as of
themselves, and did not so much as suspect him, though he were known to Christ
as God. But Christ in her Ordinance dealt as man (ministerially) as a Pattern
to us, who are to admit visible Disciples, not being able to descend into their
hearts. When the woman taken in adultery was brought before Christ, he dealt as
a man, called for her accusers, and when none came, dismissed her; and yet he
knew her (as God) to be guilty, and therefore says, Go, and sin no more;
Unless Christ as a Minister had known Judas to be a Reprobate, what reason had
he to exclude him? Now let the Reader judge, what life is left in this Argument
about Judas his receiving, which is found and proved to be so feeble in its
consequence, and antecedent.

The fifth Section of the Paper.
THE Canon prescribing, and directing the due administration, The fifth Section
of the Paper.
and receiving of the Eucharist is, 1 Cor. 11. We cannot with Tertullian adore
the fullness of Scripture, unless we yield it to be a perfect rule of faith
and manners, which it cannot be if it be deficientin any thing necessary to be
done, or believed, especially in such places, where it purposely hand leth
things of that concernment; and therefore here (and only here) an argument ab
authoritate negative holds good. But in that Chapter I find a precept, Let a
man examine himself; none, that he should necessarily pass the examination of
his Pastor. Between the proper examination of himself, and eating, and
drinking; no other thing intervenes, and therefore this very Commentary is made
upon that Text by pathetical Chrysostom: He does not bid one man to examine
another, but every man himself, making the judgment private, and the trial
without witnesses. Pareus strikes in unisons with that ancient Father: The
Apostle says not, The Priest shall examine, or prove them, but every man
himself. So does Sarcerius, He commands not that one should be approved to
another; but each one to himself, as long before Clemens Alexandrinus accounted
every man's conscience to be hisbest director in this case, l. 1. Stromat. By
what authority then can he be rejected that has examined himself? And to
suspect that any have not examined themselves, that shall profess to have done
so, without pregnant probability to the contrary, how can it be compatible with
that charity that hops all things, and suspecteth not?

SECT. XII.
Wherein of a third Argument from 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself.

Cor. 11.28. This has two supporters: 1. That it is the very Canon for the
Sacrament. 2. The fullness of the Scripture.




In its parts, and in the whole. There is a fullness in every part, in every
phrase and sentence. The smallest filing of this wedge is pure gold. Mountains
of matter hang upon the smallest syllable, as the Jews use to speak; so in the
whole. The whole is a full rule of faith. Now so far we agree, but that all of
any matter is contained in any one place, (which is here supposed) will be hard
to prove. We are not wanting to the due respect of Scripture, while we hold the
whole to be a most complete rule of faith and manners. That which is wanting in
one place, is supplied in another. It has been the ill hap (if I may so speak)
of all the Arguments hitherto alleged, to dash upon that Rock, (ab
authoritate Scripturae negative,) which makes them all deficient in their
authority, while the Scripture stands for a firm and full rule to all the
godly. That the Apostle does purposely handle the Doctrine of the Sacrament in
that place, we freely grant; but that nothing can be necessary about the
practice of it, which is not there expressed, we see no reason to yield. We are
sure there is that elsewhere which is not there, and we hope all is necessary
that is revealed. For redundancy is a blemish the word is as free of, as it is
of defect. Besides, reasons may be given, why no mention there, and then, of
any preparatory work by the trial of others.

1. Because those spoken unto, namely the Corinthians were before, and newly
admitted into Church Fellowship, by profession of their faith, and therefore
needed not to be called to this again. Whereas ours are borne in a Church,
where has been a long neglect of true Discipline, and where an unfitness in
many is confessed by all that are ingenuous.

2. The Apostle in this Scripture eyes Christ's performance with his Disciples,
where was no need of this examination, they being all formerly joined to
Christ, and known of him. You may find learned Zanchy the Protestant Schoolman
(as he is deservedly styled) making, and in some part resellng your objection,
so far, as that this Precept does not deny the inspection of others. If none
of these were of weight, why may not the examination of Pastors and
Church Officers well stand with that of a man's self? These being not contrary,
but subordinate, the Precept is not exclusive. It is not, Let a man examine
himself only: Small hopes of that man's self-examining, who cannot bear the
friendly trial of his Minister.

It is meant (as Zanchy well) of secret sins, (we may add, and of sincerity of
graces) which men cannot see in others.

But our examination is for the satisfaction, and honor of the Church, and is
of that which may be known and judged by others: Men's own is for the
reformation, and comfort of their own consciences. We believe that those
Ministers that hold it necessary, (as the case now stands with our
Congregations) to examine others, are yet little behind their Opponents in
earnest pressing upon men's consciences the examination of themselves, charging
such as they deal with, not to rest on the trial and approbation of others, but
to approve themselves to God in the searching, and judging of themselves.

Lastly, because the Scripture stands for such a fullness in that single
Scripture, as to leave out no one necessary thing: Let us ask whether a godly
Communicant be bound to no other duty, besides what is there particularly
expressed? We hope prayer at least, and sundry other duties, which are not
mentioned, may yet be regarded and practiced, and have their warrant elsewhere.
Some Fathers and others do gloss these words, as is said in the Paper, but not
in that sense.

Their mind was, and so is ours, that men should not busy themselves about
others, neglecting their own condition, nor rest upon other men's opinions of
them, without discerning a difference from themselves formerly, and from others
at present. Chrysostom speaks well, when rightly taken for private examination
should be in a secret place, (where the soul may freely have communion with
God;) but that which is for reformation, and satisfaction of the Church, should
nevertheless be with witnesses.

If Clemens Alexandrinue counted every man's conscience his best director, we
hope he meant this of conscientious men, not of men void of true conscience,
which is the condition of all such as we willingly keep off. Pareus in verba,
id est, 1 Cor. 11.28. in part altera, p. 563.
Pareus is one brought in to side with the Fathers, unto him we are contented
to hearken; We have sought the words alleged, and find him thus speaking: Non
dicit Apostolus, Sacerdoter probent, etc. that is, The Apostle does not say,
Let the Priests examine, or try the Communicants; but, Let every one examine
himself; to show the Reader, what an unison this is. We must freely point at a
great mistake, and that in three points.

1. Pareus speaks this of Popish Priests.

2. Of Auricular confession.

3. In the following words he is ours, justifying what he is alleged against:
Examina publica, vel privata, that is, Examina publica, veprivata minime
improbamus, sed requirimus.
public or private examinations of Communicants we by no means condemn, but
require.

So that however he grants the examination there commanded, to be especially of
a man's self, which we freely assent unto. yet he is not against that which we
contend for. It is here and elsewhere hinted, that our examination is risen out
of the ashes of Auricular confession; but (alas!) the difference between these
is easily showed, and the harshnesse of the comparison is as evident.

1. Examination defended is sometime before the whole society, and never so
private, as is suggested: but always before two or three witnesses at the least.

2. Auricular confession is constantly, and continually renewed, so often as
the Ordinance is made use of: this is never but once.

3. Ratione subjecti, they are as wide as a Minister of the Gospel, and a Friar
or Jesuit. It is not for want of ignorance, and ill will to the truth, that
examination by Church Officers, to find out men's fitness for visible
communion, is counted by many a point of Popery; but enough of this. Shortly,
he that builds upon the alleged Text, that no others have to do with men's
fitness to the Sacrament, because a private self-examination about the
sincerity of their graces, to ground a judgment of faith upon, is commended;
or that it is against charity, to suspend any man that professes himself
prepared; he that lays this upon the Text, lays more upon it then it will
bear, and which the Ancients and Modern approved Authors will not own, as we
hope more fully to prove anon.

The sixth Section of the Paper.
IN the Primitive Church were excluded from the Communion, the Catechumeni, The
sixth Section of the Paper.
Energumeni, persons excommunicate, and penitents. and such as lapsed into
Heresy, until they repented, and I should be glad to be taught; for sure it
is out of my learning, where, or when any others were rejected, but only under
this notion and capacity. In these ancient times I find that mutual
reconciliations, and in Affrican Churches vigils with prayers, and in
Chrysostomes times fastings, and sometimes in some places the public
renouncing in some particular heresies, were antecedent to the Synaxis; but I
find no necessity of previous examination. When the Church saw the benefit of
public confessions for public offenses, as well for the subduing of the
stubbornness of their hard hearts, and the improving of their deep
humiliation; as for the raising up again by those sensible comforts, which they
received by the public prayers of the Church, and use of the Keys. Some men
reflecting hereupon, and finding their consciences smarting for like fins,
which being secretly carried, were not obnoxious to the censures of the Church,
to the end they might obtain like consolation and quiet mind, did voluntarily
submit themselves to the Churches Discipline herein, and underwent the burden
of public confession and penance; and to the end this publication of secret
offenses might be performed in the best way, and discreetest manner, some
prudent Minister was first acquainted therewith, by whose direction the
Delinquent might understand what sins were first to be brought to the public
notice of the Church, and in what manner the penance was to be performed by
them.

At first it was left free to the penitent to choose his Ghostly Father; but at
length by the general consent of the Bishops it was ordained, that in every
Church one certain discreet Minister should be appointed to receive
confessions, until at length in the time of Nectarius Bishop of
Constantinople, (who died, An. D. 401. Socrates, Hist. l. 5. c. 19.
) upon occasion of the infamy drawn upon the Clergy by the confession of a
Gentlewoman, defiled by a Deacon in that City, it was thought fit it should be
abolished, and liberty should be given to every man upon the private
examination of his own conscience, to resort to the holy Communion, which
doubtless occasioned Chrysostom the successor of Nectarius to make those
deliveries of himself, which are prementioned The result of those premises is
this, that the ancient Church sometime thought it requisite that confession of
penitents should precede the Communion, but not the examination of all, or any
that communicated. I shall desire that it may be deliberately considered,

First, Whether repentance be not as necessary to worthy receiving, and as
principal a part of that examination which every one ought to make of himself,
as knowledge; and then as advisedly to perpend.

Secondly Whether there be not as great a reason to revive Auricular
confession, (in some qualified, and rectified manner) as to introduce a
particular examination, especially since the Church of Rome asserts, and
practices it upon this same principle, Greg. Valentia, tom. 3. disp. 6. quest.
8. punct. 3. page 43.
which these men do their precedaneous examination, (viz.) because it is the
duty of the Priest to repel unworthy, and to admit the worthy, which is best
done upon the knowledge of the penitents estate in confession.

SECT. XIII.
Wherein of the practice of Antiquity in preparation for, and exclusion from
the Lords Supper.

In the sixth Paragraph he passes from Scripture-Argument to Antiquity, Illi
vero quamvis non habent sacras literas. habent fortasse doctores veteres, and
sanctos Patres, Juel. Apol. p. 114.
which discourse is continued in the seventh and eighth Sections. In this a
line is drawn from the Primitive Church, down to the time of Chrysostom, or
rather a circle about that age he lived in. In whose time the yoke of Auricular
confession was broken, and liberty granted to every man to resort to the
Communion upon the private examination of his own conscience. We shall now make
trial of the strength of this also, where we find some things yielded, others
affirmed, and supposed, all which we will consider. We might here show many
reasons against building too much on the Fathers and Antiquity, this objection
being raised upon the sand thereof, and taken not for Scripture-Antiquity, but
upon humane account, of Fatherss and Councels. Sibrandus Lubertus, de
principiis, c. dogm. p. 7.
It is received among all Orthodox Divines, that the Books of the Prophets and
Apostles, are the only principle of Christian belief. The Fathers have their
errors, sometimes they agree in mistakes, and another while are divided in
truths. It is the saying of an eminent man, L. Verulam Essays, p. 140.
(They that teverence old times too much, are a scorn to the new,) in his
Essay on Innovation, whereon by some passages in the first Section of the Paper
sent, we conjecture the Authors eye to have been. Justine Martyr refers the
opinion of the Chiliasts (which has been taken for an error,) to the
Apostles. Irenaeus says, that he had by tradition, that Jesus Christ lived
fifty years on earth, which is false.

It is the manner of the Fathers (says our Author) when they would commend a
thing, Sib. Lub. de p. c. dog. p. 130.
not knowing its Original, to refer it to the Apostles, and Primitive Church.
In the three first ages, or centuries of the Fathers, the Learned are perplexed
with spurious works; so that there is great uncertainty as to the Fathers and
state of the Primitive Church, as it is reported by Writers. Besides, the
Primitive Church is stretched somewhat too far, when it is brought down to
the time of Chrysostom, (who lived in the fourth Century) when in the
judgment of some it extends not beyond the Apostles days, or but to the third
Century: We wonder most at this, that devout Chrysostom is brought in for this
suggested liberty. Let the Reader consult him, especially on Matthew. Hom. 38.
Chrrysost. Hom. 28. on Mat. p. 98
toward the end of the Homily; and if he find not Chrysostom of another
mind, we are deceived. We shall set down his words hereafter: But what if such
a thing be concluded on, will it therefore be a truth not to be gainsaid? No,
the consent of Bishops is not always so authentic. Here again Auricular
confession is made our pattern, and so presented, as to cast an odium upon the
Ministers, and their actings in this business. What else that story of
unclearmesse serves for, we know not.

As to the Queries, and demands in the end of the Section, we answer, 1.
Repentance is as necessary as knowledge, and is a part of examination, or
rather examination is a part, or act of repentance. 2. That private confession
in a right and rectified manner, has never been totally disused; the private
unburthening of grieved souls into the bosom of some Christian friend,
Minister or other in some difficult cases, has been, and is practiced home to
this day.


We hope that the Author may see in time, that the Ministers principles in
their separation, and examination are not Romish: We abhor the Church of
Romes rotten Principles; We abhor her, her ways, and friends. Some of her
Principles may be good, yet then her inferences are base. These men pointed at
in the Paper do undertake to show, that as they dislike not that Christian
refuge of private confession, which is the very word and will of God: Jam. 5.16.
So they can maintain their course of examination without use of the
Philistines forge, nor do they introduce anything; only they desire that all,
whether public or private duties to God, or the Churches honor, may be upheld.

We come next to consider, what is produced from Antiquity, and yielded in this
Controversy; as also to see, whether this be for the Paper, or against it. A
smatterer in Antiquity may know, that the Ancients rejected, and suspended
diverse sorts of men under sundry considerations, and that they were exceeding
cautelous about admission to this Ordinance, no print whereof is to be seen in
the common practice of our Assemblies. Such orders, or distinctions of men as
are named, may be found; some make three, some four sorts of these, as
Catechumeni, Energumeni, etc. All which forms were in order to a holy
Communion, that persons ignorant and unfit might be kept off.

First, The Catechumeni were such as the Church nurtured in the fundamentals of
Religion, being unbaptized, the children (as we suppose) of Pagans.

The Energumeni were a sort of men possessed of Satan, or men excommunicate; as
Peter Martyr P. Mart. loc. com. p. 835, and 831. Illi dicuntur energumeni, qui
interius laborant pervexationem daemonis, etc. Joh. Alstaig. Lex. Th. p. 282.
thinks, because such were delivered unto Satan. Energumeni, ab energia, as
others, from an inward laboring under Satan.

What the penitents were, is more easily known by the sound of the Word, namely
such as became scandalous by their manners, or opinions. Now that such as these
are mentioned in ancient Writers is granted; nor is it necessary we should
assign other qualifications, when these distinctions in Antiquity were in
order to a more holy Communion, (which is our end) that persons ignorant and
unfit might be kept off: Such as speak of the Discipline of these times do
relate their courses more fully about admitting penitents, and such as had been
scandalous.

1. They were admitted to the limits of the Church.

2. To lie down in the Church Porch.

3. To hearing of the Word, but not to stay at prayers.

4. Next to see the Sacrament, not receiving till they were sufficiently
humbled.

These things without doubt had a good use, and do shame the ordinary
Administrations in our Parishes, where no such things are thought on, See
Evangel. Com. in Episle, in p. 4.
but (all to the Sacrament.) is the plea and practice.

Thus far Antiquity is for us, rather then against us.

Let us take a little more of what is granted; The Primitive Church (says the
Paper) saw the use of public confession; Now our examination is little more or
other The admission of very many of our members, was only by public
confession, and that some others have done the same thing more privately,
before two or three witnesses, this has been out of our tenderness, and
condescension to their bashfulnesse; Otherwise we think the public (we mean
the presence of the Church) to be the fittest place, so that here is little
varying from Antiquity. Now if this be considered, what comfort can Ministers,
or others take in holding larger and wider principles then the ancient godly
did; the clear light of the Doctrine of Grace calling (now) for more pureness
in our own ways, and in the Churches, and the times now being more
enlightened, and discerning, godly men then submitted to the Churches
discipline, why are such as would be so esteemed averse now? That the practice
of public confession at first pure, did afterward become corrupt by the
working of Antichrist, this is to be bewailed, but it is no argument against
the use of the same, o^ a very like course by us. The rejection spoken of, was
after the abuse appeared; but now men (to use the Proverb) sweat to see the
saddle, or rather bridle to curb their lufts. It seems to us the authorities
urged should constrain men, we speak (to the better sort of Ministers) to do
somewhat equivalent to what the Ancients did, rather then to stickle against
the day of small things. It affects us to read in the few Ancients (we converse
with) such passages as these, Sancta Sanctis. Holy things to holy men, which
was pronounced by the Deacon before the administration of the Lords Supper;
which shows their purity this way; the very Heathens had one to cry, Procul
hinc, J. Mich. Dilherrus, lib. 2. Elect. c. 1.
Be gone you that are profane. We see by what we have read, that the Ancients
require as much, or more then we do; and therefore are censured by one for
going too far this way: Now what if some difference be in the formality of
our actings? a distingue tempora will take off that. We live in a Church
corrupted through the negligence of latter days; If we redressing differ
(something) from them in gathering and ordering, it is not much to be stood
upon. We shall shut up this Section with one or two testimonies, by which the
Reader may see of what Spirit the best of the Ancients were, as to the point in
hand, namely about suspension, or admission to the Lords Table.

They thought it (says one) detestable to God and man, not only for them that
were defiled with lesser sins, but if but under a cloud of suspicion to come to
the Eucharist, and they judged it dangerous for absolved penitents to touch
those things.

If not thought holy enough by them to whom the care of the Sacrament was
committed. Chrysostom is as full as can be wished, I would not suffer these
things to be done (speaking of the approaching of men unfit) rather will I give
my life, Albaspinaeus, lib. 2. obser. 25. Nulla potest congruentior
commodiorque afferri ratio, (speaking of the strictness of the Ancients) quam
quae ex reverentia ac Religtone petitur; qua adversus Sanctam Eucharistiam
ferebantur; detestabile quippe Deo and hominibus non solum existimabant hominem
vel levissima macula inquinatum, ac maculae nebula offensum ad Eucharistiam
accedere, etc.
and pour out my own blood. After he had admonished Ministers not to deliver
the Eucharist, to the unworthy, he adds these words, if therefore any general,
if the Consul himself, if one that wears the Crown come unworthily, forbid and
restrain him, thou have greater authority then he. How round are these words?
Let us therefore keep off all (absolutely) that we see to come unworthily. No
small punishment hangs over our heads, if we suffer any to come that we know to
live in any sin; He does not say, if he will not submit to trial, you are
free; and if you exhort, you have freed your own soul. No, his principles were
more strict, and holy, then so to speak. His blood will be required of thy
hands: This is other, See Chrysostom at large, 38. Hom. on Matthew, p. 198.
yea, higher language. If it be said, that Chrysostom spoke of notorious known
sinners, and that such are not pleaded for; We must answer, nor are others
pleaded against, or willingly excluded by us: Though knowing men, and such as
are of innocent lives, may be called forth, these make little work for Friars,
and are good examples to their weak Brethren. What is required of, and done by
them, is chiefly to encourage others; We wish we could but see notorious wicked
ones kept off in the Assemblies obout us, it would beget better thoughts in us
of the spirits of some, then now we can have; but we hear of no such work,
rather we know the contrary.

The seventh Section of the Paper.
THE Eucharist was often in these Primitive times sent to persons absent: The
seventh Section of the Paper.
It was given to Strangers coming to Rome, as a pledge or Symboll of their
consent, and communion in the same faith, where was no probability, surely no
evidence of precedent examination.

SECT. XIV.
Wherein is replied unto the seventh Paragraph, about giving the Sacrament to
strangers, and sending it to the absent; Arguments against Examination.

fetches it from Rome; prove it you to be an ancient practice, and we will
maintain it to be an ancient error. Antichrist has been long working in the
Church, the Fathers might be too free, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7
this will not excuse men's prodigality of Christ's blood in these days. Men's
actings which have been without warrant, are neither good presidents, nor
arguments; such as are strangers by place, may upon the knowledge of some
members, or certificate from their Church be admitted; Strangers in place are
not to be stood upon, if they be not strangers in heart and condition: He that
dwells next door, may be a stranger to Heaven and Jesus Christ.

The eighth Section of the Paper.
IN the first times they generally communicated daily, which St. Hierom says,
The eighth Section of the Paper. Eusebius. ex Iren. cent. 2. Magdeburg.
he neither approves, nor reprehends. Zepherinus Bishop of Rome about A. D.
300. ordained that generally every one pubertatem excessus, (which was about
the 15. or 16. year) should communicate once a year. Fabianus; that they should
do it thrice; so did the Agathense Council.

This decree is found under the name of the Apostles Canons, Can. 10. Which
though I am not ignorant, are not rightly fathered upon them; yet are ancient,
and not contemptible. As many of the faithful as come into the Church, and
hear the Scriptures, but continue not out the prayers, nor receive the holy
Communion; let them be put from the Communion of the Church, as men that work
the breach of order. And it is noted in the Margent upon the same Canons: In
old time all that were present did communicate. And consonantly the Council of
Antioch decreed. that all that come into the Church of God, and hear the holy
Scriptures, and refuse the receiving of the Lords Sacrament, let them be put
from the Church; In vain, Hom. 3. ad Ephesians.
says Chrysostom, we stand at the Altar, when none will participate. -- If
thou stand by, and do not communicate, thou art wicked, thou art shameless,
thou art impudent; I would not only have you to participate, but to be worthy
partakers. Thou will say, I am unworthy to partake of the holy Mysteries; then
art thou unworthy to be partaker of the prayers; not only by those things set
before us, but by Hymns also does the Holy Ghost descend; you that are under
penance, depart. -- He that partakes not, De medicina poenitent. super illud,
1 Cor. 5. Si quis frater, etc.
is a penitent. We can, says Augustine, repel no man from the Communion, but
one that by his own confession, and the sentence of the Ecclesiastical, or
Civil Judicatory shall be accused, or convicted of some crime. And in another
place, (which Gratian cites) under the name of St Hilary ( De consecrat. did.
2.6. si. non tanta,) Only for these sins that deserve excommunication, may a
man be driven from the Communion, Ep. 118. c. 3.

And the School (if it has any regard left it) does generally hold, as also
the Casuists, (and besides many reasons, they cite the authority of Saint
Augustine to abet their opinion) that the Communion is not to be denied to a
secret sinner, that is not notorious, if he desire it, left he be thereby
defamed. Let it now be considered, whether there can be any conformity between
the Ancient Church, and these men, that are as careful, and as earnest to
exclude men from the Sacrament, as the Ancients were to bring them to it. Now
men stand by, and would, but are not suffered to communicate; where then, and
upon whom shall we lay Chrysastomes stigme of wicked, shameless, and impudent?
If the Pastor shall say of his flock, as it seems some of Chrysostomes
auditors said of themselves, they are unworthy, the same Father will give the
Pastor the same answer which he did his own flock, they are then unworthy to be
partakers of the prayers; and the Council of Antioch adds, unworthy to hear
the holy Scriptures. If they are not under penance, they are not in that
Fathers judgment to be rejected. And I would have it laid to heart in a
serious consideration, that seeing the Word is the savor of death unto death
unto some, as well as he eats and drinks his damnation that eats and drinks
unworthily; why there should not be as great a necessity to examine men of
their preparation and fitness in order to the hearing of the Word, as to the
receiving of the Sacrament; especially seeing that precept of not casting
pearls before swine, or giving holy things to dogs, (which some allege to
justify this Occonomy of excluding from the Sacrament such as they suspect
unworthy) is first and principally intended of preaching of the Word.

SECT. 15.
Wherein other Arguments from Antiquity are answered, and the vote of the
Schooolmen produced for the defendants.



1. What if they received often? this was an argument of their faith, and
strength of love to Christ in those days; we like their daily receiving better
then their general, unless the times were much better then ours. It may be
often, and yet not so often. There is no necessity, nor hardly fitness in this
daily receiving.

1. How shall the Church come together? 2. What shall become of their calling?
3. What time of preparation?
This often receiving touches not us, but checks those that while they dislike
us, do content themselves with receiving it once, or twice a year, if they
make it not an Easter-formality alone.

2. What if they received at fifteen or sixteen years old? so they be godly
young ones, we see no fault in that neither, we have had some taken in among us
about that age.

3. Suppose it were decreed that all present at the Word should communicate;
this might well be, if such as were under censure, or obnoxious to it were
excepted. We also believe that such as belong to a reformed and orderly Church,
cannot without offense, unless the cause be shown go away from the Eucharist,
(having been present at the Word) when it is administered. All this while these
men are no enemies to Antiquity. While we are considering these authorities, we
see more confusion then variety; How agrees that note upon the Margent of the
Canons? [In old time all did communicate, yea all that hear the Word by the
appointment of the Council of Antioch, and no difference between presence at
the Churches prayers, and at her breaking of bread.]

This was in old time, and truly unless the thimes were holier then ours now
are, they were old dark times when such things were practiced. Thus the former
authorities. But the following testimonies remember of some restraint upon that
Ordinance, which is the true account of Antiquity, as is confessed in the
Paper, and has been demonstrated by us. It is as clear as the light at
noonday, that all under the Word were not suffered to come to the Lords Table,
though this be the mind, and desire of most in those days: and that which
commonly lies in the deck, where examination, and such like distinguishing
courses were opposed. Mr. Ph. Goodwin.
All to the Sacrament, being (as a godly man speaks) the great Goliath of these
days, with whom the little David's of this age are encountering; Amesius in
medulla, Th. p. 288 289.
As little weight has that testimony, which allows no cause of suspension from
the Communion, less then that which deserves excommunication; whereas the
Paper makes the excommunicate but one of those sorts of the excluded, Antiquity
has distinguished between suspension, and excommunication, which are now
termed the greater and the lesser excommunication.

We come now to give an account of our regard of the Schoolmen, and of their
respect to us in the present debate. We shall desire those that have them, to
consult them upon the third part of Thomas Aquinas, and to bring us word
whether they don ot put it into the hands of Ministers, to deny the Sacrament
unto all such, as they do judge to be scandalous sinners, or unworthy persons.
We have given a taste of the words of one of these.

This dispensation or denial of the Sacrament, Haec dispensatio vel negatio
Sacramenti, non est consideranda ut actio judicialis, etc.
is not to be considered as a judicial or penal act, but as a prudent and
faithful administering; and therefore depends not upon witnesses and proofs, but
only upon that judgment and knowledge, which in a prudent existimation by
occurrent circumstances is judged sufficient, that without any offense the
Sacrament may be, and ought to be denied; see the Schools say so much, Suarez
par. 3. Tho tom. 3. disp. 6, 7. Sect. 3 p. 856.
that they say more then we would have them; that whole Section, and all the
Sections of that disputation tend to the same purpose. The Pastor must more
regard the reverence, or dignity of the Sacrament, then the right of the
sinner. In the sixth Section are these words: A violent suspicion is enough to
deny the Sacrament, Ib. Sect. 6 p. 863.
according to the common opinion of Divines. Now to prove from the Schoolmen,
and Casuists, that all but the scandalous were admitted, or that secret sinners
are not to be kept off, is to prove nothing at all, Greg. Mag. Epist. lib. 2.
cap. 66.
for we sinde that only such ought to be excluded, as are some way scandalous.
If it be manifest to our knowledge of any man, that he is guilty of some
ungracious fault, let him by our authority be deprived of the communion of
Christ's body and blood. It is a sad charge which closes these authorities, but
being misapplied, it troubles not us much, we leave it to the Reader to judge
whether there be not more conformity between us and Antiquity, then our
Adversaries can make good of their practice, while they make no separation, and
set no bounds or fence against profaners. Who they be that are so careful to
repel, and exclude men, as the Ancients were to bring them to the Sacrament,
we know not. Nor will we too hastily resolve where that stigme of Chrysostom
(being so foul) should rest; a man may see (with half an eye) where the Paper
would fix it, nay, where it does; but no matter, harder words then these must
the servants of Christ bear with joy: With more truth, and candor may it be
laid at their doors that are more careful and forward to have men partake, then
to have them worthy partakers, as many are; this was not Chrysostomes mind, we
have cause to bless God for the comfort he has given us in our weak
endeavors, to preserve the dignity of his Ordinance. Nor have we the least
touch of guilt, as to our excluding some, many are worthily excluded, some
stand off, and exclude themselves upon some poor pretenses. We shall not bear
their guilt at the last day. It is not much what men think, man's judgment is
much easier borne then Gods. There is yet one thing unanswered in this Section,
which we are requested to consider. It is, Whether it be not as necessary to
examine men before they hear the Word, See Ursini Cateche. a Pareo illust. p.
531. See Evang, com. p. 178. See Gillespy, Aarons Rod. p. 489. Canes quidem
quibus sanctum non est dandum, and porci ante quos margaritae non suntt
abjiciendae, Mat. 7.6. ab ista sacra mensa abigantur. At in quibus seriae
poenitentiae signa deprebenduntur, illi non diu^urnis remoris, etc. Harm.
Evang. Ger. fol. cap. 66. p. 941.
as before the holy Supper, becanse the Word has the savor of death to some;
and that Scripture (Cast not your pearls before swine) is meant of hearing the
Word? It seems to us to be below reason, to see no difference between other
Ordinances and the Lords Supper, as to mat-of examination. Those words (Cast
not your pearls, etc.) may extend to hearers of the Word, this is not denied:
but where one applies it so, many do apply it to the Communion. So by Alexander
Halensis, and others of note, Who knows not that distinction between a
converting and confirming Ordinance? -- Some indeed have contested against this
difference, but with slender success. The Word Heathens are capable of. Go,
preach the Word to every creature. The other is proper to Saints, to comfort,
and strengthen the begotten. So that there is not the same reason for a preced
aneous examination in these two Ordinances.

As to that controversy, Whether the Sacrament may convert (which borders upon
this opinion?) so much is said about it by two learned and godly men, as little
can be added. Gillespy.
One in a vigorous reply to Master Prinne, by whom (though a man free of his
pen) no answer has been given. Ph. Good.
The other is a late, clear, and sweet discourse. Consult these; we are
sailing with a side-winde, being not directly engaged by the Paper, to speak
our thoughts, yet we shall spare a few words to it. Conversion of souls is Gods
work, who is not limited by his own Ordinances, but is above them, while we are
under them; he can without any or by unsanctified means call a soul. We read
of one converted by often seeing a deaths head in a ring, another by a man's
falling down dead in his sight; these (you will say) are not proper, or
sanctified means. Again, by prayer a soul may be converted in some sense, As

1. Grace may be then given in.

2. In prayer much of the Gospel may be held out, as to sins guilt, misery
and remedy, and so a soul may be wrought upon, this is by prayer, but not as
such: The scope of it being to beg grace, to seek a blessing on the Word, and
sanctify that means. Further, a soul may be wrought upon by a
Sacrament-Sermon, or Sacrament-exhortation, or one may be turned from the
practice of a particular sin, and may have his conversion cleared at such a
time. Or thus, the time of receiving the Sacrament, may be the time of his
first sensible feeling of grace wrought, yet all this does not make it a
converting Ordinance in an ordinary way, such as in faith may be used for that
end. No, Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. which is meant of preaching, as a
distinct Ordinance, see ver. 15. But this is more then we owe the Paper, which
does not affirm (in terminis) that the Lords Supper is a converting Ordinance,
but only this, that the danger is alike of unworthy hearing, as of unworthy
receiving, and therefore examination is no more necessary to the one, then
before the other; there being no examination before hearing, why before the
Lords Supper?

1. But this conceit has no conformity with Antiquity, for the Catechumeni,
and penitents were admitted to the Word, but put from the other as all men know.

2. Hear a worthy or two in this case. The Word goes before faith, the
Sacraments, follow says learned Amesius. Peter Martyr speaks thus in English:
Moreover, Amesius, Bell. Enerv. tom. 3. lib. 1. cap. 1. Pet. Martyr upon Mat.
18.17. Adbaec praedicandum est eis qui nondum audierunt, aut certe nondum
perceperunt: attamen utcunque feratur impuritas conventuum ubi ver bum
praedicatur quam Christus and Apostoli tulcrunt, coenae tamen communio (ut
dixi) purior esse debet, etc.
we must preach to those that have not yet heard or not understood. Yet though
the impurity and mixture of Assemblies where the Word is preached, be to be
born with, which Christ, and his Disciples did bear, yet the communion of the
Supper should be purer (as I said) for it is a public thanksgiving for
redemption given of them, who do openly profess themselves Christians.

The nineth Section of the Paper.
WHat apological reason can there be showed to obstruct or impede the admission
of all that profess the faith of Christ, The ninth Section of the Paper.
though formally, and are not scandalous by a manifest belying of their
profession? The Sacrament is not defiled by their partaking, no more then the
Word is by being preached unto faithless people, and that is no more then the
Sun is polluted by shining upon a dunghill. Those that communicate with them
are not polluted, or defrauded thereby of the fruit, and efficacy of the
Sacrament; neither does God bind us to dive into other men's consciences; nor
can their fraud, or deceits, or cold, formal profession hurt any beside
themselves. To God they seem such as they are, but of us they must be taken for
such as they seem. In the eye of God they are against Christ, that are not
truly and sincerely with him: in our eyes they must be received as with Christ,
that are not in outward show against him. (Beside that it was said by Tully to
be Cato's fault, that he was so strict and severe, as if he had lived in
Plato's Commonwealth, not in the dregs of Romulus:) The Church at no time can
pretend to, or hope for perfection of degrees, rarely that of parts. Jacobs
ladder had several degrees in it, and all were not of one height, or rising.
The floor has in it wheat, and chaff; the field corn, and tares; the net good
fish, and bad; and which I would have more especially taken notice of, at the
nuptial banquet was one found without a wedding garment. I keep the Church,
says St. Augustine, full of wheat, Contra. Crescon. l. 3. c. 15, and 36.
and chaff: I amend whom I can, I tolerate whom I cannot: I fly the chaff,
lest I become the same thing; but not the floor, lest I be nothing. Accuse
thou with all thy forces; if they be innocent, thy ventosity shall not hurt
them, as being corn; if nocent, the corn ought not to be deserted for the
chafe. Accuse them what thou can, I, overcome if thou provest it; I am
victor if thou provest it not. If thou prove it not, I overcome, be thy self
Judge, if thou do prove it, I am victor by the judgment of Cyprian, who
taught that the barn was not to be forsaken for the chafe. To forsake the
Assemblies because of the mixture, and communion of hypocrites, and evil men I
should willingly know, if it be not to revive the old heresies of Donatus,
Lucifer, Novatus, and Audius? And to make the Church of the called to be of no
greater latitude then that of the elect? whereas many are called, but few are
chosen. And as the people may not withdraw themselves from the Communion upon
that pretense, so neither may the Minister withhold the Communion from them;
for can it be thought rational that the holy desire of a competent number
should be unsatisfied, because the greater part is careless, and indisposed to
join with them? Is not this to eradicate the corn for the tares sake, whereas
rather both should be suffered to grow together until harvest? And as it is no
prejudice to the rest of the people to communicate with them, so none likewise
to the Pastor to administer it to them, so as he have by public and
preparatory teaching, and as he shall find it fit, and seasonable and meet
with opportunities to do it, by private conference endeavored to principle,
and dispose them to a worthy receiving. Petitur a te cura, non curatio, says
St. Bernard, If thou teach, that is thine; if he will not learn, that is
his: take what is thine, and go thy way, says the same Father. If the watchman
cry, and the City will not be warned, their blood shall be upon their own
heads, he has delivered his soul. Neither was the Pastor of Corinth blamed for
admitting those that did eat, and drink unworthily, but they were reprehended
that came so unprepared; nor were the servants checked for bringing into the
marriage feast a man that had no wedding garment, though himself were cast out
into utter darkness. I know a man is guilty of every sin he labors not to
hinder, but then first he must have a power to impede it; and to say a Minister
is empowered to put from the Sacrament without the party will submit to
examination, is petitio principii, for that is the thing controverted. And
secondly, if the matter be necessary, and the failer be only in the manner of
doing it, the rule holds not, for to crop one ear of a whole harvest; and to
instance in one of many cases, How then could a Christian Prince from a
Heathen, for confirmation of a league, take an oath made by his false gods? And
surely, take, eat, and let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, being
in the imperative, and so consequently commands, make the Communion a matter
necessary, and it is denied by none that the Sacraments are necessary
necessitate precaepti, if not medii. It is true, Chrysostom that so vehemently
urges all to come, as deeply charge Ministers not to admit known offenders
to the Communion; But if one, says he, be ignorant, that he is an evil person,
after that he has used much diligence therein, he is not to be blamed; for
those things are spoken by me of such as are known, but this is not our present
case; for persons openly evil, and scandalous, we have before professed that we
plead not for; but I shall desire it may be thought upon, whether, or no, while
some men fear accidentally to lose or hazard souls, they do not more endanger
them, and their own souls too, by withholding from them the Sacrament, the
likeliest means of full, and perfect recovery of them?

SECT. 16.
Wherein answer is given to the ninth Paragraph, calling for reasons, and
grounds, and containing some other arguments.

necessitate praecepti; true, so they may be, and yet to be administered in due
manner; and with due care. It is still intimated that scandalous sinners should
not come; now we might take this for granted, and say no more, but that the
concessions look one way, and the arguments another; how shall any be kept
back, if the Ministers have no power to impede, unless men will submit? no man
says, the Minister (or any other) has power to impede such as are not unfit.
If the unfit may be suspended it is enough; and if not, these the Minister has
no power at all. If some be scandalous, and unfit as is yielded (in terminis)
then there must be a Judge of this unfitness, which must not be themselves,
but the Ministers; and Church Officers. But to come nearer to the very words,
and order, we can yield no reason why men not scandalous, (nor ignorant) should
be kept off, our minds being to admit all that come not under those
qualifications, namely, ignorant, or some way scandalous; if we could know men
to be but formal, (that is dead, and hypocritical) though they were not
scandalous, they should be kept off; for such are intruders, have no right, and
are necessarily profaners of the Sacrament; but we cannot ordinarily discern
this, though we know that there are many such; therefore we steer by another
compass.

We say further, that the openly wicked only do defile the Sacrament (in the
worst sense;) secret sinners (hypocrites, and formalists) in Gods eye, profane
ones in the Churches sight; the first draw judgments on themselves, the latter
on others: ungracious persons cannot actually, and intentionally sanctify Gods
Name in their approaches to the Lords Table. But if all these, and such as
these be excepted, there will be no dunghils for the Ordinance of the Sun of
righteousness to shine upon, and so no fear of manifest pollution.

Again, Gods people themselves may be faulty through negligence; but if
Ministers, and godly people do their duty, then though ungodly ones be
admitted, they are blameless, and the Ordinance may not be null to them, nor
polluted; however, if they know such to be admitted, it must needs be a sore
burden to them. Long have godly people in this land groaned (Ministers
especially) under this heavy burden, from which (as they hope) they may now
deliver themselves. That which is affirmed here, that a previous exhortation on
the Ministers part frees his soul, is to us an unsound position; for we
conceive much more required, and incumbent on Ministers, and the Church. There
is more required: Why else does Chrysostom bid them deny it to some? If after
he have admonished, he admits such as he knows, (or may know) to be wicked, he
sins against his own soul, by defiling it with other men's sins. The people
also have somewhat to do on their parts, namely, praying against the toleration
of the wicked, besides informing, and declaring against them that live loosely,
and are inordinate walkers, as did the house of Cloe; 1 Cor. 1.11
why should men think that public warning is enough, while some are not
capable of the sight of the danger shown, or of performing the duty of
self-examination; others are hardened, and will advance through a storm of the
most terrible threats? suspension is a more effectual means, then a bare
exhortation to teach men repentance; we have seen the experience of both. You
will scarce find one staying away in these Parishes, where are warnings, but
no other discipline; let not men deceive themselves, and others. It is objected
that the Ordinance is defiled no more then the Sun is by shining upon a
dunghill. We answer, the Ordinance may be defiled, that is, profaned, and
abused, though not corrupted in its essence. The Sun is a natural agent, and
in a Physical way cannot be defiled: The Sacrament does continue a holy, and
pure institution in it self, while it is most profanely abused. God is
dishonored truly, yet he does not become inglorious in himself, by men's
wickedness: the defilement of the Sacrament is this, the society, 1 Cor. 5.7.
wherein the wicked are, is corrupted, leavened, or troubled, as the Spirit
speaks; defiled it is unto the wicked through the sins of their souls: Yea,
unto the godly too, they do become filthy, if they be faulty.





All that follows about the errors of Novatus, and others: Gal. 5.12. Holymour
Stock on Mala. p. 30. By Ministers continuance and suffering wicked men, and
not censuring them, they may be many ways hurtful, and infect the clean, and
holy, these being more capable of the others evils, then they are able to
communicate good to them, as health is not so communicable, as contagion, 1
Cor. 5.6 Then if they desire to keep them whole from pollutions, they must
separate the wicked as shepherds, says Chysostome, separrate the infected, and
scabbed from the whole.
The distinguishing of the Church visible from the invisible, the state of the
Church here below, etc. We yield all this, and yet can see nothing gained upon
us thereby, there will be tares among the wheat unto the worlds end, only we
are not taught that tares do signify profane men, but rather hypocrites, such
as come so near Christians, that we cannot distinguish them.

Tares are very like the wheat in the growing up, as one observes out of
Jerome, Gospelworship. p. 239.
but scandalous men are not like believers.

Object. But is it not rational, that the desire of a competent number be
satisfied, though the greater part be indisposed?

Answ. Yes, it is fit they should be satisfied in a lawful, and due way: But
what if such a competent number has not appeared, when proposals have been
made; upon this supposition, that such might be found? We know of no godly and
well-disposed people within our precincts, but may have the Ordinance if they
desire it, nor is it our desire to straiten the Ordinance causelessly; we are
joyful, when any discover a serious minding of that holy business. The
fewness of those that are accepted is either from men's own unfitness, or from
their own unwillingnesse. The truth is, men will have it where they please, and
in what manner they please, otherwise they are not so godly, but they can
neglect so precious an institution. But still the strong hold and place of
retreat we find to be this. If men come unworthily it is to themselves, the
Minister can but teach, and warn; so doing he needs not fear the guilt of
other men's sins, for he has no power to do more. We answer, 1. The zeal of
Chrysostom and Ambrose will rise up against those, who taught not only to
admonish, but to keep back. Ambrose kept off Theodosius an Emperor. 2. The
partaking of other men's sins will not be so easily avoided. Can I clear my self
by telling one that there is poison in such a cup that will be his death, and
yet (he desiring) afterward give it him? What a folly is this? But the
Minister has no power to do more. That is a question not yet fully resolved.
Though the power be not solely in him, yet if it be in the Church Officers, it
is enough; and surely there is a power to that end somewhere, or almost all the
learned men in the world have mistaken the doctrine of the keys, from that
text, Mat. 16.19. We should confirm this more, See the 3d. Section of the
Paper.
but that we find the paper in a sort granting it. If Ministers have not a
power, who have? If there be such a thing to be done, the power is somewhere;
shall we raise up Bishops, and their Substitutes out of their graves to lead
us herein? Is not the Word Christ enough? Alas, that a duty should be to be
done, but none found to do it; a power, but none to act it; keys, but no hand
to hold them. What a vanity is this? If the Schools be regarded, they empower
the Minister, as was showed before. And the Authority we live under, did (and
for ought we know does) authorize the keeping back of the unfit, See the
several Ordinances of Parliament
and unworthy. If you say, This is granted you, that scandalous persons should
not be admitted: We must needs say, we have observed such words often. But how
are they made good while this passes so current, that a Minister has no power
to keep him back that will not submit to his trial, which is here affirmed? If
you say, He may keep back the scandalous, but not whom he pleases, or men well
qualified; nor is this desired, or pleaded for; Let coming to this Ordinance
stand, and pass for a Disciple-priviledge, and Ministers authorized, and
allowed to discern Disciple properties in them that come, and we are agreed.
Other allegations seem to us to lessen the care, and take off the activity of
Ministers in casting out, or turning off the unworthy. The Pastor of Corinth
(you say) is not blamed for admitting those that eat, and drink their own
damnation, but they themselves are reprehended, not he. We grant, he is not
there, or elsewhere blamed alone, but the whole Church, (whose the duty is, and
not the Ministers alone) is blamed, 1 Cor 4.21. This Rod was for abuses among
them, and their negligence in this might be one.


Object. Again, the servants are not checked when one is brought in without a
wedding garment.

Answ. Our Answer is, 1. This is a Parable, and so proves nothing, but only in
the scope of it. 2. It is a great Question whether this be not to be understood
of the Preaching of the Gospel, or of the Supper of grace at large in the Word
taught, and not of this Ordinance alone? We do not find that the servants
brought in that man, Mr. Phil. Goodwin. p. 125.
for then they might have been questioned too, and not he himself alone. One
says well, Parables are like spectacles, they help some to see, Ne quem a
gratia Dei excludat, impiis quoque illam and iniquis proponit. Musc. in Isa.
cap. 55 p. 745.
but others see the worse for them: So shall we, if we build a liberty of
coming to the Lords Supper, and an exemption of Ministers from blame upon this
Scripture. It Is true Ministers must preach Christ freely, bidding all according
to the universal tenders of grace in the Gospel. See we not the greatest
sinners sometimes foremost in coming to Christ? So that the Gospels way of
inviting all sensible sinners, suits this parable right well. But should the
utmost be made of each branch thereof, to advance Sacramental liberty, not
only admitting, but even constraining of the worst might be inferred; and this
foundation every one would see to be sandy. The unsealed may be called, or
invited, but the uncalled may not be sealed. We like a free Pulpit well, but
condemn a too free Table.


Object. Now to shut up our reply to this Section. There is a serious caveat
given us, not to hazard, and lose our own souls, while we are scrupulous about
others.

We answer, we do not (at least desire not to do) things out of fear, but upon
knowledge and persuasion of our duty. We know that the unworthy comers do
directly (quoad corruptionem actus) defile and destroy themselves; nor is the
Sacrament a proper or likely means to recover such as we desire to keep back,
but is rather likely by accident to blind, and harden them more then before.
The preventing of men's sins, and damnation cannot hazard our souls, Epistle
of Jude, v. 23.
but will comfort our consciences at the last day; 2 Cor. 2.15
under this buckler we fight, and act.

SECT. XVII.
Answering the Queries made in the end of the Paper.

I should be glad that some godly, The beginning of the tenth Section of the
Paper.
and moderate men might be satisfied in the scruples they have concerning this
course, and discipline.
Apology may remove them, especially from godly, and peaceable men. But when
we reflect upon these doubts, or queries here made, they seem to us to be
rather the hard thoughts of enemies, then the doubts of friends. Scruples are
(as we take it) men's doubts in their own way. That which impedes, and intangles
my conscience in my own actings, that is my scruple. But whatever these be,
(for we are not willing to contend about words) whether objections, censures,
or scruples, they shall (by Gods help) receive some answer.

SECT. XVIII.
Wherein of the first Querie, namely,

Whether it suite with the rule of the Apostle, Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in
the faith receive you? The first Querie in the tenth Section of the Paper.
Whether it be not judging, or setting at naught thy brother, or indeed not
owning him as a brother; And so contrary to ver. 1?


This languor or infirmity of faith must be borne, this is the sense of the
place. But least we should seem to decline this Scripture, let it be granted,
that believers may be weak in other respects, and that this Apostolical precept
must not dashed against in any practice.

Our answer therefore is, that the Ordinance of the Supper is very proper for
the weak in faith, being a strengthening appointment. We exclude not
(willingly) any such as are weak in the Apostles sense, but rather invite, and
encourage them. We think our brethren go beyond their warrant, while they take
Saints of the first magnitude only into fellowship. God has people of ill
sizes; there is the same holiness, but not the same degree of true holiness
in all believers; not the weak, but the dead; not children, but bastards do we
(purposely) refuse. Where we see any measure of true godly fear, any degree of
graciousnesse we gladly admit. God forbid we should refuse the meanest as to
the world, or in grace: no, we covet the purest, and take the weakest.

As to judging the other part of our burden, Calvin on the 14. Chapter to the To.
ver. 1.
Calvin will tell you, that judging there, is to bring men under our own Laws.
We abhor this: we desire to bring men under Christ's rules, and Laws, to find
men able to examine themselves, to be discerners of the Lords body, and that
they are desirous of holiness, and conformity to Jesus Christ; this we do try
for, and strive to discern: we judge not men's hearts, or final estates, but
their present condition by their actions. When we act in those matters
(according to our callings) we build our thoughts upon men's words, Mat. 7.16,
17.
and fruits, by which we are taught to discern one man from another, and good
men from bad; It is Christian and rational so to judge.

Who will fear to say, it is a smoaky house, where ordinarily the smoke breaks
out at doors, and windows? We desire to fear, and feel the least guilt of
evil, which may lie upon us; but as for this pride and contemning which is laid
to our charge, we hope the Lord sees us innocent. Austin makes it pride to
contemn discipline, not to use it: But more of this, when we come to answer
the Querie about Lording. It has been an old design of Satan, See Boltons
direct. to walk with God. p. 7, 8.
to brand religious courses with pride, as Master Bolton observes. He that
differences his society, and is not humble enough to be base, is by many deemed
pround. The Discourse of true happiness. p. 43.
To be render beyond the common course, this is to be strait-laced: to be
sullen, rigid, proud, or what you will; but after the way that the world calls
pride, have the precious servants of God walked, in a holy, Mr. Boroughs
Gracious Spirit, p. 156.
not in a humourous singularity, as one speaks. It is not safe to call good
evil. The Lord deliver us from that which some call humility. He is truly
devoted to humility, that can be content (in this world) to lose the repute of
an humble man, 1 Cor. 4.10
and be thought proud, (as Paul and his Fellow Christians were counted foolish,
weak, Nemo virtuti magis devotus, quam qui boni viri famam perdit, ne
conscientiam perdat. Seneca, Epist. 8.
any thing) for Christ's sake. Pride in judging others is a very foul thing, it
concerns all to watch against it. We know no better remedy then to judge our
selves rightly; we ought to observe the inward workings of our own hearts, and
to have a judgment of faith of our selves. He that judges himself truly, is
most likely to judge others wisely, and charitably. But if the godly cannot
persuade others to think well of them, 1 These. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 1.12.
yet let them rejoice in this, that they so far know their own spirits, that
though they be compassed about with great infirmities, yet they know, that what
they do is not out of pride.

Lastly, if our suspension of some from the Sacrament, must needs be
contemning, yet let me tell you of whom it is; it is of them that contemn Gods
ways, and of no others. Now to contemn such contemners is no sinful
contempt, and yet we deny that we contemn any: no, we mourn over the worst;
Refusing the wicked, may be (we hope) without contemning, but esteeming of the
godly will hardly stand without such contemning; as that of David, Psalm. 15.
ver. 4. These will not be parted, both springing from a pure heart. 2 These.
3.6, 15.
Such as are withdrawn from in this exercise, are not disclaimed altogether
from being brethren, but looked upon as offending brethren, at present not
capable of that which they have a remote right unto.

SECT. XIX.
Wherein the second Querie, namely,

Whether this Economy, that seems to hope, or believe nothing, and
suspecteth all to be ignorant, The second Querie in the tenth Section.
or hypocrites, and therefore necessarily to come under probation, resent of
that charity, which hops, believes all things, and fuspecteth not?
Morton in locum. p. 345.
1 Cor. 13.7. Whereon the judgment of some learned ones is, that the
particulars there are rather to be referred unto God, then to man; but not to
stand upon that. If we hope nothing, and suspect all, we are uncharitable to
the utmost, we had then as little love, and wisdom, as now these words, as
applied to us have of truth. We know some, (yea, many) to be knowing, and hope
of diverse that they are not hypocrites; there may be reasons given why persons
may be called to some trial and prosession of their knowledge, who are not
suspected of gross ignorance; the more remote any are from the suspicion of
ignorance, the more forcible will their example be to bring on others of a
lower form: and the more pliant such are, the more will their humility commend
their knowledge. The trial of such may be necessary, though not in their
single capacity as communicants, yet in the relative, as to the body they unite
with, and the work of reformation which the Church is to pass under. We have a
mind to be as charitable as others, and as we ought to be, but we cannot
suffer charity, (as much as we love and honor it) to swallow up all our duty.
Ministers may be charitable overmuch, and are, when they are prodigal of
Church Priviledges, (and therein of Christ's blood,) and when they are
senseless in their hopes, as some are, trusting all, and trying none: but
watchmen must suspect, and Ministers must save some with fear. Paul was jealous
and afraid, was he uncharitable? It is the praise of the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, that he had tried some; charity has a garment to cast upon some
sins, Rev. 2.2
but no license, or indulgence for any. True charity (as the saying is) is not
blind: We are not bound to hope contrary to our knowledge, and experience;
charity when true, is friendly to the love of God (whence it springs) and to
his ways, and people; it is not against charity to suspect of ignorance and
unfitness, when the contrary is no way discovered. Men show ignorance of their
duty in this very thing, that they refuse to submit to the trial of their
knowledge in so fair a way. We hear much of charity, we wish we could see more
of that which rejoices in the truth, 1 Cor. 13.6
more then in iniquity.

Some men's charity is so great, that if they know a man to be an often swearer,
or that loves the pot, or alebench, or have but overnight, (or lately) beheld
him in his sins, yet if he cry guilty, and say he will amend; they can next day
believe a change in him, and that such a one may be a fit partaker of that
blesseh Ordinance. But (alas!) this is a large charity, which fondly neglects
Gods revealed will, and flies to his absolute power. Men experienced in the
work of grace, and repentance will have other thoughts: hell and heaven do not
stand so near together, that men may so quickly step from one to the other.
Commonly men fall down before they stand upright, and when they are down, Act.
2.37 2 Cor. 7.12
there is some struggling and striving before they get up. Grace, if we judge by
Gods common working, is not like Jonah's Gourd, which sprung up in a night. Let
us not be over-credulous, and unscriptural in our thoughts and hopes; there may
be more charity in in our keeping back, then in our admitting some.

1. It is against love to God, Et quam ventam hujus contemptus consequeris Hom.
38. in Mat.
whose Ordinance by this credulousnesse is prostituted to many vile persons.
They are far from loving God whose embracing of men is a spurning at their
Redeemer, a trampling on the blood of the Covenant, Heb. ^0.29. as that text is
appled by Chrysostom.

2. Love to men requires, that if we see one about to hurt himself, we prevent
him, if we can; Shall I permit a man to drink his damnation, and say, I love
him? Love must be guided by wisdom; there is little love unto the souls of men
shown by them, who admit all; though they pretend to do this out of love. We
take them (say some) to be all Gods people, that will come, and will not debar
themselves of so great a good, thus some speak.

Pareus will teach those men that the work is not good, unless the men be
good; but alas, Cum ab infi delibus usurpentur Sacramenta, eorum usus non est
bonum opus. Usus Sacramentorum est bonum opus, quando hunc usum praecedunt
opera moralia, tunc dicitur usus, alias abusus. Pareus in Cath. Uisin. p. 539.
it is not good to them though it be good, and most precious in it self. It is
that which will content them for the present, but undo them (namely, the
impenitent) in the end. He loves his friend best that keeps him to his
Physicians rules, though it cross his present desire. One of note, among other
reasons why unworthy persons were kept off, proves it to belove to their souls.

3. It is against charity to the Church, Walt Strato. de rebus. Eccles. cap. 17.
lying under loss, and reproach through neglect of order, and discipline: Some
separating absolutely, others staying with grief of soul.

SECT. XX.
Wherein of the third Querie, namely,

Whether it savor not much of the old Pharisees, Touch me not, for I am holier
then thou; The third Querie.
and relish not of that Pharisees standing and praying by himself in the
Parable, where Beza notes a singularity, and sequestring himself from the
Publican, who must stand afar off, which as one says was not supplicatio,
but superlatio?


Answ. Well, Touch me not, etc. This saying of the Jews has been the old
attendant of that common nickname of Puritan, and the very labell of profane
lips. But if we may not suspect others (as was thought in the former doubt) of
hypocrisy, why are we suspected?

Are we fallen below all good thoughts and hopes? May not our actings proceed
as well from the tenderness of our consciences, and love of holiness; as from
the base overweening conceit of our own pureness? Surely it is possible they
may. May not a man be humble in his own eyes, and yet be wary about his society
in Gods Ordinance? We are persuaded he may, we see no incongruity in either of
these. Truly we desire more holiness in our selves, and others, then is yet
attained, and we judge our present way conducing to it. When you find us
boasting of our own holiness, condemn us boldly; we wish all Pharisees had
hypocrisy written on their foreheads with a Sunne-beame, we should see many a
worlding, and Politician detected then. As to that text of Esaias, it is spoken
(as the best think) by the people to the Prophets, Musculus on Esaias 65. chapter p.
851.
who had reproved them for their corrupt worship in gardens, and mountains,
Stand by thy self, (say they to Esaias) come not near us. Now if the speakers
prove to be the people, why are the Ministers marked (with this coal) for
Pharisees? Many like those in Esay's time stand off from us as too holy, and
the while blame us for standing off from them as Publicans. The distance
between us, and others is not of our making, but of their own.

SECT. XXI.
Wherein of the fourth Querie, namely,

Whether it mell not strongly of the spirit of Diotrephes, that sought the
pre-eminence, and be not a Lording it over Gods heritage, since it tends to
reduce every one to an awful subjection to his Minister, lest his reputation be
blasted by being repelled from the Communion? The fourth Querie.
^ his is the more suspected, because not only persons, which they may think
they have cause to suspect to be of incompetent knowledge, must pass this
trial by examination, but generally every one; not only such, of whom they
might be doubtful, (and yet in dubio melior est possidentis bonam famam, (as I
said before) yet when sure there can be no such violent suspicion, that makes
the thing morally certain, and which only by the opinion of the Casuists, may
warrant the trial, but even those that perchance were more susceptible of
Catechizing the Minister, and whose shekels are known to be double to those of
the Sanctuary. And to think there is cause to suspect every man's insufficiency
in point of knowledge is to imply, as the Papists have abusively perverted that
of Gregory, that while the Oxen labored, The fourth Querie in the tenth
Section of the Paper.
they were all Asses that fed by them. It grieves some that suffrage for
Presbytery, to see others hereupon to suspect, that it was cast in like mould
with that of Popery, whose main (if not only) pinciple was the advance of the
power and grandor of the Prelates and Priests. As they (among other things)
would seem to have a power to damn any man, while they taught a necessity
(necessitatem medii) of partaking the Sacraments, as absolutely medious to
salvation, and the efficacy of those Sacraments to depend upon the intention of
the Minister; so as it was no Sacrament, where he intended it not, vesting a
power in the Pastor, without any notorious offense to exclude from the
Sacrament, impowers him to reject any from the ordinary means of salvation, and
so coacts an awful dependence of all upon him in order to subjection.

Diotrephes is that which seems to possess and act us in our way. Pudet haec
opprobria dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli. Should we spread our selves
upon every limb and part of this Objection, too much time would be spent in
answering.

But why the spirit of Diotrephes?

1. Because it designs reducing our people into awe. 2. Because all are called
to trial, yea, such as are more able then the tryers. 3. Makes the people
asses. 4. Shapes Presbytery to Popery. This is the series.


1. To Diotrephes and his Lording power. See Estius on the 3. Epistle of John,
v. 9.
It feems to us that the author is somewhat mistaken in the condition of
Diotrephes. The text tells us, he sought pre-eminence, and the learned tell us,
that his ambition rather crossed John, then oppressed the people. He was an
heretic, and sought to sit in the Church above an Apostle. He receives not
us, says John; any thing over the people above the state of a Bishop we read
not of in him, only he depressed John; so that he was nearer the spirit of an
Anti-apostolist, then of a rigid, and imperious Presbyter, as to the people.
But what is it to Lord it over Gods heritage? It is a going beyond Ministerial
power, and infringing the liberties, and privileges of the Saints.

1. It is a going beyond Ministerial power. Then if keeping away ignorant, and
scandalous persons be not an exceeding of this power, it is no Lording, 1 Cor.
4.1, etc.
or imperious thing. That Ministers are Church Officers, and have committed to
them, as stewards in Christ's house, all the mysteries of the Gospel, is too
clear to be denied, or doubted. This Paper yields (somewhere) a Ministerial
power as to the use of those two keys of Doctrine and Censure, we desire but
Ministerial power. If we act more, we are deservedly blamed. We shall not
dispute (here) the proper, and proximate subject of Church Power, as Ministers
we claim, but what does belong to Church Officers without injury to the
Church. Now if stewards of the mysteries of the Gospel, it behooves us to be
faithful as to the peoples right, so to the dignity of the Sacrament. Did we
impose any thing not commanded of God, or act Bishop-like in a sole
jurisdiction, we could never avoid this blame. Let Lording fall, so rule may
stand, some subjection is due by Gods Word to all godly Ministers from their
people. If when minded of this, they cry out of Lording, this is their own
fault, and ignorance of their duty. In a way of surmising, what godly courses
but may be (thus) blasted, and confuted? With some men all rule is tyranny.
Some Anabaptists count all Magistrates Tyrants, so do others all Church Power
tyranny.

Erastianisme, and Anabaptisme do in this join hands. Ph. Goodwin, Evan.
Communicant. p. 206
A late godly Writer says, that in Luthers time some profanely professed, that
they had rather live under the dominion of the Turk, then where all should be
ordered according to the will of God. Shall such thoughts, and sayings now
prejudice Gods ways? We read that the men of Israel counted Solomon a Tyrant,
1 Kin. 9.22.10.27.
yet the Queen of Sheba admires the happiness of his servants, and Subjects,
he made none of the people bondmen. Yea, he made silver to be as stones, only
he laid a tribute for the house of the Lord. But they that cannot distinguish
between pride, and power, between pride, and discipline, need somewhat to clear
their eyesight. When the Apostle condemns Lordship over the flock, he takes
not away government, Heb. 13. ver. 7.17.24.
for that were to contradict Puul in three places in one Chapter; the Pastor
then has rule, but it must not be tyrannical.

2. Lording is an overthrowing of the privileges of the Saints, and godly; but
we study to preserve their privileges, and to raise a fence, that they may not
be trodden down by wild beasts, Esaias. 5.2.
but preserved in their use from evident profanation. We gather out the stones
of Gods vineyard? Besides all that is done is by voluntary agreement, our rules
extend but to them that freely submit to them. We excommunicate none, nor
meddle with other men's ways. Indeed we discover by our actings what we would
draw our Congregations unto; and that while they refuse to follow us therein,
our union with them (in that Ordinance) cannot be comfortable. And this we do
as being bound in conscience to use all good means to redress abuses, and to
promote the National Engagement of Reformation. Here now are essays of rule,
and order, but no imperiousness, or usurpation: When Moses stood for the
Priests Office against the pride of Corah, and his accomplices, they tell him,
that the Priests took too much upon them.

Truth is, only gracious spirits are fit to be governed in a Christian, or
Church Way. Gods yoke is grievous to the sons of Belial. Hinc illae lachrymae.
Is any thing put upon men but the light burden of Christ's laws? Is it
intolerable to come under the duties of godliness? is there cause given to men
to cry out of Lording, and blasting their reputation, when so facile a thing
is required, as the discovery of their knowledge, and clearing of their
practices from known wickedness?

Object. 2. But all are called to trial, such as excel their teachers.

Answ. Why not all as well as some? Duties of Religion are to be imposed
without respect of persons. It is possible (though not so usual) that the
Pastor may be exceeded in learning, and gifts by some of his Congregation, but
does this exempt such from obedience? What if a wife have more knowledge then
her husband? some particular subjects more policy then their governors? will
this justify the disobedience of the one? or null the authority of the other?
An humble man may submit to one of meaner abilities then himself; yea then,
when they are known, and confessed to be so; if for no other reasons, yet to
avoid exceptions, and to encourage others; such as are able, and godly too, do
seldom scruple this, because though they have great abilities, yet they know
them not so, as to oppose them against their duty. Again, if the persons tried
be found so knowing, it will add to their esteem, and not diminish it in the
least. Among other mistakes this is one, that our greatest suspicion is of
ignorance. Alas, many are better headed, then hearted. We believe, were the
truth known among them that stand off from us, the greater part suspect their
practice, more then their knowledge. For did they live as they should, and as
they conceive we expect, the discovery of their knowledge of Jesus Christ
before a few Christians would not appear so formidable a work; yea, should we
know any under our charges, or near us, that were susceptible of Catechizing
any of us, we might in policy forbear the calling of them forth, without any
other reason.

Nay, we could ingenuously say to such, as once John to Christ, I had need to
be taught of thee, and come thou to me? which was the answer (as I am
informed) of a Minister not long since to an eminent man, submitting to his
trial for admission to the Sacrament. Shortly, we envy no man's gifts, but wish
them more, and their conversation suitable. One says of the present state of
the University of Oxford: There have been more Muses heretofore, Cor. a Lap. in
Exodus 6.30. p. 543
but never so many Graces as now. We honor Graces above Muses. We find it to
be a doubt among the learned, whether the common shekel be greater, or less
then that of the Sanctuary? Some make it less, others greater; we will not go
about to determine this; the allusion (every one sees) reflects upon the
particular Ministers: however, we pass it by. There were shekels of gold some,
others of brass, iron, etc. Answerable to these are the various kinds and
degrees of men's gifts; not the largest shekels, but the holiest are the best; a
little piece of gold is better then a great piece of silver. Knowledge adorned
with humility, and engaged to advance piety (of whatever measure and content)
is after the shekel, and standard of the Sanctuary.

Object. 3. We imply that our people are asses.

Answ. We need a pair of tongs to deal with so odious a comparison as this is,
let it return to the place from whence it came; we leave it to Popish Priests,
and Episcopal spirits, whose guise it has been to advance themselves, and
depresse the laity, and to this end wish their ignorance, rather then their
knowing much. We maintain a difference between Officers, and members of
Churches; but we freely acknowledge all godly people to be the Lords Clergy;
however, we are not ignorant of a more restrained use of that word in the
Ancients.

Object. 4. We shape Presbytery to Popery, etc.

Answ. These are the dregs of this bitter cup. We stand not much upon the
sayings of them that have voted for Presbytery. Perchance some voted and acted
therein for wrong ends, and their votes might prosper accordingly; some we are
sure were once in a nearness to act in that way, who were very unmeet for such
a work.

Last of all, that Presbytery should be cast into the mould of Popery is a
wild fancy, and argues both the corruption of the man's heart, and darkness of
his mind that suspects it.

Men that like not the restraint of their lusts by any Church Government, must
cry out of Popery, covetousness, ambition, Prelacy, and such like, which are
but fig leaves to cover their nakedness. In a word, a man may say this for
Presbytery, though he be not fond of it, that (whatever it be else) it is the
strongest bar that ever was set against Popery.

SECT. 22.
Wherein of the fifth, and last Querie, namely,

Whether this be not half way toward the Independants, and symbolize not with
the congregational way? For what difference is there between their gathering a
Church, and this collecting together of communicants, The fifth query in the
tenth section of the Paper.
some of one place, some of another? what material disparity is there between
their covenant with the Church, and this admitting none without satisfaction
given, and profession made of their sufficiency to the Minister? They admit any
to the hearing of the Word, not to the Communion, and such is the method also
of this Difcipline. Are not both equally guilty of an Allotrioepiscopacy of
removing the ancient land-markes, and confounding of Churches, and limits: And
taking in such of whose souls they have by no law, nor consonancy to good
order, any proper, or special cure?

And of a resemblance with the Partridge, Jer. 17.11. which gathers the young
which she brings not forth, The fifth querie of the tenth section of the
Paper.
(as was the ancient, and is still the marginal reading) and of that Magic
which some Romans were slandered with, of charming, and bringing other men's
fruits into their fields? Consider what I say, and the Lord give me, and thee
understanding in all things.

is neither sinful, nor impossible. We are so much for peace, that we could
(if our hearts deceive us not) go many miles barefoot to meet it. We are very
sensible of that of the Apostle Paul, and wish others to mind it: Gal. 5.15.
If ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of
another. They are strangers at home, and to the times, that see not truth and
holiness losing sensibly and fearfully by our rents.

Lastly, Of infant baptism. p. 228.
we commend the opinion, in some branches, of holy master Baxter to serious
scanning.

Notwithstanding all this, if our neighbors will see how far we are from
compliance with rigid Independants, One blow more to Babylon. p. 21.
let them consult a late book written by an affectionate opposite. We leave
them to answer the confounding of Churches; when we have fully embraced their
principles, we will reply to this charge also.

In the mean time that which is called disorder against law, and Magic, is but
the effect of such speeches, as we have often heard, terming our meeting
schismatical, and seditious: but we are assured the society is guilty of
neither; not of Schism, because we separate not from true Churches, but only
aim at the Reformation (if possible) of those Congregations we watch over, and
in the Country about us; not of sedition, while the present authority is for
us, (at least not against us,) and we no underminers of them, nor are we
tumultuous, or injurious: we constrain none; that which is done is a
voluntary, and free work. If we cannot convince, and satisfy other men's
consciences, we leave them to themselves, nor is there any injury to other
Ministers. We do not clock their chickens from them, but it may be (if it be
serious enough so to speak, as we are in a sort urged,) we may have hatched
some eggs of their nest, and this offense (we hope) they will forgive us.

But to answer the comparison taken out of Jeremy. We shall borrow a like
resemblance from a learned Divine, and so end. He speaking to that word of
Peter (...), 1 Pet. 4.4. alludes thus: Mr. Hoskins Dr. of law, in his 7. Sermon.
p. 22.
The hen that has hatched Partridges or Pheasants eggs, seeing them soar
aloft, looks strangely after them, because she knows not that they are of a
higher kind.

This is the reason (says he) why men of the world do gaze, and grudge at such
as take a flight somewhat above them, because they are ignorant of this, that
they are of a better generation.

We have gone step by step with the Author to the end of his walk. To satisfy
the Reader, and more fully to lay open our minds, and desires as to the use of
the Lords Supper;

These four following heads we purpose to pass over.

1. Why not the Sacrament in our own Congregations? 2. Why we separate not in
other Ordinances? 3. What are the Scripture-grounds and proofs for our way,
and practice? 4. Some other queries about this business in the close of all.
SECT. 23.
Why not the Sacrament in our own Congregations?

only the law of love and condescension binds us, we stand not upon terms of
policy, and closeness, while we have hopes of doing good to souls; and
therefore answer,

It is in some, but not yet in the rest of our Assemblies, and this is because
there is no fit matter, or rather not sufficient at home; not that we think all
our people incapable, as is by some enviously surmised, and suggested. No, it
is unto some more their own unwillingnesse, then any thing else that keeps them
off. They that will partake must not only be fit for such an Ordinance, but
willing for such a work as we design, (viz.) Reformation of corruptions, and
noting of corrupt members; we know not how these Ministers and people do
satisfy themselves, who wholly neglect the Ordinance. We must needs say, our
former corruptions are justly punished with these interruptions, which are as
well the sins, as judgments of most places. Most particular Churches have
been fed (of late) with one breast, the other being dry; though we doubt not
but the Lord has supplied this to all his, (who is able to make this non-use,
useful, holding forth a crucified Christ in the Word, and giving souls to
eat, and drink the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ by faith, See Calvin on
Joh. 6, p. 806. Perperam hanc locum de caena.
of which John the sixth Chapter, while they have wanted the Sacramental
eating) yet we conceive the Word of Christ to be peremptory, and therefore the
duty so incumbent on all believers, as upon no pretense whatsoever (if
necessaries be not wanting) altogether, Evang. Commun. 403.
or long to be discontinued. One Objection without any long digression we may
consider. It is better (says one) to delay, then to defile an Ordinance;
better to delay that we may not defile, then to defile that we may not delay;
the delay only opposing the circumstance, etc. We shall more fully answer this
in another place.

Here in a word, the delay does more then oppose the circumstance; as it may be
prolonged, it does oppose the command it self, time here being of the
substance of the command: Do this as often. But (to return) whatever others
think, we could not satisfy our consciences as to our own duties, without
procuring opportunities for them that were godly to enjoy this so blessed an
institution: but when this is done, and all serious people may with no great
pains embrace this privilege frequently and purely; they (the generality)
scruple that which has no sin in it, namely, the going out of their
Parishes; a circumstance which defiles not the action, The true administering of
censures the earth cannot bear it. The thief endures to hear of hemp, as well
as unruly lustful men to be shackled in the fear of being excommunicate. Mr.
Paul Baine on the Ephesians. p. 293.
so much as in appearance, while we have professed (as they know) and are still
resolved to return to our places, (as to this Ordinance too,) as soon as a
competent number shall appear fit, and willing to carry on so great a work.
Some years since, and before we pitched at Pyworthy, this our intendment was
spoken of in the Pulpit; and the people desired to discover their affection to
the work, but not a man in some places appeared. Some through worldly fear,
doubting State-changes, and revolutions; others (we fear) for worse reasons,
and a few (as we believe,) wanting zeal, and boldness to go before others in
the matters of God. Upon this there being a Church formed in one of our
Congregations, according to the rule of the Word, in the choice of a Pastor,
Officers, and Members, other Ministers, and people are joined to this society;
for which we bless God, and in which we are likely to walk till we can see
truth, or reason against us, which yet is not shown us. But lo, what a dust
does this raise? what rumors fill the Country, as if some strange thing had
happened? how are we become our peoples enemies, and grievous burdens? we
complain not of uncivil disturbances, (we have found none,) but of hard
thoughts, and untempered words; unto which that of the Historian concerning
Germanicus may be applied:

Tacitus.
He was hated (says he) and maligned the more violently, because unjustly.
Instead of six hundred necks in one man (as one says) to submit to the
Discipline of the Gospel, we find a thousand mouths opened by one against it,
when we observe the disorder of men's spirits, and their unthankfulness; the
Joshua, chap. 22. And for our much desired Discipline and holy order, was there
ever a people under beaven who called themselves reformers, that opposed it
mere desperately, and that vi^ified it, and railed against it more
scurrilously? as if it were but a device of ambition; Presbyters, that
traiteronsly sought domination over their superiors, and not the law, and
order established by Christ, as if these men had never read Scriptures, or will
tread in the dirt the laws of Christ, which must judge them? Mr. Baxter his
Saints everlasting Rest, p. 296. 2d. part.
Divine history brings to our minds that passion, which was once stirred up in
the other tribes, against the two tribes, and half; when they supposed a
schism to be hatching, yea, broken forth, they censure deeply, and prepare
cruelly, but the issue was peace at the last; the like approbation and blessing
we hope for, when a good understanding is begot. In the mean time, better is
dissension for Piety, then corrupt communion. As to them that traduce, and
revile us, did they know how sweet God makes their gall to our tastes, they
would soon grow weary of their reproaches out of very envy. Let no good soul
faint for men, but eye God, whose Word must be our Sun and shield; whatever
we suffer in our estates, names, and quiet, we shall have him a faithful
debtour, and seasonable paymaster.

SECT. 24.
Wherein of this, Why we separate not in all Ordinances?

do for going too far, and doing too much. Camero praelect. de Escles. p. 402.
The learned distinguish of a twofold separation, namely, positive and
negative. The first we condemn, unless upon weighty and just grounds. The
second we are acting in, namely, making a separation in our Congregations, not
separating from our Churches, but from some corruptions in them, in order unto
Reformation. So did our Savior; he lived in unity with the Jewish Church in
necessary Ordinances, but yet separated from it in regard of corruptions in
some things, as in the washings, Mr. Hildersham, on Joh. p. 167.
and mis-observation of the Passover, namely, on a wrong time. Churches are to
be made new, as Christians are, by restoring that which was lost. We are not so
strong, Mr. Cotton against Williams, p. 117, 118, 119. in the 5. part.
as they seem to be, who renounce their Ministry, and Congregations, as
nullities. It is no small matter to destroy Churches and to scatter flocks. It
has been matter of repentance unto some, the seducing of men from hearing in
Parish-Churches, and teaching them to account their Ministry a false
Ministry, and our professors no visible Saints. It is supposed by us, that
some at least of our Congregations are sound in their essentials, and so
capable of Reformation: these we would cure, not destroy. We are afraid of
schism, as of a great sin, and work of the flesh. We profess before God,
Angels, and men, that our consciences tremble at the destruction and confusion
of true Churches in the lowest capacity; we may not (as we conceive) safely
forsake Assemblies, which God has not forsaken, but is present with, in the
Word, and Doctrine of salvation.

Rigid and absolute separation carries contempt with it, and rather hinders
then furthers the amendment of evil men. The rigid separatist has seldom been
steady, or rested, till all instituted worship, and moral laws of God are
separated from. It is the saying of acute Baxter, Commonly the truest opinion
lies in the midst. But more particularly,

1. We separate not, as to the Word and prayer, because a mixture is allowed
here, not only in the judgment of the godly learned, as before, but by the
example of the Word, and true reason, all sorts have been admitted to both
these, and necessarily must, being the ordinary means of begetting faith.
Christ taught the multitude. The Apostles sent to preach unto the world. The
godly have prayed in the presence of unbelievers. He gave thanks (which is
prayer) in the presence of them all, namely passengers in his ship, Act. 27.35.
Elisha prayed in the presence of Gehazi, Dr. Gouge in his whole armor. p. 216.
as is collected by some of note, from 2 King. 4.33. We may pray for wicked
men, which is not denied, then why not in their presence, or with them? To pray
for, is more then to pray with; their presence at the duty can be no sin,
while it is that they are commanded to do, though at present their own evils
make them unable to do as they should. Peter bids Simon Magus to pray, Act.
8.22. and yet he saw him in the gall of bitterness.

Lastly, that which is lawful in it self, and the duty of all men, may be done
any where, or in the presence of any; but so are prayer and hearing.

2. As to Baptism, Disciplina cum verbo and Sacramentis conjungi solet ab
optimis Theologis in Ecclesia Dei notanda: quamvis non sit nota simpliciter
essentialis and reciproca. (Jicut neque reliquae duae) ad completum tamen
ecclesiae statum necessario debet idesse. Ames. Medul. Theol. c. 37. p, 285.
we suppose our Churchss to be true, but sick, and corrupt; the truth of some
of them (as to their essence) we think we can prove. A Church may be in a
Parish, as well as in a Country, or City, (as Ephesus, Corinth) yea, as well
as in the world. We do not say our Assemblies are Churches as Parishes, but
that they are Churches in Parishes: and in that sense Parish-Churches. They are
Churches, as having the matter and form of Churches, but not without great
disorder at present. We are willing to discuss in another fit place this
question with our brethren otherwise minded, Whether the Churches of England be
true Churches (because it is the hinge of many other controversies?) and we
will undertake to prove that some are, which is enough where all are denied for
matter and form true Churches.

We suppose the Controversy would quickly be ended, were the characters of
visibility agreed on. The Word and Sacraments have passed as notes of a visible
Church, in the judgment of Austin, Calvin, Zanchy, and almost all good Writers
unto this day; and although we may and must allow discipline to have a place in
the definition of sound, and healthy Churches, yet to put all, or most upon
this one, is unwarrantable, and unreasonable. Amesius speaks somewhat to the
purpose, and (as we conceive) fully and truly, to whom we remit the Reader, Men
professing holiness and not contradicting their profession are the proper
matter of a true visible Church: but such our Churches have, though not only
such, which the Apostles Churches had not. The form of a Church is the union
of the body with Jesus Christ, which is (visibly) by living under
Gospel Ordinances conscienciously dispensed; the form of a man is the union of
the soul and body together. Ordinances are the ligaments that tie Christ and
the Church together. Now the means cannot be denied to be with us, no, nor the
effect of the means, therefore with us is the form of visible Churches. Now
(having a little cleared our supposition) upon this account it follows, that
all infants borne in our Churches are to be baptized. For Congregational
Churches (as they are called) do baptize all their infants, we follow in this
the same ground and principle. If any object that sundry of the Parents are
ungodly, whose children we baptize; We ask, whether they can deny baptism to
the child of any member, (how offensive soever) before the sentence of cutting
off pass upon him? These supposed wicked ones whether (as carnal or profane)
are not excommunicated, what therefore should hinder their childrens baptism?
Besides, the children are not baptized in their right alone, but in the
Churches: Where the child is borne a member, being holy (federally) by birth
and therefore to be baptized. We look to see so much as may perswde us in
charity to take a man's profession to be serious, before we think him fit to
come to the sealing, and distinguishing Ordinance, Mr. Perkins on Gal. 3. chapter
2. vol. p. 284.
a remote right may serve to bring in his child, but a nearer right ( in actu
primo, (as the learned speak) that is present, and visible) is necessary to a
man's self.

While a father is sequestrable, or sequestered, his son has the right of an
heir. Under excommunication it self (as some think) it being for the souls
good, there remains (so terrible as it is) some dormant, or virtual right
still: and therefore it is a question, whether formal excommunication of the
Parents, The Lord deliver us from this medicine of our dissensious, that we be
not made so to agree (viz) as Hooper, and Ridley in the prison, yea, that we be
not soder'd together with our own blood. Mr. Buroughs on Hosea p. 131.
do cut off the seed from all Church Priviledges? Charity may embrace the
child in some one initial Ordinance, when it cannot embrace the Parent in all.

But to close this. We are not of those that take delight in making differences
among the godly more wide, but (as equally tender of peace and holiness, of
unity and piety:) do humbly desire all professing religion in earnest to lay to
heart Satan's, and profane men's advantage by the Churches divisions. O pray for
the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love it. But alas, instead of
prayers, fightings. The godly were better friends when they enjoyed less
liberty: but this does not please God, nor become his children: our fear is
that if the godly unite not under mercies, God may bring together by some
common calamity.

SECT. XXV.
Wherein the Scripture-grounds and proofs for our way and practice are held
forth.

Cor. 14.40. Jer. 15.19. 2 These. 3.2. 6, 14, 15, verses, 1 Cor. 5.11. Mat. 7.6.
1 Cor. 11.27. unto the end, compared with Jude ver. 23. 1 Timothy 5.22. Heb.
13.17. 1 Pet. 3.15. 2 Chronicles. 23.19. Joel 3.17. Nahum 1.15. Zach. 12.21. Unto
all these, And

1. Unto, 1 Cor. 14.40. The first Proof.
Let all things be done decently, and in order. This is a general rule serving
unto the worlds end, to direct the Churches in matters of outward worship,
whereof this of admission to, and exclusion from the Lords Table is one;
suppose now we had no particular warrant from Gods Word to bear us out, yet if
our course be holy, and orderly, it has warrant from that general rule.

Courses that have an excellent, and holy use in the Church, may be justified
by this text (being well managed against all the world. B. Abbot against Church
forsakers. p. 116.
It is confessed by one, and it is the mind (we believe) of the most moderate,
and ingenuous of our adversaries, that it were a glorious and comfortable
thing, if none but holy persons did draw near to this holy Table. We assume,
But a general rule will bear up a glorious and comfortable practice in the
Church. He says (in another place) that it is the Ministers misery, that he
must admit all. This (must) is without either command of God, or man. If it
seem necessary, but yet a misery, and they (the Ministers) sensible of it, why
embrace they not with joy the liberty now given to exclude the unworthy? He is
not sensible of his misery, that embraces not the remedy. It could not be a
misery but as it is sin; and if a sin to admit all, as undoubtedly it is
(as our Congregations are) a great one, then Gods Word must warrant the
exclusion of some. If a misery, why does not the sense of this misery stir up
men to act in courses of reformation? But they will tell you, they want a
command from men, and therefore cannot do as they would. This is but a shift of
unwilling minds. Is not Gods Word our rule, giving a command for all
Gospel-duties? We will not undertake to speak the mind of the higher powers in
this matter; only this we believe, that they give more liberty then. is taken,
and we hope they will satisfy the just desires of the godly in this thing. The
Magistrate does command Ministers to do their duty, but leaves them to the Word
for their rule. There be Ordinances of Parliament (which are in force while the
same Parliament sits that made them) which do authorize the keeping back of all
ignorant and scandalous persons. It is not good to father our own corruptions,
and unwillingnesse to the work of reformation on the State. Let not Ministers
say they want authority, while they have the authority of the Word. Let us ask
the learned, what other warrant, or authority, besides the general rule
forementioned, had the Ancients for all their wary discipline, and separating,
and distinguishing orders about the Lords Supper? No particular warrant from
the Word (we are assured) as to their orders of Penitents, and courses about
them.

The Text then, 1 Cor. 14.40. will yield this Argument.
Where is no due order in Sacramental administrations, there Gods Word is not
observed; But where all are admitted there is no order: Therefore in the
admission of all Gods will is not observed.

The Major is very clear; Gods Word commanding order, it cannot be observed
without it.

The Minor may be further proved.

Where there is mixture, and confusion of good and bad fit and unfit, there is
no order. But where all are admitted is this mixture. Ergo.

We do not well see what can be denied here.

Lastly, as the course which others walk in is contrary to this rule, so ours
is according to it.

Which may be thus drawn out:

That course, and way which does naturally, and directly tend to set up order,
and holiness in the Church, is warrantable by this text;

But our way does so tend.

The Minor is thus proved.

Where only such are admitted, and all such are admitted as can challenge right
to the Sacrament by the Word of Christ, there due order and decency are
observed.

But so it is with us.

Therefore with us is a direct tendency unto holy order and decency.

SECT. XXVI.
Wherein of that text, Jer. 15.19. If thou take forth the precious from the
vile, then shall thou be as my mouth.

The second Proof.
Not to mention variety of interpretations: it may be otherwise worded thus:

If thou separate the flexible, ingenuous, and godly Jews, from the hardened,
profane, and obstinate.

This is most likely to be the truth, because he speaks of persons, not of
things; not of graces, and corruptions, but of men, namely, precious ones, and
vile ones, for he says (them, namely men) in the next words. What by taking
out? This is a Metaphor alluding to Goldsmiths refining metals, taking the
heaviest from the lighter; the heaviest metal being purest. Some give the
sense in this manner: If thou seek to win the good; from the bad. Others thus,
If thou wisely make a difference between the profane, and godly. Now there is
a threefold separation, as some distinguish.

1. Ministerial, or Doctrinal, which is twofold.

1. In preaching, which is called a dividing the Word aright.

2. By preaching, namely, when by Gods blessing the Word preached converts
some, and so separates them from the world, or men uncalled.

2. The other kind is Practical separation, this is when in some things of
conversation we turn from some men; of which the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.5.

3. The third kind of separation is Ecclesiastical, which is properly the act
of the Church, or its Officers. This is also twofold.

1. When a company of men do separate from an Idolatrous Church, (as we from
Rome justly) and do make another Church; See Camero de Ecclesia. p. 402.
of this, Rev. 18.4. and many other Texts: This the learned call a positive
separation.

2. Another is when a Church does separate from the scandalous members of her
own body, or separate such as are scandalous from her; This has been, and may
be practiced, being grounded upon this, and other texts of Scripture; as, 2
These. 3.6. of which hereafter. This is termed a negative separation, in a
Church, not from it. This is our case, we separate only in that wherein those
separated from cannot lawfully join; the lawfulness of this is contended for by
this, and many other Scriptures. The text in hand is by many taken as speaking
only of doctrinal separation in preaching; but this cannot be: for the
following words are expressed for more, for a practical separation at least:
Return not thou to them, let them come to thee, that is, walk thou Jeremy in a
right way thy self, and draw as many to thee as thou can. He speaks of
making, and maintaining a personal separation, as to some things of God. He
speaks of separating persons.

Further, if the opinion be true, that the text alleged allows only a
doctrinal separation in preaching, and denies any other, then Excommunication
falls, and all the Religious practices of the Ancients (who make diverse sorts
in the Church, The Ministers of the Gospel, and New Testament ought to make
difference between the godly and wicked, as much as in them licih; to accept
and receive the one, and to reject and exclude the other from the public
prayers of the Church, and from the sacred Table of Christ; hence is the
command to the Church of Corinth, and to the Pastor, as the principal man. Adds
these texts, 2 Cor. 5.13. Jer. 15.19. See this and more in that learned, and
godly man Mr. Stock, in his Commentary on Mal. p. 129, and 130.
as has been shown) must be, and are condemned. It has been a rule in
expounding Scripture, that we must not limit it, and straiten it, when the
Spirit leaves it free, and general; now they do limit for their own ends, who
will have it speak only of differencing men's spiritual estates by preaching.
Who knows not that Church Censures were under the Old Testament, and that there
was (then) an Ecclesiastical separation, or casting out, but that the love of
carnal liberty makes men forgetful? But to sum up this text also.

That which God commands is our duty.

But God commands more then a doctrinal separation in applying the Word.

Therefore more is our duty.

The Minor is proved in the opening of this text, and by the reasons given upon
it. What reason, and cause we have to make some separation in our Assemblies,
the whole land saw, (the godly party we mean) in every corner of it, as does
appear by their petitions, and the Parliaments orders, and acts upon them: and
truly he that sees it not necessary at this day, is not a little blind; now if
some separation must be made, then examination and such like proper means must
be alse.

SECT. XXVII.
Wherein of 2 These. 3.2, 6, 14, 15. verses.

The third Proof.
He speaks of wicked men ( verse 2.) which he will have noted, ( verse 14.)
that is, censured, as is plain; and that not as to civil conversation only, 1
Cor. 5.10 Ita sane, ut nec emendationis vigilatia quiescat corripiendo,
degradando, excommunicando, caeterisque coercionibus licitis, etc. Aug. lib. 4.
contra Donatistac.
for herein more liberty has been, and may be taken, as hereafter may be
shown. The best Divines do expound verses 14.15. of Church Censures. So by
Austin of old, speaking touching mixture in the Church: This may be, provided
that Church Censures be not neglected (says Austin alleging the Words of our
text.) So by many choice ones of latter days. Here is first a character of
some false brethren, unreasonable wicked men; then a command, ( ver. 6.) to
withdraw, and after to note, and have no company, ver. 14. which by the
following words we are constrained to understand of some exclusion from
fellowship in some Ordinances, or act of Church Communion.

Note, that is, put a mark upon him, that he may be ashamed: Non significate
sed signate, as Erasmus, and others. What should this black mark be? Is it
casting out by excommunication? No, that is too much at first, 1 Cor. 5.13
the excommunicate is to be accounted as a Heathen, not as a brother. What, is
it only by leaving his society in civil things? No, that is as much too little,
and hardly to be done, such may his relations be. Dr. Sclater 1 These. 2. p. 284.
Therefore meant of withdrawing in sacris, namely, in holy things. Thus judge
the best, and soundest Interpreters. Some censure; either the greater, as
Excommunication; or the lesser, as Suspention from the Lords Table must be. It
is noted as a punishment to be in the sight of the Church, such a noting, and
withdrawing, as tends to the shaming, and reforming of scandalous and misliving
brethren. Suspension from civil society, is less shaming. But to end this text.

Noting offending brethren so as to shame them, is holy, and necessary.

But such is our suspension of misliving men.

Therefore holy and necessary.

That it has, and does humble, experience proves. What noting, or shaming is
there, or can there be in general caveats, and warnings? who sees not that the
grossest men take neither shame, nor warning by them.

SECT. XXVIII.
Wherein of these words: If any man that is called a brother, be a fornicator,
or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner,
with such a one no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5.11.

The fourth Proof.
We will not cloy the Reader with authorities of most learned, and holy men,
28. Centurists, lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 275. Atque ita excluduntur a communione
Ecclesiae.
which might here be multiplied. The Centurists apply this text to the
Sacrament, that he will not have meat taken; this belongs to Discipline (says
Tossanus upon the place.)

Others are as express, as Martyr, Beza in his Annot. in locum. p. 526.
Beza, who defends Aquinas in this against Erasmus. This text affords an
argument (which way soever taken) against admission of drunkards, Quanto magis
convictu sacro, says Pareus on the place.
and such like to the Sacrament.

If by eating you will understand common bread, then it follows a minori, from
the lesser, to the greater, that if we may not eat common, much less sacred
bread with such men. But,

3. If we take it for Sacramental eating, then we have an Apostolical
injunction, against the coming of ungodly ones to the Lords table, and by
consequence an allowance of ^eparation as to such, and of trial in order to it.
Now that this is the true meaning of the words, is to be proved many ways.

1. By the context, for the whole Chapter concerns Church Fellowship, and
censures.

It is about casting out of the Incestuous person, as every one sees; mark
these words which follow immediately (Do not we judge them that are within?)
then he speaks of judging, that is, of a Church-censure; therefore inferres as
a conclusion, Put away from among you that (or the like) wicked person.

2. It may be proved by these reasons out of the text.

1. If meant of common bread, then this absurdity follows, that I may not sit
at an ordinary, or dine, or sup any where. if any ungodly man be present; what
a snare will this be to men's consciences, considering that we account all
brethren (in a larger sense) that profess Christ? so that it must send us out
of the world, and put us to borrow Novatus his ladder.

2. He means not the withdrawing of civil society by particular persons in a
private way, but of the Church; for to them he writes; therefore meant of
Church-eating.

3. The nature of the recited sins show that he intends scandals calling for
Discipline, and coming under the like censure with incest.

4. He had spoken of keeping company before, therefore (eat not) contains more
then a denial of civil converse.

SECT. XXIX.
of Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine.

The fifth Proof.
The conceit (here) of some is, that this is meant of preaching the Gospel unto
the Gentiles, but much besides the mark. Some restriction we read of, as to
going into the way of the Gentiles; Mat. 5.10.
but this was but for a time, Act. 13.46
afterward we read, Lo, we turn unto the Gentiles; this fancy evacuates the
text, and makes it to be as a Be without a sting. Others will have the words
to be meant only of those that be open persecutors, or of dogs, by a legal
censure, namely, such as have been proved, and judicially so made, which they
do suppose none to be (in actu, vel potentia,) because Church Government is
unsettled. There is some truth in this last, but (yet) as it is urged by some
it is but a shift: The truth (that we grant) is, that every private Christians
Censure does not make a man to be a dog, but the sentence of such as have
some power from Christ to keep back from an Ordinance; but the shift is this,
That because now government is unsettled, therefore none may be taken, or looked
on as such. This we cannot close with; we believe that Ministers of the Gospel
may act by virtue of their commission from Christ, upon their own knowledge or
conscience, as to censuring, by not admitting such as are scandalous. Do
profane men cease to be dogs, because there is not a complete Judicatory to
judge them? No, they are so voted by the Word, their sins, and contempt of
Gods ways make them such, the Scripture interprets this expression to signify
men of a profane life. See 2 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 22. Prove. 26.11. Adogge turns
to his vomit, and so a fool to his folly, that is, a wicked man to his sin.
Now if the will of Jesus Christ be, that this fountain be kept pure, as
Chrysostom speaks, that is, that the precious Ordinance of the Lords Supper be
not prostituted unto men of vicious lives, then our endeavor to keep off the
unfit, is fully the mind of Christ too. But the first is true; Therefore, etc.

Lastly, where none are kept back, where no courses of discipline are acted in,
but preaching alone, there this Command of Christ is not observed at all.

It is clear that the Sacrament is holy, and that vicious men are swine, then
to give them the Sacrament is to profane it, which should not be given way
unto. But,

See more of this Text, page 42.

Object. It is objected by some that the Word preached is a pearl too, and
upon this account not to be preached unto swine.

Answ. The word is indeed a pearl, and some men are so swinish, and dogged,
that this text will warrant our silence toward them, but the objection is weak;
for non est eadem ratio, as we say, the reason is not the same; For though the
Word, and Sacrament be both jewels, yet the one is necessary to conversion, to
make them that be swine to become sheep; and dogs, lambs: but of this before.
So then sancta canibus, is a harsh discord to that sweet note of the Ancient
Church, Sancta sanctis, namely, holy things to holy men.

SECT. XXX.
Of 1 Cor. 11.27. unto the end of the Chapter, compared with ver. 23. of the
Epistle of Jude.

The sixth Proof.
Many things for our purpose may be drawn hence. In the former text there is a
fiery danger represented, and detected in unworthy receiving. In the other text
a duty toward them that are apt to run into this danger, and to neglect
their warning. In that the Apostle would have men to examine themselves, and so
to eat, he shows, that such as do eat worthily must be people of knowledge, and
grace; for such only can, and will examine themselves. So that if
self-examination be necessary to go before receiving, then such as do not, or
cannot, ought to be excluded; and the danger being so capital, there should be
a preventing thereof in others to their utmost. Now it is very certain that a
natural man, an ignorant, impenitent person cannot prforme his duty of
examining, therefore all such ought to be excluded. That which we examine for
(as to one principal part) is, whether people can examine themselves? which we
are assured many cannot do, who yet are left by many Ministers to themselves,
and desire so to be. Upon this ground infants, fools, and mad men are not
admitted, because unable to examine themselves; now such as be wicked men
cannot be (rationally) supposed either able or willing to try, or judge
themselves, they are spiritually fools, wanting that prudence, patience, and
self-suspicion, which are the principles of this examination; they suspect
neither good absent, nor evil present, but are full of false confidence, and
Laodecean security. How should a natural man be willing to such a work? He that
lives in sin, and is unconverted, has no principle to walk in the ways of
God freely; he may play the Ape, and do (as to outward works) what he sees
others do, but as for discerning in the Ordinance, or searching his own heart
before, these are things far above him. We do then our own work, not other
men's, while we try their fitness, and capacity to examine themselves.

SECT. XXXI.
On 1 Timothy 5.22. Neither be partakers of other men's sins.

The seventh Proof.
Other men's sins becoming ours, will prove as terrible to our consciences, as
any originally our own. The evasions applied to this text are many. We are not
partakers of other men's sins, (say some) while we exhort the unworthy not to
come, setting before them the danger of such coming; which is all that lies on
us to do. But we suspect the insufficiency of this excuse. If a Minister be
silent and do not reprove the sins of his Congregation he is guilty by
silence of their sins, this is truth. But yet though silence makes guilty,
yet bare reproving does not make innocent, because not our full duty. A
Ministers reproving and binding the impenitent in the Congregation by
denunciation of Gods judgments may clear him (ad hoc,) or as a Preacher, but
not as a Ruler or Steward. For if the same Minister shall loose the same men by
giving them the seals of the New Covenant, which is in effect to tell them,
that they are Saints interested in Gospel-priviledges, and promises, or
justified persons, we must fear that the guilt which was thrust out at the
fore-doore, comes in again at the back-doore.

It must needs be, that Ministers observing the state of their flock, shall,
and will find, and know among them some that are very sottish, worldly, and
wicked: now are they not guilty of these, or such men's sins, when they admit
them knowing them to be in the gall of bitterness, so far as fruits can show
it? In the text we are upon, the Apostle speaks of Ordination of Ministers,
wherein by not examining the persons to be ordained, guilt is contracted, and
this is when that great work is done without examining, or proving, As 1 Timothy
3.10. then it is sudden. In like manner the giving of the Sacrament is sudden,
and guilty, (though but once in a year) where no difference or trial is made
of them that come; but as in Jeroboams days, he that would might be a Priest,
so he that will (though of the basest of the people) may be a guest at the
Lords Table; men may put all this off, by thinking the fault is is not theirs,
while the act is other men's, but other men's sins may be ours. As in civil
Judicatories there are Principals and Accessories, so before God there will be
too and non-examiners, are Accessories before the fact.

SECT. XXXII.
On Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you. 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready
always to give an answer to every one, that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meekness and fear.

The eighth and. nineth Proofs.
We join these together that we may be the shorter. Here are two famous
Apostles appearing for us, the one requiring confession of faith even before
enemies; that which we desire in order to men's discovery of their knowledge, is
but in effect the confession of their faith, or an answer, or reason of their
hope. Now if this were to be given before an enemy, then much more, and easier
is it to be made before friends: Such as desire to be helpers of men's faith,
not upbraiders of their weakness.

Not expecting more submission from any, then they (hope) to show meekness, and
gentleness to all.

As to the other text, Obey them that have he rule over you.

They that would construe it of the Magistrate; forget themselves very much;
for though they be Rulers in a true sense, yet the Apostle could not mean such
here. He speaks of actual Governors at that time. Now were there any (then)
that did watch over the souls of believers? Were they not enemies to them, and
their faith? But now if we take Guides, and Rulers to be Ministers, (which is
the opinion almost of all Expositors) then these things will follow.

1. 1 These. 5.2. 1 Timothy 3.5 4.11.5.17.
That the people under them must be ruled and governed by them, for the title
of Rulers enforces duty.

2. Ministers must give an account of them, which cannot be well done without
taking knowledge of their estates.

3. They must not only preach and exhort, but do all else, which may conduce to
the peoples salvation.

4. If people obey not, they hurt themselves two ways: 1. By sinning directly
against this command. 2. By sadding their Pastors heart, and so lessening their
profit by his Ministry. All these are applicable to our purpose, urging
activity on the Ministers as well in discipline as in preaching. and calling
loudly for compliance from the people.


SECT. XXXIII.
On Lev. 13.5. 2 Chronicles. 23.19. Joel 3.17. Nahum 1.15. Zach. 14.21.

The 11.12, 13, 14, and 15. Proofs.
These Texts, ( Lev. 13.5. 2 Chronicles. 23.19.) have an equity in them, which is
Argumentative. May none enter the gates of Gods house being unclean in any
thing? then still there need Porters in Gods house to keep out men morally
unclean; shall we be less tender in the substance, then they were in the
type, and shadow?

That of Leviticus shows that the Priests were made Judges of the peoples
fitness, Priests, and Prophets under the Law ought to reject and exclude, much
more they in the Gospel; that which was not tolerable then, cannot be now. Holy
Mr. Stock, p. 130. on Malachi.
as to the legal qualification: then may Ministers try and discern (by virtue
of this) of men's fitness for spiritual communion.

Lastly, these Texts, Joel 3.17. Nahum 1.15. Zach. 14.21. All these are against
the impure, and horrid mixtures, which in our days are without sufficient
check in most Assemblies. God has promised this happiness unto his people
under the Gospel, that there shall come no more into them the uncircumcised,
and unclean; So shall you know that I am the Lord your God dwelling among you,
See Mr. Caryll in his 5. Vol. on Job, p. 85.
Esaias 52.1. Now if strangers, and men of Belial, (that is not enduring the yoke
of Christ) shall still be mixed (knowingly) with Gods people, How is this
promise made good? The times of the Gospel will never appear pure and
Gospel-like, while this is unredressed: and he that suffers such to pass and
stand approved in the fellowship of the Gospel, will be found one day a
back-friend to holiness. God looks now for a more real and spiritual people,
and will not own such for his people as are graceless, whatever their
profession may be. Camero observes well. That in the Old Testament they that
were jews without, Camero, to 3. p. 538, 539. In populo Novi Test. Deus omnia
voluit esse spiritualia, and realia. In Novo Test. nusquam populi Dei nomen
tribuitur prophanis, and impiis hominibus, utcunque extrinsecus nomen Christo
dederint.
though inwardly, and really p^ophane, yet they were called Gods people: but
(says he) in the New it is not so found; because the present state is more
spiritual. The name or title of Gods people is never given to wicked men,
though they profess, unless by antieipation, as Act. 18.10. Here is an end of
the texts, which conclude positively for our endeavor, and practice in
gathering and distinguishing our Communicants by examining. What all these
lights will do, being set up together, who knows?

There remains yet a fourth proposal, which we intend to finish in a few
Sections; and so an end of this discourse. Three heads are intended. Of 1.
Arguments. 2. Objections. 3. Queries upon the whole business.


SECT. XXXIV.
Wherein of some Arguments, as seconds to the Scriptures alleged.



1. Because this Sacrament belongs only to godly ones: all admitted upon good
grounds are supposed to be such (in the judgment of charity) (viz.) to be
true, and real believers. Men have a right (in Gods sight) only as such; the
wicked eat panem Domini, not panem Dominum, as by Protestants is maintained
against Papists: and they that have no true grace, have a seal to a blanck, as
their case is commonly expressed by our Divines. Men stand in the visible
Church, as they are apprehended to belong to the invisible. All this is foundly
proved by our Savior Christ, administering at first to Disciples only, Mat.
26.26. Not to Disciples in the largest acceptance, (for many professed
besides) but to such as were more peculiar was it given. Nor can we without
much weakness take this to be an accidental circumstance, it being
fore-determined by Christ so to have it, and his practice being a rule to the
Church. Such as are not learners of Christ (as the grossly ignorant) or such
as are not sincere lovers of Christ, but lovers of, and livers in known sins,
how can any man make those to be Disciples of Christ? An unregeuerated person
is far from a Disciple. He cannot examine himself, (as before) not act graces
which he wants. None can take Christ in the Sacrament who have not taken him
first in the Word. Shall souls be thought to extend spiritual acts which are
carnal? This being so clear it must needs be agreeable to the Word, and mind
of Christ, to examine men in order to a worthy receiving, and walking up to the
rule, and example of Christ.

1. Posito fine, ponuntur media couducentia ad finem. The means, Quae Deus
prohibet in Ecclesia fieri, ea vult Ecclesiae judicio vitari.
and the end come under the same command; this passes with all learned, and
intelligent men. Now we find the end commanded. Unworthy ones are forbidden,
and denied. Who will say that ignorant and scandalous in life are to be
admitted? In opere Catech. Ursi^i Parei oper a recognito. p. 538.
Now this being granted, any proper, and sufficient way to this end, namely,
exclusion of the unfit, cannot want a probation from the Word. For the end is
attained by means, and is in vain set forth without them. Christ's will is
that only Disciples (real souls) should come to this Ordinance; Must there not
then be a means, and a way found to distinguish them from others? London
Ministers Vindication. p. 66, 67
The point is handsomely expressed by this similitude: A man gives a legacy by
will to certain poor Scholars. Now shall the trustees of this Will take men's
own sayings, or trust, reports that they are Scholars, or try their ability in
arts, and tongues? All will say, the Trustees may examine such as desire the
Legacy* and refuse them that will not submit. Now let this Sacrament be this
Legacy of Christ, as it is (you know) the New Testament in his body and blood,
and then apply and resolve accordingly. If there be a work to be done, there
must be powers to act it, for powers are in vain unless drawn into act, and a
work is in vain commanded without a power somewhere. If admonition will not
serve, there must be a further power of suspension, and censure. Christ has
not only a purpose that this ordinance should be continued, but that it should
be fenced from profanation in the continuance. He that holds up the use of this
Ordinance, without setting up a fence to keep it pure, respects too little the
will, and glory of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 13.8
We can do nothing (says the Apostle) against the truth, but for the truth. He
speaks not of doctrinal truth alone, but chiefly of practical, or true
administration of Church Power in matters of plety; for before he threatens the
use of Apostolical power in punishing. The end of which power is the supporting
of the Church by upholding godliness, and purity of Ordinance therein, and
suppressing the contraries, so that to make no separation is to cross the very
end of Church Power, and to do against the truth of Piety, which the Apostle
could not do, and we should not, though we be as reprobates, or unapprov'd by
some for it.

SECT. XXXV.
Motives unto Ministers, and others serving to move them unto a right
transaction of the Lords Supper.



1. See, Motive.
and lay to heart the evils following the neglect of this, or any like course,
these will make a large Catalogue. See Mr. Hilder-sham on Joh. 4 p. 167.


1. And chiefly God is provoked to remove our Candlestick for neglect of
Church Censures upon scandalous offenders, considering the Apostles Words, A
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, 1. Cor. 5.6.

Alas, we have not only a little leaven in our Congregations, but are (many
where is) even lumps of leaven, as to the practice of known sins. Our
corruptions unless appeared against will provoke God to depart from us: Thy
Camp shall be holy, that he may see no unclean thing in thee, and depart from
thee, Deuteronomy. 32.14.

2. The second evil is the confusion of souls by ordinary and common
profanation; eating and drinking their own damnation.

3. Abuse of the blood of Christ, by being too prodigal thereof.

4. Obstructing the reformation of the Churches we live in.

5. Crossing the desires of the godly in the land, and the actings of the State
herein.

6. p. 33. Omnes simpliciter pellamus, quos indigne accedere videmus, Chrysostom. in
Hom. 83. on Mat p. 198
Degenerating from the primitive times, and all true Antiquity. Witness the
forecited courses of the Ancient Churches, and the Words of Chrysostom, Let us
keep away all without exception that we see to come unworthily.

These and many more we might represent (viz.) all former attempts this way
fall to the ground. Malignants, and Neuters made to rejoice at our confusion,
grieving the godly in communion, who though they dare not rashly separate from
a Church, yet desire a differencing by censure in it. Thus not of late, but of
old. Laurentius Humphredus de religionis conservatione and confirmatione vera
ad Nobil. Clem. and populum Anglicanum, p. 23.
We shall present but one, or two of former times. One of good learning and
good esteem writes thus from abroad of the Church where he was. I cannot
wonder enough (says he) or grieve enough, when I perceive in these places
Church Discipline to be rejected. And to be either none or too loose, or not
vigilantly administered, where yet else a true image of religion is seen, as if
the Gospel could be where men live not Evangelically: Interea non desperandum
libenter esse fateor, dabit posterior aetas tractabiliores forte animas,
mitiora pectora quam nostra habent secula. Aret. Probl. p. 132.
thus he. Aretius living in such evil times (as ours are) wherein men were
impatient of any restraint or censures as to Church Fellowship, comforts
himself with hopes of better days.

Lastly, the want of making some separation as to the Lords Table, has given
occasion to such as have absolutely forsaken our Congregations: Mr. Cotton,
Bloody Tenent. 2. p. p. 138. Sacramental stumbling block removed. p. 24.
Motive. 2
See Master Cotton, and others. All these well weighed, they will prove the
Churches best friends, that in an humble, and moderate way desire the best
means to be used to provoke its purity.

2. The second Motive, and consideration contains the great advantages got by
acting in some courses of discipline.

1. We shall the better defend the truth of our Churches, Disciplina est pars
regni Christi, sic cadem ratione est pars Evangelii, est sanctus modus
Evangelii promovendiin ipso Evangelio institutus. Neque igitur totum Christi
regnum, neque Evangelium recipient, qui rejiciunt disciplinam. Ames. Medul. p.
287.
while the whole Gospel is with us, and not a part only, and the holy means of
promoting the Gospel, as Reverend Amesius.

2. We shall see the more comfort in our preaching, have the better satisfaction
in our own consciences, (whilst God is our witness that we have taken pains,
drawn loss upon our estates, stirred up the envy of the multitude against us
for his service sake) and adorn our Ministry: This is your dignity (says
Chrysostom) speaking to Ministers about keeping off from the Lords Table, this
your stability, and crown; in the forecited Homily.

3. We shall enjoy the sweet society oftentimes of them that fear the Lord,
The communion and fellowship of the Saints is the lower beaven of Saints Mr.
Caryl 5. vol. on Job p. 254.
which the godly find to be a rare cordial. Men of this world (great ones)
think they do not live longer then they have their matches, and meetings in a
fellowship suitable to their spirits. A soul having real union with sesus
Christ, finds the communion of Saints its proper, and natural element, out of
which he languisheth, and in which he lives with much pleasure.

4. We shall have the honor of professing Christ, beyond the line of former
customs, and formality, and shall bear witness to the excellency which the
Word places in those that be really gracious. None are now counted (by some
men) sublime, but such as are of good blood and birth above common men, the
excellency that is by grace is little noted. The world looks on them as Jewels
who have some natural, and outside-lustre, though never so low, and dark
creatures as to the ways of God.

5. We reap the fruit of the prayers, and dangers of those renouned Saints in
the age before us, who desired to see the things we (do or might) see, but did
not see them, we are entered into the labor of their spirits.

SECT. XXXVI.
Wherein usual Objections are answered.

Object. One is this: The Stirs and troubles where any such separation is
made.

Answ. To this our answer is, That the farthest we may follow peace with men
is, as it may stand with holiness, and duty to God. Better to quit peace then
holiness, though peace be dear. Indeed from a high, rash or absolute
separation there are dangerous consequences, but from that which is moderate,
and warrantable no such dangers; we must distinguish between the cause, and
occasion of stirs and divisions.

Christ's Doctrine may be the one, but men's lusts are the other. Esau is angry
with Jacob, now although Jacob loved peace, and would not willingly offend his
brother, yet he thinks it not fit to part with his blessing to end the quarrel:
So here reformation is necessary, and that requires examination, and alteration
in some things, which offends men that are brethren by profession; shall we now
desist for quietness sake? that were to lose our blessing, and to offend God
by being wanting to his providence, and our own duty.

Object. 2. That this is not discernable from schism, and absolute separation.

Answ. For answer to what is said already, we add this: Separation from
Churches is properly a renouncing of all membership with them as unlawful rigid
separatists would not communicate, though they know all to be godly with us,
this is remote from our thoughts.

Object. 3. Against the responsory part of this discourse, that we do but
undertake to prove what is granted us, namely, that all scandalous persons are
to be kept off, and therefore answer not.

Answ. But may we not retort this? The Paper which is answered does grant the
maine thing we contend for, and drive at, and yet opposes us stiffly, which is
to prevaricate, as we take it. He that will put us to this task, namely, to
prove that persons knowing, and not any way scandalous may be kept from the
Lords Table, will hear of our refusal; the Economy of our way is only to
exclude the visibly unworthy, and no others. We do still desire that all
serious Christians may enjoy this, and all other privileges of the Gospel. We
have in our answer (as was said before) opposed all that does oppose us, and
no more. Other Objections are touched on before.

SECT. XXXVII.
Wherein of certain Queries upon the whole business, which is the last head.



to Gods Word. Whence we may assume in this sort:

When this was taken, either we saw the alteration of corrupt customs to be
necessary as to the Congregations we live in, or we saw it not necessary to be
so now; now if the latter be true, may we not say, that whosoever so took it,
he swore not in judgment, and so took Gods Name in vain? For he swore to
reform, being convinced of no corruptions. But if the first be true, then we
desire to know of every Minister, and other man that has taken it, whith what
conscience they can oppose ways, and courses tending to that sworn end, and
how they dare to withhold their own activity therein?

Ecclesia esset falsaria, admittens, quos Deus excludit, and pugnaret secum.
Ursin. Cath a Pareo illust. p. 532.
in giving the Seal of salvation to the very same man, which they have
pronounced damned; binding the same men in one Ordinance, and loosing them in
another? Is not this to play fast and loose with the Ministry? We put this to
them only, that do admit such as they know to be scandalous, and see them (as
far as men can see) to be impenitent. This is ordinarily done without any
grief or scruple, that we hear of. In the denunciation of Gods judgments, the
most scandalous of any Congregation must needs be sometimes in the Preachers
thoughts.



See Manton on Epist of James p.
the Church is not to own upon profession only: others say, profession gives a
right; but when the learned so speak, they (as we think) take profession as
contradistinct to faith, and truth of grace, which is inward, and invisible.
Should they understand it so, as if profession alone namely, a bare, dead, and
naked profession, without any thing to evidence it to be serious, should be
enough, they should not (as we conceive) speak soundly.

is unsettled, See Mr. Stock on Mal. p. 130
and their people being opposite to ways of reformation? shall they give the
Sacrament promiscuously to all? or shall they by their own authority exclude,
and put off the unfit? or shall they wholly desist, or lay down? We conceive
that Ministers are in a very great strait, having a necessity lying upon them
on the one hand, to administer the Ordinance, and yet having (perchance) a ked
party predominant in their Congregations ready to hinder any good course of
separation. Somewhat is written, but not much, to this purpose; we wish a
timely and full light were given. We conceive, 1. The use of the Ordinance of
the Supper to be so necessary; as that it may not always, nor long be
discontinued; the command of Christ [Do this] requires obedience; This is well
proved by one of late. Mr. Jeanes
But we see no necessity to close with him, in another point, that while the
Church is undisciplined, the Sacrament may be administered in every
Congregation, without any separation, which seems to be his practice, and
judgment. 2. We conceive that the Lords Supper cannot be holily transacted by
any, unless the scandalous be removed: the mind of Christ being fully against
it. p. 16.
Intending it for Disciples only, as was there shown. As he that pleades thus,
My Church is not Presbyterated; Therefore I am at liberty to administer, or
not, pleads weakly: So he that says, My Church is not disciplined; Therefore I
make no separation at all, but take all; truly to us he speaks as weakly as the
other. The pleas are much alike. Mr. Jeanes his advantage upon his adversaries,
is by this, that he holds them so strictly to Presbyterian principles; whereas
we think it much safer to transgress a disputable principle of Presbytery,
then to offend against the light of the Word. All principles of
Church Government are not alike clear; were we to speak to some particular
Minister, we should open our minds thus: If you cannot with the godly party of
your Congregation, join your self fitly to some well constituted Church, then
may the Minister by his own authory (without Elders) put back such as he knows
to be unfit, and so administer it at home; this seems safer then a total
disuse of the Sacrament, or then the abuse of it by admitting all. We speak of
this as to be done only in a case of necessity. The necessity of Elders to
join with the Minister is clearer to some godly men, then it is to others. The
Minister is empowered, and commissioned as to all Ordinances by Christ; whether
in this Sacrament to act solely, or alone, is a question. What if two, or three
Ministers join and act together for a while, being not so well able to act
alone? Stands this at any great distance from the rule?


The Fathers, and Schoolmen give much, yea, most (if not all) to the Minister.
We write this as willing to help others, and willing to be helped our selves by
better judgments.



Let the godly consider these following.

1. As to knowledge, there must be so much light as may let in Christ into the
soul; the quantity of a man's knowledge is not so much to be weighed, as the
quality thereof to be tried. Knowledge of principles, and fundamentals must be.
If to our our best discerning a man's knowledge appear to be sound, and
distinct, that is, not of many things, but of one thing from another, or in
order to another; then our mind is that the least measure may serve: Job 21.14
2 Pet. 3.5 Hos. 4 6.
the light comes in at a very little hole, the best know but in part; all are
therefore in some sense ignorant, but in the worst sense they only are
ignorant, who care not to know, who have no mind to knowledge, who are
ignorant of their ignorance, and the danger of it. Mark these with the black
coal of ignorance. Ephesians 5.11


2. As to practice these four qualifications seem necessary.

1. He that is received upon good grounds, must be no companion of drunkards, 2 Timothy 3.5. Psalm. 101.4, 5. Prove. 1.14, 15. Genesis 49.6. Prove. 28.7. Mat. 8.22. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Act. 2.42, 44. 1 John 1.7. Heb. 10.33. Mal.
3.16. Psalm. 15.4 Psalm. 101.6.
or deriders of godliness, nor of any loose livers. It become not Disciples,
or the children of God to accompany their Lords, and Fathers enemies. It is in
some sort an approving of their ways, which not only in word, but every other
way we should appear against; we are not free enough from any sins, while we
are too free in accompanying those that commit them; while the wicked confess
they are burdened with the company of the good, the godly must profess the
like of the wicked.

2. He must be such a one, as frequents, and delights in the society of godly
people. Dr Preston of love. p. 102, 103. 1 Samuel 19.2 Heb. 10.25 Ps. 122.1. 2
Pet. 2.7, 8 Ps. 120.5. Psalm. 16.3 Phil. 2.1, 2 Ephesians. 4.3. 1 These. 5.11.
A man's companion is (as it were) the counterpane of himself. Of all other
things (says one) company is worst dissembled. Will ye profess that ye love
the Saints? and that you delight in them, and yet you desire to be in any
company rather then theirs; that when you are among them, you are as it were
out of your element? It is impossible, but those that are moved by the same
Spirit, should be best pleased when they are in one, and the same society; it is
natural to love company, and religious to love good, and suitable company.

2. 1 John 1.6. 1 These. 2.10. Phil. 1.27. 1 Chronicles. 5.1, 2. 1 Cor. 6.11 Gal.
5.19 Rev 22.15 2 Timothy 2.19.
He must not be known to be guilty of any gross sin. Sins of infirmity
(truly so called) will stand with this rule, but the practice of known sins
will not; A man is guilty of that sin, not which he has once committed, and
repented of, but of that which he is not changed from, but continues in.

If it may be said freely of any one, that he is a liar, a deceaver, a swearer,
an idler, a wanton, a filthy talker, or such like; he, or she lives in a known
sin; there must be a freedom from scandal. Sine crimine, though non fine
peccato, as Jerome.


4. He must be such a one as performs all religious duties, as well in
private, as in public according to his calling, this is visible godliness.
Reverend Mr. Stock on Malachy p. 132. Phil. 2.15. 1 Pet. 1.15 2.12.3.16. 2
Pet. 3.11 Luke 1.6. Act. 3.19. Rev. 3.19. Romans 2.4. Psalm. 4.3. Psalm. 32.6 1 Timothy 2.2, 10. Genesis 18.19. Act. 17.11 Acts 16.25. Acts 2.42. Revel. 1.10. Heb.
10.23, 24, 25^ Acts 20.7. Acts 10.2, 9, 30. Joh. 4.23. Joh. 9.31. 1 Timothy 4.7.
Tit. 2.12. 2 Pet. 3.11. 2 Pet. 1.6, 7. Genesis 12.7.
Inward worship makes a Christian in Gods sight, and outward in man's: no other
virtue can commend, or qualify without godliness, this is the chiefest flower
of a Christians crown. Honesty is indeed a part of religion, and devotion is
the life, and soul of honesty. We deny not but these may be apprehended to be
in such as God sees unsound. Nevertheless requiring these, we do what in us
lies. While undiscerned hypocrites deeply engage their souls in Sacramental
guilt, we have freed ours, and shall be a sweet savor to God, when their
sacrifices stink.

We have (now) done, Conclusion.
only this Caution we thought to conclude with, while we have spent time, and
some pains in holding out the truth in, and about the fellowship of believers
in that great Ordinance of the Lords Supper. We would not be so taken, as if we
placed the life of Religion in any outward way, or more refined course of Gods
worship. No, the having of Christ is an inward thing, the power of godliness
is first to be heeded. If we be nothing within, no great matter though we sit
at the right or left hand of Christ's outward Kingdom. Let us contend
principally to be members of Christ, to be of the invisile Church: Imbodied in
the Church of the firstborn. Here we cannot easily be too careful, or
curious; but as to external fellowship, though the mind of Christ in this
also be to be sought, and followed, yet so much earnestness, and confidence
needs not, as in the other, unless men take care how they live, it is not much
matter how they worship. Thou may be in a purer Church Way then another, and
yet be the impurer, and vainer soul of the two. It is better to see a man's
conversation commending his way, then to see men beholding to their way for
their esteem.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. HVMPHREYS FIRST SERMON.
I Shall make two stands upon the whole;

How this Doctrine is 1. Raised. 2. Managed.


I. How this Doctrine is raised. His Text is, Mark 14.23.

And they all drank of it.

These [all] he says, were the twelve Apostles, and Christ's whole
Congregation; whence he gathers his free admission to this Ordinance.

Answ. Two things are here supposed or affirmed.

1. That they were the twelve Apostles which did communicate with Christ.

2. That these twelve were his whole Congregation. This is the Basis of the
whole; so that if these communicants were rather less then twelve, or not
Christ's whole Congregation, then all is lost on his side.

1. That all then present, when this Ordinance was instituted by Christ, did
partake thereof is to be granted, so far the universality holds right; but,

2. That these all which drank, were the twelve Apostles, is more then is
said, and is (at least) a disputable point.

Now to suppose or beg that which a man knows to be doubted, and denied by
many eminent Divines, this is not Scholastical. They might sit down all, (in
his sense) and yet might not all continue out all the several actions which
were performed at that sitting.

3. To gather hence, that all howsoever professing Christ should be admitted to
this Ordinance, seems to me weak, and most unsound. My reasons are,

(1.) Because Christ did not then call all that did profess him, and so belong
to him; he had many more Disciples besides the twelve, as is well known, which
were part of Christ's followers, though not so nearly altogether related as
these. To say that the twelve were Christ's whole Congregation, is but a fancy,
however serviceable to the design in hand; Christ's followers were his
Congregation, at least the seventy were surely part of it, and therefore the
twelve were not his whole Church, as is boldly affirmed. These then were but
part of his Disciples, the chiefest and most real, as Elders or Officers in a
Church may be, so that their general admission is no plea for free admission.
If all named Disciples had been called to this holy Institution, there had then
been some footing for such a Collection; but not so, not all, but only the
choicest are called.

Besides, (2.) Christ's words point not out only this generality, but rather by
that restriction ye (Take ye, drink ye,) show us that Christ did not intend
that spiritual feast for all howsoever professing; but that such as were his
true Disciples should partake.

All Disciples (we say) should drink of Christ's cup, and only Disciples, not
bare born professors, whose profaneness plainly shows them to want all true
love and duty to Jesus Christ. You see how sandy the foundation is on which the
whole Book and Discourse is built, viz. on a forced and wrested sense of
Scripture. Thus shortly of the first.

II. How his Doctrine is managed.

The management is in three things: 1. Apology. 2. The state of the question.
3. Proof by Scriptures and Reasons.


1. His Apology, wherein he commends his own meaning to be honest; so it may
be, and yet his plea evil; sometimes the meaning is better then the matter.

2. In his stating of the point,

1. He distinguishes the people of a visible Church into capable, and
incapable. The incapable are of three sorts, Infants, Mad men, and
Excommunicate persons: all besides (he says) are capable.

And why are these incapable? The Church (he will say) has censured one sort;
but the other (I hope) are incapable, because they cannot discern the Lords
body, or examine themselves; and if so, then all that cannot perform those
duties are incapable also. Now it is sure that all grossly ignorant of Christ,
all impenitent sinners are unable to do these; therefore his own reason will
constrain him to allow the keeping back of others, (viz.) as well spiritual
fools, and mad men as natural. Folly and madness can never be denied to be,
wherever sin reigns.

1. He distinguishes of men's capacity.

(1.) In regard of themselves, this he dares not affirm as to all in the
Church; should he, the very stones might cry out, and confute him. (2.) In
regard of the Church, or Ministers, and thus all are capable that do, or may
come.
But what Scripture has this distinction footing on? Those that are incapable
in themselves, (we knowing them to be so) we should judge to be such, and
exclude them. Can necessary profaners of the Sacrament be capable in respect of
the Church, whose duty it is to preserve the dignity of all Christ's
appointments? The Church must take none but such as she sees, and may suppose
capable. The reason to color this distinction, is this: Ministers are to offer
Christ freely, (which is more formally laid down afterward, here but in a
Parenthesis) therefore an universal capacity for all men, [whoever comes.] It
seems by this that even Jews, and Pagans may not be denied this Saerament, if
they come, and ask it; for these are called to believe, even all that believe
not within the sound of the Gospel, so that here he seems to forget his former
limitation as to the Church; his Scripture is, Revel. 22.17. and Esaias 55.1.
which indeed do hold out a free admission of all sensible sinners to believe on
Christ, but to ground on this a liberty for the most insensible soul to come to
this Ordinance, is a non sequitur with a witness.

In the foot of all, he believes that none except ipso jure, or de facto, (that
is, such as are, or ought to be excommunicated,) should be excluded. Here is
somewhat more then was before, he seemed to speak of actual excommunication
alone; now if there be but such as ought to be excomunicated, they may be kept
back. Truly this will almost man the man's market. Such as he speaks against do
desire to exclude none but these that ^^jure [of right] should be censured by
the Church; for this very exclusion is a noting, or censuring of them, as some
ways offending; Now let the Reader judge, what weight, and light these
distinctions carry, wherein he rather contradicts himself, then cleares his
matter.

3. His Scripture-proofs. His first Text is, Exodus 12.3, 47 50. verses. They
shall take every man his lamb, that is, This is my, law concering every family
in Israel, all the congregaion, and every person rightly disposed in their
families must observe this. Of these general terms, [ every man, all the
Congregation, the whole people] I may say (as to his use, Dolosus in
universalibus; I deny not but the Evangelicall Sacrament is one in substance
with the Passcover, which did foreshew Christ to die for his peoples sins, nor
dare I slight arguments fetched from the Old Testament, yet I conceive, that
arguments out of the Old Testament, and matters of the Jewish Church may be
sometimes misapplied unto the things of the New, and if I am not mistaken, it
is so here. Here is ( viz. Exodus 12.) a free admission. Why? All are commanded
to eat, and all disaccordingly. But many things may be said to this.

1. This was the first Passcover, and some things were extraordinary in it,
(viz.) sprinkling of the blood, the staff in hand, etc. As learned Interpreters
observe.

2. The text only shows what is the law of the Passover as to all families,
not meddling with the laws of suspension from it, as to some persons, which
were afterward given, ( Numb. 9.6, 7. Levit. 22.47.) where some for seven
days, others for a month were suspended; this is plain that no unclean
person was to eat of holy things, Passover, or other. Some [then] knowing
this, grumbled, as many do now, Wherefore are we kept back? Numb. 9.7? Gods
answer indeed there is not an absolute denial, and the reason is, because the
uncleanness spoken of was not moral, it was but for a ceremonial fault; now
uncleanness as to sins lies till men repent; here are no set days
therefore, but in that cause, God resolves how long that typical filthiness
should exclude. Now because no such laws were given at the first Passover,
shall we infer, therefore it was free for all, which other Scriptures show to
be false?

3. This text serves not Mr. Humphreys turn. For, 1. He excepts some, but here
all are called; Make the Lords Table, as free as the Passover, and it should
be extended to every man, without exception. 2. If legal pollution did keep
off for a month (so long is the pollution judged to continue) as he grants,
much more ought spiritual pollution to exclude, which is greater; how else do
we answer, or rise higher then the type? 3. It seems to me to be a very
falsehood, that no spiritual pollution did keep off. Did not uncircumcision of
heart, declared by practice keep back? Why else are those that have the charge
of Gods Sanctuary blamed? Ezekiel. 44.7.8, 9. The Jews thought they might not eat
the Passover, if they enter the Judgment-hall on an holy day, which was not
forbidden by any ceremonial law, therefore a moral, and not a legal
pollution, Ioh. 18.23. And why else are the Priests reproved for putting no
difference betwixt the holy, and profane? 4. The Passover had an external
benefit which all did partake of, therefore a right to that Ordinance so far,
as external; but the Lords Supper is a more spiritual Ordinance, no type. The
wicked were termed Gods people then, not so in the New. See Camero, p. 5.
Morally unclean were kept from the trespasse-offering, which was less then the
Passover, Number 5.6.7. How inevident then, if not untrue, is that assertion,
Moral evils keep none from the Passover.


2. To the second proof, which is, 2. Chro. 30.5. They decreed to proclaim
through all Israel from Dan to Beersheba, that they should come, and keep the
passover to the Lord.

Here is indeed a general proclamation, but yet you see after, v. 18. that
such as sanctified not themselves, and yet came, did highly, offend the will of
God; therefore there should not have been so free a coming, as he suggests.
Besides, they had all interest, as I said, in the typical, external, and
commemorate part of that Ordinance, Look upon Hezekiahs prayer, and you will
find that general coming sinful; and if so, some prevention would have done
well; see also that even the hearts unpreparednesse, when men are legally pure,
does deserve exclusion.

3. To the 3d. proof, which is, 1. Cor. 10.17. We being many are all partakers
of one bread.

Here he has found the word [all] and this is victory enough; but (with his
leave) some might be excluded for all this; the sense is but this, we partakers
do all partake of one bread; If in that Church they did suffer all, or too many
to partake, that was their fault, and it is set down to warn us against the
like, not to be a rule to us.

This mistake I wish those men would see, that would feign make the faults of
the Corinthians to become our rule. What if these that were Idolaters, and
drunkards did eat? This (I believe) is not set down, to teach or allow us to
admit the like scandalous ones; but rather to warn us, that we might be more
pure. I hope the faults of particular Churches, and believers are not recorded
for our imitation. Again, it does not appear to me that any of those
Corinthians were so gross as you make them. How is it possible that any one
embracing Christ, can remain an actual, and open Idolater? Idolatry was their
great sin before conversion, from which they were turned to believe in
Christ. How can it then be conceived that they still retained it? It is true,
that they did not keep themselves so clear, as they should have done from
Idolatry, in that they might be sometimes present (as a Protestant at Mass) in
their idol-temples, or else (as I think) in that they eat with them, eating of
the very meat sacrificed by the Pagans, and drinking in the same cups, in
which they offered. This was very base, it was in them Idolatry, they were
guilty of that sin, by sitting, and eating with them in such a manner, that
men given to Idolatry (as you speak) that is, serving of Idols, were admitted
to the Lords table, this (in my opinion) is very unlikely, if not false; do not
you believe any longer, that the Church of Corinth was so corrupt, as that they
would take into fellowship Gentiles, without an utter renouncing their known
sin of Idolatry; yet this you do surmise (very sinfully, as I think) that
you may make men believe an over-easinesse in this Church as to receaving
members, and persuade the stronger to your own Idol of general admission to the
Sacrament.

4. The next Scripture is, 1 Cor. 10.4, 5.

To this some answer, that this Sea, Rock, and Manna, were not Sacraments to
the Jews, but their use was external, to feed their bodies, which had they
wanted they must have died; but I rather answer, 1. That these were
extraordinary things, and Ab extraordinario ad ordinarium non valet argumentum.
2. It Is true, they had some Spiritual signification, and therefore God was
displeased with that very action proceeding from unworthy ones. 3. Their sins
did follow, not forego those actions, at least one of them (viz.) Baptism in
the cloud and sea. Therefore this proves not, that such as are scandalous
before, may be admitted to the Evangelicall Supper. How far then is this place
from the man's purpose, notwithstanding his crowing upon it? The Apostle
presses it to this end, that things spiritual be not abused by carnal, and
ungodly ones, which is our aim, and desire.


5. His next argument is from the Parable of the feast, Mat. 22. and, Luke 14.

This to serve his turn must signify the Sacramental Supper, whereas it seems
much more to point unto the preaching of the Gospel, or the Supper of grace, to
which souls are invited. It is that feast which the Prophets called to, before
ever this Ordinance was instituted. See, Isai. 55.1, etc.

The scope of Parables (I grant) is argumentative, but you shall find him
arguing from particular branches, as that of compelling men to come in, which
he will have to signify their duty, which is a wild fancy; rather (as I
apprehend) the scope of this Parable may be either,

First, by sending three several times, to signify the three several
dispensations of the Gospel. First, as a breakfast, Genesis 3. Secondly, under the
Law, as a Dinner. Thirdly, under the Gospel, as a Supper. For that which is a
Supper in Luke, is a Dinner in Matthew.

Secondly, in that it is a Supper, it shows we have now the fullest, and last
dispensation of Christ; as a Supper is the last meal of a day.

Thirdly, it may note Gods sending first to the Jews, who for the generality
refused; then to the Gentiles, who were far off. The compelling may signify
the Spirits convincing, or Gods drawing of souls to Jesus Christ.

The love of Christ constraines (says the Apostle;) and the Spirit of Christ
does convince, when it begins conversion; and the love of Christ draws, when
it seazeth upon a wounded, and bleeding heart for sin.

So that all these flourishes from this Parable (restraining it to the
Sacrament) seem much besides the mind of God therein. I might note other
defects, as where he says, the servant brought in the man without the
wedding garment, which the text does not say. Lastly, the man will have a free
Table, and a free Pulpit to be one. I mean the same liberty and latitude in
coming to the Sacrament, as in hearing, which is a gross mistake, contrary to
Scripture, reason, and Antiquity.

6. Another Scripture is, Mat. 3.11. with Mark. 1.5. where John baptizeth all;
whence is inferred an equal latitude for the other Sacrament; this argument he
takes to be very strong; but the Reader searching the Scripture, will find it
weak.

1. John did baptize none, but such as came in a capacity for it, and he
required confession of sins, yea, fruits of repentance too; give us these,
and we shall ask no more. John's example serves us much better then him. 1. John
did not baptize those Pharisees which he calls a generation of Vipers, they
wanted the fruits he called for; the Publicans came in a capacity, the
Pharisees not, therefore checked by Christ; See, Luke 7.29, 30. And all the
people that heard him, and the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the
baptism of John. But the Pharisees, and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God
against themselves, being not baptized of him. The Pharisees came to his
baptism; which might be to see the administering of it, or as sent. See, John.
1.24. And they which were sent, were of the Pharisees; which is the judgment
of diverse godly learned; this might be, and yet they not be baptized: the text
is plain, that some did refuse, if not all: and therefore are checked by John
for resting on that carnal privilege of being Abraham's seed; had some of the
Pharisees only resused, they had not been more to be blamed then the Publicans,
for some of them rejected also.

Secondly, those that were baptized by John whether Pharisees, or Publicans,
did all confess their sins, they were first tried by that; now grant this to
be done before the Lords Supper in a serious way, and we are friends. The
drunkards, and profane persons, which he would have freely admitted must first
confess their drunkenness to be a foul sin, and take shame to themselves
for it, or we may exclude them by his own argument; for Eadem est ratio
utriusque Sacramenti; and John did not baptize any without this trial by
confession of sins, which was an act, and evidence of their repentance.

7. The next Text is, Acts. 2.41. Then they that gladly received his word, were
baptized, etc. And did communicate.

How little this Text helps him, the Reader will plainly see, when he has
noted the great difference between those thousands, and our multitudes.

1. These were all converted ones, ours many of them making but a dead and
contradictory profession, some as void of the knowledge of Religion as the
Heathen, and others worse then Pagans in their practice. Is it not the man's
doting on his Sacramental liberty, which keeps him from seeing any difference
between those converts, and [some] loose professors among us? I would feign
learn from this Author, what more could be said of the truest Saints, then is
said of these, Acts. 2. First, they are pricked in heart, ours (alas many)
insensible sinners, blinded, and hardened creatures. Secondly, they
affectionatly desirous after the ways of salvation, ours (some) enemies in
heart, and very cross to good ways. Thirly, they were steadfast and constant
in the communion with the Apostles, and practice of holy duties; these stand
off from the people of God as hypocrites, maligning and defaming them; what
they can, not having so much as a form of godliness, if you expect their
customary coming to the Church.

It seems to argue some want of spiritual sight and love to holiness, when
scandalous persons, only because they profess, must be admitted to the Lords
Table upon this ground alone, because thousands of precious godly ones had this
liberty of general admission; in his next let him teach us how we shall know
common drunkards and swearers to be converted, which must be, or this argument
dies; it was, I know, some twenty years a go, the opinion of Chancellours and
Officials, that albaptized persons were to be held regenerate, and upon this
account their use was to check such Ministers as did difference men's spiritual
estates in their preaching.

8. Acts. 10.28. God has showed me that I should not call any man common, or
unclcane.

He very much likes this place as peculiar for expression; See how fancy may
bring a man in love, and make him bless God for that which should make him
mourn; he judges no man unclean, and yet the Apostle teaches us to call, and
account some swine, even all such as wallow in their sins. But let us see his
strength from this Scripture. Peter he says was scrupulous about admitting the
Gentiles in Christian communion, and well he might, till God resolved him; I
much question whether Mr. Humfry can show so good a warrant for his
resolvednesse to admit scandalous ones to the Lords Table: If he have had a
vision from heaven to justify his general admission, let him tell us; He has
not any clear light from Scripture, and yet he is resolved, so was not Peter;
Why must the Gentiles be taken into fellowship? First, because the wall of
partition is taken down. Secondly, because God gives of his Spirit and grace to
them; I pray see Peter's Comment. v. 35. In every Nation he that fears God;
and works righteousness is accepted of him; Such Gentiles as fear God; yea,
all men fearing God must be embraced; must all Gentiles be embraced? No, but
such as believe, receive the Word, had the Holy Ghost, and repentance unto
life. See Acts. 11.1.18. Acts. 10.46. The Gentiles upon this account are not
accounted unclean. If your conscience be so large, as not to account those men
unclean, who want all hopeful evidences of grace, yet do not so abuse the
Scripture, and Peter's example, as to make these your supporters.

9. His last texts are, Isay 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come. Rev.
22.17. Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor. 1 Timothy 2.4. Who will have all men to be saved.
John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me.

To speak nothing particularly unto these Scriptures; here are two gross
mistakes. 1. That the tender or offer of Christ in the Word preached ought to be
no larger then admission to the Lords Table; Christ and grace are to be
proposed in the ministry of the Word, even to the wicked, being sensible of
sin; yea, to them, that they may be sensible; but that before men do believe,
or are converted, they should have enjoyment of the Sacrament, is contrary to
all the practice of Christ, and his Apostles. 2. Another mistake is this, That
we so straighten the Ordinance, as to shut out poor sinners from it; This here,
and elsewhere he quaintly dilates on, and aggravates to stir up hatred against
godly Ministers. But Sir, I would have you know, that we embrace every poor
sinner, so far as we can discern; and they are only scandalous, and gross
sinners, such as want feeling of sin, and spiritual poverty that we
willingly exclude; do you no better understand who are poor sinners? Alas poor
Froome.

Having spoken to his Scriptures, I come next to his Reasons, and
considerations, which are six, or seven, as he numbers them.

Reas. 1. His first Reason is shortly this. The Sacraments are a visible word,
a declaring of Christ crucified; This Sacrament spoken of, sets forth Christ to
the eyes, as the Gospel preached does to the ear; it is only to diverse senses,
there is all the difference; hence he confidently infers, that the same
latitude must be in communicating, and hearing; and here, says he, I stand as
upon a Rock; Now I shall try whether he build upon a Rock indeed, or upon the
sand. Sir, you do in this tell us that the forenamed Ordinances aggree in their
matter, this is most true; but that there is no difference between them, but
only in this, that they are to diverse senses, this is what you affirm, but do
not prove; Some difference besides in their proper and peculiar use, is
apparent; the Word serves to call sinners, this Sacrament to nourish, and
confirm believers. Multitudes of authorities, even of the most learned and
godly might I heap, who are so rational as to reject this Reason, but I should
argue, and reason out the difference between us in this particular. Where do
you find that ever the Sacrament was made use of but to confirm, and comfort
such as had already the effect of the Word upon their hearts? Therefore
although the Sacrament does represent Christ to believers, (which is all you
prove, and this is not denied) yet it does not follow but the Word has a
precedence, and must first call and dispose before this Sacramental
declaration is propor for any eyes; Go teach, and boptize, says out Savior;
first teach, make disciples, and then baptize; this [de adultis] is found
reasoning; we must not baptize men of years, much less give the Lords Supper
without some fruits of teaching, appears. Our blessed Savior only mentions
those two, Word, and Baptizme for the gathering of Churches, and so as the Word
must go before Baptizme too; As for the Lords Supper, that follows both. It is
by the Gospel phreacht in a proper sense, that sinners are gathered Ephesians. 1.10.
Though we be not about gathering Churches (unless our peoples obstinacy drives
us to it) but studying and striving to reform our Congregations corrupted by a
too long disuse of Scripture discipline, yet here to persecute this rationally
and effectually, it will be necessary that we try who they be that are wrought
upon by the word, at least that we for a time keep off them from the Ordinance
who appear to be wicked ones. We are about I say to redress, and perfect our
Church Communion according to the Word; our Covenant, and will of the chief
Magistrate. Now, why may we not observe the same rule in reforming, which the
Apostle did in gathering?

So then, I grant you what your texts say, namely, that the Sacrament does
declare Christ crusified to believers, but it follows not (as I take it) that
it must be a proper Ordinance for the ignorant, and scandalous to partake of;
The Word in its proper latitude reaches to the world, to every creature, to the
old creature, as well as to the new; but if we make the Word and Sacrament to be
(as you say) of the same latitude, we shall confound the Church and world,
which the Word distinguishes and opposes; but you say, are there any to whom
the matter of the Word may not be declared?

Sir, the bare declaring, or setting forth of Christ is not the thing we stand
upon; we set not bars to men's hearing, or seeing, but to their receiving; the
Sacrament does more then declare, it does seal Christ, now this ought not to be
done, but to believers only; I mean, to such as in a rational charity may be
judged such.

The matter of the Gospel may be declard to any to the Word preached, or any
other holy way, even to the most scandalous, if they will give it the hearing;
but it does not follow, that therefore in this Ordinance which does not declare
only, but seal, they should have equal fellowship; The declaring or setting
forth of Christ even to the worst dishonours not Christ, but the taking of such
as are scandalous into full communion, and owning them as members of Christ, I
dare not say that this either pleases, or honors Christ. The Doctrine of the
Sacrament, or Christ Sacramental may be set before them, but it is their
admission to partake, that we oppose; The Sacraments are (you say) seals as
signs; As much as they are signs as seals; It Is true, these two signing and
sealing are distinct ends of the Lords Supper, they are signs to represent,
and seals to confirm. So far as they represent they may be somewhat
suitable unto scandalous persons, but nothing as they confirm. Would you have
them confirmed in grace, who have no true grace at all? Your two lame
similitudes contributes nothing, that the seal is not to be divided from the
writing, we easily grant, but you will have the writing sealed to him which is
no purchaser, which is absurd. You tell us how the writing and seal are
delivered together unto the Church, but our dispute is about the Churches
delivery of them to creatures. Baptism, and the Lords Supper were delivered
together unto the Church, must the Church therefore deliver them together? then
Infants must partake of the Lords Supper as well, and as soon as of Baptism.
What an absurdity is this? Because men are under the declaration of such a
bargain as heaven, that therefore the Church must seal it to them in
particular, in hope that they hereafter will have a mind to buy, it is pity
such stuff should stand under the notion of reason. No man (I grant) will say
that the Proclamation belongs to any, to whom the seal belongs not, nor will
any one (well advised) say, that either Proclamation or Seal does belong to a
Rebel that does not lay down his arms, which are your own wrods. The Gospel
belongs in a fence to all such as are under it, God sends it to most wretched
sinners, offers them conditions of peace with himself, sealed with Christ's
blood, but the doubt is, whether these promises, and tenders must be actually
and formally sealed to men, because this Proclamation, they being still in
arms, this you seem to affirm.

What you mean by confirming men to come in, I scarce understand, I think they
should come in before they be confirmed, or else your confirming will prove to
be (as it is) a sad delusion.

The Author adds force to his first Reason by four considerations. He had need
add some force, for his reason wants it.

His first consideration is this.

The Second consideration is.

1. That they refuse to admit poor souls, this is your slander, I told you
before of this, you distinguish not between gross sinners, and sensible sinners

2. That they receive not men though qualified according to Christ's mind. This
is another false witness.

Sir, it is Christ's mind that men should be qualified with grace, as with
knowledge, to discern Christ in that Ordinance, etc. And therefore do his
faithful Ministers look after these things.

3. He coming with knowledge and repentance, or requiring and looking after
these, contrary to free grace? I had thought that free grace had only opposed
merit, not cast off all qualifications as the fruits, and signs of it.
Cannot Christ be free in the Sacrament, unless the ignorant, and scandalous
person be also admitted to it? I know well, we must come to this Ordinance,
without the least thought of the merit of our graces; but yet he that comes to
the Lords Table without this price in his heart, and life, will be dealt with
as he was that wanted a wedding garment; Indeed by your arguing you make grace
not free, but loose.

The third consideration is an inconsiderate one, a very dark, and sad one;
Answer. Sir, the use of the Ordinance of the Gospel in Christ's own way, and
order is best; I am confident you neever read that Christ, or the Apostles used
this way of conviction. The experience of the most godly in all parts of the
land, and of the world, will rise up against this your assertion; The sealing
of the Covenant to men, before they understand it, and take hold of it, is the
common cutthroats of souls in our Parishes. Which way soever we take it, it is
the spirit, and his fullness that does convince. The Sacrament is not the
fullness of the Word, but the Spirit; the Word may come with the outward seal,
and yet not come in its full virtue, as you say.

The fourth consideration is. That the Gospel is a Gospel of peace, but the
course of separation, or admitting only some, this is unpeaceable. Answer. Have
you never read those words of Christ? I came not to send peace, but a sword.
The godly will more peacable, and quiet, when the scandalous are put from them.
You would have a worldly, and fleshly unity kept up, whatever become of purity
and Reformation. Sir, The peace of the Church will not well, nor long stand
without a holy use of all Church Censures. It is the sweet saying of a godly
man. It is far better to occasion wrath in the bad, then grief in the good.
We are and must be tender of unity, but not insensible of corruptions in Gods
worship. We look upon the distempers in many men's spirits, their railing, and
many created difficulties to the godly to be evidences that the work is Gods,
who can, if not calm, yet restrain the spirits of the worst; you are told
that wounded sinners are not to be rejected: in your next impression leave out
your Prosopopria's, we take Saints of the lowest form, and acknowledge none to
be such, unless they acknowledge themselves to be the chiefest of sinners.

Reas. 2. This is from the nature of the visible Church containing a mixture,
now our Congregations being Churches, they should have this Sacrament in a
free, and mixed way.

Answ. I shall in this oppose you upon your own principles, let the Churches of
England be true Churches, (as it will not be hard to prove many of them to be)
yet are they corrupted through the negligence of former times, that there may
be need of Reformation or separation in our Churches, to prevent separation
from them.

I do not believe, nor can you prove, that we should own men for Church Members
for bare profession.

Sir, We are not about to take this Ordinance from our Churches, but to fit our
Churches for this Ordinance; so that what you say is little to the purpose, you
allow particular Churches to use the highest censure of Excommunication, why
not this of Suspension, acting in, and for the Reformation of our Discipline
according to Gods Word, and our Covenant, whereof you take as little notice, as
if you were a man of another Nation. What you say about the nature of a visible
Church, I shall not oppose, only I must point at your ignorance in making our
separation, and Christ to be one. Christ's is a final determination of all men
as to their estates. Ours is but a severing of some in order to their future
salvation, if they belong to God. We note some for ignorance, that they may get
knowledge; and others for their wickedness, that they may repent. We should
indeed presume, and (as you say) anticipate Christ's work, did we attempt, or
design, a general, or final separation. Hypocrites (as the tares) will grow
together with the wheat to the end. This is all the scope of that Parable, but
the force of your argument is built not upon the scope, but upon the
circumstance, namely the servants discerning; which is but a branch of the
Parable, and added to fill up this Similitude, of no virtue therefore to prove
that known sinners must not be kept off, when discerned. The Parable speaks of
hypocrites, as you your selves say well, now hypocrites are not discerned but
by God only. Is not here a contradiction? If we put these things together.

Let us come now to Christ's example. What is that?

1. He converses with Publicans, and sinners, but where I pray you? Was it at
the Sacrament? I hope not, but at their own Table. This he did that he might
have occasion to do them good by his Word. But what is this to the purpose? We
know it is our duty to hold forth Christ to the worst of men, if they will hear
us.

2. But in this Ordinance, Christ also conversed with Judas, something you say
for this; and I could quickly say as much against it; I will only tell you,
what a learned man says to others, that you have chosen a bad Porter to let in
men to the Sacrament, nor have you well studied the Evangelists I see: for you
might have found the three Evangelists to differ somewhat, which might have
abated your confidence.

Luke indeed speaks of Judas after the Cup, but Matthew, and Mark before; and
it is the opinion of very many godly and learned, that there is a
recapitulation in Lukes Narration. As for John he is expressly against you.
Immediately after the Sop, (says he) which was before the Sacrament, Judas
went out, being now discovered, and in a sort cast out, as those words intimate
( John 13.30.) which was before the Suppers administering; so then what was dark
as to the disagreeing of the other Evangelists about the order, and Judas his
presence, that John clearly resolves, saying, That he went immediately out upon
our Saviors discovering him.

That which thou do do quickly, which words were spoken before the Sacrament.

Here is little argument in all this; But he will tell you that it is a poor
shift to say, Judas was a close hypocrite.

Answ. He aims (I know) at an Objection lying against him, namely this, That
though Judas had received, yet this will not help him, or his cause. Had he
proved that to be a shift, which he so styles, he had written ingenuously, but
he says it, and proves it not.

The truth is, That though the most eminent of our Divines, (at least many of
them) oppose Judas his receiving, (which should have moved this Author unto a
little more consideration, and modesty in faying down his opinion) yet the
thing is left by others as doubtful, and so has it ever stood in the Church,
so that there is no such evidence of fact, as he speaks of; if there had, men
of clear heads, and upright hearts would see it, as well as himself,

Sir, let me give you and others this Caveat. You know the story of Judas,
beware lest your contending for a free admission to the Lords Table, prove not
as traitorous to the Churches purity, as Judas did to Christ himself.

Reas. 3. Admission to, and transaction of the business of this Sacrament must
be with much charity, and humility; without judging, especially in Ministers;
But this is impossible, where there is not a free admission. Thus he.

Answ. But what time will he take to prove his Minor?

He shows us not the least proof or reason, only flies to his own experience,
which is a weak prop. Should a Jew go this way to work, how might the precious
doctrine of our Savior be decried? That Doctrine which is of God ought to
bring forth, and continue love among men; but see the Gospel does the contrary.
What sects, what wars, what bitterness from this way? The Popishly affected
commonly argue in this sort against the Gospel. Look (say they) what stirs, and
blood since Luther, the founder of their Reformation: The truth is; That when
men fail in their judgments they must needs fail in their observations, so
does this Author; He is fallen in love with a free admission to the Sacrament,
(and so is the generality of men) and therefore lays load upon our opinion and
practice, voting it to be the ready way to heart-burnings, and such like evils
in men's spirits; I will not say, but these courses of Reformation may occasion
and draw forth such evils, but surely men's own lusts and wickednesses are the
causes of them. And why so much pride, and hatred, and contempt of others in
Ministers, and other Christians, persuaded to exclude some from the Lords
Table? May we not be humble, and loving too, and yet careful, and tender over
the Ordinances of Christ? The Spirit of a Minister of Jesus Christ (as I take
it) carries him to a special love of the godly. Can we not be loving to men
unless we be cruel to the blood of Christ? Lay down therefore these
uncharitable conjectures, and evil surmises of Gods servants: the
faithfulness, humility, and gentleness of some of these is very evident to
the hearts of the godly, and yet of a contrary judgment to you in this matter
of the Sacrament; Your text 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. is not to be understood of such
forbearing of evil men, as rationally conduces to please them in their sins,
and blind their souls; such suffering and bearing with evil ones is most
ungracious; see what follows his suffering, and bearing, In meekness
instructing, ver. 25. This all godly ones will strive to observe; such as they
debar they also lovingly inform of their unfitness, and entreat to forbear
till they shall be apprehended to be in a better capacity. Can you tell us of
any won to repentance by your free way? truly we know none; but if we may speak
our experiences, as you do yours, we find very many hardened in their sins by
this indulgence, which you plead for.

Here you mind us of three passages of our Saviors.

1 From that Parable of the Pharisee, and Publican, where you go about to
fasten Pharisaisme upon us, but with some mollifying; not a proud, only a
strict and rigid Pharisaism; here he is somewhat more modest then others who
are of his mind in our dispute. We are Puritans, Novatians, Chatharists,
Donatists, or what you will, if we be found desirous to mend our Church-society
by examining and severing of our people. But what if this be his own blind
zeal? For, first, he knows not that we turn off any poor sinners: no, we
embrace where we see any (though the least measure of) true spiritual poverty,
Secondly; I might tell him, that he rather inverts the use of this blessed
Ordinance, and by his freeness lays it open to manifest profanation. Christ
ordained it to be a Disciple-priviledge, a bond to unite his people, and he
would have it lie common even to them that have not the face of Christians in
their practice. O blessed Lord! open the eyes, and rectify the zeal of these
men, who are more forward to satisfy the desires, and cries of carnal men,
then they are to advance the Churches holiness, or preserve the dignity of thy
holy institutions.

2. The second memorable passage concludes Christ's freeness in eating with
sinners to be a reason for a free communion; but I have told him already,
Christ was more free at the Pharisees Table, then at his own. Christ that did
eat with Publicans, did celebrate his Supper with his own Disciples only, he
took none of them in there; nay, he left out very many that professed him to be
their Lord; How impertinent therefore is that passionate exclamation? O sweet
Jesus! etc. I see Rhetoric must serve, when Logic fails.

3. The third place is in John 8. Let him that is without sin himself, cast the
first stone at her. I could tell him of a better use to be made of this
example; though Christ knew this woman to be a grievous sinner, yet because no
proof came, he would not censure her; he would act so as he might example us;
not as a God, who knew all things, but as a Judge, who must know but what is
proved. And this may afford a reason, why Judas was not excluded, (if we grant
him admitted) because Christ would not exclude him upon his divine knowledge,
as he would not condemn the woman spoken of; as to men, Judas was as free from
scandal as any of the rest; besides, if this be a reason why we should not
censure, and note open offenders, because we our selves have sins and
corruptions about us, then why should not this hinder the Church from
excommunicating also, which he himself grants to be a Christian censure? I
confess the feeling of our own sins should make us act humbly, and
compassionately, but that this should take us off from censuring others in the
way of our callings. and offices, because God may censure us; this is a mere
fancy; God without doubt can censure us all, and will as for other sins, so
for our unrighteous censures of others, yea, for our not censuring when there
is cause. Why falls he so foul upon the Churches censures? Why does he not
tell the Judges on the bench, that they are sinners themselves and therefore
should not condemn thieves, and murderers? The Churches spiritual censures are
in the hands of men, subject to like passions with others, even to all humane
infirmities, and if this had been a bar to their execution Christ would (not
doubt), have found other hands for them.

Reas. 4. This is drawn from the vanity, (as he says) formality, impossibility
of selecting people to this Ordinance, all these separations come to nothing.

Answ. He has heard (I believe) of some rash, groundless separations to have
run unto a shameful extreme. What of this? does it follow that a moderate
severing (as to some Ordinance) of the more precious (in a visible Church) from
the vile must needs end so too? he might (were he willing) observe the contrary
in many places of this land, where this discipline has been long practiced,
and the Churches standing to this day, and the godly walking with much
steadfastness in them; so then, here an untruth is affirmed; and he bids men to
look for that which I hope they shall never see; here he makes this query under
his reason, Who are to be accounted fit? Are all that make profession? or only
real believers the men? I answer, We do not think bare profession to be enough
to challenge admission unto this Ordinance, where there is a denial thereof by
ignorance, or a contradiction by ungodliness of life; and yet we do not stand
to this that all must be sincere; you are out therefore in your division, it
wants a member; we expect rational grounds for our hopes of men's seriousness
in what they profess; but are not for certainty, and infallibility, as to
their gracious estates. We are not ashamed to profess that we would have our
Churches as pure as by any sanctified means we can make them, and yet are
enemies to the endless, infinite separation you point at. As for your girds at
Purity, God may perchance make you mourn without an Onion.

Reas. 5. This is gathered from a supposed uniformity of Gous service in all
other parts of worship; the command of God is universal, therefore should be so
as to the Communion. Answ. Some enclosure you your self have yielded, as to
children, mad men, etc. All therefore may not do this. In a Church reformed, as
to government, all (I grant) should be admitted which are not under the Churches
censure; but with us has been a long neglect of discipline, with us are
multitudes of profane ones, and no such thing as excommunication in use. The
present enclosure put upon this Sacrament, is a way to redress our fellowship,
and communion, which are grown so corrupt, that without a purge there can be
small hopes of ever seeing order or discipline among us. Had you, and others
the patience to wait till the Churches hedge be made up, you might then have
your desired freedom. While the Church is without enclosure, the Sacrament
will need one very much; When the streetdoore lies open, there is the more need
to lock the inner rooms. You say, that unregenerate men, who cannot perform
duties without sin, are not yet to be excluded from any. [You say] This is
your strength and common thunderboult; should I but say the contrary, this were
a just answer to you. But to give you better then you bring: you would feign (I
see) have all duties alike, but this will not be yielded you. There be duties
that be natural, and there be duties that be instituted; These you should
learn to distinguish. There be intiall duties; To these unregenerate men must
be called and moved, as to pray, believe, repent. Prayer and hearing of the
Word, are such, that whatever the men be, they are to endeavor, and act in
these as the means of grace. Notwithstanding that it is any ones duty to come
to the Sacrament being unregenerate, this you will hardly prove. Certainly
Christ commanded not those to come, that cannot perform what he wills, nor
discern what he offers. Every one must pray to God, and praise God. It is
their duties as creatures to do those things, and they sin as much or more in
not doing, as in doing. But to receive the Sacrament, this is a duty of men,
not as creatures, but as believers. And he that is judged unfit by his Minister
or the Church, does not sin in staying away.

To your Grammatical conceit, which here follows, I return you this: Why do
you not as well question Lily, as to his Grammar method, as Independents, and
Presbyterians for their practice as to Ordinances? Being a Scholar you, know,
the Grammar would not be perfect without a Quae genus. No more will our
Churches if there be a Syntax, and no noting Anomala's. The ignorant, and
scandalous are Heteroclites to the Churches communion, or Syntax. And to your
question, the Presbyterians will tell you, that a child, by a remote right of
his Parents, may have a just claim to a Church-priviledge. The Lepers had a
right to their houses, when they were thrust out of them. Such as are of a
Church may make themselves incapable of some Church-enjoyment, and yet prefer
their children: So do suspended, and excommunicated persons. Infants of
Church Members, whether de jure, or de facto excommunicate, or whether growing
mad, and so excluded; these infants (I say) are borne in that Church, whose
censure their Parents bear.

Now Sir, that is such a stitching, such a Presbyterians seame, as your knife
is (for ought I see) too dull to rip; So far is this from truth which you
say, that in yielding the one, they have granted the other.

Reas. 6. This is made up of many particulars.

Answ. When you prove it your duty to do, as you teach, I shall then believe
you.

Answ. Yes, as a steward of the mysteries of the Gospel you have a power to
preserve the dignity of this Ordinance, and to keep off all visible unworthy
ones.

Answ. So (it seems) of the most profane drunkards and swearers; but is not
your hope faithless, and your charity blind, and irrational.

Answ. But his absolute power must not be eyed in such cases, but his revealed
will.

Answ. This is good, and charitable, that your endeavor extends to all; but
when you do, or may know by constant experience of too many, that they are
unprepared; is not this branch of your reason vain? Your duty is to endeavor
to fit all; but, Sir, this is not all, but only a part of your duty. It is your
duty to advance holiness, and order in the Churches of Christ, to preserve the
dignity and purity of his Ordinances, to provide for the comfort of his people
in the use of them. This you do not.

Answ. Because God in mercy heard Hezekiah, and removed upon his prayer a
judgment inflicted for unworthy coming to a typical Ordinance, therefore he
concludes his innocence from doing a like; but stay, Sir, in this you are
unlike Hezekiah, he did this once, when upon an extraordinary occasion, the
people came from far, and could not well observe the legal rites; but you (it
seems) make this a common practice. You know beforehand what people will come,
(that the scandalous ones of your flock will come) and you think to preserve
your soul from the guilt of their sins by confessing their unworthiness.
Pray for those that come, (the best need it) but think not that your praying
will be an antidote to you and others, if you knowingly admit the unworthy.

7. Lastly, I venture the issue on God. Answ. It is good to be sure keeping to
our rule, and not to venture too far.

To venture without the Word is to presume, which is evil as you know. It is
good to walk by a rule; for then if we venture, it is in a good bottom.

Gods Ordinances (I acknowledge) will be a sweet savor to him, whatever be the
effects of them upon others: But while his Ordinances are sweet, our actings
may be sour; and when they are so we must look one day to hear of it.

Finally, he hints at some other pressing consideracions from the command, and
good of coming, and from the evil of omitting this Ordinance. Answ. What is
here behind in the bottom, we'll meet with in the other part of the book.

Ordinances are means, this is true, but yet all Ordinances are not alike, as
has been shown. If a soul want grace, there are proper means of conversion,
and begetting grace, to which he must apply himself; some Ordinances (as this)
are both means and pledges of grace already given.

The Ordinances are baths, but are baths common to them, that have the plague,
(I hope not) though they are open to all, or most other diseases, Some Records
tell us, that John would not come into the bath, because Cerinthus was there.

In his upshot, he makes a weak flourish, with the Parable, Mat. 22. and
instead of scrupling the unworthy coming of the worst men, sentences them to be
worst of all that come not. I think him a wretch, who despises, and altogether
neglects this Ordinance; but he that forbears for a time, either as scrupling
his own fitness, or as offended with the undue manner of administering where
he should partake, I am far from thinking such a one more unworthy, then a
presumptuous intruder. Such as are in a capacity, and come not, these deal
unworthy indeed. As to your trouble about neglect of administering, and coming;
Why take you such a large stride, stepping from one extreme into another,
whereas the truth and your duty lies between both? You need not neglect
administering, that is another extreme to admitting all. I wish you would avoid
them both. If you will not be persuaded to this, but still practice your free
admission, who will promise you, that none shall presume? I think very many
have already presumed upon your book to come unworthily, and many more (while
you maintain this freeness) are like to do so. Let this stick another while
on your thoughts, and then perchance instead of calling in of all, you may see
cause to call in much of what you have published in this book.

FINIS

