MALIGNANCY UN-MASKED. WITH A PLEA FOR THE Public Faith.

BRIEFLY AND PROMISCUOUSLY DISPUTED, By J. S. Gent.

Qui monet, amat, ave, cave, vale.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, January 26. 1642.

To the Reader.
I Had not arrogated the privilege of the Press, but that I considered the
distempers of this Nation have proceeded from various influences, and so must
the cures. The qualifications of men's minds are as different as the
dispositions of their bodies, and therefore my notions may aptly meet with some
capacities. The judicious may retract my mistakes, the ignorant may rectify
their own; sublime strains overreach, mude expressions reach not a common
judgment, my faculties fit with the mean. If my Treatise want matter or
method, art or argument, humanity may impute it to want of time and years, I
desire the general good, but expect not a general approbation.

A servant to the Republique, J. S.

MALIGNANCY UN-MASKED. WITH A Plea for the Public Faith.
IT is a principle in reason as well as policy to support great designs with
firm resolutions, and endeavors equal to both; wisdom (which is the object
of the intellect) speaks no less, and common prudence (which acts in the
will) directs what it is to decline the accomplishment of an expedient once
attempted; Many justify public folly, and deny public faith; they approve
of safety, but dislike the means; they affect the appearance, and reject the
essence of truth; they seem to obey the King, and yet repugne the Laws; they
honor the Parliament, and slight its power; they are ambidexters, and yet
neuters; for they look one way, and swim another. If you demand a reason,
passion shall step in, and plead tradition; and if you make a further
progression, they will be ready to swallow you up with your duty of Submission
to higher powers; they urge a personal, and connive at a national good; if
they be learned, they speak and write obscurely; if ignorant, it is sufficient
they have the learned (though malefactors) for their presidents; private
relations so charm them, that they seem to be asleep, and happy were this
Kingdom, if they might not be awaked till reformation may receive a deep
rooting; the discipline (or circumstantiall part of religion) they dote upon,
but which of them have appeared in defense of any doctrinals which have been
wounded by Arminians and others, or have suppressed superstition, or the graduals
of Idolatry? It is a facile matter, to make lubricke professions, and reserved
oaths; but how do they check such semblances by the express opposition of
the general good. But they say they have a Protestant King, who will defend
the Religion of Queen Elizabeth's time, they have known Laws still in force,
and with whom, or for what should they contest? In answer to which, my subject
will admit of variety of matter as a necessary introduction to my conclusion)
therefore let it not offend the Reader, that a method is propounded to so short
a work.









Elizabeth was, and how active in reformation; but as in nature a habit is not
without great peril deserted, so in policy a sudden change causes a
Catastrophe; undoubtedly had that good Queen had the command of time, or that
the thread of her life had been prolonged, she would have prevented the plea of
the present opposers, Sed non reluctandum est cum Deo.

Seneca in another case, Non in re sed opinione laborasti, your endeavors have
not been pertinent, but opinionate.

(ipso facto) tolerate the assenting to an impious imposition; power is no
further extensive, then it has subordination from, and reference to the divine
prescripts, duo contradictoria non possunt simul esse vera, contrary powers
cannot be at once effectual, and I am confident this subject would not be
insisted upon, but that Casus plerumque ridiculus multos elevavit, a ridiculous
matter will blow up some disputations.

strain of resistance is derived, it is answered from Majesty, and there it is
patronized, and though I approve not what Keck^rm. cites in his question
(qualiter judicandum est de resistentia Principis) posse Principem eodem ordine
and jure Regno dejici quo admissus est si eas leges and pacta v^olet sub quibus
admissus est: yet I say with Augustine, Regna sine justitia, magna potius l^
trocin^a sunt quam imperia, A government without justice, is rather a robbery
then a Royal authority. When the Apostle says Submit to every Ordinance of
man, for the Lords sake; it must be intended they are such Ordinances which the
Lord will favor; and these words (for the Lords sake) are a limit, Romans 13.1.
and not a motive to obedience And for the words of submission to the higher
powers it is denied that they refer to the Kings personal command; His
Majesty in His own Declaration acknowledges His government to be a mixed
Monarchy, and that mixture presupposes somewhat (at least) of an equal power
to Majesty; and what can that be, but the laws Divine and Humane?



when they are both open, because that sense is more contracted to the object:
so when a whole Kingdom acts by its representative, there is the most clear
conveyance of discerning. Then hence will arise this proposition, That they
that best know the Kingdoms danger, can best provide for its safety; but the
Parliament do best know the Kingdoms danger, ergo, etc. quaere, The danger
being thus known, may they be by power impugned? Reason rules us to decline
things destructive, and prevention is the best of policies. Seneca says,
Facilius est pernitiosa resistere quam regere, and non admittere quam admissa
moderari, It is more easy to resist than rule; and not to admit, then being
admitted to moderate a mischief; where the supreme privileges (political or
divine) are in hazard, the greatest aid may be made use of for their
preservation; and if the King deny to secure his people by His power, they may
secure themselves by their own; For as far as public are preferrable before
private advantages, so far an Ordinance in Parliament before the mere
personal commands of a Prince. A King is as a private person, if not
considered in the execution of his Kingly Office, and in that Office he has
His limits. It is a paradox to reason, that the will of one should subvert the
being of a Nation; for posterity may have cause to curse such an Introduction
to slavery; obedience is no further lawful, then it has a mutual reflection
of good; and is so much the more unjustifiable, by how much the more the
public detriment may be occasioned therefrom. If the subjects Jewels (the
Laws) may be defended, they may in such manner be defended as they are
opposed. It was an excellent saying, spoken by a mild King (as Kecker. in his
Curs. philosophici disput. 35. cites it) Hoe gladio pro meutitor si recte
imperaro, sin rempublicam laesero conirame utitor, Use this Sword for me if I
rule rightly, but if I wrong the Commonwealth use it against me. The case might
be concluded with Doctor Fern, if the King did solely deviate, the best way
were to withhold from him what he wills wherewith to accomplish his unjust
ends, and so the flame might be extinguished by withdrawing the fuel; but this
case is of a different complexion, His Majesty's actions have an influence upon
many, or rather, theirs upon him; and for former want of Parliaments, there is
such a swarm of evil doers in the Land, that they stand in need of a
protection; and because they cannot safeguard themselves, they will have
assistants of equal guilt, and for that a resistance (so pernicious) cannot be
supported without some power that may strike terror in the people, they have
got the King to own them, and that no sooner attained, but (by some
superusuall prevalency, which we have cause to fear Heavens have permitted for
our scourge) have seduced our Sovereign to leave His Parliament, (a fatal
blow, and the seed of our sufferings,) and now they can boast of their cause,
their Captain, and their quarrel; and woe unto us, in that our Kings
personal and political powers are intercombatants. It is not unknown how
their Army consists of many who would not stay to hear the meaning of justice;
that pretend to fight for, what apparently they fly from, who fame truth, and
therefore fear the touchstone; some there may be (whose worth the weal
public has never heard of) and for ought that can be judged of them are
mere indifferents for Law, and Laodiceans for religion, and of such I conclude
that these troubles might sooner be determined, were they as good as they are
great. Those who are related to His Majesty, as Servants, Officers, Favorites,
(or that expect any such interests in reversion, or otherwise) are many, and we
wonder not if they are borne away in the stream of their expectations: What
Bishops do proceed (undoubtedly) from a spirit of revenge (which is ever acted
with envy) and cease not till the object of its malice be made the subject of
their chastisement: we expect not reasons from ignorants, nor why indigents
thrust themselves upon such a service; it is more then sufficient, that defect
of wit and wealth are their prime inducements. Papists (whose Religion
tolerates them to be cruel) begin to make us sensible of a papal enemy; they
acknowledge Protestancy, and their usurped Catholisme, to be direct contraries,
and yet they are undertakers for defense of the Protestant religion, (a mystery
to reason, and a perilous insinuation) indeed they are (ad haras aptiores quam
ad aras) fitter to be marked for mortal enemies, then competent assistants,
and beyond contradiction they will make use of their power to root out their
opposers; of all which persons take a survey, and you will find the remainder
of their strength very inconsiderable; so that the instruments the matter, and
manner of their first disseverance from us, and association amongst themselves
and the ends they apparently propound may so stigmatize their pretenses that
none who prize their own or posterities good can forbear to endeavor their
suppression. To what distresses we are now subjected, a tender heart cannot
conceive, without great reluctance; and we are the more unhappy in this, that
we begin to be weary of defending our lives, liberties, and religion; great
Forces are raised, a great work is on foot, the hearts of people are enlarged,
and why should their hands be straitened? There is a public Felicity, which
claims the Public Faith, Justice is the efficient cause of Law, execution
the life of power; the protection of offenders justifies the offense, and to
dispense with punishment is an implicit encouragement: to entrust the Kingdom
in unsafe hands is to provide for its ruin; and should the Nation perish, the
Parliament sitting, what blemish would accrue to such future assemblies? many
are acquainted with their disease and remedy, and sleighting both, blame the
Physicians; what monsters are they to nature, what mockers of God, whiles they
thus persist? many never appeared, and some appearing have disanimated
multitudes by their apostacies, so sweet is the name of propriety, and the
Mammon of this world, that they dote upon the increase of wealth, whiles a
loss of the total should more affect them; they are so far from believing,
that it is requisite to hazard all for the preservation of all, that they will
not hazard part for the securing of the rest; they imagine not how individual
and dependant all interests be, nor how they are bound by the Laws of God,
nature, and Nation to sacrifice themselves, much more their estates, for the
general good (wherein they have a particular share.) There is a strange
misprision of the word Public, when it is taken for the essential
independency of the Kingdom; for it does, or ought to receive influence from
every member, and so by participation they are both completed. Those that fall
back from their good beginnings check their own judgments, and discover
their diffidence; in the one, they become objects of scorn to the world; in
the other, they provoke the Almighty to punish them with what they fear. The
vulgar presuppose some invisible power in a Kingdom to preserve it self, and
twere more tolerable if it were in them an act of faith; but being otherwise,
how do they injure themselves, the weal public, and succeeding ages, by
their shuffelings; (and it were well if the practice of greater persons did not
savor of these or more ridiculous tenets.) The work is framed, the
instruments appointed, and the wheel of reformation is now rouling about, and
will you deny Oil to refresh the decayed sinews thereof? And although it be
the opinion of every Christian, (quod non pecuniam sed militum ducumque
virtutem belli and imperii nervum esse) that it is not money, but the good
cause and virtuous Captains, that are the chief causes of victory, yet in
concurrent and second causes we may urge the saying of Demosthenes, Opus sunt
opes and sine iis nihil fiet quod opus, There is need of riches, and without
them naught can be done that is needful. Thucyd. says, Bellum non est in
armis, sed in expensis and sumptibus per quos efficacia arma and utilia siunt,
war consists more in expense then Arms. And as the Oracle said to the father
of Alexander, Hastis pugna argentatis atque omnia vinces, Fight with gilded
Spe^res, (...).
and be confident of the conquest. Much use may be made of such moral
sentences. Gods usual way of working is by means, and where such a way is
offered it is a great sin in man to neglect it; a supernatural potency is
not limited to natural, but natural to it; we tempt our maker, in losing our
opportunities; in all contrivances there are the principles and instrumentals
and it is a gross omission not to improve things for their proper ends,
Evangelum non tollit politias and fides non destruit naturam, The Gospel takes
not away policy, nor does faith destroy nature; spiritual things do not
exclude temporal, but regulate them; Our trust in our divine Captain forbids
not the use of helps, but declares them subordinate. Oh let not the practice
of men publish them guilty of such unreasonable opinions; nor let them conceal
themselves, lest judgment find them out; he that gives the Talent will demand
an account; and shall thy brethren perish whiles thou have means to prevent
it? It is an unnatural and ungrateful part to accompany designers to a
hazard, and there to leave them; to assist the initiations of a good work, and
to relinquish the same unfinished, manifests an ill qualified mind; (for such
variation is inconsistent with the life of a Christian.) Do you dispute the
security of moneys lent out? you may rather doubt of the safety of what you
retain; what greater engagement can be expected, (or being expected, can be
given) then the body representative of a Kingdom? they are entrusted in the
whole, and shall they be distrusted in regard of part? can any knowing man
conjecture, that they have not consciences, interests, and expectations equal
to any other? shall your election give them (and your diffidence divest them
of) your confidences? they are agitating your affairs, and will you not allow
their disbursements. For your satisfaction, they have exceeded the presidents
of any of their predecessors, and are become your particular accountants, and
do you still repine? we never read of any denials of supply (when demanded by
former Parliaments, but how the people have unboweld themselves in such a case
is obvious, to every Historian;) will you be the first that ever deserted (take
heed you bewail not being destitute of) such a Council? Is it probable they
will so dilacerate the authoritys of future Parliaments, as not to dis-ingage
themselves? Not to give credence to a private friend, is inhumanity; not to a
Parliament is moral infidelity. When that serene day shall appear wherein
these troubles shall admit of a tranquillity, you may be confident to receive
your own with advantage, in the interim they are sharers with you in your
sufferings. He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord; necessity
denominates poverty, and what so great as that which is public? if times thus
continue, the rich will be made a prey, and will rejoice to preserve any part
of their estates; To be involved in a condition equal to the most miserable,
is a thing we fear not, but are like to taste of. When His Majesty's forces
were at Branford, many of the malignants sent necessaries to the Army against
him, what they did (against their seeming selves) because of fear, shall not
we do much more for conscience sake? so stupid are the hearts of men, that no
arguments have any inforcement, unless tipped with extant danger, and those
only referring to their personal losses; perils merely imminent (to what
ever object they relate) leave a slight impression, but I pray such may escape
a too late repentance. What I here importune refers only to those who see a
necessity of reformation, and who either have not afforded some supplies, or if
they have, intend no addition; Alas, our miseries grow, the enemies forces are
like Caterpillars in the land; we have Moses prayers, but want Aarons rod;
nature calls upon you, to be tender of thousands who carry their lives in their
hands for your sake; religion dictates this way, to prevent the powers of the
prelates, etc. who have long tyrannized over the truth; your own safety may
inform you what sadness will seize upon you when you must survive your
liberties The Question is not whether religion or no religion, laws or no
laws, but whether both in their purity and vigor shall take place? As for
those who delight in these distractions, who gain by the peoples groanings, or
who are such persons formerly intimated, or their adherents, I invoke the
omnipotent for their conviction, and that in the mean time their hands may not
bring to pass their own enterprises. And here sorrow supersedes expressions,
Labeo. omnis morbus est habitus contra naturam, (every disease being a habit
against nature;) the disease and cure of this Region do much deject me, war
is the physic, and must we not expect a doubtful combat betwixt the spirits
and the humors? The animadversion of His Majesty's past, and present condition,
does dissolve my thoughts into tears, even in this that the Defender of the
Faith should (per accidens aut aliter) become an offense to the faithful. But
we hope the principles of Law and Religion have still residence in His Royal
breast, and will appear, when the obstructions occasioned by evil Counselors
shall be made perspicuous, and that in the close of differences the hearts of
the people shall have cause to make inward acclamations for their Sovereigns
safety, their Parliaments fidellity their own liberty, their religions
settlement, and posterities approaching happiness; which sweet saeson heavens
hasten to this Kingdoms comfort.

FINIS.

