A SCHEME OF POPISH CRVELTIES or A Prospect of what we must Expect under a
Popish Successor.


Once more we will Act ore Sixty Six
But then with Blood ye Flames we will mix.


Rvffians and Friars in barbarous Lust agree
No Matron nor no Virgin in shall escape free.


Thus bravely we Two Lusts at once fulfill
We Ravish first, and ye next Moment, Kill.


Such Bluddy Massacres and Cutting throats
Our Church for marks of true Religion Notes.


Thus may ye Town be shattered by ye Towr
If ear it come under a Papist's power.


Thus our feirce zeal ye Heretics does (...)
No Sights more pleasing to a Roman (...).


When French and bloddy Tories shall invade
These Argumts these Trophies must perswad^.


Both Non and Con under our fury Bleeds
each Drawn (...) th Wild Steed
whilst joyful Monks in Triumph shake their Beads.


Our work is done and now in Pomp we go
To finish Englands Bliss with Popish show.


The Explanation.
First of all is represented that (...)atel; Pillar or (...) (...) London
Br^d^, erected by Act of Parl(...), to perpe^^ate the Memory of the City's
(...) Burnt by Popish Treachery, in the ye^r Sixty Six. Now as the Prophets of
old frequently express the Fore(...)t of impending Judgments (...) a Watchm^n
placed on a Watchtower: So let the Reader fancy himself on the Top of that
lo^^y Column, and that thence he beholds the Miseries and Calamities
represented in the Nine Figures following: All which will certainly be
England's Portion, if ever she come (which God forbid) to truckle under a
professed Bigoted Papist.

1. The first figure gives you the dismal View of a City wilfully and
trea(...)ly set on fire in diverse parts; Houses, Streets, Palaces, Churches,
all surrounded with devouring Flames, just as in Sixty Six: Only the next Bout
(...) the same time a Massacre, or sudden cutting of the Throats of all True
(...) and such as have opposed the Devilish Designs of (...)'d Party. Which
Slaughter was designed to have (...) Sixty Six, and to have begun with the
Murder of the KING; (whom God preserve, both from Popish Assassinates and
Traitorous Councils) but only they sound Affairs abroad not then ripe enough
for their purpose.

2. Here you behold Ruffians and Hectors, Popish Priests, Jesuits, Monks, and
the rest of the Black Guard to the Prince of Darkness, endeavoring to Ravish
^our Wives, your Daughters, your Sisters, and your Mothers: For it is well known
to all that have traveled, that there is not such another Crew of brutish
Goats and savage Satyrs in the World, as the Romish Priests and Friars; no
Woman, old or young, beautiful or homely, can escape their lust.

3. Their lust being satiated, their bloody Cruelties next begin. Here you see
they are beating out the Brains of Infants, and snatching them out of their
tender Mothers Arms; which being done, they likewise put the Mothers also to
the Sword; thereby with ingenious Cruelty murdering them twice, first by the
sight of their Childrens Tragedy, and next by their own Wounds.

4. The fourth Figure represents the Papists at work on their long-intended
Massacre; some cutting of Throats, others Robbing and Plundering. And amongst
the rest, an Irish Jesuit with his bloody S(...)n, as busy as any. What is
here but in Picture, was real Fact within these forty years in Ireland, where
above two hundred thousand Protestants were destroyed in this manner by Popish
Cannibals.

5. This shows the danger the City of London would be in, in case a Papist
should ever obtain the Crown; their Habitations laid desolate, their Houses
battered about their Ears till they become their Graves, Churches shattered,
and the Tops of Steeples falling, etc. by the fury of the Great Guns that might
be mounted for that purpose on the Tower.

6. Here you have the old Popish Sport of Burning Holy Martyrs at a Stake for
holding the Truths of Gods Word and pure Religion, and opposing Popish Idolatry
and Superstitions. In this manner there were in the short Reign of Queen Mary
put to death no fewer then 277 persons. And yet she promised as fair to the
Protestants before she came to the Crown, as any Body can do. Just such
perfidious Bloody Doings you must again expect, if ever you admit a Queen Mary
in Breeches.

7. The (...) Figure represents an (...); for Popery can never be established
(...)and without the Assistance of Troops of French and Irish Papists: (...)hat
Slaughters and dreadful Desolation they will make where-ev(...)ome, is here in
part displaid to your consideration.

8. Her (...) the barbarous Executions and Tortures of Protestant Ministers,
ag(...)om the Popish Locusts have a particular spite; and therefore here y(...)
several Jesuits and Friars rejoicing at this Cruelty, which was actuall^ (...)
late in Piedmont, and in Forty One in Ireland. And this Martyr (...)t of a
Church-of-England-Minister, to show that Popish Rage will m(...) (...)ion
between them and others, but all must come over absolutely t(...), or else be
destroyed.

9. The la(...) that which we trust God will never suffer, viz. That the
Papists have (...)mit; and now they are marching in Procession, and going to
defile our (...)ir ridiculous Abominatious: And then adieu to all Tr(...)
Religion in En(...) (...)e ever afterward hear the sweet sounds of Liberty or
Property; But Sl(...) (...) as Spiritual, shall remain on you and your
Posterity; and your Chil(...) (...) Children shall live and die Vassals and
Idolaters, and curse your Me(...)ray'd them into such a dolesome and more then
Egyptian-Bo^dage, bot(...)ul.

To prevent (...)ul Mischiefs, let every man that has any sense of Religion,
any regard to (...)d, the Welfare of his Country, or the Just Liberties of
himself and hi(...)ndeavour in his Station, by all Lawful Ways and Means he
can, to oppos(...)ent of Popery amongst us.

LONDON, Printed for N. Thomlinson in Thames Street, and are to be sold by all
the Protestant Booksellers in London and Westminster.


