OF RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLIES, AND THE PUBLIC SERVICE OF GOD:

A Discourse According to Apostolical Rule and Practice.

By HERBERT THORNDIKE.

HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA



CAMBRIDGE:

Printed by Roger Daniel Printer to the University, and are to be sold at the
Angel in Lombardstreet in London. 1641.

To the Readers.
THere is no such light to the true meaning of the Scripture, as the practice
of matters contained in it, under the Synagogue first, and in the Church
afterward. This is the reason of the course held here, in inquiring what was
done or arguing what is to be done for the Public Service of God. It is not to
be expected that the particulars here observed or discoursed under the
judgment of this Church, and the Learned in it, should indifferently take
place: It is enough if the main foundation, which I have given my thoughts a
little freedom to dig for, prove not fleeting. Then may it serve for the
edifying of it unto peace. However, you see wherefore writing in English,
nevertheless I produce the passages of Writers in their own formal words. You
shall find them translated for the satisfaction of all sorts. The learned
Readers may please to excuse me, if walking for the most part an untrodden
path, they find nothing but work cut out, to be made up at leisure. All may
please to do so much right to themselves or me, as to refer themselves to
such things as the delay of the Press has given occasion to add at the end,
before they begin to read. The Heads of matters here entreated, are premised
for the ease of such as make choice of what they think best to read.

The Contents of the Chapters.
Chap. I. THe Public Service of God the most eminent work of Christians. How
the form of it may be derived from the Scriptures. The Subject, and the
Proceeding of this Discourse.

Chap. II. Days of Assemblies appointed by the Law. The Moral Service of God
not specified in it, but collected from it. How the Jews are taxed for spending
the Sabbath in pastime. Places of such Assemblies not provided in it. The
Priests charged to teach the Law by deciding controversies of it. The Chair of
Moses, the Chair of Prophets. High places, to what purpose. Beginning of
Synagogues. Disciples of Prophets studied to be Prophets. They ministered the
Moral Service of God in High places and Synagogues.

Chap. III. The profession of Scribes that succeeded the Prophets. Wisemen of
the Jews were the learned sort of Scribes. Scribes of all the three Sects. They
taught in Synagogues. Who were Lawyers. Who sat in their Courts, and of their
Disciples. The manner of their sitting in Schools and Synagogues. How they sat
in Feasting. Of the Elders of Synagogues. Who among them received Imposition of
hands.

Chap. IV. Presbyteries of Churches, with their Bishops, answerable to the Jews
Consistories, made with Imposition of hands. They sat in the Church as the
other in the Synagogue: That argues their Office of Governing the Church. And
the difference of them from the people. The Elders of the people in the
Africane Churches were not of this rank. What is the double Honor of
Presbyters in S. Paul. The Apostles Rule, in discerning Spiritual Graces. The
Proceeding and Extent of his Discourse. His Catalogue of Graces and
Ministeries. How diverse of them may meet in the same man. Doctors are those of
the Presbyters that preached. Helps were Deacons.

Chap. V. Prophets in most of the Churches remembered by the Apostles. The gift
of Languages, the purpose and nature of it. The Limbs and Branches of both
these Graces, in S. Paul. Of praying, and praising God by the Spirit. Those
that spoke strange Tongues understood what they said. Interpretation concerns
all that was spoken in strange Languages. They prayed and studied for
spiritual Graces. Prophesying in S. Paul signifies singing psalms. Prayers
of the Church conceived by immediate inspiration. The nearness of the Graces
of Prophesying and Languages. The ground and meaning of the Apostles Rule. It
proceeds of none but Prophets. What is to be judged in that which Prophets
spoke. The custom in the Primitive Church of many preaching at the same
Assembly came from hence.

Chap. VI. The parts of that work of Gods Service for which Christians
assemble. Psalms of Gods praises part of the substance of it. The ground and
efficacy of Common prayers. Reading the Scriptures a substantial part of
public Service. The necessity and excellence of preaching, for expounding the
Scriptures. The Eucharist the chief part of public Service. The Apostles Rule,
of Order and Comeliness. The force of Custom in preserving Order, and of
Reason in judging of Comeliness. All practice of the Primitive Church
prescribes not to us. Correspondence with it necessary. The practice of it, in
the point in hand, of what advantage. Order of Public Service, a Law of
Christian Kingdoms. Direction of Ministers of the Church requisite. The
Obligation of it. The Agreement of the chief Reformers.

Chap. VII. The prohibition of Quenching the Spirit, concerns immediate
inspirations. Prescript Form of Prayers as well as of other parts of the
Service is for the Edification of the Church. Order not to be maintained
without it. Three parts of the Service of the Temple. The praises of God, the
Confession of sins, the Priests Blessings. The Service of the Synagogue
prescribed. Of the eighteen Benedictions. Of the Service of their Fast of Seven
days. The Deacon ministered their Service. Justine Martyr and Tertullian
misunderstood. Sum of the Church Service. All Prescript. Of Canons that
prescribe the Service to be ordered by Councels. Alterations in Liturgies.
Agreement of Reformed Churches.

Chap. VIII. Of times of Assemblies. Daily morning and evening Service is for
the edification of the Church. Humane Institution of Festivals lawful. Public
Service upon them, and upon weekly and yearly times of Fasting, is for increase
of godliness. Of frequent celebration of the Eucharist. Hours of Prayer among
the Apostles and Primitive Christians, from the Synagogue. Festivalls of the
Law for gladness, and those of humane institution in the Synagogue. Of
Fasting-dayes in the Synagogue and Primitive Church. How the Eucharist was
frequented in the Primitive Church. The Order of this Church agreeable with the
judgment of chief Reformers.

Chap. IX. The reasons why it is for the edification of the Church to use
Ceremonies in Public Service. It is avowed by the chief Reformers. Of the
respect of times and places. Of the difference of Vestures and Gestures.
Caution in matter of Ceremonies. The obligation of Rules whereby they are
determined.

Chap. X. What is to be considered touching our Service. The Service of Hearers
and Believers. Confession of sins whether of old the beginning of Service. The
ancient order of Psalms and Lessons. The Mass contains an abridgement of
it. Several manners of singing Psalms. Purpose of Lessons. The Place of the
Sermon. Dismission of Hearers. Original of Litanies. Prayer indicted by the
Deacon. The Thanksgiving from whence the Sacrament is called the Eucharist.
Prayer which it was celebrated with. Prayer for all the Church at celebrating
the Eucharist. The residue of that Service. The charge of the Mass on our
Service. Extent of the power of the Keys, and wherein it consists. Of
Confession of sins and Absolution at the beginning. Our Order of Rsalmes and
Lessons. Of the Creed and Collects. The Sermon part of our Service. Of the
Communion-Service and appertenances of it.

Chap. XI. How the Form of Public Service is ordered. Dependence of Churches
is from the Apostles, for that and other purposes. How the preaching of Lay men
imports Schism. The good of the Order of Public Service.

Of Religious Assemblies, And The Public Service of GOD. A Discourse according
to Apostolical Rule and Practice.
CHAP. I.
The Public Service of God the most eminent work of Christians. How the Form
of it may be derived from the Scriptures. The Subject, and the Proceeding of
this Discourse.

THe most eminent work that men are able to tender to the honor of God, is his
public Service at the Assemblies of Christians. That supernatural tincture
which the faith of Christ and his Grace infuseth into the best of our actions,
seems to consist in the obedience to God, out of which they are done; and the
intention of his glory and worship, to which they are addressed: That the
reason of them is derived from the will and pleasure of God, and the intent of
them directed to his honor and service. Whereas all the men of this world can
do nothing but out of love to themselves, taking the rise and motive of their
doings from that which concerns their particulars, and aiming at nothing else
in their intentions. All sorts of Christian men's actions, as they proceed from
such considerations as these, are capable to be qualified the Service of God.
But that which is called his Public Service professes the exercise of nothing
else, neither is capable to be accounted otherwise, unless it be counterfeit.
For what consideration can common sense fasten upon that which we do, when we
assemble our selves for religious Service, but the conscience of our subjection
to God, the acknowledgement of our want of his direction and assistance, and
our desire and affection to the good which we expect at his hands? Only to be
Public is still an addition of advantage to it, in as much as the honor,
which it pleases God to accept at men's hands, becomes his Greatness more
when it proceeds from more agreement of minds. And as the strength of men's
bodies, joined to one purpose, removes that which one by one they could not
do; so united devotions prevail with God to such effect, as severally they
cannot bring to pass. The Prophet Esaias ii. 2, 3, 4. from the Prophet Micah iv.
1. In the last days it shall come to pass, says he, that the mountain of the
house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it
shall be exalted above the hills: And people shall flow unto it, and many
nations shall come and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,
and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we
will walk in his paths: For the law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. And a third Prophet, Sophon. iii. 9. For then will I turn
to the people a pure language, or a pure lip, that they may call upon the name
of the Lord with one consent, or with one shoulder. The meaning of these
Prophets is, to tell us what the Gentiles should do when they applied
themselves to the Church, the mountain of God, the hill of Sion, by two
principal particulars: They should flow like the waters of a deluge to learn
the will of God which the Church teaches; they should crowd in like a
multitude, with one shoulder, to serve God with that language which he had
sanctified. Who can read this, and not think what God recommendeth to
Christians? one current to the Church, to learn his will there: one shoulder,
striving who shall crowd in first: one lip, one language that sounds nothing
but his praises. So that in the Public Service of God are fulfilled the words
of the Gospel, Matt. vi. 13. A city cannot be hid that stands upon an hill:
Be the Profession what it will be that differenceth a true visible Church from
a false, it must be the Public Service of God that must make that Profession
visible. And the Apostle, 1. Tim. ii. 8. I will therefore that men pray every
where, lifting up pure hands without wrath or disputing, when he says, every
where, takes away the difference which the Temple at Jerusalem made; when he
says, without wrath or disputing, signifies that his speech is of Public
Assemblies, the fruit whereof he would not have intercepted through their
dissensions: and so expounds that one lip of the Prophet, signifying that
unity of mind which Gods people serve him with. This is too much to be said
here, but perhaps too little to persuade, how much the frame of Public worship
concerns the honor of God and his Service: How much it must needs be for the
advantage of godliness, that it be formed without prejudice. Were all
particulars of it ordered in Scripture, as the Ceremonies of that Figurative
Service under Moses are, there were no more to do, but to make all things
according to the pattern showed in the mountain, Hebr. viii. 5. Exodus xxv. 40.
And he that did it should be, for his part, faithful in all the house of God,
as was Moses, Hebr. iii. 2. Numb. xii. 7. But he that is there said to be
faithful in all the house of God as Moses was, has discharged his Office in
revealing and establishing the substance of the worship of God in Spirit and
Truth: And what is further determined in Scripture, and what is not, my purpose
is not to dispute here, because my discourse proceeds from that which I can
find expressed in Scripture, to that which remains questionable, according to
it. For my part, I do not find so much delivered concerning the Service of God
at the Assemblies of Christians, any where in Scripture, as in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, where the Apostle discourses the use of Spiritual
Graces of that time in those Assemblies. And therefore my first travel in this
little work shall be, to inquire the true meaning of that whole discourse of
the Apostle, the proceeding of it, and the grounds whereupon his rules are
framed. Which to do with success, I shall first discover the office of
Prophets and Scribes under the first and second Temple; of the Graces of
Prophesying and of Languages under the first times of the Gospel; in ministering
the Moral and Perpetual, not the Ceremonial and Figurative Service of God,
at their Assemblies for that purpose. To the result of which inquiries, if we
shall join the rules which the same Apostle debateth in the eleventh Chapter of
the same Epistle, concerning men and women vailing or uncovering their heads in
those Assemblies, and concerning celebrating the Eucharist, with the Feasts of
Love used then at common meetings, with the grounds whereupon they proceed;
adding to both such passages of Scripture as fall in with the meaning of these,
speaking home to what was done, or prescribed to be done, at their religious
Assemblies: perhaps by this means we shall be furnished of such principles, and
such rules derived thence, as the Scriptures afford the Church to proceed upon,
as well in the substance of that which is to be done in the Public Service of
God, as in the form, and course, and circumstances of it. And this, upon the
by, will minister just occasion to inquire further into the condition of those
Graces and Ministeries, by which the several parts of this work were exercised
at that time according to the Apostle, or intended to be exercised in after
ages. To which point having said something of late in a little tract of the
Primitive government of Churches, and finding it too much slighted there,
because the particular discourse of it suited not with the model of that
Treatise, my desire is to take it in hand upon this occasion once more, and
inquire what further satisfaction, the consideration of Public Service at
their religious Assemblies, will yield them that desire the truth, as
concerning the nature and condition of ministeries first instituted for that
purpose.

CHAP. II.
Days of Assemblies appointed by the Law. The Moral Service of God not
specified in it, but collected from it. How the Jews are taxed for spending the
Sabbath in pastime. Places of such Assemblies not provided in it. The Priests
charged to teach the Law by deciding controversies of it. The Chair of Moses,
the Chair of Prophets. High places, to what purpose. Beginning of Synagogues.
Disciples of Prophets studied to be Prophets. They ministered the Moral Service
of God in High places and Synagogues.

OF the Figurative Service proper to the Law of Moses, and that people which
received it, of the kinds, and times, and place for offering sacrifices, there
is particular appointment in it: but of serving God by Prayer, or hearing his
Word, you have there so much the less remembrance. In Leviticus xxiii. we find
the particular of all their Solemnities that are called holy Assemblies: For
thus the general is propounded, verse. 2. The Assemblies of the Lord, which ye
shall proclaim for holy Convocations, these are my Assemblies. The first of
these is the Sabbath, then the Passover, Pentecost, the beginning of the New
year, the day of Atonement, and the Feast of Tabernacles. And, with leave, I
rather use the word Assemblies then Feasts in this place, because the name of
Feasts is proper to those Solemnities which are to be celebrated with joy and
cheerfulness: whereas in this number, the day of Atonement was to be observed
with the greatest humiliation that could be expressed. The Original word (...)
containing all Assemblies, such as all these are commanded to be, and as I take
it none else. For that which is read Psalm. lxxxi. 3. Blow up the Trumpet in the
new Moon, in the time appointed, against the day of our Feasts, depends upon
the Law, Numb. x. 10. Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn
Feast days, (or rather days of Assemblies, for the word is the same that I
translated so before) and in the beginning of your Months, you shall blow with
your Trumpets over the burnt-offerings, and over the sacrifice of your
peace offerings, that they may be to you for a memorial before your God. Where
we see three sorts of Solemnities distinguished: First, the day of your
gladness, containing Solemnities to be celebrated with cheerfulness of heart,
that is, Feasts: Then, the solemn days of Assemblies, as the word signifies,
containing besides those, Assemblies for humiliation, as the day of Atonement:
And last, the beginnings of your Months, wherein peculiar sacrifices are
enjoined, Numb. xxviii. 11. And here it is provided, that Trumpets should be
sounded over those sacrifices by the Priests in the Tabernacle; but that no
Assembly is appointed to be upon them, the difference here made between them
and their days of Assemblies, is presumption enough. But in particular, the
first and last days of the Passover, and Feast of Tabernacles (the one
whereof was kept for seven days, the other for eight) were to be solemn
Assemblies, which the rest were not, and therefore in the Greek of the
Septuagint are called (...), or great days, to wit, of those Feasts, in
comparison of the less. Esaias i. 13. The New Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of
Assemblies, I cannot away with: (...). The calling of Assemblies is here
translated Great days, as in the Gospel, John vii. 37. In the last day, the
GREAT DAY of that Feast. By which Translation, that which is general in the
Original, is restrained to the first and last days of those two Festivals.
Now the Sabbath was the greatest of all Solemnities appointed for Assemblies:
For they were commanded so to rest from bodily labor, as not to kindle fire,
to dress the meat they eat upon it: For as in Exodus xvi. 5, 16, 29. God
contesteth that he gave them a double measure of Manna the day before, that
they might dress it against the Sabbath: So we have again Exodus xxx. 3. You
shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the Sabbath. The same,
Levit. xxiii. 3. where Abenezra, IN ALL YOUR HABITATIONS, that is, in your
land, and out of your land, at home, and upon the way. To teach us, that it was
not for the time that they lived upon Manna in the wilderness, that they were
forbidden to kindle fire upon the Sabbath, but through ALL THEIR HABITATIONS,
wheresoever they dwelt afterward. And many have observed, that in Levit.
xxiii. it is not said of any other day but of the Sabbath, and the day of
Atonement, Thou shall do no work upon it; but of the other days of Assemblies,
Thou shall do no Servile work upon them: to show us the difference between
them, that upon the Sabbath and day of Atonement it was prohibited to dress
the meat of the day; but upon other Solemnities that was permitted, but to do
any work that men were wont to put their slaves to, was prohibited: which is
the received practice of the Jews, and has a just ground in the Scripture,
Exodus xii. 16. where, of the first and last day of the Passover, is said, No
manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that
only may be done, or dressed, of you. Abenezra upon that place, (...) Of none
of the solemn Assemblies, beside the Sabbath and day of Atonement, it is said,
NOMANNER OF WORK: Only of the Passover he says it, and adds an exception
of the meat of the soul. that is, requisite for the sustenance of nature. Here
is a strict command of bodily rest, especially upon the Sabbath, and that
particularized, to concern both Israelites themselves, and their slaves, and
those that sojourn within their gates: But that is very considerable which
excellent Divines have observed, That in the fourth Commandment, where is so
large provision for bodily rest, there the purpose of that rest is only
pointed at in general terms, when it is commanded to be SANCTIFIED; which is
likewise done in all their Solemnities, when they are called ASSEMBLIES: but
there is no mention made of any particular work of the Moral Service of God,
wherewith the Sabbath is commanded to be sanctified, or for performance whereof
they are commanded to Assemble, unless it be the reading of the Law upon the
seventh year, commanded Deuteronomy. xxxi. 12. So that it seems the Jews have
reason, when they observe, that neither the Form, nor Time of Prayer, is
appointed them by the Law of Moses, but by the constitutions of their Elders,
Maimoni of Prayer, C. 1. Numb. 1, 2. Indeed, that the spiritual Service of
God, of Prayers, and his Praises, of hearing the Word, and meditating upon his
works, was the thing, for love whereof the Jews were commanded to keep the
Sabbath, those miserable people, who in most things are blinded with the
letter, and never look under the vail upon Moses his face, have been able
always to perceive; as it is to be seen by the sayings of their late and
ancient Writers. Josephus ad v. Appionem ii. (...). Moses propounded to the
Jews the most excellent and necessary learning of the Law; not by hearing it
once or twice, but every seventh day, laying aside their works, he commanded
them to Assemble for the hearing of the Law, and thoroughly and exactly to learn
it. Philo de vita Mosis iii. relating the passage of him that gathered wood on
the Sabbath, of whom it is said, Numb. xv. 33. They brought him unto Moses and
Aaron, and unto all the Congregation: (...). They take him, says he, and bring
him to the Ruler, with whom sat the Priests, all the multitude standing by to
hear. He observes that Moses was then expounding the Law, as upon the
Assembly of the Sabbath; Aaron, that is, as he expounds it, the Priests
sitting on the Bench with him, the Congregation standing by to hear. The
observation he prosecuteth with his reason in these words: (...); For the
custom was, always when occasion gave way, but principally on the seventh
days, as I showed before, to be exercised in knowledge: the Chief going before
and teaching, the rest increasing in goodness, and bettering in life and
manners. From whence at this day the Jews study their Country learning upon
the Seventh days, dedicating that time to knowledge, and the contemplation of
Nature. For the Synagogues in cities, what are they but schools of wisdom? and
in his book de Decalogo, he deriveth the employment of the Sabbath in
considering the works of God, and calling their own works to account, from that
which God did in the beginning, when he saw all that he had made, and behold it
was good. Abenezra upon the fourth Commandment, Exodus xx. 8. (...) We see that
the year of Remission is correspondent to the Sabbath, for it is likewise the
seventh of years. And the Lord commanded, that they should read the Law in the
beginning of it, before men, women and children, expressing the reason Deuteronomy.
xxxi. 12. THAT THEY MAY HEAR, AND LEARN, AND OBSERVE: And behold, the Sabbath
was given to consider the works of God, and to meditate upon his Law, as it is
written, Psalm. xcii. 4. FOR THOU LORD HAVE MADE ME GLAD THROUGH THY WORK, I
WILL TRIUMPH IN THE WORKS OF THY HANDS. R. Isaac Abarbinel upon Deuteronomy. v. 12.
(...). Besides, part of the benefit of this allowed day is to give to the
blessed God the seventh of the week, to learn the Divine law, and the Tradition
of the words thereof, the expositions of it, and to mark well the NICETIES of
it: As they say (that is, their ancient Talmud Doctors) in the Gemara of the
Jerusalem Talmud, SABBATHS AND FEASTS WERE NOT GIVEN, BUT TO LEARN THE LAW
UPON THEM. And therefore they say in the great Midras (or allegorical
exposition) of Exodus Sect. 26. and of Deuteronomy, That the Sabbath weighs
against all the Commandments: as procuring them to be known and observed. A man
may justly marvel, seeing the Moral intent and purpose of this Commandment
was so well known among the learned of this people, how it comes to pass,
that the Fathers of the Church charge the Jews so deep, for observing the
Sabbath with bodily ease, and luxurious pastimes. Ignatius, Epist. ad Magnes.
(...). I understand that there is cause to think these words to be none of
Ignatius his own; which notwithstanding, they are Ancient enough for this
purpose, and in themselves remarkable: if first we observe, That the Eastern
Christians of Ancient time, observed the Sabbath in some measure for Divine
Service, as well as the Lords day, from whence came afterward the difference
about fasting on the Saturday. For immediately upon these words it follows,
(...), and after he has kept the Sabbath, let every lover of Christ keep the
Lords day festival. Thus then says the supposed Ignatius, Let every one of
you keep the Sabbath spiritually, taking pleasure in meditation of the Law, not
in bodily rest, admiring the workmanship of God, not eating meat dressed the
day before, nor drinking lukewarm drinks, and walking by measure, and taking
pleasure in dansing and senseless noises. S. Augustine in Joan. Tract. iv.
Observa diem Sabbati, magis nobis praecipitur, quia spiritualiter observandum
praecipitur. Judaei enim serviliter observant diem Sabbati, ad luxuriam, ad
ebrietatem. Quanto melius foeminae eorum lanam facerent, quam illo die in
Menianis saltarent? KEEP THE SABBATH, is commanded us more, because it is
commanded us spiritually to be observed. For the Jews keep the Sabbath day
slavishly, for luxury, for drunkenness: How much better had their women spin
wool on that day, then danse in the porticoes? and in Psalm. xcii. Ecce and
hodiernus dies Sabbati est: Hunc, in praesenti tempore, otio quodam
corporaliter languido, and fluxo, and luxurioso, observant Judaei: vacant enim
ad nugas. and cum Deus praeceperit observari Sabbatum, illi in his quae Deus
prohibet exercent Sabbatum. Vacatio nostra a malis operibus, vacatio illorum a
bonis operibus est: melius est enim arare quam saltare. Illi a bono opere
vacant, ab opere nugatorio non vacant. Behold this is also a day of Sabbath,
which the Jews at this present keep with a kind of bodily, languishing,
dissolute, and luxurious ease: For they are at leisure for toys. And whereas
God commands to keep the Sabbath, they spend the Sabbath in that which God
forbids. Our being at leisure is from bad works, theirs from good works; for
it is better to plough then to danse. They are at leisure from doing good, from
trifling business they are not at leisure. He that reads this and the like
that might be produced, has cause to marvel, that the practice of that people
should be so wide of the profession of their Doctors: but that there is great
cause to think, whereas bodily rest is expressly commanded, the spiritual and
moral employment of it but intimated in the Commandment, and by the learned
collected from thence, and from other Scriptures, by consequence of discourse,
that the people apprehended that more, which was open, as being for their ease,
neglecting that which was collected, as not so pleasant. And therefore unless
we be wilful in refusing the Truth, it cannot be denied, that the DISPENSATION
of that time, prevails in this, as well as in other particulars. For though
no man doubts that the Ancient people of God were led by the promises of the
kingdom of heaven, and life everlasting; yet are those promises, in the law of
Moses, conveyed and recommended to them, under the Figure of Paradise, of the
land of Promise, and the fruits of it. Mihi in Evangelio promittuntur regna
coelorum, quae Instrumentum vetus omnino non nominat, says S. Jerome, Epist.
129. To me is the kingdom of heaven promised in the Gospel, which the old
Testament does not so much as name. S. Augustine cont. Faustum xix. 31.
Testimoniis vitae aeternae and resurrectionis mortuorum abundat vetus
Scriptura, sed hoc nomen REGNUM COELORUM, de nullo inde loco mihi occurrit, hoc
enim proprie pertinet ad REVELATIONEM Novi Testamenti. The old Scriptures are
full of Testimonies of life everlasting, and the resurrection of the dead, but
the name of the KINGDOM OF HEAVEN I meet with in no place of it, for it
properly belongs to the REVEALING of the New Testament. Again, Mortem innuit
secundam, cum diceret, ADAM, UBIES? sed de ea nihil dixisse credendum est,
propter DISPENSATIONEM Novi Testamenti, ubi mors secunda apertissime
declaratur: God intimates the second death, says he, when he says, ADAM
WHERE ART THOU? but it is to be thought that he expressed nothing of it,
because of the DISPENSATION of the New Testament, where the second death is
most manifestly declared. Others might be produced to the same purpose. The
reason is the same in the matter of Sacrifices, for which we know what
particular order is taken in the Law of Moses, and yet are not the Prophets
afraid to say, that God gave no command for them. Psalm. xl. 6. Sacrifice and
offering thou did not desire: Jerem. viii. 21. I spoke not to your Fathers,
nor commanded them, in the day when I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
concerning burnt-offerings and sacrifices. And all this according to the tenor
of the Law, which commanded a Ceremonial Service, as the figure of that
worship which God requires in Spirit and Truth. Thus stands the matter in
our present business: For if the Sabbath be a figure, as the Scripture
declares, and the Jews themselves acknowledge, then the observation of it
commanded must needs be Figurative. Which is no more then the Apostle proves
in the fourth to the Hebrews, that the Rest which they observed the Sabbath
with, was the Figure of that rest which remains to the people of God.
Therefore it pleased God, in this point also to observe that dispensation of
the Old Testament, which he had set on foot in other particulars: taking order
at large, that the Sabbath should be celebrated with bodily rest, but that
Service of God in Spirit and Truth, which is proper to the DISPENSATION of the
New Testament, as it is greatest in esteem, so is it least in appearance of the
Commandment, which God gave for the purpose. To the same purpose, as hitherto
it has been observed, that the Law has specified no particular work of the
Moral Service of God, with which it commands the Sabbath to be SANCTIFIED,
or for which it appoints ASSEMBLIES: So must we further observe in this
place, that it neither provideth for PLACES, wherein it might be exercised by
the body of that People, nor takes order by whom it should be Ministered in
such Places, but has left us to collect by circumstance and the traces of
their Ancient practice remembered in the Scriptures, that it was Ministered by
the Prophets, as Prophets, rather then by the Priests and Levites, as Priests
and Levites, as well in Synagogues as in the Temple, or at the Tabernacle. The
command of Assemblies, Levit. xxiii. might well be prescribed in the law of
Moses, with a particular effect, in respect of that time, that the whole
Congregation of that people lived together in the wilderness of Arabia. Then
and there it is easy to conceive, how they were assembled to celebrate those
solemnities, that is, at the Tabernacle, or round about it, which the Jews call
The Camp of Levi. But when they were settled in the land of Promise, we see
what the Law requires: Deuteronomy. xvi. 16. Three times in a year shall all thy
males appear before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose. This
is the extent of the Law, thrice a year to resort to the Tabernacle, and that
none but Males; and therefore the question will remain, How the body of that
people assembled themselves through the year (it being a thing manifest that
the greatest part could not resort to the Tabernacle) and those Houses of
Prayer, which afterward were called Synagogues, whereof Philo speaks in the
words alleged, not yet erected through the Country, as shall appear by the
dark traces of the beginning of them, which we shall find by and by in the
Scriptures, during the time of Solomon's Temple. So that the words of Philo and
Josephus alleged before, wherein they tell us, That Moses commanded that
people to Assemble every seventh day, to learn the Law, that it was their
custom so to do; and that the Chief taught at those Assemblies, and the rest
learned to live according to that which was taught, must be understood with
these limitations, That it was collected from the letter of the Law of Moses,
and preserved in the practice of that people, at such times and places as
afforded means of Religious Assemblies for such purpose. In fine, it will
appear, that the Law of Moses, according to the dispensation of that time,
intended to be most express in the Figurative Ceremonial Service, peculiar to
that people, by the Ministeries of Priests and Levites, so particularly
appointed in it for that kind of Service. And yet, so little provision as we
find in the Law for the office of Prophets, and children of the Prophets, that
is, their disciples, these were the men nevertheless that Ministered the Moral
Service of God, of Prayers, and the Praises of God, and the exposition of the
Law, at their Religious Assemblies. A thing that may sound strange to them,
that find the charge of Teaching the Law, laid upon the Priests and Levites
from the beginning, in diverse passages of it. But if we view those passages at
a near distance, it will appear, that they speak not of TEACHING the Law at any
Religious Assemblies for such purpose, but of deciding cases emergent, or
giving Judgment in causes arising upon it. Deuteronomy. xxiiii. 8. Take heed in the
Plague of Leprosy, that thou observe diligently, and do according to all that
the Priests the Levites shall TEACH you: as I commanded them, so shall ye
observe to do. In Leviticus there is much provided, concerning the Priests
proceeding in judging Leprosies, but that the people should stand to their
judgment, provision is not made. Here is declared, that in those cases, they
did not resort to the Priests as to Physicians, to follow their sentence so
far as their own respect should advise, but that their sentence, called here
TEACHING, had the force of binding them to stand to it. 2. Chron. xviii. 18.
Josaphat in the third year of his reign sent his Princes, to TEACH in the
Cities of Judah, and with them he sent Levites and Priests. R. Solomon Jarchi
there: (...) For it lay upon the Priests and Levites to teach and instruct, as
it is written, Deuteronomy. xxiii. 8. ACCORDING TO ALL THAT THE PRIESTS AND LEVITES
SHALL TEACH. And the Princes went with them, that none might disobey them, and
to constrain them to hear them, and observe to do according to the command of
the Judges, like that Deuteronomy. xvi. 18. JUDGES AND OFFICERS ^HALT THOU MAKE THEE:
Judges, to judge he people, and Officers to constrain them to do he command of
the Judges. This TEACHING ^hen consisted in declaring the obligation of ^he Law
by the Judges of it, the Priests and Levites, and the Princes were officers
with power to enforce the execution of it. Mal. ii. ^. The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and the Law they should require at his mouth, For he is the
messenger of the Lord of Hosts. In ^he Chaldee of Jonathan (...) because he
ministers before the Lord of Hosts. From which Translation some of the Jews
expound this reason thus: You shall have recourse to the Priests, to determine
matters doubtful in the Law, for, standing to minister before the Lord in the
Temple, he is always ready for such purposes. R. Isaac A^arbinel upon Deuteronomy.
xvii. 9. But however this prove, if we consider what follows there, verse. 9.
You have been partial in the Law, we shall find, the gloss of David Kimchi to
be most true, (...) You accept the persons of great men in matter of the Law,
which says, Levit. xxii. 22. YE SHALL NOT OFFER THESE UNTO THE LORD: And when
they bring an offering with a stain, you are afraid to reprove them, and tell
them, this Offering is not allowable. So that the intent of this Text also,
points at the deciding of difficulties emergent about the Law of Moses.
Levit. x. 8. where the Priests are forbidden to drink wine, during the time of
their service, there follows a further reason, verse. 10. And that you may put
difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean: and that ye
may TEACH the children of Israel all the Statutes which the Lord has spoken
unto them by the hand of Moses. To resolve where the Law took hold or not in
particular cases of that nature, is to divide between unholy and holy, between
clean and unclean: Therefore we have cause to think, that the General which
follows, of TEACHING all Statutes, is commanded to the same purpose, in
matters of other nature. And that of Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 10. They shall TEACH Jacob
thy Statutes and Israel thy Law, Abarbinel expounds to the same effect. For
he observes that it goes before thus, Who says unto his father and to his
mother, I have not seen him; neither does he acknowledge his brethren, nor know
his own children: as the reason of that which follows, They shall TEACH Jacob
thy Statutes, and Israel thy Law. Because they take no notice of their dearest
relations in Judgment, therefore they shall TEACH Jacob thy Statutes, and
Israel thy Law, by deciding the controversies of it. And all this, because the
Original word (...), is proper to signify instruction by way of precept, from
whence the Law is called (...), and the declaration of the obligation or not
obligation of it, is in the language of their Doctors, called (...). Neither
is it material, though some of these Scriptures be otherwise understood. For
my purpose is not to say, that the people was not taught at all by the Priests
and Levites at Religious Assemblies, but not as such. It is for diverse reasons
to be believed, That the most part of Prophets, and disciples of Prophets, were
Priests and Levites. They were free from the care of Estates and Inheritances:
They were the men that came nearest to God by their Office in his Ceremonial
Service, which, an extraordinary degree of the knowledge and fear of God, best
suited with: But it is as certain, that the charge of Teaching the people,
belonged as well to the Prophets that were not Priests and Levites. The Scribes
and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, says our Lord in the Gospel; which is very
well expounded in the words of Philo alleged before; for he tells us, That it
was the custom, from the time of Moses, for the Chief to teach, and the people
to learn to live as he taught. Then, the Chair of Moses, is the Chair of
Doctrine as well as of Judgment, and Moses the Chief of Doctors, as well as
of Judges. But it is well known what the Lord said unto Moses, Numb. xi. 16,
17. Gather unto me seventy men of the Elders of Israel, whom thou know to be
Elders of the people, and Officers over them, and I will take of the Spirit
that is upon thee, and put it upon them. These that were known to be Elders of
Israel in their several Tribes, or their Officers in Egypt, as we read Exodus
iiii. 29. v. 19. are chosen to receive their share of Moses his spirit:
whereupon it follows, verse. 29. And it came to pass that when the spirit
rested upon them, they prophesied and ceased not. The Jews Doctors, seem to
apprehend the nature of the Gift which these men received, not amiss. Moses
Maimoni in More Nebochim. ii. 45. Abarbinel upon the place. They tell us, that
the meanest degree of Gods spirit, was that whereby men found themselves moved
and enabled, to those works of wisdom and courage, which otherwise they
thought not themselves fit to undertake, with assurance that all was from
above. This is the Grace, say they, which the Judges received, when it is said,
THE SPIRIT OF GOD INVESTED GEDEON, OR CAME UPON SAMPSON, for example. The
second is, when men are moved to speak of things belonging to the knowledge of
God, and his praises, beyond their natural or habituated capacities, without
seeing any figures, asleep or awake, but with assurance that it was from God.
And this they make to be the Grace of them, which writ those parts of
Scripture, which the Jews call (...), Ecclesiastical writers, (...), that is,
Written by the Holy Ghost, which nevertheless in a large sense are called
Prophets: And in these two degrees they say consisted the condition of Saul,
that was endued with the Holy Ghost, to enable him for Government, so as
sometimes he arrived at the rank of a Prophet. And thus these Elders received
of the spirit of Moses, for the Government of the people with him, in such
measure, that they atteined also to be Prophets. It is the constant Tradition
of that people, That the knowledge of the Law, was delivered by Moses, and this
Consistory of Elders, to succeeding ages. Which if it go no further, is no more
then reason for us to believe, though they have built all the fooleries of
their unwritten Law upon it. If Moses were the Chief of Doctors, those of
Moses his Bench must needs in their degree be the like. The Lord promises to
his people a successor to Moses in this Grace, Deuteronomy. xviii. 15. A Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me, him
shall you hear: which the New Testament verifieth in our Lord Christ, Acts
vii. 37. and elsewhere. But if this promise be partly verified for the time, in
those Prophets which God raised up from age to age after Moses, for further
knowledge of the Law which he gave, as the promise of a Savior, was for the
time, in part verified in their Judges and Kings, by whom God delivered his
people from their enemies, as some will have it, then is the charge of hearing
those Prophets, but the relative of their charge, in Teaching the people. In
the time of Samuel we read of certain Colleges of Prophets, and disciples of
Prophets, such as was that 1. Sam. x. 5. where Saul and his servant met a
company of Prophets; and such as was that 1. Sam. xix. 18, 20. at Naioth in
Ramah, where David abode with Samuel: and where Saul's messengers saw the
company of Prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over them.
This Naioth in Ramah, is here translated by Jonathan the Chaldee Paraphrast,
(...) the house of learning in Ramah: and Samuel stood over them as their
Master to teach them, as he rendereth it. It is the place where Samuel was born
and dwelt, called in the beginning of that book, Ramathaim Sophim, in the Greek
(...), and is the same with Joseph's Town of Arimathaea in the Gospel. By the
word it should seem it was compounded of two Towns, in the one whereof was
Naioth, the residence of those that studied the Law there under Samuel:
whereupon Jonathan translateth it there, Ramah of the disciples of the
Prophets. It is here very much to be observed, that they were forbidden by the
Law, To offer Sacrifice but before the Ark, in the place which the Lord shall
choose. Nevertheless, while this choice of God stood suspended, and while the
house at Shiloh was desolate, from the time that the Ark was taken by the
Philistines, till it was settled again at Jerusalem, High places were licensed
as the Jews speak, that is, it was lawful to offer Sacrifices where the Ark
was not. Such are these whereof we now speak, 1. Sam. ix. 12. x. 5. where
Jonathan translateth it (...) the house of Feasting, because having offered
their peace offerings, the use was, To Feast upon the remains of them, as you
find it there. In fine, the people assembling to such places to offer their
Sacrifices, and to celebrate their Solemnities, and the Prophets having their
Residence there, what doubt can be made, but that all this must be, for the
purpose of preaching to the people, as they assembled there, or ministering what
else may appear to belong to their office? And this is well apprehended by men
of learning, to be the beginning of Synagogues and Schools among that people.
For when the Ark was settled, and it was become unlawful to offer sacrifices
in the High places, to assemble for public prayers, and the praises of God,
and learning the Law, was no inconvenience. The like is to be said of those
aboads of Prophets, at Bethel, and Jericho, 2. Kings ii. 3, 5. the like whereof
were in other Cities, says D. Kimchi upon that place: And that in 2. Kings vi.
1. where we may observe Elisha to be Master, as Samuel in that of Naioth before.
The like we may conceive of that 2. Kings xxii. 14. where Huldah the
Prophetess is said to dwell (...), which Jonathan translateth as before, the
house of learning, our English, the College. R. David Kimchi there, Our
Doctors of blessed memory say, That three prophesied in the days of Josiah,
Jeremiah in the streets or villages, Zephaniah in the Synagogues, and Huldah
among the women. Solomon Jarchi upon Es. i. 21. It was full of judgment,
righteousness lodged in it. (...). And we find in Pesikta thus: R. Menahem
son of R. Hosaia says, There were CDLXXX Synagogues in Jerusalem according
to the number of the word (...) in Gematria: That is, counting the number which
the letters of it make. As who should say, that it was irregular on purpose, to
put them in mind how many Synagogues were in Jerusalem when the Prophet spoke
this. And that so many there were in it under the second Temple, is often
reported among them, and may pass for Historical Truth: But to find this out
of the Prophet in his time, is one of the crotchets which these men's brains are
always teeming with. In fine, if there be any express remembrance of
Synagogues, under Solomon's Temple, in the Scripture, I suppose it must be that,
Psalm. lxxvii. 8. They have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the land. and
before, verse. 4. Thine enemies rore in the midst of thy Congregations. which is
more then can be understood of the Temple alone, or the several buildings of
it. Only the doubt is, to what time the meaning of this Psalm is to be
related, and when it might be penned, because Junius has been bold to refer
it to Antiochus Epiphanes his time. But the constant Tradition of the Jews
seems to have obtained the credit of Historical Truth, that the Scripture
was signed in Ezra's time: And the end of Malachi (whom the Jews will have to
be Ezra) seems to speak no less, iiii. 4. sounding like the passage from the
Old to the New Testament: reflecting upon the Old, when he bids them
remember the Law of Moses, and pointing at the New, when he promises the
sending of Elias before the day of the Lord came. Besides, it is against the
Truth of History, that the Temple was destroyed in Antiochus Epiphanes his
time, which not only this Psalm, but diverse of the same Title import. lxxix.
1. O God the Heathen are come into thine inheritance, thine holy Temple have
they defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones. Upon the Title of this
Psalm, which is, A Psalm of Asaph, the Chaldee descanteth thus: A song, by the
hands of Asaph, upon the desolation of the Sanctuary, by the spirit of
Prophecy he said, lxxxi. 13. The Boar out of the wood does wast it, and the
Wild Beast of the field does devour it. Therefore I observe much, what we
read after the lxxii. Psalm; Here end the prayers of David the son of Jesse:
and yet you shall find not a few under David's name afterward. Which seems to
argue the first to have been a several Collection of David's Psalms by
themselves: Besides which nevertheless were found others of his, which with
the rest, belonging to other names, as Moses, Asaph, Heman, and others, make up
the Collection that follows. The Case is not much unlike in the book of
Proverbs. Two Titles of Solomon's Proverbs, C. i. and x. argue two several
Collections. C. xxv. there begins a third Collection of them with this
Title, These are also Proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah King of
Judah copied out. But that this Collection lasts to the end of the book,
meeting with a Title so disputable, C. xxx. who shall assure us? Since then
after the lxxii. Psalm, where we read, Here end the prayers of David son of
Jesse, there follow a considerable number under the name of Asaph, why should
we doubt him to be writer of them, more then David of his? Or that he, that was
a Prophet, as shall be said, foresaw in them the destruction of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar and the Chaldeans? If there can yet be question who penned the
Psalm, it is quite extinguished by the Text of 2. Chron. xxix. 30. where
Ezekiah commands the Levites to praise God in the words of David and Asaph:
And therefore the Scripture speaks of Synagogues during Solomon's Temple: But
with such obscure remembrance, that it cannot be thought, they could afford the
body of that people means to assemble for the Service of God. One doubt there
is yet behind, as concerning this Grace: to what purpose the disciples of the
Prophets studied for that Grace, which was only in the power of the Holy Ghost
to bestow, being far from us to believe, as some Mahumetane Philosophers are
said to do, That it is to be compassed with humane indevours: which if they
aimed not toward that purpose, why then are they called sons, that is
Disciples, of the Prophets, as the Chaldee of Jonathan always translateth it?
Why do we see, that for the most part, in Scripture, those persons that were
brought up to it, were endued with the Grace? It was in the power of God, no
doubt, to bestow it where he pleased: nevertheless, so it was found, that for
the most part he did bestow it, where men's manners were suitable, where men's
courses were applied to it: (To say nothing here of those dispositions of
nature and fortune which the Ebrew Doctors require) this is to be seen in the
place alleged 1. Sam. x. 11. And the Proverb that did rise upon Saul's
prophesying, Is Saul also among the Prophets? For had it not been unusual,
that persons never bred to any such course, should be invested with the Spirit
on the sudden, it had not been so great a marvel, as to cause and occasion the
Proverb: On the other side, to show how it comes to pass, it follows there,
And one of the same place answered and said, But who is their father? To say,
that seeing these children of the Prophets, that is, Disciples, had God to
their Father, to teach them by his Spirit, it was no marvel to see a man grown
a Prophet without help of other Masters. Which is the case that Amos expresses
vii. 14. I was no Prophet, nor Prophets son, but an heardsman, and gatherer
of Sycomore fruit, And the Lord took me, as I followed the flock, and the Lord
said unto me, Go, Prophecy unto my people Israel. Now, the study that disposed
men to this Grace, was, without doubt, that of the Law of Moses: in that all
conversed, and spent their time, that pretended, though some atteined the Gift
of Gods Grace, others stayed at that knowledge, which by humane indevours they
could compass: Whereupon that which is called in the places of Samuel
aforesaid a company of Prophets, is by Jonathan translated in the Chaldee (...)
A pack of Scribes. A difference remarkable in that Translation, which it
makes, in rendering the word PROPHETS: for when he conceives the speech is of
such as had the Grace, he translateth it (...) Prophets: when he extends it
to those that did but pretend, he terms it diverse times, Scribes, and
Doctors. Jer. xxvi. 16. Then said the Princes and all the people unto the
Priests, and to the Prophets: Jon. (...), to the Scribes. Jer. xxix. 1. These
are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the Prophet sent from Jerusalem unto
the Priests, and to the Prophets. Jon. (...), to the Scribes. And again, verse.
15. Because ye have said the Lord has raised us up Prophets in Babylon. Jon.
(...) Doctors. When the Scripture speaks plainly of false Prophets, then he
is wont to add in translating, FALSE Prophets. This we shall see to be the
beginning of those that are called Scribes in the Gospel, which among the Jews
are called WISEMEN otherwise, when the Grace of Prophecy had ceased among that
people. And to this purpose it is worth the noting which R. Moses Maimoni among
others of their Doctors, delivers of Baruch the Scribe, the son of Neriah,
in Moreh Nebochim ii. 32. that his complaint specified, Jer. xlv. 3. Woe is me
now, for the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my mourning, and
find no rest: was upon this occasion, that having run his best course, under
Jeremy, for the purpose, the Lord in the end refused him the Grace of a
Prophet, which he aimed at. For sure the answer the Lord gives is very
suitable: as it follows, Behold, that which I have built, will I pull down,
and that which I have planted, will I pluck up, even this whole land, and
seek thou great things for thy self? To say, that in the time of public
wrath, it was more fit for him to seek deliverance, then eminence; which is his
reward, as it follows, Behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, says the
Lord, but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey, in all places whither thou
go. Now it is to be observed, that the Original word, which we translate
prophesying, is of so large a meaning, that it contains whatsoever that Grace
inableth, or that office requires a man to do. For, how is it said, Ecclus.
xlviii. 13. that Elizeus his body PROPHESIED, because of the miracle wrought by
his bones after his death, but because it was always expected at Prophets
hands to do miracles? As our Lord is called a Prophet mighty in word and deed,
Luke xxiiii. 19. It is then no marvel, that Prophets should be inspired by the
Holy Ghost to set forth the praises of God, or that their Ministry should be
required in that work. 1. Sam. x. 10. we read of Saul and his servant. 1. Sam.
xix. 20. we read of his messengers, thus; And Saul sent messengers to take
David: and when they saw the company of the Prophets prophesying, and Samuel
standing as appointed over them, the Spirit of the Lord was upon the Messengers
of Saul, and they also Prophesied. In the Greek, that which is in the Ebrue
(...), or in the other place, -- (...), A band of Prophets, or a congregation
of Prophets, is rendered (...), and (...), and Prophesying, is by Jonathan
turned (...), that is, praising or singing: They found them singing the praises
of God, under Samuel, Master of the Quire, and they, when it came to their
turn, sung that which they were inspired with: as the Apostle, 1. Cor. xiiii.
26. When you come together, every one of you has a Psalm: Thus Exodus xv. 21.
Miriam the PROPHETESS, the sister of Aaron took a Timbrel in her hand, and all
the women went out after her with Timbrels and Danses, and she answered them
saying: in the Greek it is, (...), she led them the song, which she had
composed, as being a PROPHETESS. Or she sung that which Moses had composed by
the Holy Ghost before, for her beginning is, Sing unto the Lord, for he has
triumphed gloriously, the Horse and his Rider has he cast into the Sea: which
is that of Moses. Again we read 1. Chron. xxv. 3. Moreover, David and the
Captains of the Host, separated to the service, of the sons of Asaph, and of
Heman, and of Iduthun, who should PROPHECY, with Harps, with Psalteries, and
with Cymbals. and verse. v. All these were the sons of Heman the Kings SEER in
the words of God, to lift up the horn. In the first place, the Greek has it
(...), speaking, that is, the praise of God; in the other, (...), that struck
up to the Lord. But there must be a reason why the praises of God is called
PROPHESYING, and SEERS, that send them forth. And what is that but this,
because the Spirit of God indicted Psalms to the heads mentioned here, with whom
the rest joined in singing them to the Lord? R. David Kimchi there, (...), The
sons of Asaph played upon Instruments, and sang, and the Holy Spirit rested
upon Asaph, and he sung with his voice to the noise of the harps. So Heman and
Iduthun were all Prophets with Instruments of Song: For the book of Psalms was
written by the Holy Ghost, and there are in it Prophesies of the Captivity and
Deliverance. Here you see, that Asaph and the rest were Prophets inspired by
the Holy Ghost, so that it can be no marvel to find Prophesies under their
name in the Psalms, as was said: Besides, their children also and scholars are
said to Prophecy in singing the praises of God which they were inspired with.
A thing to be observed toward that which shall follow. Further, that Prophets
instructed the people in the Law, at their Assemblies for that purpose, in the
Temple or else where, there is enough to argue out of Scripture. Abenezra upon
Exodus xx. 8. (...), And it was the fashion of the Israelites, close upon the
Sabbath, to go unto the Prophets: As it is said, 2. Kings iiii. 22. WHEREFORE
VVILT THOU GO TO HIM TO DAY? IT IS NEITHER NEW MOON, NOR SABBATH. R. Levi ben
Gerson upon that place, (...), It seems that in those days, they used to go
before the great (wise) men, and they instructed them in the way they should
go, and the things they should do. Neither is this Exposition the apprehension
of these later Doctors: Manasseh ben Israel the now Rabbi at Amsterdam has
quoted it to us from the Talmudists: Gem. Succoth, C. 2. Council. in Exodus
Quaest. 35. To the same purpose belongs that of the Talmudists alleged from
David Kimchi, that Jeremiah prophesied in the Villages, Zephaniah in the
Synagogues, and Huldah amongst the women. The same D. Kimchi upon 2. Kings ii.
3. tells us that the reason and purpose of those Colleges of Prophets there
remembered, was to reprove the Israelites through those Cities. In Psalm. lx
xiii. 16, 17. When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me, until I
went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their end. Abenezra there,
(...), and the meaning of the Sanctuary of God, is, Because there were the
Priests of account, and the WISEMEN of Israel, and they revealed this secret.
And Eccles. v. 1. Keep thy feet when thou go to the house of God, and be
more ready to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider not
that they do evil. The Chaldee Paraphrase thus descanteth upon these words,
(...), Thou son of man, keep thy feet when thou go into the Sanctuary of
God to pray, that thou go not thither full of sins, before thou do
repent, and apply thine care to receive instruction of the Law from the Priests
and WISEMEN: and be not as fools that offer Sacrifice upon their sins, and
repent not of their evil works, that stick in their hands, and it is not
accepted, neither know they how to do good or evil about them. Here you have
the meaning of these Scriptures expressed, by conjecture, taken from the
practice of aftertimes better known: But WISEMEN joined here with Priests, are
they which Jonathan called Scribes before, as shall be said, and such Priests
they were that did this office. It is to be believed that it was no less the
office of Prophets, to conceive prayers in behalf of the Congregation at their
Assemblies, though we find no such express conjecture in Scriptures of the Old
Testament. When people resorted to the Prophets, when they taught them the Law,
as was said; shall we believe they had not public prayers at those Assemblies?
or shall we believe that it was not ministered by the Prophet to whom they
resorted? especially seeing it appears many ways, that it was the Office of
Prophets to pray for the necessities of the people; as men most familiar with
God, and so most like to prevail. And the Prophets of Baal, 1. Kings xviii. 26.
called upon the name of Baal from morning till noon, which in verse. 29. is thus
said: And it came to pass when midday was past, and they PROPHESIED till the
offering of the evening Sacrifice. Here their prayers to their god, is called
Prophesying, as a part of the Prophets office, which Elias does afterward. And
Samuel, 1. Sam. xii. 23. As for me, God forbid that I should sin against the
Lord in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the right
way. Joining together the parts of his Office, Teaching and Praying. Last, The
King of Israel, 2. Kings vi. 30. God do so and more also to me, if the head of
Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day: As he whose Office it
was to remove the wrath of God by his prayers, and did not. If these
consequences seem not to speak home to the ministering of the Service of God by
prayer, at their religious Assemblies, compare that which has been said with
that which follows, concerning the Prophets of the New Testament, and the
things that have been said, will no doubt appear unquestionable.

CHAP. III.
The Profession of Scribes, that succeeded the Prophets. Wisemen of the Jews
were the learned sort of Scribes. Scribes of all the three Sects. They taught
in Synagogues. Who were Lawyers. Who sat in their Courts, and of their
Disciples. The manner of their sitting in Schools and Synagogues. How they sat
in Feasting. Of the Elders of Synagogues. Who among them received Imposition of
Hands.

THat the chief, if not the only knowledge, to which men of learning were bred
among the people of God from the beginning, was that of the Law, and afterward
of the other Scriptures, the name of Scribes is evidence enough: Whose
profession Epiphanius thus describes, (...): These, says he, were men that
repeated the Law, teaching a kind of Grammatical knowledge: in other things
practicing the fashions of the Jews. And Abarbinel in the words alleged before,
has expressed three particulars concerning the Law, wherein the Jews were
instructed upon the Sabbaths: (...). The first concerns no more then the very
words, and the ordinary reading of them, as it was delivered, and as the people
received it: and by this continual hearing the Law, the people came to be so
cunning in it, as Josephus professes, in the place before named: (...). But if
a man ask any of us, concerning the Laws, he will tell every thing readier then
his own name: for learning them straight as soon as we come to knowledge, we
keep them imprinted in our minds. The third thing which he calls (...),
concerns the Grammatical niceties in reading the words of the Law, the
knowledge whereof Epiphanius says the Scribes did profess. This is the reason
that it is recorded for the commendation of Esdras, Esd. i. 6. That he was a
ready Scribe in the Law of Moses. As in the third book of Ezra, cap. 8. for the
same cause he is called (...), A Reader in the Law of God, who is called a
Scribe of the Law of God elsewhere. And that is the reason of the language
which our Lord uses to the Scribe, What is written in the Law? how READ
thou? Luke x. 26. For as it is true, that the vowels which the letters must be
sounded with, are not distinguished in the Substance of that Language: So it is
most certain, that the way of reading, was not at the first delivered to that
people, in that method of general Rules, which since has been invented, but
was taught and received by particular Tradition, and continued by remembrance
and practice. Whereupon it is evident, what difference of sounds may be fastened
upon the same characters of letters, if it be but from that most ancient
Translation of the Bible in Greek, commonly ascribed to seventy Elders of
Israel. The substance whereof still remaining (whatsoever alterations may have
been made) is sufficient to show, how much difference there was between the
reading which they followed, and that which we now use. And by consequence, how
much it concerned the true meaning of the Law, to have learned the true reading
of it, which the Jews, whose reading we follow, pretend to have received from
Esdras, and the men of learning in his time, whom they call the men of the
Grand Synagogue. But the endless niceties and curious observances, wherewith
the reading, which we now deservedly use, is delivered unto us, is sufficient
to demonstrate that which I was saying before, that from the beginning, the
certain manner of reading was delivered by particular observance, and in time
became reduced unto that general method, which now we use, with such
unspeakable speed and advantage. Thus, all that made profession of
book-learning among that people, are called Scribes; though it seems, some
that enjoyed the style, went no further then writing and reading. And such as
these they were, that taught little children afterward among the Jews, of
whose Office we find Rules in Maimoni, Talmud Torah. cap. 11. And the Jewish
Doctors imagine, that Jacob prophesied, that most of these should be of the
Tribe of Simeon, when he said, Genesis xlix. 7. I will divide them in Jacob and
scatter them in Israel. And the Commentaries under S. Ambrose his name, expound
the Office of those Doctors, of whom S. Paul speaks, 1. Cor. xii. 28. in
these words, Illos dicit Doctores, qui in Ecclesia literis and lectionibus
retinendis pueros imbuebant, more Synagogae, quia traditio illorum ad nes
transitum fecit: He speaks of those Teachers in the Church, which instructed
children in reading and reteining their lessons, after the fashion of the
Synagogue, for their Tradition has passedover to us. How well he has
deciphered the Office of Doctors in the Apostle, we shall see afterward; but
that which he says, of the fashion of teaching children to read, and say over
lessons of the Scripture, which the Church learned from the Synagogue, is that
business of less learned Scribes, whereof we speak. For there was a further
degree of knowledge, consisting in the exposition of the Law, which is the
third particular remaining, expressed in Abarbinels words, in the second place,
and those which came to this pitch, as they were still Scribes, which is the
name common to all men of learning among that people, so they were counted
WISEMEN besides, in regard of the knowledge of the Law they professed, which
was the wisdom of that people, according to Deuteronomy. iiii. 6. Thus you shall find
Scribes and Wisemen joined together in the New Testament: Matthew. xxiii. 34.
Behold I send unto you Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes: And 1. Cor. i. 20.
Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world?
And for this cause it is, that the Disciples of the Prophets are translated
Scribes in Jonathan, as was said before: And the same are the WISEMEN which
taught the Law of God in the Temple: which we also read of Ezra the Scribe,
vii. 10. For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the Law of the Lord, and to
do, and to teach in Israel Statutes and Judgments. Whether they were Priests,
and Levites, or whether they were others, that were bred from their youth to
the knowledge of the Law and Scriptures, these were the men, and no other but
these, that were indifferently assumed to sit in all Courts of Judgment of
that people, and to teach in their Schools and Synagogues. You heard before some
slight remembrance of places of learning, where Companies of Prophets had their
residence, some suspicion of Synagogues, where that people assembled, not for
that Ceremonial worship which was confined to the Temple, but for the Moral
and Spiritual Service of God, according to the light of that time, during the
time of Solomon's Temple. But after the return from Babylon, Schools and
Synagogues, for certain, were multiplied all over the Country; and the effect
of it was, without doubt, of unspeakable benefit. Men of learning have thought
it strange, and inquired what the reason might be, that this people, before
their Captivity, when they had the Prophets to teach and admonish them, still
from time to time should fall away from God to the worship of Idols: whereas
after their return, though there were no more Prophets, nor miracles wrought,
nevertheless they continued constant in the Service of one God, however the
service and knowledge of him were corrupted. To my understanding this one
reason goes far in giving account of it; because where Assemblies were held,
where the Law was read and taught, where the Service of God was exercised, that
is, where there were Synagogues, there was the most powerful means to hold
them constant to that which they professed. But on the other side, we see what
a great evil sprung among them in stead of it, diversities of opinions, sects
and divisions, among them which held all constant to one Law, whereof the
Learned professed the Knowledge. The chief whereof were those of the Sadduces
and Pharisees which the Gospel remembers; and which are remembered here, to
show, that they took not upon them the Teaching of the Law, but as they were
Scribes, as well as Pharisees or Sadduces: the name of Scribes importing the
learning of the Law to which they were bred, the name of Pharisees and
Sadduces, the sect and manner of life they professed, according to the opinions
those orders maintained. So that as nothing hinders him that has professed
some Monastical Order, to proceed in the Degrees of the Schools, no more
inconvenience is it, to take the same men, both for Scribes, and also for
Pharisees and Sadduces. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, says our
Lord, Matthew. xxiii. 2. the difference is made, because many were Scribes that
were not Pharisees, as also many Pharisees that were no Scribes: as in those
words which Sigonius has produced out of the life of James son of Zebedee,
Josias unus e SCRIBIS PHARIS AEORUM, misit funem in collum Apostoli: Josias a
SCRIBE, ONE OF THE PHARISEES, put a rope upon the Apostles neck. Gamaliel, of
whom we read in the Scripture for S. Paul's Master, is called there a Pharisee;
and that he was a Scribe for his learning, there can be no doubt. And when it
is said, Acts xxiii. 9. The Scribes that were of the Pharisees part, it is
plain that there were also Scribes of the Sadduces: which seem to have carried
more credit after our Lords death, under another High Priest, then when he was
alive. For when it is said, Acts v. 17. Then the High Priest rose up, and all
that were with him, which is the sect of the Sadduces, and were filled with
indignation, it may be observed that before, iiii. 2. we read thus, And as they
spoke unto the people, the Priests and Captain of the Temple, and the Sadduces
came upon them, which same faction is thus specified verse. 5. And it came to
pass on the morrow that their Rulers and Elders, and Scribes were gathered
together at Jerusalem; out of which as it is to be presumed that the faction of
the Sadduces, cherished by the High Priest, had then the stroke, (whereupon the
Apostles preaching then the Resurrection of our Lord, found some advantage in
Gamaliel, and S. Paul afterward in the Pharisees) so there is necessity to
think, the same were Scribes and Sadduces both, which dealt in these matters.
And for the third sect of the Essenes, there is no doubt, but the learned of
them also were counted in the number of the Scribes; seeing we know that they
taught the Law in their own Synagogues, as shall be said. But of those that are
called in the Gospel Lawyers, there is question among men of learning, what
might be the difference between them and Scribes, whose Profession was the Law
of Moses, and the Exposition of it. For when our Lord says unto them, Luke xi.
46. Woe unto you also Lawyers, having said the like before to the Scribes, it is
plain, that he might speak to Scribes and not to Lawyers, and yet the
Profession of Scribes being the Law of Moses, and the Exposition of it, it is
strange there should be Lawyers which were no Scribes. And therefore my
resolution must be, that they cease not to be Scribes which are called Lawyers,
but as they own that style for their Profession of Learning, so is the other
due for the Privilege they have in it: which seems to have been among them,
whatsoever was then conferred by Imposition of hands, which made them Rabbis
or Doctors of the Law that had it: Maimoni, in Sanedrin. C. iiii. number. 2. And
therefore when Gamaliel, Acts ii. 34. is called (...), it is the same that
(...) or (...), or Rabbi alone. For hereupon you shall observe the words that
he uses, Luke xx. 45. Then answered one of the LAWYERS and said unto him,
Master, in thus saying thou reprochest us also: to show, that they were still
of a better rank then the rest, and should take it worse to be found fault
with; which is here verified, by the Privilege which they of all other Scribes
were invested with. For to show in how great esteem was this Profession among
that people, be it here observed, that no man was capable, at least of sitting
in their Courts of Judgment, but those that were bred to this kind of
knowledge. I speak not here of the free times of that Commonwealth, under
their own Laws and Governors: Then, it is reason to think, that the Princes of
Israel, and noblest persons, were placed in the Grand Court of lxxi. at
Jerusalem, with the Chief Priests, and Prophets, or their Successors, the
greatest of the Scribes to assist them in the knowledge of the Law. It is
observed of late, that Josephus makes the middle Court of xxiii. to consist
but of vii. with two assistants to each of them, of the tribe of Levi, to wit,
for the knowledge of the Law; which came near the number of xxiii. The
description that follows derived from their Ancient Doctors, seems to
concern the times when the freedom of the people was abated, and that great
Court reduced, from governing the State, to judge the greatest of those matters
wherein they were left to their own Laws. Which fitteth the present purpose
nevertheless. Because from it we shall perceive the employment of their
Scribes, together with the fashion of their Consistories, and of their
Synagogues in consequence, whereupon that which is to follow depends. R.
Moses in Sanedrin. C. ii. number. 1. They place not in any Sanedrin, great or
little, but WISEMEN; men abounding in knowledge of the Law, men of large
knowledge in other Sciences: And straight afterward, They place not in the
Sanedrin but Priests and Levites, and Israelites of birth, sit to be of
Alliance to the Priesthood, as it is said, Numb. xi. 16. AND THEY SHALL STAND
THERE WITH THEE: of men like thee, in wisdom, and godliness, and birth. And
it is a precept, that there be Priests and Levites of the Great Sanedrin, as it
is said, Deuteronomy. xvii. 9. AND THOU SHALL COME UNTO THE PRIESTS THE LEVITES. But
if none be found, though there be none but Israelites, it is allowable.
Israelites of birth, were not assumed for their birth: for the Priests and
Levites, that were counted among them of best birth, sat not there, unless
their learning were answerable: The High Priest himself, unless he were fit
for his wisdom, had no place in the Sanedrin of Seventy one in Jerusalem, as
it follows straight afterward. Now the manner of breeding here requisite is
to be understood, from the description of the second Court, of three and
twenty, which he makes in the first Chapter there before. Number. 6. (...), The
Judge that is of greatest wisdom among them, is Head over them, the rest sit
in a round, as it were a half Circle, that the Head may see them all. And
again, Numb. 7. Before every Sanedrin they place three ranks of Disciples of
Wisemen, three and twenty in every rank: the first near the Judges; the second
lower then that; the third lower then the second: and in every rank they sit
according to their degree in Wisdom. Out of these as need requires, they
assume the next in rank to assist in Judgment, when the Bench is not complete,
by Imposition of Hands, as it follows there, because finable Causes, that
belonged to this middle Court, were not judged but by Masters made by
Imposition of hands. But the lowest of their Courts was thus: Cap. 1. number. 6.
In Cities of less then sixscore Families, they place THREE Judges, as in no
Court less then three, that it may have more and less if they chance to be
divided in a Cause. When there are not in a City two Great Wisemen, one fit to
teach and decide, in all the Law, the other that can understand and dispute,
(ask and answer) they place no Sanedrin in it, though it have two thousand of
Israel: where there are these two, one to understand, and one to speak, it is a
Sanedrin: where there are three, it is mean: where four, whereof three can
speak, that is a Sanedrin of Wisdom: For as you have it there afterward, C.
ii. number. ult. (...), Though a Court of three be a full Court, it is commendable
whenever there are more, and better that a Cause be decided by eleven then by
ten; and it is requisite that all that sit in the Court be Disciples of the
WISE, and fitting. So, though this Court, reaching but to money matters,
require not Imposition of hands, yet you see what qualities it requires, in
two that are necessary, and in all that may sit in it. And thus it appears
how that is verified in particular, which was generally affirmed before, That
none could come to sit in any of their Courts of Justice, but their Scribes,
but their Wise, but the Disciples of Wise, but those that were bred to the
knowledge of the Law. But it concerns my purpose to observe further, in that
description of the middle Court, the three ranks of Disciples that sat beneath
the Judges by degrees, according to their knowledge, because the like order
took place at their religious Assemblies in the Synagogues, the people sitting
flat on the floores. S. Ambrose upon the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. xiiii.
29, 30. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge; If it be
revealed to another as he SITS, let the first hold his peace. Traditio
Synagogae est, quam nos vult sectari: -- ut sedentes disputent: Seniores
dignitate in Cathedris, sequentes in subselli is, novissimi in pavimento super
mattas. It is a Tradition or custom of the Synagogue which he would have us to
follow; to dispute sitting: The Eldest in dignity in Chairs, the next upon
Benches, the last upon matted floores. To this purpose speak those words
alleged to us from the Talmudists, Gem. Horaioth. C. iii. 13. (...), Our
Masters say, When the Prince comes in (that is, the Head of the High Court of
seventy one) all the people stand up to him, and sit not down till he bid them:
when the Father of the Court comes in (that is, his mate) they make him two
ranks, one on this side, another on that, and sit not down till he is set: when
the Wiseman comes in (that is, the next, that always sat on the left hand to
the Prince) one stands up, and one sits still. Disciples of the Wise, and
their Children, when the people want them, step over the heads of the people,
though it is an imputation for a Disciple of the Wise to come in last. If he go
out for his necessities, he comes in, and sits down in his place. Sons of
Disciples of the Wise that are deputed Pastors of the Synagogue, when they have
understanding to learn, come in and sit before their fathers, with their backs
to the people: while they have not, they come in and sit behind their fathers,
with their faces to the people. R. Eleazar, son of R. Sadock, said, At Feasts
also they set them each beside their Fathers. Here you see, how the Elders sat
in a Round in the face of the people, sitting before them upon the floor. The
manner whereof in the Synagogue is thus further expressed in Maimoni, Tephillah
ubircath Cohenim, cap. xi. 4. for having told us, that in every Synagogue, in
the Quarter toward which they pray, looking to the Temple, they build a place,
which they call therefore the Hecall, where they lay a Copy of the Law, and set
the Ark, out of which they take the book of the Law which they read in the
Synagogue, with the back to this Hecall, and the face to the people, he
pursues it thus: Number. 4. How sit the people in the Synagogue? The Elders sit
with their faces toward the people, and their backs toward the Hecall, and
all the people sit rank before rank, the face of every rank toward the back of
the rank before it, so the faces of all the people are toward the Sanctuary,
and toward the Elders, and toward the Ark, and when the Minister of the
Synagogue stands up to prayer, he stands on the ground before the Ark, with
his face to the Sanctuary, as the rest of the people. And for that which S.
Ambrose says of matted floores, it follows there, number. 5. They use respect
in the Synagogues and Schools, and sweep them, and floor them, And the
Israelites in Spain and the West, and in Shinar, and the land of Comeliness,
they use to set up lights in the Synagogues, and floor them with MATS, to sit
upon, but in the land of Edom (the Roman Empire) they sit upon seats. Thus is
the meaning of that in the Psalm cvii. 32. brought into their practice, when he
says, Let them exalt him also in the Congregation of the people, and praise
him in the SEAT of the Elders. The Chaldee; Exalt him in the Synagogue of the
people of Israel, and praise him in the Sanedrin (or Seat) of WISEMEN. R. Sol.
Jarchi there, (...), And it is requisite to confess him before ten, whereof
two are the strength of our Masters: that is, such two, as were requisite before
to make a Sanedrin according to R. Moses. For their Rule is, that those, whom
this Psalm mentions, give public thanks, that is, in a Synagogue, that is of
ten, where there are two WISEMEN, which therefore are counted a Sanedrin, of
which they expound the words of the Psalm, The seat of the Elders. True it is,
you shall find diverse sayings of the Ebrew Doctors wherein the Disciples of
the Wise are described sitting on the floor at the feet of their Masters, and
not upon seats of a lower rank; and so was S. Paul, Acts xxii. 3. brought up at
the feet of Gamaliel. But that, it should seem, is to be understood, of Masters
sitting alone among their Scholars, by that which we read of it, in Maimoni,
Talmud Torah. C. iii. number. 2. (...), How do they teach? the Master sits in
the head, and the Scholars in a ROUND before him like a Crown, that they may all
see the Master, and hear his words. The Master sits not in a Chair, and his
Disciples on the floor, but all on the floor or in Chairs. Formerly the
Masters sat and the Scholars stood, but before the destruction of the second
Temple, all practiced it, their disciples and themselves sitting. Though in S.
Paul there is something particular, if we believe that which Abenezra relates
out of the Talmudists, upon Nehem. viii. 5. where we read, And Ezra opened the
book in the sight of all the people (for he was above all the people) and when
he opened it, all the people stood up. It may be, says he, they stood up in
their place. So say our Masters of blessed memory, from the days of Moses to
our Master Gamaliel they learned standing. Good reason S. Paul should remember
the feet of Gamaliel, and good reason we should think his Scholars sat at his
feet, if he were the first that brought up the custom, which Maimoni says was
received, before the Temple was destroyed, for Scholars to sit when their
Masters read and discoursed: which I leave to the Masters of the Talmud to be
verified. In the mean time, the fashion of these Assemblies, and the very
posture of those that sat there to teach, makes that very clear which our
Lord says in the Gospel, Matthew. xxiii. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses CHAIR. And the same are the seats whereof our Lord speaks there, verse.
6. And love the uppermost rooms at Feasts ((...), because they eat leaning) and
the chief seats in Synagogues ((...), because they taught sitting in Chairs, as
S. Ambrose said before.) For which purpose you have seen hitherto that the
Doctors sat with their faces to the people, that they might be ready to stand
up when the Law was read, and from thence take the Occason and Argument of
their speech to the people. Therefore says the Apostle, Acts xv. 21. For Moses
has of Old time in every City them that preach him; being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath. And Acts xiii. 14. Paul and Barnabas went into the
Synagogue at Antiochia in Pisidia on the Sabbath, and sat down: And after the
reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto
them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation to the
people, say on. Then Paul stood up, and beckning with his hand, said. In like
sort our Savior, in the Synagogue at Nazareth, Luke iiii. 16. having read the
lesson of Esaiah the Prophet, proceeds to expound it. And certain it is that
our Lord and his Disciples were admitted and invited to teach in the Synagogue,
upon no other respect, but the opinion which the world had of their Wisdom and
Knowledge of the Scripture, for which, they going so far beyond those that
professed it, no marvel if they were received for Doctors of it. And Philo of
the Essenes, lib. Omnem probum liberum esse. (...). Coming to their holy places
called Synagogues, they sit down in ranks, according to years, the young under
the Elders, with fit decorum, disposed to hear: Then one takes the book and
reads, another of the best practiced comes afterward, and recognizeth that
which was least understood: that is, expounds it. And it should seem by the
name the Jews give their Sermons, that the Custom was, for many of these
Doctors, that sat in the head of Synagogues, to speak to the same purpose,
inquiring the truth of the Scripture. For as they call the School (...), so
they call preaching in the Synagogue, (...), and (...), Preachers, both for the
reason, of inquiring, at these meetings, the meaning of the Scriptures. For
which reason S. Paul, 1. Cor. i. 20. (...); calling the same persons Wisemen
first, then Scribes, and last of all, Inquirers of this world; that is, Jewish
Doctors, that were still inquiring among themselves the truth of the
Scriptures at their meetings, and yet believed not; that seems to be the true
meaning of the words. As our Savior, Luke ii. 46. was found in the Temple
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them questions,
which was the School where they disputed. But this posture of sitting, in the
Court, in the School, in the Synagogue, in Judgment, in Learning, in their
Service of God, will be still better understood, if we observe, that it was the
fashion of that people to sit at meat no otherwise; as did also the Greeks and
Romans after them, eat lying, and leaning on the elbow, in a half Round, which
they call Sigma, from the Ancient figure of that letter, which was thus, C.
This is called in the Bible (...), in the Chaldee it is translated (...),
signifying the Company that were met, for the reason of sitting in compass. Of
which the words of the Talmud alleged out of Horaioth, Cap. 3. are to be
understood, where, having said, That the sons of disciples of the Wise,
before they be capable of learning, sit at their fathers backs, in the Round
whereof we spoke, it follows, R. Eleazar son of R. Sadock said, In Feasts
also they set them beside their fathers; that is, behind their places in the
Round aforesaid. And of Old time it may be observed, that the middle place, in
this fashion of sitting, was most Honorable, among that people, by that of
King Saul, 1. Sam. xx. 25. And the King sat upon his seat as at other times,
even upon a seat by the wall. Sol. Jarchi, (...), in the head of the couch next
the wall. Supposing them to sit in a Round or half Circle, as was always the
fashion to do, we must needs imagine that the back or middle of this half
Circle must be toward the wall for all convenience. And thereupon, by the way,
we have cause to think, that there is no mistake, in the vulgar way of
representing the last Supper of our Lord; which the learned Jesuit Sirmondus,
Annot. in Sidon. 1. Epist. ii. thinks the Painters make, when they set our
Lord in the midst at Table. Whereas the right order he conceives to be that,
which he observed in the Mosaicall work at Capua, done by the Abbot of Cassino,
that was afterward Victor II. Pope, where our Lord sits in the dexter point
of the Couch, S. John leaning his head in his bosom, who by that means, might
easily perceive S. Peter becken to him, as he sat in the sinister point of it,
as chief of the Disciples. And indeed he has reason to say, that among the
Romans, the dexter point was most honorable, the sinister next to it: but
among the Ebrews, as has been said, it was the middle, where S. John leaning
in our Lords bosom, might easily enough perceive S. Peter becken as he sat in
the point. But in the words alleged out of Maimoni, we must now observe the
condition of these Elders of the Synagogue which he says sat in the head of
the Assembly with their faces to the people. It is the Title of those chief of
the Tribes, that had authority over the people in Egypt, out of whom were
chosen the seventy Assistants to Moses in the Grand Consistory, as was said. It
is in the Gospel the Title of those, in whom, together with the chief Priests
and Scribes, the authority over that people rested, so far as they were
suffered to use their own Laws, the Grand Court of Seventy, being at that time
either dissolved, or removed from Jerusalem, and abated, as the Talmudists,
agreeing with Josephus, relate: for he tells us, that they were put to death
by Herod, Antiq. xv. ii. They tell us, that they removed from Jerusalem xl.
years before the destruction of the Temple, that is, a little before our Lords
death, because they would not be used as a stale to give sentence of death,
beside their own Judgment; the force of their sentence consisting in their
residence at Jerusalem, as they will have it: Aboda zara, c. i. which it is
probable is to be understood, when they began to recover themselves, of the
blow received under Herod. Correspondently therefore, in the Synagogues of
their dispersion, under this name we must understand those, by whose Authority
the common businesses of the Congregation were transacted, so far as they had
leave to use their own Law among the Nations; which it seems are therefore
called, Acts xiii. 15. Rulers of the Synagogue, and were sometimes men of
Learning, Scribes, Wisemen, Rabbis, otherwhiles not. That their Doctors in
this respect were called Elders, I will use no other proof but that which is
ordered in their Law concerning him that they call a Rebellious Elder, of whom
Maimoni in Mamrim, cap. vii. n. 1. A Rebellious Elder is not liable to death,
till he be a WISEMAN that has attained to be fit to decide, next to a
Sanedrin. And in Talmud Torah, cap. vii. 1. a Wiseman, that is, an Elder
excellent in wisdom, is one of those that must not be excommunicated in
public. On the other side, that some of these Elders in Synagogues were not
Rabbis, it shall appear, by the description which the same Rabbi makes, of
their Order, in holding the Fast of Seven days, whereof he writes in
Taanioth, Cap. iiii. 2. (...), After that they put up among them an Elder that
is a WISEMAN, themselves sitting: if there be no Elder that is a WISEMAN, they
put up a Wiseman; if neither, they set up such an one as will serve, and he
speaks words of humiliation, (...), according to his ability, till he humble
their hearts, and they repent with perfect repentance. By which it appears,
that Elders in their Synagogues, whose place R. Moses described us, in the head
of the people, were some of the Profession of Learning, some not. These are the
Elders of the Synagogues remembered of Epiphanius, Haer. xxx. n. 11. and in
diverse Constitutions of the Emperors, mentioning all public Persons in
Synagogues. In particular we are to observe here, that some of these Elders
were wont to be deputed to make provision for the poor of the Synagogue. Which
some think are the men that are called Patres Synagogarum, in the Constitution
of Constantine the Great, L. iv. Cod. Theod. de Jud. and Coelicolis. Of these,
those words the Talmud alleged out of Horaioth, C. iii. are to be understood:
The sons of Disciples of the Wise, that are deputed Pastors of the
Synagogue. For it is for no other cause but this, that they are called (...),
or Pastors, as well at this day, as of old time. Leo Modena, the now Rabbi at
Venice, calls those Deputies that provide for the poor, in his own Language,
Memumnim, and Parnassim, in his little Italian Tract, Of the Rites and Customs
of the Ebrews, P. i. C. xiv. And in diverse places of R. Benjamins Itinerary we
read of diverse Rabbis, whom he calls Parnassim, for this cause, not because
they were Preachers to the Synagogue. Those that had that faculty, and
undertook that charge, both he and others call Darshanim. To let us understand,
that all their Rabbis preached not in the Synagogues (for Rabbis they are all
that have that style) but those alone, that had the Talent of it, as the same
Leo Modena writes of them. P. 2. C. iii. 2. For the Jews are no flinchers from
old customs. We are to observe further here, what Elders were made by
Imposition of hands. Maimoni in Sanedrin, C. iiii. (...). And how is Imposition
of hands done? Not that they stay their hands upon the head of the Elder, but
that they call him RABBI, and say to him, Behold, thou art Ordained, and have
license to judge even Finable Causes. And they give not this Imposition of
hands, which is the Ordination of Elders to be Judges, but by three. So that of
the Misna Sanedrin, C. i. n. 2. Ordination of Elders is done by three; may well
be understood of such Elders as are Ordained Judges in Finable Causes, because
the name of Elders is common to Judges and other Elders. True it is, there be
other purposes reckoned by Maimoni (in the place aforesaid) afterward, to
which they might be Ordained. But all of them concern controversies of the Law,
which their Ordination licenceth them to decide. And seeing it is said, That
Ordination is made by styling the Person Ordained, Rabbi, it seems it
belonged to none but DOCTORS. Indeed in the Itinerary aforesaid, we read,
that in his days, about the year of our Lord MCLXXIII. all the Rabbis and
Deacons of Synagogues of that great Resort, were appointed by him, whom they
called Head of the Exile, at Bagdat, and came thither to him to get Imposition
of hands, p. 73. and 74. But according to the ancient custom of that People,
those that were promoted Rabbis, by Imposition of hands, were made only in
the land of Israel, that is, in all that they possessed when they came out of
Egypt. Insomuch that unless he that Promoted, and he that was Promoted, were
both in the land of Promise, there was no Imposition of hands: If both were
within the compass of it, then might it be done by writing, if they were not
present: Maimoni in the same place. Therefore, if we believe, that all Elders
of Synagogues and Deacons, (called among them (...), in Epiphanius, (...)) were
made by Imposition of hands; then must it be said, that Maimoni, and others
according to him, speak of no Imposition of hands but that which made Rabbis,
because of the Eminence of such persons. Last of all, it is to be observed
here, that in these Colleges or Benches of Elders, whereof my speech is, that
governed great and populous Synagogues, there was also one Head, the Chief in
Learning and Authority, called in the Gospel, in the life of the Emperor
Alexander Severus, and in diverse Constitutions of the Emperors, The Ruler of
the Synagogue, or Archisynagogue. And, as it has been proved elsewhere, that
the Bishop and Presbyters of Christian Churches, are many times comprised in
the common style of Presbyters, (...), Praepositi, Antistites, Praesidents, and
the like: so it seems, that both the Archisynagogue and Elders are signified
under the same title, RULERS OF THE SYNAGOGUE, at Antiochia in Pisidia, Acts
xiii. 15. And so was Jairus, One of the Rulers of the Synagogue, Mark v. 28.

CHAP. IIII.
Presbyteries of Churches, with their Bishops, answerable to the Jews
Consistories, made with Imposition of hands. They sat in the Church as the
other in the Synagogue: That argues their Office of Governing the Church. And
the difference of them from the people. The Elders of the people in the
Africane Churches were not of this rank. What is the double Honor of
Presbyters in S. Paul. The Apostles Rule, in discerning Spiritual Graces. The
Proceeding and Extent of his Discourse. His Catalogue of Graces and
Ministeries. How diverse of them may meet in the same man. Doctors are those of
the Presbyters that preached. Helps were Deacons.

WHen the Gospel of Christ was to be published to the world, the Nation of the
Jews was now dispersed far and wide, and their Synagogues and Assemblies
settled in the most eminent places of the Roman Empire, as the Acts of the
Apostles alone is enough to inform us. Gods singular Providence having procured
their Profession, and the writings that contein it, thus to come to the
knowledge of the Gentiles, to make way for the Gospel which drew near. Now the
Apostles being themselves Jews by birth, and pretending to call those
Congregations which they converted to the Faith, whether from Jews or Gentiles,
to a Condition correspondent to that of the Jews in their banishment, that is,
as the Apostle alludeth 1. Pet. ii. 11. to live Strangers and Pilgrims from
that Jerusalem which is above, as they were from Jerusalem upon earth, it is no
marvel if the State of them which they ordained, bear a great deal of
correspondence with the Synagogue. The chief point of which correspondence
consists in those Presbyteries, upon which, as has been proved elsewhere,
they stated the Government of those Churches, which they converted to the
Faith. It is no marvel that the Apostles ordained these Presbyteries of
Churches with Imposition of hands, though it be more then I can affirm of those
Presbyteries of Synagogues. It was from the beginning a sensible sign of Gods
hand stretched out to bestow the Grace of the Holy Ghost, which was pretended
to be procured by the Benediction of him that gave it. Such Graces of the Holy
Ghost the Apostles professed to go along with the Truth which they preached to
convince all nations of it. And we see how it pleased God to make good what
they professed, by that abundance of Spiritual Graces mentioned by the
Apostle. Whereas the Jews may seem to have confined those Graces to the land of
Promise, out of their opinion of that kingdom which they promise themselves
there. In regard of this Imposition of hands, the Presbyteries of Churches may
well be compared with those Consistories of the Jews, which were so ordained,
as well for deciding matters of Judgment, as for teaching the Law, at such
time as those same Consistories, were among them, as well Schools of Learning,
as Courts of Judicature. Those Consistories, with their Presidents, whereof you
heard before out of Moses Maimoni, answering these Presbyteries, and the Heads
of them called Bishops, which came over them, as has been showed, in
succession to the Apostles. Otherwise, setting aside Imposition of hands, the
very pattern of these Presbyteries in Christian Churches, is to be seen in
those Presbyteries of great and populous Synagogues under their Rulers, or
Archisynagogues, whereof has been said. To make this correspondence further to
appear, that which has been discoursed, of the manner, in which these
Consistories or Elders sat in the School or Synagogue, shall now be declared
to have held in the Church, for the sitting of the Bishop and his Presbyters.
The words of Ignatius, Epist. ad Magnes. are hitherto ill read in our Copies,
by which means the true sense is diverted: I mean these wherein he saluteth
them, (...). With your Reverend Bishop, and the victorious spiritual Stephen
their Presbyter, and their Deacons (or Ministers) according to God. which
directs this Salutation to one Stephen a Presbyter there: But in that Old
Translation of these Epistles remembered elsewhere, these words are rendered
thus: Cum digne decentissimo Episcopo vestro, and digne complexa spirituali
Corona Presbyterii vestri, and eorum qui secundum Deum diaconorum. Whereby it
appears, that he that made that Translation read, (...) (...): that is, the
spiritual Crown of their Presbytery; because sitting in a half Round, in the
head place of the Church, they very well resembled the fashion of a Crown, and
are therefore called in the Constitutions of the Apostles, ii. 28. (...), The
Crown of the Church. There, order is taken, that the Presbyters, at the Feasts
of Love then practiced, shall receive a double share to that of the widows, in
these words, (...). As for the Presbyters, that they may take pains about the
word of Doctrine, let there be a double part set aside for them also, for the
Apostles of our Lords sake, whose place they possess, as Counselors to the
Bishop, and the Crown of the Church. We are not to conceive that it must needs
be a full Round that is called a Crown: that Constellation of stars that is
so called, wants a great deal of a Circle. I suppose, because we must allow
room to tie it behind the head, to avoid Tertullians objection, That the hinder
parts of the head swell not. If then the Bishop and Presbyters sat in that
figure of a half Round, which we saw practiced in the Jews Consistories, and
that in the head of the Congregation, it is for no other reason that they are
called the Crown of the Church. Now, this fashion of their sitting is thus
described in the same book, ii. 58. (...). Let the Bishops Chur stand in the
midst, and let the Presbytery sit on both sides of him, and the Deacons stand
by, lightened of too much apparel, for they are in the ship of the Church, like
Mariners and Rulers of sides; by their direction let the people sit on the
other side, with all quietness and good order; and let the women also sit
apart, keeping silence: then let the Reader stand on high, and read. It is
plain that he sets here the Bishops Chair in the midst of the upper end of
the Church, because he called them before the Crown of the Church, and because,
if the Deacons order the sides, then is the Bishop Master at the stern. In the
mean time, he sitting in the midst, and the Presbyters on both hands, the
Deacons must needs be conceived to stand beside them, behind the Compass of
that Round in which they sat. And thus sitting, they are said, in the
Constitutions, as you had it even now, To possess the place of our Lords
Apostles. And in Ignatius, Epist. ad Magnes. (...) (...). The Bishop sitting
highest in place of God, (that is, of Christ) and the Presbyters in place of
the Bench of Apostles. And Gregory Nazianzen setting down the dream, wherein he
saw himself sitting as he was wont to do in the Church, describes himself
sitting in the midst, and the Presbyters in Chairs on this hand and on that: to
show in what posture there they sat. This will be all still more clear if we
compare it with the posture of the Clergy at celebrating the Eucharist,
described in the same Constitutions, and in him that calls himself Dionysius
the Areopagite, Eccles. Hierarch. c. 3. (...). The Bishop stands at the midst
of the Divine Altar, and only the chief of the Deacons stand about him with
the Priests. Constit. Apost. viii. 12. more in particular; (...). Andlet the
Presbyters stand on his right hand on his left, like Scholars that stand beside
their Master; and let two Deacons on either side the Altar, hold fans of thin
skins, or Peacocks feathers, or linen, to drive away the little creatures that
fly about, that they light not in the Cups. The posture of the Presbyters on
each hand the Bishop, and of the two Deacons, at the points of the
Communion Table, describes that Round whereof we speak, in which the Bishop
and Presbyters sat with their faces to the people, ready to rise and speak to
them when time required, ready to celebrate the Eucharist in the like posture
behind the Communion Table: which therefore seems to have been the most
ancient custom of the Church, as, out of Jewel against Harding, is noted in
the last Chapter of the Holy Table, and is like to have been the Original
reason of all that is observed there, of compassing the Altar, in the Greek
Liturgies. This is that which Tertullian calls Ordinem and Consessum
Ecclesiae, Ignatius, (...), The Order, or the Bench of the Church, consiting of
the Bishop and his Presbyters, in allusion and correspondence to the
Commonalties of the Roman Empire, governed by their annual Magistrates, and a
Bench of their Counselors, called Ordo Reipublicae, The Order or the Bench of
such Commonalties. The consideration hereof is very forcible to convince common
sense of the Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, as the Heads of these
Presbyteries, granting that which men of learning cannot refuse for Historical
truth. It is found in Tertullians words, De Praescript. Haeret. C. xxxvi. Age
jam, qui voles curiositatem melius exercere in negotio Salutis tuae, percurre
Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae adhuc cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis
praesident, apud quas ipsae authenticae eorum literae recitantur, sonantes
vocem and repraesentantes faciem uniuscujusque, Thou that shall have a mind to
exercise thy curiosity better, in the business of thy salvation, go to now,
run over the Apostolic Churches, in which the very Chairs of the Apostles
govern in their places, in which their authentic writings are read, sounding
the voice and representing the visage of each. He that should have denied the
Books kept and used by those Churches to have been the Authenticks of the
Apostles, would have been thought to disadvantage the Faith. What shall we
imagine of him that denies the very Chairs, wherein the Apostles sat in the
Head of those Churches, to be possessed by their Successors as was pretended
there, from whence Tertullian argues? For when he says, that they sounded
their voice and represented their visage, does he not affirm that their
Epistles written to those Churches preached in their absence, as themselves did
out of those Chairs in presence? I have showed out of the Scriptures, that the
Apostles exercised the Government in chief, of those Churches which they had
planted Presbyteries to govern, as occasion required. The Chairs whereof
Tertullian speaks, were the seats of that Government, as well as Doctrine,
when they were there. The Apostles had diverse companions which were both their
Disciples in the Doctrine, and their Coadjutours in the work of the Gospel. Of
these S. Paul speaks, Phil. iv. 3. With Clement also, and the rest of my
workfellows. These, or some of these, which sometimes gave personal attendance
upon the Apostles, not moving in their office but at their disposing, became
afterward settled by them upon particular Churches, which they found they
could not attend so well themselves, for the government of those which were
converted, and the conversion of those which were not. Thus were Timotheus and
Titus placed over the Churches of Asia and Crete, just upon the time when he
made account to see them no more. Thus was Mark attendant on Peter at writing
his first Epistle, v. 13. who was afterward, as all agree, seated by him at
Alexandria, and did the office of an Evangelist there. Clemens and Linus,
companions of the Apostles, All Antiquity agrees, were placed by them over the
Church at Rome, though in what rank and condition, it agrees not. The words of
Theodoret are remarkable, where he answers the question, Why S. Paul writ
Epistles to Timotheus and Titus, none to Silas or the rest of his fellows:
(...) (...) And we say, says he, that he had already p^^ Churches in the hands
of these, the rest he had with him. What means the Apostles instructions
concerning the perpetual government of those Churches, if they had nothing to
do but to plant Presbyteries there, and away? S. Paul sends for Timotheus to
Rome, 2. Tim. iiii. 9. as for Titus to Nicopolis, iii. 12. who was also with
him at Rome, and went thence to Dalmatia, 2. Tim. iiii. 10. But did he mean
that his instructions should be void thenceforth, or be practiced at Ephesus,
and in Crete afterward? We cannot discredit Antiquity that makes them Bishops
there, without offering violence to the tenor of the Scriptures that inforceth
it. But how is Titus counted Bishop of a Church, that is instructed to plant
Presbyteries through the cities of Crete, i. 3. all under his own government
and oversight? or how is Timotheus Bishop of one Church of Ephesus, that is,
instructed to govern, as well as to plant all the Presbyteries whereof the
Apostle writes? for all those Presbyteries import Episcopal Churches. No
otherwise then the Apostle had his Chair in all the Churches of his planting,
according to Tertullian. The Apostles could not settle all things in the
intended form at the beginning. So far there is no fault in Epiphanius his
words. Not because they knew not what to do, but for reasons best known to
themselves; because perhaps they might find it more to the purpose, to put into
the hands of their own Disciples those Churches on which depended the planting
and government of many more, then to set men untried over the Presbyteries of
particular Churches. Is S. Mark Bishop of Alexandria the less, because he
preached the Gospel through the Country under it, because he planted the
government of Churches, perhaps under his own oversight for the time? Or what
inconvenience is it, that S. James an Apostle, should be deputed by consent of
the Apostles, to exercise that office in the parts of Palestine and Arabia,
always with resort to his residence at the Mother Church of Jerusalem? or that
he should therefore be counted Bishop of it? In due time, even during the age
of the Apostles, several Churches had their several Bishops, as appears by
the Angels of the seven Churches of Asia, which from the beginning were in the
compass of Timothies charge. At first all Presbyters were Angels of Churches,
according to the Apostle, 1. Cor. xi. For this cause ought a woman to have
power upon her head, because of the Angels: (That seems the most natural
meaning of his words, for Tertullian in diverse places of his book, De Velandis
Virginibus, intimates one reason of vailing women's faces in the Church, from
the scandal of their countenances) when Bishops came over them, no marvel if
they alone were called, the Angels of those Churches. For it is acknowledged,
that all Presbyters are called Bishops under the Apostles: But when several
Heads were set over several Churches, then Heads of Presbyteries, were only
Bishops thenceforth. Those that would have us take those Angels of Churches for
the Churches of those Angels, rather then believe, that Epistles concerning
those Churches, were fit to be addressed to their Bishops, might have corrected
their mistake out of the Scripture, that says, Revel. i. 20. The seven Stars
are the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven Candlesticks are the seven
Churches. S. Ambrose, or whosoever writ those Commentaries, upon 1. Cor. xii.
28. says two things: First, the Apostles, spoken of there, are Bishops; to
wit, in the then state of the Church: Then, having compared the Apostles with
Prophets, he concludes, Et quia ab uno Deo Patre sunt omnia, idcirco singulos
Episcopos singulis Ecclesiis praeesse decrevit: And because all things are from
one Father, God, therefore he decreed that several Bishops should be over
several Churches. In these two particulars he speaks my whole meaning: The
Apostles were Bishops, but not several ones of several Churches: But as there
is one God over all, so he decreed, says he, that afterward several Bishops
should be over several Churches. In the mean time, the rights reserved to
great Churches, over the less, which now we see derived with so much learning
from the times of the Apostles, is the print which remains of that Government
and oversight of them, which at the first rested in those great Churches, from
which they were propagated, by the Apostles, or by their companions. Walo
Messalinus stands stiff upon S. Hieromes opinion, that there were no Bishops,
till they were appointed by the Church, to extinguish the schisms of
Presbyteries. But Tertullians words enforce more, That the Bishops of his time
sat in those Chairs which the Apostles possessed for theirs. And before, C.
xxxii. Sicut Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia Polycarpum ab Joanne CONLOCATUM refert. As
the Church at Smyrna relates that John PLACED Polycarpus, or Installed him; to
wit, in the Bishops Chair there. He thinks that all this imports, that
Polycarpus took place of the rest of the Presbyters, and no more. But
indifferent reason will require him, to grant no more superiority of Bishops,
then the Chair of the Apostles imports. However S. Hierome reconcile his
opinion, with his own words, concerning the Presbyters of Alexandria, that from
S. Marks time were wont to take one of their number, and place him on a higher
step, and call him Bishop of Alexandria: common sense will enforce, the high
rank in which he sat, to import the superiority and eminence of his office,
even during the Apostles time. The consideration of this Order, or this Bench
of the Church, shall give me further occasion to resume and aver two
particulars of good consequence in this business. The first, the Extent of the
Office common to the Bishop and Presbyters; as for preaching and celebrating
the Sacraments, so for the oversight and government of the Church, in those
Spiritual matters, wherein, as members of the Church, men communicate,
expressed in all places of the Scripture wherein there is any remembrance of
their Charge. Survaying those passages of the Acts, and Epistles of the
Apostles, in which the office of Presbyters is remembered, we find it every
where described, as well by the oversight, or government, or care, or
whatsoever you please to call it, of the Church in Spiritual matters, as by
the charge of Teaching the people. Both parts ascribed to them that bear the
rank and style of Presbyters. Acts xx. 29. 1. Pet. v. 2. 1. Tim. iiii. 2, 5.
Titus i. 7, 9. 1 Thessalonians. v. 22. True it is, that the Church is of it self a
mere Spiritual Commonwealth, not endued with any temporal power to enforce,
by way of constraint, the effect of those Ministeries which they stand trusted
with. Before the Temporal powers of the world were converted to the Faith,
they came to effect by the voluntary consent of Christians: The same good will,
that moved them to become such, was enough to prevail with them to yield effect
to those Ministeries, which God had provided, for the maintenance and
propagation of it. It seems that the Ground of the present Separation is
derived from hence, That hereupon Ordinations and Censures are to pass by
voices of the Congregation according to the Scriptures. And true it is, that in
the primitive Church, according to the practice of the Apostles times, these
matters passed at their religious Assemblies, under the sight and conscience,
as S. Cyprian speaks, that is, under the notice of the people. Ordinations
were allowed by them, as not having to except against the persons: reproofs and
censures were their reproofs and censures; for they reproved, and cast out
those whom the Ecclesiastical Order sentenced to it. 2. Cor. ii. 6. Sufficient
to such an one is the rebuke by the MANY. The Congregation must needs rebuke
him, whom they put from their body to give effect to the Apostles sentence, 1.
Cor. v. 4. To show us the meaning and extent of his words there, verse. 12. For
what have I to do to judge those that are without? do not YE judge those that
are within? The Apostle censureth, and the people censureth. The difference of
their right and charge is in the third verse expressed, in the case I newly
have judged or determined already, that he be delivered to Satan at one of your
Assemblies, that is, solemnly put from the body of Christians. In regard of the
faction then on foot among the Presbyters, as has been showed else where, it
appears, that the person in fault was born out by a side of the people;
especially, if we believe S. Chrysostom that he was one of the Pastors. The
Apostles were so charitable to expect the peoples consent in Ordinations and
Censures, that they meant not to betray their own right with Gods cause. Judge
whether he proceeds upon voices, that inchargeth them to execure his
sentence, and yet he says, I condemn and you candemne. But how shall the
government of the Church in general belong to the Ecclesiastical Order, if
the particulars of it be in the hands of the people? 1. Pet. v. 2. Feed the
stock of God, OVERSEEING, not upon constraint, but willingly; not as lording it
over the heritage, but as ensamples to the flock. 1 Thessalonians. v. 12. Know them
which labor among you, and ARE OVER you in the Lord. Titus i. 7. A Bishop must
be blameless, as the STEWARD of God: endued with those qualities that follow,
not concerning preaching, but government. The like, 1. Tim. iii. 2, 3, 4, and
verse. 5. If a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he TAKE CARE of
the Church of God? Romans xii. 8. He that RULES with diligence. Hebr. xiii. 17.
OBEY THEM THAT HAVE THE RULE OVER you, OR GUIDE you. Is all this obedience no
more then to give them the hearing when they preach? Who shall be left to yield
obedience, according to this general charge, if the particulars of it,
Ordinations, and Censures belong as well to the people? Of the right of the
Ecclesiastical Order in these particulars, enough has been said. And the
Primitive practice of them in the Church is enough to interpret the meaning of
those Scriptures, to the common sense of men that will use it. Tertullian,
Apologet. C. xxxix. speaking of their Assemblies, Ibidem etiam exhortationes,
castigationes, and censura divina. Praesident probati quique Seniores. He
tells us, that exhortations, reproofs, and spiritual censures passed at
their Assemblies; but under the presidence of their Presbyters. Firm. Epist:
Ixxv. Cypr Omnis potest as and gratia in Ecclesia constituta est. In qua
praesident Majores natu, qui and baptizandt, and manum imponendi, and Ordinandi
habent potestatem. All power and favor is seated in the Church. In which the
Presbyters are Presidents, which have power both to baptize, to impose hands
(in Penance) and to ordain. All my meaning is contained in these words. Some of
S. Cyprians Presbyters made a side of the people, to admit the lapsed to
communicate without Penance, upon petition of the imprisoned toward martydome.
S. Cyprian neither neglects the danger of Schism, nor sits down to tell
voices, which, if that were the right, in conscience must carry it; but casts
about, with authority, to reduce the people and their leaders to acknowledge
themselves. He complains that the people was debauched by some of his
Clergy, that ought to have kept them in discipline, and instructed them to
desire no man's reconcilement before Penance. Lib. iii. Ep. 14, 16. He writes
to those of the Clergy that they shall give account of what they did to him
and the Clergy, to the Confessors and to the people. Ep. 14. To the people he
writes, to advise and rule those that were so irregular in their demands. Ep.
16. But he resolves, as a cause that concerned the rest of the Church, not to
proceed without advice of his fellow Bishops: Praesente and stantium plebe,
quibus and ipsis pro timore and fide suo honor habendus est. Ep. 18. In
presence of those of the people that fell not, to whom respect was to be had,
for the faith and fear they had shown. He yields respect unto his people to
encourage their obedience: But in whom the keys of the Church rested, he
shows, Ep. 16. Cum in minoribus delictis, quae non in Deum committuntur,
poenitentia agatur justo tempore, and exomologesis fiat inspecta vita ejus qui
agit poenitentiam, nec ad communicationem venire quis possit nisi prius illi ab
Episcopo and Clero manus fuerit imposita. Seeing inlesse faults, that are not
done against God, men do penance their due time, and come to Confession upon
consideration of the life of him that does penance, and no man can come to
communicate, unless first hands be laid on him by the Bishop and Clergy. Show
me any share of the people, in determining the measure of Penance, or in
releasing the persons, and let it be believed that the keys of Gods house
belong to the people. And this is their interesse in the Government of the
Church. For they that give them right of deciding Controversies, because they
are mentioned in the Council at Jerusalem, Acts xv. 12, 22, 23. may please to
consider S. Cyprians Order, which allows their presence for their
satisfaction, not their voices to decide. As they are present at Councels, but
not called to give sentence. But since Kingdoms and Commonwealths are become
Christian, the Laws of those Kingdoms and Commonwealths, as they enforce the
Ministers of the Church to execute their office, according to such Rules as
they enforce, so they constrain the people to yield outward effect to the same.
The good order and peace of the Church cannot be preserved otherwise. All this
while the Office of Ministers continues the same. No part of it accrueth to
the Secular powers. By becoming Christians they purchase themselves no more
right, then the Charge of maintaining the Ministers of the Church, in doing
their Office, contains. Only, as all Christians have the judgment of
particular discretion to discharge unto God, even in matters of Religion, the
account of what themselves do: so is this judgment of particular discretion,
by public persons, but most by the Sovereigne, of right employed in all that,
in which they lend or refuse their assistance to the Ministers of the Church in
their Office, always under the account due to God and to the Sovereigne. What
is then the meaning of that which we read in these days, That all
Jurisdiction of the Church, exercised by the Ministers of it, even that of
Excommunicating (call it Jurisdiction for the present, though the term be
proper where there is power to constrain) is inherent and derived in and from
the Commonwealth, that is, in our particular from the Crown of this Kingdom?
From whence it will follow by just and due consequence, that the Office charged
upon the Ministers of the Church by the Scriptures, cannot be executed by them
of right, so long as Kingdoms and Commonwealths are enemies of the Faith. So
that whatsoever the Church did under the Empire, before it was converted to the
Faith, was an attempt upon the Laws of it: And the Church must of necessity
die, and come to nothing, for want of right to execute and propagate the
Ministeries which it stands incharged with by the Scripture. The Canonists
have done well to distinguish between Order and Jurisdiction in the Ministeries
of the Church, provided that the ground be right understood, upon which these
terms are distinguishable according to the Scriptures. That will point the
effect of it to a far other purpose: but we must not be beholden to the
Canonists for it, being indeed this. Because he that receives the Order of
Presbyter in the Church, for example, is not, of necessity, by the same Act
deputed to the exercise of all that his Order imports, and inableth to
exercise, without receiving the Order anew; I say, by the Scriptures, he is not
confined, when he receives the Order, when, where, how, what part of those
things he shall exercise, which the Order inableth to do. True it is, when the
Canon that prohibited Ordinations without Title of Office was in force, to the
true purpose of it, by receiving the Order, a man was deputed to the Service of
the Church, in which he received it, as a Bishop is now when first he is
ordained. And the nearer the Course of Law comes to this Canon, the better I
conceive it is, in that regard. But as this deputation was alterable, so was
the execution of it of necessity limitable, in them that received it. What Law
of God, what Command of Scripture, what Rule or Practice of the whole Church is
there, to hinder him that is deputed to one Service, to undertake another, for
the good of the Church? Or to enable all that have received the Order of
Presbyter, for example, indifferently to exercise the power of the Keys, and of
Ordaining, so far as it belongs to that Order of right? much less to
exercise it according to their own sense, and not according to Rules prescribed
by the Church. Therefore, when the Order is given, if you please to call the
right of exercising that which it imports, in such time, and place, and sort,
as he that receives it is, or may be deputed to do, without receiving the
Order anew, the power of Jurisdiction: this power of Jurisdiction may be given
or limited by other acts besides, though habitually, and afar off it be
contained in the Order of Presbyters, and exercised without receiving the Order
anew, so soon as a man is deputed to the exercise of it. If further the
question be made, From whom this power of Jurisdiction, that is, the right of
exercising that which the Order thus inableth to do, is derived, and in whom
the power of Jurisdiction, that is, the right of giving this right resideth,
which the Canonists derive from the Pope upon the whole Church: The answer is
plain, that it must rest in them and be derived from them, upon whom the
Government of particular Churches, and that which falls under them, is
estated according to the Scriptures: In as much as no Law of God inforceth the
rest of Churches to be Governed by one, further then the Law of Charity
inforceth all to concur to the unity of the whole. In the outward
Jurisdiction of the Church in charitable causes, settled here upon Bishoprics,
the matter is somewhat otherwise, in as much as it is not so settled by
express provision of Scripture. And yet not so strange from the Scripture, and
that which is provided there, but that it may seem originally to have been
derived from thence. 1. Cor. vi. The Apostle reproving them for impleading one
another in the Courts of unbelievers shows, that the Church was disparaged in
that course, as if it had none fit to decide their controversies: whereas it
had been better to refer their causes to the meanest of the Church, then to
sue before Infidels. That is the meaning of his words there, verse. 4. If ye
have causes concerning matters of this life, set them to judge who are least
esteemed in the Church: Not spoken by way of precept, commanding them to let
the simplest of the brethren judge their causes (that were a strange course,
where there were abler men to do it) but by way of Concession, that it were
better so to do then as they did do. For the practice of the Church argues,
that the Custom grew, upon this Order of the Apostle, to refer their causes
to the chief of the Church as the Church, that is, to the Bishop and
Presbyters. In the Constitutions of the Apostles, ii. 47. (...). Let your
Consistories be upon the Mundayes, that if there arise opposition to your
sentence, having leisure till the Sabbath, you may set the opposition straight,
and make them friends that are at variance among themselves against the Lords
day. And the Deacons also an^ Presbyters be present at the Consistory, judging
without respect of persons, as men of God. c. 45. before, (...). But suffer not
the Magistrates of the world to give sentence on ours. Not withdrawing
obedience (he should be much mis^aken that should so understand it) but taking
up controversies within the Church, after ^his course. And all to this purpose,
that on ^he Lords day they might communicate, that they might give and receive
the kiss of peace, that when the Deacon pronounced, (...), Let no man ^ave a
quarrel, or suspicion against any, they might nevertheless draw near. Such
was ^he beginning of the external Jurisdiction of ^he Church, by which it may
be judged, whether it were first bestowed by the indulgence of Christian
Princes, or by them con^inued, upon the practice of the Church, before the
Empire was Christian. But of this we speak not here, as not concerning the
Government of the Church in Spiritual ^atters, wherein, as members of the
Church, we communicate. That stands indeed, and ^ometh to effect, by the free
consent of members of it, so far as Religion is not the Law of that Kingdom
or Commonwealth ^ which it flourishes. Because our Lord ^^dued not the
Ministers of his Kingdom with that power to constrain obedience, which himself
used not upon earth. But as ^he Laws of Kingdoms and Common-^ealths enforce
the Execution and outward ^ffect of Ministeries instituted in the Scri^tures;
in this respect, not the power of excommunicating alone, but of preaching, and
ministering the Sacraments, and whatsoeve^ else belongs to the Office, is
derived from the Commonwealth, that is in our particular, from the Imperial
Crown of this Kingdom, because it is exercised with effec^ outwardly (that is,
of doing the work* though not of producing the inward end and purpose of
converting the soul) by Laws enforced by it. The like is to be said of all tha^
is done in deputing those that receive any Order in the Church, to the exercise
of any part of that function which the Order received imports. The right and
charge o^ it, must rest upon those Ministeries, that an^ incharged with the
oversight and government of such matters, according to the Scriptures, and by
whom it must be exercised were the Commonwealth not Christian^* But the power
that inforceth the effect o^ that which they do in this, and all parts o^ their
Office, is derived from the Secular Arm of the Commonwealth, that cherishes
the Church in the bosom of it. As for Excommunication by Judges Delegate, or
High-Commissioners, that is, by men not of these Orders; First, it proceeds
upon Rules directed by the Church, and then the course o^ it is not so
agreeable to the tenor of Scripture, as to the necessities of the Kingdom For
that is here to be averred again, that the Presbyteries whereof we speak are
differenced from the rest of the people, as Benches composed of none but
persons Ordained by Imposition of hands, for the purpose of Teaching the
people, and Ordering and Governing Spiritual matters. So you have the Office
described in all places where there is remembrance of it in the Scriptures.
Only in the words of the Apostle, 1. Tim. v. 17. Let the Elders that rule well
be counted worthy of double honor: especially those that labor in the Word
and Doctrine, it is imagined that two kinds of Presbyters, as well as two parts
of their Office, are expressed, one of Ministers of the Church, another of the
people; one perpetual, the other ambulatory for their time, both alike
interessed in the Government of the Church, the Office of Preaching charged
upon the one. How little of this is set down in the words of the Apostle, were
the sense of them that which is pretended, let all the world judge: yet this is
the state of that discipline, which has been pressed, as one of the essential
marks of avisible Church. But the purpose is now to satisfy that which has
been alleged from the collections of Justellus upon the Africane Canons, to
make good this pretended meaning of the Apostle, and that from the Apostles own
words. He has there produced, out of Church-writers of the age of S. Augustine
and Optatus, or underneath, much remembrance of certain Persons, styled in
those Writers, Seniores Ecclesiarum, Elders of Churches. As in S. Augustine,
cont. Cresc. iii. 56. Clerici and Seniores Cirthensium. Epist. 136. Peregrinus
Presbyter, and Seniores Ecclesiae Musticanae regionis. in Ep. Conc.
Cabarsussitani apud S. Aug. in Psalm. 36. Seniores Ecclesiae Carthaginensis. and
to these persons are ascribed certain Acts, retaining at least to the
Government of those Churches. As, The Church goods are deposited in their
hands, Optatus, lib. i. They reprove a drunkard, August. Sermon. xix. De verbis
Domini. They are present at an Ecclesiastical Judgment, Greg. l. xi. Ep. 19.
The Elders of the Church at Carthage, solicit the sentencing of their Bishops
cause, Epist. Council. Cabarsussitani apud August. in Psalm. 36. these and more
particulars produced by Justellus. Out of Origin iiii. cont. Celsum, that the
Church had certain of the people to inform them of scandalous offenses,
whereupon they might proceed to reproof or censure. But observe first the style
of the Apostle, (...). 1. Tim. 5. 17. and Heb. xiii. 17. (...), agreeing with
that of Tertullian, Apolog. cap. 39. PRAESIDENT probati quique Seniores; and of
Firmilianus, Ep. lxxv. Cypr. In qua PRAESIDENT majores natu; and Ignatius
before, (...). All expressing the first rank of the Church, in which, after the
Bishop, they put the Presbyters. Compare herewith the rank in which we see
these Elders of the people in the time of Optatus and S. Augustine placed in
these writings from whence the remembrance of them is alleged. In Actis
Purgat. Caecil. and Felicis. Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, Seniores. August.
iii. cont. Cresc. 56. Clerici and Seniores Cirthensium, and then let common
sense judge, whether these, that stand in rank and style behind all degrees of
the Clergy, be the men that the Apostle places in the head of the Church, as
Rulers of it: or how those that governed the Church can come behind Deacons,
and inferior Ranks whom they governed. The truth is, in that age, when the
Latin tongue began to decay and corrupt, they are called Seniores, in the
Authors alleged by Justellus, in the same sense, as now in the Vulgar
Languages, into which the Latin is changed, Signori, or Scigneurs. And
therefore there is remembrance of Seniores locorum, and Seniores regni
Childeberti, out of Gregory of Tours, as well as Seniores Ecclesiae: signifying
the Aldermen of Commonalties, and Lords of the Kingdom, as well as the Chief
persons of such or such a people, that acknowledged the Christian Faith, at
such time as all were not Christians, but Churches and Commonalties in which
they subsisted, made bodies distinct in persons as well as in nights. In that
regard it seems they are called sometimes Viri Ecclesiastici, Ecclesiastical
persons, that is belonging to the Church, because there were others of like
rank, which, being Heathen, belonged not to it, rather then for any settled
charge, in these Offices, which we find them executing in behalf of the Church:
which nevertheless import not the Government of the Church, settled upon the
Bishop and Presbyters, but that Assistance, which the best of the people, in
Commonalties where the Church was planted, vouchsafed to afford the Government,
managed by the Ministers according to Scripture; and have well been understood,
as a good and ancient President of the Office of Churchwardens among us. There
is yet another peremptory exception against this pretended meaning of the
Apostle, published of late in the observation of Sculletus, which shall here be
repeated to aver the truth of it. For when he says, Let the Elders that rule
well be accounted worthy of double honor; the meaning is, for certain, of
double maintenance, which must be in respect of single maintenance allowed
somewhere else. Now let any man judge without prejudice, whether these Elders
of Congregations, remembered in S. Augustines time, being none of the Clergy,
received maintenance from the Church, out of the oblations of the people, or
not. Whereas the Apostle in the beginning of the Chapter having said, Honor
widows that are widows indeed, that is, allow them maintenance from the means
of the Church, which the Bishop always dispensed; when he comes to speak of
Elders unreproveable in their charge, fitly orders, that their maintenance be
double to that of widows, which is also the Italian gloss of Diodati. The like
practice we find in the Constitutions of the Apostles, where he orders the
course of dividing portions, at the Agapae or Feasts of Love then used,
abrogated afterward by the xxvii. Canon of Laodicea. The words are in the
place alleged before, ii. 28. (...), But whatsoever is given to the old women
(that is, to the widows of whom the Apostle speaks there) let twice so much
be given to the Deacons, in honor of Jesus Christ. Then follow the words
alleged before, wherein it is ordered that the Presbyters have as much as the
Deacons. I know that in another case, that is, in dividing the remains of
oblations for the Eucharist, the proportion is otherwise, according to the same
Constitutions, viii. 31. (...) (...). Let the Deacons distribute the remains of
the blessings at the mysteries, according to the mind of the Bishop or
Presbyters to the Clergy: To the Bishop four parts; to a Presbyter three; to
a Deacon two; to the rest, Subdeacons, Readers, Singers, or Deaconesses one
part. Nevertheless from the particular remembered before, we may well conclude
the meaning of the Apostle, that his Order is, the maintenance of Presbyters to
be double that of widows. And upon these considerations it shall not trouble me
to repeat what I have affirmed elsewhere, That for this mistake of Lay Elders
there is neither appearance in Scripture, nor in Ecclesiastical writers. For
of the Text, 1. Cor. xii. 28. I shall speak afterward. Walo Messalinus
deriveth the pedigree of these Africane Elders, by conjecture, from those of
the Apostle, whose employment consisted in governing the Church, rather then in
teaching the people. But out of his excellent learning he acknowledges, that
though they are called Ecclesiastical persons, yet they were not of the
Ecclesiastical Order, not of the Bench of the Church, which those of the
Apostle did constitute. And therefore the pretense of their pedigree avails
not to make them inherit the charge which those of our time have been invested
with, as much without president of the Churches of Africa, as without warrant
from the Scriptures. The ground of the mistake was, because men would not
believe, that in the time of the Apostles, and among the Presbyters of their
ordaining, there was none that did not preach from time to time. Whereas the
state and condition of their Congregations required as well men's wisdom and
goodness, in the oversight of those spiritual matters, wherein the members of
them did communicate, as their learning and eloquence in speaking, which was
not always to be expected from such qualities of men as were promoted to that
charge. Of our Lords kindred that confessed him before Domitian, promoted
therefore afterward to the Government of Churches, I have made mention
elsewhere. Tertull. de Idol. c. 7. Parum sit si ab aliis manibus accipiant quod
contaminant, sed etiam ipsi tradunt aliis quod contaminaverunt. Adleguntur in
Ordinem Ecclesiasticum artifices Idolorum. Be it a small thing, if they receive
of others that which they pollute, nay themselves deliver also to others that
which they have polluted. Men whose craft is to make Idols are chosen to the
Bench of the Church. If Presbyters, that delivered the Eucharist, were
sometimes Painters and Carvers in those days, well may we imagine that all of
them preached not always: It was enough that the Bishop or some of them did
it. If this were the condition of the Ecclesiastical Order in that time, then
must of necessity the Office of Teaching in the Church belong rather to the
particular gifts and abilites of some, then to the general and perpetual
charge of all Presbyters. And this I still suppose to be part of the cause,
that it pleased God in the time of the Apostles, to distribute such varieties
of spiritual Graces among those that believed, that there might be every where
such as might furnish this Office of preaching and teaching in their
Assemblies, by the help of extraordinary Graces, which upon the ordinary means
of men's Learning and Studies, which now the Church is so well provided with,
would then have proved defective. The use of these Graces is that which the
Apostle debateth at large, 1. Cor. xii. xiiii. and the exposition of his
meaning there, is the business which henceforth I charge my self with. The
issue whereof will enable us to discern by what sorts of Persons and Graces the
public Service of God was Ministered at those Assemblies, which his purpose in
that Discourse is to regulate. This Discourse the Apostle opens in the
beginning of the xii. Chapter, with a mark to discern such as spoke indeed by
the Spirit of God, from such as pretended it, but were moved in truth by
unclean Spirits. For that I take to be the meaning of his words there, verse. 3.
Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God,
calls Jesus accursed, or Anathema: and that no man can say, that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. The words of S. Chrysostom upon this place:
(...). That is, Therefore at the first beginning he puts down the difference
between Divining and Prophesying, for which purpose they received the Gift of
discerning spirits, (as it follows verse. 10. afterward) that they might
distinguish, and know, who spoke by a clean spirit, and who by an unclean. And
again, (...). For the devil being naught, shuffled in among those that
prophesyed, foisting in False-prophets, forsooth such as themselves also
foretold things to come. So that in his judgment, the words of the Apostle are
not general, to affirm that no man could call Jesus LORD but by the Holy
Ghost, but relate to the particular whereof he speaks; to tell us, that such
as pretended to speak by the Holy Ghost, if they glorified our Lord Christ,
then were they what they pretended to be, otherwise not. As who should say,
That it was not in them to persist in their counterfeiting, when it was
required of them to confess Christ. For we know that in the Primitive times,
at the naming of JESUS, unclean spirits forsook the possessed. And thus S.
Chrysostom answers, That she which had the unclean spirit, Acts xvi. 16.
confessed Christ indeed, but unwillingly, and so, as she was discovered by it.
For being a thing evident, that men did and might counterfeit themselves
Christians, and call Jesus LORD, with a tongue rather moved by the evil spirit,
it seems an inconvenience to grant, that all men, in confessing Christ, speak
by the Holy Ghost, in regard of the truth which they confess. But it is
reasonable to conceive, that God suffered not those that pretended to
spiritual Graces (of whom the Apostle propounds there to speak in
particular) being moved indeed by the evil spirit. This sense I embrace,
because the same mark is laid down so plainly by another Apostle, to the same
purpose, 1. John iiii. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits, whether they are of God, because many false-prophets are gone out into
the world: Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; every spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. And every spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God. Spirits, the Apostle
here calls Inspirations, as in S. Paul, 1. Cor. xii. 10. discerning of
SPIRITS, that is, Inspirations: And, 1 Cor. xiv. 12. because ye are zealous of
SPIRITS, that is, of spiritual Graces. And the difference between his mark to
try them by and S. Paul's, is but this: according to the one, He that
acknowledges Jesus the Messiah to be come in the flesh; according to the
other, He that acknowledges Jesus that is come in the flesh, to be the Lord,
he it is that speaks by the Holy Ghost. The same is the meaning of the
Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. v. 19, 20. according to the same S. Chrysostom: where
having said, Quench not the Spirit, despise not Prophesying, he adds
immediately, Try all things, hold fast that which is good: instructing them in
the particular in hand, to examine all that pretended to these spiritual
Graces, by the Gift of discerning spirits, which God then allowed the Church
for that purpose; and to make use of such as proved that which they professed.
The Proposition of this Discourse of the Apostle then, concerns those Graces
of the Holy Ghost that consisted in speaking, whereof therefore there might be
use in public Assemblies, which his purpose is to order by such Rules as we
shall see him propound in the end of the fourteenth Chapter of this Epistle.
But this to do, he fetches a compass about, and lancheth into a general
discourse of all manner of Graces, all manner of Ministeries, all manner of
works that have relation to the public body of the Church; to show, that all
were given and intended, not for the eminence of those persons on whom they
were bestowed, but for the public benefit. This is the point to which he
proceeds, verse. 4. Now, there are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit;
and there are differences of Administrations, but the same Lord. And there are
diversities of Operations, but it is the same God that works all in all. But
the Administration of the Spirit is given every man to profit withal. It
concerns not the purpose of my discourse here, to be nice in inquiring the
difference between Graces, and Ministeries, and Operations, remembered here by
the Apostle. It is enough to observe, that the name of MINISTERIES is sometimes
particular for those that are called Deacons, from the Original word (...),
because they ministered to the Apostles, to the Bishop, and Presbyters, for
discharge of their Office: sometimes general, for all kind of Service, in
regard of him to whom it addresseth. For as concerning the force of the word,
as the Apostle says here, There are differences of Ministeries, but the same
Lord; so generally that which is done in service to any person, that person is
the Lord, and those services in his regard are Ministeries. Indeed, the
Apostle, when he says in the next words, The manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man to profit withal, manifestly proceeds to speak of none
but miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, demonstrating the presence thereof in
the Church. Though the word (...) is general in its own nature, signifying all
manner of Gifts proceeding from Favor and Grace, as it is translated in the
Syriack, (...), signifying Gifts: Whereas (...), Operations, seems
particularly to relate to such Graces as tended to miraculous works, and is
therefore rendered in the Syriack (...), signifying Powerful Operations. Thus
it is true which S. Chrysostom writes upon this Chapter, in the beginning:
Because those that were converted from Idols knew not the Old Testament, and
the Holy Ghost is invisible, God gave in these Graces a sensible evidence of
the operation of it: (...). And this, says he, manifested to those that were
without the Church, that the Holy Ghost is in him that speaks. Therefore so
he calls it, saying, BUT TO EVERY ONE IS GIVEN THE MANIFESTATION OF THE
SPIRIT TO PROFIT WITH: calling Gifts, the manifestation of the Spirit. And
Oecumenius according to him, Though this be true, yet the Process of the
Apostles discourse, from verse. 12. intends not only to comprise miraculous
Graces, but all Ministeries ordained for the public Service of the Church,
whether depending on miraculous Graces or not: as appears both by the reason
whereupon he proceeds, and by the catalogue, wherein, from verse. 8. he
recapitulateth and reckons the particulars of all that can be reduced under
those heads of Graces, of Ministeries, of Operations. For the reason wherewith
the Apostle pursues this point proposed, that all these are intended, not to
make the persons eminent in whom they are, but for public benefit, is the
comparison of a natural body and the members of it, whereof there is none that
envieth or despises another: to teach private persons not to grudge at them
upon whom public Graces or Places are bestowed; and them not to despise
private persons. This comparison the Apostle sets on foot also in his
Epistle to the Romans, but slighteth it over more in brief there, because (as
S. Chrysostom thinks) it seems, the abuse against which he writes, as it
was also there, so was it more rife among the Corinthians. This reason, it is
plain, concerns those that have public Ministeries no less then those that
have miraculous Graces; both being for the common benefit of the body, which is
the Church. But the Apostle having enlarged this comparison to the full in this
place, to show to whom he speaks as members of public places, proceeds
verse. 28. to particularize all to whom his Exhortation belongs, Apostles,
Prophets, and the rest; among whom he reckons (...), that is, Helps, and
Governments; which our English rendereth Helps in Governments: which whether
they mean miraculous Graces, such as the Apostle calls The Manifestation of
the Spirit, or Ministeries of public Service in the Church, I refer to
further consideration afterward. In the mean time observing, that the Apostle,
writing to the Romans for the same purpose, has reckoned more particulars of
the same nature not necessarily proceeding from miraculous Graces, though his
discourse there, xii. 6. compriseth those also, when he says, Having several
Gifts according to the Grace that is given to us. For the present, we may see
what this whole discourse of the Apostle aymeth at, by the conclusion of the
Chapter, where he says, Covet earnestly the best Gifts: and yet show I unto
you a more excellent way. For this Exhortation it is that tyeth all that has
passed with that which follows. The Syriack reads it thus, If ye be zealous
of the best Graces, I will yet show you a more excellent way. Theodoret and
Oecumenius make a question of it, thus; Are ye zealous of the most eminent
Graces? I will yet show you a way beyond them all. But whether the meaning be
to exhort them to pursue the most useful Graces, or to suppose that they did
it, thus much for certain his intent is, to give the ground and reason why all
members of public Service in the Church are not to seek the eminence of their
persons, but the common benefit: because there is a thing called The common
Charity of Christians, more available toward the esteem of all men's persons,
be they never so private in the Church with God, then all those Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, that appear so mavelous to common sense. This is the occasion of
that comparison which follows throughout the thirteenth Chapter, between the
common Charity of Christians, and their particular miraculous Graces: which
being dispatched there, in good time does the Apostle proceed to resume that
which he had proposed before, and upon this occasion intermitted, concerning
zeal and study for the most excellent Graces, which he tyeth up with that
Charity which hitherto he has preferred to them all in that proposition which
he opens the fourteenth Chapter with, Follow after Charity and desire
spiritual Gifts, but rather that ye may Prophecy. For when he prefers
Prophesying before other spiritual Gifts, it is plain enough what he meant
when he said before, Be zealous of the best Graces: a thing in which there can
be no doubt, because it is the subject of what is behind in this Discourse. Now
let me lay down the words of the Apostle wherein he reckons in particular the
Graces and Ministeries of the Church. 1. Cor. xii. 28. And God has set some in
the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that
Miracles, then gifts of Healing, Helps in Governments, diversities of Tongues,
whereunto we may add out of verse. 29. Interpreting of Tongues. And herewith
compare the Catalogue of the same, which he compriseth under the name of Gifts
and Graces, Romans xii. 6, 7, 8. Having then gifis differing according to the
grace that is given to us; whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy according to the
proportion of faith: Or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering: Or he that
Teaches, on Teaching: Or he that Exhorts, on Exhortation: He that Gives,
let him do it with simplicity: He that Rules, with diligence: He that shows
Mercy, with cheerfulness. That which follows, concerns the particular
virtues of Christians, and the works of them, as Love, Hope, Patience, and the
like: such as are also those that went before, of giving and showing mercy,
which the Apostle has ranked among those Graces which tend to the general
good of the Church, it seems, because they also respect the benefit of
others. Last of all, add unto these the Ministeries which the Grace of Christ,
upon his Asscension, poured out upon the Church, appoints; according to the
same Apostle, Ephesians. iiii. 11, 12. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ. By which words, as well as by the particulars which he
puts down, and which he leaves out, of those which he reckons in the
other places, it appears that he intended (according to the purpose of his
speech there) to comprise none but those Graces and Ministeries which tend to
the edification of the whole Church in matter of doctrine. But writing to the
Corinthians, his intent was to set down all manner of Graces and Ministeries
tending to the common benefit of the whole Church either in spiritual or
corporal necessities, in working miracles, and the like: none whereof he
mentions to the Romans, neither the Graces of Apostles and Evangelists, it
seems, because they are Graces and Offices not confined to one Church in
particular. These Catalogues are here compared for the ease and direction of
them that desire to judge of such particulars as seem not yet out of doubt in
the Ministeries appointed by the Apostles. To which purpose we must resume what
has been elsewhere observed, That nothing hinders diverse of the Graces
specified to meet in the same person. For though we suppose, as the Apostle
seems to suppose, all Ministeries to be accompanied with the Graces which the
discharge of them requires: as the Elders of Israel, Number. xi. 25. received
part of Moses his spirit; and though all Graces infer Ministeries, as he that
is endued with any of the Graces specified to the Corinthians, ministers the
effect of his grace to the benefit of others; yet there is a difference between
Ministeries of public office in the Church, whether to cease or continue, and
Graces which enable either a public person to a public, or private persons to
a particular work, as that of Miracles. Several Ministeries of public place
in the Church, must belong to several persons; but public persons are capable
as well of the Graces which private persons have, as of those that belong to
their public charge, including perhaps the Graces of inferior Ministeries.
And the instance of the first in the Catalogue shall put this out of doubt,
that is of Apostles. For nothing hinders an Apostle to be a Prophet, to speak
strange languages, to work miracles, or the like. The Commentaries under S.
Ambrose his name, Quamvis sint and Apostoli Prophetae, quia primus gradus
reliquos subjectos habet. Though, says he, Apostles also are Prophets, because
the chief degree has the rest subject to it. His meaning is, the Grace of
Apostles contains the Graces of inferior Ministers, as their ministeries are
subject to that of the Apostles. Evangelists were no Apostles but their
ministers in using their Graces to second the Apostles, therefore the Grace of
Apostles contains that of Evangelists. Prophets were no Apostles to preach
the Faith and plant Churches, but for the instruction of Churches planted in
the knowledge of the Scriptures; but the Grace of a Prophet to all purposes
might be in an Apostle. Doctors were no Apostles, but Apostles chief of
Doctors. Elders of Churches could not be Apostles, they were from the
beginning ordained for the service of several Churches, but the Apostles make
themselves their fellow Elders in regard to the Government of all Churches of
their charge. If Presbyters, much more Bishops, (which as Heads of Presbyters)
were that in one Church which the Apostles were in all of their own planting
and charge. Those companions of the Apostles where of you have heard, are some
of them called in express terms Evangelists, and the Office may well be
thought to belong to the rest. Titus, Clemens, Linus, Erastus, and others, may
upon good presumption be called Evangelists; as those are to whom their
condition is so answerable, Mark, Luke, Timothy, that are so called in
Scripture, or so reputed in Ecclesiastical Writers. My conjecture was, that
they were sent by their several Churches, as Timothy from that of Lystra, Acts
xvi. 3. as Deacons to minister unto the Apostles, Heads of those Churches for
the time that they continued in their attendance; and by them employed to
preach the Gospel at their appointment in such places where themselves could
not, in regard of the Grace given them to do it. As Philip, Deacon to the
Apostles first, and afterward to S. James, was also an Evangelist to preach
the Gospel to Samaria, Acts viii. 5. xxi. 8. And I see no cause to repent of
this conjecture, reading thus, Acts xix. 22. So he sent before two of those
that MINISTERED unto him, Timotheus and Erastus. It is the word from whence
Deacons have their name. But when they received the charge of Churches, though
Bishops of those Churches, yet ceased they not to be Evangelists, for the
charge of propagating the Gospel through the Countries seated underneath the
Cities of those Churches. Thus was Mark at Alexandria, Timothy at Ephesus,
Titus at Gortyna in Crete: the rest are to be seen in Walo Messalinus, p.
cxcii. He supposes that these companions of the Apostles are themselves also
called Apostles of a second rank, as sent by the Apostles to preach the Gospel
at their disposing, as the Apostles were by Christ to preach the Gospel every
where without restraint. And there is appearance of this sense, 2. Pet. iii. 2.
Apoc. ii. 2. (not in Phil. ii. 25. 2. Cor. viii. 23. where Epaphroditus and
others are called Apostles of Churches, in a third sense, declared elsewhere,
answerable to those Apostles of the Synagogue, mentioned in the Constitutions
of the Emperors that were sent through the Synagogues to gather the dues of
their Patriarch residing in Palestine.) And Theodoret conceives, that when all
Presbyters were called Bishops, then Bishops were called Apostles in this
sense. But we must not understand those to be the Apostles of whom this place
speaks, but the first Apostles of Christ: For those that are thus called
Apostles, are the same that are called Evangelists here, and Ephesians. iiii. 12.
Thus there is a difference between Graces and Ministeries. But as concerning
the Office of Doctors mentioned by the Apostle, it may be two ways
understood. The Disciples of Prophets under the Old Testament, such as attained
not to the Grace of immediate inspiration, but rested in that knowledge which
the ordinary blessing of God upon their studies was able to compass, in the
Scripture are called Prophets, in the Chaldee Paraphrase are sometimes
translated Scribes, sometimes Doctors, as has been said. Some man may
conceive the like of the Prophets of the New Testament; that their Disciples,
that had no immediate inspirations, were admitted to teach in the Church, which
after this rank of Prophets was ceased, came also to nothing. But because there
is no mention of any such in Ecclesiastical Writers, there is no reason to
doubt that the men whom the Apostle here calls Doctors, are those of the
Presbyters which had the abilities of Preaching and Teaching the people at
their Assemblies; that those of the Presbyters that preached not, are called
here by the Apostle Governments, and the Deacons (...), that is, Helps, or
Assistants to the Government of Presbyters; so that it is not to be translated
Helps in Governments, but Helps, Governments. For we are not here to imagine
that the Apostle reckoning one by one the list of all Graces and Ministeries of
the Church, should say never a word of Presbyters and Deacons, the only
Ministeries of Succession in the Church under Bishops. Now the Office of
Deacons, though set up at the first upon occasion of ministering the Oblations
of the faithful to the necessities of the poor, yet if we regard the practice
of it in the times next the Apostles, cannot be better expressed then calling
them Assistants to the Office of Government resting in the Presbyters, when
there was no Bishop at Corinth. And we have here a particular reason why the
Apostle would not call them by the usual name of Deacons in this place,
because he had used it before in a general sense, when he said, There be
diverse MINISTERIES, (...), but one LORD, and therefore could not so well use it
again here in this particular sense. And the Apostles intent here being to
distinguish all Graces in his Catalogue, and having showed that there were two
parts of the Presbyters Office, in Teaching and Governing, the one whereof some
attained not, even in the Apostles time: it is reasonable to imagine, that the
Office and Ministry of Presbyters is specified here in the names of these two
Graces, in the exercise whereof it consists. No otherwise then in the other
place to the Romans, in these words, (...), are designed the same two Graces,
in the work whereof consists the Office of Presbyters: which he that
acknowledges, shall give reason enough why the Apostle reckons the Gift of
EXHORTATION there, besides that of DOCTRINE; being no inconvenience to make
several parts of this Grace, tending to the edification of the Church,
according to that which several men are most able to do, though all may be
comprised under one name of DOCTRINE. Whereas those that upon the mention of
Teaching imagine a several Ministry of Doctors, instituted by the Apostle
for all ages of the Church, are tied in consequence to set up the like for
Exhortation, which is ridiculous. Again, hereby we give account what the
Apostle to the Ephesians understands by PASTORS AND TEACHERS, to wit, those
that exercised also that part of the Presbyters Office which concerned the
edification of the Church in doctrine, whereof there he speaks, and of
nothing else. And thereupon conclude, that Pastors and Doctors are both one
there with the Apostle. For what reason else can be rendered why there is no
remembrance of Pastors in either of those other places wherein the Apostle
makes a more particular reckoning of the Ministeries of the Church, both to
the Romans and to the Corinthians? What reason but this, Because they are set
down in both places under the name of DOCTORS? Well may it seem, that the
Office of them whom the Synagogue called PASTORS, being referred in the Church
to the inferior Order of Deacons, the name stuck upon those that ministered the
food of the soul in the Church which is for the purpose of it. Clemens Epist.
ad Cor. p. 63. (...). Be a man faithful, be a man able to utter knowledge, be
he wise in discerning discourses, be he pure in works. He seems to point at
some of the Presbyters there in whom these abilities were. Tertull. de
praescript. c. 3. Quid ergo si Episcopus, si Diaconus, si Vidua, si Virgo, si
Doctor, si etiam Martyr lapsus a regula fuerit? What then if a Bishop, if a
Deacon, a Widow, a Virgin, if even a Martyr shall fall from the rule? In this
list of principal ranks in the Church, Presbyters have no room, unless we
understand them in the name of DOCTORS, the best part of their Office.
Theodoret, Epit. Haer. l. v. c. penult. (...); What can they say of the
Incestuous person at Corinth, who was not only vouchsafed the divine
mysteries, but also had attained a Doctors Grace? He follows S. Chrysostomes
conjecture, which conceives that the Corinthians were puffed up, as the
Apostle blames them, 1. Cor. v. 3. with the opinion of that man, because he
was one of their Doctors, that is, one of the Presbyters of that Church, that
exercised the Office of Preaching, and by that means bore sway among the
people. In fine, the Apostle intends by Doctors, the same that are so called
in all Ecclesiastical Writers, that is, the Bishops, or such of the Presbyters
as were seen in Preaching. It is worth the observing, that Beza has expounded
those whom the Apostle calls (...), no otherwise then Deacons and Presbyters;
meaning indeed those Elders of the people, which he imagined. But having showed
that there never was any such in the Church, well may we take his judgment
along with so much of the truth as he acknowledges; which deserves still more
credit from the President of Synagogues, which had Elders, some learned some
not, some that preached and some that did not, as has been said. Salmasius of
late, in his work De Foenore Trapezit. has shown some evidence of two sorts of
Presbyters, in the first times of the Church. But according to his admirable
knowledge, he saw withal, that they were all of one rank in the Church, all of
the Ecclesiastical Order, all made by Imposition of hands; and by consequence,
none of those Elders of the people which have been set up to manage the keys of
the Church, that is, the Office of the Ecclesiastical Order, according to the
Scriptures. Besides, it is to be observed, that the Office of Bishops (which
name he thinks most proper to those Presbyters which preached not, but were
exercised in ordering Church Matters) and Presbyters is described almost in all
places where there is mention of it in the Scriptures by both qualities, of
Teaching, and Governing the Church. Which is my argument to conclude, That
howsoever some men's abilities might be seen in the one rather then in the
other, howsoever some men according to their abilities might be applied to this
rather then to that, yet both Offices concerned the whole Order, that of
Preaching in chief. To which though some attained not, yet all are encouraged
to labor toward it as the most excellent work of their place, as by S. Paul,
allowing them that double maintenance, ESPECIALLY in that respect: So by these
Constitutions, allowing them that double portion at their Feasts of Love, for
that purpose, that they may take pains in the Word of Doctrine, as the words go
there. Be it then resolved, that the Presbyters of the Church, at least part of
them, were those Doctors whereof the Apostle writes; and from thence be it
considered, what distempers slight mistakes in the sound of the Scripture bring
to pass, when we see the Order of Doctors, distinct from that of Presbyters,
pressed as a point of that Discipline that makes one of the essential marks
of a visible Church. But whether the Prophets of the Primitive Church, which
taught the people at their Assemblies, were Presbyters or not, is not so easy
to determine. Some of them we have reason enough to think were, be it but for
those Prophets of Antiochia, Acts xiii. 2. that ministered unto the Lord and
fasted, when the Holy Ghost said unto them, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for
the work to which I have appointed them; and those other among whom Timothy
received Imposition of hands with prophesying, 1. Tim. iv. 14. But that all
Presbyters were Prophets, or all Prophets Presbyters, is more then I can
resolve. Of these Prophets henceforth we are to entreat.

CHAP. V.
Prophets in most of the Churches remembered by the Apostles. The Gift of
Languages, the purpose and nature of it. The Limbs and Branches of both these
Graces, in S. Paul. Of Praying, and Praising God by the Spirit. Those that
spoke strange Tongues, understood what they said. Interpretation concerns all
that was spoken in strange Languages. They prayed and studied for Spiritual
Graces. Prophesying in S. Paul, signifies singing Psalms. Prayers of the
Church conceived by immediate inspiration. The nearness of the Graces of
Prophesying and Languages. The ground and meaning of the Apostles Rule. It
proceeds of none but Prophets. What is to be judged in that which Prophets
spoke. The custom in the Primitive Church of many Preaching at the same
Assembly came from hence.

IN the beginning of the Christian Faith, it pleased God, for the propagation
and maintenance of it, to revive the Grace of Prophesying, decayed and lost
among his Ancient people, in a large measure, in most of the Churches planted
by the Apostles: though there be not found so much concerning their Office any
where as in this Church of Corinth. In the Church of Jerusalem, the mother of
all Churches, Acts xi. 27. And in those days came Prophets from Jerusalem to
Antiochia. xv. 32. And Judas and Silas being Prophets also themselves. In the
Church of Antiochia, Acts xiii. 1. Now there were in the Church that was at
Antiochia, certain Prophets and Doctors. At Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. v. 20.
Despise not Prophesying. At Corinth, as we see at large. At Ephesus, Ephesians. iv.
11. And he gave some Apostles, some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors
and Doctors. At Rome, Romans xii. 6. Whether Prophecy, according to the
proportion of Faith. And setting these particulars aside, how general the
Grace was, is to be seen, because the Apostle reckoning, 1. Cor. xii. 28. all
members of public use and service, Ephesians. iv. 11. all Ministeries of
edification, names Prophets among them whom God has placed in the Church.
Besides this Grace, which was more for the edification of them that believed,
instructing them in the mysteries of our Faith at their Religious Assemblies,
the Grace of speaking strange Languages was also bestowed upon the Churches to
make evidence to unbelievers that the Holy Ghost was present there, and by that
means, to draw them to believe, as the Apostle says here, 1. Cor. xiiii. 22.
Tongues are a sign not to them that believe, but to them that believe not: but
prophesying serves not for them that believe not, but for them that believe:
containing in it a Preface to that which God now intended to do, in bringing
all Nations and Languages to the acknowledgement of him that was hitherto
confined to one people, so that when the Gospel was received, his praises
should sound in all kind of Languages. For it is not to be imagined, as if the
Gift of Languages that makes so much noise in this Epistle, and in the
Scriptures elsewhere, consisted merely in speaking in an unknown Tongue, and
not in the subject suggested to them by the Spirit to speak. It is plain
besides, that it was the praises of God, and those mysteries of the knowledge
of God, which those that had the Gift could not reach to of themselves, that
they were moved by the Holy Ghost to express in unknown Languages. So it is
said of the Apostles when first they received this Grace, Acts ii. 4. And they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as
the spirit gave them utterance. And to show further what matters they uttered,
the company assembled say of them, verse. 7. We do hear them speak in our
tongues the wonderful works of God. As it is said of them which were with
Cornelius, Acts x. 46. They heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God.
And upon this ground it is, that Saint Peter expounds the passage of the
Prophet Joel, And it shall come to pass in the last days, says God, I will
pour out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream
dreams, of the Apostles when they spoke in strange Languages. To show us, that
the matters uttered in strange Languages, were the like as the Prophets
revealed, the Gift of unknown Tongues over and above. From whence we may
perceive the meaning of that which the Apostle has set down here, verse. 2. For
he that speaks in an unknown tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God; for
no man understands him, howbeit in the spirit he speaks MYSTERIES. And
again, verse. 4. He that speaks in an unknown tongue, edifieth himself. Where
you have in plain terms, that those things which the Holy Ghost moved men to
speak in strange Languages were for the instruction of those that had the
Grace, in the mysteries of Gods Kingdom. For this reason the Gift of Languages
is compared with that of PROPHESYING throughout this whole xiiii. Chapter of
the first to the Corinthians, with intent to regulate the use of both at their
religious Assemblies. So that it seems all spiritual Graces are by the
Apostle referred to these two kinds, in that difference which he makes from
the beginning, Be zealous of spiritual Gifts, but rather of PROPHESYING: Where
I must allow Beza's Translation to be more exact then that which we use. For
where he says, (...). it is plain, that Prophesying is of the number of
spiritual Graces; and therefore not to be excepted, in opposition to them; as
if the Apostle exhorted to study Prophesying rather then spiritual Graces: but
as it is translated there, to be zealous of spiritual Graces, but of all
spiritual Graces ESPECIALLY of that of Prophesying. Oecumenius thus glosseth
the words, (...). But we must not neglect other Graces, and especially that of
Prophesying; to the same sense, which is the true meaning of the words. Now the
particulars in regard whereof the Apostle advances the Gift of PROPHESYING
beyond that of Languages, are thus set down, verse. 3. He that Prophesies
speaks unto men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort. (...). This is
the gloss of Oecumenius: that is, For, says he, he edifieth men, and
exhorts them to the Faith, and comfort them upon the temptations that
shall be. Here are then so many limbs of this Grace, and of the work to which
it did enable. And Chap. xiii. 2. when he says, And though I have the Gift of
Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge: it should seem by
these words, that the knowledge of all Divine mysteries is to be ranged under
this Grace. S. Chrysostom there, (...). He puts not down Propheysing alone,
but the highest degree of it, for having said, IF I HAVE PROPHECY, he adds,
AND KNOW ALL MYSTERIES, AND ALL KNOWLEDGE. And whether those particulars
which the Apostle here expresses xii. 8. when he says, For to one is given by
the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same
spirit; whether these, I say, be of the same nature, limbs of this Gift of
Prophesying, and of immediate inspiration or not, is resolved both by the terms
which the Apostle uses when he says, To one is given the word of wisdom by
the SPIRIT, to another the word of knowledge by the same SPIRIT: for those
things which are given by the Spirit are inspirations in this place. And by the
consequence of his speech, having said before, The manifestation of the Spirit
is given to every man to profit with: for the manifestation of the Spirit are
those Graces by which the presence of the Holy Ghost in the Church was made
manifest. And we see in what particulars the Apostle further specifieth this
Grace, in opposition to that of Languages, xiv. 6. Now, Brethren, if I come
unto you with Tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you,
either by REVELATION, or by KNOWLEDGE, or by PROPHESYING, or by DOCTRINE.
These are all particulars comprised within the compass of that Grace which the
Apostle intends to advance beyond that of Languages, and in verse. 1. and
elsewhere goes under the name of PROPHESYING. And therefore I am apt to think,
that in this text the word PROPHESYING stands in a particular sense, to
signify foretelling of things to come: As it does also, Chap. xii. 10. For the
Apostle having said, verse. 8. To one is given the word of wisdom by the
Spirit, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit (which are both
members of the Grace of Prophesying in the latitude of it, as appears Chap.
xiii. 3. And though I have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries
and all knowledge) adds nevertheless, verse. 10. To another is given the
working of miracles, to another Prophecy; distinguishing the Grace of
foretelling things to come, from the wisdom and knowledge inspired by the Holy
Ghost, which are all sometimes comprehended under one Grace of Prophesying. But
that which the Apostle calls REVELATION, is without doubt the disclosing of
secrets. That I take to be questionless, by what we find afterward, verse. 24,
25. But if all Prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all, and thus are the
secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he will
worship God, and report that God is among you of atruth. S. Chrysostom here,
(...). It is not the same for a man to come in, and see one speaking of Greek,
another Persian, as it is to hear the secrets of his own mind, and whether he
came in to try, with an evil mind, or with a sound one; and that he has done
this or that, for this is much more terrible and useful then that. To this
purpose he alleges Nebuchadnezzars act, falling down before Daniel upon the
discovery of his dream, ii. 47. And that under the Old Testament, Revealing of
secrets was a thing required at their Prophets hands. By the way we may
perceive by that which Saul and his Fathers servants did, 1. Sam. ix. 6.
repairing to Samuel to inquire of his Fathers Asses that were strayed. From
whence we must conclude, that this Grace of PROPHESYING, under the New
Testament, was of immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost, to all purposes as
under the Old. For you shall find, verse. 30. If Revelation be made to another
that sits by, let the first hold his peace: To show us, that some were
inspired upon the very point of time with the truth of matters in debate at
their Assemblies, as was Jehaziell son of Zachariah, at the meeting which
Josaphat had assembled, 2. Chron. xx. 14. As were those by whom Paul and
Barnabas were sent, Acts xiii. 2. And those by whom Timothy was ordained, 1.
Tim. iv. 14. And as that Maid at least pretended to be, of whom Tertullian De
Anima, c. ix. Besides we see how often these Prophets of the New Testament are
inspired to foretell things to come. And in reason, the Gift of Languages being
inspired both for the subject, and the tongue in which it is expressed, it is
certain, that the Gift of Prophesying is not contained within humane
conceptions. And indeed the Offices specified out of the Apostle of Edifying,
Exhorting, Comforting, of Speaking words of wisdom and knowledge of mysteries,
may well be referred to that rank of inspirations, whereby a man is moved to
speak that which the use of his humane reason inableth him not to conceive,
with assurance that the motion is from the Holy Ghost: which kind of
inspirations are counted Prophesies even among the Ebrew Doctors, as has been
said. And in this kind the Exposition of Scripture is not without cause
understood under the Gift of Prophesying in this place. The Commentaries
entitled to S. Ambrose, Prophetas dicit Interpretes Scripturarum. Sicut enim
Propheta futur a praedicit, quae nesciuntur, ita and hic, dum Scripturarum
sensum, qui multis occultus est, manifestat, dicitur PROPHETARE. By Prophets he
means Expositours of the Scriptures. For as a Prophet foretells things to
come which are not known; so such an one, manifesting the meaning of the
Scripture, which many perceive not, is said to PROPHECY. The same is to be
found again in him and others diverse times, not so much because the Apostle
has specified here any such part of Prophets office, as because the rules
which he prescribes in Prophesying afterward, from verse. 29. do plainly
belong to those that had the Scripture in hand to expound, as shall appear
afterward. Therefore it is plain that these Prophetical inspirations were
seen in the Exposition of Scripture, because it is that upon which the Apostles
rule proceeds, verse. 30. If revelation be made to another sitting by, let the
first hold his peace: meaning, that he that was expounding the Scripture should
give way to him to whom the truth of it was revealed upon the instant of time.
But there is something else besides this belonging to the Gift of Prophesying
as well as of Languages. For the Apostle from verse. 14. here, thus writes: If
I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is
unfruitful. What is it then? I will pray with my spirit, but I will pray with
understanding also. I will sing with my spirit, and I will sing with
understanding also. Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he
that occupies the place of the unlearned say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks,
seeing he understands not what thou say? For thou verily give thanks
well, but the other is not edified. It is not so clear, how the Apostle here
says, My spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful, having said
before, He that speaks in a tongue edifieth himself. For if he that has the
Gift profits in the understanding of the mysteries which the spirit
suggesteth to him in a strange Language, how is his understanding unfruitful?
Therefore S. Chrysostom acknowledging this difficulty, yields, that some of
them which had this Grace, understood what they said, others not; for thus he
writes upon these words, He that speaks in a strange Language edifieth
himself: (...). And how if he know not what he says? But thus far he
speaks of those that understand what they say, but know not how to express
it to others. But the words of Theodoret are thus in the Greek of Oecumenius,
(...). That is, He means by SPIRIT, the spiritual Grace, but by
UNDERSTANDING, the declaration and interpretation of things that are spoken. By
thus expounding the word (...) to signify a meaning understood, he seems to
reconcile the text with that before, without acknowledging that they understood
not what they spoke in strange Languages. According to which sense (...),
bears this interpretation, my meaning is fruitless, to wit, to the hearers,
not yielding them the fruit required of it: and again, (...), is, I will pray
in a meaning understood. Whether the words will bear this meaning or not, let
men of learning judge: The thing is probable enough, seeing the fault which the
Apostle finds, verse, 17. is not that a man's self is not edified, but says
he, another is not edified. And if we follow the intent of the Apostle close,
it will easily appear, that the purpose of his speech requires more then that
a man himself should understand what he speaks in an unknown tongue, to wit,
that his Audience also should understand it. And therefore let who will dispute
the proper signification of his words (a thing not so seasonable in this place)
so long as the drift and purpose of the argument guides and over-ruleth the
sense, when he says, I will pray and sing with my SPIRIT, I will pray also and
sing with UNDERSTANDING, to be this, I will pray and sing by inspiration, but
it shall be in a meaning understood, or understandable; according to the words
of Theodoret alleged before, (...). And it follows thus, (...). Now he says,
It is fit that he that speaks in another tongue, whether singing Psalms, or
Praying, or Teaching should either interpret himself (and understand what he
says) for the benefit of his hearers, or that another should do it, that is
sufficient to be taken for an Assistant to his Doctrine. The words enclosed are
added by Oecumenius, desiring to jumble S. Chrysostomes Interpretation and
Theodorets into one, which proceed from contrary opinions: for all the rest
besides those words is extant in the Latin of Theodoret, who has delivered
the right of the Apostles meaning, That it is requisite for him that speaks
tongues to interpret, supposing that he understands what he says. The same
sense is expounded by S. Basil, Reg. Brev. 278. otherwise the nature of this
Branch of the Gift of Languages is truly set down by S. Chrysostom in these
words, (...). For of old there were many that had the Grace of Prayer, with
that of Language. and they prayed, and the tongue praying spoke the Persian or
Roman Language, but the mind knew not what was said. In that he thinks, that
he which had the Gift, understood not what he said, I have showed for what
cause I leave him before; but in that he says, They had a Grace of Praying with
that of Languages, as a branch of it, it shall further appear how right he is
afterward. The more I marvel, that the learned Heinsius of late should so
disguise the meaning of this whole passage, in expounding that appertenance of
this Gift of Languages, whereof the Apostle speaks here, verse. 13. Wherefore
let him that speaks in an unknown tongue, pray, that he may INTERPRET. The
meaning whereof he makes this: When a man has spoken in an unknown tongue,
let him repeat the sum of it in his prayer afterward, and so interpret his
meaning in a known Language. These are some of his words, Siquis ergo, inquit,
lingua peregrina usus est, adjungat preces, quibus antedictainterpretetur.
Peregrina enim lingua preces si concipiantur, frustra fit hoc certe, quia non
intelliguntur. If a man have used a strange language, says the Apostle, let
his prayers follow, wherein he may interpret what he said before. For if prayer
be conceived in an unknown tongue, sure it is to no purpose, being not
understood. Thus do men sometimes employ their wit and learning to make things
obscure that are plain enough when they are let alone. But though, as he says,
it is now in use in diverse Churches to recapitulate the Sermon in a prayer
after it, yet it concerned him to have showed us some trace or step of like
practice in the writings of the Apostles, or Primitive Christians, if he would
have us to believe this to be the meaning of the Apostle. Now the Apostle, as
he speaks of praying, so he speaks of singing, of blessing, of giving
thanks with the Spirit, and with understanding: these are no dependances of
that which was preached before, therefore neither that Praying whereof he
speaks here. For you heard what Theodoret said before, (...). Whether in
praying, or in singing Psalms, or in Teaching. And you shall see what the
Apostle says afterward, verse. 26, 27. When ye come together, every one of you
has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has an Interpretation. Let all
things be done to edifying. If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by
two, or at the most by three, and let one interpret. Where, as Theodoret has
well expressed his meaning, that all things, as well singing of Psalms, as
teaching matter of Doctrine (and Theodoret had cause to add Praying, finding
it before, verse. 15.) might be done to the best purpose of edifying, his will
is, that whatsoever is spoken in any of those kinds, in a strange Language, be
interpreted by one, whether the same that spoke already, or another that had
the Gift to do it. In fine, to make appear that the Apostle when he says,
verse. 13. Let him that speaks in an unknown tongue pray that he may
Interpret, intends that he should pray for the Gift of Interpreting that
which he was inspired to speak in a strange Language. It shall here be declared
that the Apostle directs them to labor after these Graces by their Prayers
as well as by their Studies, or what means else they could address to God for
the attaining of them. That which we saw practiced by the Disciples of
Prophets, under the Old Testament, that we shall see prescribed by the Apostle
under the New, when he says, 1. Cor. xii. 31. But be zealous of the best
Gifts. and 1. Cor. xiiii. 1. Be Zealous of spiritual Gifts. and again, Let him
that speaks in an unknown tongue, pray that he may Interpret. Where S.
Chrysostom, (...). Here he shows, that it is in them to receive the Grace.
For, LET HIM PRAY, says he, that is, Let him contribute that which is required
at his hands, for if thou ask studiously, thou shall receive it. When he
expounds, Let him pray, to be, Let him contribute what is required from him,
he means that Zeal and Study which is spoken of in the other places, of which
you have again, verse. 39. Be zealous or studious of Prophesying, and forbid not
to speak with Tongues: and 1 Thessalonians. v. 20. Despise not Prophesying. The like
you shall find in S. Chrysostom upon!. Cor. xii. 31. and the Commentaries
under S. Ambrose his name, upon 1. Cor. xiiii. 32. The Spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets. Idcirco dixit SUBJECTUS EST PROPHETIS, ut ingenia
accenderet hac spe, quod Spiritus conatus adjuvet. Therefore he says IS
SUBjECT TO THE PROPHETS, to encourage wits, with hope that the Spirit helps
their endeavors: And by and by he draws to this purpose the words of the
Apostle, For they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them, and adds,
Hoc est enim subjectum esse, quod est sequi. Ita Spiritus Subjectus dicitur, ut
conatus bonos adjuvet, cum perficit. Subjectus enim videtur qui coepta alterius
perficit. For to be subject, is the same as to follow. So the Spirit is said to
be Subject, because of his help to good endeavors, when he brings them to
pass. For he that brings another undertakings to effect, seems to be
subject. This is not to allow this meaning of the Apostles words, which I shall
show afterward to be otherwise: but to take notice what impression of this
truth they received from the places alleged. And you shall find the same
Authors, to let pass others, expounding the Apostles words Romans xii. 3, 6. no
otherwise. According as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith, and
whether Prophesying according to the proportion of Faith. S. Ambrose, Haec ergo
datur pro modo accipientis, hoc est, quantum causa exigit propter quam datur.
This therefore (that is, Prophecy) is given according to the measure of him
that receives; that is, as much as the cause requires, in respect whereof it
is bestowed. And S. Chrysostom, (...). For though it be a Grace, it is not
indifferently poured forth. But taking the measure from them which receive it,
flows upon them, in measure as it finds the vessel of faith offered.
understanding that faith which moves men to sue to God for such Graces, as he
says, pray that he may Interpret. And this is it which the Apostle writes to
Timothy, 1. Tim. iv. 13, 14. Till I come give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, to doctrine, neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given
thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. And 2.
Tim. 1. 6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the Gift of
God that is in thee, by the putting on of my hands. For in calling it a Gift,
he signifies an extraordinary Grace of that time: but in willing him to stir
it up, and not to neglect it, he shows that it was in him to procure it at
Gods hands, by reading, and teaching, and praying, and the like means which he
names, or names not. The true meaning then of the Apostle when he says,
verse. 14, 15, 16, 17. For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prays,
but my understanding is unfruitful. What is it then? I will pray with the
spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the
spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also: Else when thou shall
bless with the spirit, how shall he that possesses the room of the unlearned
say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say?
For thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified: I say the
meaning of this whole passage supposes that which we began to prove of the
Prophets under the Old Testament, that it was part of their Office to compose
the praises of God, and the prayers of their Congregations. For if we take not
our marks amiss, we shall see that the strength of our advantage upon these
words against the Church of Rome lies in this, because the Apostle argues
expressly against them, that to show their Gift of Languages, took upon them,
not only to utter the mysteries of God in strange Tongues, but also in them to
conceive Prayers and Psalms of Gods praises, in the name and behalf of the
Church. This they are desirous to decline if the Apostle would give leave. For
that which he says, verse. 17. ANOTHER is not edified, is as much as we find,
verse. v. and verse. xii. that the CHURCH may be edified. and verse. xix. In the
Church I had rather speak five words to teach OTHERS. and the Apostle
afterward, verse. 16. What is it then, my brethren, when you come TOGETHER,
every one of you has a Psalm. And to this purpose it will be very effectual
to observe, That as in the Old Testament, Saul and his servant are said to meet
a whole Quire of Prophets Prophesying, and the sons of Asaph, Heman and
Jeduthun are said to Prophecy in singing the praises of God which the spirits
of Prophets had indicted; so in the New Testament, for the same cause, it
seems, that singing the praises of God, is called Prophesying by the Apostle.
For let me ask what the Apostle means when he says, 1. Cor. xi. 5. Every
woman praying or PROPHESYING with her head uncovered: his speech concerning
Christian Assemblies, wherein he forbids a woman to speak, 1. Cor. xiiii.
34? Is it that which the Italian Gloss of Diodati after Beza has expounded?
It seems, says he, this word is to be taken here, not only for handling or
expounding the Mysteries of the word of God, as Romans xii. 6. but also for
hearing them, marking them, meditating upon them while they are proposed of
those that have the Charge. This cannot be allowed. Praying is the parties own
act, why not PROPHESYING, that stands in rank with it? The Commentaries under
S. Ambrose his name, Prophetari autem est, adventum fore Domini voce Symboli
post Orationem effari; To Prophecy is to pronounce in the words of the Creed,
that the Lord shall come. The Creed was pronounced by the whole Congregation,
this he thinks was called Prophesying, because it speaks of the coming of
Christ which shall be. I bring not this because I allow it, for it is somewhat
strange, to make all people Prophets that say their Creed, because one Article
of it speaks of things to come: besides, I do not find that the Creed was
from the beginning any part of the Church Service. But because he saw the true
point of the difficulty, that hearing Prophesies was no Prophesying, but it
must be something that the Congregation utters, as well as in Praying, which
the Apostle calls Prophesying: And what does the whole Congregation send
forth but Prayers and Psalms? In both these, as near as can be, the people
bear their part: the whole pack of Prophets Prophesied together, when Saul, and
his servant, and his messengers came, because they all joined in the Praises of
God, Samuel guiding the Quire: when the Spirit of God came on them, they
uttered the Praises of God which the Spirit of God suggested, the rest bearing
part in their sense. Isidore Pelusiota, lib. ii. Epist. 90. (...). The Apostles
of our Lord, and Teachers of our Orders, desirous to suppress idle talking in
Churches, understandingly permitted women to sing in them. I know there are
other Texts of the Apostle, where he speaks in general to all persons to
sing Psalms; Ephesians. v. 18, 19. Be filled with the spirit: speaking to your
selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody
in your hearts unto God. And Coloss. iii. 6. Teaching and admonishing one
another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs: singing with grace in
pure hearts unto God: yet with good right are these words referred to no place
but this, because express mention of women singing in Assemblies, we find none
but here. If any man thinks, that Isidore in those words, reflecteth not upon
any thing delivered in writing by the Apostles, but of the custom which the
Church received at their hands. It must needs nevertheless seem the most
probable sense of S. Paul's words, which makes them agree with that custom,
which he says the Church received from the Apostles. Tertullian de Virg.
Velandis, cap. xvii. Quantam autem castigationem merebuntur etiam illae, quae
inter Psalmos, vel in quacunque Dei mentione, retectae perseverant? Meritone
etiam in oratione ipsa facilime fimbriam, aut villum, aut quodlibet filum
cerebro superponunt, and tectas se opinantur? But what reproof shall even they
deserve, that continue unveiled in singing Psalms, or in any mention of God?
Have they reason in their very Prayers, at their best ease to lay a fringe, or
thrumme, or any thread upon the brain, and think themselves veiled? here you
have the two particulars of Psalms and Prayers expressed, which the Apostle
calls Praying and Prophesying* with the reason, of reverence at the mention
of God, to enforce his purpose, that they ought not to content themselves with
no veil at Psalms, or with a slight one at Prayers. And afterward, Oportet
ergo omni tempore and omni loco memores Legis incedere, paratas and instructas
ad omnem Dei mentionem, qui si fuerit in pectore cognoscetur and in capite
foeminarum. It behooves therefore to walk mindful of this Law, at all times
and in all places, ready and provided against all mention of God, who if he be
in women's hearts will be known on their heads; expressing the Apostles reason,
Reverence at the mention of God. And as for the Prayers of the Church, we have
a singular passage in the Apostle Romans viii. 26. to the best of my judgment to
be understood to this purpose, And the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for
we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit makes intercession
for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. For what is it, that the
Apostle calls the first fruits of the Spirit, verse. 23. there before, but the
flowr and cream of those spiritual Graces, whereof the Apostle writes all
this while to the Corinthians? And when he says, we know not what we should
pray for as we ought, true it is, we are sufficiently informed, what we are to
pray for in the Scripture, but seeing the purpose of the Scripture in general,
is not so perfectly understood by all persons, much less the Exigence of it
duly pointed in particular, it is no marvel if we believe, that the inspiration
of the holy Ghost, is able far better to inform us, what we are to pray for,
even at our Assemblies, when we see the Apostle himself pray for the goad in
the flesh to be removed, which God thought not fit to be granted. But when he
says, the Spirit makes intercession for us, we know first that by the SPIRIT,
the Apostle in this subject continually understands the Inspirations of it,
as has been observed before: we know again what endless debate and
difficulties, the sense of these words breeds, and what better course have we
to end them, then by understanding in these words, the intercessions which the
holy Ghost inspireth? And those unutterable groans of the Spirit, whose mind he
that searches the heart tries, verse. 27. and finds that it makes
intercession for the Saints, according to God, what are they else, but those
desires, which the Spirit inspireth to them which have the first fruits of it,
causing them to groan within themselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the
redemption of the body, as it went before verse. 13? For as men inspired were not
able to express the vehemence of the desires they were inspired with, no more
were they able to comprehend the meaning of them, the depth of things inspired,
being sounded by him alone that inditeth the same. This exposition is S.
Chrysostomes, who has delivered us the ground of it for Historical truth,
upon the place, telling us, that there was no less peculiar an inspiration to
pray, at that time, then there was to foretell things to come, to cure
diseases, to do miracles, to speak strange languages. (...). With all these,
says he, there was also a Grace of Prayer, which was also called A SPIRIT (as
the spirit of knowledge, the spirit of wisdom, and the like, that is the
spiritual Gift of it) and he that had this, prayed for all the multitude. For
because, not knowing many of those things that are good for us, we desire those
that are not, (as here it is said, We know not what to ask for as we ought) the
grace of Prayer came upon some man then, and he stood up to desire in the name
of all, that which was good for the Church in Common, and taught others to do
it. And again, (...) (...). For he that was vouchsafed this Grace, standing
with much compunction, with many groans, such as prostrate a man in mind before
God, asks such things as are good for all. Correspondent whereto now is the
Deacon, when he offers to God the prayers for the people. The opinion and
relation of this most excellent man at expounding the Scripture, going so clear
with the words of the Apostle, makes this beyond question with me, to be the
meaning of the Apostle. which shall afterward get still more credit, by the
profer which shall be made, of designing the kind and nature of these Prayers
and Thanksgivings, whereof the Apostle speaks here, to have been the same
that the Church has practiced in all Ages since. And, these things supposed,
the meaning of the Apostle in the passage which we are in hand with
sufficiently shows, that as these which were endowed with the grace of
Languages, did not stick to do those things, to utter the praises of God, the
prayers and thanksgiving of the people, at their Assemblies, in unknown
tongues, to make show of their Gift which he forbids: so those that had the
Grace of Prophesying, did and are directed to do the like for the benefit of
the Congregation, in all particulars whereof he speaks. These things thus
cleared, give us full assurance of the kindred between these two kinds of
Graces, of Languages and Prophesying, by the limbs and branches of the offices
expected from both: and that by consequence, all these Prophetical Graces,
were of immediate inspiration, as much as that of Languages. which the Apostle
coming up to his first purpose in this whole discourse, which was to regulate
the use of both kinds of these Graces at their Assemblies, further declares in
recapitulating those Offices of both, verse. 27. which he thinks fit to
remember there. His words are these, verse. 26. How is it then brethren? when ye
come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue,
has a revelation, has an interpretation: Let all things be done to edifying.
Tongues and Interpretations of them, it is plain, belong to none but those that
have that Grace: Revelations are specified before to be a kind of Prophesying,
but there is no reason to convince that they might not be suggested in strange
languages. Psalms it is plain by that which went before, were uttered in strange
languages, but the Apostle prescribes to do it in the known tongue, as an
office of Prophesying. Of Doctrines the like must be said as of Revelations. In
fine, the reason which moves the Apostle to allow speaking in strange tongues
in the Church, provided there be one to interpret, because the matters so
uttered are for the edifying of it, is enough to prove that the substance of
things uttered by both Graces, was not unlike; and therefore those rules also,
in which the Apostle concludes, serve to aver the difference and agreement
observed between the two kinds of Graces, speaking as they do to two heads, one
of Languages, the other of Prophesying. The sum of them being the same that
was proposed in the beginning of the chapter: for there we read, desire
spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may Prophecy; and here in the conclusion
we read, verse. 39. covet to Prophecy, and forbid not to speak with Tongues.
Commending the one without limitation, permitting the other with a caveat of
one to interpret. The same is the meaning of his rule to the Thessalonians, 1.
v. 19, 20. Quench not the spirit, despise not Prophesying. The one part
advising to maintain all spiritual Graces, by allowing the orderly use of them
at their assemblies; the other in particular to esteem aright of Prophesying
above the rest, which the Apostle expresses in terms of abatement, charging
not to despise it. Before I take in hand the meaning of these rules in
particular, be it observed, that these things which were delivered at their
assemblies, in the use of both kinds of Graces, were not conceived upon the
instant, but ready provided before: for within these terms the Apostles words
will conclude us, when he says, verse. 26. When ye come together every one of
you HAS a Psalm, etc. which is, that they came provided of what they intended
there to declare, as appears by that part of the rule that concerns
Prophesying verse. 29, 30. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the
other judge: if revelation be made to another that sits by, let the first
hold his peace. Where the difference is manifest, between that which was
suggested at the instant, and that which was conceived before. Now whereas the
principle upon which the Apostle proceeds is the edification of the people,
as he says, verse. 26. Let all be done to edifying; well are we assured that it
was for the edification of the Church, to understand what the Spirit suggested
to them that spoke in strange languages, concerning the praises of God and the
mysteries of his kingdom. It was for their edification indeed, but not so much
as the knowledge of the Scripture, which consists not of Revelation for the
time, but is intended for the perpetual instruction of Gods people. Therefore
the Apostles will is, that two or three speak with tongues, and another
interpret, not to take up that time which the exposition of Scripture required,
verse. 27. S. Ambrose upon those words, Ideo ut multum tres and Interpretem
illorum, ne occuparent diem Linguis loquentes, and non haberent tempus
Prophetae disserendi Scripturas, qui sunt totius Ecclesiae illuminatores.
Therefore three at the most, and him that interprets them, that they should
not spend the day in speaking Languages, so that the Prophets which are the
inlightners of the whole Church, should not have time to expound the
Scriptures. The holy Ghost was dispensed among men that were converted to the
faith, for their assistance in understanding the Scriptures, which always was
their business. They began straight, as the use was under the Old Testament, to
train others to the same knowledge. The Apostles rule supposes no less, ver.
29, 30. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. If
revelation be made to one that sits by, let the first hold his peace. The
whole words of S. Ambrose touched before; Haec Traditio est Synagogae quam nos
vult sectari (quia Christianis scribit, sed ex Gentibus factis, non ex Judaeis)
ut sedentes disputent, Seniores dignitate in cathedris, sequentes in
subselliis, novissimi in pavimento super mattas: Quibus sirevelatum fuerit,
dandum locum dicendi praecipit, nec despiciendos quia membra Corporis sunt: It
is a Tradition of the Synagogue which he would have us to follow (for he
writes to Christians, but converted, not from the Jews, but from the Gentiles)
to dispute sitting, the Eldest in dignity in Chairs, the next on seats, the
last on matted floores. To whom if Revelation were made, he commands that
room to speak be allowed, not despising them as members of the body. The
inspiration of the Holy Ghost was not always present with Prophets, they spoke
in Exposition of the Scripture, out of that which the Spirit formerly had
suggested. Most like it is that the inspirations of the Holy Ghost should
possess one or other of them which had the Grace, in the time and place of
Divine Service: for you saw before verse. 24. how the revelation of secrets was
wont to be infused upon them at that time when unbelievers came into their
Assemblies. If any such thing came to pass, the Apostles will is, though he
were of a mean rank among the Disciples of Prophets, he should be allowed to
speak. For let no man think that the Apostle here allows all members of the
Church to speak in public. In that the pretended S. Ambrose seems to
mistake, admitting those, whom he describes sitting on the floor, to speak.
For he that was inspired without peradventure sat not upon the floor, but
among the Prophets. The words of the Apostle are general, when he says, verse.
31. For ye may all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted. But this speech all this while concerns not the Congregation, but
those that have the Gifts of Prophesying and speaking with Languages. And men
of Learning know, that general words are to be confined to the particular
Argument of the speech. Besides, the Apostle has made the difference himself,
when he says, verse. 16. How shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned
say Amen at thy giving of thanks? (...), he that sits in the place of a
private person without Learning, is so named in difference to those that
professed themselves Teachers; if he should stand up and teach, this difference
which the Apostle makes would be quite abolished. He forbids a woman to
speak in the Church whatsoever be her Graces, were she one of Philips daughters
the Prophetesses, he allows not all men to speak, but such whose Graces were
known and discerned, of whom all the Discourse hitherto proceeds. Now the
matter in question is this: It is plain that the Gift of Languages came by
immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost: and it is plain that many particulars
of the Gift of Prophesying did likewise, as the foretelling of things to come
called Prophesying, verse. 6. the knowledge of men's secrets, the understanding
of the Scripture, and of matters debated upon it, verse. 25. and 30. the Praises
of God and the Prayers of the Congregation, which were inspired in strange
Languages, as it is said, verse. 14. My spirit prays, but my understanding is
unfruitful; and therefore were no less inspired to them of whom the Apostle,
verse. 15. I will pray and sing with the Spirit, and with understanding. In
fine, there is no cause to make doubt, that all the particulars, through this
whole Chapter, ranged under the general Grace of Prophesying, are by him
understood to proceed from men endued with immediate inspirations. And
therefore the question will be, What is his meaning in that which follows,
verse. 32. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; for on the
one side, when he says, The Spirits of the Prophets, the word SPIRITS in this
subject has always signified inspirations, true or pretended: on the other
side, the inspirations of the Holy Ghost are not to be subject, are not to be
judged, as verse. 29. though it be by Prophets. The meaning of these words give
me leave thus to debate. S. Ambrose thinks, that when it is said, The Spirits
of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, a reason is given for the Rule
which commands to speak by turns, and to give way to him that is inspired
upon the instant, verse. 29, and 30. to show that this they might well do,
because they were not so inspired by the Holy Ghost, as to be transported to
speak whether they would or not, but that it was in them to moderate, as it was
in them to procure the influence of it, according to his words produced before.
In this sense, the Spirits of Prophets are subject to the Prophets themselves.
But though we grant, that men's particular endeavors were means to attain the
Grace of immediate inspirations, as was proved, yet we are not therefore bound
to grant, that it was in them to be inspired at their pleasure. In the Old
Testament it is said, That the Spirit of the Lord CAME upon Saul and his
servants: and Jer. xlii. 7. After ten days the word of the Lord CAME to
Jeremiah, having undertaken to pray for the revealing of the will of God to
them before: from whence the Ebrew Doctors collect, that he could not obtain
the Grace in the mean time: Maimoni Fundam. Legis viii. 5. and the late
Annotations there. Besides, this sense is impertinent to the Apostles purpose;
who when he says, verse. 29. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the
others judge, speaks of things brought from home, and conceived before the
time of meeting, as you may see verse. 26. When you come together every one of
you has a Psalm, and so forth. But when he says, verse. 30. If revelation be
made to another as he sits, let the first hold his peace, he speaks of
that which is inspired at the instant of time. And therefore it seems more
reasonable to conceive, that the Apostle, when he says, verse. 31. ye may all
Prophecy one by one, rendereth a reason for what he had said in commanding
them to speak by turns, that all might contribute to the edification of the
Church, as it follows there, That all may learn, and all may be comforted:
But when he adds, And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets, he rendereth a reason for what he said in commanding the other to
judge* because if some should not yield to the judgment of others, the
confusion and unquietness ensuing hereupon might be imputed to the Ordinance
of God. Theodoret, after S. Chrysostom; Ita Jesus subjiciebatur Mosi, ita
Elizaeus Eliae, ita ipsi Elizaeo multitudo Prophetarum, ita ipsi Apostolo
Timotheus and Titus and reliqui. So was Josue subject to Moses, so Elizeus to
Elias, so a number of Prophets to Elizeus, so Timotheus, Titus, and the rest,
to the Apostle. And this sense Calvine embraces. According to which, the
judgment whereof the Apostle speaks, if we conceive it to concern immediate
inspirations, must not be understood to call them to account, as for the truth
of that which the Holy Ghost inditeth, but to consist in judging the meaning
and consequence of things inspired, which even the persons from whom they came,
though not ignorant throughout, as not bereft of their senses and understanding
in Prophesying, yet were not able themselves to sound to the bottom. Do we not
see the Prophet Daniel, ix. 2. studying about the seventy years which the
Prophet Jeremiah had foretold, for the desolations of Jerusalem, whereupon he
prays and obtains the Revelation of the seventy weeks? And the Apostle, 1.
Pet. i. 10, 11. expressly affirms that the ancient Prophets, who Prophesied
of Salvation by Christ, searched and enquired diligently about it, and the time
of it, whereof the Spirit within them Prophesied. And to show that it was no
otherwise with them that were endued with like spiritual Graces under the New
Testament, it is to be observed with what earnest obtestations the Apostle
deals with the Thessalonians, 2. Ep. ii. 1, 2. not to be troubled as if the
day of Christ were at hand, either by SPIRIT, or by word, or by letter as from
us. For if the Spirit spoke it, how are they otherwise to be persuaded? Is it
because the Apostle speaks of pretended inspirations? So it is said indeed,
but them he had instructed them to discern, 1 Thessalonians. v. 21. How then shall we
think that the Apostle beseeches them not to be moved with that which the
Spirit spoke, but as it might be a meaning collected out of words spoken by
some man that had such Graces? And therefore in 1. Tim. iiii. 1. the Apostle
thus writes, (...), The Spirit speaks EXPRESSLY, says the Apostle, making
that a different thing from the meaning apprehended, or collected from things
which the Spirit spoke. And to my apprehension we have an eminent instance
hereof in the Apostle himself, who having had a Revelation, Acts xix. by which
he purposed in the Spirit when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to
go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I must also see Rome; under
this resolution writes to the Romans in that Epistle, dated not long
afterward, xv. 23. That he had now no place in those parts: and to the Elders
of Ephesus not long after that thus speaks, Acts xx. 25. I know that ye all
among whom I have gone, preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no
more. All which nevertheless, being afterward at Rome, he writes to the
Philippians from thence, ii. 24. That he hops to come to them shortly. And to
Philemon, in the parts of Asia, about the same time, verse. 22. To prepare him a
lodging, as hoping to be granted to them through their prayers: Things which
can no ways stand with that which he had written before, that he had no longer
place in those parts; and that the Ephesians should see him no more: and all
this, no more inconvenience in the Apostle then this, that upon his Revelation
he conceived God had appointed that, which afterward upon the success of his
affairs, he was in hope would come to pass otherwise: Nor more inconvenience
that this should be related in Scripture, then that the speeches of Jobs
friends should have a place in it, of whom it is said, They have not spoken
aright of me as my servant Job has done. Thus then, when the Apostle wills
the others to judge of that which two or three Prophets shall say, as he
appoints at their meetings, his meaning is, not only of that which by the
way of common reason and ordinary skill shall be said in Exposition of the
Scripture; but even those things which are spoken by inspiration, which he
calls the Spirits of the Prophets, he will have subject to the Judgment of
the Prophets, so far as concerns the meaning and consequence of them, to be
measured by the rest of the Scriptures. And to this purpose it seems he
orders the use of those spiritual Graces which are poured upon this Church
of Corinth in such abundance, that it was hard to find a course for all of them
to employ their Gifts so, that all might have opportunity by turns, if not at
the same meeting, to use their Grace in Prophesying, that the Church might be
edified by it; and that others might by the Gift of discerning spirits judge
the meaning of those things that were spoken by the Spirit, so that the Church
might receive no such offense, as that which the Thessalonians did, in
conceiving from things that were spoken by the Spirit, that the day of the Lord
was at hand at that time. Though it is nevertheless to be thought that this
course, of speaking by many at the same Assembly, was practiced in the
Synagogue, especially when diverse Scribes and Doctors were present; as also
some traces of the same custom have continued in the practice of the Church.
Beza expounding the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. xi. 8. Therefore ought a
woman to have power over her head because of the Angels, to be meant of the
Ministers of Churches: Vtitur autem plurali numero, quod in maxima donorum Dei
abundantia, non tantum apud Corinthios, ut apparet infra xiv. 39. sed etiam
olim aliis in Ecclesiis, non unus solus, sed etiam bini and terni in coetibus
sacris sermonem haberent, ut de praeclaris aliis donis taceam, de quibus noster
Apostolus infra xiv. 26. Quod etiam liquet ex Tertulliani Apologetico, and
quibusdam in Antiochena Ecclesia Chrysostomi Homiliis: Now he speaks in the
plural number, because for the abundance of Gods Graces, not only amongst the
Corinthians, as appears beneath, xiv. 39. but also in other Churches of old
time, not one alone, but two or three spoke at religious Assemblies. Which also
appears by Tertullians Apologetick, and some Homilies of Chrysostom in the
Church of Antiochia. Tertull. Apolog. c. 39. Certe fidem sanctis vocibus
pascimus, spem erigimus, fiduciam figimus, disciplinam praeceptorum nihilominus
inculcationibus densamus. Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes, and
censura divina: Certainly with these holy words we nourish faith, we erect our
hope, we fasten our confidence; as much we compact our discipline, repeating
the rules of it. There also exhortations, reproofs, and the censure of God:
speaking of reading and expounding the Scriptures in their Assemblies. Whether
or no these be the words which he means I know not; I find nothing else in
that book to the purpose. But it is clear which he says of S. Chrysostom. In
Ferrarius De ritu Concionum, ii. 40. you shall find the passages of his
Homilies marked, in which he signifies, that the Bishop was to preach when he
had done. And in one passage related out of him in Baronius, Ann. lvii. n. 160.
he testifies in express terms, that this custom of the Church was but a
figure and monument of those Graces which had flourished in the Primitive.
Adding further, that when the Preacher blessed, or, as they call it, saluted
the people at his beginning with these or the like words, The Lord be with you,
the people answering, as the fashion was (which yet remains in one place of
our Service) And with thy Spirit, the meaning of this answer had reference to
the Spiritual inspired Grace, out of which they were known to speak, at the
beginning. Gregory Nissene, (...), Ne igitur longius vobis, fratres, sermonis
exordium protrahamus, cum mirific is eorum qui ante nos dixerunt orationibus
operam dederitis. Therefore, brethren, not to draw you out the beginning of my
speech too much in length, having taken pains to hear the admirable Sermons of
those that have spoken before me. But of all the rest the book called the
Constitutions of the Apostles most in particular, ii. 51. (...). Then, says he
(when the Gospel is read) let the Presbyters exhort the people one by one, not
all at once, and after all the Bishop, as it is fitting for the Master to do.
For here you see how the Order of the Apostle was sometimes practiced in the
Church, when the Bishop preached in the last place, after one or more of the
Presbyters.

CHAP. VI.
The parts of that work of Gods Service for which Christians assemble. Psalms
of Gods praises part of the substance of it. The ground and efficacy of Common
Prayers. Reading the Scriptures a substantial part of Public Service. The
necessity and excellence of Preaching, for expounding the Scriptures. The
Eucharist the chief part of Public Service. The Apostles Rule, of Order and
Comeliness. The force of Custom in preserving Order, and of Reason in judging
of Gomelinesse. All practice of the Primitive Church prescribes not to us.
Correspondence with it necessary. The Practice of it, in the point in hand, of
what advantage. Order of Public Service, a Law of Christian Kingdoms.
Direction of Ministers of the Church requisite. The Obligation of it. Agreement
of the chief Reformers.

THus far then have we traveled in the first part of our business
propounded, inquiring the Apostles meaning in this whole discourse, intended to
regulate the use of spiritual Graces proper to that time, in their Assemblies,
by comparing the particulars of it, with that which is found remembered in the
Scriptures to the like purpose. How wide soever these things may be thought
from my intent, as having nothing to do with the particulars, which the Apostle
here orders, to me it shall seem a great gain, for the pains bestowed here,
that from hence we may collect the substance of those things which are to be
done at the Religious Assemblies of Christians, the particulars of that work
for which we Assemble our selves; which are no other according to the Apostle
then our Common Service expresses, in the entrance to it, To set forth his
most worthy Praise, to hear his most holy Word, (which must be understood
according to the purpose and opportunities of several Assemblies, either read
or expounded, as the meaning of it has always been declared by practice) and
to ask those things which be requisite and necessary, as well for the body, as
the soul. The same has Tertullian expressed to have been the business of the
Primitive Christians at their Assemblies. De Anim. c. ix. Jam vero, prout
Scripturae leguntur, aut Psalmi canuntur, aut Adlocutiones proferuntur, aut
Petitiones delega^tur, ita inde materiae visionibus subministrantur. Now, as
the Scriptures are read, or Psalms sung, or Exhortations produced, or Prayers
preferred, so is matter ministered to her visions. In his Apologetick, c. 39.
and in Justine Martyr his second Apology, where they describe to the Powers of
the Empire what the Christians did at their Assemblies, of singing Psalms
there is no remembrance, the rest are the same particulars. There can be no
question made that their practice was derived from the Apostles, when we
consider how much this Discourse of the Apostle infers, in which we have
seen the Psalms and the Prayers which those that were endued with spiritual
Graces composed and conceived on the behalf of the Church, as has been showed:
where nevertheless he has expressed the part that particular persons bear,
when he says, Every man or woman Praying or Prophesying, that is, singing of
Psalms, as has been declared before. In like sort, whatsoever Rules he gives
to order the course of Prophesying among them, proceed from supposition of
reading the Scriptures before, to the Exposition whereof he wills them to
contribute the fruit of their Graces. And this in the first place I make
account to be gained without contradiction from this Discourse of the Apostle,
That all these are substantial parts of that work, for which we go to Church;
all of them Principals, none of them accessories in it. The setting forth of
Gods praises in Psalms of Thanksgiving you shall see to be that part of moral
and perpetual Service, the Order whereof is most particularly remembered in the
Old Testament in Solomon's Temple. As the Sacrifice was burning upon the Altar,
and the Wine-offering pouring out on it, and the Priests blowing with the
Trumpets in the Court of the Sanctuary, which was their Ceremonial and
Figurative Service, in the mean time, the Levites stood upon their Pulpits in
the outer Courts where the men or women of Israel were licenced to come,
singing the Psalms of Gods praises. Times of their Assemblies were prescribed
by the Law of Moses, as you have seen, but no Order for any particular work of
spiritual Service to be performed at them, is there remembered. Not to make a
doubt that other Offices were frequented, together with the Exposition of the
Law, as the custom and opportunity served; but to show, that the Psalms of
Gods praises, for the ordinary daily practice whereof such express Order was
taken and remembered, must by no means be reckoned of the by, but of the main of
Gods Public Service. And if we should go further to show that this was no
personal service of the Levites alone, but of the whole congregation of Gods
people assembled there; and that it is so acceptable with God in this regard,
because his praise appears more glorious, when his people join together in
setting it forth, we might produce a great part of the book of Psalms, wherein
David and other persons inspired by the Holy Ghost have either expressed, or
stirred up the affections of the whole congregation to that work, and
recommended the Service of God which it yields. Psalm. xxxiv. 3. O magnify
the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name TOGETHER. cxlix. 1. O sing unto the
Lord a new song, and his praise in the CONGREGATION of the Saints. lxxxiv. 4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they will be still praising thee.
He commends the condition of Priests and Levites, but he desires as far as
he can to make it his own, cxvii. when he sings, O praise God all ye People,
praise him all ye Nations. The Apostle shows us that this is accomplished
when the Gentiles submit themselves to the Church, Romans xv. 11. and so is all
the rest of like nature, Psalm. c. 4. O go your way into his gates with
Thanksgiving, and into his courts with Praise, be thankful unto him and bless
his Name. But shall we believe that these things are accomplished in merely
believing the Gospel, or in serving him according to it, as they are required
to do in the Scriptures that foresaw it? In fine, S. Augustine has instructed
us, that the Psalms are to be understood in the person of David, or him that
composed them by the Holy Ghost, in the first place; but afterward, they
belong to the person of Christ first, and then to his mystical body the
Church: So, whatsoever is there read in the singular number, has the last
resort of the meaning in the congregation of Gods people: But those things that
are couched in the plural number there cannot properly be understood to
proceed from particular persons; every Praise ye, every Hallelujah is owned of
none but Assemblies. Besides, it expresses to us the interesse which the
honor of God has in every thing of this nature that is public. Could it be
supposed, that the same thing were done, the same praises yielded to God by
each man in private, which all men yield him in common, there is no Christian
that is sensible of the body of Christ, and the fellowship of all members of
it, could think these to be both one to Gods Service, because the Spirit that
makes this body one, requires of each member of it a particular influence in
the common Office. Hearts endued with several Graces to God, are like several
voices to the ear. But we are far from supposing this: Many men may think
that they need not go to Church for those Offices which they do at home: But
they ought to think what the common sort of Christians might do, if Assemblies
were not held: As the matter is, the Service which the best are able to yield
unto God, is much improved by joining with the rest of his members, but should
we not Assemble for that purpose, the hearts of plain simple members, which now
are most acceptable to God, would be able to move little in this work, the
Order of the Congregation not guiding them in it. Last of all, be it considered
that this is the employment of the other world: when men's desires are all
satisfied, and all the subject of prayers possessed, the Angels, the Elders
about the Throne of God, and all the people of Jews and Gentiles which
encompasse it, Revel. vii. 9. cease not to join in the praises of God, when the
Church is become perfectly one. As for the Prayers of Christian Assemblies, we
know upon what Patent they stand. Matthew. xviii. 19, 20. Again I say unto you,
that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing they shall ask,
it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven. For where two or
three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. And we
know that all Service of God at that time had reference to the Temple at
Jerusalem, which reference our Lord abrogateth in his speech with the
Samaritane, John iv. 21. 23. substituting the worship of God in Spirit and
Truth, in stead of the Ceremonial worship of the Temple, upon which all
depended at that time. We must know further, that by the Rules of the
Synagogue, under ten that are of years there is no Congregation. Before that
number of such as are come to years be present, they go not to Prayers: But our
Lord, intending to free his Church of all Rules that might abridge the
Privileges of it, knowing that occasions might fall out to diminish the number
of his people that desired to Assemble, assures them of his presence in the
midst of them, where the least number agree in the things which they desire at
his hands. But if the reason of his presence among them be their agreement in
their desires, then two or three that agree in their desires, with opposition
to the rest of the Congregation, shall not be heard; but if they agree with the
Congregation, then must they, and will they, Assemble with it to obtain their
desires at Gods hands. The Apostle, 1. Tim. ii. 8. I will therefore, says he,
that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands without wrath or disputing.
Beza there, His verbis tollitur Hierosoly mitani Templi circumstantia legalis:
Et ista respondent verbis Mal. i. 2. Joan. iv. 21. Omnem tamen locum intellige
sacris coetibus destinatum. Agit enim Paulus de publicis precibus in communi
conventu, ut in toto orb terrarum pura haec sacrificia Deo offerantur, de
quibus apud Malachiam agitur. These words, in every place, take away the legal
circumstance of the Temple at Jerusalem. And this agrees with the words Mal.
i. 2. Joan. iv. 21. But understand every place, of such as are appointed for
holy Assemblies. For Paul speaks of Common Prayers at public meetings, that
those pure sacrifices, of which the Prophet Malachi speaks, be offered to God
all over the world. When the Apostle forbids wrath, and disputing in their
Prayers, it is plain enough his meaning is of their Assemblies, the fruit
whereof he would not have intercepted through their dissentions. A strange
thing that men should so forget the Communion of Saints, as to think of the
Public Prayers of the Church no otherwise, then of those which they know they
can make at home: As who should say that the incense of the Temple which the
Psalm speaks of, cxli. 2. Let my Prayer be directed before thee as the
incense, made no other perfume, then the spices would do were they burnt one by
one. Coimus ad Deum ut quasi manufacta precationibus ambiamus. Haec vis Deo
grata est Tertull. Apologet. c. 39. We make a riot upon God, as if we sued by
strong hand with our Prayers. This violence is welcome to God. He that is
earnestly desirous to obtain those things which the Church prays for at Gods
hands, will think his pains well bestowed to join so much strength to his suit,
as the favor of the Congregation with God affords. The Jews have an opinion
that the Prayers of the Congregation are always heard: not so the Prayers of
particular persons in private. Maimoni of Prayer c. viii. number. 1. They have
deserved to void the truth of this opinion, as for the favorable part of it,
but the promise of our Lord has enlarged it to us. Again, (...), And always,
says he, let a man go morning and evening to the Synagogue, for his prayer is
not heard always but in the Synagogue: and he that dwells in a city where
there is a Synagogue and prays not there with the Congregation, this is he
that is called a BAD NEIGHBOR. Well may he be called a Bad Neighbor that will
not lend his neighbors prayers the strength of his own; but himself finds
the fruit of his own bad neighborhood, when his own prayers want the
assistance of his neighbors. The Church is one in faith, and one in love, to
this purpose, that all that hold the unity of it, may find the strength of the
whole, in the effect of their own prayers. This is that one shoulder, and that
one lip of the Prophet Zephaniah, one shoulder to crowd into Gods service, one
lip to praise him with. This is that Mountain of God in the Prophet Isaiah,
unto which he foretells that all nations should flow: whereupon the Rule of
the Jews is, to run to the Synagogue, but to come easily from thence, Maimoni
c. viii. n. 2. (...) And we are commanded to run to the Synagogue. As it is
said, Hos. vi. 3. AND WE SHALL KNOW, WE SHALL DRIVE ON TO KNOW THE LORD.
Neither is it to be thought, that the public service of the Church can stand
without reading the Scriptures, how easy soever some men imagine it is to do
it at home. First, from the beginning of Moral and not Ceremonial service in
Synagogues, it has appeared, that it was wont to be read there as the subject
for those speeches that followed for the exposition of it: we know we have the
Law of Moses distinguished into divisions, answerable to the number of weeks in
the year, that it might begin and end with it: and you shall find afterward an
Order of reading the Law in public as ancient as Nehemiahs time. The lessons
of the Prophets, correspondent to these, how ancient soever they be (Elias the
Levite deriveth them from the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, as if the Jews began
to practice them, when he had forbidden them to read the Law of Moses) we know
our Lord Christ took one of them for the subject of his sermon at Nazareth, as
his Apostle stood up at Antiochia after the reading of the Law and the
Prophets. Certain it is, that from hence has been continued the custom of
Lessons of the Old and New Testament in the Church to the same purpose. Justin
Martyr in his second Apology. (...). On the day called Sunday all that abide in
towns or the countries about meet in one place, and the records of the
Apostles, or the writings of the Prophets are read, as far as occasion serves.
Then the Reader having done, the Presiaent in a speech instructs, and
exhorts to the imitation of such excellent things. The words have a place
here, because the Author is so ancient: otherwise the matter is plain enough,
were it but from that we had in the Constitutions of the Apostles, for no
question the custom has been very general, to begin the sermon when the
Lessons of the Epistles and Gospels were done. And hereupon it is that
Preachers, among the Latin Church writers, are called Tractatores, and
Tractare, to preach, and S. Augustines exposition upon S. John is called
Tractatus, because it was preached to the people. All this, because they
handled the Scriptures which were read. And Optatus charging the Donatists and
Parmenians, that their fashion was to leave the exposition of their Texts, the
Lessons read, to fall on railing upon the Catholics, lib. iv. Nullus vestrum
qui non aliud initiet, aliud explicet: Lectiones Dominicas incipitis, and
Tractatus vestros ad injurias nostras explicatis: Profertis Evangelium and
facitis absenti fratri convicium. There is none of you, says he, but begins
one thing and expounds another: Ye begin with the Lessons of the Lord, but ye
pursue your Tractates to our wrong: Ye produce the Gospel, but ye revile your
brother in his absence. Hereupon the name of Tractatores stands sometime in
opposition to Canonici and Authentici; to preserve the difference between the
authority of Scripture, and whatsoever words it is expounded with. A difference
not to be smothered between the Scripture and the best exposition of it that a
man can imagine. There is one thing that hinders the effect of the Scripture
when it is read, that is, because it is not understood. Thereupon comes the
office of Preaching in the Church, to expound the word of God; and that which
is preached has the force and virtue of the Word of God, because the Word of
God is not the letters and syllables, but the sense and meaning of the
Scriptures. But all men are capable more or less of understanding the
Scriptures as they are read: And no man understands them so well, but may
improve by hearing them read in the Church. Let those that slight this part of
the Church Service take order first, that all Congregations shall be perfect in
the knowledge of the Scriptures. And yet were that come to pass, we must not
give way to leave it out: The better they are acquainted with it, the more
shall they improve in the understanding of it, by hearing it repeated. But so
far as it is understood, it is a thing strange and admirable, that any man
living should imagine, that the effect thereof, in inlightning the mind, or
converting the heart, is less when it is read, then when it is expounded out
of the pulpit. The one the word of God, as the holy Ghost inspired it, the
other no less, so far as it departs not from that which is written, but
always subject, so long as man is subject to error and mistake, to depart
from it. And when this precious wine is once dashed with the water of humane
apprehensions, it is no offense to me that it is still called the Word of God;
for so it should be, and so it is presumed to be, till it appear otherwise: but
it will concern every man to look about him, that he pin not on God his own
infirmities. As for the necessity and excellence of preaching, let all them
that are most affected to it examine their reasons, and they shall not ascribe
more to it, then here shall be done. Here, if any where, that difference has
place, which Divines make of things necessary to salvation: some as means,
without which it cannot be had in any case; others as things commanded to be
done, without which it is not to be had for those that are under that Command
and do them not. He that in his ripe years has learned so much of the
Christian faith, as to be informed in the means of our reconcilement to God,
and that condition of life which it requires, believing the one, and
submitting to the other, and desiring his baptism in consequence. As he that
was baptized an infant, and when he comes to years of knowledge does the
like, as it concerns his case to do, what wants such a man to set him in
the state of Salvation, that can be counted necessary MEANS of it? what should
hinder him with old Simeon to sing his Nunc dimittis, should it please God to
take him in that estate? But because that condition of life, which Christians
undertake, professes to do all things out of obedience to the will of God, and
with intention of his honor and service, therefore those things which in the
latitude of their kind and nature are necessary but as things commanded to be
done, become necessary as means of Salvation, to those that are under that
command. He that by his own fault is ignorant of that which it concerns him
to believe, or to do for the discharge of his profession to God: He that
suffers himself to be abused, to be diverted and led aside by the deceits of
the world, and his corrupt inclinations, for want of that warning and advise,
whereof God appoints him the means: he must needs fail of his profession to
God, in fulfilling whereof the means of salvation consists: but he must take
it upon his own account, that he fails of it. Upon these considerations, we
are to value the necessity of Preaching, in respect of particular persons.
Upon these considerations we are to value, how much it must needs concern all
Christian Commonwealths, to furnish the means; all Christian Churches, to take
order that it may be done. As the means to bring men to know, as the means to
move men to embrace those means, without which they cannot be saved: As the
means to instruct them more and more, to guide them from time to time, in a
straight course both of their judgment and doings. These considerations
notwithstanding, if the question be made, Which is the chief work for which
Christians Assemble, to hear the Scriptures expounded by Preaching, or to
serve God in their Prayers. There is a visible advantage due to this latter,
because it is a means nearer the end of both. It cannot be denied that all
Preaching is to the purpose of informing the mind, or moving the heart to
desire that which is good indeed: But Prayer being the actual desire of it, is
the exercise of the means which God ordains to procure it. But otherwise, if
we compare the work of Ministering the Prayers of the Church, with that of
Ministering the Doctrine of the Scripture, upon the considerations premised, it
must be affirmed, that Preaching is the chief work which the Ministers of the
Church from their office are able to contribute toward the public service of
God. Because the other part of it may be Ministered to the same purpose by men
of common sense, whereas this requires those personal abilities which all men
have not. For one may be the mouth of the Congregation in Prayer, to as good
purpose in all regards, in following a prescript form, as exercising his wit
and understanding about it, (suppose this for the present which shall be proved
afterward) and therefore we see in the Primitive Church, most parts of the
Service were referred to inferior Ministers. They had such as read the
Lessons, such as sung the Psalms, and a great part of the Prayers were done by
Deacons. And though many men are so eager to have all Ministers to be the mouth
of the Congregation in conceiving Prayers at the instant; yet no man shall
persuade me that their meaning is, to place the best of their performance,
either in the conceptions or in the language wherein they express the desires
thereof to God, for these sure make no difference to him, so their be no
offense. The best they can contribute is the devotion of the heart which they
pray with, wherein they are but one of the Congregation: the meanest of it may
bring as good as they are able to do. But in Preaching, a man's knowledge in the
Scriptures, his abilities to express his knowledge to the capacity of his
Audience, his discretion in addressing it to their particular without offense
will either be seen, or missed. And therefore, whosoever commends the price
and value of the work, for due reasons, must needs call to mind how difficult
it is. For he that comes to expound the Scripture to the people, must
understand it aright before he comes to expound it, and that understanding
comes not in these days by the immediate inspiration of the Spirit, but is
allotted to humane endeavors, in these that in the fear of God take pains
about the means which he has provided for it. And in delivering no more then a
man's knowledge, there fall out many times these failings, which like Eli's sons
may make the Offering of God to be loathed, and the Ministry of God
contemptible. And though all Scripture, as says the Apostle, 1. Tim. iii. 15.
is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, yet may all this be so unseasonably ministered, that the effect
may prove offense, though the end be amendment. It cannot be said with justice,
that this truth is acknowledged here, to abate the esteem of this work, which
tends indeed to inhance the diligence of them which do it. But this must be
averred, that unless men and abilities be provided for the work, as well as
the work for them, it may prove a sword in a blind man's hand, to wound the
Church as well as the enemies of it. Though all that hitherto has been said,
to the nature and use of these particulars of Public service, pretends to
show no more but this, that they are all principals and substantials, no
accessories in it. That the praise of God in Psalms, the reading of the
Scriptures, is not, by the nature of the work, and the Primitive Custom of the
Church, to while out the time till the Congregation be assembled: That the
prayers of the Church, are not in the main intent of them, to usher in the
Sermon, or to leave impression of it in men's minds afterward, but for the
procuring of all necessaries of the Congregation, and each particular of it, so
far as general order can comprise. Hitherto has nothing been said of the
chief part of Public Service among Christians, that is, of Celebrating and
receiving the Lords Supper: the Eucharist, which from the beginning of the
Profession and Name of Christians, was frequented as the chief part of Public
Service in most of their Assemblies, now, because it is not of such continual
use, is not mentioned among the rest, at the beginning of our Service. For the
present I press no more but the words of the Apostle, as they seem to be
expounded by a passage of Ignatius, to show what effect the prayers of the
Congregation have in the Consecration of that Sacrament, and the effect of it.
For it is a fearful word of the Apostle, 1. Cor. xi. 20, 21. where having
charged the divisions among them, to be the cause that their Assemblies were
not for the better but for the worse, he proceeds thus, When ye come together
therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper: For in eating
every one takes before other his own supper: and one is hungry, and another is
drunken. It is plain it was the Lords Supper they intended to celebrate,
therefore, if they received it not through their own fault, it must needs be
sacrilege on their hands. The fault is plain enough, as well neglect of the
Congregation, out of the schisms that were among them, as their excess in
particular. Take the words of Ignatius to expound the Apostle, they are the
words of one that drank at his spring, and spoke to the same purpose, Epist. ad
Ephesians. (...). Let no man be deceived, if a man be not within the Altar, he
comes short of the bread of God. He that is within the Altar, with Ignatius,
is he that communicates with the Church: in imitation of those under the Law
that feasted upon the relics of Peace Offerings, to which the Love Feasts of
Christians used with the Eucharist, practiced correspondence. There was one
Altar from whence all men communicated of those Sacrifices; which those that
forsake, says Ignatius, may take upon them to celebrate the Eucharist, but the
bread they receive is not the Lords, it is profane. To the same purpose, Ep. ad
Smyrn. (...). Let that be counted a firm Eucharist which is held under the
Bishop, or him to whom he commits it. The celebration of the Eucharist is
not sound, nor effectual but under the Bishop, that is, in the unity of the
Church, therefore sacrilege in them that attempt it. His reason is to our
purpose, for if the prayer of one or two have that force, says he, that God
stands in the midst of them, how much more shall the Prayer wherein the
Bishop and Church agrees prevail? That Prayer wherein they agree prevails to
make the Sacrament the bread of God, to them that agree in it, therefore that,
wherein they agree not leaves it as it was no bread of God, but the subject of
their Sacrilege. If this be not enough to enforce the virtue of public
Prayers, nothing will serve the turn. It is the agreement of the Congregation
in their Prayers, that makes the Elements, the Supper of the Lord with S.
Paul; the bread of God with Ignatius, to them that agree: those that agree not
fail of the Grace, fail not of committing sacrilege. Having thus far derived
the substance of that which is to be done at Christian Assemblies, from the
practice of the Apostles themselves, and after them of the Primitive
Christians, it will be requisite before we go further, upon the president of
their practice, to consider the weight and extent of the reasons, upon which
the Apostle proceeds, in ordering the manner of performing the particulars,
whereof hitherto has been said among the Corinthians: The chief whereof is the
edification of Gods people, upon which he pitcheth the issue of his foregoing
dispute, verse. 26. which may seem to extend no further then the information of
the mind and understanding, in matters of Religion belonging to knowledge;
because the speech of the Apostle proceeds concerning the use of spiritual
Graces, which he directs to that purpose: As you see, verse. 3. it is
expressly differenced from matter of exhortation and comfort, when he says,
He that Prophesies, speaks to men to EDIFICATION, and exhortation, and
comfort. Nevertheless it must be something else that he means there, verse.
17. For thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified: that is,
because he understands not what thou say, he is not guided and directed to
go along with the Thanksgiving wherein thou go before in an unknown Language.
And in this Epistle before, viii. 10. Shall not the conscience of him that is
weak, be edified to eat those things which be offered to Idols? Where you see
a man is said to be EDIFIED by whatsoever it is that advances his intentions
toward any work. And therefore, though the reason of EDIFYING may sometimes
tend to the particular sense of Teaching, yet it is not so to be confined, but
that, whatsoever is a fit means to train and guide us in the ways of
godliness, must be said to tend toward the edification of Gods people. And
thus, the Rules which the Apostle afterward qualifieth all that is to be done
in the Church with, when he says, Let all things be done decently, and in
order, are clearly subordinate to this main reason of the Edification of the
Church, and derived from it. For, without doubt, there is nothing so powerful
to Edification, that is, to guide and train the body of the Church in the
exercise of godliness, as a good Order for the particular practice of those
Offices thereof which are generally commanded in the Scriptures. Well might the
Apostles say here, verse. 33. God is not the Author of confusion but of Order,
as in all Churches of the Saints. Whosoever withdraws himself from the
public Order of the Church, out of opinion that a better might be established,
will hinder the Edification thereof more in that neglect of the course in force
which he procures, then it is possible he should advance it in the practice of
those whom he thinks to direct in a better course. For on the one side, his
own followers, out of heat of contention, shall always spend their zeal upon
matters of small consequence, which ought to be conversant about the great
things of the Gospel: On the other side, those that are not affected with his
singularities, are disquieted in their own course of Gods Service. The other
part of the Apostles Rule seems to extend further then the term of Decency,
in which it is translated, contains, (...) says the Apostle, honest says
the Old Latin, and in S. Paul's Epistles (...), which is rendered there honest
ambulare, and (...), in the Acts, honestae mulieres, all these express more
then Decency. For that is seen in the least matters, where all things are fit
and suitable, but that which in Latin is called honestas, in none but those
that carry an appearance that deserves respect. Which if the property of the
word will not enforce, as to them that relish it right without fail it will
do, the nature and kind of that whereof the Apostle speaks, will constrain it
to import no less then that which bears an appearance of respect and
account: Because in matter of so high a nature, as the exercise of Religion,
nothing can be decent, nothing can become, but that which preserves the
respect which actions of that rank are to be performed with. So much common
sense tells us, that the outward appearance of all kind of proceedings, is a
means to maintain the inward esteem which men ought to hold of those things
that are done there. Let no man blame me that appeal to common sense to judge
what becomes in matters of Religion, which must neither stand nor fall by the
judgment of common sense, being so far beyond it. The Apostle here has done
it before me, verse. 23. If the Church be met, and all speak with tongues, and
there come in those that are unlearned or unbelievers, will they not say that
ye are mad? For what is this, but to condemn that which they did in the
exercise of Religion, by the verdict of common sense, which though unable to
judge of the Religion of Christians, nevertheless is able to discern what is
suitable to the end which the Assemblies of Christians profess? And do we not
all see with what kind of reasons in another place, 1. Cor. xi. 13. he argues
another point of this nature, to settle a custom for men to be bare, women to
be veiled at their Assemblies? It is first to be known, that the women of those
times, and of the Jews in particular, as Tertullian in one place witnesses,
were careful to keep their faces veiled from the sight of men, when they came
in public; which was in them a profession of bashfulnesse, and that modesty
which they desired to preserve. On the other side, in men it was a mark of
confusion and disgrace to have the face covered: the custom was to go bare in
public, and that in token of the freedom and boldness which they professed.
And it is plain, that the Covering, whereof the Apostle speaks, was such an
one as the face was veiled with: for therefore he says, verse. 4. The man
dishonors his head, in covering it when he prays or prophesies,
disclaiming the freedom and dignity of his sex: The woman in discovering her
head, not professing the modesty and subjection of her sex: therefore he says
afterward, that the woman's hair is given her for a veil, that is to cover the
face with, which if it be not done, she had as good be shaven, says he, verse.
5. In Tertullians time, those that professed Virginity, took upon them to sit
with their faces unveiled in the Church, taking it for a privilege of their
rank, to disclaim the subjection of the sex, and profess freedom. This is
the occasion of his book, De Virginibus velandis. What opinion it was, upon
which the custom which the Apostle writes against at Corinth proceeded, is
not known. How the Apostle argues we see, 1. Cor. xi. 13. Judge in your
selves, says he, is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered? does not
even nature it self teach you, etc? To show us the reason whereupon he
proceeds, that the custom then practiced, for men to go bare-head in sign
of freedom and profession of boldness and cheerfulness of heart, women
veiled in sign of modesty and bashfulnesse, as it was agreeable to revealed
truth, as the Apostle disputes before, verse. 3, 7. which teaches that the
woman was created of the man, and must not forget the subjection she owes him
from whom she first came; so is it to the light of nature, that teaches women
to keep their hair to veil themselves with; if there be nothing else to do it
with, men to part with theirs, that it hinder not their boldness to appear: As
Tertul. Apolog. c. xxx. says, They prayed bare-headed, because not ashamed. By
which it remains undeniable, how much the Apostle refers to common reason,
to judge of the fitness of those things that are practiced at our Religious
Assemblies, when he sets aside his Apostolic Authority, to consult with
their common sense about matters to be ordered. But when that is done, having
alleged how agreeable the custom for which he pleaded was, both to the light
of nature, and to revealed truth; because it is not possible that matters of
this nature should be put past contradiction and dispute, by constraining
reasons issuing from the mere nature of things, and yet the quiet of the
Church, on which the Edification of it depends, requires that they should be
out of dispute: you shall see where the last resort of his plea ends, when he
says, verse. 16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God. where he has estated a general Rule for
the Church to follow, that in matters of this indifference, the custom of the
Church is to be preferred before our own reasons. The indifference whereof here
we speak, is not to be found in the action to be done or not to be done, as if
in things of this slight nature our obligation to God had no influence, as if
it were indifferent to a man to do or not to do, to do this or the other: but
the indifference, whereof we speak, is to be understood in the latitude and
kind of the thing prescribed to be done or not done, which indifference is
taken away by custom accruing. For example, when S. Augustine says, Ep.
cxviii. that to fast on Saturday or not, to celebrate the Eucharist, or to
communicate every day or not, were things of free observance; his meaning was
not, that it was free for particular persons to do what they would, without
respect to the custom in which they lived; that is quite against the purpose
of his Epistle, which is for the observation of present customs: but that of
their own nature and kind they were free to be determined by the practice of
several Churches, which he that regards not in his particular, is the cause
of an offense. It is no more then the Apostle teaches, when he says, If any
man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of
God. Where he acknowledges, that in things of this nature, even his own
reasons, for the custom in force, must needs be subject to contradiction of
contrary reasons, much more, other men's reasons, for customs of like nature,
might be opposed with such as might move men to think the contrary custom
better, for which they plead: and yet concluding, that they ought to submit
their reasons to the custom in force, has given us authority to conclude,
That men are bound, in matter of that nature, to balk their private judgment,
to proceed upon public custom. The reason being that which was argued before,
because custom contains Order, and upon Order the edification of the Church
depends: Neither can private Innovations, in the advantage which they yield,
beyond that which is received, countervail the disadvantage of public
confusion and unquietness, which they cause. There are besides these which
have been discoursed two considerations of singular moment to recommend and to
enforce the Orders of Public Service. For as the Church universal is but one
in regard of times, as well as of places and countries, those Orders must needs
appear most commendable, which are derived from the universal practice of the
Ancient Church, especially next the Apostles: And as the Church is at this time
incorporate into the State of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, it is the secular
Arm that establishes it with a power that is able to constrain, but when that
is done, there must needs accrue a second obligation of obedience for
conscience, which the Apostle requires to be yielded to secular Powers. It is
not my purpose to oblige the Church of this time to reduce into practice all
things which a man may find to have been practiced even in the time of the
Apostles, much less afterward: We have diverse remarkable instances, of
matters allowed, and appointed by the Apostles in Scripture, which are come to
disuse upon appearance that the reason is ceased whereupon they were
prescribed. Such is that whereof I spoke even now, for women to be veiled on
their faces, in the time of Public Service, which the Apostle inforceth with
so many reasons, and yet among us does not take place, neither in the rest of
countries, where it was never the custom for women to go abroad with their
faces covered, in sign of the modesty and subjection which they profess.
Such is that Ancient Custom of Agapae, or Feasts of Love, the Original
whereof S. Chrysostom truly deriveth from the manner of living of those
Primitive Christians that made all things common, in the Acts of the Apostles.
There were those in other places that went not so far, yet intended to
preserve some impression of their practice: These, upon set days of
Assemblies, furnished a common entertainment both for rich and poor, so that,
Service being done, after the Communion of the Mysteries, they went all to
feast together, the rich providing and inviting the poor, and all together
making good cheer. This is his discourse, in 1. ad Cor. Hom. xxvii. neither was
it any part of the Apostles mind, to forbid this course, but rather to allow
it, so far as he regulateth and orders the course of it. Which
nevertheless we see it is so lost, as if there had never been remembrance of
any such thing in Scripture, because it appears to common reason, that it
cannot be practiced to the same purpose, now that all the world is Christian,
as it was when they were tied so strait together by the Profession that
differenced them from the Gentiles. And such is that Order of the Apostle
concerning Gentiles converted to the Faith, Acts xv. 29. To abstain from meats
offered to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled: The reason where
of being nothing but this, when it is examined to the bottom, that the Jews
converted to the Faith, might find less offense in matters of daily practice,
which their Orders imposed upon them, but the Gentiles made no scruple at, and
so might the better piece into one household of the Church; it is no marvel if
the observance of it came afterward to disuse when the reason had ceased. And
therefore it is remarkable even in S. Augustines time, as we find, cont. Faust.
l. xxxii. 15. that diverse Christians then scrupled at the violation of this
observance, in eating of a Hare killed by breaking the neck, or small Fowl
without letting blood, which he that does, says he, is now laughed at for his
pains of the rest; because it could not appear to one so soon as the rest, that
the ground of this injunction was ceased. If then such Ordinances and Customs
as are allowed and enjoined by the Apostles themselves are with right
abolished, because the reason of them is ceased, much more those, which were
taken up at the beginning upon humane appointment of the Church, may cease when
the reason of that good appears not, and must cease when evil consequences,
which they draw into the Church at their heels, begin to appear. This is that
which justifies the Reformation which we profess, wherein some observances in
the Church, as ancient as there is remembrance in it of things used since the
time of the Apostles, are perhaps abolished by Law, or disused by Custom; the
remembrance of the dead at the Celebration of the Eucharist, for example: The
reason of edification of the Church, by the comfort which it receives at the
Communion professed with the deceased, not being now required in particular, by
them which presume of it, in all that dye in the Faith; and the abuses, which
it has trained in after it, appearing unsufferable. But all this being
granted, the consideration of the Primitive Church, and the President of it, to
my understanding, prescribes two things: The first is general: as it is a
Church, and all Churches make one Church by acknowledging and maintaining Union
and Communion with the Churches that have been in other ages, as well as with
the Churches that are in other Countries, we are obliged not to disclaim, not
to renounce it, but to maintain our selves always of Communion with it,
without substantial difference of belief or practice. The Donatists in old
time, as S. Augustine charge, fell foul upon the Article of the Catholic
Church, because they acknowledged no Church but their own, but thought it had
failed in all other Countries, by communicating with the Church of Africa, from
which they had separated themselves: Much more foul must he needs fall upon
that Article, that thinks the Church perished almost as soon as it was
instituted, and proceeds in his practice, as obliged to renounce that which
was in the first ages. To maintain this Communion, it is not requisite we
commend, but it is necessary we tolerate all that was then in practice: though
we believe some things may be mended at this time, we must not believe any
thing was pernicious at that time. This indeed, in the height, concerns them
which separate from this Church: Let them advise upon what terms they renounce
that Church which communicates with the Primitive Church, with which all
Churches are bound to hold correspondence; but in a lower degree concerns all
those that think they cannot detest the corruptions of the Church of Rome
enough, till they involve the Primitive Church, and whatsoever is done upon the
President of it, in the same imputations which stick upon it: which is, out of
indiscreet zeal to our own cause, to prevaricate against it, and for the
blindness of the love we bear it, to oversee the advantages of it. For what
greater pleasure can we do the Church of Rome, then to quit them the Ancient
Church as their clear advantage? Or what greater scandal can we fasten upon
the Reformation which we love, then to make every thing we like not a mark of
Antichrist, for which we hold our selves bound to separate? which if we should
do upon no other matters, then those which some men will have to be such, then
were we as true schismatics as they of the Church of Rome would have us. The
second is an advantage more particular to the point we are in hand with. As it
was the Church Primitive, near the fountain, and resented that fire the Holy
Ghost had inspired so late, that which discourse of reason concludes to be for
the Edification of the Church in the Service of God, must needs appear more
reasonable, if it were then in practice. Were the question about matters
difficult and obscure in the meaning of the Scriptures, knowledge goes along
with gray hairs, and it is to be believed that the Church may improve in it, as
in time: But whereas it was said before, that we are to use our common reason in
judging what is for the Edification of the Church in the Order of Public
Service, it is not to be thought that these are matters that require so much
depth of understanding, as they do uprightness of disposition, to give
sentence without inclination or prejudice. I say then, that when the coast was
clear of partialities, the matters in hand not controverted on any side, the
Church bent more to act in the Service of God, then to dispute about it, the
practice of that time may be a way too steep for us to tread, but sure it is
straight to direct us. We must not slight those Orders which directed them to
make the Service of God their earnest business, because the Church of Rome
has made it a formal employment to pass the time over with. If in weeding
this Garden of Gods Church we pluck up wholesome Ordinances with the abuses
which have been pinned to them, well may men devise Laws for a good fense, but
not to much purpose, when Religion is not suffered to grow within the Pale.
That noble and learned Du Plessis thought it a great advantage to the cause he
undertook against the Mass, if he could demonstrate the Form of Service used
in the Reformed Churches of France, to be more agreeable to that of the
Primitive Church, then that of the Masse-book of Rome. This he thought worth
his pains to undertake, and if we regard the substance of Public Service, may
well be thought to have performed it. I am yet in a more general point,
concerning the Order of Public Service, but I shall think it advantage enough
to the cause, in which I deal, to show the points questioned in this Order to
be of more Ancient Practice in the Church, then the corruptions of the Church
of Rome, for which we leave it. And when I come anon to survay the particular
Form of Service which this Church uses, let men of learning judge what is
nearer to the Primitive then both; but thereupon I must take leave to conclude,
That this Church is not to forsake the Primitive to conform to other Reformed
Churches, where the Order in force has both the President of so Ancient
Practice, and the reason of Edification to commend it. Now the difference
between this State of the Church, incorporate into the bodies of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, and the Primitive, when it was either tolerated or persecuted
under the Roman Empire, is to be seen in the Apostles fishing after the
Resurrection of Christ, John xxii. 11. Though there were taken 153. great
fishes, yet the Net brake not. For the multitude of believers were of one
heart, and one soul, Acts iiii. 32. They came out of good will into the Net of
the Apostles, and out of good will they applied themselves to the Orders,
wherein they were directed by them and their successors, not able to constrain
obedience; so the Net was not strong enough to hold them, and yet brake not.
But when the world came into the Church, then was the Parable of our Lord more
clearly fulfilled, which resembles the Gospel to a Net, which drew to the land
both good and bad fish, and when the Net is not strengthened by the secular
Arm, no marvel to see it break in pieces. It is therefore requisite, that the
Orders of Public Service have the force of Temporal Laws, by Act of Kingdoms
and Commonwealths; but it is nevertheless requisite, that it should be
directed by the Office of Ministers of the Church, no otherwise then it was
before the Empire or any Commonwealth received the Faith. The charge of
directing belongs to the one which cannot be dispossessed of it, the power of
constraining belongs to the other which must give account how they use it or
not. Heb. xiii. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, or guide you, and
submit your selves: for they watch for your souls as they that must give
account. 1 Thessalonians. v. 12, 13. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them which
labor among you, and are over you in the Lord; and to esteem them very highly
in love for their works sake. What can these Exhortations and Injunctions of
the Apostle concern, if in matters so proper to their charge, as the Public
Service of God and the Order of it, those of whom the Apostle speaks are not
to direct but to execute? And when those disorders fell among the Corinthians
in their Feasts of Love, and receiving the Mysteries, in praying, praising God,
and preaching in unknown Languages, no doubt through those partialities of the
Presbyters, the Ordinary Guides of the Church there, where of has been spoken
elsewhere; the Apostle indeed himself takes Order in his time, but in case the
like fall out afterward, has he not authorized the Ordinary Ministeries of
the Church, by his example, to take Order in like matters? And when he writes
to Timothy, 1. Tim. ii. 1. I will therefore that first of all supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men: wherein
without peradventure he takes order for the substance of Public Prayer for
their Assemblies, as shall appear, is it his purpose to refer the ordering of
it to the Congregation there, or to his Office whom he inchargeth with it? It
is to be seen indeed how much King David did in ordering the Public course of
Divine Service in his time: But it is to be considered how he proceeded in it,
by that which we read, 1. Chron. xv. 16, 17. And David spoke to the chief of
the Levites, to appoint their brethren singers with instruments of music,
psalteries, and harps, and cymbals, sounding by lifting up the voice with joy.
And the Levites appointed Heman and the rest: which is the very course by which
we pretend such things are to pass. But in the Church of Christ, as from the
beginning things came to be practiced in the Service of God, by Order of the
Ministers and consent of the people; so when Emperors, Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths received the Faith, they purchased themselves no right of
disposing in such matters, as by the Scriptures belong to the Ministers charge,
but they impose upon themselves the charge of enforcing these Orders which
shall seem to be for the advancement of godliness. And therefore upon the
judgment of discretion, common to all Christians, they are to proceed in
denying or enforcing the execution of that which is directed by them whose
charge it concerns. If they proceed further, they are to answer for the good
as well as for the wrong which they do, so far as that which is done for the
better, as it advances the public good in the particular substance of that
which is done, so it may prejudice it more, in the consequence of the Example.
Let us then recollect from the first to the last, what has been said, of the
reasons and grounds whereupon the Apostle proceeds in regulating matters
concerning the Public service of God, and we shall find that the Church in all
ages is to proceed no otherwise. First, the edification of the Church, that is,
the instruction of Gods people in the knowledge of him, and the training of
them in the exercise of godliness, is the aim proposed. This is procured by
observing Order and Comeliness in all things to be done, of that nature. The
best and most unpartiall reason is to be employed in judging what best becomes
in matters of this weight: and because it is not possible to put these
Ordinances past contradiction of opposite reasons, the custom directed by the
Ministers of the Church, upon advise of common reason, and most primitive and
universal President of the Church, and enforced by the secular Arm, is to take
place for Order sake. If after all this a question be made, Whether matters
established with a tolerable respect to the Fiduciall Line of this Rule, oblige
men in conscience to observe them or not, he shall leave the Church obnoxious
to perpetual confusion, by necessary consequence, seeing it is not possible
that all men should agree, of their free accord to observe any course as
fittest to be observed, unless they think themselves tied in conscience to
observe that Rule, which for the latitude and kind of it is not sinful for
themselves to observe, and that if they fail, they may be constrained to it,
because it is established. Possible it is that men proceeding in the form of
this Rule, should so far mistake themselves, as to enjoin the Church to
violate some of Gods Laws in obeying theirs: in such, a man is bound with his
blood to maintain his disobedience. But our speech concerns matters of
indifference, where the perpetual Law of God and Nature forbids not the
whole kind and latitude of the thing commanded, where no perpetual Law of God
or Nature, no positive constitution of God or man, that ought to take place
before this, comes between; if the Laws of the Church, strengthened by the
secular Arm, bind not a man in conscience by virtue of that Law of God, that
inforceth obedience to their Authors, to do according to them, then must all
men be at their freedom, to dissolve or preserve order in the Service of God
as they please. Where nothing but custom of the Church, upon probable reason,
directs our practice, we must not proceed according to our private reasons,
which persuade the contrary; but according to public custom, if we will be
ruled by the Apostle: But where there is Law to constrain us, we may perhaps
have reason to think, that the Authors of Laws might have done better, in
ordering matters otherwise, and yet be bound our selves to follow the course
which they prescribe. They are to answer for the things they enjoin; we for our
performance; when was any humane Law made that could not be faulted? if our
obedience be delayed till it find such laws as no fault can be found with, the
world must end in confusion, before we practice that virtue. It is never
lawful to do any thing that is evil; but it is not evil, but necessary, in the
sphere of things indifferent, to follow the Law that stands, though a better
might stand in stead of it. Herewith agrees the judgment of the principal
reformed Divines, themselves chief Reformers, which my desire is to repeat
here, though it has been produced more at large, not as pretending to stand or
fall by plurality of voices, but desiring to make it appear, that nothing is
said here to cross the Principles of the Reformation and chief Reformers.
Philip. loco de Caerem. in Ecclesia, p. 651. In Ecclesiis emendatis reliqui
sunt ritus aliqui adiaphori, quia hujus vitae actiones ordine aliquo
distribuendae sunt. Hominum natura intelligit and amat ordinem, qui quidem
maxim decet Ecclesiam and congressus publicos. In reformed Churches there
remain some indifferent rites (rites concerning indifferent things) because the
actions of this life are to be disposed in some order. Man by nature
apprehends and loves order, which especially becomes the Church and Public
Assemblies. Calv. 4. Instit. x. 27. Neque enim haberi potest quod Paulus
exigit, ut decenter omnia and ordine fiant, nisi additis observationibus,
tanquam vinculis quibusdam, ordo ipse and decorum consistat. That whith Paul
requires, that all things be done decently and in order, is not to be
obtained, unless that Order and Comeliness stand upon some observances, added
as bonds, to wit, to enforce it. To the same purpose a little before, Si in
rebus agendis vigere semper aliquem ritum oportet, quem non respui publicae
honest at is intersit, at que adeo humanitatis ipsius: id in Ecclesiis
praesertim observandum, quae cum been composita omnium constitutione optime
sustinentur, tum vero sine concordia nullae sunt prorsus. And a little after he
touches the reason here discoursed to the quick. At cum in hominum moribus
tanta sit diversitas, tanta in animis varietas, tanta in judici is ingentisque
pugna, neque politia ulla satis firma est, nist certis legibus constituta, nec
sine stata quadam forma servari ritus quispiam potest. But there being so much
difference in men's manners, so much diversity of minds, so much contrariety of
judgments and dispositions, neither is any Commonwealth firm as it should be,
till it be settled with certain Laws, neither can any rite be observed, without
some settled form. Rites prescribed by God, cannot be observed but according to
Forms prescribed by man. Philip. ubi supra. Rursus autem munitur publics
tranquillitas hac doctrina, quod dicimus, propter (...), eos ritus qui boni
ordinis causa instituti sunt, servandos esse, and peccare homines petulantes,
qui in Ecclesiis emendatis violant tales ritus cum scandalo. Again, the public
quiet is fortified by this doctrine, wherein we say, that for good Orders sake,
those Rites which are ordained for good Orders sake, are to be observed, and
that such saucy persons, as violate such Rites with offense in reformed
Churches, do sin. Again, Aliqui homines, etc. Some men of savage nature hate
all Laws as a prison: but others of gentle nature and sociable, and
understanding themselves to be born to Communicate, nay, that their chief work
is to contribute their endeavors to help and cherish the Church of their own
accord observe honest and useful Rites, and avoid Offenses, and knowing that
public Assemblies of the Church are ordained by the singular providence and
blessing of God, and that God would have this frequency credited, that the
voice of the Gospel may sound upon earth, study to maintain the order, the
quiet, the gravitie of these Assemblies.

CHAP. VII.
The prohibition of Quenching the Spirit, concerns immediate inspirations.
Prescript Form of Prayers as well of as other parts of the Service is for the
Edification of the Church. Order not to be maintained without it. Three parts
of the Service of the Temple. The Praises of God, the Confession of sins, the
Priests Blessings. The Service of the Synagogue prescribed. Of the eighteen
Benedictions. Of the Service of their Fast of Seven days. The Deacon ministered
their Service. Justine Martyr and Tertullian misunderstood. Sum of the
Church Service. All Prescript. Of Canons that Prescribe the Service to be
Ordered by Councels. Alterations in Liturgies. Agreement of Reformed Churches.

THis is the substance of those things that are to be done, for the public
Service of God, at the Assemblies of Christians. And these are the grounds of
those Rules by which the form, in which they are done, is to be directed.
Before we come to touch that particular form of Service which we use, with
these Rules, let us make trial of them in some particulars, which in the
general point of public Service are or may be questionable. And that by the
method already set on foot of Reasons drawn from the grounds and rules of the
Apostle, seconded by the practice of the Primitive, the judgment and agreement
of Reformed Churches. Among which there is none of more account then this,
Whether there ought to be a set Form of Prayer prescribed for our Assemblies.
For it is not denied, that their ought to be an order prescribed for Public
Service in the whole: but Public Prayers, and the form of them, it is
pretended, are to be referred to the discretion of the person by whom they are
ministered, by virtue of that charge of the Apostle, wherein he forbids to
Quench the Spirit, 1. These. v. 19. which is conceived to be done, when the
conceptions of men's minds, or the expressions of their tongues, are stinted to
prescribed forms, and men by that means so confined, that they cannot make
demonstration of those graces which the Spirit of God has endued them with.
This is, to my understanding, the best of that Argument, that casts so much
and so dangerous scruple in a clear business. And at a distance carries an
appearance of the Word of God, and the meaning of Scripture, but survayed near
hand, may be a warning to all men, how they trouble the Church with
misapprehension, received upon the superficial sound of the words of it. For
when the Apostle forbids to Quench the Spirit, he speaks of immediate
inspirations of the holy Ghost, such as they were, by which men were enabled to
discern the secrets of other men's hearts. As in 1. Cor. xiv. 24. by which the
Prophets of Antiochia were informed of the will of God, for the sending of Paul
and Barnabas: And those others for the ordination of Timothy, Act. xiii. 2. 1.
Tim. iv. 14. by which the truth was revealed unto them, as concerning matters
in hand at their Assemblies, 1. Cor. xiv. 30. And the Rule of the Apostle, If
Revelation be made to another as he sits, let the first be silent, is to the
same purpose, of not Quenching these inspirations. Which, as it has been
showed, that they were maintained by the exercise of them, so it is no marvel
if the Apostle be earnest to have them by all means maintained, because in them
consisted the Edification of the Church at that time. Therefore he commands,
that when immediate revelation is made to one, he that spoke before be silent:
not to demonstrate what the Spirit of God was able to do, in the person by whom
it speaks. That is a mistake which overthrows the whole dispute of the
Apostle, in the xii. chapter before (for it tends to the admiration of those
persons which are endued with such Graces; the thing the Apostle labors
against through that whole discourse.) But because by them, the presence of the
holy Ghost in the Church was evidenced to unbelievers, and confirmed to
believers: And because, by such inspirations, when it pleased God to send them,
the Church was informed of all things contained in them, in the particulars of
the true sense of the Scriptures, debated in their Congregations. In fine,
Quench not the Spirit, in regard of the Church, is the same with the
proposition of this xiv. chap. Be zealous of spiritual Graces, especially of
Prophesying: which is also the conclusion of the same, verse. 39. Be zealous of
Prophesying, but forbid not to speak with Tongues. He that has the Grace
quenches it, when he pursues it not by those means, which were effectual
toward it at that time: and the Church quenches it, if they allow not the
publishing of such inspirations at their Assemblies. For my part, I am
confident, that the words of the Apostle, Quench not the Spirit, relate as well
to the gift of Languages, as his words in this xiv. chap. verse. 1. Be zealous
of spiritual Graces, especially of Prophesying. For Prophesying being
excepted, the rest of spiritual Graces is the gift of Languages, and it
concerned the Thessalonians, as it did the Corinthians, that this gift of
Languages should be maintained among them, as well to evidence the presence of
the holy Ghost, as because the things inspired in strange languages, being
expounded, served for the unestimable edification of the people. If then these
that stand upon this prohibition of the Apostle, will come into our Assemblies,
and speak the mysteries of Gods kingdom in Languages unknown to them before, if
they will take upon them to reveal the secrets of men's hearts, to design
Ministers of the Church, to decide matters in debate through the Church, by
immediate inspiration of the holy Ghost, and to make proof of these Graces, as
Prophets are to do, we will acknowledge, that the Offices of composing the
praises of God, and conceiving Prayers in behalf of the Church, is to be
referred to them upon the same terms, as it was to those of whom we read in
the Apostle: nothing composed by humane reason shall be thought so acceptable
to God, so much for the edification of his people, as that which his own Spirit
inditeth. But if they dare not pretend to any such Grace, let the^ consider
upon what consequences they pretend to the Privileges of it. For they that
pretend that the Church is bound to use their conceptions and expressions, for
the direction of the people, in public prayers, upon this ground, because they
are the inspirations of the holy Ghost, may by as good right pretend to decide
all matters controverted in point of Faith, to order all matters of dispute in
the Government of the Church, to root out and plant both Kingdoms and
Churches. For that which the holy Ghost inspireth for ordering of Church or
Commonwealth, is as much to be executed, as that which it inspireth for
directing the prayers of Congregations. But if they disclaim all pretense of
immediate inspiration, as there is no doubt but they do, and profess no
confidence, but of the blessing of Gods Spirit upon humane endeavors, perhaps
complaining, that these consequences are drawn upon them, which belong to those
opinions which they renounce; First, it will be reason, that they be free in
acknowledging and professing their meaning, in a matter of this consequence.
Because it is certain, that the sound of GODS SPIRIT, and the fashion of
Extemporary conceptions, in Praying and Preaching, insinuates, and needs must
insinuate to the people, the pretense of immediate inspirations, which to men
of judgment they are constrained to disavow. Then, this being done, our
question will be upon the right hinges, and the point to be decided will be
this, Whether it be more for the edification of the people, in the direction of
their public Prayers, to use those forms, which upon mature advise have been
framed by the ablest of those, the Church had to entrust with that business,
or these, which particular persons, out of their readiness in conceiving and
expressing those things which they think fit to be said, shall use in their
Congregations. It has been well observed already in this point, that the
spirits of the people are stinted as much to the Form which the Minister
conceives, as his spirit, to the form which the Church has prescribed. So
that if the Church quench the Spirit in them, when it confineth them to the
forms which it has advised, they do no less to the people, in confining them
to the form which they from time to time conceive. The precept of the Apostle
comes to one effect in both courses, the question that remains is, Which is
more for the Edification of the people. Which, because the Apostle in matters
of this nature has referred us to the common reason of men not possessed with
prejudice, my desire is, that the common sense of Christians may sentence;
dispairing to carry any thing by dispute of reason, at the hands of such men as
can make any question in a matter so clear. But because with reason it may be
alleged, that men's particular conceptions are more apt to address themselves
to the particular occasions of Congregations, fit to be represented to God in
their Prayers then a general form is able to do, it will be requisite further
to represent, what advantages this convenience is out-wayed with on the other
side. First, in regard of abilities of persons, by whom it must be performed,
let me congratulate with those, that are so sensible of their own, that they
would have other men, for a punishment of their negligence, to shame themselves
before the people, in doing it as it should not be done: But let me wish them
more love to our common profession, then to desire to draw so just a scandal
upon it. Is it like to grow commendable with the enemies of it, in this
respect, because the Ministry of public Prayers, is ridiculous to our own
people? Or what is the way to make Religion, and the Sacrifice of God stink in
men's nostrils, if this do not? Those of the ablest of this opinion think
themselves ill dealt with, when the stops and hummes of their Extemporary
Prayers, are drawn in consequence, to the prejudice of that way which they
defire to render commendable: but when we hear these flying pretenses pass up
and down, by which those demurres of humane imperfection are entitled to those
unutterable groans which the Spirit of God inditeth, according to the Apostle,
we have reason not to admire the occasion of such unsufferable profaneness.
What shall we say then of the meanest rank of persons, by whom Extemporary
conceptions and expressions in such high Offices must be ministered, but this,
that the ill order by which they are vented to the world, must needs bring
Religion to be contemptible? Again, in regard of men's opinions and
inclinations, in regard of several discretions and judgments, in point of
what is fit to be recommended to God in public Prayers, which way shall we
attain that Order, that Reverence, which this Office requires according to the
Apostle? If men be left to themselves, whatsoever opinion in Religion,
whatsoever debate between neighbors, whatsoever public matter of Church or
Commonwealth, a man shall please to make his interesse, upon like reason he
may make the subject of his Prayers, and of the Congregation, which if it be
not well directed (as what man is free from mistake, where men may be and
always are of diverse opinions) must either pursue his interesse, for the will
of God in their desires, or as they are bound to be, must be scandalized at
that which is done. I had rather belie mine own senses, then charge any man
with that which appears not; but if experience tell us not, that such things
have been done, that men's prayers in the Church have smoked with their choler
in private and public matters, yet reason will tell us, how easily it may be
done, and such Ordinance pointed in time against them, that least deserve it in
Church or Commonwealth. As the matter is among us, we see how far men's minds
are from being agreed, when we are to pray for fair weather, and when for rain:
make particular persons infallible Judges, not of a thing of that consequence,
but of whatsoever may be the subject of our prayers, and we make them all Popes
in their Congregations: make them not infallible, and we multiply scandalls in
the Service of God to the worlds end, to which no man should come till all were
ended. Last of all, it is not the ingenious conceptions of men's minds, it is
not the eloquent expressions of their tongues, that God is affected with: the
Ministers devotion will prove more free toward God, when his mind is less at
work in framing terms to express what he conceives to be for the purpose. But
if we have regard unto the meanest rank in knowledge, as well as in estate,
which are always the greatest part, and therefore in whom Charity has the
most share, it will appear a great advantage to their devotions, to run smooth
upon the Forms to which they are practiced, which must needs be intercepted
with studying the meaning of new ones, which they are directed with. This is
that which my reason is able to inform in this point, Whether a prescript form
of prayers be for the edification of the Church, in maintaining Order, and
Reverence in the Public Service of God, or not. Let us see which way the
practice of the Church inclines, or has inclined: though the matter be great,
as concerning the meaning of the Apostles charge, and the form of serving God,
a man shall have no cause to suspect his own reason, when the reason of the
Church, and the guides of it go before. But I must begin with the Public
Service of God in the Temple, so far as it was moral, and consisted not in
offering Sacrifices: That carries more prejudice with it then man's reason can
enforce; That which was done there, is President enough to presume, that the
like is not against the Law of God and the Scripture. Of this we read thus, 1.
Chron. xxiii. 30. And to stand every morning to thank and praise the Lord, and
likewise at evening: and at all offering burnt-offerings to the Lord, on the
Sabbaths, the New Moons, and the Solemn Assemblies. For without doubt, the
purpose is here to specify at what times the Levites sung the Psalms of Gods
praises, to the Sacrifices that were offering in the Court of the Temple,
whereof we read before, 1. Chron. xvi. 4. And he appointed of the Levites to
Minister before the Ark of the Lord: and to record, and thank, and praise the
Lord God of Israel. And again, verse. 37. the same is repeated. But afterward,
having spoken of the Priests, whom David left to sacrifice upon the Altar at
Gibeon, it follows, verse. 41. And with them Heman, and Jeduthun, and the rest
that were chosen, that were expressed by name to give thanks to the Lord,
because his mercy indureth for ever. Here you shall perceive the time and the
place of this Service expressed in Scripture. Part of them with Asaph, were to
Minister before the Ark, part with Heman and Jeduthun to give thanks unto the
Lord, where the Priests offered the burnt-offering morning and evening, verse.
40. for the time that the Altar was at Gibeon, the Ark in the city of David.
But for a perpetual course, as you have it, xxiii. 30. To stand every morning
to thank and praise the Lord, and likewise at evening: and at all offering of
burnt-offerings to the Lord, in the Sabbaths, in the New Moons, and on the
Assemblies. For thus it must here be translated, as R. David Kimchi has
glossed it, That they should also be ready to praise, when the burnt-sacrifice
is offered on the Sabbaths, and New Moons, and days of Assemblies; and also to
help the Priests on these days, when there are many offerings. For by this
exposition is signified both the help which the Priests had from the Levites in
sacrificing, and also the kinds of Sacrifices, at which the Levites sung
Psalms of Praise and Thanksgiving. Maimoni Cele hammikdash. C. iii. (...), And
when do they sing? Over all the burnt-offerings of the Congregation which were
due, and over the peace offerings of an Assembly, at the pouring of the wine:
But the voluntary burnt-offerings of the Congregation, over these they sung not
the Song. A Rule without doubt raised from the Scripture alleged; and the
place here signified, where they stood to sing, that is before the Ark, is the
same that is signified at Solomon's Sacrifice, 2. Chron. v. 12. where they stood
East from the Altar, as it must be translated, that is, at the East Gate of the
Temple, either before the men's Court, or before the women's Court. For at both
these Gates there was a Pulpit for the Levites, where, at all these times,
stood twelve at the least, for this purpose, Maimoni (as before.) And before
the latter were those fifteen steps, from which the fifteen Psalms of degrees
are named, because they were sung there, as the Talmudists will have it, Mass.
Middoth, Cap. ii. Numb. 5, 6. and the annotations upon it. To this must be
added that memorable passage of the Samaritane Chronicle, published not long
since, the tenor whereof is this, The High Priest living at that time (that is
the year of the world 4713. by their account) took away that most excellent
book that was in their hands ever since the calm and peaceable time of the
Israelites, which contained those Songs and Prayers which were ever used before
their Sacrifices. For before every of their several Sacrifices they had their
several Songs, still used in those times of peace, all which, accurately
written, were transmitted to the subsequent generations, from the time of the
Legate (Moses) unto this day, by the Ministry of the Holy Priest. For this
whole passage speaks clearly of the Service of God in the Temple, showing us,
that besides the book of Psalms there were other Songs used at the Sacrifices
of their several Solemnities, which were, according to the course of their
Service, put together in one book for the purpose. There was besides, another
part of the Service done in the Temple, which men of learning have hit upon by
conjecture, out of Apoc. viii. 3. And another Angel came and stood at the
Altar, having a golden Censer, and there was given unto him much incense, that
he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints, upon the golden Altar which
was before the Throne; joined with Luke i. 10. And the whole multitude of the
people were praying without at the time of incense. From which Text Lud.
Capellus collected, That while the Priest offered his incense in the
Tabernacle, the people were at their prayers abroad, and that S. John's Vision
alludeth to nothing else. Whereupon our Mead of Christ's College very
ingeniously conceived, that where it is said there, verse. i. When he had opened
the seventh Seal, there was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour,
all this was represented in resemblance of the Service of the Temple, where
first the Praises of God are sung, as it is before, vi. 9. then there is
silence for half an hour, while the Priest within offers the incense, and
the people without pray for remission of sins every one by themselves. For so
I find this conjecture verified in Prike Aboth. v. 5. where one of the ten
miracles, which the Jews relate fell out continually in the Service of God in
the Temple, is this, (...), that is, They stood crowded, but they worshipped at
large. which R. Obadiah Bartenora proceeds thus to expound upon the meaning
of the word (...), It has the sense, says he, from swimming upon the face of
the waters: For, because of the crowd every one pressed his fellow, so that
they stood swimming as it were, with their feet lifted up from the ground, in
the air. At the time of worshipping, the miracle happened to them, that they
worshipped at large, every man four cubits from the next, that he might not
hear him when he confessed and remembered his sins. Wherefore they stood
while the Levites sung, at pouring the wine upon the burnt-offering, but when
the Priest went to offer the incense, then fell every man down to make
confession of his sins in private. Which being done, the Holy Priest, coming
out into the Court, pronounced the Benediction, appointed in the Law, over the
people, which was the end of Service. Of this Maimoni, of Prayer, and the
Priests blessing, xiiii. 9. In the Temple, after the morning Service was done,
the Priests went up into the Pulpit to bless: which makes me presume, that
the Order of Service in the Temple was no otherwise then has been declared.
Which Ecclesiasticus seems punctually to describe in Onias, cap. l. 15, 16,
17. He stretched out his hand to the cup, and poured of the blood of the grape,
he poured out at the foot of the Altar a sweet smelling savor unto the most
high King of all. Then shouted the sons of Aaron, and sounded the silver
trumpets, and made a great noise to be heard for a remembrance before the most
High. Then all the people together hasted, and fell down to the earth upon
their faces, to worship their Lord God Almighty, the most High. When the wine
was poured forth, and the Priests blew the trumpets within, at Festivals, it is
to be understood, that the Levites sung the praises of God without at the same
time, as we saw before: and so it follows in the next words, wherein this
description is repeated, verse. 18, 19. The singers also sang praises with their
voices, with great variety of sounds was there made sweet melody. And the
people besought the Lord the most High, by prayer before him that is merciful,
till the solemnity of the Lord was ended, and they had finished his Service.
After all follows the Priests blessing, as Maimoni said, verse. 20, 21. Then
he went down, and lifted up his hands over the whole Congregation of the
children of Israel, to give the blessing of the Lord with his lips, and to
rejoice in his Name. And they bowed themselves down to worship the second time,
that they might receive a blessing from the most High. I make no doubt but
there was time for reading and expounding the Law in the Temple, as it has
been touched, but because I find no remembrance of it in this Service, and
because it concerns not the point in hand, I let it alone. In this course of
Service then, the prayer wherewith each of them confessed their sins was
private and at pleasure, the rest was all by prescript form. The Priests
blessing expressed in Scripture: the praises of God, out of the book of
Psalms, and others for the purpose. And this is the strength of that Argument
that is drawn from the Titles of the Psalms, showing that they were indicted
for the purpose of praising God, and praying to him, as the tenor of them is.
Two or three of these Titles it shall not be amiss to produce here. Psalm.
iiii. and all the rest where the title is To the chief Musician, the Chaldee
translateth (...), to sing, or to praise: to tell us, that they were Psalms
composed for the Master of Music, to be used in the Service of the Temple.
xcii. A Psalm, a Song for the Sabbath day: It is a pleasant thing to read the
vagaries of the Jews upon this Title, from whence they conceive this Psalm to
be made by Adam, after his fall on the Friday, to serve God with on the
Sabbath; whereas the meaning in our observation is plain, that it was composed
to be sung in the Service of the Temple on the Sabbath, which the very tenor
of the Psalm inforceth, when it says, verse. 4. For thou Lord have made me
glad through thy works: I will triumph in the works of thy hands: pointing at
the meditation of the Creation upon the Sabbath, as the Jews expound it. Last,
the Title of those fifteen Psalms after the cxx. called Psalms of Degrees,
expounded as before, from the fifteen steps between the men's Court, and that of
the Priests, is assurance enough that they were made to serve God with there.
By which it appears, that the Prophets of God, and their Disciples, that the
great Wisemen of the Jews, that the Apostles of our Lord, when they frequented
this Service, as shall be said, thought not their spirits stinted by the
prescipt form of it. The Service of God in the Synagogues depended much upon
this in the Temple; neither is it in me to imagine what reason can be alleged,
why a prescript form used in the Temple should not fit the Synagogue. The way
to put this past peradventure, had been to describe the particulars of that
Service, and to trace the Antiquity of them, from their best writings; but a
discourse too long and obscure for this place. I shall be content to produce
two or three passages, of the substance or circumstance of it, by which shall
appear whatsoever alterations it has received, (As at the present, in the
substance of their Service all agree, though for the particulars there is not
more difference among Jews of several Countries in any thing then in this,
says Leo Modena, in the piece named before, P. 1. C. xi. 6.) that a prescript
form was used among them, under the second Temple, while they continued the
people of God. The Order whereof, for my part, I must needs refer to the
Ancient Scribes that succeeded the Prophets; as mine Author R. Moses Maimoni
has expressed in the first particular which I intend to allege, that is the
xviii. Benedictions, wherein, praising God, they beg at his hands the supply of
his daily blessings. These, in his Treatise of Prayer and Benediction of the
Priests, i. 2. he refers to Ezra, as the Author of them, when being
returned from the Captivity, it was found that the people was not able to
praise and serve God in a continued speech, their language being mixed with
that of strangers. I confess I should have thought it a more probable reason
to have said, that they were composed as a direction for the Service of God,
both in public and private, as still their use is: But for this Authors
credit, it is very well known, that all his stuff comes from the best writings
which that people have. And the agreement of the Jews of all Countries, in
these and the other Benedictions, whereof they are bound to say every day an
hundred, and that of old, sufficiently shows how ancient they are, when other
ingredients of their Service are subject to change with times and places: as
their Hymns for example, whereof is to be seen at large, in Abenezra upon
Ecclesiastes, v. 1. where he disputes against those of R. Eliezer hakkalir,
preferring before them those which R. Saadiah Haggaon had made. The second
particular, that I will produce, is the Service of the seven days Fast,
described in the same Maimoni, Taanioth iv. 14. how it was performed, in
Jerusalem. His words are to this effect; (...), When they prayed after this
Order in Jerusalem, they went into the Mountain of the Temple, against the East
Gate, and when the Apostle of the Congregation was come to, He that heard
Abraham (the Prayer that ended thus) Blessed be thou, O Lord God, our God, the
God of Israel, from generation to generation. The people answer, Blessed be the
Name of his glorious Kingdom, to all generations and evermore. And the Officer
of the Synagogue says to the Priests that blow the Trumpets, (according to the
Law, Number. x. 9.) Sound ye sons of Aaron, sound: and again he prays. This is
a form then which was in use during the Temple, upon that occasion, and gives
presumption enough, that there was the like for all other ordinary and
extraordinary ones. And at this occasion in particular is the Rule verified,
which says, That the people did not answer Amen within the Mountain of the
Temple. Gem. Hierosol. Taanioth c. ii. Babylon Beracoth c. ix. which Rule is
enough to prove my intent, because it shows, that there were certain forms
among them, (the same that still are extant) which when they were used in the
Synagogue, the people answered Amen in the end; but when they were used in the
Mountain of the Temple, that is, within the outmost compass of it, the peoples
answer was, as before, Blessed be the Name of his glorious Kingdom to all
generations and evermore. And the case is related in the Misna Taanioth ii. 5.
that whereas once this answer was used in the Synagogue, the matter came before
the WISE, (and, as I remember, it was before the great Sanedrin at Sippore,
during the time that it sat there, being removed from Jerusalem, whereof
before) and their resolution was, that it was not so practiced, but only at the
East Gate, and in the Mountain of the Temple; that is, as Maimoni and Bartenora
both expound it, at the East Gate of the Temple, and at the Eastern Gate of the
Mountain of the Temple. To make the meaning of their resolution to be this,
that the answer of the people aforesaid, in stead of Amen, which they used to
answer in the Synagogue, was only practiced after the Benediction of the
Priests which they gave at the East Gate of the Temple, as was said, and at
this Service of the Fast of seven days in Jerusalem, where it was done at the
East Gate of the Mountain of the Temple, the outmost close of it. But seeing
the same Service was done throughout their Synagogues, as the cause required,
of necessity the same form was used upon those occasions, and the like upon
others. The last particular I shall produce, is a Circumstance observable at
all their Services, That whereas the reading of the Law and other Scriptures,
and the Exposition of it was done by principal persons, the chief of the
Synagogue, with their faces turned to the people as they sat, as our Lord in
the Synagogue of Nazareth, Luke iv. 16. on the other side, the Prayers were
read by him whom they call Apparitour of the Synagogue, correspondent to the
Deacon in the Christian Church, with his back to the people, and his face to
the Ark and to the Elders. This Office, though of good account in the
Synagogue, as we see in Maimoni of Prayer, C. viii. n. 11. being yet inferior
to the Scribes and WISE, it is plain to my common sense, that it was not
entrusted to direct the Prayers of their betters, in qualities proper to that
work, upon other ground then this, because the Prayers had been composed by
those wise and learned before, and were therefore ministered by their inferiors,
the Deacons of Synagogues. Such is he of whom Luke iv. 20. And he closed the
book and gave it again to the Minister, and sat down: Such is he that is
called Apostle of the Congregation in Maimoni, the place aforesaid, that
pronounces the Service prescribed there, and to show that it was no late
practice among them which he prescribes, is called in the Misna, Beracoth v.
3. Taanith. ii. 2. (...), he that comes down before the Ark: The reason, if my
conjecture mistake not, being this, Because the place where he sat among the
Elders was higher then that of the people, by some steps, so that he must come
down those steps to stand before them, with his back to the people, in doing
Service: As R. Benjamin in his Itinerary, p. 75. describes the chief Synagogue
at Bagdat, that before the Ark there were ten stairs of marble, in the top
whereof sat the head of the Captains, of the lineage of David. Now it is to be
known, that things related in the Misna, written in the days of Antoninus
Pius, are not to be understood as if they were of no greater standing then that
time, but are the most Ancient Orders of that people, practiced and delivered
long before from hand to hand, as things not lawful to be committed to writing,
and then first written, for fear that their manifold dispersions might bring
their Rules and Orders into oblivion, as themselves profess. As for the
practice of the Church next to the Apostles, let me use the advantage which is
due to the truth, and prescribe one thing, in their way, that intend to prove
it to be against the Scripture, and the Apostle, forbidding to stint the Spirit
to use prescript forms in praying, which is this; That it is not enough for
their purpose, to show out of some Church-writers, that some Churches might
refer themselves, in the direction of their devotions, to their Bishops or to
their Presbyters; but it behooves them to show that they did it, as
acknowledging that sense of the Apostle, alleging their reason, and forbearing
it as against Scripture. For there is a great deal of reason why that course
might be tolerable and sufficient in the beginning, while the Church was
oppressed by the secular Powers of the Empire, and the fear of persecution
contained the people in respect to the Orders of their Pastors, and them in
respect to their Office, which afterward, when the world was come into the
Church, and the Empire become Christian, would not serve the turn. Then as it
was requisite, that all Rules of the Church should receive force from the
secular Arm, so might it prove requisite that the Order of Public Service
should be settled in a prescript form, though it had been left to the
discretion of particular persons before; in regard of that good and bad fish
that was come into the Net, and might take the occasions pointed at to make
rents in it. But I allege this exception, to put them in mind, that no
Ecclesiastical writer has yet been alleged to use their reasons, which
gives just evidence of the Novelty of the opinion grounded on it: Not because
I do think the cause needs it, or that any time of the Church can be showed,
after the Apostles, and the time of extraordinary Graces, wherein a prescript
form of Public Service has not been used; much less that any such thing is
proved by the words of Justine Martyr and Tertullian, produced out of their
Apologies for the Christians, wherein they inform the Powers of the Empire,
what the Christians did at their Assemblies. Which had they been but turned
right into English, would have made it appear that they enforce either another
sense, or quite contrary to that which they are produced to prove. The words of
Justine, the place aforenamed, Apol. ii. (...). which they translate, Then he
who instructed the people, prayed according to his ability. (...), they
translate, He that instructed the people, signifying him that governed the
people, to wit, in Ecclesiastical matters: True it is the same person did
both, but the same word signifies not both: this by the way. But, (...), they
translate, according to his ability, as if (...), and (...), were both one. You
shall see a difference by the Ebrew. Their Ancient Doctors have this saying,
(...), Whosoever says Amen WITH ALL HIS MIGHT, the Gate of the Garden of Eden
is opened to him, Musar. C. iv. And in the same manner of speech, Maimoni
describing their Morning Service, c. ix. 1. and the people answer, Amen: be his
great Name blessed for ever, and to all everlastings, WITH ALL THEIR MIGHT.
Whereas the same Rabbi, in another place, Taanioth c. iv. 1. describing the
speech of him that Preached humiliation to the people at the Fast of seven
days, whereof before, adds; and proceeds in such like discourses, according
to his ability, until he humble their hearts and they repent perfectly. In the
Ebrew it is here (...), in the other places, (...), the first is in Greek,
(...), the other, (...), in English that signifies, according to his ability,
this, with all his might, so much difference there is, and the mistake it
causes no less then thus: They will needs make Justine dream, as much as
themselves do, of making show of men's faculties in conceiving Prayers, who
speaks of nothing but that earnestness of Devotion with which he says the
Bishop or Presbyter came to consecrate the Eucharist, more proper without doubt
to that prime point of Gods Service; which he thus expresses, That he sends
forth Prayers and Thanksgivings WITH ALL HIS MIGHT. In fine, when Justine,
speaking of the Thanksgiving which the Eucharist was consecrated with, says
that he made it, (...), with all his might, he means neither more nor less
then before, speaking of the Common Prayers of the people, which he says they
made, (...), or earnestly, as shall be said. The words of Tertullian, Apolog.
C. xxx. Illuc suspicientes Christiani manibus expansis, quia innocuis; capite
nudo, quia non erubescimus; sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus pro omnibus
Imperatoribus. It is justly excepted, that these words are not to the purpose,
as containing the private devotions of Christians, compared with those of the
Pagans. Nevertheless, the subject of these Prayers, which he prosecuteth
afterward, is the same with the Prayers of their Assemblies, whereof he
speaks, C. xxxix. and gives just cause to think, that he speaks of private
forms of devotion, borrowed from the public. He says there, that Christians
prayed with hands stretched out, to protest their innocence; bare-headed, to
profess that they were not ashamed, touching the Gentiles, that covered hands
and faces in praying, which he interprets a confession of guilt in the hands,
an acknowledgement of shame in the face, which that habit signified, as has
been said: And in the same strain he goes on, to tell them, that whereas they
had their remembrancers to suggest the devotions they addressed to their
several Deities, which he calls Monitours, the Christians prayed without
Monitours, because they prayed by heart. For the words, sine Monitore, quia de
pectore, of Tertullian, affected always to imitate and express the Greek, are
to my best apprehension, the translation of that which is called in Greek
(...), in English, to say by heart: and so they could not have showed a passage
more pregnant with the sense they intended to destroy, That they prayed by
prescript forms. The fairest proof we can make, that the Church after the
Apostles time, and the use of extraordinary Graces, betook themselves to
prescript forms of Prayer, as well as other parts of Gods Service, will be from
the parts of it. The Psalms of David, in the first place, do mix Prayers with
the praises of God, and are no extemporary conceptions, yet were always one of
the first parts of public Service, as shall appear in due time. As for other
Hymns of private composure, Conc. Laod. Canon 15. (...). That besides enrolled
Singers that go up into the Desk, and sing out of the Parchmine, others ought
not to sing in the Church. Canon 59. (...). That Psalms of private persons
must not be said in the Church. These Canons seem to make opposition between
those that came from private persons, and those that were entered in the
Church-books. These only to be sung out of those books by Clergy Chanters,
enrolled in the list of the Church, that other persons might take no occasion
to bring any into use, besides those that were prescribed and received. I find
that to meet with the poison of Arrius, sicut in principio was added to Gloria
Patri, in the Church Service. And I have heard, that to meet with the poison of
Pelagius, they took up the custom to put Dei Gratia in Titles and Inscriptions
of Letters. But that the custom of using such set forms was taken up first,
because the Arian and Pelagian heresies conveyed and spread themselves by that
means, is strange news to hear. It might have been said with more reason of
the hymns of Valentinus, so long before, which Tertullian taxes, De carne
Christi, C. xvii. And let unpartiall reason answer the question, Whether it be
more like if any such thing were, that they should make that advantage, because
set forms were then in practice, or, Whether the Church should fall to use that
course, because it was first taken up by these heresies. In reading and
expounding the Scriptures, the question is not made. But that is the
particular, wherein I must yield something of private conception to have been
used in the Primitive Church Service. It is believed, that in the flourishing
times of the Church, Preachers were wont, in the beginning of their Sermons, to
commend themselves and their labors to Gods blessing; the form is extant which
S. Ambrose used, neither do we find that it was not at their own choice. But
after the Sermon, the Catechumeni or Hearers, those that were under Penance,
those that were vexed with unclean spirits, were dismissed with the several
Prayers of the Congregation and Benedictions of the Bishop or Presbyter, on
their several behalves. When that was done, the Prayers which were used at the
Eucharist by the Congregation that was admitted to it were of two sorts, as
shall be showed afterward, when I come to compare the Service which this
Church uses, with that of the Primitive. The first was of those which the
Apostle calls Supplications and Intercessions, not only for the general and
particular necessities both of the Congregation and the members of it, but of
all members of Church and Commonwealth, together or in particular, which are
the same for substance which have since been called Litanies. The second was
that Thanksgiving, from which that Sacrament is still called the Eucharist,
because it was always consecrated with it; wherein remembrance was made of all
the blessings of Gods Providence, in particular, that of our Lord Christ, which
it pretends to commemorate with prayer that his Ordinance may be effectual
to the present. I know there followed Thanksgiving after the Communion, besides
other pieces of that Service, as shall be said: which I regard not so much now,
because they seem not to have been of such consideration, in the frame of their
Service. My intent is to show in due time, that these were the prayers
practiced upon the Apostles order, 1. Tim. ii. 1. I exhort therefore, before
all, that Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made
for all men: For kings and all that are in Eminence: That they are the same
which the Apostle intimates, and specifieth to have been practiced, at that
time, when he says, 1. Cor. xiv. 15. I will pray with the Spirit, but I will
pray also with the understanding, I will sing with the Spirit, but I will sing
also with the understanding: else when thou BLESSEST with the Spirit, how shall
he that fills the place of the ignorant say Amen at thy GIVING OF THANKS,
seeing he knows not what thou say? In fine, that these Intercessions
whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans viii. 26. when he says, The Spirit it self
INTERCEDETH for us with groans not to be uttered, are the same which in the
Primitive Church were solemn and perpetual before Celabrating the Eucharist
according to S. Chrysostomes Exposition averred before. This must be done after
we have showed, what reason there is to think, that the Eucharist was
celebrated at these Assemblies whereof the Apostle writes to the Corinthians,
chap. xiv. In the mean time, as concerning the Prayers for Hearers, Penitents,
and possessed Persons, as well as the said Supplications and Intercessions,
that they were all done by prescript form, let me argue as I did before, of the
Prayers of the Synagogue, because they were ministered by the Deacon, as S.
Chrysostom said, and as it shall appear afterward, by the remembrance we
shall find of the Custom of the Church. For I suppose no reason will yield,
that the Church referred themselves to be directed in their Public Service by
that rank of Ministers. As for the THANKSGIVING which the Sacrament was
consecrated with, I will here use no more then the words of S. Cyprian, de
Lapsis, Sermon. xiv. Vbi vero SOLENNIBUS adimpletis dare calicem Diaconus
praesentibus coepit, etc. and in another place where he calls it, Calicem
SOLENNI benedictione sacratum. And ask whether the Eucharist were consecrated
with an Ex tempore Prayer, in Justine or Tertullians time, the form whereof by
S. Cyprians time was become SOLEMN. Of the Preface Sursum Corda, remembered by
the same S. Cyprian, de orat. Domini, and yet extant in all ancient Liturgies
as well as ours, as well as of other particulars, there will be occasion to
speak afterward. From that which has been said of a prescript form of Prayer
at celebrating the Eucharist, I will take upon me to presume no less of other
Services at other Assemblies. Conc. Laod. Can. xviii. takes Order, (...): That
the same service of Prayers ought to be performed both at ninth hours (at
three after noon) and evenings. It has been said of late, that this Canon
first confined the Prayers of the Church to a set Form, commanding to use
always the same, but such an one as every one composed for his own turn. This
is argued from the iii. Council of Carthage, after this of Laodicea, Can.
xxiii. where it is said, Et quicunque sibi preces alicunde describit, non eis
utatur, nisi prius eas cum instructioribus fratribus contulerit. And whosoever
copieth out Prayers for his use, from any where, let him not use them, till he
have debated them with his more learned brethren. Afterward, that the forms to
be used be first allowed in the Synod, we are told was first ordered, in the
ii. Council of Milevis, some few years after this. The words are these, Placuit
etiam illud, ut preces, vel orationes, seu missae, quae probatae fuerint in
Concilio, sive Praefationes, sive Commendationes, seu mannum Impositiones ab
omnibus celebrentur: nec alia omnino dicantur in Ecclesia, nisi quae a
prudentioribus tractatae, vel comprobatae in Synodo fuerint, ne forte aliquid
contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus studium fuerit compositum. It
seemed good also that those Prayers, or Masses, which have been allowed in the
Council, whether Prefaces, or Commendations, or Impositions of Hands, be
frequented of all; so that none at all be said in the Church, but such as have
been treated by the more discreet, or allowed in the Synod, lest perhaps
something against the Faith be composed, either through ignorance, or too
little heed. With what judgment these bold conjectures are imposed upon the
world for truth, is now to be considered. First, it is acknowledged on all
sides, among men of learning, that there is a great deal of confusion in these
Africane Canons, as they have been published in the Collection of Councels. In
particular, by Justellus his preface and edition of those Canons it appears,
that the Council which is there called the iii. of Carthage, Caesario and
Attico Coss. A. D. CCCXCIII. did make Canons, which are yet extam in the Code
published by Justellus, in number xxiii. the rest of the L. fathered upon it,
are packed together, most of them, out of the Council of Carthage in which that
Code was inacted, Post Cons. Honorii xii. and Theod. viii. A. D. CDXIX. whereof
nevertheless this is none. But this ii. Council of Milevis, Theod. vii. and
Palladio Coss. A. D. CDXVI. decreed indeed against Pelagius and Celestius, but
made no Canons whereof we have just remembrance: the xxvii fathered upon it,
are packed together out of diverse Africane Councels, one whereof is that of
Carthage Honorio vii. and Theod. ii. Coss. A. D. CCCCVII. among the Canons
whereof there is one, which in the Copy, published first in Greek by Du
Tillet, since with the Original Latin, by Justellus, is in number ciii, in
these terms, Placuit etiam hoc, ut preces quae probatae fuerint in Concilio,
sive Praefationes, sive Commendationes, seu manus Impositiones, ab omnibus
celebrentur: nec aliae omnino contra fidem praeferantur (in the Collection
called the Africane Council, proferantur) sed quaecunque a prudentioribus
fuerint collectae, dicantur. This also seemed good that these Prayers which
have been allowed in the Council, whether Prefaces, or Commendations, or
Impositions of hands, be frequented of all: so that by no means, others against
the faith, be preferred (or said) but these that have been composed by the more
discreet, be said. Balsamon upon this Canon, (...). It seems some Bishops
took upon them to say Prayers not customed. It seems indeed inconvenience was
perceived, by the unconformitie of particular Episcopal Churches, upon
alterations made by the Ministers of them in their form of Service. Therefore
it is provided, That the Service to be used be first approved in the usual
Synod of the Africane Churches, that all Episcopal Churches of those
Provinces might be conformable. But this supposes a Form which those Churches
had, how should else provision be made against alteration in it? And this being
without doubt the Authentic Canon, from which both those recited have been
jumbled into the Councels specified: neither can we allow them more credit,
then can be thought due to him that pleased to make that jumble; nor can we
admit any other sense of the words of them, then the words of this Canon
enforce. Which sense, being of no more consequence, will not be worth the while
further to dispute. And it is to be observed, that some Western Canons have
provided to the same purpose, that all the Churches of the same Province, be
conformable in point of Service. Conc. Venet. C. xv. Rectum quoque duximus ut
vel intra Provinciam nostram Sacrorum ordo, and psallendi una sit consuetudo.
We have also thought it right, that in sacred offices, and the order of
singing, the same custom hold through our Province. Conc. Epaon. C. xxvii. Ad
celebrandum divina Officia, Ordinem, quem Metropolitani tenent, Provinciales
observare debebunt. For celebrating divine Offices, those of Provinces shall be
bound to observe the Order which the Metropolitanes hold. By which appears
the point aimed at in all these Canons, to make the whole Province conformable
in Divine Service. Which was without doubt the intent of that of Laodicea,
expounded by Zonaras, by that ciii. of the Africane Canons, (...). The same
thing (says he) does this present Canon also ordain. Thus it is easy to
perceive, that this Canon of Laodicea, providing that the order of Prayer be
always the SAME, intended not to appoint the SAME Minister always to use the
same order of Prayers, as is imagined, but that there should be one Form
unalterable, with respect to the Diocese of Asia, for which it was Originally
made: As that of Carthage, for the Diocese of Africa, and others for their
several Provinces. And because they allow by this Canon every man to compose
his own service, so it be always the same, let them take notice how this
agrees with Zonaras, (...), etc. Therefore, says he, this Canon seems to
order the same, that whosoever would shall not compose Prayers and say them at
Assemblies. And now judge whether he or these new Masters is best at expounding
the Canons. Only observe, That this xviii. Canon of Laodicea concerns not
the Service of those Assemblies at which the Eucharist was celebrated, of which
alone that ciii. Africane Canon proceeds: the title whereof is, De precibus
ad altar dicendis, of Prayers to be said at the Altar. Whereupon it might
perhaps be conceived, that the said pretended Milevitane Canon, where it
orders the Prayers of the Eucharist, requires them to be allowed by the
Synod; where it requires them either to be allowed by the Synod, or else
treated by the more discreet, speaks of other Services such as that Canon of
Laodicea concerns: but being of no more credit, it deserves not to be sifted
so near. Add to all this the Tradition in the lives of the Popes, what this or
that Pope added to the Prayers that the Eucharist was celebrated with, which
there is no reason to discredit for the whole, and it will appear both that
there was a set Form from the beginning, and that it was subject to continual
alterations, the true reason why the Primitive forms cannot now be exhibited. I
am not so credulous as to entitle the Liturgies fathered upon S. James, S.
Mark, S. Peter, no nor S. Basil, or S. Chrysostom, as now we have them, to the
persons whose names they wear. But I am confident they are the Services
frequented in the Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria, Rome, Constantinople, and
the parts of the East that followed S. Basil, in celebrating the Eucharist,
from the time that they were put in this frame, and that to this frame they are
reduced, through those changes which several ages have brought to pass, from
a prescript form at the beginning, though not this. For example, That which is
called S. Peter's, is word for word the Canon of the Roman missall, with some
parts of the Eastern Liturgies, which I find not yet to have been frequented in
the Western. From hence we have ground enough to imagine, why it has been
called S. Peter's. That of S. James we may discern to be the service of the
Church of Jerusalem, by the particulars of it related to in the Catechises
attributed to Cyrill of Jerusalem, Catech. v. That of S. Mark may be discerned
for the Service of the Church of Alexandria, by the great agreement it carries
with that of S. Cyrill sometimes Patriarch, and with the Ethiopick received
from thence, as from their Mother Church, both in Biblioth. Patrum. But as for
the alterations to which it is to be believed these Liturgies have been subject
from time to time, we have this confession of Victorius Sciatach, the Maronite
at Rome, in his Preface to Velseius of Ausburg, before the three Liturgies,
which at the request of his friends, he turned for him out of the Arabic Copy
sent him by Scaliger. Nam ut Latini ipsi and Graeci Pontifices, multa deinceps
in suis Liturgiis, quas jam inde ab Apostolis acceperant, pro re nata, vel
immutarunt, vel addiderunt: ita etiam ab Alexandrinis and Aegyptiis, par est
credere, pro temporum opportunitate factitatum. For as the Latin and Greek
Prelates either added or changed, upon occasion, diverse things afterward, in
the Liturgies which they received even from the Apostles: so is it meet to
think was done according to the occasion of times, by those of Alexandria and
Egypt. Of the Alterations made in the Roman Service by the Popes Gelasius and
Gregory the Great, beside others, the remembrance is quick and fresh in diverse
Writers. The like it is reasonable to conceive of other active Prelates. This
he very pertinently argues afterward from the Copy which he translated, in
which the Liturgy called S. Basils was couched at large. Of the two that
remain, entitled to Gregory the Divine and S. Cyrill, nothing was set down but
the passages of difference from that of S. Basil. Though being subject to such
continual alterations, we cannot be bound to believe them, as they are, to
have been composed by those persons whose names they bear. And this truth we
must take notice to be of great advantage to the cause of that Reformation
which we profess. For presuming, as we do, that an alteration in matter of
Religion has come to pass, what better account can we give how it should be
effected, what more reasonable way can we assign, of conveighing it into the
minds of the people, then by unsensible alterations in the form of public
service? which so long as we know in general to have been done, there is just
cause otherwise to presume, that it has been to that purpose which we oppose.
And if the traces hereof were well hunted in particular, perhaps it might be
made to appear to common sense, in the main particulars which we profess to
reform. So when demand is made to exhibit the Copies of Primitive Liturgies,
the case is much as it was of old at Athens, in the dispute about Theseus his
ship in Plutarch, Whether this which had been so changed, that no man could
tell what part of it remained, were the same or not. Suppose we leave the
Problem to those keen wits of Greece, that started it, I suppose it could not
be questioned on any side, that there had been once such a ship of Theseus. In
our case I shall hope to produce some ribs or limbs of the service practiced
and prescribed by the Apostle for the substance of it. And therefore, though I
presume not with that Maronite, that the Apostles themselves prescribed the
form, and delivered to those which succeeded them, having showed before, That
for that time the parts of it were ministered by immediate inspiration of Gods
Spirit: yet this I will take upon me to conclude out of the premises, that as
it had been in the Synagogue before, so in the Church afterward, when those
inspirations were ceased, they betook themselves on all hands to prescript
forms, which at the first derived from the Primitive practice, retained that
agreement in several places which in the substance of them still appears.
And being propagated from the greatest Churches at the first, have at length
all yielded in a manner to the principal. By Balsamon in Can. xxxii. Sex. Syn.
and his answer to Mark Patriarch of Alexandria, it appears how desirous the
service of S. Chrystostome, that is, of Constantinople, was to put down these
of Jerusalem and Alexandria. And it is well enough known how the Roman Mass,
which was once the Gregorian Service, has abolished the Spanish, Gaulish, and
Germane Orders, and confined that which is entitled to S. Ambrose to his own
Church of Millain. That this perpetual practice of the Church, of prescript
forms of Service is not against the Principles of the Reformation, or the
judgment of chief Reformers, a few words shall serve to conclude. In
particular, in this of England, for which I plead, That the Principal of the
Clergy should be employed to advise the whole kingdom assembled, to inact a
Form of Service, to the purpose that those which could make no Prayers of their
own head, might use it as cork to help them to swim with, not for any of these
considerations expressed before, especially the practice of it once inacted,
having been without interruption ever since, is a thing so far from common
reason to conceive, that it is hard to believe that those which speak it
believe themselves in it. In Luthers Reformation the question is not made,
though there is no reason to be showed, why their example should not be drawn
into consequence here. As for the other according to Calvine, so far as my
lot has been to know the preacher of it, I confess it is a thing which has
made me much marvel, to see them so punctual in practicing their form
prescribed, that scarce any thing came from the Ministers themselves, but that
very short prayer before the Sermon, wherein they recommend themselves and their
performance to the blessing of God, as you saw the fashion was in the Ancient
Church. Because it is found that the opinions, which this Church has been
disquieted with, were taken up upon unreasonable affectation to be conformable
with them, those that pretend their example are bound to show us among them the
Principle whereupon this point is condemned, that a prescript Form is that
which the Apostle forbids in Quenching the Spirit. Therefore it will not be
enough to say, That diverse Churches of that Reformation, use to neglect the
Order appointed them, and use the voluntary conceptions of their Ministers in
public Prayers. For that may be thought of all, and of us, for the reasons
premised must be thought an example of ill consequence, and not for this Church
to imitate. But it is requisite to allege the same reason from their Doctors,
and to show that they disallow set Prayers, as Quenching the Spirit. To which
purpose I have not yet heard any thing produced either from the Fathers of the
Church or from the Reformed Doctors. And therefore till that be done, I am
bold to send home that Principle to them that have most right to own in, that
is, to those of the separation from this Church of England, or rather to those
Germane Sectaries, that dreamed of Enthusiasmes, and immediate inspirations.

CHAP. VIII.
Of times of Assemblies. Daily Morning and Evening Service is for the
edification of the Church. Humane Institution of Festivals lawful. Public
Service upon them, and upon weekly and yearly times of Fasting, is for increase
of godliness. Of frequent celebration of the Eucharist. Hours of Prayer among
the Apostles and Primitive Christians, from the Synagogue. Festivals of the Law
for gladness, and those of humane institution in the Synagogue. Of
Fasting-dayes in the Synagogue and Primitive Church. How the Eucharist was
frequented in the Primitive Church. The Order of this Church agreeable with the
judgment of chief Reformers.

THe next point concerning in general the Order of Public Service, is the
difference of times, and days, and hours, in respect of frequenting our
Assemblies for the purpose of it* And first, the Order of daily Morning and
Evening Service, how much it concerns the edification of the Church, that is,
the training of it in the exercise of Godliness. A point otherwise to be
pleaded then the rest. For in other matters we have reason, or at least the
shadow of reason, to deal with: In this, it is not for Christians to allege,
That it is not for the honor and glory of God to be served in public, or that
it is not for the benefit of his people to join together in addressing their
petitions, in procuring their daily wants at his hands. Nevertheless, as if
these considerations were to give way to the occasions of the world, those that
deny them not to be valuable, are content to let them, and the Order of daily
Service grounded upon them, be uneffectuall and to no purpose. This is not the
place to dispute how much the consideration of Gods Service is to outweigh the
world and the occasions of it. Only, because it may be said, How many idle
bellies are maintained in the Church of Rome, to Pater over their Mattens and
Evensongs, in a manner not regarded by themselves, and a language not
understood by the people: let it be considered, what greater advantage the
devil could wish to make of this abuse among them, then upon occasion of it to
bring the Service of God into disuse among us; or how he could have improved
this scandal to more purpose, for the hindering of Goodness, then rooting out
the substance of Gods Service, rather then reforming the abuses of the manner
of it. In the next place, the difference of Festival and Fasting-dayes from
the ordinary, in respect to the Service of God upon them, is an Order much
concerning the edification of the Church, in the exercise of Godliness. Here
indeed some pretense of reason has been made, to show that it is not in the
power of the Church to appoint Festival days, as a thing contrary to the
tenor of the Law which says, Six days thou shall labor and do all that thou
have to do. I know not whether men by this time be ware of the mistakes which
this reason involveth, because it makes not so much noise in these days: but
without doubt it was always a gross inconsequence, to imagine an office of
the second Table, of laboring in ordinary work, to be commanded by a law of
the first Table: but without doubt it was always a gross inconvenience, to
imagine God to give a command here, which we must suppose him to cross
afterward in the law of Moses, when he comes to appoint New Mons and other
Solemnities to be observed on these six days. Therefore when the Commandment
says, Six days thou SHALL labor, the meaning is, Six days thou MAY
labor: thou art licensed and not forbidden to do thy daily work on them, by
this Commandment. So it is translated in our last English, Exodus xxxi. 15. Six
days may work be done: And in the Ebrew the same word stands for both
senses. Last of all, whereas it is known that there were in the Jews Calendar,
at the time when our Lord Christ lived upon earth, diverse Solemnities besides
those that were appointed by the law of Moses, of which something must be said
afterward; and we know by the Gospel, that our Lord himself kept the Feast of
the Dedication instituted by Judas Macchabeus, by that particular we are
assured, both that he observed the rest, and that by observing he allowed and
commended the Institution in general, for the purpose whereof we speak. For,
the blessings of God, whereof these Solemnities renew the remembrance, are of
that esteem to the Church, that we are not able to express too much
thankfulness in taking that occasion of solemnizing his Service. And the
greatest part of Christians are such as will receive much improvement in the
principal Mysteries of our Faith, by the sensible instruction which the
observation of such Solemnities yields. The remembrance of the Birth, the
Sufferings, the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, the Coming of the Holy
Ghost, the Conversion of the Gentiles by sending the Apostles, the way made
before his coming by the Annunciation of the Angel, and the coming of the
Baptist, as it is a powerful mean to train the more ignorant sort in the
understanding of such great Mysteries, so it is a just occasion for all sorts,
to make that a particular time of serving God, upon which we solemnize those
great works of his. For the purpose is not to hinder the occasions of the
world, by setting aside men's ordinary work, but to prefer the Service of God
before it. If the Public Service of God be of better esteem then the business
of this world, well may the Church own all the means by which she labors to
procure the exercise of it: but if the business of this world, so far as it
hinders not the Service of God, be good and commendable, she shall not need
to own the restraint of it further then it tends to that purpose. Therefore
provided, as it is among us, that the wholesome effect of this Ordinance vanish
not in the excessive multitude of Festivals, ordinary occasions crowding out
the remembrance of those that deserve it; it will not serve the turn to say,
That the Papists have made these Solemnities the occasion of worshipping the
Saints that own the days: To that must the same be answered as before, That it
is the use and improvement that the devil would choose to make of such scandals,
to prevent the abuse of Gods Service, by rooting out the exercise of it. As for
particular Solemnities of Fasting, by the week, or by the year, we are to
consider that abstinence is not only the cure of that sensuality which surfeit
breeds, but the most powerful means to represent unto a man the whole
condition of his soul toward God. Would a man desire to humble himself in the
consideration of his offenses? Let common sense be judge, whether he shall do
it full or fasting to better purpose. Wherefore, being subject to run into
offense from time to time, what more wholesome Ordinance can the Church have,
then to Assemble from week to week to humble our selves in the presence of God,
and to labor to divert his due wrath, that it light not upon us in general or
in particular? And being subject nevertheless to heap wrath against our
selves, by slighting our continual humiliation and repentance, what more
Solemn Ordinance could reason devise, then Fasting before Festivals; then
before the most Solemn yearly Festival, the most Solemn yearly Fast; by
humiliation going before, to estate us in the right of those blessings which
then we celebrate? Our Lord in the Gospel has said of his Disciples, When the
Bridegroom shall be taken from among them, then shall they Fast in those days:
Should Christians never Fast but when public calamities, or extraordinary
occasions of the Commonwealth call for it, well may it be asked, Where is the
effect of these words? I speak not now of any difference of meats for
conscience sake, in that abstinence is not seen in the consideration now in
hand: But I speak of the Service of God upon these occasions, which being
appointed for humbling of our souls in consideration of our offenses, common
sense will not refuse, that abstinence is necessary for the purpose. If it be
said in this point as before, That the Papists have abused this Ordinance to a
sacrilegious opinion of Satisfaction, and Merit, and the worship of God: having
declared a just and true reason and ground of the Ordinance, according to which
it is no worship of God, but the opportunity and means of his due and requisite
Service, the answer must be as before, That it is the advantage which the devil
would wish to make of such abuses, to make them the pretense to root out the
Service of God, and so to save the pains of reforming it. The last
consideration which I refer to this head, concerns the frequent Celebration
and Communion of the Eucharist, which is indeed the crown of Public Service,
and the most solemn and chief work of Christian Assemblies. And though for the
particular time of Communicating, it is rather commended then enjoined, yet the
remembrance it imports is so proper, so particular to the Profession we make,
that our Assemblies are never so like the Assemblies of Christians, as when it
is celebrated. And though it is not in men so to command the occasions of the
world, as to be always disposed to communicate, yet, that in the general of
the Church there should not always be persons disposed to communicate, that it
should not be celebrated for those which are disposed to communicate, is an
inconvenience, for which nothing but too much love of the world, too much
backwardness from spiritual duties, can be alleged. For if it be said, That
the Church of Rome, by retaining the Custom of celebrating day by day, has
turned the Communion into a Sacrifice for the quick and dead; the answer must
be as before, That it is the use which the enemy of mankind would choose to make
of their abuses, to persuade men, that so long as private Masses are abolished,
they are at freedom to be secure of the frequent Celebration and Communion of
the Eucharist. If any man think that under this which has been said, there is
an intent to shoulder out Preaching, by commending other causes of Religious
Assemblies, he shall both wrong my meaning, and mistake the truth of the cause.
He that will have men to Preach more then they learn, and to void those
crudities in the Church which were never digested in their studies, perhaps may
have reason to think, that where the stuff is slight, there the larger measure
is due: but besides the scandals such raw doctrine must needs breed, he shall
be sure to bring a slight esteem upon that Profession, wherein God is served no
otherwise. But he that will provide abilities of men for so great a work, shall
find, that these Assemblies on Festival and Fasting-dayes, the occasions
whereof are here commended, shall minister opportunities of continual
Preaching, even beyond those of hearing, always for the edification of the
Church, where men are able to support the respect and esteem of so great a
work. It is now time to put together the Primitive practice of the Church, in
the particulars here touched, deriving it as near as can be from the time of
the Apostles. It is thus written of the first Disciples, Acts ii. 42. And they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Communion, and in breaking
bread, and Prayers. And verse. 46. And day by day continuing with one mind in
the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness and singleness of heart. Again, iii. 1. Now Peter and John went up
together into the Temple, at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour: that
is, three after noon. The Synagogues were instituted for the moral and
perpetual Service of God, by prayer, and praising him, and expounding his
word, leaving the figurative worship of Sacrifices to the Temple: upon which
nevertheless the circumstances of that moral Service depended, as has been
observed out of R. Moses Maimoni, Tephillah Ubircath Cohenim, C. l. n. 7. and
must be repeated here. Thus he delivers; That correspondent to the daily
Sacrifice Morning and Evening, there was ordered among them, and practiced, one
Service for the Morning, another for the Evening: that therefore called (...),
this (...). And on Solemn days, when there was a Sacrifice more then ordinary
offered by the Law, a third called (...), that is, over and above. Further, n.
8. That, as the limbs of the Evening Sacrifice were burning all night upon the
Altar, so, in correspondence, there was ordered a prayer at night, which,
though not obligatory, he says was practiced by all Israel. Of the Service
appointed for Fasting-dayes, at closing in the Evening, called therefore by
them (...), I need say nothing here. C. ii. n. 2. he declares, that because,
when the Eve of the Passover fell upon the Friday, the Evening Sacrifice was
killed half an hour after noon; therefore the time from which the Evening
Sacrifice became due was from thence to half an hour after three; which was
called (...), the great Evening Service, the less being from thence to
Sunne-set. So that he who prays this Service from half an hour after twelve,
is disobliged of the debt of it: And upon what terms it is said, either at both
these hours, or at the one, according to their orders, it follows there, n.
3. Of these three Services, the Ebrew Doctors, Maimoni as before, Abenezra upon
Psalm. iv. 6. R. Saadiah upon Dan. vi. 10. constantly expound the words of the
Psalmist there; Evening, and Morning, and at Noon will I pray, and cry aloud,
and he shall hear my voice. And that of Daniel, He kneeled upon his knees
three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before God, as before time.
Whence it should seem, that when S. Peter went up to pray upon the house top
about the sixth hour, Acts x. 9. his meaning was to observe the lawful hour
of the Evening Service half an hour after Noon: though, being at Jerusalem, he
went up into the Temple with John at the hour of Prayer, being the ninth
hour, when this Service was performed there, in the Assembly of the people.
The same which Judith observed, as we read, Judith ix. 1. About the time that
the incense of that Evening was offered in Jerusalem, in the house of the Lord,
Judith cried with a loud voice and said. According to that of the Psalm, Let
my Prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense, and let the lifting up of
my hands be an Evening Sacrifice, as you heard before, that their prayers in the
Temple were offered at the time of incense. Thus the order of the Synagogue
aimed at the Sacrifices, which by the Law were offered in the Temple. In the
Church, it was received of very ancient time, to pray at nine, at twelve, and
at three afternoon, aiming, it should seem, at the practice of the Synagogue,
and of the Apostles according to it, but with the difference you see, that they
prayed thrice in the day time, whereas the Jews third Service was at going to
bed, as you have it in Maimoni as before. Tertullian, De Jejun. adv. Psych. C.
x. shows, that the hours of nine, and twelve, and three were customed for
Prayer by the Christians of that time, by proving it from the example of the
Disciples assembled, as S. Peter says, Acts ii. 15. upon the third hour of
the day; of S. Peter, that went up to pray at the sixth hour; and of Peter and
John, that went up to the Temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour.
And then it follows, Quod etiam suadet Danielis quoque argumentum, ter die
orantis, utique per aliquarum horarum exceptionem, non aliarum autem quam
insigniorum exinde Apostolicarum, tertiae, sextae, nonae. Hinc itaque and
Petrum dicam ex vetere potius usu nonam observasse, tertio orantem supremae
orationis munere. Which also Daniel his praying thrice a day argues, forsooth,
excepting some hours, and those no other then these of the Apostles, which
thence were more notable, the third, sixth, and ninth. Hereupon I would say,
that Peter rather observed the ninth by ancient custom, praying the third
time, as the last offering. Here lies the difference. It is the third prayer
of the day, according to Tertullian, which Peter and John offered at the time
of Evening Sacrifice, which these Ebrew Doctors make but the second.
Whatsoever become of this difference, as concerning the hours of men's private
prayers, the public hours of the Temple, observed by the Apostles, became a
President to the Church for the Public Service of God at their Assemblies. In
the Constitutions of the Apostles, they are exhorted to pray the Lords Prayer
thrice a day, according to Tertullian, vii. 24. They are again exhorted to pray
at other hours besides, viii. 36. But as concerning their Assemblies, thus he
instructs the Bishop to teach the people, just according to the practice of
the Synagogue, alleged out of Maimoni ii. 58. (...). But in teaching, O
Bishop, charge and instruct the people to be continually at Church, Morning and
Evening every day, and not absent at all. Whereas upon Lords days, in the same
place he remembers three Services, which seem to be those whereof the Canon of
Laodicea speaks, where it appoints the same Service of Prayers to be used,
both at three and at Evenings, meaning upon Lords days, according to these
Constitutions. It is not then this Authors judgment, (upon which I stand not)
but it is the Example of the Apostles, and Primitive Disciples, resorting to
the Temple to serve God with the Jews, in the Service there practiced, and that
according to the custom of the Synagogue; but it is the custom of the Church
by him remembered, and derived from their Example, that must needs recommend
with great weight unto us the order of this Church, as concerning daily Morning
and Evening Service. And to the same purpose, in the Reformation, Calvine upon
Acts iii. 1. Instituerat Dominus ut Sacrificium vesperi and mane offerrent. Hoc
exercitio docebantur ab Invocatione and cultu Dei incipere diem and claudere.
God has appointed the Jews to offer Sacrifice morning and evening. By this
exercise they were taught to begin and close the day with calling upon God, and
his Service. A little after, Primum, quod statas horas Deus veteri populo esse
voluit, inde colligimus Ecclesiam non posse carere certa disciplina. Ac hodie,
nisi obstaret nimius torpor, utile esset quotidie haberi tales conventus.
First, whereas God appointed his ancient people set hours, thence we gather,
that the Church cannot be without a certain discipline. And at this day, if too
much dullness hindered not, it were useful every day to hold such Assemblies.
Of Festivals appointed by the Guides of the Synagogue, not by the Law of Moses,
we have four, to my remembrance, expressed in the Scriptures. The first is
that of Purim, Esther ix. 20. The second, the Festival of the Law, upon Tisri
xxiii. observed still among the Jews for making an end of reading the Law,
which they begin to read over again the next Sabbath; pointed at Nehem. viii.
9. ix. 1. as Scaliger De Emend. Temp. vii. Not. in Comp. Jud. has excellently
observed. It is first to be known, that the Festivals of the Law were appointed
to be solemnized with mirth and gladness of heart: wherefore they are called,
Number. x. 10. The days of your gladness. And in the Psalm for the Sabbath,
xcii. 4. the Psalmist in this respect, For thou Lord have made me glad through
thy works, says he, I will triumph in the works of thy hands: expressing the
subject of that gladness, the remembrance of the Creation, upon that day
celebrated. Though the observance of rest upon the Sabbath was strict, yet when
our Savior went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on
the Sabbath, Luke xiv. 1. this invitation and entertainment is argument enough
that it was Festival, for the manner of observance. Hereupon it is, that the
people falling to weep upon hearing the Law read, the first day of the Feast of
Tabernacles, Nehem. viii. 9. are forbidden to violate the Law of the Feast, and
commanded to observe the day in the right nature of it. Whereas the people
then, being forbidden to mourn on the Festival, are said, ix. 1. to have
fasted on the xxiiii. of that month, we have cause to presume with him, that
the Fast, whereof they acknowledged the cause, upon the first day of that
Feast, was deferred till the usual Solemnities of it were past; which by the
Law ending upon the xxii. and the Fast not kept till the xxiiii. it is plain
that the reason was, the Festival of the Law, falling then, and observed upon
the xxiii. as now, not by the Law, but by the Constitution of their Elders. The
third is the Feast of the wood-offering, of which Nehem. x. 34. And we cast
lots among the Priests, the Levites, and the People for the wood-offering, to
bring it into the house of our God, after the houses of our fathers, at times
appointed year by year, to burn upon the Altar of the Lord our God, as it is
written in the Law. And xiii. 31. And for the wood-offering at times appointed.
The same Scaliger conceives out of Josephus, that this Festival fell upon the
xxii. of the month Ab, to which sense he refers the words of Orach Hajim,
AB est rex, quod in eo caederent ligna in Sacrificium: AB is a King (among
Months) because upon it they cut wood for the Sacrifice. But the truth is that
which the Misna relates, Mass. Taanith. C. iv. n. 5. that it was held for nine
days of several months, whereof a great part fell in that month. For this
is that which the Scripture says, At times appointed year by year. The last
is the Dedication of the Temple by Judas Maccabeus, which our Lord observed,
John x. 22. neither is it within the compass of common sense, to imagine that
he did otherwise in the rest of the Solemnities, which were then for certain in
the Jews Calendar. As for their times of Fasting, the day of Atonement stood by
the Law of Moses, and the rest appointed for it, as strict as that of the
Sabbath; but the nature of the observance quite otherwise, with humiliation and
afflicting the Soul. There were diverse other Fasts which that people took upon
them to observe, not upon the Law, but upon public Order and Custom, upon set
days of several months, as in their Calender is yet to be seen; whereof some
are remembered in the Scriptures. Zach. vii. 5. and viii. 19. we read of the
Fasts of the fourth, and fifth, and seventh, and tenth months, in remembrance
of those calamities which God had punished the sins of that people with upon
those days, most of them still remembered in their writings. Besides, that
which is read in the Law of Moses, Number. x. 9. And if you go to war in your
land with your enemies that distress you, then you shall blow an alarm with
the Trumpets: has been from old time understood, in the practice of that
people, of all distresses that came upon them for their sins, and of
Proclaiming Fasts for strict repentance, and diverting Gods wrath, Maimoni,
Taanioth. C. i. number. 1. The Order of which Fasts was grounded upon that which
the words of the Pharisee point at, Luke xviii. 12. I fast twice in the week.
For without doubt the second and fifth day of the week, Mundayes and
Thursdayes, were observed many ages before that, for the purposes which the same
Rabbi specifieth. Tephillah Ubircath Cohenim. C. xii. n. 1. (...), Our Lord
Moses appointed Israel to read the Law at morning Prayer upon the Sabbath, and
the second and the fifth, that they might not rest three days from hearing the
Law: and Esra appointed to read it at evening Prayer upon the Sabbath, because
of idle persons. And he ordered that three men should read upon the second and
fifth, and not less then ten verses. And in Megillah. C. i. number. 6. (...),
those that dwell in villages, that Assemble not in the Synagogues, but upon the
second and the fifth. These are his words, by which it appears, that these
days were more solemn for Assemblies, then the rest of the week, seeing that
in villages they Assembled upon them in the Synagogues, which upon every day
they did not. The words of the Pharisee bear further, that they were observed
with fasting: and, besides Epiphanius, their own writers have delivered no
less. But the observance, without doubt, was not so strict upon them, else
could not the Pharisee have alleged it for his own praise. And the Order of
proclaimed Fasts, whereof I began to speak, argues no less. It was at the
least for three days, beginning at the Monday, and so on the Thursday, and
Monday next, Maimoni Taanioth. C. i. n. 5. But if seven days of fasting were
appointed, then they went on interchangeably from the first Monday, C. iii. n.
5. So the Congregation fasted not on Sabbaths or Festivals, neither did they
begin fasting on New Mons, or the Dedication, or Purim, or the working day of
a Feast, (that is the days that come between the first, and last of the
Passover and Tabernacles) but if they had begun before, they went on upon these
days, C. i. n. 6, 7. If these days then had been fasted ordinarily with such
strict observance, then could not the extraordinary Fasts, which were purposely
cast upon the same days, have been perceived. The institution and observation
of these Solemnities in the Synagogue, as it regarded no Ceremonial Service,
which figured things to come, but the Service of God by public Prayers, and
the Praises of God with hearing his Word upon the remembrance of his blessings,
or of our misdeeds, was a due President for the Church to follow, according to
the chief occasions ministered by the Principles of our Faith. The Resurrection
of our Lord in the first place. Who can doubt that the proper day of it was
solemnized from the beginning, acknowledging, as we do, that it was the ground
of determining the day which we celebrate through the year, in stead of the
Jews Sabbaths: and seeing the Apostles assembled the next Pentecost after it,
Acts ii. 1. we know there was from the beginning a great deal of difference and
debate about the time, those ancient Christians of Asia solemnizing it
according to the Moon, by a custom pretended to come from S. John: (whereof we
read in Policrates his Epistle related in Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. v. 22.) the
rest upon the first day of the week, upon which our Lord rose again. These that
differed so much about the time, agreed always in observing the Festival. So
they did in observing the Fast before it, that were at much difference as well
about the number of days, as the measure of abstinence. Ireneus in his Epistle
to Victor of Rome, in Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. v. 23. (...). For the difference
is not about the day alone, but about the very kind of fasting: for some think
they are to fast one day, some two, some more; some measure their day forty
hours of the day and night. The Passionday was commonly kept of all with
Public Fasting, as Tertullian acknowledges, De orat. c. 14. that is the one
day whereof Ireneus speaks. But besides, De Jejun. c. 2. relating the opinion
and practice of the Church, against which he writes there for the discipline
of Montanus, Certe in Evangelio illos dies jejunio determinatos putant quibus
ablatus est sponsus. For certain they think, says he, those days to be
appointed for Fasting in the Gospel, on which the Bridegroom was taken away.
That is the Passion-day and the Saturday after it, according to Tertullian, De
Jejun. c. 14. where the Sabbath or Saturday is qualified, Nunquam nisi in
Pascha jejunandum: Never but at Easter to be fasted. And the appointment of the
Gospel, whereof he speaks, is that, Mark ii. 20. The days shall come in
which the Bridegroom shall be taken from you, and then shall ye fast in those
days: or, on those days, as then it seems they understood it. But in that
which remains of I. reneus his words, there is, and seems to have been for
diverse hundred years, a slight difference of reading in the copies of Eusebius,
which infers a main difference in the sense: That reading which
Christoferson translated in Latin, acknowledged of late by Petitus, Var. Lect.
iii. 4. (though it is unknown to me from what copies) has them thus: (...).
That is, For some think they are to fast one day, some two, some more, some
forty: and they measure their day by the hours of the day and night. Meaning
that when they fast, they fast from evening to evening. Which is more, Ruffinus
read it no otherwise: for thus he translateth those last words, Nonnulli etiam
quadraginta: Ita ut horas diurnas nocturnasque computantes diem statuant.
Meaning, that some fasted forty days, but that those which fasted forty
days, computed every day four and twenty hours of the day and night. By this
reading, those some of whom Ireneus speaks, kept Lent forty days, even
before his time: though as Petitus fairly conjectureth, not upon all, but upon
some days of each week, as it has been showed, that the Jews kept their long
Fasts but on Mundayes and Thursdayes; and as he duly proves, that in S.
Augustines and Leo the Greats time, they fasted the Lent at Rome but three
days in a week. The other reading related before, is from Robert Stevens Greek,
which Nicephorus follows, for so he is translated in Latin; Nonnulli autem
quadraginta horis diurnis noctur-nisque diem metiuntur: to say, That some
measured that one day which they fasted, by forty hours of the day and night.
To make good which reading, B. Rhenanus in his Preface to Ruffinus, complaining
of the want which he found of the Greek of Eusebius, out of which much might
have been mended in that Latin, instanceth in this passage thus: Incidi
nuperrime in (...) quandam (...) Gracam, quam cum evolverem, occurrerunt forte
fortuna Irenaei verba quae Eusebius, C. xxiii. L. v. citat, de jejuniorum
diversitate, sic Graece habentia; (...) (...). Very lately, says he, I lighted
upon a certain abbridgement of Evangelicall History in Greek, which turning
over, I met by mere chance with the words of Ireneus, which Eusebius cites,
xxiii. 5. concerning difference in fasting, which in Greek run thus; For some
fasted one day, some two, some more, some forty hours of the day and night,
fasting an hour for a day: that is, forty hours for the forty days of Lent
afterward. This reading makes the conjecture probable, that it was first
called (...) or quadragesima, for the number of forty hours, which they
fasted at the beginning for the time of our Lords being under the power of
death, from twelve on Friday till the Sunday morning. For in the Constitutions
of the Apostles v. 14. the Fast is not to be ended till then at Cocks crowing,
which afterward was enlarged to forty days, as the Author alleged by
Rhenanus says, That it was at the first of forty hours, an hour for a day,
to wit, of those days that were observed afterward. The issue of this
dispute, Whether forty days were observed in the Church before Ireneus his
time, or not, must rest upon the true reading of his words in Eusebius: For
though there is mention of (...) or Quadragesima in Ignatius, and perhaps
elsewhere, yet it is not said to be called so from forty days, in the
writings of those times, to my knowledge. In the mean time it is manifest, that
there is no time of the Church to be assigned, when the Festival of the
Resurrection, and the Fast before it, was not solemnized. The Fast upon
Wednesdayes and Fridayes is referred to the like reason in the Constitutions of
the Apostles, v. 14. vii. The Wednesday is to be fasted, says he, because on
it our Lord was betrayed, and the bargain made between Judas and the Priests.
The Friday, because he suffered upon it. Epiphanius alleging the like reason,
refers the order to the Apostles, Expos. Fidei Cathol. (...) But the
Assemblies we hold are appointed by the Apostles upon the Wednesday and Friday,
and upon the Lords day; upon those in Fasting until the ninth hour. I marvel
not to hear him refer those Customs, whereof they knew no beginning, to the
Order of the Apostles. But the terms on which the Catholic Christians stand
against Montanus and his sect, in Tertullian, de Jejun. c. ii. may help to lead
us to the true ground of it: Itaque de caetero indifferenter jejunandum, ex
arbitrio, non ex imperio novae disciplinae, pro temporibus and causis
uniuscujusque. Sic and Apostolos observasse, nullum aliud imponentes jugum
certorum and ab omnibus obeundorum jejuniorum; proinde nec stationum, quae and
ipsae suos dies habeant, quartae feriae and sextae, passive tamen current,
neque sub lege praecepti. Therefore otherwise (beside the days on which the
Bridegroom was taken away) they say we are to fast indifferently, arbitrarily,
not upon command of the new discipline, according to each man's times and
occasions. And that so the Apostles observed, imposing no other yoke, of
certain Fasts to be performed of all; neither by the same reason, of Stations,
which, they say, have also their days of Wednesday and Friday, but of ordinary
course, under the law of no precept. For which cause he calls these Stations,
semijejunia, or, half Fasts, c. 13. of that book. The Wednesday and Friday
Assemblies of the Primitive Christians, with Fasting, were not of such strict
and solemn observance. No more were those of Mundayes and Thursdayes in the
Synagogue, and therefore taken up, in imitation of the Synagogue, and upon the
like reasons. The general whereof is well laid down by S. Hierome upon Gal.
iiii. 10. His question is, how the Church, appointing Festivals and set times
of Fastings, is clear of the Apostles charge upon the Galatians there, Ye
observe days, and months, and years; I fear lest I have labored upon you in
vain. His answer is, first, Et ne inordinata congregatio populi fidem
imminueret in Christum, propterea dies aliqui statuti sunt, ut in unum omnes
pariter veniremus; non quod celebrior sit dies illa qua convenimus, sed quod,
quacunque die conveniendum sit, ex mutuo conspectu laetitia major oriatur. And,
lest the disorderly assembling of the people should ^ate faith in Christ,
therefore certain days are appointed for all to assemble at once: not because
the day on which we assemble is more not able then others, but because on what
day soever we assemble, by seeing one another, more gladness arises. Meaning
that gladness wherewith they celebrated their Festivals. So his mind is, that
all difference of days among Christians, is in respect to the Order of their
Assemblies, and that in respect to the work of those Assemblies. Again, Qui
subtilius respondere conatur, dies omnes aequales esse ait, Jejunia autem and
Congregationes, inter dies, propter eos, a viris prudentibus constitutos, qui
magis saeculo vacant quam Deo, nec possunt, imo nolunt, toto in Ecclesia vitae
suae tempore congregari, and ante humanos actus, Deo orationum suarum offerre
Sacrificium. One that indeavoureth to make a more subtle answer, says, that
all days are equal, but that Fasts and Assemblies are appointed among other
days by discreet men, for those that spend more time in the world, then on
God, and can not, nay will not assemble all days of their life, in the Church,
to offer unto God the Sacrifice of their Prayers before humane actions. Adding,
that whereas the Jews Service was confined to certain times, that of Christians
is always seasonable. The Primitive Christians were always assembled, always
in posture for the Service of God, as we read in the Acts: when the number
increased, there was no expectation of humane reason, that they could continue
so unanimous in frequenting their Assemblies for that purpose. The neglect of
them must needs prove an abatement; the disorder of them, a scandal to the
Faith. Here the wisdom and the authority of the Church-guides behoved to take
place, by customing certain times, whereof the occasion was justest, to confine
men from Secular employments to better purposes. And how this course prevailed
in matter of Festivals, I refer to those well known words of S. Augustine,
Ep. cxviii. where being to instance in some universal custom of the whole
Church, Sicuti, says he, quod Domini Passio, and Resurrectio, and Asscensio in
Coelum, and Adventus de Coelo Spiritus sancti, anniversaria solennitate
celebrantur, and siquid aliud tale occurrit, quod servatur ab universa,
quacunque se diffundit, Ecclesia. As, that the Passion, the Resurrection, and
Ascension of our Lord into Heaven, and the Coming of the Holy Ghost from
Heaven, is celebrated with yearly solemnity, and if there be any thing else
which all the Church, wheresoever dispersed, observes. As for times of
Fasting, the answer of our Lord imports two things: First, that his purpose
was, that the outward freedom, which he allowed his Disciples for the time,
should symbolize with the inward comfort which the Gospel professes, and
conduct and train them (as trained they were by his Doctrine, in diverse
particulars, by corporal to spiritual things) to understand it. The second,
the reason of this purpose, because they were old vessels for the present,
which a strict discipline for the present might cause to fly in pieces: but
when the new wine of the Holy Ghost should make the vessels new, into which it
was put on the day of Pentecost, then should they Fast, then should they be
willing to undertake the discipline which their Profession suited with.
Accordingly we may find them serving God with Prayer and Fasting, Acts xiii. 3,
4. xiiii. 23. But because disorder or coldness in this voluntary performance
might disadvantage the Faith, it soon proved time to bring those voluntary
observances to set rules of practice. These causes thus disposing the Church,
and the President of the Synagogue directing not to do less, what course
should it observe, but, in stead of Mundayes and Thursdayes used in the
Synagogue, to practice Wednesdayes and Fridayes for this purpose? holding in
them a convenient distance from the Lords day, as those other did from the
Sabbath. Their Writers tell us, besides the reason specified out of Maimoni
before, that they might not rest three days from hearing the Law, that they
made choice of Mundayes and Thursdayes in regard of some great calamities that
befell their nation upon those days: What marvel is it if the Church had
regard to those which befell our Lord on the Wednesday and Friday, the other
Moral reason of assembling once in three days for Gods Service concurring?
Those ancient Christians of Tertullians time, conceived that the Fast before
Easter is appointed in the Scripture, which says, The days will come that the
Bridegroom shall be taken from among you, and then shall ye Fast in those
days, and Tertullian is content to have it believed, because Montanus required
that and more. But S. Augustine found that there is a command in Scripture to
Fast, but no time commanded when it shall be done, Ep. lxxxvi. So he would have
accepted their reason, as an allusion handsomely symbolizing with the nature of
Fasting, but the appointment he must needs refer to the Custom of the
Church, and the Ordinance of the Guides of it. It is not much otherwise with
those other days wherewith some enlarged the Fast before Easter, even before
Ireneus his time: It is not much otherwise with the Wednesday and Friday
Assemblies, though Tertullian is willing to have them both counted innovations
in the Church, on purpose to bring them into rank with Montanus his discipline,
for which he pleads, recharging the Catholic Christians, Et praeter Pascha
jejunantes, ultra illos dies quibus ablatus est sponsus, and Stationum
semijejunia interponentes. Both as Fasting besides the Passover, over and
above those days on which the Bridegroom was taken away, and interposing the
half Fasts of Stations, De Jejun. c. 13. But the betraying of Christ and his
death, is a reason that may take place to move them that have resolved to
appoint set days of Fasting every week, to choose the days on which those
things fell out before others, especially being in a convenient distance from
the Lords day, the Assemblies whereof were most solemn; otherwise, to think
that there was no more reason then that for an appointment of such consequence,
is to make them as childish as they would have them, that had rather despise
then either observe or understand their Ordinances, though the purpose be no
more then to bring the precepts of Fasting and of the Public Service of God,
into the ordinary and uniform practice of his Church, which being commanded but
in general, without such particular appointment are not like to be exercised
to great purpose. Whereas the discipline of Montanus, set up in downright terms
as schism in the Church by assembling apart for the exercise of their own
particular and voluntary observations, whatsoever heresies besides it may have
been embarked with. How ancient the observation of Wednesday and Friday
Assemblies was in the Church, is to be valued by the recommendation of them in
Ignatius, Ep. ad Philip. and Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. v. How uniform the
observation of them was in the Ancient Church, is to be known from Epiphanius
his words, Haer. lvi. (...); Who agrees not, says he, in all climates of the
world, that the Wednesday and the Friday are Fasts appointed in the Church? And
when Tertullian says in the same C. 13. afterward, that the Bishops were wont
to appoint extraordinary Fasts upon occasions which made the Church solicitous;
there can no question be made, but they were wont to choose the Wednesdayes and
Fridayes to be observed with more strictness upon these occasions: because we
saw before that all Fasts that were indicted in the Synagogue, were by Order to
fall upon the Mundayes and Thursdayes, which in a lower degree they observed
otherwise. And therefore the Orders of this Church of England, instituting
Festivals for the Public Service of God, in remembrance of his most remarkable
blessings, instituting times of Humiliation and Fasting, for diverting his
wrath, which our sins contract from time to time, stands recommended to us
by the practice of the most ancient times of the Church. Setting aside
difference of meats for conscience sake, whereof we speak not here, as was
said; opinion of Merit, of Satisfaction, of the Worship of God, being
abolished, by the reason of the Institution here professed, the form of Service
appointed by the Church, recommendeth the difference of days, to our
devotions. And though we come not near the strictness of Abstinence, wherewith
in the Primitive Church they were wont to afflict themselves, (and perhaps for
very good reasons we come not near it) yet to assemble for the Public Service
of God (even in those places, where there is not opportunity to Assemble every
day, as you saw it was practiced in the Synagogue) to abstain till these
Assemblies be over, setting aside the favor we lend our own ease, must needs
appear most commendable. I cannot say that this Institution in respect of set
days for Fasting, has found so good respect for the particular in the
Reformed Churches: the general reason is thus set down by Melanchthon, among
chief Reformers, Apol. Confess. de Trad. p. 171. Caeterum ritus humanos
observabant, -- Otherwise the Fathers observed humane rites for outward
benefit, that the people might know what time to Assemble, that all things
might be done in Churches, orderly, and gravely, and exemplarily; last of all,
that the common sort might have some Paedagogie or discipline. For the
differences of Times, and varieties of Rites, serve to put in mind the Common
sort. And by and by afterward, Dicit probandas esse Traditiones, -- Epiphanius
disputing against the Encratites, says, That Traditions are to be allowed,
that are made, (...), that is, either to restrain the flesh, for discipline of
the vulgar, or for Order and Governments sake. And we think that Traditions may
well be retained for these causes: That the people be at Service sober, (that
is, fasting, as it follows) as Josaphat, and the King of Niniveh proclaimed
Fasts: Likewise, that the Order and practice of the Church, may teach the
Church what was done, at what time. Hence come the Festivals of the Nativity,
Easter, Pentecost, and the like. This is that which Epiphanius says, That
Traditions were ordained for policies sake, that is, for Orders sake, and that
such Order might put men in mind of the story and benefits of Christ. For marks
of things, painted, as it were, in Rites and Customs, are much more effectual
to put the vulgar in mind, then writings. Now the difference of ancient between
several Churches, in the point of Public Service, upon Festival and
Fasting-dayes, is that which Epiphanius remembered before, that the Assemblies
upon Wednesdayes and Fridayes were held all Fasting till three after noon: and
Tertullian, so long before him, De Jejun. C. ii. acknowledges the Stations of
the Christians were wont to be kept on Wednesdayes and Fridayes, till three
after noon; which he out of the leaven of Montanus, is not content with. But of
the Lords day Epiphanius in the same place, (...). But all Lords days, this
holy Catholic Church counts glad days, ((...) serves to express that of
the Prophet Esa. lviii. 13. And call the Sabbath Delight, which the Jews call
(...), the DELIGHT of the Sabbath) and holds Assemblies from morning, fasteth
not: for it is inconsequent to Fast on the Lords day. So, to assemble in the
morning, was the mark of a Festival; to depart at three afternoon, of a Fast.
Further, Socrates v. 22. (...). Again, at Alexandria on Wednesdayes and
Fridayes, both the Scriptures are read, and the Doctors expound them, and all
that belongs to an Assembly is done, besides celebrating the mysteries. And
this is an ancient custom at Alexandria: for it appears that Origin taught
most of his Writings on these days in the Church. Because they took the
Eucharist to be a piece of Festival observance, therefore they thought it not
suitable when they fasted. Therefore it is ordered, Conc. Load. Can. xlix.
(...). The meaning is, that the Eucharist must not be celebrated in Lent, but
upon the Sabbath, and Lords day, on neither whereof they fasted. Nevertheless,
in other places, this reason prevailed not. By Tertullian it appears, De
Orat. C. xiiii. that in his time, and the parts where he lived, the Eucharist
was celebrated on days of Fasting. And in the same place he disputes against
those that forbore the Kiss of Peace (used in some places before receiving the
Eucharist, in some places, after it, Conc. Laod. Can. xix. Innocent. I. ad
Docent. 1.) upon days of Fasting: which was an observance of Fasting-dayes,
derived from the Synagogue, where their fashion was, not to salute one another
when they fasted. Maimoni Taanioth, C. iii. n. 8. C. v. n. 11. And S. Basil,
Epist. cclxxxix. (...). Yet we communicate four times a week, Lords days,
Wednesdayes, Fridayes, and Sabbaths, and on other days, if the memory of a
Martyr fall out. In fine, certain it is which S. Augustine delivers in this
point, Epist. cxviii. Alia, quae per loca terrarum regionesque variantur,
(sicuti est quod alii jejunant Sabbato, alii non: alii quotidie communicant
corpori and sanguini Dominico, alii certis diebus communicant: alibi nullus
dies intermittitur, quo non offeratur, alibi Sabbato tantum and Dominico, alibi
tantum Dominico: and siquid aliud hujusmodi animadverti potest) totum, inquam,
hoc genus rerum, liberas habet observationes. Other things, which change
according to places and countries of the world, (as that some fast on Saturday,
some not: some participate every day of the Lords body and blood, some receive
on certain days: in some places no day is intermitted, but it is celebrated,
otherwhere only on the Sabbath and Lords day, otherwhere on the Lords day
alone: and if any thing else of this sort can be observed) all matters of this
kind, I say, are of free observance. This indifference, or this difference
notwithstanding, we shall perceive the whole custom of the Ancient Church was
to celebrate the Eucharist, if not every day, yet upon all Lords days, if not
rather by consequence upon all Festivals, or all days of more solemn
Assemblies, as the Crown of the Service for which they assembled; both upon
example of the Primitive time. The practice of them that celebrated and
received the Eucharist every day, stands upon the example of the Primitive
Christians at Jerusalem. Of whom when it is said, that they continued constant
in the doctrine of the Apostles, and communion, and in breaking bread, and
prayers; and that, continuing with one mind in the Temple, and from house to
house, they did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of heart: to
what purpose shall we imagine that Breaking bread, and Communion is mentioned,
besides the Service of the Temple, but to signify the Service of the
Eucharist, proper to the Faith of Christians, in which they communicated among
themselves, as with the Jews in the Service of the Temple? knowing that at the
first it was used at meals (as it was instituted) among Christians. This
notwithstanding, in other places, it seems the Eucharist was celebrated but
upon Lords days, as well in the times of the Apostles, as in the Church that
succeeded. Acts xx. 7. On the first day of the week, the Disciples being
assembled to break bread; that is, to celebrate the Eucharist, as the Syriack
translateth it. Here the first day of the week seems to stand against the
rest, in terms of difference, as if upon other days they did it not. And that
is the day which S. Paul appoints the Church of Corinth, as he had done the
Churches of Galatia, to make their Collections for the poor, which Tertullian
shows was done at their Assemblies, 1. Cor. xvi. 2. Tertull. Apolog. C.
xxxix. and in Plinie's Epistle concerning the Christians of his Government,
Quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem convenire. That they were wont on a set
day to assemble before light. What day but the Lords day can we think might be
Set for this purpose? Justice Martyr, for certain, mentions no other
Assemblies of Christians, but on the Lords day, in the place aforenamed. And in
the Constitutions of the Apostles ii. 58. where he exhorts to Assemble every
day morning and evening, as was said before, the Eucharist is mentioned to be
celebrated but upon Lords days, as it follows afterward. Plinie's words in
that place, are these at large, Epist. xcvii. l. x. Quod essent soliti stato
die ante lucem convenire, carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem;
seque Sacramento, non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed ne furta, ne
latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum
appellati abnegarent. His peractis morem sibi discedendi fuisse, rur susque
coeundi adcapiendum cibum, promiscuum tamen and innoxium. The Christians
confessed, that they were wont to assemble on a set day before light, and to
sing praise among themselves to Christ as to God; and to tie themselves, upon a
Sacrament, not to any wickedness, but not to commit thefts, robberies, or
adulteries, not to falsify their trust, or deny a thing deposited, being
demanded. This done, that their custom was to depart, and meet again to eat
together, but in a vulgar and innocent sort. Grotius of late, upon Matthew. xxvi.
25. seems to conceive, that at the beginning the Eucharist was not celebrated
but at meals, as it was instituted by our Lord. And that so it was celebrated,
not only under the Apostle, as Acts xx. 11. 1. Cor. xi. or under Ignatius, but
in Justine Martyr and Tertullians time, appears by their words. Justin. Dial.
cum Tryph. (...). Therefore, that Prayers and Thanksgivings made by the worthy,
are the only complete Sacrifices and acceptable to God, I also affirm: for
these alone Christians also have received order to perform, and that upon
remembrance both of their dry and moist nourishment: at which there is also
remembrance of the Passion which God by God himself suffered. The like, Apol.
ii. the words shall follow afterward. Tertullian, de Cor. c. 3. Eucharistiae
Sacramentum, and in tempore victus, and omnibus mandatum a Domino, etiam
antelucanis coetibus, nec de aliorum manu quam Praesidentium sumimus. The
Sacrament of the Eucharist, commanded by our Lord, both to all, and at meat
time, we receive also at our Assemblies before day, but at no man's hands but our
Presidents. They are the words whereupon he groundeth: For Tertullian reckons
it among Traditions, that is, Customs of the Church not commanded in
Scripture. Which notwithstanding, nothing hinders, but the same might be
practiced in the Apostles time, and remembered in the Scriptures. To which
opinion I rather incline. Otherwise, whence should the Custom rise, in Justine
and Tertullians time, to celebrate the Eucharist at their Morning Assemblies,
when it was still in use at Supper time, in their Feasts of Love? That is it
which Ignatius calls (...), in the ancient translation alleged elsewhere,
translated, Agapam facere, in that which is extant, Missam facere, which he
says, must not be held without the Bishop, and that must be in respect of the
Eucharist. And when Justine and Tertullian affirm, that it was frequented at
meals, we must needs understand it, in the first place, of those meals to which
they assembled for the exercise of Christian Charity and the Praises of God, as
we see in Tertullian, Apol. c. 39. where if we find nothing of celebrating the
Eucharist, it is to be attributed to Cassanders reason, because it was not his
purpose to make known the fashion of the Eucharist to unbelievers, which might
bring it into contempt among them. Plinie's words alleged seem to import, that
the Christians of his time Assembled twice on Lords days, before day, and at
night. Before day, to praise Christ as God, and to tie themselves upon a
Sacrament, or Oath, to make good what they professed. I have not yet found that
they were wont to make any such formal Oath to themselves, and must think it
strange, that they should renew it at all solemn Assemblies; and therefore do
believe, that his meaning concerns the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which of
its own nature, we know, is an obligation to such purpose. At night when they
met to eat together, it has been showed that the Eucharist was celebrated. And
so Plinie's words import the same that Justines, in which he describes to us
the celebration of the Eucharist at solemn Morning Service, and elsewhere at
meals, among which the Feasts of Love had the first place; and both of them the
same that the Apostle in this place. His meaning in the xi. Chapter is not to
abrogate those Feasts of Love, but to take a course that they might be held in
common, for the exercise of Christian Charity, and the Public Service of God.
Therefore if any man pretended the necessities of nature, he gives him leave
to eat at home, xi. 34. because it has appeared, that these Assemblies were
held toward night, and that (when the Custom of the world was to entertain
themselves) then they Assembled to this sober and Christian refreshment. But in
this xiiii. Chapter he has touched all the parts of Public Service at solemn
Assemblies, Prayers, the Praises of God, the Reading and Expounding of the
Scriptures: And therefore when he says, verse. 16. Else when thou shall BLESS
with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen
at thy GIVING OF THANKS? my purpose is to show, that he refers to the
celebration of the Eucharist in particular, and that Thanksgiving which from
the beginning it was consecrated with: to which purpose I have premised these
probabilities, that the Eucharist was then celebrated at their Morning
Assemblies. In the mean time, it is plain by the Rubric of our Service, which
says, Upon the Holy days, if there be no Communion, shall be said, -- with
that which follows; and more plain by the Rubric of the first edition of
Edward VI. after the Exhortation, which says, In Cathedral Churches, or other
places, where there is daily Communion --, and again, And if upon the Sunday or
Holy day the people be negligent to come to the Communion --, that our
Reformers affected the frequentation of this Service, according to the
Primitive practice, so far as they thought it attainable. And according to
them, Calvine, 4. Instit. xvii. 43, and 46. roundly professes, That it
behooves that the Eucharist be celebrated at least once a week. Where let me
have leave to say, That it had been much more for the edification of the Church
to have labored in reducing this pious intention of our Reformers into
practice, then to contend about saying that part of the Service, (which
nevertheless, as shall appear, never properly belonged to the celebration of
that Sacrament) at the place appointed for the ministering of it.

CHAP. IX.
The reasons why it is for the edification of the Church to use Ceremonies in
Public Service. It is avowed by the chief Reformers. Of the respect of Times
and Places. Of the difference of Vestures and Gestures. Caution in matter of
Ceremonies. The obligation of Rules whereby they are determined.

OF the Rites, and Circumstances, and Ceremonies of Gods Service in Public, it
concerns to say something here, where we are about the general Order of it:
and yet, so much has been said of it, and to so good purpose, that he that
would come down to the particulars of it, shall be enforced to say over what
has been said again. My purpose is to discourse in few words, the reason and
ground upon which in general it is expedient, that the form of Public Service
should be Solemn and Ceremonious, according to the method hitherto used. And
that is this, which I touched before: Because the Rule of the Apostle commands
these things to be done both in Order and with Comeliness; and nothing can
become the Service of God, but that which serves to stir up, and to exercise
the inward reverence of the heart in our selves, and to procure it in others.
What that is, common reason must be judge, according to the Apostle. Here
therefore lies an appeal to the Common reason of all the world, not to the
particular reasons of persons interessed in prejudice, Whether that inward
Reverence and Devotion of the heart, wherein the Service of God consists, the
exercise and maintenance of it do not require that it be in the Circumstances
and Rites of it Solemn and Ceremonious? Ask the world to what purpose the chief
Actions of it are transacted with so much observance in Circumstances, but to
procure and maintain that respect which the public good requires they should
possess in men's minds. In the State of Princes, in the Courts of Judgment, in
Military matters, in the passage of all public matters of any consequence,
common sense is able to tell us what respect and observance is used, and all
reason allows the necessity of it: For by this means is conveyed into the
minds of the greatest part of people, that reverence, in which the public good
requires all men to hold those powers by which these great matters are
managed; which it is not possible should make impressions upon gross minds, by
conviction of reason, were they not managed by their senses. God has made
Christians, though governed by the Spirit of his Grace, as gross in their
bodily senses and faculties of their minds, as other men of like education are:
and it is a debt which the Guides of the Church owe to the wise and unwise of
Gods people, to conduct them in the way of godliness by means proportionable
to their faculties. The outward form of Public Service avails much, even
with them whose minds are least in tune, to corroborate their reverence and
devotion at the Service of God, by the exercise of it: but speaking of them
whose minds are less withdrawn from their senses, how great impression shall
the example of the world, practicing the Service of God in an orderly and
reverent form, make in the minds of men that cannot receive it from their
reason, but from their senses? This effect in things of slight consequence in
particular, which nevertheless, altogether, amount to a considerable sum, is
better seen by the gross in practice, then convinced by retail in dispute: yet
since the importunities of men have caused false reasons to prevail with weak
people, it is requisite the true reasons be pleaded, lest it be thought there
are none such, because not so fit to be pleaded. The Circumstances and
Ceremonies of Public Service is indeed a kind of Discipline and Paedagogie,
whereby men subject to sense are guided in the exercise of godliness: It is,
as it were, the apparel of Religion at the heart; which some think, like the
Sun, most beautiful when it is most naked; and so it were indeed, did men
consist of minds alone without bodies, but as long as our bodily senses are
manageable to our souls advantage, the heat within will starve without this
apparel without. And therefore, under better judgment, I hold it requisite,
that the observance of Rites and Ceremonies in the Public Service of God,
should increase and become more solemn after the world was come into the
Church, then under the persecuting times of it. Persecution was like
Antiperistasis in nature, in preserving Order and reverence in the Public
Offices of the Church, with the respect of those Guides that ruled it. But
since the Net of the Gospel has been cast in the Ocean, and caught good and
bad, it is more requisite that all should pass, as under rule and observance,
so in the most reverent form, that the coldness and indifference of the worser
part appear not to debauch the good disposition of others. Though from the
beginning, as early as the records of the Church are able to inform us, we are
sure it was never without such outward observances, as according to the state
of the time, tended to maintain, to witness the disposition of the heart
answerable. The Apostles ordinance of Praying and Singing Psalms, men with
heads bare, women with heads covered, the Salutation of Peace so long practiced
in the Primitive Church, from the time of the Apostles, Imposition of hands in
diverse Acts of Public Service, signifying the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost,
and Gods hand stretched out to give the blessing for which Prayer was made, and
without question derived from the times of the Apostles, are of this nature.
And it is thought that when the Apostles speak of putting off the old man, and
putting on the new, Col. iii. 9, 10. ii. 11. of burying in Baptism, Col. ii.
12. Romans vi. 4. of the unction of grace, 1. John ii. 20, 27. 1. Cor. ii. 21.
allusion is made to some Rites of Ecclesiastical Offices, used even at that
time. As for Ecclesiastical Writers, it will be hard to name any of them so
Ancient, in whom are not to be found diverse particulars of this nature. But the
general reason hitherto declared, has been better sifted by the chief
Reformers. Philip. loco de Caerem. in Eccl. p. 651. Paulus gravissime dicit,
(...). Non ordinem tantum, sed etiam singularem curam ornandi ordinis requirit:
quare addit (...), ut videamus, quid personas, loca, tempora deceat. Paul says
with much gravity, LET ALL THINGS BE DONE WITH DECENCY, AND IN ORDER. He
requires not Order alone, but a singular care of setting that Order forth;
therefore he adds DECENTLY, that we consider what becomes persons, times,
and places. This is it that I am now about, That the Order of things done at
Public Service be such as may set forth and insinuate the respect which those
times, those places, those persons require. Which Calvine still sets down in
fuller terms, 4. Instit. x. 28. Vt in sacro fidelium caetu decor e peragantur
omnia, and qua convenit dignitate. That in the holy Assembly of the faithful,
all things be done decently, and in that worth and respect as befitteth.
Afterward he sets down as much as I have done, when he says, Ac decori
quidem finis est, partim, ut dum adhibentur ritus qui venerationem rebus sacris
conciliant, talibus adminiculis ad pietatem excitemur: partim etiam, ut
modestia, and gravitas, quae in omnibus honestis actionibus spectari debet,
illic maxim eluceat. And indeed the end of comeliness is, partly, that using
such rites as procure reverence to sacred things, we may be by such helps
excited to godliness: partly, that the modesty and gravity, which in all
actions of respect ought to be attended, may there especially appear. Again, n.
29. Sed illud nobis decorum erit, quod ita sit ad sacrorum Mysteriorum
reverentiam aptum, ut sit idoneum ad pietatem exercitium, vel saltem quod ad
ornatum faciat actioni congruentem: neque idipsum sine fructu, sed ut fideles
admoneat, quanta modestia, religione, observantia sacra tractare debeant. But
that shall be counted decent with us, that shall so fit the reverence of holy
Mysteries, as may be a competent exercise unto godliness; or which at least
may conduce to ornament suitable to the action: and that, not without benefit,
but to put the faithful in mind with how much modesty and religious observance
they ought to be conversant in sacred actions. What this in general imports,
is that which I desire in the particular heads. Times and Places are no way
sanctified otherwise then as they are deputed to the Service of God. The words
of our Lord in the Gospel, Matthew. xxiii. 18. Which is the greater, the
Sacrifice, or the Altar that sanctifies it? point out to us a difference
betwixt the Law and the Gospel in this particular. For, as S. Hierome said
before, That the Service of God in Spirit and Truth, proper to the DISPENSATION
of the Gospel, is acceptable to God at all times, that all days are equal of
themselves, no difference between them, but in respect to the Assemblies of
Christians upon them, and the work of those Assemblies: so is it to be said
with truth concerning Places, to make it a general observation and a true one,
That under the Law, the Time and the Place sanctified the Service confined to
it; but under the Gospel, the Service required sanctifies the Time and Place
of it. For example, The Passover on the due time was holy, on another time had
been abominable: Dwelling in Tabernacles, commanded on such a day of such a
month, used otherwise, no part of Gods Service, but sacrilege in usurping it:
The Sacrifices whereof our Lord speaks, holy upon the Altar, otherwhere
abominable. On the other side, the Service of Christians being good by nature,
and acceptable to God at all Times and in all Places, has a special promise
of God from the unity of the Church, and the Assemblies in it. Which because
they cannot be held without public Order, confining them to Times and Places,
thereupon those Times and Places, which are capable of no Holiness in
themselves, are nevertheless truly qualified HOLY, as an attribute derived
from the holiness of those actions to which they are designed. Which may well
be called a relative, or metonymicall Holiness. Thus are Times and Places
consecrated, by being appointed to the Service of God: Places, as more subject
to sense, by the execution of that appointment; that is, by the Prayers of the
Church, ministered by the Guides of it. But in as much as it behooves, that the
Service which shall be acceptable to God, be done in the unity of his Church,
and that which is so done, must be according to public Order, confining the
Times and Places of Assemblies: hereupon, those Times and Places which are
capable of no Holiness but that which is ascribed to them, in relation to that
work whereunto they are assigned, give Holiness to that work again, in as much
as if it be done in opposition to that public Order in which the unity of the
Church consists, it is abominable before God. He that has promised to be
present where we are Assembled, by the same reason has promised to be absent
where we are divided: let them look to themselves that cause it, those that do
not, have no cause to doubt of Gods presence. This is the ground of that
respect which is due to the Times and Places of Gods Service, and which, if it
go not beyond the consideration here expressed, cannot prove superstitious. The
Holiness of that work which differenceth them, requires they be so used as
may conduce most to stir and maintain the right apprehension of that work in
our own minds, and to convay it to others. If the days of our Assemblies be
employed upon ordinary business, no marvel if the mind prove not at leisure to
attend the work for which they are designed. Churches are still more subject to
sense then days are, and the common use of them, common reason and experience
will prove to breed a common esteem of the work of Gods Service, and in
consequence, of the Majesty that owneth it. If we remember that God is there
present to accept the Service of our Assemblies, we cannot refuse to
acknowledge respect due there in general, though we refer our selves to Law,
or commendable Custom, for the particular of it. That which is to be said for
the difference of Vesture, in solemnizing the Service of God, is much to this
purpose. The meaning of it is, to procure inward reverence to that work which
it makes outwardly solemn; to represent to our own apprehensions, and to
convay to other men's, the due respect and esteem which it ought to bear in our
hearts. And common reason, and all experience justifies this intent. For all
the actions of esteem in the world are set forth with the like solemnities; to
no other purpose, but to convay by the senses to the mind that respect which
they ought to bear. And the world has tried enough, that those which have made
it part of their Religion to stick scorn upon such slight Circumstances, have
made it, no less, to deface and disgrace the substance of Gods Public
Service. As for the difference of bodily Gestures at the Service of God, that
is still a more considerable mean to procure and preserve that esteem and
respect of it, for which I plead. The words of S. Augustine of the Gestures of
Prayer are remarkable, De Cura pro Mort. C. v. which, he says, are not used so
much to lay the mind open to God, to whom the most invisible inclinations of
the heart are best known, as to stir up a man's own mind to pray with more
humble and fervent groans. And then it follows, Et nescio quomodo, cum hi
motus corporis fieri nisi animi motu praecedente non possint, eisdem rursus
exterius visibiliter factis, ille interior invisibilis qui eos fecit, augetur:
ac per hoc cordis affectus, qui ut fierent ista praecessit, quia facta sunt,
crescit. And I know not how, though these bodily motions are not done without
the motion of the mind going before, yet again, by the outward visible doing of
them, that inward and invisible one which causes them, increases: and so, the
affection of the heart, antecedent to the doing of these, by the doing of them
gathers strength. Christians have bodies as other men have, and though the
Service of God consist in the inward intention of the mind, and the devotion of
spirit which performs it, yet this bruit part of us is able to contribute so
far toward it, as it refreshes in our selves, and expresses to others the
inward motions wherein it consists. It is an impression of Nature that
teaches all people thus to actuate, thus to animate the Service they tender to
God: and experience shall tell them that observe it, That where it is passed
over with indifference, there men behave themselves more as hearers then
actours in it; there, as the natural heat at the heart, so the inward heat of
devotion, which ought to dwell there, stifleth and choketh for want of this
airing and exercise. Thus that which maintains the intention of the mind in
private, multiplieth it in public, and propagateth in others that which it
cherishes in our selves. Besides that, it contributeth toward the comeliness
of such Assemblies, if it be uniform. To good purpose it was a Deacons office
in the Primitive Church to put the people in mind of these observances, at
least in great congregations. But in this whole matter of Rites and Ceremonies
in Common Service, there is Caution to be used, with which (though in the
latitude of their nature indifferent) they will prove an advantage to it; and
without which, they may prove an offense in it. For the nature and kind of that
which is done, respect is to be had to the end proposed. If the particular
observed be not, according to reason, a circumstance apt to procure, to
maintain in our selves, to express and convay to others, that intention and
reverence which the Service of God requires, for what cause shall we say it is
observed? Shall it be thought acceptable to God alone of it self, without
reference to the due end and purpose? Then must it needs turn to a voluntary
observance, wherein we discharge our selves to God, in stead of the Service he
requires. Besides, those that are not offensive for their kind, for their
number may prove no less. For, as the suckers that grow under great stocks,
where there are too many, intercept that sap that should nourish the trees to
bear fruit: so, where the Circumstances and Ceremonies of Public Service are
multiplied beyond measure, there the mind, distracted into a number of outward
observations, cannot allow that intention to the Substance, which it spends
upon the Circumstance. And so it falls out as before, they are intended for
their own sake, as acceptable to God of themselves, without respect of
advancing that Service which he requires. Last, because it has been showed,
that Order as well as Comeliness is the Rule to direct the form of Gods
Public Service; and because, without Order, nothing becomes it, though with
Order apt to become it, that which has been said, is to be understood of those
Rites and Ceremonies which Public Order inforceth, that is, which are either
enjoined by Law, or practiced by Custom which it allows: As for the
voluntary observations of particular persons, they are by their nature subject
to abuse, as is to be seen in the Superstitions of the Church of Rome, which
all reason shows had their beginning from the well-meant devotions of private
persons. And therefore it is plain, that they may prove a just subject of that
offense to the weak, which the Apostle forbids; which those that are
practiced upon Public Orders, declaring the due meaning of them, cannot, as my
purpose is now to declare: because it is an objection, which if it take place,
as some think, must needs overthrow the most part of that which has been said
to the Order and Circumstances of Public Service. It is to be known that there
were two sorts of Jewish Christians under the Apostles, according to the
difference of whom, both their doctrine and practice, especially of S. Paul, is
to be valued. For, on the one side, the Apostles, in the Council at Jerusalem,
ordered, Acts xv. 20. that those which were converted from the Gentiles, should
abstain from things dying in the blood, and sacrificed to Idols. S. Paul
circumcised Timotheus, xvi. 3. purified himself according to the Law, xxi. 26.
In respect to the same sort, he is bold to say, Romans xii. 6. He that regards
a day, regards it to the Lord, and he that regards not a day, regards it
not to the Lord: He that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks,
and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and gives God thanks. And
that, it seems, upon the consideration that follows in the next words,
because, though not without blame, for the ignorance of their freedom, yet
living and dying to the Lord, they had a pious intention in general, to excuse
their defect in particular. But in regard to the other sort, it is the same
Apostle that says, Gal. iiii. 10, 11. Ye observe days, and months, and
times, and years. I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in
vain. And, Coloss. ii. 16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or drink, or
in respect of a Feast, or New Mood, or Sabbath: expressing further what he
means, when he says, Let no man judge you, verse. 5. Beware lest any man
spoil you. and verse. 20. Why as living in the world are you subject to
Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not? And to Titus i. 10 There are many
unruly and vain talkers, and deceivers, especially they of the Circumcision,
whose mouths must be stopped. And wherein, he expresses, verse. 15. Unto the
clean all things are clean: Showing that they were not to be tolerated but
opposed in that which they taught, of differences of times, and meats,
according to the Law of Moses. According to his practice in Titus, whereof Gal.
ii. 34. But neither Titus who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be
circumcised; and that because of false brethren, slily foisting in, that came
in privily to spy out our freedom which we have in Christ Jesus, that they
might bring us into bondage. This difference in the Apostles practice and
doctrine must needs proceed from the difference of persons they had to do with.
The one, like men that were new come out of the dark, could not look right upon
the light of that freedom which the Gospel estateth, and not satisfied of the
right of Christians, for their particular practice, made a conscience of days
and meats according to the Law. The other, renouncing their freedom, and in
love with their own servitude, took upon them to dogmatize and maintain the
necessity of such observations, upon those desperate consequences which the
Apostle expresses. Those are the weak, and these the strong, according to the
Apostle; because, though for reason, weakest, (for a false opinion is a further
weakness then a doubt of the truth) yet for will, most resolute to stand in
it. Those in action doubtful, these in opinion erroneous. These are the men
whom the Apostle charge by the Law of Love not to scandalize; showing that in
two things it might be done: First, Romans xiv. 15. If thy Brother be grieved
with thy meat, then walk thou not charitably; destroy not him with thy meat
for whom Christ died. Which Origin conceives to point at such as took distaste
at the Profession of Christ, so as to forsake it, upon occasion of such slight
offenses: And the vehemence of those terms which the Apostle uses seems to
import no less. But by the words of the Apostle, verse. 15. If thy Brother be
GRIEVED with thy meat. and verse. 10. Why JUDGE thou thy Brother? why set
thou thy Brother at naught? it appears, that all discouragement of these weak
ones, is, in the sense of the Apostle, a degree of this offense. But there is
another expressed, verse. 22, 23. That whereas it behooves all men to be
resolved of what they do, that it is acceptable to God, verse. 5. by the
indiscreet example of one that understood his own freedom, he that did not,
might be moved to use it with a doubtful conscience, which the Apostle
declares to be sin. By the way, that offense whereof the Apostle writes, 1.
Cor. viii. 9. x. 27. is of another nature, not pertinent to this purpose; for
here the offense is an example that moves a man to do that which is lawful,
with a doubtful conscience: there, it is an example which moves a man to do
that which is unlawful, with an erroneous conscience, that is to say, when the
example of him that has knowledge, eating that which was sacrificed unto
Idols, without difference, moves the simple to participate in the worship of
Idols by feasting on their Sacrifices. Thus it is supposed that offense is
given to the weak by the orders of this Church, when those that are not
satisfied in the things ordered, either take distaste thereupon at the Church,
and the Communion of it, or are moved by example to do that which is ordered,
with a doubtful conscience. Where it must be excepted, that no man can use
this argument of scandal to the weak, but he must acknowledge the things
ordered to be lawful. For the weak, whom the Apostle forbids to offend, is
he that is not persuaded of the lawfulness of that which is lawful indeed.
Besides, he that pretends the scandal of the weak, by example moving to
proceed upon a doubtful conscience, is not subject to that kind of offense.
For, in that he complains, he shows he is aware enough of the danger: And
it is without the compass of common sense to imagine, that a man should
stumble in following the example against which he professes. In fine, the
opposition made to public Order, and that which it injoyneth, is evidence
enough, that they are not the weak but the strong, not the doubtful but the
erroneous, (weak in reason, but strong in will, or, as it was once well said,
headstrong in refusing without reason what Order prescribes) not those whom
the Apostle charge to forbear, but those whom he forbeareth not a moment,
Gal. ii. 5. whom he charge the Colossians and Titus not to forbear, that we
have to deal with. The matters were light wherein their offense stuck, but the
consequence which opposition drew, involved the substance of the Gospel. So are
the things slight which we stick at, but public Order, which depends upon
the right of prescribing, and the edification of the Church, intended in the
particulars, deserve not to be abandoned for an unjust offense. True it is,
that a private person, that will be charitable, must forbear the use of his
freedom, which no Rule confineth, when he sees it will be offense to the
weak; if he forbear it not, he gives just offense according to the Apostle.
And it is to be thought, that under the countenance and wing of the erroneous
and strong, there walk diverse of those doubtful and weak, to whom respect is
to be had, according to the Apostle. But if the question thereupon be made,
Whether it be expedient for the Church to Order such things as shall seem to
advantage the Form, the Order, the Rites of Divine Service, Whether it be
expedient for those whom it concerns to observe and exact the same, in case
there may be doubtful Consciences that may take offense? The answer will be
Yes, even according to the Apostle: because otherwise the public Order, which
he recommendeth, can by no means be preserved in the Church, since it is not
possible so to order things of this nature, as to leave no possible doubt in
any Conscience. Might not those of the Gentiles, whom the Apostles enjoined to
forbear things dying in their blood, and offered to Idols, have taken offense,
because they were confined in the just use of their freedom? Or the
Corinthians, that S. Paul suffered not their women to sit with bare faces at
public Service? as the Virgins of Tertullians time professed themselves
scandalized at those of their rank that practiced it. Suppose the Church cannot
say as the Apostles, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us: S. Paul in
the other case proceeds upon no other reasons then such as the Church must
now use in like cases. And I suppose, the President inspired by the Holy Ghost,
authorizeth the Church to proceed in like matters, though not pretending
immediate inspirations. Last of all, Who can doubt, but among the erroneous of
them that did Judaize under the Apostles, there were also of the doubtful and
weak led away with their pretenses? And yet we see the Apostle forbeareth them
not a moment, in respect to the weak. All this containing no more inconvenience
then this, That whereas all men are bound to endeavor themselves to satisfy
and overcome such doubts of their Conscience, the Apostles opposition
redoubleth a new obligation to do it, lest they offend this Ministry, if they
do it not. So does the Constitution of the Church add a new obligation of
resolving doubtful Consciences, for fear of offending the public Order which
it settleth. And in all this I suppose there is no just offense. For, as there
is always means in the Church, with satisfaction to overcome doubts of
Consciences; so is there no means to procure that there shall be no doubts of
Conscience in the Church, so long as there are unperfect Christians in it. But
he whom it concerns to observe or exact public Order, must not give just
offense to public Order and all that go by it, by neglecting it, for fear of
giving unjust offense to private persons by observing or exacting it.

CHAP. X.
What is to be considered touching our Service. The Service of Hearers and
Believers. Confession of sins whether of old the beginning of Service. The
ancient Order of Psalms and Lessons. The Mass contains an abridgement of
it. Several manners of singing Psalms. Purpose of Lessons. The Place of the
Sermon. Dismission of Hearers. Original of Litanies. Prayer indicted by the
Deacon. The Thanksgiving from whence the Sacrament is called the Eucharist.
Prayer which it was always celebrated with. Prayer for all the Church at
celebrating the Eucharist. The residue of that Service. The charge of the Mass
on our Service. Extent of the power of the Keys, and wherein in consists. Of
Confession of sins and Absolution at the beginning. Our Order of Psalms and
Lessons. Of the Creed and Collects. The Sermon part of our Service. Of the
Communion-Service and appertenances of it.

BEing now to compare the Form of Service which we use with that of the
Primitive Church, and to derive both from the practice pointed out to us in
those particulars which are remembered in the Scriptures, I am to profess at
the beginning, that my purpose is not to be extended to the particulars of
words or conceptions wherein it is couched: It will be enough to reduce the
main substance and order of it to that which we find practiced under the
Apostles. My business therefore is, to describe the most ancient and general
Form of that Solemn Service which was used when the Eucharist was celebrated,
not out of the Liturgies extant alone, but out of the Testimonies of the Eldest
Ecclesiastical writers concurring. For it shall appear that from hence is
derived, and herein is contained, first, the Order of daily Morning and Evening
Service, then the Litanies, appointed besides for Lords-dayes, Wednesdayes and
Fridayes; and last, the Celebration of the Eucharist, which is all, or almost
all that which this Discourse intends to comprise. In the first place it is
to be known, that from the first times of the Church there were always two
parts of Public Service: At the one all persons might be present, though not
Christians; till the Sermon was done, the Church-doores were open and free: But
when they went to celebrate the Eucharist, then all Hearers or Catechumeni,
(that is, those that were willing to be instructed in the Faith, but were not
as yet admitted to Baptism) all that were under Penance, all possessed with
unclean spirits were dismissed and shut out, none suffered to be present but
those that were admitted to Communicate. Of these two parts we have sufficient
remembrance in Justine Martyr, the most ancient of Church-writers that remain
unquestionable. His words are these, Apol. ii. (...). As many as are persuaded
and believe those things to be true which are taught and said of us, and
undertake to be able so to live, are taught to pray and desire of God with
Fasting, forgiveness of foregoing sins, we also praying and fasting with
them. For, what prayers were these whereof he speaks, but those which we
shall show afterward were wont to be made, as a part of their Service, on
behalf of the Hearers (as also of Penitents, and persons beset with evil
spirits) by themselves and the Congregation both, immediately before their
departure? Afterward, (...). But we, having thus washed him that is persuaded
and agreed, bring him to those that are called Brethren, where they are
assembled to make Common Prayers, both for themselves, and for him that is
baptized, and all men else every where, earnestly. It shall appear in due time,
that the Prayers of the Church for all states of persons in the Church,
followed after the Hearers were dismissed, before celebrating the Eucharist.
Therefore at them, only the Brethren are present, whereas the Hearers were at
those which were made for the forgiveness of their sins. That unbelievers
were admitted to be present at Preaching or Expounding the Scriptures, in the
time of the Apostles, it appears by S. Paul, 1. Cor. xiv. 24. But if all
Prophecy and there come in one that believes not: That they were excluded at
that time as afterward, when the Eucharist came to be celebrated, I have not
the like evidence, but in reason I must needs presume it. Hereupon rises the
difference between these which once were called the First and Second Service:
The ground whereof being taken away in this state of the Church, in which all
are baptized Infants, and public Penance for the greatest part is unknown,
nevertheless that Service must needs remain the chief part of Gods public
Service which the Eucharist is celebrated with; howsoever it come to pass,
that the Eucharist is not celebrated at the greatest part of solemn Assemblies.
This is remembered here upon occasion of that Confession of sins which our
Service begins with, as also the Service of almost all reformed Churches, in
which it may be counted a general order to begin with Confession of sins.
Which order Du Plessis labors to derive from the ancient practice of the
Synagogue first, and consequently of the Church Primitive, alleging to that
purpose those forms of Confession over the sacrifices, which P. Fagius has
produced from the Hebrew Doctors, upon Lev. xvi. 21. where the Law says, And
Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live Goat, and confess
over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in their sins: together with the words of Liranus upon that
place, Sicut facimus in Confessione facta in principio Missae: As we do, says
he, in the Confession which is made at the beginning of the Mass: As also the
Author de de Cardinal. Christi Operibus, among S. Cyprians works. Hierarcha
pius, quem Spiritus s. compungit, excitat, inhabitat, and sanctificat, --
confidenter orat pro sua and populi ignorantia, recolens pudibundi and contriti
animi confessione, quod aliquando, praevalente adversum se peccato, fuerit
derelictus. The pious Bishop, whom the H. Ghost pricketh, stirs, inhabiteth,
and sanctifies, prays confidently, for his own and the peoples ignorance,
recalling in the Confession of a mind ashamed and contrite, that sometime he
has been forsaken, sin prevailing against him. It is manifest indeed, that
this Confession of sins is used in the Breviarie, in Feriali officio ad
Primam, as well as at the beginning of the Mass, in these words, Confiteor Deo
omnipotenti -- The people answering, Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, and
dimissis peccatis tuis, perducat te ad vitam aeternam. Which done, the people
also make the like Confession for their parts, the Minister answering the same.
And this is the Confession of sins which is meant in the words of Liranus,
and the Author de Cardinalibus Christi operibus, though it is not probable
that it passed in those scandalous terms that follow, in his time. And this, in
the Rubricks of the Maronites Missall, as it is printed at Rome, is called,
Absolving the Priest, by the people. But since sacrifices are no part of the
moral Service of God, and it has been declared how Confession of sins was
used in the Temple at that moral Service, it seems impertinent here to
consider that which was done at offering Sacrifices. As for the Service of the
Primitive Church, at which unbelievers, and such as only pretended to
Baptism, with those that were under Penance, and the like, were present, This
will be a constraining reason to prove, that no Confession of sins, no prayer
for Forgiveness was made in common for them and all believers, at the
beginning of Service, because of the great distance of their estates and
conditions in the Church, and because this was the subject of those Prayers,
which Hearers and Penitents were dismissed with at the end of the first
Service, the Congregation joining with them, and the Bishop or Priest blessing
them to that purpose, as must be said afterward. Therefore in Justin Martyr
and Tertullian, where they describe what was done at those solemn Assemblies,
in the Constitutions of the Apostles L. viii. which seems to be the most
ancient Form extant, and in most of the Greekish Liturgies, there is no
Confession of sins at the beginning. And therefore it may justly seem to have
been put there, after that the difference of first and second Service came to
be observed rather for fashions sake, and remembrance of the ancient custom,
then for the original reason, when the world was become Christian, and the
difference between hearers and the rest abolished. In the beginning of the
copy which they give us of the Ancient Spanish Course, called the mosarabe or
mustarabe, there is this Rubric; Facta prius Confessione, uti fit in Miss is
Latinis, juxta usum Toletanum antiquum, dicitur Introitus to qui sequitur modo.
Confession first being made, as in Latin Masses, according to the ancient use
of Toledo, the Introit is said in manner following. As if this Confession were
proper to the Latin Service, in opposition to the Greekish. Which
notwithstanding in that which is entitled to S. James, he that celebrateth,
makes Confession of his sins, praying for pardon, to the purpose that his
Service in celebrating the Eucharist may be accepted: which originally when no
mention was made of the Eucharist at the beginning, being kept private from the
unbelievers, could not have been. That which is now at the beginning of the
Mass, by the stuff is discovered to be of later date, being as scandalous a
passage, as any in all the Mass besides, when he says, Confiteor Deo
Omnipotenti, B. Mariae semper Virgini, B. Michacli Archangelo, B. Joanni
Baptistae, SS. Apostolis Petro and Paulo, B. N. Omnibus SS. and vobis Fratres,
quia peccavi nimis, cogitatione, verbo, and opere. This is not to say that
Confession of sins is not fit for the beginning of Service, I mean nothing
less, as shall be said afterward: But that it is not derived from the
general and original Form of public Service in the Church, for reasons
proper to that time. The example of S. Basils Monks, and their morning Service,
described by him Ep. lxiii. seems more pertinent to be made the president of
ours. His words are these, (...). For the people with us, rises betimes after
night to the house of prayer, and making confession to God with pains, and
tribulation, and distress of tears, at length rising from prayer fall to
singing Psalms. For here he speaks of Confession at Morning Service. As also
that Confession of sins which we spoke of in the Breviary, howsoever
scandalous for the stuff, seems to have been used to the same purpose with
ours, and that of other Reformed Churches, for a preparation and entrance to
Morning Service. Now because it has been showed before, that this solemn
Service of God consisted of Psalms of Gods praises, of reading the Scripture
and expounding it, of Common Prayers, and the celebration of the Euchrist, that
which remains here to be declared is this, in what Form and Order these
materials were practiced, according to the eldest and most general custom of
the Church which we shall be able to discern. The Order of reading the
Scriptures is this, according to the Constitutions of the Apostles ii. 57.
having reckoned the Scriptures of the Old Testament, to be read in Churches,
(...). And two Lessons being read (out of the Old Testament) let some other
sing the Psalms of David: and let the people answer the Acrostiches: after
that let our Acts be read: and the Epistles of Paul our workfellow, which he
sent to the Churches, by suggestion of the H. Ghost: and after all this let a
Deacon or a Presbyter read the Gospels. The 17. Canon of Laodicea is, (...).
That the Psalms should not be continued in Assemblies, but a Lesson to be
interposed in the midst, after every Psalm. This is ordered, says Balsamon,
to take off the weariness of the people at these offices, by this mixture. He
that calls himself Dionysius the Areopagite, Eccl. Hierar. C. V. (...). Being
returned back to the Divine Altar, he begins the holy melody of the
Psalms, all ranks of the Church singing with him those holy Psalms: after,
follows in consequence, the reading of the holy Scriptures by the Ministers. In
this Form, which he describes, there is no interlacing of Psalms and Lessons,
but the Psalms first, and afterward the reading of the Scriptures. Of the
Churches of Africa and their custom, we may presume from S. Augustine. His
Sermons make diverse times mention of a Lesson first out of the Prophets, then
out of the Epistles and Gospels, with a Psalm or Psalms between them: And in
his Sermon he expounds them all sometimes. In the Mass it self, there remains
something of this custom, as brief and short as they have made it. To compare
it with the Form described before in part out of the Constitutions, and for the
rest to be described, it is strange to see to what a small model they have
reduced it. Whether it were, because it was framed for those times and places,
where Morning Service was used besides, for which reason they thought good to
abridge it, retaining nevertheless the substantial parts of public Service:
Or whether out of a desire of multiplying private Masses, it was so made on
purpose for speed: Or whether so it were always in the Latin Church, and we
are to believe those copies which they give us of the Ambrosian Service, and
that of the Mosarabe or Spanish to be of any great time, (indeed the Order of
Lessons said to be composed by S. Hierome, and of Antiphones by S. Gregory, and
other Forms of the Latin Church, are all very short) This notwithstanding, in
the Introit we see the trace of that singing of Psalms in the beginning, of
which Dionysius: And the Graduall, as they call it, which is the shred of a
Psalm between the Epistle and the Gospel, is in the same place with that
Psalm between those Lessons whereof S. Augustine speaks. In the pattern of
the Ambrosian Service for Christmasse day, which we have out of the Missall of
the Church of Millain, there is first a Lesson out of the Prophets, a second
out of the Epistles, and the last out of the Gospels, with versicles of
Psalms, or Hymns, or Antiphones between each. Here, as concerning the Psalms
in the Church, let me have leave to resume that which was proved before out of
S. Paul, that the custom was from the times of the Apostles, so to sing them
that the whole Congregation might bear a part in the praises of God, which the
book of Psalms from time to time inviteth them to do. Accordingly in the
pretended Dionysius, the Bishop begins the Psalms, but all the ranks proceed
to join in the same. But in the Constitutions of the Apostles, the people are
to answer only the Acrostichs. What those were I cannot better conjecture,
then by the words of Philo, de vita Contempl. where he relates the fashion of
those Hymns which the Essenes by Alexandria in Egypt used at their Common
Feasts, which he says were sung first by the chief, afterward by the rest in
their order, (...). All hearing with much silence, but when the ends and
burdens of the Hymns are to be sung, for them all the men and women sing out.
Some such thing I suppose it was, which in the Constitutions there is called
(...), or end. verses of the Psalms, as the Gloria Patri among us, known to
the people at those times, when for some inconvenience found of indecorum in
performing this Office, the whole Congregation joined no more in the Psalms.
For though in the Custom of those Churches, which Dionysius describes, the
people joined in them, at those times whereof he speaks, and though I doubt
not but those Constitutions, and the Canons of the Council of Laodicea be more
ancient then the pretended Dionysius, yet by them it appears, that when the
Constitutions direct the people to join in the closes, and when that Council
orders, Can. 15. that no more then the Canonical singers (that is, enrolled
in the list of the Church) that went up into the desk, and sung out of the
Parchmine, should sing in the Church, there was by that time, and in those
places of the Church, inconvenience found in the Congregations joining in it,
for which cause it was referred to the Church-singers. Another course there was
much used in diverse parts of the Church, of singing the Psalms by Antiphones:
Of which it shall not be requisite here to repeat what is delivered of the
first use of it, in the East under Ignatius, the coming of it into the West
under S. Ambrose, the relation of S. Basil, and the practice of his Monks,
Epist. lxiii. the Order of Pope Celestine, for the Psalms to be sung before
the Eucharist by way of Antiphones: It shall suffice to take notice here, that
this was one of the ways that were put in use, to the purpose that the
Congregation might join in the praises of God with most comeliness, according
to the custom of the Apostles time. Of the Lessons of the Scripture it must
further be observed here, that the Ancient and Primitive Order of the Church
seems to have intended them so large, that by hearing them read in the
Church, they might become familiar even to the unlearned of the people, as
Josephus said before, that the Jews by hearing Moses read in the Synagogues,
became as perfect in their Laws, as a man is in telling his own name, whereas
among other Nations, the simple never attain to know their own Laws. For you
see how many Lessons are directed to be read in the Constitutions of the
Apostles, two out of the Old Testament, out of the Acts, out of the Epistles,
out of the Gospels. Last of all, accordingly he reckons in particular the
Books of the Old Testament to be read in the Church; as does also the said
Council of Laodicea in the last Canon, upon this occasion repeat the list of
holy Scriptures to be read in the Church: and Dionysius expounding the order of
the Church described by him before, reckons the subject of all the particular
Books in the Scriptures, which he says are read after the Psalms, to enlarge
with more ample declarations and examples those things which in the Psalms are
but darkly and in brief pointed at. All which, I suppose, intimates a great
deal more then those short Lessons picked out of some parts of the Scriptures,
as well for the Roman Missall, as other Liturgies extant. In that which is
entitled to S. James, there is a remarkable Rubric after the Angelical Hymn,
and the Prayer that follows it, which says thus, (...). After is read very
largely the holy Oracles of the Old Testament, and the Prophets, and the
Incarnation of the Son of God is declared, -- that is, the Gospels are read.
For hereby he gives us suspicion enough to presume, that the reading of the
Scriptures was wont to be larger at the first then afterward it became, when
in the declining and degenerating times of the Church, the increase of sensible
Ceremonies and Observances began to crowd out the substantial parts of the
reasonable Service of God. For so there is cause to conceive by that of the
Sermon, whereof it follows immediately there, (...) that is, After the Lessons
are read, and the Sermon is done. For in Justine Martyrs description of the
Service in his time, after the reading of the Scriptures, follows immediately
the Sermon to expound them, and to exhort the people to follow the doctrine.
Tertullian speaks not of the order or place which the Sermon had in the
Service, but remembers it as a principal part of it. In the Constitutions of
the Apostles the place was produced before, wherein mention is made, after the
reading of the Scriptures, of the Presbyters speaking to the people one after
another, and the Bishop after them, according to the Custom derived from the
Apostles time. The 18. Canon of Laodicea is, (...). That after the Sermons of
the Bishops, first the Prayer for the Hearers must be made apart. In fine, It
is manifest by the Order of all Liturgies extant, in which is described the
Order of the solemn Service of the Church, that is, when the Eucharist was
celebrated; first, that of all Lessons of the Scriptures, those out of the
Gospels were read in the last place, as it is expressed in S. Augustine
alleged, before in the Constitutions of the Apostles, and in diverse others,
that might be produced were it questionable: Then, that after the reading of
the Gospel, followed the Sermon for the exposition of it, or some other of the
Lessons. And yet in Dionysius there is no mention at all of the Sermon, either
in the description he makes of the Service, or in the Exposition wherein he
renders a reason of it, but immediately after the reading of the Gospel, the
last in order of the New Testament, the Hearers and Penitent and the like are
dismissed, and then follows the Creed. Which to me is an argument of the
Authors time, and that when he writ, the Sermon in some places began to be
disused, and also, because he mentions the Creed in the order of Public
Service, of which in Justine, Tertullian, the Constitutions of the Apostles,
the Canons of Laodicea, wherein almost all the particulars of Public Service
are ordered, in fine, whereof in the most Ancient descriptions of the Service
there is no remembrance. It appeared before by the words of S. Ambrose, and so
it does by Dionysius, that it was pronounced from the beginning of the use of
it, by the whole Congregation: for the first expounded the words of the
Apostle, Every woman praying or prophesying, of saying or singing the Creed;
and the second says thus, (...) The Catholic Hymn being acknowledged before,
by all the Congregation of the Church. This is then the Order of that former
part of Public Service which from the beginning the Hearers and Penitents were
to be present at, to learn the doctrine of the Church, and to profit in it, so
as to be thought fit for Baptism and for the Communion of the Eucharist. For
the Latin Mass (as well as all other Liturgies extant) though reduced to so
small a model as was observed, by the shortness of the Psalms and Lessons,
and leaving out the Sermon, always principal ingredients of it, represents
nevertheless the Order and Course of that solemn Service which the Eucharist
was celebrated with. This difference of the first and second Service in the
Liturgies extant, is rather retained for fashions sake, and in remembrance of
the Ancient Order, then according to the Original purpose of it: for it shall
appear that some part of the Prayers which at the first were for believers
alone, and such as communicated, not to come till the Hearers and Penitents
were gone forth, in all the Greek and Eastern Liturgies are now put into the
first part of the Service. But the end of the first Service, and the beginning
of that which only believers were present at, is manifest enough in it (as it
is in downright terms expressed in all the Greek and Eastern Liturgies when
the Hearers were to go forth) not in the place where Durandus would have it,
iiii. 1. after the Offering; but as it is in the Constitutions of the Apostles,
in the 18 Canon of Laodicea, in Dionysius, in others, after the Prayers for the
Hearers and Penitents, which followed as soon as the Sermon was done,
immediately before the Creed. Howsoever, from hence it appears, that the
Lessons of the Epistles and Gospels are originally belonging to the former part
of this Service. The 18 Canon of Laodicea, of these Prayers for the Hearers and
Penitents speaks thus, (...). That first after the Sermons of the Bishops,
the Prayer be made for the Hearers, and after the Hearers are departed, the
Prayer for the Penitents be made, and when they are come under hand and
departed, that then the Prayers of the Believers be made. The subject and
fashion of these prayers both, are very plainly described in the Constitutions
of the Apostles, to have been this, (...) (...) -- viii. 5, 6. All rising up,
let the Deacon get up on some high place, and pronounce, NONE OF THE HEARERS,
NONE OF THE UNBELIEVERS, and silence being made, let him say, PRAY YE HEARERS.
And let all the believers pray for them in their mind, saying, LORD HAVE MERCY:
and let him minister for them, saying, Let us all beseech the Lord for the
Hearers, that -- (...): And at every of these particulars which the Deacon
speaks to them of, let the people say, LORD HAVE MERCY. The particulars whereof
he speaks are there at large, that God would hear them, that he would
enlighten them, and make them wise, that he would teach them the knowledge of
God, and the rest: Of these the Deacon speaks to the people, when he bids them
pray that God would do so and so for them, which kind of Prayers, ministered by
the Deacon, as he said before, are called therefore (...) or Allocutions: And
the people answers at every point, (as at Litanies, the people still have their
Answer, called sometime the Suffrage) Lord have mercy. And this is the reason
that was used to prove, that the form of these prayers was prescript, because
it was ministered by Deacons. Afterward it follows, (...) (...): they bending
down their heads, let the Bishop ordained (for the Service which is here
described, is at the Ordination of a Bishop) bless them, saying, as it follows
there. In the same manner was prayer made for the beset with unclean spirits,
and for the Penitents, but that in these the Canon of Laodicea expresses that
they were to come and kneel, the Bishop holding his hands over their heads, and
so pronouncing the like prayer of blessing over them; which is therefore there
called (...), to come under hand, and from whence, in this Condition they are
called (...), those that fall under, to wit, the Bishops hands. These forms are
here described, both to declare the ancient practice, and also for a help
toward the understanding of that which follows. After the departure of the
Hearers and Penitents, there followed principally two sorts of Prayers, as may
be gathered from the words of Justine in his second Apology, where that most
Ancient Martyr that flourished some thirty or forty years after S. John's
death, that is, after the Age of the Apostles, relates the course of public
Service at the Assemblies of Christians. After the Sermon, he thus describes
what followed, (...). After, we all rise, and send forth prayers, and, as we
said before, when we have done praying, bread and wine and water are offered:
And the Ruler likewise sends forth prayers and thanksgivings with all his
might. Here you have the Prayers of the whole Congregation in the first place,
which therefore are called in the words related in the beginning of this
Chapter, (...), Common Prayers, or Prayers of the whole Congregation, to
distinguish them from those Prayers and Thanksgivings, which he says were made
afterward, for consecrating of the Eucharist, by the Bishop or Presbyter
alone, though in behalf of the people. Where, by the way, you may see further
that Justine means by those words, (...), to express nothing but that earnest
devotion which those Prayers were offered with, by that which he adds (...),
or likewise: For having said in the words alleged before that the Congregation
made the former sort, which he calls their Common Prayers, (...), or
vehemently, he adds, that the Bishop made the Thanksgiving which the
Eucharist was consecrated with, (...), in like sort with all his might: with
the like earnest devotion which the other were made with. The most Ancient
description that we have next to this, of the Form of this solemn Service,
seems to be that which is found in the Constitutions of the Apostles. For by
many things we may find, that that book meant to express the Customs of the
Church, in the times before Constantine. You may have observed before, how it
forbids the faithful to plead before the Powers of this world, that is,
before heathen Magistrates. And that course of dividing Portions at their
Feasts of love, which is there prescribed, was before observed to be abolished
by the Council of Laodicea, which was before Constantine. And in the Form of
Prayer for all states of the Church after the Consecration (whereof afterward)
set down there viii. 12. it is to be observed, that Prayer is made for the
Emperor and Powers of the world, (...), that they may keep peace with us, that
is, not persecute the Church. In this Work then, l. viii. c. 10. 11. is
described at large, first, the Prayer for the whole state of the Church, and
the particular members and conditions of it, and after that, c. 12. the Prayer
of Thanksgiving which the Eucharist was consecrated with: And to show evident
distinction of these two parts of the Service, the kiss of Peace comes between
both, which being a received Custom from the time of the Apostles, gives cause
to presume, that the Prayers, between which it is interposed, are no less
derived from the Primitive practice of the Apostles time. Though true it is,
that according to the Custom of the Western Churches, it followed after the
Consecration of the Eucharist, before the receiving of it. There follows
besides in the same place, a new admonition of the Deacon to all that had not
right to Communicate, to depart before the celebration of the Eucharist, among
the rest (...), you that pray the first prayer, depart. Which I take to be
this, that such of the Believers as were present indeed at the Prayers of the
Congregation for all states of the Church, but did not intend to Communicate,
should also depart: To show the difference of those two Prayers whereof we now
speak, the subject whereof deserves to be further declared, out of the most
Ancient of Ecclesiastical Writers. Justine Martyr, after the words alleged in
the beginning of this Chapter, thus describes the Prayers of the faithful, to
which he says the new baptized were brought, (...). That we may be thought
meet, having learned the truth, to be also found good livers in works, and
keepers of things commanded, so as to be everlastingly saved. He specifieth the
chief point of those prayers, for otherwise, you shall find in the words before
quoted, that they prayed in them for themselves, for the new baptized, and for
all men else, everywhere. Tertullian Apolog. C. xxxix. where he describes what
was done at their Assemblies. Coimus in coetum and Congregationem, ut ad Deum
quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus orantes. Haec vis Deo grata est. Oramus
etiam pro imperatoribus, pro ministris eorum and potestatibus, pro statu
seculi, pro rerum quiet, pro mora finis. We meet and assemble in a
Congregation, that making as it were a strength against God, we may sue to him
in our Prayers. This violence is welcome to God. We pray also for Emperors and
their Ministers and Powers, for the state of the world, for the peaceable
condition of affairs, for the delay of the end. The particulars of the Prayers
they made for the Emperors are enlarged C. xxx. upon the occasion of comparing
the devotions of Christians and Pagans. Vitam illis prolixam, imperium securum,
domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum, Orbem quietum,
quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt. Wishing them long life, secure rule,
the Court safe, the Armies valiant, the Senate faithful, the people good, the
world quiet, whatsoever a man and Caesar may desire: Tertullian, as Cassander
observed before, intended not to declare to the Heathen the manner of
celebrating the Eucharist, as the custom was to keep it private, lest it might
incur the scorn of those that understood not what it meant: Those which
Justine calls the Common Prayers of the Congregation, which went next before it,
are here described by those passages that deserved most favor at the worlds
hands. In the 18 Canon of Laodicea, after the departure of the Hearers and
Penitents, (...). That the prayers of the faithful be made, in number three,
one, that is the first, in silence; the second and third to be accomplished by
Allocution: And so then the Peace to be given (that is, the kiss of Peace) and
so the holy offering to be made. What the purpose of that prayer might be,
which here in the first place is prescribed to be made by all the people in
silence, I find not else where: As for those which follow, to be made (...), or
by way of speaking to the people, the matter is plain out of that which was
declared before, concerning the Form of the prayers for the Hearers and
Penitents, in which the Deacon spoke to the people, from point to point
directing them what to desire of God on their behalf, the people answering to
every point, Lord have mercy; which prayers were therefore called (...), or
Allocutions, in the Constitutions of the Apostles. In like sort were these
Prayers for all states of the Church, directed by the Deacon, speaking to the
people, in the particulars expressed in the said Constitutions, viii. 10. Let
us pray for the Peace and firm state of the world, that it may please God --
For the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, that it may please God -- For the
Diocese, for all Bishops, that God would give -- For the Deacons and inferior
Ministers, for the married and continent, for those that give Alms and
Oblations, that God would -- For the sick and imprisoned, for travelers by
land and sea, and the rest -- In fine, whosoever shall take notice of the
particulars there related, shall perceive a very Ancient, if not the Original
pattern and use of those Prayers, which have since been called Litanies or
Supplications. I speak not now of the use of them in Processions, for diverting
the wrath of God in public calamities, and the like occasions, or of what was
put in practice therein by Claudianus Mamertus, Gregory the Great, and others:
I speak of the Original and Universal use of them, in that solemn Service of
the Church, which the Eucharist was celebrated with: For in all Liturgies
extant, which, though they be not so ancient as the Titles of them pretend,
nevertheless retain the traces of ancient Forms in all parts, it is easily to
be perceived, both by the form of those prayers which are ministered by the
Deacon, the people answering, and also by the subject of them, concerning all
estates of the Church, and the prosperous condition of it, that they are
nothing else but those Common Prayers whereof Justine Martyr of so ancient time
speaks, according to the forms practiced at several times, and in several
places. True it is, that in those ancient Liturgies they come not after the
departure of the Hearers, as in Justine, and the Canon of Laodicea, and the
Constitutions of the Apostles. But when the departure of the Hearers was
retained in a manner for fashions sake, in remembrance of the ancient Custom,
the reason of it being ceased, when the world was become Christian, it is
reasonable to think, that the Order of the Service depending upon it might
change, the substance nevertheless remaining, as descending Originally from
the Apostles. And though it be not easy for me to give account, why the Canon
of Laodicea prescribes two of these prayers to be made, dividing it into two,
or repeating it twice, yet it is easy for any man to observe, especially in
the Liturgies entitled to S. Basil and S. Chrysostom, that these Prayers are
diverse times repeated, whether in brief or at large; that fashion so far
complying with the Prescript of the Canon, as to show us, that those are the
Prayers where of it speaks. The subject of them is thus comprised in another
place of the Constitutions, ii. 51. (...), Let the Deacon pray for the whole
Church, and all the world, and the parts of it, for fruitful seasons, for the
Priests and Rulers, for the Bishop and King, and the general Peace. This is
the reason that it is called in the Greekish Liturgies, (...), or Prayers for
Peace, because the beginning of it is in the Constitutions of the Apostles,
(...), that is, for the peaceable and quiet state of the whole world. It is
also in some of them called (...), or the general Collect. From whence it
appears, that this is the Prayer whereof Tertullian speaks, the subject
where of he expresses, pro statu seculi, pro rerum quiet: for the settled and
quiet state of the world. That which has been said of the Manner and Order of
this Prayer, is to be understood of the Liturgies of the Eastern Churches now
extant. Not only in those Greekish ones under the names of S. James, S. Mark,
S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, but in the Ethiopick, in that of the Christians of S.
Thomas in India, in that of the Maronites printed at Rome, it takes place
according to the manner described. Of the Service of the Latin Church the like
cannot be said. The Litanies, whereof this Prayer is the source, are used upon
several particular Occasions in the Mass, as it is now, but have no place in
the Ordinary Course of it, unless we suppose the Kyrie cleeson which the
Rationalists call the Litanies, to be that which remains of them, the model of
the Latin Service being so abbridged as was observed before. And by S. Ambrose,
or whosoever writ those books de Sacramentis, it appears, that prayer was
made to that effect before the consecration of the Eucharist, his words are iv.
4. Oration praemittitur pro populo, pro Regibus, pro caeteris: Prayer is
premised, says he, (to the Consecration of the Eucharist) for the people, for
the Emperors, for the rest. But in those words he speaks of prayers that
were made at the Lords board by him that celebrated the Eucharist, of which
afterward, not of those that were ministered by the Deacon speaking to the
people in the manner aforesaid: which nevertheless S. Augustine of the Latin
Church remembers, when he says, Epist. 118. Cum communis oration voce Diaconi
indicitur, when Common prayer is indicted by the Deacons voice: for this is
that which Justine Martyr called Common Prayer before. Rhenanus in Tertull. de
Corona, Et arbitrantur quidem illi Missam incepisse, dicente Saceraote, Dominus
vobiscum: and mox, Sursum corda. Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro: And they
truly (that is, those that studied the Ancient Form of Service, out of the
eldest and best Church-writers) think that the Mass begins when the Priest
says, THE LORD BE WITH YOU, and by and by, LIFT UP YOUR HEARTS; afterward,
LET us GIVE THANKS TO OUR LORD GOD. If his meaning be that the Celebration of
the Eucharist began always with the Preface, Sursum corda, well and good. But
if he mean this, that the second Service, or the Prayers at which Believers
alone were present, began then, it is an oversight: The testimonies produced
are beyond exception to show that according to the most ancient Custom of the
Church, prayer was made for all states of men, and of the Church first, in the
manner aforesaid. In fine, the great agreement of all the Liturgies specified,
coming from those most Ancient Eastern Churches, with the eldest of
Church-writers, together with other pregnant circumstances that concur, make
me bold to conclude, that the practice of these prayers is derived from the
Apostles, and the Custom of their time, and are the same whereof S. Paul
writes, Romans viii. 26, 27. Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities:
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the spirit it self
makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that
searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the spirit, that it makes
intercession for the Saints according to God. For according to the exposition
of S. Chrysostom, proved good before, these prayers, which in the Primitive
times were made by men endued with Prophetic Graces, called here the Spirit,
were afterward ministered by the Deacon, going before the people: which holds
good of these, not only according to all the Liturgies and Authorities
alleged, but according to Justine in chief, and in the eldest place, who, when
he relates that he which ministered the Eucharist, began not but with the
Thanksgiving, after these which he calls the Common Prayers were ended, gives
presumption enough, that the said Common Prayers were ministered by the Deacon
with him, as with S. Chrysostom. Then the terms in which the Apostle expresses
the nature of these prayers, calling them Intercessions for the Saints, seem to
specify the subject whereof we speak, for all states of the Church. And last,
when the Apostle says, makes intercession for us with gronings not to be
uttered: and before verse. 23. Our selves also which have the first fruits of the
spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves: S. Chrysostom testifies,
that the Correspondent hereof, was done by the Deacon in his time: with whom
agree the words of Justine, (...) (...) wherein he witnesses the earnest
vehemence which these prayers were made with. And in the prayers quoted in the
Constitutions of the Apostles, for the Hearers and Penitents, which, as has
been showed, were made after the same sort: (...), Let us beseech the Lord for
them still more vehemently: and in that for the faithful, at the end of it,
(...) Let us stand up having vehemently prayed. And to the Penitents in the
beginning, (...), Pray ye that are under Penance vehemently. And the Cyrie
cleeson, or, Lord have mercy, the foot and burden of this Prayer, as you have
seen in the Liturgies of S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom, is called (...), and in
that of S. Peter, (...), understanding (...), the Prayer of vehement and
earnest supplication to God. All Arguments of that vehemence and earnest
devotion, which the fashion and manner of the Litanies, if it were relished
aright, still breaths, derived from those groans and tears, with which men
endued with Primitive Graces, made then intercession to God for the Church and
states of it. And perhaps the Apostle, when he said 1. Cor. xiiii. 15. I will
pray with the spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing
with the spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also, meant no other
prayers but those whereof he writes to the Romans, those first sort of Prayers
whereof here we speak, at the Service of believers. For in that which follows
verse. 16. Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he that
occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say? for thou verily give thanks well, but the
other is not edified: many things induce me to think, that the Apostle speaks
of nothing else, but of that Thanksgiving, which from the beginning the
Eucharist was consecrated with, and from which it has the name, and is the
next point in the order of this Service. For so the Apostles directions will
appear complete, reaching to all parts of the Service which proceed from men's
particulars. For the reading of the Scriptures we must here except, presupposed
as the subject and employment of present Graces. For the Psalms of Gods
praises, which the spirit then indicted, he provideth when he says, I will
sing with the spirit, but I will sing with the understanding also. For the
Exposition of the Scriptures, more at large, in the rules that follow, from
verse. 26. For the Prayers which by the suggestion of the holy Ghost were made
for the Church and all States of it, when he says, I will pray with the
spirit, but I will pray with the understanding also. For the Prayers which the
Eucharist was celebrated with, in the words now in hand, verse. 16, 17. The
Commentaries under S. Ambrose his name: Hi ex Hebraeis erant, qui aliquando
Syra lingua, plerumque Hebraea in Tractatibus and Oblationibus utebantur ad
commendationem. Gloriabantur enim se dici Hebraeos, propter meritum Abrahae:
These (that would needs speak in strange Languages in the Church) were of the
Hebrews, which for their commendation, used sometimes the Syriack, most an end
the Hebrew, in their Sermons and Oblations. For they took pride to be called
Hebrews, for the merit of Abraham. The Offering, is the whole Action of Prayers
and Thanksgiving which the Eucharist was celebrated with, as shall appear. So,
saying in express terms, that they did it in Syriack and Hebrew, he directs
us to the Apostles meaning, in that which he calls Blessing and Thanksgiving;
which in the Scriptures and eldest of Church-writers, stand sometimes
absolutely and without addition, to signify, by way of Eminence, the
Celebration of the Eucharist. Otherwise why is it called, 1. Cor. x. 16. the
Cup of blessing which we bless? but from that blessing or Thanksgiving (as it
is indifferently called in the Scriptures) with which it was instituted by
Christ, and appointed to be used afterward. Ignatius ad Magnes. (...). Let
that be counted a sound Thanksgiving which is under the Bishop, or to whom he
gives leave. His meaning is, that to celebrate the Eucharist, apart from the
Bishop, and without his Order, was not effectual toward God. The true Clemens,
S. Paul's scholar, Epist. ad Corinth. (...). Let each of you, Brethren, give
thanks to God in his own rank. He directs the Presbyters of Corinth, to
celebrate the Eucharist by their turns, to avoid contention about it. In the
words of Ireneus related in Greek by Epiphanius, Haer. xxxiv. of the
Marcosians, (...), Pretending to give thanks, is as much to say as pretending
to celebrate the Eucharist, and so more then once afterward: therefore when
the Apostle says, How shall he say Amen (...), and after, (...), he seems to
mean neither more nor less. For the Answer of the people, saying Amen, at the
end of this Thanksgiving, is so solemnly remarked in Ecclesiastical writers,
that the Apostle may justly seem to make reference to it: Justine M. Apol. 11.
(...). Who having done his Prayers and Thanksgiving, all the people present,
join assent with him, saying Amen. Then the chief having given Thanks, and all
the people assented with like wishes. And in the Epistle of Dionysius of
Alexandria in Eusebius, Hist. Eccles. vii. 9. (...). Having heard the
Thanksgiving, (that is, been present at consecrating the Eucharist) and
answered Amen with the rest. The subject of this Thanksgiving is thus expressed
by Justine the Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, where he compares
the offering of fine flower for the leprous at his cleansing according to the
Law, Levit. xiiii. 10. with the bread of that Thanksgiving which our Lord has
appointed us to make in remembrance of his passion, (...). That withal we may
give Thanks to God, for having made the world, and all things in it for man,
and for having freed us from that naughtiness wherein we were born, and
overthrown principalities and powers, with a perfect overthrow, by him that
became passible according to his Counsel. And Ireneus, iii. 34. arguing
against the Heretics of that time, that denied God the Father to have created
heaven and earth, because then the Church should do affront to God, offering
him the Creatures which he acknowledges not for his, sufficiently shows,
that the Creatures of bread and wine were offered with this Eucharist or
Thanksgiving, as well for the Creation of all things, as for the Redemption of
us. Justine Martyr, Apol. ii. justifies the Christians against the Heathen,
that consumed not Gods Creatures with fire, in sacrifices, but received them
with words of Prayer and Thanksgiving, (...): For being born, and for all means
of health, kinds of qualities, and changes of seasons: Wherein though the
purpose of his speech is directed to the ordinary use of Gods Creatures, yet
withal he seems to describe that Thanksgiving which then the Eucharist was
celebrated with, being then used, as it was instituted at meat. In the
Constitutions of the Apostles, viii. 12. you have at large laid down the Form
of this Thanksgiving, containing first a rehearsal of Gods unspeakable
perfections: of the Creation, by Christ, of things visible and invisible, and
of man in righteousness: of the Providence of God toward man having sinned,
before the Law and by it, with praise to him therefore, with the Cherubim and
Seraphim: But more particularly recounting the Incarnation of Christ, and the
whole Course of his dispensation in the flesh, especially his sufferings,
death, and rising again. Hereupon it follows, (...) (...). That is, Therefore
being mindful of those things which he suffered for us, we give thee thanks,
Almighty God, not so much as we ought, but as much as we are able, (there is
Justine Martyrs (...)) and fulfill his appointment: For upon the night wherein
he was betrayed -- rehearsing the whole words of institution of the Eucharist
upon this. The same is the argument of this Thanksgiving, in the Liturgies
entitled to S. James, and S. Basil, both the Greek and the Latin, and that
which we have from Masius out of the Syriack. In that of S. Chrysostom it is
to the same purpose, but in fewer words; in that of S. Mark, the same for
substance, but more in brief, and for Order somewhat otherwise: So in that
which I spoke of, turned out of the Arabic, under the names of S. Basil, S.
Gregory, and S. Cyril, in this last as in that of S. Mark, and not much
otherwise in that of the Christians of Saint Thomas in India. In the Canon of
the Mass, that which is called the preface, seems to be that which remains
of this Thanksgiving, for it expresses the praises of God with much vehemence,
though the subject of those praises, either concerning the Creation of the
world, or our redemption is not contained in it: For the Tenor of it is in a
manner that of our Service, It is very meet, right -- and afterward, therefore
with Angels and Archangels -- besides the proper Prefaces, in which are
celebrated the works of Gods goodness, which the Church remembers upon
several Solemnities. In fine, it seems that this Thanksgiving, from which
both the Action of celebrating this Sacrament, and the consecrated elements
themselves, are called (...), according to Justine Martyr and Ireneus, did from
the eldest times of the Church, contain the remembrance of the Creation of all
things, in regard to the ordinary use of Gods creatures, for the maintenance of
our bodies, because it was at the first practiced, as it was instituted, at
meat. So much the words of Justine Martyr related before seem to import, when he
affirms, that the only Sacrifice that Christians have received to offer, is
that of Praise and Thanksgiving at their nourishment, at which remembrance is
made of the Passion which God suffered for us. But as this Sacrament was
frequented no otherwise then as the most solemn part of Gods public Service at
religious Assemblies for that purpose, whatsoever was expressed more or less
of the subject of it, concerning the Creation and Redemption of the world, yet
in all manner of Liturgies of all Christian Churches, there is none, that I
have seen, which does not premise this Thanksgiving and praise to God, to the
celebration of that Sacrament. And it is very remarkable, that in that distance
of times and places, from which we receive the several forms yet extant with
so much difference, as must needs proceed from thence, yet there are two
particulars of it, in which all the Forms that are extant agree, the one the
beginning of it, with Sursum corda, or Lift up your hearts, the people
answering as we use it, and then to let us understand to what purpose they are
exhorted to do it, Let us give thanks to our Lord God, specifying the Prayer
which I now describe: The other is the Communion of the Church militant with
the fellowship of Angels in this Office, expressed in the Trisagion or
Seraphicall Hymn, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath, for though there is
much difference between Forms that are extant, yet it will be hard to find any
of them, wherein both those have not a place, which, had the forms been
arbitrary, could not have come to pass. Here a question lies, to mine
apprehension, very much concerning this purpose: whereas the Creatures of bread
and wine are deputed to the effect of becoming the body and blood of Christ to
them that receive them aright, by the appointment of our Lord, executed by the
Church, how it can be conceived, that by giving thanks to God, to the purpose
specified, they are, on the part of the Church, deputed to such effect. To me
it seems unquestionable, that the Thanksgiving, wherewith our Lord in the
Gospel is said to have celebrated this Sacrament at his last supper, contained
also Prayer to God, for the effect to which the elements when they became this
Sacrament, are deputed: And that the Church, upon his example, has always
frequented his institution with the like, rehearsing his institution out of the
Gospel, and praying for the effect of it at the present, after the Thanksgiving
hitherto described: And so, whereas in the sense of the Church of Rome, the
elements are consecrated, that is, transubstantiated into the body and blood of
Christ, by rehearsing the affirmative words of Christ, This is my body, this is
my blood, as operative: In the true sense of the Church, they are consecrated,
that is, deputed to be this Sacrament, and to the effect of it, by the Prayer
of the Congregation, grounded upon the institution of Christ, and the promise
which it implies. Let me suppose in the first place, that the elements, by
being deputed to become this Sacrament, are not abolished for their substance,
nor cease to be what they were, but yet begin to be what they were not, that
is, visible signs, not only to figure the Sacrifice of Christ his Cross,
which being so used, they are apt to do of themselves, setting the institution
of Christ aside, but also to tender and exhibit the invisible Grace which they
represent to them that receive. For, though no man can receive the body and
blood of Christ, that is not disposed with a living Faith to receive the same,
yet on Gods part it is undoubtedly tendered to those that are not so disposed,
otherwise how says the Apostle, that those that eat and drink unworthily are
guilty of the body and blood of Christ, as not discerning the same? And
otherwise how says our Lord of the elements, at the instant of delivering
them, this is my body, this is my blood, in the present tense? Let me suppose
in the second place, that our Lord, in celebrating this Sacrament, made use of
the received custom of his people: which was, as still it is, in receiving all
good things at Gods hands, to premise Thanksgiving, or Blessing, as they call
it, before they used them. In particular, at Feasts, before supper was done,
they took bread and broke it, and gave it about, and the cup of wine likewise,
having blessed God for the use of those excellent creatures. Upon solemnities,
and particular occasions, mention was made of that which the time required.
This is the ground of those two points of the Thanksgiving discussed before, the
use of those creatures, and the redemption of the world which our Lord
specified, upon the exigenc^ of the general custom, and the particula^
occasion, and the Primitive Christians, according to Justine Martyr, frequented
upon his example. But, as in the like case, at the miracle of the Loaves, when
it is said, that our Lord looked up to heaven and blessed, Matt* xiv. 19. or
gave thanks, as it is, John vi. 11. i^ cannot be doubted that besides blessing
God for his creatures, he prayed also for the purpose of that which he intended
to do: No more is it to be doubted that the Thanksgiving which he made over
those elements for that which they represented contained also Prayer, that by
them it might be communicated to his disciples. The tenor and consequence of
our Lords words requires no less. For that which is affirmed must be true
before it be truly affirmed, and the process of this action, blessing and
delivering the elements, and commanding to receive them as his body and blood,
imports that he intended to affirm that so they were, in the true sense which
the words import, at the instant of delivering them. And by what consequence
could his disciples conceive them to be deputed, for signs to exhibit his
body and blood, upon his giving of Thanks over them for the redemption of the
world, unless we suppose his Thanksgiving, whereof the Gospel speaks, to
contain also Prayer, that they might become effectual to that purpose? And
herewith agrees that of the Apostle; Every creature of God is good, and none
to be rejected, being received with Thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by the
word of God, and prayer. For here, the Thanksgiving, wherewith the creatures
are sanctified to the nourishment of our bodies, contains also prayer,
grounded upon the Word of God, whereby he appoints them for that purpose:
Accordingly therefore, the Thanksgiving, wherewith these elements were
sanctified by our Lord to be the nourishment of the soul, must contain prayer,
not grounded upon the institution of God to that purpose, (because the act of
Christ for the present, went before his institution for the future) but as
joined to his command, grounding a word of promise to the Church, whereupon it
was to do likewise. And herewith agree those Forms of Thanksgiving, or, as they
call them Benedictions, which the Jews at this day practice, from very ancient
time, as they pretend: For the foot and close of diverse the most remarkable of
them, is with prayer for the blessing of God upon that wherefore they give
Thanks. For example, among the daily xviii. Blessed be thou, O Lord our God,
that removest sleep from our eyes, and slumbring from our eyelids: And let it
please thee, O Lord our God, and God of our Fathers, to practice us in thy Law,
and to make us cleave to thy precepts, and bring us not into sin, and
transgression, and temptation, and contempt, and so forth, ending thus, Blessed
be thou, O Lord, that give good graces. The blessing of the Law, that is, the
Thanksgiving to God for it, is this, Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the King
of the world, that has sanctified us with his precepts, and given us command
concerning the matters of the Law: And sweeten, O God, the words of the Law in
our mouth, and in the mouth of thy people the house of Israel: And make us all,
and our children, and our childrens children, knowers of thy Name, and learners
of thy Law for it self: Blessed art thou, O Lord, that teach thy people
Israel the Law. So in the Blessing of wine, so in the Blessing after meat. And
so for the resemblance of the Blessing of our Lord over the elements with
these, and the exigence of the business, may we justly presume that it ran in
the like form, to the purpose of it. And last of all, herewith agrees the
practice of the ancient Church, wherein for certain, the Thanksgiving described
before was joined with prayer for the effect of that which was done. So says
Justine, that the President sent forth PRAYERS AND THANKSGIVINGS to God. So in
Tertullian de or at. C. xiiii. Sacrisiciorum orationes, and in the next words,
Eucharistia stand both for the same. So in the ciiii of the Africane Canons
these Thanksgivings are called Prefaces, to my thinking, because this
Thanksgiving was always premised to the prayer which the Eucharist was
consecrated with. I will here propound that Form of Prayer which follows
after the rehearsal of the institution of this Sacrament, in the place
alleged of the Constitutions of the Apostles. For a Prayer to the like effect
is to be found in all the Eastern Liturgies. Which if we compare with the
Testimonies of Ecclesiastical Writers, which diverse have produced to prove,
that the elements are not consecrated by the affirmative words of Christ, as
operative, but by the prayers of the Church, it will appear, that it is the
prayer whereof we now speak, always used in the Church, to obtain of God the
promise which the institution of Christ supposes, that the elements present
might be deputed to the effect of becoming visible signs, tendering and
exhibiting the invisible grace which they figure. Which is that which in this
matter is called Consecration, as I suppose. Having repeated the institution of
this Sacrament out of the Gospels, where we left before, it follows, (...) --
Therefore mindful of his Passion, and death, and rising from the dead, and
ascension into heaven, and of his second appearance, at which he is to come
with glory and power to judge the quick and dead, and to render to every man
according to his works, we offer to thee our King and God, according to his
appointment, this bread and this cup, giving thanks to thee through him, that
thou have vouchsafed us to stand before thee, and to minister unto thee: And
beseech thee that thou would look favorably upon these Oblations present
before thee, thou God that want nothing, and accept them to the honor of
thy Christ, and send down the holy Spirit, witness of the passions of the Lord
Jesus, upon this Sacrifice, to exhibit this bread the body, and this cup the
blood of thy Christ: That they which partake of it, may be confirmed in
godliness, obtain remission of sins, be delivered from the devil and his
deceit, be filled with the holy Ghost, become worthy of thy Christ, and obtain
life everlasting, thou being reconciled to them, God Almighty. It is clearly
true in the sense and language of the ancient Church, which S. Ambrose says,
De iis qui mist. init. C. ix. Ante consecrationem alia species nominatur, post
consecrationem, corpus Christi significatur: Before Consecration another
species is named (that is the bread) after it the body of Christ is signified.
And de Sacr. v. 4. Dixi vobis, quod ante verba Christi, quod offertur, panis
dicatur, ubi Christi verba depromta fuerint, jam non panis dicitur, sed corpus
appellatur: I told you that before the words of Christ, that which is offered
is called bread; after the words of Christ ^^e produced, it is no more called
bread, it is called his body. Therefore, whereas in this prayer the elements
are named by their kind, of bread and wine, it is plain, that all that while
they are not conceived or intended to be consecrated. And what doubt can there
be in that, when we see a prayer follow, wherein is desired, that the elements
may become the body and blood of Christ? And he that shall turn over the Copies
of Liturgies, which we have extant from the Eastern Churches, shall find them
to agree in this: That after the institution is rehearsed out of the Gospels,
professing that what is presently done, is in obedience to the same, prayer is
made first, that by the holy Ghost the elements may be sanctified to become the
body and blood of Christ, and then, that they may be to such effects of grace,
as are specified in the form rehearsed to them that communicate. Only in the
Missall of the Maronites, printed at Rome, there be diverse forms of
Consecration (which they call Anaphora) under the Apostles names, and other
Eastern Doctors, wherein this prayer seems to be wilfully changed, to make
them conformable to the doctrine of the now Church of Rome. It was printed
there for the use of that nation, in the year MDXCIV. In the ancient form of
the Latin Church, there seems (not by the now Canon of the Mass but by the
remembrance of it extant in ancient Church-writers) to have been some
difference from this, and that difference seems to have occasioned the error
of the now Church of Rome, concerning Consecration by operative words.
Nevertheless the words of S. Ambrose, or whosoever writ those books de Sacram.
are these, v. 4. Vis scire quia verbis coelestibus consecratur? accipe quae
sint verba. Dicit Sacerdos, Fac nobis hanc hostiam asscriptam, rationabilem,
acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu
Christi. Qui pridie quam pateretur -- Will thou know that it is consecrated by
the heavenly words? hear what be the words: The Priest says, Make this
Sacrifice imputable, accountable, acceptable for us, which is the figure of the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who the night before he suffered --
and so forth, proceeding to rehearse the institution out of the Gospel. In the
Canon of the Mass is added, ratam, or ratified; Fac nobis hanc hostiam
asscriptam, ratam, rationabilem, much to my purpose. For it is plain that this
is not the doctrine of the now Church of Rome, when, being to show how the
elements are consecrated, he produces the prayer of the Church joined to the
institution of Christ: Which is to say, that by virtue of Christ's institution,
executed by the Church, with prayer to God to ratify and accept the elements
presently offered, to be the figure and remembrance of the body and blood of
Christ, they are deputed to become this Sacrament. In the Canon of the Mass
these words are somewhat changed from that which is set down in S. Ambrose, for
they are read thus, Vt nobis corpus and sanguis siant dilectissimi Filii tui
Domini nostri Jesu Christi: That they may become to us the body and blood of
thy most beloved Son our Lord Christ Jesus. And it seems that they were
changed on purpose, that this Sacrament might not be called a Figure of the
invisible Grace of it. But in the mean time it is manifest, that here prayer is
made for the effect of Christ's institution in these elements, and that nothing
can be more cross to this doctrine of the now Church of Rome, then their own
Service. S. Ambrose observed, that after the institution is rehearsed, the
elements are called the body and blood: The reason seems to be, because they
were intended to be deputed to become this Sacrament, by prayer grounded on the
institution of Christ, which it is joined with. But it should seem, that after
the institution there followed in the ancient form of the Latin Church, a
prayer to the purpose, though not in the terms of that which now follows in
the Canon of the Mass, the close whereof is this, Vt quot quot ex hac altaris
participatione Sacrosanctum Filii tui corpus and sanguinem sumserimus, omni
benedictione coelesti and gratia repleamur: That as many as shall receive the
holy body and blood of thy Son, by participating of this altar, may be
fulfilled with thy heavenly benediction and grace. Which is plainly in lieu of
the second point of that prayer alleged out of all the Eastern Liturgies,
desiring the like effects of grace, by the means of this Sacrament upon them
that communicate. If any man think that the Forms hitherto described import,
that the ancient Church intended to consecrate the elements, in the sense of
the now Church of Rome, that is, to abolish the corporal substance of them,
and substitute that of the body and blood of Christ in stead, not in the true
sense, to depute them to become visible signs, tendering and exhibiting the
invisible Grace which they figure, he shall much prejudice the truth which we
profess: The due advantage whereof has been long since proved to be this,
that the error pinned upon it, is not to be found so much as in the Service of
the Church where it is bred and maintained. When Prayer is made concerning the
elements in the Canon of the Mass, Vt nobis corpus fiant dilectissimi Filii
tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi: That they may become to us the body and blood
of thy welbeloved Son our Lord Christ Jesus: These words to us, make an
abatement in the proper signification of the body and blood. For the elements
may be said to become the body and blood of Christ without addition, in the
same true sense in which they are so called in the Scriptures. But when they
are said to become the body and blood of Christ to them that communicate, that
true sense is so well signified and expressed, that the words cannot well be
understood otherwise, then to import not the corporal substance, but the
spiritual use of them. In the Greekish form, prayer is made, that the elements
may be made, or become, or be changed, or translated into the body and blood of
Christ. That also among our Writers of Controversies is acknowledged to be
verified, and is indeed easily verified, though we suppose them not to cease to
be what they were, but to become what they were not, that is, visible signs
exhibiting the invisible grace which they figure. To which meaning, that which
always follows in that form directs us, when prayer is made, that the elements
may become the body and blood of Christ, so that they which receive them may be
fulfilled with the blessings of his grace: Which is to say, that they may
become that which they are called, (to wit, the body and blood of Christ) not
in respect of the corporal substance and kind, whereof they consist, but in
respect to the spiritual communion which they exhibit. And indeed, when S.
Ambrose says that after consecration the body of the Lord and his blood only
is named, and signified, and expressed, this also seems to import a great
abatement of the proper signification of the body and blood of Christ: As being
so called and named and signified to us, not because the substance of their
nature and kind is abolished, but because it comes no more into consideration,
as not concerning the spiritual benefit of them that communicate. Which
seems to be the true reason, why Church-writers continually call the elements
by the names of that which they exhibit, without such addition as might import
that abatement whereof now we speak: who nevertheless otherwhiles stick not to
acknowledge, that the species of the elements (that is, in their sense, not the
outward appearance of the accidents, as those of the Church of Rome disguise
the true meaning of the Latin word, but the inward nature and substance of
their kind) does remain as it was. It remains now to declare both the right
purpose and true meaning of that prayer for all States of the Church, which in
all Liturgies, that I have seen, is made at consecrating the Eucharist, and
before the receiving of it. In that which has been hitherto represented, out
of the Constitutions of the Apostles, as in the most of the Eastern Liturgies,
immediately after the Consecration hitherto described. The beginning of it
there is thus, (...): Further we pray thee, O Lord, for thy holy Church from
end to end, which thou have purchased with the precious blood of thy Christ,
that thou would keep it unmoved, unwaved, till the end of the world. And for
all Bishops that divide the word of truth aright. Further we pray thee for the
meannesse of me that offer to thee. For the whole Presbytery, for the Deacons
and all the Clergy, that -- Further, for the King and Powers, that they may
keep peace toward us. Further, we offer to thee for all the Saints that have
pleased thee from the beginning of the world -- Further, we pray thee for all
this people, reckoning virgins, widows, married, and infants. Further we
entreat for this city, for the sick, the banished, slaves, travelers, and
those that are at home, that -- Further, we pray thee for those that hate us
and persecute us for thy name, for those that are without, and go astray, that
-- Further, for the Hearers, the Possessed, the Penitents, that -- Further, we
offer to thee for seasonable weather, and increase of fruits, that -- Further,
we pray thee for the absent for reasonable causes, that -- In the same place,
that is, immediately after the Consecration of the Eucharist, is this Prayer
made, in the Liturgies attributed to S. James, S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom. In
the same place, in all the forms related under the names of ancient Saints and
Doctors of the Church, in the Missall of the Maronites, unless it be one. But
in the Liturgy entitled to S. Mark, this prayer is inserted straight after the
beginning of the Eucharist or Thanksgiving described before. In the Ethiopick,
immediately after the salutation of Peace, which in the Eastern Churches was
always straight before the Eucharist. In that of S. Cyril among the three
translated out of the Arabic and mentioned before, in the same place with that
of S. Mark. From whence we may argue this to have been the course of the Church
of Alexandria, by the agreement observed, between those Liturgies that are
entitled to those that were Bishops of Alexandria, and the Ethiopick depending
upon that Church, wherein they differ from the rest. Yet so it is also in that
of the Christians of S. Thomas in the East Indies. In the Latin Churches this
prayer seems of old to have gone before the Consecration, for S. Ambrose
describing the Consecration, says, de Sacram. iv. 4. Oration praemittitur pro
populo, pro regibus, pro caeteris: Prayer is premised for the people, for the
king, for the rest. And S. Augustine, Epist. lix. Eligo in his verbis hoc
intelligere, quod omnis vel pene omnis frequentat Ecclesia, ut Precationes
accipiamus dictas, quas facimus in Celebratione Sacramentorum, antequam illud
quod est in Domini mensa incipiat benedici; Orationes, cum benedicitur and
sanctificatur: I choose to understand in these words (of S. Paul to Timothy 1.
ii. 1, 2.) that which all or almost all the Church frequenteth, that we take
those to be called Supplications, which we make at celebrating the Sacraments,
before that which is on the Lords Board begin to be blessed; Prayers, when it
is blessed and sanctified. For without peradventure, these are the
supplications for all states of the Church, whereof he speaks. The Order of
this Prayer in the Canon of the Mass is somewhat strange: for he that will
take notice of that which goes before the words of Institution, and that which
follows after the same, until the Lords Prayer, comparing all with the tenor
of other Liturgies, may observe, that they are all parcels of this Prayer for
all States of Christ's Church, which here we describe. And I observe, that in
that form which is entitled to S. Peter, in the Missall of the Maronites, this
prayer is likewise made, both before the words of Institution, and after the
same. I am punctual in observing the tenor of several Liturgies in this
point, to give notice, that there is no ancient or pretended ancient form
extant, wherein prayer is not made by him that celebrateth the Eucharist at the
Lords Board, to this purpose. A thing which seems to me somewhat strange,
that, according to the general Custom of the Church declared before, prayer
having been made by the people a little before upon the same subject, that is,
for all States of Christ's Church, though not in the same manner, but bidden by
the Deacon, and answered by the people, the same prayers should be again
repeated by him that celebrateth the Eucharist, at the Lords Board. Which is
more, the Church of Africa seems to have differed from the rest in the manner
of this prayer, whereof we speak, by S. Augustines words, Epist. cvi. Quando
audis Sacerdotem ad Altar exhortantem populum Dei, or a pro incredulis, ut eos
Deus convertat ad fidem, and pro Catechumenis, ut eis desiderium regenerationis
inspiret, and pro fidelibus ut in eo quod esse coeperunt, ejus munere
perseverent: When thou hear the Priest at the Altar exhorting the people of
God, pray for the unbelievers, that God would convert them to the faith: and
for the Hearers that he would inspire the desire of Regeneration into them. and
for the faithful, that by his Grace they may persevere in that which they have
begun to be. Compare we herewith his words that are read Epist. Cxviii. cap. 18
Quando autem non est tempus cum in Ecclesia fratres congregantur sancta
cantandi, nisi cum legitur, aut disputatur, aut Antistes clara voce deprecatur,
aut communis Oration voce Diaconi indicitur? When is it not time to sing holy
songs at the Assemblies of the Brethren in the Church, but in time of reading
or preaching, or when the Bishop prays with a loud voice, or when Common
Prayer is indicted by the Deacons voice? Again, Epist. Cvi. Vbi audieritis
Sacerdotem Dei, adejus Altar, exhortantem populum Dei, aut ipsum clara voce or
antem, ut incredulas gentes ad fidem suam venire compellat, non respondetis,
Amen? When you hear the Priest of God at his Altar exhorting the people of
God, or himself praying with a loud voice, that he would compel unbelieving
Nations to his Faith, do ye not answer, Amen? When S. Augustine mentions
Common Prayer indicted by the Deacons voice, he acknowledges the Litanies
described before, (which Justine Martyr also calls Common Prayers, because they
proceeded from all the people) to have been practiced in the Africane Churches,
before the Eucharist: which notwithstanding, by his words it appears, that he
which celebrated the Eucharist, in the same form, was wont to exhort the people
to make this prayer for all states of persons, Unbelievers, Hearers, Believers
(for instance of the rest) which is not according to the form of any of those
Liturgies which we have, to my remembrance. But he informs us besides, that
those things which the Bishop exhorted the people to pray for, the same he
prayed for alone afterward, and that prayer he means, when he speaks of the
Bishop praying with a loud voice. It is hard for me to give account of this
general practice of the ancient Church, otherwise then by conjecture. Thus
much may be affirmed with confidence, that the practice of this Prayer was the
effect of the Apostles instruction, whereof our Service speaks; Who by thy
holy Apostle have taught us to make prayers and supplications and to give
thanks for all men. The words of the Apostle, 1. Tim. ii. 1, 2. I exhort
therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men, for Kings and all that are in Authority, that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. S. Ambrose
upon these words, Haec regula Ecclesiastica tradita est a Magistro Gentium, --
This Ecclesiastical Rule is delivered to the Church by the Doctor of the
Gentiles, which our Priests use, to make supplication for all, praying for the
Kings of this world, that they may hold the Nations subject, that settled in
peace, we may be able to serve our God with tranquillity and quiet of mind.
Praying also for those that are trusted with high power, that they may govern
the Commonwealth in justice and truth, with abundance of all things, that the
trouble of sedition being removed, gladness may succeed. When he calls it,
The rule of that Service which their Priests ministered, it is plain he
understands the words of the Apostle concerning the Prayers which were made
at the Lords Board, at celebrating the Eucharist: Besides the brief, which he
relates, contains the chief particulars of that form produced out of the
Constitutions of the Apostles. So S. Augustine Ep. lix. in the words partly
related before, partly to be related afterward, acknowledges the whole Order
of the Service which the Eucharist was celebrated with, to be prescribed in
these words of the Apostle. But this purpose to prove, there needs no great
dispute. The general Custom of the Ancient Church, gathered from the
marvelous agreement of all ancient forms of Service that remain, speaks aloud,
That this Prayer for all men at the Eucharist, whereof we speak, comes from the
Order of the Apostle. It seems therefore to me most probable that the meaning
of the Apostle is this, and so was understood and practiced by all the ancient
Church, that, at the celebration of the Eucharist, Supplications and Prayers be
made for all men, for Kings, etc. For it is nothing forced or strained to take
the word (...) or Thanksgivings, in the same sense, in which it stands in the
passages of Clemens and Ignatius alleged before, for the Celebration of the
Eucharist, for the whole action, and all the Prayers which it was celebrated
with. And otherwise, the consequence of the Apostles words will be altogether
impertinent. For in the common and general sense of this word Thanksgiving, it
is not proper to exhort that giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings
and so forth, that we may lead a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty:
But it is proper to exhort that Supplications and Prayers be made for all men,
for Kings and the rest, that by the means of their rule and government we may
lead a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: And it is proper enough
to exhort, that Thanksgivings be made for all men, to that purpose,
understanding by Thanksgivings, that action of celebrating the Eucharist, part
whereof are those Supplications and Prayers. And thus, as in lieu of spiritual
graces in Prayer, which were used to make Supplication for the necessities of
all members and states of the Church under the Apostle, according to S.
Chrysostom alleged before, Prayers afterward in most parts of the Church were
indicted by the Deacon, and made by the people, which for the manner and
substance both, were conceived before, to be the Original of those that since
have been called Litanies: So, nevertheless, to give effect to this rule of
the Apostle, it seems to have been an ancient and general custom of the
Church, to make Supplications and Prayers at the Lords Board, at celebrating
the Eucharist, though much to the same purpose with the former, for all states
of men, but of the Church in particular. And this nice observation, if it may
take place, will be of great consequence, to out the Church of Rome, of all
pretense of the Sacrifice of the Mass in the sense of the ancient Church, and
in particular in the style and tenor of the Liturgies themselves, which for
the great agreement between themselves, and with the style of the most ancient
Church-writers, seem to contain and express it. For it is manifest, that it is
called an Oblation or Sacrifice, in all Liturgies, according to the style of
the most ancient Church-writers, not as consecrated, but as presented and
offered (whether by the people, as the custom was, to him that ministered, or
by him that ministered to God) to be consecrated, as aforesaid. It is the style
of the form produced out of the Constitutions of the Apostles, We offer unto
thee this bread and this cup, beseeching thee that they may become the body and
blood of Christ to the souls health of them that receive, or to that purpose.
Thus far there is no pretense of the Sacrifice of the Mass, which supposes
the body and blood of Christ present, as the subject of it. True it is, that
the style of this Prayer, whereof we speak, in diverse points of diverse
Liturgies runs in the terms of, we offer unto thee, for such and such, for this
and that: But it is to be observed, that this Prayer came not after the
Consecration in all Liturgies, and according to the custom of all Churches, to
give occasion to think, that the meaning is, to offer Christ there present by
consecration, for the said persons and causes, but went before it in diverse, as
has been said, the purpose of it being to execute the Apostles exhortation, to
make prayers supplications and intercessions for all men at celebrating the
Eucharist. Besides, it is no where said, we offer unto thee the body and blood
of Christ for such persons and causes, but it is diverse times said, we offer
unto thee (...), this reasonable service: and what is that but these Prayers?
For in the form alleged, it is said at some points, we pray thee for the
Church, and for the King, at others, we offer unto thee for this people, and
for the weather, and fruitful seasons, and shall we not think them both to
stand in one sense? It has been showed, that this Prayer is the practice of
the Apostles exhortation, to make Prayers and Supplications and Thanksgivings
for all men: And it has been declared that the meaning of his exhortation is,
that at the celebration of the Eucharist such Prayers and Supplications be
made. Therefore, when it is said, by name, in the form related out of the
Constitutions of the Apostles, we offer unto thee for this people, we offer
unto thee for the weather and fruitful seasons, what should hinder the meaning
to be according, at this celebration of the Eucharist, in confidence that thou
hear thy Son for us, at this remembrance of his death, and in obedience to
thine Apostle, we pray unto thee for such persons and causes? as it is in
express terms in the Liturgy of the Indian Christians, Hac enim hora qua
Patri tuo Sacrificium offertur, rogo majestatem tuam, miserere omnium
creaturarum. For at this hour, when Sacrifice is offered to thy Father, I pray
thy Majesty, have mercy on all creatures. And thus, so often as we read in
Church-writers of offering for such and such persons and causes, the meaning
is, that they offered the elements, in which the Eucharist was to be
celebrated, that with it they might pray for those persons or causes, according
to the Apostle. And if the question be further made concerning offering for the
dead, it shall seem to me nothing improbable, that because the Apostle
exhorts that Supplications and Prayers and Intercessions and Thanksgivings be
made for all men, therefore the ancient Church enlarged the sense of that ALL
MEN further then they needed to do, to comprise the dead as well as the living:
and that thence came the commemoration of the dead at the Eucharist, and the
offering of the elements, that it might be celebrated, and that such
commemoration might be made. Though as concerning the particulars of the
Prayers for the dead in the ancient Church, how far they came from the
Scripture, and how far from humane opinions, in that whole matter I refer
my self to those things which have been declared with so much learning, by that
excellent learned Prelate, in his Answer to the Jesuits challenge in Ireland.
As for the rest of the Service which the Eucharist is celebrated with, after
the Prayer hitherto described, there follows in the Constitutions of the
Apostles, a brief repetition of the Litanies, with a Prayer of the Bishop, that
the Congregation may worthily Communicate. In the time of Communicating, it is
ordered there, that the xxxiiii. Psalm be sung, in regard of the words, O taste
and see how gracious the Lord is! in other of the Eastern Liturgies, the xxiii.
xlii. cxviii. cxliv. are prescribed. The Latin Liturgists call the verses of
Psalms that are sung during the time of Communicating, Communions; and the
Prayer or Thanksgiving that follows after the same, Postcommunions. Such a form
of Thanksgiving there is extant in all Liturgies. The people is dismissed with
the Benediction of the Bishop in the Constitutions, which Benediction comes
after the Consecration; before the Communion, in the most of other Liturgies. I
will here repeat that whole passage of S. Augustine, the beginning whereof was
produced before, for it contains the whole Order of these remains whereof we
speak. Ep. lix. Eligo in his verbis hoc intelligere, quod omnis vel pene omnis
frequentat Ecclesia, ut Precationes accipiamus dictas, quas facimus in
celebratione Sacramentorum, antequam illud quod est in Domini Mensa incipiat
benedici; Orationes, cum benedicitur, and sanctificatur, and ad distribuendum
comminuitur, quam totam petitionem, fere omnis Ecclesia Dominica oratione
concludit: Interpellationes autem, sive ut vestri codices habent, Postulationes
fiunt, cum populus benedicitur: Tunc enim Antistites, velut Advocati, susceptos
suos per manuum impositionem misericordissimae offerunt potestati. Quo facto,
and participato tanto Sacramento, Gratiarum actio cuncta concludit. I choose to
understand in these words, that which all or almost all the Church frequenteth,
that we conceive those to be called Supplications, which we make at celebrating
the Mysteries, before that which is on the Lords Board begin to be blessed;
Prayers, when it is blessed, and sanctified, and broken to be distributed,
which Petition almost all the Church concludes with the Lords Prayer: (so it is
in all forms that are extant, and it is another mark that they were prescript)
But Intercessions, or as your books have it, Requests are made, when the people
is blessed: for then the Bishops, as Advocates, receiving their people, offer
them to the most merciful power with imposition of hands. Which done, and so
great a Sacrament participated, all concludes with Thanksgiving. The Ciii. of
the Africane Canons related before: Placuit etiam illud, ut preces quae probatae
fuerint in Concilio, sive Praefationes, sive Commendationes, seu manuum
Impositiones ab omnibus celebrentur. It seems that the benedictions of the
Bishop or Presbyter that celebrated, (to whom this Office also belonged as S.
Hierome contendeth) whereof we speak, are called here Commendations, or
Impositions of hands, to say, prayers to commend the people to God with
imposition of hands: unless by these Commendations we understand those prayers
for all men, according to the Apostle, wherewith the several estates of all
men, especially of the Church, were commended to God: which says S. Augustine
went before the sanctifying of the elements. In the Anaphora of S. Basil
published by Masius out of the Syriack, there is this prayer at the beginning,
before the Consecration of the Eucharist: Extend Domine manum tuam non
asspectabilem, and benedic servis and ancillis tuis, mundatoque ipsos ab omni
macula carnis and spiritus, at que dignare ipsosfieri participes corporis
unigeniti Filii tui. The people bowed the head at receiving this blessing, the
Bishop holding his hands over them, as a sign of Gods hand stretched out to
bless. Therefore he says, Extend, O Lord, thy invisible hand, and bless thy
servants and handmaids, and cleanse them from all stain of flesh and spirit,
and daigne them to become partakers of the body of thy only begotten Son. Of
Confession of sins at beginning of the Mass has been said: After the
Consecration, the Benediction is contained in these words, Pax Domini sit
semper vobiscum: The Peace of God be with you always. You shall see how Luther
understands it, in his form of Communion, of the year MDXXIII. Quae est
quaedam quasi publica absolutio a peccatis communicantium. Vox plane
Evangelica, annuncians remissionem peccatorum, unica illa ac dignissima ad
mensam Domini praeparatio, si fide apprehendatur, non secus at que ex ore
Christi prolata: Which is, says he, a kind of public absolution of them that
communicate from their sins. The very voice of the Gospel pronouncing
remission of sins, the only fittest preparation to the Lords Board, if
apprehended by faith, as out of Christ's mouth. But it is plain that this is to
be accounted a benediction, because, as has been said, Confession of sins
and prayer for pardon upon the same, is made at the beginning of the Mass. In
the Liturgy of S. Basil which we have translated out of the Arabic, at the
beginning, prayer is made for remission of sins at large, upon the promise of
the Gospel, Whose sins ye remit -- the like prayer is made there after
receiving the Eucharist. In the Ethiopick, prayer is made before the
Consecration of the Eucharist to like purpose, though corrupted with that
superstition which ignorance breeds. This seems most answerable to that
Confession of sins which our Service uses before the Eucharist, otherwise it
is to be granted, that in most Liturgies, that which seems to keep most
correspondence with it, is rather a benediction, then Confession with prayer
for pardon of sins.

It remains, that from that which has been said, we give account of that
Form of Service which we use, deriving it higher then the Mass (from which it
is charged to come, as containing nothing but that which is found there, though
not all that is there) and showing, where it shall be requisite, that the
corruptions of the Mass are laid aside in it. How just this charge is, may
appear in the Confession of sins which it begins with: were it enough to
condemn any part of our Service, to say, that the like is used in the Breviary
and Mass, then must we condemn almost all Reformed Churches, that use
Confession of sins at the beginning of their Service, as the Breviary and
Mass does. Du Plessis thought otherwise: like a man of Learning as well as
Nobility, he saw it was an argument of some Antiquity in the practice of the
Reformed Churches in France, that Confession of sins, which they use in the
beginning, was and had been used in the Mass, and this ancient use an
advantage to recommend it. And we have cause to see, that though it was not
used in the beginning of Service, where Hearers and Penitents were dismissed in
the middle, yet the alteration of times having brought that to nothing, we have
no cause to balk it at the beginning, though it be there used in the Breviary
and Mass. He that will use a little judgment and conscience, must distinguish
between a form of Public Service, and the corruptions of the Mass pinned to
it; between that which we follow, and the reasons why we follow it. If by doing
that which is done in the Mass, we retain the corruptions of it, it is time it
were done no more: If any man would not have us do that aright, which tends to
the Service of God, because in the Mass it is done amiss, we are bidden to
our loss. The reason why we begin with Confession of sins is not to be
faulted; Both because daily sins accrue daily upon the Congregations and
members of it, and daily reckonings not daily cleared oppress in the end, and
there is no such means as the public Prayers of the Church to strike them
clear: And particularly, as an entrance and preparation to the Service of God,
because if our Confession be such as it must be presumed to be, it is the only
sufficient disposition to make our Service acceptable to God. That which this
Church of England is to give account of in particular, is the declaration of
forgiveness upon the Confession of sins, not used in other Reformed
Churches. In this he shall proceed upon the surest ground, that first shall
resolve wherein the power of binding and loosing, of retaining and remitting
sins, given by our Lord in the Gospel, under the Symbol of the keys of his
house, consists, and how far it extends. For as there is no question,
that the Ministers of the Church, by this Commission, are authorized to DECLARE
forgiveness of sins to whomsoever they shall find disposed by serious
Contrition and true Faith to receive it at Gods hands: So to think, that to
bind and loose, to remit and retain sins, is nothing else but to declare them
bound or loosed, remitted or retained, and that the Charge whereof we speak
consists in declaring this, and nothing else, is a thing which the property of
no language will bear, seeing that in all use of speech, all men understand it
to be one thing to bind and loose, to retain and remit sins, another thing to
declare that: Yet is it no part of my mind, to make this power of the keys, by
which sins are bound or remitted, to consist in the power of pronouncing
sentence of forgiveness, which God ratifieth: as resting well assured, that
God gives pardon to whomsoever he sees disposed to receive it: And that thence
forth, that disposition being brought to pass, the Ministry of the keys
consists only in declaring the pardon given by God: It seems
nevertheless, that the Ministry of the keys is formerly seen otherwise, that
is, in procuring that disposition of the hearts which is requisite to make men
capable of forgiveness, in bringing them to the knowledge of their sins, in
directing the course which they have to take in seeking their reconcilement
with God. The discipline of the Primitive Church seems to point out to us
this direct meaning of our Lords promise, agreeable to the rest of the
Scriptures: according to the words of Firmilianus Bishop of Cesarea Cappadocia
to S. Cyprian, in the lxxv. of his Epistles produced elsewhere: Non quasi a
nobis delictorum suorum veniam consequantur, sed ut per no^ ad delictorum
suorum intelligentiam convertantur, and Domino before satisfacere cogantur.
Not as if they procured the pardon of their faults at our hands, says he, but
that by us they may be converted to understand their faults, and constrained to
make more full satisfaction to the Lord. How he means that men are converted
to acknowledge their faults to God, by the means of his ministers, is to be
seen in Tertullians words, Apologet. C. xxxix. speaking thus of their
Assemblies; Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes, and censura divine. Nam
and judicatur magno cum pondere, ut apud certos de Dei conspectu; summumque
futuri judicii praejudicium, siquis ita deliquerit, ut a communicatione
Orationis, and Convertus, and omnis sancti Commercii relegetur: There also are
exhortations, reproofs, and the Censure of God. For first, judgment is given
with great weight, as among men assured of Gods sight; and then it is the
greatest prejudice of the judgment to come, if a man fail so, as to be
confined from the Communion of prayers, and Assemblies, and all holy Commerce.
It was not the mere preaching of the Scripture, and knowledge of the doctrine
of it, that brought men to acknowledge their offenses, according to
Firmilianus: Tertullian shows it was the Exhortations, the reproofs, the
Censures of the Church, that were employed to that purpose. By whom it
follows there, Praesident probati quique Seniores: The Presidents are all the
approved Elders. The Bishop (whom we have seen him acknowledge elsewhere) and
his Presbyters. And in the same Epistle of Firmilianus, Omnis potestas and
gratia in Ecclesia constituta est, in qua praesident Majores natu, qui and
baptizandi, and manuum imponendi, and ordinandi habent potestatem: All power
and favor is estated upon the Church, the Presidents whereof are the Elders,
which have power both to baptize, and to impose hands (in Penance) and to
ordain. It is the Bishop that writes this. The Exhortations, the Reproofs, the
Censures, by which men were brought to the sight and acknowledgement of their
faults, and constrained to the due course of humiliation for procuring
forgiveness, were ministered at their Assemblies, but by the Presidents. The
means of forgiveness, ministered in the discipline of Penance, consists in the
parties repentance, and the prayers of the Church. Penance was not prescribed
in the Ancient Church only to give satisfaction to the Church, for the
scandal of bad example: Those that imagine this, shall not take notice of any
mention of it in Ecclesiastical Writers, but they shall find their mistake
convinced: It was to appease the wrath of God offended, and to recover his
favor again, which is in Firmilianus his terms, to make satisfaction to God,
not in the senseless and impious sense of the now Church of Rome, to make him
recompense for the debt of punishment incurred, but according to the use of the
word in good Latin, to appease his wrath with true sorrow and with cordial
contrition, to seek reconcilement. Imposition of hands was not used once, in
pronouncing sentence of forgiveness, but always at Public Service, during
the prescript time of Penance, those of that State, after the earnest prayers
of the Congregation for their pardon, coming and kneeling before the Bishop,
holding his hands over their heads, with his blessing and Prayers for that
purpose, were dismissed before the Mysteries: this was called on their part
(...) or falling down, on his part (...) or Imposition of hands in Penance. In
the ministry of these means of forgiveness, the power of the keys is seen.
In Rhenanus his Argument to Tertullians book de Poenit. are to be found diverse
remarkable things to this purpose, out of the Penitentialls of Theodulphus of
Orleans, and Theodore of Canterbury, out of S. Basil and Tertullian, that
Confession to God is that which cleanses sin, but Confession to the Church,
is to the purpose of learning the course men are to hold, in seeking pardon,
and obtaining the Prayers of the Church to that purpose. Besides this, I find
that S. Cyprian has placed the power of the keys in the Sacrament of
Baptism. His words are these, Epist. lxxiii. Manifestum est autem, ubi and per
quos remissa peccatorum dari possit, quae in baptismo scilicet datur. Nam Petro
primum Dominus (super quem aedificavit Ecclesiam, and unde unitatis originem
instituit and ostendit) potestatem istam dedit, ut id solveretur in coelis,
quod ille solvisset in terris. Now it is manifest where and by whom remission
of sins may be given, I mean that which is given in Baptism. For unto Peter
(upon whom he built the Church, and from whom he appointed and expressed the
original of unity) our Lord at first gave this power, that it should be
loosed in heaven, which he loosed on earth. And by and by afterward: Vnde
intelligimus, non nisi in Ecclesia praepositis, and in Evangelica lege ac
dominica ordinatione fundatis, licere baptizare, and remissam peccatorum dare.
Whence we understand, that it is not lawful but for those that are set over
the Church, and founded upon the law of the Gospel, and the Ordinance of our
Lord, to baptize and give remission of sins; to wit, as is given by the power
which S. Peter received under the figure of the keys of Gods Church. I find
further, that Primasius, a scholar of S. Augustines, seems to place the power
of binding and loosing, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist: in Apoc. viii. 3. A
thing somewhat strange, to make the power of binding and loosing all one with
the Sacraments: But that it is to be remembered, that the judgment of the
Church, and the Ministers of it, goes before the ministering of them, to discern
how fit they are for them, that pretend, and to constrain them to the means
which make them capable of forgiveness. It is no more then follows there in S.
Cyprian, speaking of rebaptizing those that returned from their heresies:
Quapropter, qui fidei and veritati praesumus, eos qui ad fidem and veritatem
veniunt, and agentes poenitentiam remitti sibi peccata postulant, decipere non
debemus and fallere: Sed correctos a nobis, ac reformatos, ad regnum coelorum
disciplinis coelestibus erudire. Therefore we that are over the faith and
truth, must not deceive nor coosen those that come to the faith and truth, and
doing Penance, desire their sins to be remitted. But instruct them, amended
and reformed by us, to the kingdom of heaven, with heavenly discipline. They
that returned from-heresies, sought remission of sins by repentance: his
opinion was, that it was not to be had without a second Baptism: and the power
of binding and loosing he makes to consist in prescribing repentance and
admitting them to baptism upon repentance. So that in sum, he shall seem
most sufficiently to comprise the whole charge of binding and loosing, that
shall make it to consist in the ministry of those means, which dispose men to
be capable of remission of sins. In which regard the Ministers of the Church
shall be said, with as much property of speech, to remit and retain sins, to
bind and loose, as the Physician is said to cure those diseases, in which he
does no more, but prescribe or apply the remedies. But no man doubts but this
Office, as it is appointed in respect of God to procure pardon, so it is in
respect of the conscience, to assure it: Which assurance, as it is warrantable
for them to give, that have seen the course performed which they are entrusted
to prescribe; so is it due for him to receive, that has performed it. Suppose
then, we leave it questionable, as not to be disputed in this place, what
sins are to come under the discipline of Penance, either of necessity, or
for a sure course of procuring their pardon: Certain it is, that the children
of God do continually remember, with remorse and bitterness of spirit, the
sins which they committed of old: And certain it is, that men's daily offenses
are not capable of so solemn a cure: so great is the number of them, that it is
not possible for man's mind to attend them in particular. And as certain it is,
that there is no means so powerful to obtain pardon of them, as the daily
prayers of the Congregation to that purpose. So that the course which the
Church prescribes for the pardon of daily offenses being put in practice, what
can be more just, more due, then to declare that forgiveness, which those that
dissemble not, those that are as they pretend to be, do attain? What more
comfortable, then to hear the news of it from his mouth, by whom the Church
ministers the office? What more seasonable, then to do this before we come to
praise God, and hear his word, that we may persuade our hearts, that he
accepts this service at the hands of them that hate not to reform themselves?
In this consideration I must needs prefer the Order of this Church of
England, before that of other reformed Churches, in that we put Confession of
sins in the first place of our Service, they refer it till after the
Psalms, and the reading of the Scriptures, when the Preacher goes up into the
pulpit. They reckon them, as needs they must, of the substance of their
Service. And Du Plessis has pleaded them, as he had reason, to show, that
their Service comes nearer that of the Primitive Church, then the Mass: But
beginning as they do, without solemn Confession of sins before, they give the
people occasion to esteem them otherwise then the Service of God, as taken up
merely to while out the time while the people assemble. Whereas the solemn
beginning of our Service, with Confession of sins, serves to put the people
in mind, that it is all the solemn service of God that follows, and of the
attention of mind, and devotion of spirit which they ow it, by the preparation
of confessing and putting away sins, requisite to make it acceptable. The
more have they to answer for, that make it their employment to extinguish in
the minds of the people that respect to this part of Gods Service, which the
Order of the Church has labored to procure, and with the blessing of God had
procured, had not their peevishness been, that will not have God served,
unless it be that way they like. Whatsoever honor the praises of God
reverently and attentively performed might have yielded him, whatsoever good
fruit the learning of his Scriptures might have brought forth in his people, is
with justice to be required at their hands, that have been the means to
intercept it, by the unjust disgrace, which they have stuck upon the settled
Order of this Service. Now as concerning the Ancient and general course of
Gods praises, and reading the Scripture, it appears by Justine Martyr and
Tertullian, that the Order of reading the Scripture in the Church was arbitrary
in their time, as accommodated to the condition of the times, and occasions of
their Assemblies, by the guides of several Churches. The one of them says,
that the Scriptures are read, (...), as far as occasion serves: The others
words are these, Apologer. C. xxxix. Coimus ad literarum Divinarum
commemorationem, si quid praesentium temporum qualit as aut praemonere cogit
aut recognoscere. We assemble to repeat the Scriptures of God (not like those
that will not Assemble till they be read) what the condition of the present
times inforceth either to forewarn, or to recognize. The Order which is
accommodated to the Condition of the times, cannot be certain and appointed
before. The reason, why a set Order in these parts of public Service, is now
preferred before the disposition of the Guides of Churches from time to time,
is the same for which men choose to live by positive law, rather then by the
will of their Rulers, though, if men were as they should be, it is manifest
that they might cut straighter by the thread of Justice, applying right reason
to the case, then ruling their proceedings by a general, that was not built
upon the particular. The Order might be better were it left to particular
disposing, but the courses of the world inforceth to presume, that it would be
for the worse. Besides, in Ecclesiastical matters by a set Order we attain
uniformitie with other Churches, to help toward the unity of the whole, we
avoid disputes about what is most fitting, which in matters of this probable
nature must needs be endless, we avoid jealousies and umbrages upon that which
is not customable. What this amounts to, S. Augustines experience may teach us,
Sermon. cxliv. de tempore. Volueram aliquando ut per singulos annos secundum
omnes Evangelist as etiam Passio legeretur: factum est: audierunt homines quod
non consueverunt, and perturbati sunt. I had once a desire that every year the
Passion also (as the Resurrection, in Easter-week) should be read according to
all the Evangelists: it was done: men heard what they had not wont to hear,
and were troubled. How unjust the charge of the Mass upon our Service is, has
appeared in the first point of it: how untrue it is will appear in the next,
that is, in the Order of Psalms and Lessons at the daily Morning and Evening
Service. For, if because the Breviarie and Mass contain a certain order of
Psalms and Lessons for the Service of God, therefore all orders of Psalms and
Lessons to that purpose are derived from the Breviarie and Mass, and
chargeable with the corruptions of them; what shall become of the Ancient
Church before there was any such thing as Breviarie or Mass, that is, either
form of public Service in the opinion of those that profess this, or,
according to the truth, as the Mass imports the corruptions of public
Service? What shall become of the Church under the Apostles, when public
Service consisted of the same Ingredients, as has been showed, and the Order
of them is no more then S. Paul's rule, Let all things be done decently and in
Order? But if the meaning of these clamours be to say, that this same Order of
going over the Psalter once a month at daily Morning and Evening Service, of
going over the Bible or all the most convenient of it once a year, is the
Order of the Breviarie and Mass, it might concern all men either of honesty
or shame, though not to look into the Breviarie or Mass, of which they are so
confident, yet to look upon the Preface of this our Service which they condemn
without understanding, and think whether men of common sense would use all
those excellent reasons, to excuse the alteration of that course, which now
they are accused for retaining. But granting all to be true which is so
apparently false, were the Mass worse then it is; and all this the very Order
contained in it, is it possible that any man of judgment or conscience, should
think it enough to say, that this or that is in the Breviarie or Mass, and
never trouble himself to show that it is part of the corruptions which they
contain? What reason is there to prove, that the Order of the Psalter once a
month, is not for the Service of God, and the edification of his Church? This
Church abolisheth not the use of Psalms to musical tunes, where they may have
place in the course of our Service. Is it demanded further, that the monthly
course of the Psalter be abolished, to make them room? If it be, the Church is
bidden to loss, and the service of God shall suffer in it: the people is now
more plentifully conducted to the knowledge of God, and his praises according
to his own word: then, the ruder sort shall have much ado, to dream over a
Psalm, in a great deal of time, in a manner so far from that decency to
which it pretends, as may be a just means to dead the devotion of such as are
not set upon a good edge. The Answers of the people represent, in some sort,
that most ancient and commendable fashion of Antiphones, and teach them their
office, and conduct them to bear their part in the praises of God, not to sit
by as Hearers, where they are to be Actours. And where that fashion may be
represented to the truth, in the more skillful Congregations of Collegiate and
Cathedral Churches, what a strange prejudice is it, that will not suffer
reasonable persons, to relish the advantage of it, in the service of God? But
all this affords no ground to condemn the course of those more skillful
Congregations of Collegiate and Cathedral Churches, in singing the Hymns with
Music, provided the Congregation may understand and go along in their
devotions. He that undertakes to do it, shall be sure to run upon a rock from
which he shall not come off without splitting, that is, the president of the
public Service of God in the Temple. For let no man think that this is to be
ranked with the figurative Service of God, according to the Ceremonial law:
That he must leave to the inner Court of Priests, the praises of God are part
of the perpetual Service of God in spirit and truth, to last under the Gospel,
instituted and indicted by the Prophets, Ministers of that service, frequented
by the Apostles, and a president for the Church, according to the rule of
edification of it. I am ashamed to repeat here the needless quarrels with the
old Translation of the Psalms in use. Men seem now to be wise enough, to see
the shameless partiality which they contain, in that men should be so quick,
as to see so many faults in that, and pass by all the extreme barbarismes, the
spurious additions, the false translations which the Psalms in Meetre contain.
I suppose the Church intends not to aver, all that is read in the Church, to
be truly translated. If so, God help the universal Church, when it had no
Scripture of the old Testament, but the Greek, and the Translations of it. Let
them that find fault, employ themselves, and all they can make, to translate
but that one book of Psalms; if they put their work past a considerable number
of just exceptions, I am ready to forfeit for one. It is sufficient to my
understanding, and always was, that what is read in the Church is more fit for
the edification of it, then to go about to change it. And what interesse has
any man not to desire change in that point, but S. Augustines experience
alleged before, audierunt homines quod non consueverunt, and perturbati sunt?
What will any man say now to the Order of reading the Scriptures once a year
in the Church? Shall this be the thanks of the Church of England, for renewing
that religious Order of the Ancient Church, and providing a public course for
the people to become acquainted with the Scripture, to say, that it is out of
the Breviarie or Mass? The offense is, because some of the Apocrypha are read:
before that offense had been taken, it should have been showed, that nothing
but that which is inspired by the H. Ghost should be heard in the Church. What
then would a number of good Sermons become, which how good soever, no man dare
say are inspired. Sure, they that will advise with reason and conscience, not
with prejudice, must enquire, whether the reading of them promote or hinder the
edification of the Church. In that respect, so far is it from me to put out
some Apocrypha, that I would rather put in the first of Maccabees, as
describing the fulfilling of some of Daniels prophesies, and the then state of
Gods people. But is it from the Mass that the Church of England learned to
restore the Sermon into the due place at solemn Service? I should have thought
it one of the abuses of the Mass, that whereas, by the universal custom of
the Church, the place of it appeared, there the use of it was for the most part
silenced. The good Order of this Church, and the success God has lent it,
has prevailed so far, that this Apostolical Order may be said to have
recovered the ancient place and rank. As for the Afternoon Sermon, I am yet to
learn what place it had in the public Service of the Church, by what Command
of Scripture, what rule or custom of the Ancient Church it is pressed.
Timothy is commanded to be instant in season and out of season, but to what
purpose? to publish the Word, to do the office of an Evangelist, to win
strangers to the Faith. How can that be importune? So Paul preached at Troas
till midnight. If that be our president, let us celebrate the Eucharist, as
those of the Church of Rome do, on Christmasse eve. There are examples of
preaching as well Evening as Morning in the ancient Church, but at particular
times, and on particular occasions: my question is, to show me the place of the
Sermon in the Afternoon Service, as it has been showed in the Morning Service,
otherwise not satisfied of any rule or custom of the Church. Not because men's
laws are not a fense to Gods law, and that it is not for the good of the Church
the more it is frequented, as it ought, especially, to the purpose that the
people may sufficiently understand their profession, and the grounds of it: but
because it is reason, that the offices of the Church be practiced with respect
to opportunities and abilities, not in such sort, as may neither advance the
Honor of God, nor of the Profession which we make. We hear no news of new
reasons against the Creed, for part of the Service. It was a great work to
settle such forms as might conclude, and confine, and bring to light the malice
of Heretics. The next work to that was to bring it into the Service. So was it
best commended to the knowledge, to the respect of Gods people; which respect
had it been preserved, this new varnish of old Heresies, which prevails so
far abroad, is not like to have taken with the people. What shall I say of
the Collects or Prayers which the daily Service concludes with? My Proposition
allows me not to dispute the particular conceptions, or terms in which they are
expressed. But I must commend the Order of answers of the people, in all places
of the Service where it stands. It refreshes their attention; it teaches them
their part at Public Prayers, not to stand by and censure how well the
Minister plays the mouth of the Congregation. If they be to act their part in
it, the part assigned them in our Service conducts them in doing their office.
As for the subject of them, the occasions of several seasons and solemnities,
protection against bodily and ghostly enemies, conduct of Gods grace and
providence, success of the rule of the Commonwealth, and guidance of the
Church, and the like; it is unknown to me, that any thing is more fit and
requisite then these to be remembered at all public Assemblies. It has been
showed, that those prayers for all states and conditions of persons in the
Church, which since have been called Litanies, were from the beginning
frequented at the solemn Service of the Church, before the celebration of the
Eucharist, and that it is like so to have been, even under the Apostles. Now
though the condition of the Church be not for the present capable of so good
and so excellent a custom, as the continual Celebration of the Eucharist on
Lords-dayes, yet was there great reason that the Litanies should be prescribed
on these days nevertheless, as the next member of the Public Service of God,
observed from the beginning of the Church. And because they contain matter of
Supplication, for the diverting of Gods judgments, and obtaining of his
blessings, nothing could be more suitable, then to add them to the daily
Morning Service on Wednesdayes and Fridayes, as the exercise of that continual
humiliation before God, to which the observation of these days was intended,
to the unspeakable benefit of the Church, and the continual discharge of those
most excellent offices of Fasting, Prayer, and Alms among Christians. It is
past mine apprehension to imagine, wherein any man will pretend to fault the
act of Confession of sins in the Public Service of God, before celebrating
and receiving the Eucharist. For if Repentance be a disposition requisite to
make men capable of the grace which it exhibiteth, shall it not be exercised at
the Public Service of God, which our common profession acknowledges so
necessary, rather then only presumed to be performed in particular? And if it
prove by the verdict of all consciences, to be darkened from time to time by the
intercourse of daily offenses, joined with unthankfulness, and
unfruitfulnesse, is not that Order for the edification of the Church, which
reviveth, and refreshes, and inlighteneth it, at so solemn an act of religious
Service as this? Sure I am, that whosoever will lay his hand upon an honest
heart, shall not say, that the form which we use is taken out of the Mass,
when he considers, that which the Reformation teaches and professes of free
pardon of sins through Christ, to be so comfortably expressed in it. And
seeing it has been showed before, that in the practice of the Ancient Church,
to them which for notorious or acknowledged offenses were under the state of
Penance, the means of forgiveness was partly ministered in the public Prayers
of the Church and the Ministers of it, what can be more suitable to this
practice, and the grounds of it, on behalf of those that acknowledge themselves
sinners, but are not reduced by the Church under that discipline, then that
prayer or blessing wherein he that celebrateth the Eucharist, imploreth that
Grace on their behalf at Gods hands? To me it seems, that the rehearsal of
the Decalogue in the beginning of that which some still call the latter
Service, together with the answers of the people, craving pardon and grace to
observe them for the future, is to the very purpose of this Confession of
sins, and to actuate our repentance, by calling to mind our offenses by
retail, though it is in the Order of our Service somewhat removed from it, as
being thought fit, for other reasons, to be used when the Eucharist was not
celebrated. Notwithstanding, were it left to my choice, I confess I should
think the most proper place for this Confession of sins, to be that which it
holds in the first Edition of Edward VI. after the consecration of the
elements, and before receiving them, with that prayer which begins, We do
not presume -- after the same: For the reason why it has been otherwise
ordered, seems to have been to avoid offense, lest it might be thought to
import Transubstantiation, in those words spoken after Consecration, So to eat
the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood: The cause of
which offense, if any such may be imagined, seems to me utterly voided, in
the words added there, so to eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and
to drink his blood IN THESE HOLY MYSTERIES. Thus much let me be bold to affirm,
that it would be a great fault in the Church to celebrate this Sacrament,
without something answerable to that Thanksgiving, wherewith it was first
instituted by our Lord, and practiced by the whole Church. Suppose it contain
no mention of the Creation, and the blessing of Gods creatures, because, as
has been said, it seems to have been practiced heretofore, in relation to
man's bodily sustenance, wherewith it was instituted and practiced at the first:
Without Thanksgiving for the redemption of the world, it is not duly received;
therefore with it, it is duly celebrated. Of this Thanksgiving for the
redemption of the world, there is due remembrance in the very end of the
Exhortation, from those words, And above all things -- therefore it seems,
that the Preface, wherein that Thanksgiving is contained and expressed, after,
Lift up your hearts, had followed very seasonably, after remembrance of the
cause and ground of it. But the substance of that which is done, is always the
same. Further, how little soever the grace of Gods goodness depend on that
which by man is ordered for the fittest, and though it is not pretended that
any Law of God in the Scriptures inacteth this Sacrament to be celebrated with
that Thanksgiving from which it is called the Eucharist, or that Prayer for the
effect of Christ's Institution at the present, which is the close of it: yet
since it has been showed that so this Sacrament has been celebrated from the
beginning of the Church, and that for so good reasons upon our Lords example at
the institution of it, and since this course so much concerns the edification
of the Church, it seems altogether requisite, that the Elements be not
supposed deputed for such a blessing to the Congregation, by the mere act of
receiving them to such purpose, but should be actually and formally deputed, by
remembering the Institution of our Lord, and by the prayer of the Church,
professing the execution, and begging the blessing of the same, which I suppose
is called Consecration among us. Gregory the great and Isidore tell us, that
the Apostles, and S. Peter by name, celebrated the Eucharist with the Lords
Prayer alone; but that alone, must be understood to except other accessories to
the manner of celebrating, consisting in the Eucharist or Thanksgiving, whereof
the Prayer of Consecration was the foot and close. Rabanus de Instit. Cler.
lib. 32. Cum benedictione enim and gratiarum action primum Dominus corporis
and sanguinis sui Sacramenta dedicavit, and Apostolis tradidit, quod exinde
Apostoli imitati fecere, and successores suos facere docuerunt, quod and nunc,
per totum Orbem terrarum, generaliter tota custodit Ecclesia: For our Lord at
first initiated, and delivered to his Apostles the mysteries of his body and
blood, with blessing and Thanksgiving, which thence the Apostles imitated, and
did, and taught their successors to do, and which now the whole Church
generally observes all the world over. That which has been said is enough to
show, that it was always celebrated with this Thanksgiving, the foot whereof,
as has been showed, was the Prayer of the Church for the effect of the
Institution of our Lord at the present. Where are they now that take upon them
to say, that all our Service is taken out of the Mass? how will they discharge
themselves in this most eminent point? or how will they be able to digest this
untruth, which the least insight of the Mass will thrust down their throat?
the form of the Mass was related before, Vt nobis Corpus and Sanguis fiat
dilectissimi filii tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi, and it was showed, that
Transubstantiation is not contained in these words: Nevertheless because there
might be offense taken at the words, upon the sense of those that use them, we
see them altered into those terms, wherein the truth of that which is done is
most excellently expressed, to the intent of the Scripture, and true sense of
the Primitive Church, in these words, Hear us, O merciful Father; and those
which follow. In like sort, because the very term of Offering, and Sacrifice,
though used with a far other meaning then the Church of Rome professes,
seems to sound their meaning, it is not only removed out of the Prayer for
the whole state of Christ's Church, but the prayer it self removed, to stand
before the Consecration, as we conjectured it did stand in the Africane
Churches, and not after it, to give opinion that Christ, present by
Consecration, was sacrificed then for the quick and dead, as the Church of Rome
imagines. Of the rest of the Service of the Eucharist I shall need to say
nothing, having showed, that in the ancient Church, as with us, the time of
communicating was transacted with Psalms, after that Thanksgiving, the
dismission upon that. The people is dismissed with the blessing in our Service,
as in the most ancient form related in the Constitutions of the Apostles; and
so in the Reformed Churches of France, though they use that of Moses, still
frequented by the Synagogue. In the Service prescribed for Lords days, and
Festivalls, when the Eucharist is not celebrated, it is not strange if
something be added above the ordinary course to make it more solemn, though it
had been rather to be wished, that the world were disposed for the true
solemnity of it. Is the voice of the Law, calling us to mind our offenses, and
moving to crave pardon and grace for the future, nothing to the Service of God?
The Lessons of the Epistles and Gospels belong indeed to the first part of the
Service, as has been showed; but shall we take them to come from the Mass,
where they are last found, or from S. Hierome, from whom they seem first to
have come? And was it not convenient in them to remember what the Church
celebrateth at several seasons, and solemnities of the year? and to promote
the edification of the Church, and instruction of the people in the mysteries
of the faith, by giving Preachers a subject of their Sermons, suitable to those
solemnities. Last of all, though the world is not disposed, to the continual
celebration of the Eucharist, yet was it requisite in reverence to the Apostles
Order, and the universal practice of the Church, that the prayer for all
states of the same, should be used at almost all solemn Assemblies, which
because it always went along with the Eucharist, as it is used, serves to put
us in mind, what is wanting. In fine, though all Forms of Service devised by
men must needs remain disputable, and happy it is, when so they are, but upon
slight matters, so my hope is, that from hence will appear, that the form which
we use deserves this commendation, that it is possible to alter it for the
better, but easy to alter it for the worse. Thus far upon the Principles
propounded in the beginning, of things remembered in the Scripture, concerning
the public Service of God, and the most ancient and general practice of the
Church to expound them. I have discoursed the substance and form of Gods
Public Service at solemn Assemblies for that purpose, the circumstances of it,
and the particular form which we use. Of the rest of Ecclesiastical Offices,
and the Course we use in them, it was not my purpose to say any thing at the
present: In which nevertheless the reasons hitherto disputed will easily take
place to show, both that it is for the edification of the Church, that the
performance of them be solemn and by prescript form, and that the form which we
use is exceeding commendable.

CHAP. XI.
How the Form of Public Service is ordered. Dependence of Churches is from the
Apostles, for that and other purposes. How the preaching of Lay men imports
Schism. The good of the Order of Public Service.

ANd now without further dispute it is to be seen, what is prescribed
concerning the Public Service of God in the Scriptures, and what is left to be
ordered by humane appointment. The particular Offices whereof it consists, of
Public Prayers, and the Praises of God, of reading and expounding the
Scriptures, of the Celebration of the Eucharist, and the rest, are prescribed
and recommended to the Church in the rules and practice of holy Scripture. The
Order and Form in which they are to be performed, is acknowledged on all hands
that it ought to be prescript, yet is it no where prescribed in the Scriptures,
but left to humane Ordinance: That which is to be Preached is acknowledged, on
all hands, to be referred for the most part to the private endeavors of
particular persons: not in respect to any immediate inspiration of the holy
Ghost, otherwise to be quenched, but because it is the ordinary means to
instruct and admonish whole Congregations, in that which most concerns them
of the knowledge and doctrine of the Scriptures. Public Prayers, some think
are to be ministered according to the disposition and discretion of particular
guides of particular Congregations, by virtue of the Apostles Ordinance,
forbidding to Quench the spirit. Here it is proved, that, because it is
confessed, that the Grace of praying by immediate inspiration is not now
extant, therefore the purpose of this Ordinance cease, and that the ordinary
rule of the edification of the Church to be attained by the Order and
Comeliness of these things which are done at public Assemblies, is followed to
far more purpose, in the use of a form prescript and uniform. It is further
here to be observed, that whatsoever may concern the honor of God, the unity
of the Church, the truth of Religion, and the recommendation of it, is most
effectually to be procured, as procured it was from the beginning of our Faith,
by the dependence of Churches, visibly derived from the appointment and
ordinance of the Apostles. It has been declared, that according to that which
was done by Barnabas and Paul, ordaining Presbyters through the Churches, Acts
xiv. 22. according to that which Titus is instructed to ordain Presbyters
through the Cities, Titus 1, 3. that is, Colleges of Presbyters to order the
Churches founded in populous Cities, so throughout the whole Christian world,
were all Churches of Cities, thought meet for their greatness, whether
instituted by the Apostles, or propagated thence, governed by Presbyteries, or
Colleges of Presbyters, the Heads whereof were Bishops, in Succession to the
Apostles. We know the Gospel attained to the Countries and Territories lying
under these Cities, upon the preaching of the Apostles; the Scripture says,
Acts xiii. 49. upon the first preaching of Paul and Barnabas, The word of the
Lord was dispersed all over the Country: and Clemens, disciple of the
Apostles, Epist. ad Cor. (...). Preaching therefore through Cities and
Countries they made the first fruits of them, trying them by the spirit,
Bishops and Deacons of such as should believe, speaking of the Apostles and
their time: And we are ready to believe, that Congregations might be planted in
these Countries and Territories during their time, though we read nothing of
it here, and the division of titles and Churches, that is, City and rural
Congregations, in the Church of Rome, is assigned in the Popes lives to a far
later time then this. But do we not know that according to the general and
Primitive Custom of the Church, these rural Congregations received their
Ministers from the Mother-Churches in which their Ordinations were made? Does
it not appear to common sense, that the form of Gods public Service, as it
has been described, uniform in the main ingredients from the beginning,
unconformable in particulars of less moment, was practiced by particular
congregations according to their Mother-Churches? Does not the distinction of
Dioceses, or as they were first called, (...), habitations adjoining to chief
Cities, received in all parts of the Church, proclaim that the institution and
appointment of it, cannot have been accessory and particular, but universal
and Primitive? And what cause have we to doubt that the holy Ghost directing
the Apostles, should move them to that Course, which according to the condition
of the world, must needs be most reasonable? Or who can doubt that according to
the condition of the world, it is most reasonable to presume, that frequent and
populous residences must needs be furnished of men of best abilities, and means
to know the right course of ordering public matters of the Church, for most
advantage to the truth of Religion, the Peace of the Church, and the Service of
God, rather then that vulgar and rude Congregations, inflamed with the
ignorance and malice and overweening of unable guides, should choose for
themselves, not only in things necessary for their own souls health, wherein
all have their due interesse, but in things concerning the general state of
the Church, which they are neither bound nor able to understand? I must
confess to have written heretofore, that in the time of the Apostles, the work
of Preaching seems to have gone rather by men's abilities then their Offices:
And now I hope, in good time, having declared here several regards in which
this is verified. It has been showed that of the the same Ecclesiastical
Order, the same Bench of the Church, some Presbyters exercised the abilities of
Preaching, some not. It has been showed, that the rank of Prophets furnished
by the immediate inspiration of God, for the more plentiful performance of
that work in the beginning of the Gospel, cannot be thought to have been the
same with that of Presbyters. And if any man stand upon it, it shall not
trouble me to yield that which Grotius of late has observed, and under the
Church of Rome Ferarius de Ritu Concionum, ii. 6. That in the Primitive times
of the Church, Lay men were licensed to preach by the Bishops of Churches,
according to the instances alleged in the letter of the Bishops of Palestine
to Demetrius of Alexandria, in Origens case, related by Eusebius. For it
seems most agreeable to the Succession of Scribes after the Prophets in the
Synagogue, seeing it is neither reasonable to conceive, that Scribes were
denied this Office, when they were found fit, nor that those to whom it was
granted, were all Elders of Synagogues. And by this an easy reason is given
how our Lord and his Apostles are admitted to speak in the Synagogues, as
licensed and invited by the Elders and Rulers of them according to the
Scripture, Acts xiii. 14. And perhaps the Custom might remain in the Church,
after prophetical Graces for the instruction of it were ceased, that those
which had the knowledge of the Scriptures without inspiration, should be
admitted to speak to the people. But what is all this to these mechanic
persons that make themselves Churches, and the Churches them their Ministers,
without education, without calling, without acknowledgement of one Church of
God? They please themselves in observing, that S. Paul used his trade while he
Preached the Gospel, as they do: And in that perhaps there is as much mistake
as in the rest. For it is not all one for a Preacher to be bred to a trade from
his youth, and for him that is bred to a trade from his youth to become a
Preacher when he please. To me there is so much difference, that I yield the
one to be S. Paul's case, as the world sees the other to be theirs. It is
observed in Scaligers Elenchus and elsewhere, that S. Paul in that particular
made use of his education under Gamaliel, in regard it was the custom of their
Doctors, to breed their Scholars to a trade, as well as to the knowledge of
the Law, which they were to profess. And there is a saying among them in Pirke
Aboth, of this tenor to my remembrance, Always with the Law let a man learn
the way of the earth; the meaning is, a trade for his maintenance. Hereupon, it
is ordinary for their Rabbis to be surnamed by their trade. And in Maimoni
Talmud Torah C. iii. you have diverse sayings of their ancient Doctors, that
with the Law a man is to practice a trade for his maintenance, as this, All Law
(that is, all learning of the law) with which there is not work, in the end
comes to nothing, and draws on naughtiness, and the end of such a man is, he
falls to rob creatures. And in C. ii. before, He that exercises a trade with
the study of the law, must spend three hours of the day at his trade, and
nine at his study, which are divided as it follows there. The knowledge then of
these abilities, to which this education tended, taken according to public
Order of that time, and the exercise of them for the public instruction of the
people, allowed according to the same, seem to contain sufficient warrant of
humane calling, to speak to the people in the Church, in them that were not
Ministers of it. S. Ambrose in Ephesians. iiii. Vt ergo cresceret plebs and
multiplicaretur, omnibus inter initia concessum est and evangelizare, and
baptizare, and Scripturas in Ecclesia explanare. That the people of believers
might increase and multiply, in the beginning it was granted to all to preach
the Gospel, and to baptize, and to expound the Scriptures in the Church. There
is a difference between that which he calls preaching the Gospel, and
expounding the Scriptures in the Church, though both are called preaching among
us: For it is one thing to publish the Gospel where there is no Church, another
to minister the doctrine of the Scriptures where there is. The Scripture
witnesses, that those which were dispersed upon the persecution raised about
Stephen, did the one without difference, Acts viii. 4. xi. 19. It is no more
then all Christians must do, so far as they hold themselves able to advance
the faith. As for expounding the Scriptures in Churches settled, where Order
took place, in that also S. Ambrose his words may be verified, that it was
granted to all, that is, to all conditions, whether Ministers of Churches or
not: But no otherwise granted then has been said, upon knowledge of competent
abilities, according to the practice of public Order, derived, as it seems,
into the Church from the Synagogue. But does this fault the public Order of
this time, that confineth the public exercise of this Office, to the public
ministeries of the Church? The course of education being open to all, and the
performance of that course, proved and presumed according to public Order, of
all that pretend to these ministeries, the ministeries of Congregations being
furnished by that public Order, to authorize others in Congregations so
appointed, would be to choke the edification of the Church, by setting up
perpetual emulation and difference. But how eminent soever men's abilities are,
how well soever known to themselves or the world, to undertake the instructions
of the people without public Order in public Assemblies, is a thing that no
Scripture, no time, no Custom of the Primitive Church will allow. To tread all
that learning under foot, without which the knowledge of the Scriptures is not
to be had upon humane endeavors, to undervalue the abilities of a learned age,
in comparison of the boldness of mechanic persons, in spending the mouth
without sense underneath, seems to be the wantonness of this time, for
after-ages to admire. But for private persons, against public Order, and the
unity of the Church, to call such Assemblies, and to exercise these pretended
abilities in such Assemblies as public Order forbids, is neither more nor
less then Schism, let them that do it advise, at whose door the sin of
that Schism lies. For, the public profession of this Church is the same,
that has been proved, these so many years, to contain no cause of separation
in it: And these that separate are so far from setting a foot new, or from
proving old charges, that they seem to be yet to learn, whether there be any
such thing as proving that which they say, or not. The unity of the Church is
a thing commanded by God, the divisions that and shall arise in the Church, are
a thing foretold by God: He that has foretold that divisions shall come, has
commanded that they shall not come: To me it seems a strange reason, because
God has foretold that Heresies shall come in, for men therefore to set open
the door, and for public Order to take a course, by the independance of
Churches, to allow as many religions as Conventicles. The dependence of
particular Congregations upon Episcopal Churches, for the Original relates
to the institution of the Apostles, for the end, to the unity of the Church:
The dependence of these Bishops Churches upon the seats of Metropolitanes and
Patriarchs, acknowledges a mere humane Original from the state of the Roman
Empire, and the residence of the chief Powers of it, but not without respect to
the Gospel first planted, according to the president of the Apostles, in the
most eminent cities, and thence derived into the Countries about: But relates
to the same end of one Church, as procuring the actual correspondence of all
the members of it. Since Religion is become part of the State of several
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, they are not to receive from one another the laws
that enforce the exercise of it; but it is requisite that the exercise of it
through each Kingdom and Commonwealth be uniform, by Ecclesiastical rules,
advised by each Church, and enforced by each Kingdom and Commonwealth, the
dependence of particular Congregations upon Episcopal Churches, in the
exercise of Religion according to such Rules continuing inviolable, as the
institution of the Apostles. Now regard we the truth of Religion, regard we the
peace of the Church, regard we the honor and glory of God, and the credit of
our Profession toward such as are without, this dependence of Churches is not
more effectual in any point of Religion, then in the uniform and prescript
form of Gods Public Service. What means is there so effectual to convey and
settle the truth professed in the minds of all people, then to glorify God in
it, and according to it, in the continual exercise of his service? What means
so powerful to obtain the peace of the Church from God, to preserve it with
men, as to join in the same uniform service of God for the purpose? As for the
honor of God, and the commendation of that profession which we make, let
common reason not possessed with prejudice be judge, whether the voluntary
extemporary conceptions of particular Ministers of Congregations, or the forms
maturely advised by the most able, shall prove the more probable means to
procure it. Let the public exercise of Religion consist, in speaking to the
people more then men have learned of the knowledge of the Scriptures, in
permitting men to vent their own passions, or perhaps factions, for the
devotions of their people, for their Prayers and Thanksgivings to God: Let the
Preachers Office consist in speaking by measure of time, not by weight of
matter; let it consist rather in the exercise of the lungs, then of any
knowledge in the Scriptures: Let the Hearers Office consist in patience of
sitting still so many glasses, or rather in censuring the Preachers abilities,
in Praying as well as in Preaching (for to that the office of praying in the
Church may come:) And those that are affected to the Profession with the best,
shall be forced for love of truth, to lament that it is so much scandalized and
hindered by them that pretend to advance it. But let the Praises of God, the
hearing of his Scriptures read and expounded, the Common Prayers of the Church
and the celebration of the Eucharist be performed with that discretion for the
Order, with that choice for the substance, with that reverence for the outward
visage and fashion of what is said and done respectively at each of these parts
of Gods Public Service, and let not me doubt that God the Author, and men
strangers to our profession, shall join in making good and acknowledging that
of the Apostle, 1. Cor. xiiii. 25, that God is among us of a truth.

FINIS.
The Author, upon his revisall, desires the Reader in these several places to
add and read as follows.
Page 15. line 12. after his own, add, And indeed the passage seems to have
been crowded in hither out of Justine Martyr his dialogue with Trypho the Jew,
though contrary to his meaning: for it appears that the Jews of that time
gave not leave to drink warmed drink on the Sabbath by his words there, (...).

Page 65. line 19. after words, add of.

P. 84. l. 7. read, case. I truly have judged.

Page 87. line 19. after to the people, add, The words of S. Augustine, contra
Epist. Parmen. iii. 2. Tunc etiam ille and timore percutitur, and pudore
sanatur, cum ab universa Ecclesia se anathematizatum videns sociam turbam cum
qua in delicto suo gaudeat, and bonis insultet, non potest invenire: Then also
is he both struck with fear, and healed with shame, when seeing himself
anathematized by the whole Congregation, he can find no rout to bear him
company, wherewith to exult in his fault, and insult over the good. Shall I
believe that in S. Augustines time the sentence of Anathema came from the
Congregation, which Tertullian so long before has appropriated to the
Ecclesiastical Order, when he says, de pudicit. c. xiiii. Hoc enim non a Deo
postularetur, quod erat in Praesident is officio: For that would not be desired
of God, which was part of the Presidents Office, speaking of delivering to
Satan the incestuous person at Corinth? yet nevertheless S. Augustine says,
that a man is anathematized by the whole Congregation, in regard of the
execution and effect which the sentence of the Bishop or Ecclesiastical Order
then found by consent of the people, when the Law enforced it not. Which is the
very case of the Apostle alleged before.

Page 90. l. 22. after right, add, and charge.

P. 91. l. 17. aft. whole, add, The dependence indeed of particular
Congregations upon Episcopal Churches, is clearly derived from the Institution
of the Apostles related in the Scriptures, as must be observed afterward: But
it must also be said, that the dependence of Episcopal Churches is from humane
right.

Page 93. l. 1. after obedience, add, from the secular Powers.

Page 104. l. 22. after evil spirit, add, to persist in their counterfeiting.

Page 117. l. 13. after Ecclesiastical Writers, add, as of Ministers of
Churches, (it shall be oserved indeed, that sometimes Lay men were licensed to
teach the people in the Primitive times, but those are never called or
accounted Doctors of Churches, that we should suppose them to be the remains
of those Ministers of Churches, which the Apostle calls Doctors)

Page 123. l. 12. for, But that all Presbyters were Prophets, or all Prophets
Presbyters, read, But that all Prophets were Presbyters, is more then I can
resolve. By the Apostles description it should seem that they had their place
with the Bench of the Church. Walo Messalinus out of Ruffinus has remembered to
us, Ordinem Propheticum, the Rank or Bench of Prophets, as a Ministry by
themselves. Ireneus, Justine Martyr, and Tertullian have left mention of the
Grace of Prophets as extant in their time, but of the use of it, for the
ordinary Ministry of the Church, in teaching the people, they have said
nothing to my knowledge.

Page 131. l. 9. read, required at their Prophets hands by the way we may
perceive, etc

Page 138. l. 30. read, in a strange language it shall here be declared, etc.

P. 161. l. 4. after done. If this please not, or if it seem not general
enough, to satisfy the meaning of the Apostles words, it may be said in larger
terms that all that which the Prophets by help of humane discourse conceived
and uttered for and in their public Assemblies, upon the grounds of their
particular revelations, is here called the Spirits of the Prophets. Which
therefore must needs be subject to the judgment of other Prophets.

P. 169. l. 1. read, to make it his own. Cxvii. when he sings, O praise God
all ye people, praise him all ye Nations; the Apostle, etc.

P. 212. l. 4. read, by whom it speaks, that is a mistake which, etc.

P. 232. l. 11. read, the head of the Captives, of the lineage, etc. ibid. l.
22. after profess add, And from that first title of the Misna we have enough
to convince this whole point if Scaligers judgment may take place. For there
we have diverse cases concerning the very formal words of diverse of those
Prayers which still they use, resolved by Doctors that lived not long after
our Lords time. And Scaligers judgment is, VI. De Emend. Temp. that there is
no more question to be made whether those resolutions be the resolutions of
those Doctors to whom they are entitled there, then whether the resolutions of
the old Roman Sages, preserved in the digests of the Civil Law be their own or
not. Thus must needs those Prayers be far more ancient then the time of our
Lord, concerning the formal terms whereof, cases new disputed at that time,
see the Misna Beracoth C. iv. 3. v. 2.

P. 236. l. ult. after, by heart, add, There is a reason why the heathen had
prompters to suggest unto them the devotions which they addressed to several
Deities, because they counted several Deities properly able to bestow several
blessings, and accordingly held several rites proper for their Service, which
it was Sacrilege to perform otherwise. Arnobius contra Gentes iii. Vsque
adeores exigit propriatim Deos scire, nec ambigere, nec dubitare de
uniuscujusque vi, nomine; ut cum altenis ritibus and appellationibus fuerint
invocati, and aures habeant structas, and piaculis nos teneant inexpiabilibus
obligatos. So far it concerns particularly to know the Gods, without
ambiguitie or doubt of the virtue and name of each; that when they are called
upon by the rites and names of others, both they have their ears stopped, and
hold us ensnared with inexpiable sacriledges. See there before. So Tertullian
according to this sense makes a very pertinent opposition between the Heathen
that prayed as they were prompted, and the Heathen that prayed by heart.

P. 241. l. 25. after Solemn, add, Which question perhaps need not be asked,
if we consider that S. Cyprian spoke in his Masters terms, who, when he names
Dominica solennia, and again, post transacta solennia, De Anima C. i. x. must
needs be understood to mean the same, to wit, the solemn Prayers which the
Eucharist was celebrated with. For indeed the latter of those two passages of
S. Cyprian, I think is out of a Work entitled to him but none of his own.

P. 245. l. 30. after hold, add, To the same purpose, Conc. Gerund. Can. 1.

P. 282. l. 7. after those, add, things.

Page 283. l. ult. read, a schism in the Church, etc.

P. 298. l. 22. read, minds are best in tune, etc.

P. 313. l. 32. Therefore in that they require that public Order be not
exacted in respect to the weak, they acknowledge the thing lawful, by
acknowledging him weak that doubts of it; though in truth it concerns them
rather to inform the weak of the lawfulness of those things which public
Order requires at their hands, then to continue them in their weakness, and
thereupon pretend that public Order ought not to be exacted at their hands.

P. 362. l. 23. after to the purpose of it, add, Let a man look over the
benedictions which they use before and after the Lesson of Hear O Israel,
Deuteronomy. vi. in the morning: Let a man look over the xviii. benedictions which
they say every day, morning, evening, and at night, the antiquite whereof may
in some sort be valued by that which has been said before C. vii. and it shall
easily appear, that they contain Prayers as well as Praises or Thanksgivings to
God, though called Benedictions, because they begin, or end, or both, with
Blessed art thou, O God, specifying something concerning the subject of each.

Page 386. l. 14. after ignorance breeds, add, In the Anaphora of S. Peter,
in the Maronites Missall, this Prayer is made for forgiveness of sins. In
the Jesuit Kircherus his Prodromus Captus, for an essay of that language, I
remember there is produced a form of this Prayer, as ministered by the Deacon,
out of some of their Liturgies. The books are not in my hand for the present.

Faults escaped in Printing.
Page 72. l. 26. for swell read smell. p. 98. l. 22. Sculletus r. Scultetus.
p. 108. l. 9. verse. 8. r. verse. 28. p. 176. l. 13. Parmenians r. Parmenianus.
p. 223. l. 19. for Prike always read Pirke. p. 248. l. 23. Sciatach r.
Scialach. l. 24. Velseius r. Velserus. p. 252. l. 13. Preacher, r. practice. p.
253. l. 16. in r. it.


