A SATYR AGAINST THE CAVALIERS: Penned in opposition to the Satyr against
Separatists.
GOOD morrow to my Genius, and good day
To my revived self: Thy drowzy clay
Shake off my soul, and make thy self as free,
As in the Separation thou must be.
Come life of truth, and innocence, inspire
My late Lethargick mind with active fire.;
Such as may be to wanderers a light,
And bring them with my self to day from night.
Farewell all by-respects, with you farewell,
Each desperate and too-loyall Infidel,
That thinks it safer to break faith with Christ,
And heaven, than not be sworn a Monarchist;
Calls grave men's resolutions for the truth
Rebellion, managed by the City-youth;
And regulating errors of the Crown
Plots and devices forged to pull it down.
Plots and devices! Take them to your selves
True sons of mischief, and your popish Elves
That with your loyal treasons hug our King
Unto his own, and Kingdoms ruining*
What plots were working when the Statists stood
On tip-toe, and looked over the public good;
And nothing would be thought on but our lives,
And fortunes vassall'd to prerogatives?
When the forlorn Imps of great Buckingham
Reviving, left off mourning for his name,
And made that plat-forme perfect he begun,
But being stopped by Felton, left undone?
Who plotted when the papists were forborne,
And our Religion made a public scorn?
When the State-sinners strove with might and maine
To keep them so securely with their gain,
That if a Cherubim from heaven sent,
Had told us of this longed-for Parliament,
Our hopeless hearts would back unto him tell,
That sure it was too great a miracle.
Yet ye have seen their tricks did fail them all,
Great CHARLES was pleased a Parliament to call,
Eminent in wisdom, courage wit and zeal,
The choycest flowers of the Commonweal,
Whose yet un-blasted virtues gave us free
Enjoyment of a year of Iubilee,
Till malice, active in its base design,
Their fair proceedings strove to countermine,
By bringing Majesty to a distaste
Of this or that which in the house was past:
Nor was there counsel wanting to set forth,
A journey now prepared for the North,
And all forsooth for this same weighty reason,
Because the unruly people at such a season,
Pressed to the Court. No question they were glad
At such a time to see those fellows mad:
Now they have got this end, let them alone
To bring a sudden war, their maine plot, on,
By working in the Prince a stubborn hate
To what is thought convenient for the state.
And now they have their ends: yet this by the way,
I Am of the mind we shall not act a play
As yet, new made by the Poetic Earl
New Castle, that mis-us'd the Comic Girl:
I Will to Black-Friars, and entreat them strait;
The Countrey-Captaine may his Lord awayt;
The little wit may pass, but for the form,
There Is as much order in it as in a storm;
And when his Variety came out to please,
The stage it self was turned to Little-ease:
Let both be sent to his penurious Camp,
To save the charge of a Tobacco Lamp.
Such Lords, whose vanities teach them no more
Than art to please in Court, to dice and whore,
Are now the sticklers for the Cavall'rie,
With the blind Howlets of Philosophy,
Whose poor ambition leads them blindfold on
To Court, the whorish weeds of Babylon.
Bristoll, thou have a pate: therefore it is known
Thy Counsels are not Reasons, and thine own:
We know what took thy Spaniolized George,
When he for Strafford speech and wit did forge;
Thou saw his eager truth might lose the King,
Believe me Sir, it was a dangerous thing.
Alas for the great Seal! It is great pity
He lost the favor both of Court and City;
By staying long, and then staying no longer;
Here British resolution should been stronger:
Regarded now of few, hated of most,
He walks like some honorable ghost.
Falkland, they say you are the learned wit,
That giving Roast-meat, beats us with the spit,
That with your clouded sense in Declarations,
Would cheat us to the ruin of three Nations;
You must excuse us, if we say there is
A false-hood in each long Parenthesis.
Hartford, and Herbert, Worster, with the rest,
That have a further aim than to invest
Our loved Charles, with his thrice Royal stem,
In his (as you do call it) lost Diadem.
Revile ye still the pillars of our state,
Whilst you stand tottering over your desperate fate,
Call up those busy ghosts that once did thrive
In mischief like your selves, but not outlive
Their work, gallant Cethegus, and the rest,
Whose glorious hopes plumed with Romes wealth, and dressed,
Soared high, and ventured themselves, and all,
To give themselves, or Rome a funeral;
If Spleens may be more fatal than your own,
Mix theirs with yours, that once it may be known
You Have tried your worst; if first it prove in vain,
Use may make perfect, act it over again:
But know, there is above a power Divine
Will give's a Tullie for each Catiline.
FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1643.


