A SPEECH of the Right Honorable the Lord Vicount Say and Seal, one of his
Majesty's Privy Council.

SPOKEN IN PARLIAment the 25th. day of February, Anno Dom. 1642. Concerning the
Bishop of Canterburies Petition, delivered to the High Court of Parliament,
February the 22. 1642. 1641

Avouched by Richard Brown, Clericus.

London, Printed T. Banks. 1642.

A SPEECH OF THE right Honorable the Lord Vicount Say and Seal, one of his
Majesty's privy Council.
Spoken in Parliament the twenty fifth day of February, Anno Dom. 1642.
Concerning the Bishop of Canterburies Petition delivered to the high Court of
Parliament. February, 22. 1642.
Master Speaker.
I Have waited to find you free from greater businesses, that I might crave
leave to speak of some things concerning my self, and this I have the more
desired since my Lord of Canterburies Petition, who expressing his troubles,
and bewayling the misery of his condition, and of the condition of the Church
of England (for he would needs join them together) which I think he may, as
the cause and effect, (for the miseries of the Church have certainly risen from
him.) as also he insisted much upon this, that these troubles had befallen him
through the malice of two parties, the Papists, and the Sectaries, and by those
he said the Church was greatly afflicted, how far this man will extend this
word Sectary, and whom he will comprehend under it I know not, but I have cause
to fear; that I may lie under some misapprehensions in respect of matters of
this Nature, which how far it concerns him, your Lordships will perceive by
what I shall say. My Lord of Canterbury a man of a mean birth, bred up in a
College (and that to frequently falls out to be in a faction, whose narrow
comprehensions extended it self no further, then to carry on a side in the
college, or canvas for a proctors place in the University, being suddenly
advanced to highest places of Government in Church and State, had not his heart
enlarged, by the enlargement of his fortunes, but still the maintaining of his
party, was that which filled all his thoughts, which he prosecuted with so much
violence, and inconsiderateness, that he had not an eye to see the
consequences thereof to Church state; until he brought both into such
distractions, danger and dishonor which we now find our selves encompassed
with all.

My Lords, as for me he has been pleased to say that he had observed me, not
to come to prayers and added that I was in his knowledge, as great a Separatist
as any was in England.

For the first of these that he charge upon me, it may be he was willing to
have it thought that I would not join in prayer with your Lordships, (which is
altogether false, for I should most willingly join in prayer with you, and
further I will add that I do not think but some set forms of prayer by some
men, in some cases, may be lawfully used, but this is that which I am not
satisfied in that, a certain number of men should usurp an authority unto
themselves, to frame certain prayers, and forms of divine service, and when
that is done under the name of the Church, to enjoyne them upon all persons in
all times, and upon all occasions to be used, and no other.

This sets aside the gifts and graces which Christ has given; and thrusts out
the exercise of them to substitute in their places, and introduce a device of
man, This munition of such forms upon all men, turns that which in the
beginning necessity brought in, for the help of insuficiency, to be now the
continuance and maintenance of insufficiency, and a bar to the exercise of
able and sufficient gifts, and graces, as if because some men had need to make
use of crutches, all men should be prohibited, the use of their legs, and
enjoined to take up such crutches as have been prepared for those who have no
legs, as for my part I will not refuse to come to prayer; for I take the sin
then to be personal, and to reside in the person officiating only I know not
whether I express my self clearly in this or not, and it may seem to be a
vice scrupulositie, give me leave therefore to endeavor to clear it by an
instance or two, in the time of the law when God appointed himself to be
worshipped by offerings, and sacrifices, the shadows and tipes of those truths
which were to come, if a poor man that had not ability to bring a Bullock,
or a Rame, or a Lamb, had brought a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young
Pigeons, it would have been in him an acceptable service, but if a man of
ability who had Herds and flocks, should out of negligence or
coveteousnesse have spared the cost of a Bullock or a Rame, and brought young
Pigeons, his service would have been rejected, how much more would the service
have been abomination if men should have taken authority, to have enjoined all
to bring noe other but Turtle or young Pigeons, because some were not able to
do more.

Now in this time of the gospel God has appointed the foolishness of
preaching, for so the world accountes it to be the means whereby he will save
those that believe, I conceive that where there are noe gifts enableing men to
preach, there might be a lawful and profitable use of reading of printed
sermons and Homilies and in such case they might very lawfully be heard, but if
some men upon pretense to prevent extravagant preaching should take upon them
to publish and set forth a book of public and common sermons, fit for all
times and occations, and should enjoin ministers to conform to those, and use
noe preaching at all, this would make it utterly unlawful, and to be professed
against, as that which were the bringing in of a human device and munition the
place and instead of Gods ordinance, and therefore the evil of it would soon
appear to us if so inioynd. Therefore I hope your Lordshipps will in that
respect let me stand right in your opinions, and I shall now end with two
requests.

The one that your Lordshippes will please to pardon me for troublinge you with
so long adiscourse concerning my self.

The second is humbly to entreat of you that where you know there is one and
the same God worshipped, one and the same faith embraced, one, and the same
spirit moveing, workeing love and an unblameable conversation with out any
offense to the state in your brethren that in all these concure with you, will
not suffer them (for Ceremonies and things to you indifferent) but not to them,
but these which with out offense to the state, or prejudice to the Church you
may take of, to be thrust out of the Land, as it wear and cut of from the
native Country, for if thus you shall wound the consciences of your brethren,
you will certainly offend and sin against Christ.

FINIS.

