THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE.

A SERMON Preached before the Judge of ASSISE at Leicester, Julie 30. 1652.

By ANTONIE SCATTERGOOD Rectour of Winwick in Northhampton-shire.

LONDON. Printed by ROGER DANIEL Anno 1652.

ORNATISSIMO VIRO D. THOMAE CAVE BARONETTO, ET LECTISSIMAE EJUS CONJUGI
PENELOPAE HANC OPELLAM

D. D. D.

ANTONIUS SCATTERGOOD.

THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE.
ROMANS XIV. 10. We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.


I Know it is usual in such assemblies as this to handle texts of Scripture
proper to the present occasion: Such as is Jethro's counsel to Moses concerning
the choice of Judges, Exodus 18.21. Moses's charge to the Judges he had chosen,
Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. Samuels example, (that was a Judge itinerant 1. Sam. 7.15-17.
in Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and Ramah) 1 Samuel 12.3. King Jehoshaphat's
commission to the Judges he set in the cities of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Job's
profession of his own integrity, Job. 29.7-17. David's vow, Psalm. 101. those
Proverbs of Solomon, and passages of the Prophets that either press the duties
of Magistrates, or prohibit Bribery, Cowardice, Partiality, or some other vice
incident to that honorable calling. Such places as these are for the most part
the subject of Assise-sermons: And indeed so worthy they are to be ever fresh
in the memories of all in authority, that I wish they were written on the walls
of their houses, or rather in the tables of their hearts. Yet my desire being
to speak to all here present, and not to one only, or a few (though those few,
yea that one, be more considerable at this time then many others) I have
therefore balked such texts, and chosen one of general and perpetual
concernment; a text that will not so much minister occasion to the Preacher to
satissie the humor of those that exspect a Satyr from the pulpit, and love to
see the faults of others, great ones especially, lashed, while themselves sit
untouched, as it will force us all, if well and duly weighed, to erect a
tribunal every man in his own bosom, and to become Accusers and Judges of our
selves; a text that will not so much give occasion the Preacher to tell the
people what the Informer, and witness, and Pleader, and Jurer, and Judge should
do, as it will force us all, of what calling or rank soever, seriously to
bethink ourselves, and carefully to enquire of others, as they in the Acts,
chapt. 2.37. and 9.6. and 16.30. What we ourselves should do. All here at
Church have not business at the Court: The Sheriff's men will tell you so anon:
Yea, many there are who never had, and happily never shall have, any quarrel or
controversy to be tried before an earthly Judge: But the Judge that comes in
the clouds every eye shall see him, Rev. 1.7. every one shall be summonned to
appear before him, to receive according to what he has done in the body,
whether good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. We shall all stand before the judgment seat
of Christ. The text, ye see, is profitable at any time, for any congregation.
And meethinketh it is also seasonable enough at this time, and suitable enough
to the present auditorie. We have a Judge, and an Assizes in the Town; and we
have a Judge and an Assizes in the Text: and each ought to reflect upon the
other. The Trumpet, and Guard, and Attendance, the Robes, the Tribunal, the
Bar, the whole pomp and proceeding of Judges here below should mind us of
that awful Judge who will one day descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. and coming in
the glory of his Father, with his Angels and myriads of Saints, Mat. 16.27.
Jude 14. shall erect his judgment seat in the clouds, and there sit upon the
eternal life and death of all mankind. Thus the affair in hand is an emblem
of the Text: for an Assise is a little Doomsday: And again the Text by Gods
blessing may have great influence upon the affair in hand. For let all that
have to do in matters apperteining to Judgment but believe and remember these
few words, We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and I am
consident there will be no malicious calumnies or false accusations brought
into the Court, no rotten cause gilded over by bribed eloquence, no verdict
given-in against evidence and Oath, no perverting, no delaying of Justice, but
all, from him that sits on the Bench to the meanest Officer, will by the
terrors of the Lord be persuaded so to demean themselves as to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward men, Acts. 24.16. The Text
then is a word spoken in fit season; as appears further from our Saviors
telling the High Priest and Council of the Jews, when he was apprehended and
brought before them, that they should see him come in the clouds of heaven,
Mat. 26.64. and from S. Paul's reasoning before Felix of the judgment to come,
Acts. 24.25.

My porch is big enough: It is time to walk into the Court. I have hitherto
made way for my Text: Let us now make entrance into it. Therein three things
are obvious to our view: 1. A Judgment Seat; 2. The Person that shall sit upon
it; 3. The Persons that shall stand before it. Whence three points of doctrine:
1. There shall be a Judgment; 2. Christ shall be the Judge; 3. The Judgment
shall be general.



I. That there shall be a Judgment after death, though it be an article of
Christian Faith, the property and privilege whereof is to look beyond the veil,
and to behold things invisible; yet was it not wholly hid from the ey of
natural Reason: for we find the wiser sort of the Heathen making some
discoveries of it. The Sibylls prophecy of it. Plato and other Philosophers
prove it, in their discourses concerning the Immortality of the soul, and its
condition after death. The Poets with their witty fancies paint it out in their
fables of Aeacus and his fellow-Judges, of the Elysian fields, of Tityus's
vultur, of Tantalus's hunger and thirst, of the darkness and fire and furies of
the infernal regions. If these by the glimmering light of Nature could see so
much, how can we wonder enough at those Sadducees and Epicures amongst us,
that deny this truth now the Sun of the Gospel shines so bright about them?
what can we think, but that they are mere Atheists, and not worthy to be
disputed with, since they deny our principles, and oppose both Scripture and
Nature? Time will come when they shall feel what they will not now believe, and
bewail their error when it will be too late. As for us, let us not be
deceived. Let not their evil words corrupt either our minds or our manners. Let
not us follow swinish Epicures, who profess ourselves Christ's sheep; but let us
hear the voice of our Shepherd; and while they deride the Scriptures, let us
believe them. And they are as clear in this matter as any. Solomon says to the
voluptuous youngster, Know thou that for all these things God will bring thee
into judgment, Eccl. 11.9. and he ends that excellent book with that golden
sentence concerning the end of all things, God shall bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing whether it be good or whether it be evil,
Eccl. 12.14. Our Savior in the Gospel does not only tell us that he will
come at the last day, and by his powerful voice rail up all unto judgment,
Mat. 16.27. Joh. 5.28, 29. and 6.39. but he also punctually sets down the
signs of his coming, Matthew. 24. and the manner of his proceeding, Matthew. 25.
And since the rest of his words have proved faithful and true, let us not make
any question of this. He foretold the particulars of his passion, the manner of
his death, and the time of his resurrection; He promissed to send the holy
Ghost upon his disciples; He threatened the ruin of the temple, the desolation
of Jerusalem, and the rejection of the Jews. Let the accomplishment of these
predictions confirm our belief of the other. The same mouth spoke all; and the
same hand that has fulfilled so many, will not fail in one. That this main
point might be the more generally believed, he commanded his Apostles to
testify that it is he that is ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and
dead, Acts 10.42. And accordingly they almost in all their Sermons and Epistles
do teach and press it. It were tedious to cite all the places. S. Paul
describes the manner of the Lords coming, 1 Thessalonians. 4.15-17. And S. John amongst
his many other Revelations, had the white Throne, the raising of the dead, the
opening of the Books, the last judgment, and the execution of it revealed unto
him, Rev. 20.11-15. The like vision had Daniel, Dan. 7.9, 10, 13, 14. Yea,
Enoch even in the beginning of the world was so certain of the end of it, that
he speaks of the day of doom as if he had then seen it. And indeed he did see
the day of Christ's second coming with the like eye to that wherewith Abraham
beheld his first. See him as it were pointing with his finger at the Judge
marching in the clouds with all the company of heaven with him, Jude 14.
Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all, etc. This article of the later Judgment is not only grounded (as
ye see) upon the word, but we may draw arguments also to prove it from all the
Attributes of God. His Power will then be shown in raising the dead out of the
dust, and bringing all his rational creatures before his Tribunal, and with
one word of his mouth turning the wicked into hell, and all the people that
forgot God. His Wisdom will then appear, by bringing to light the hidden
things of darkness and laying open all the works and words and thoughts of men.
His Truth will then be manifest, by performing the promises that he made to his
servants, and by executing the threats denounced against his enemies. Lastly,
his Justice and Mercy will then become unquestionable, which during the time of
this life are much questioned. Here in this world God does not always reward
men according to their works, but for the most part suffers his dearest
children to lie under the cross, while the wicked are laden with his benefits.
Cain builds Cities, while Abel sleeps in the dust; Esau is a great Lord,
while Jacob endures an hard service; Chaste Joseph heth by the heels, while his
wanton Mistress is at liberty; Naboth's vineyard is usurped by Ahab; Lazarus
wants relief at the gluttons door briefly. the rod of the ungodly lies upon
the back of the righteous; the devils goats tread down Gods heritage: and all
this while though God look upon them that deal treacherously, yet he holds
his tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then he,
Hab. 1.13. And because God thundereth not as often as men blaspheme, because
sentence against their evil works is not executed speedily, therefore the heart
of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil, Eccles. 8.11. Nay, because
God keeps silence, they take his silence for consent, and they think he is
altogether such an one as themselves, Psa. 50.21. Sure he loves our persons
(say they) he owneth our cause, he is well pleased with our courses, otherwise
he would never pour his favors so plentifully on us. And thus they grow more
hardened in their sins. On the other side, the righteous comparing their own
affliction with the prosperity of the wicked, are ready to call into question
the justice of God, and the truth of his promises. This seeming confusion that
is in Gods dealings with men in this world, made not some moral Heathens alone
to question Providence (as we read Lucilius demanded of Seneca, Quid ita si
providentia mundus agatur, tam multa bonis viris accidunt mala? but it moved
the Prophet thus to expostulate with God himself, Righteous art thou, O Lord,
when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments; Wherefore
does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? Jer. 12.1. Yea, this unevenness in the ways of God made the
Psalmist stumble shrewdly, Psalm. 73.2, 3. As for me (says he) my feet were
almost gone, my steps had wellnigh slipped; For I was envious at the foolish,
when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. And ver. 13, 14. Verily I have
cleansed mine heart in vain, and washed mine hands in innocence; For all the
day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning. He began to think it
a vam thing to serve God, if God rewarded his servants with no better wages
then afflictions. And surely Religion were the grandest folly in the world, and
we Christians of all men the most miserable, (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
15.19.) if in this life only we had hope in Christ. If there were no
recompense of reward to be looked for hereafter, who would choose to suffer
affliction with the people of God, rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin,
and esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches then the tredjures of a
kingdom, as Moses did, Hebr. 11.25, 26. The briny tears of repentance, and the
bitter pills of mortification would never down with any of us, if not sugared
with after-hopes. But blessed be God we are assured, that after all these
gloomy days and doubtful weather, the day of the revelation of the righteous
judgment of God will appear, when those Saints of his whom he had afflicted in
this life shall be the more rewarded for their patience, and those wicked
wretches to whom he had been so bountiful, shall be the more sharply punished
for the abuse of his blessings. Yea, this very irregular proceeding of God now
is (...), a manifest token, of his righteous judgment hereafter, as the
Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. The Wise man argues in like manner, Eccles. 3.16,
17. For observing the cruelty and injustice of men in great place and
authority, how in stead of being a shelter and sanctuary to the oppressed, they
proved unto them a briar and a thorn-hedge, in stead of being patrones of laws
they perverted them, making use of their power to do mischief, and turning
their Courts of Justice into dens of rapine, into mere butcheries and shops of
cruelty, what infers he hence? Not what they Ezekiel. 9.9. The Lord has
forsaken the earth, and the Lord sees not; but what his Father does in the
like case, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the
needy the Lord will arise, etc. Solomon from the cruel and unjust courses of
Magistrates infers the just judgment of God, and how there shall be a time
when he that is higher then the highest will call them to account for all their
oppression of the poor, and their violent perverting judgment and justiee. For
thus he says, Moreover, I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that
wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there.
I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked; for there
is a time there for every purpose and for every work. Thus Solomon, like
Samson, found honey in the carcases even of lions. And thus may the children of
God do still. The prosperous wickedness of profane persons, which emboldeneth
them in their ways of cruelty and tyranny, and makes them say in their
hearts, God has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see it, Psalm.
10.11. even that very same thing, though it often wring tears from the eyes of
the godly, yet it affords them a towell to wipe their cheeks withal, it
being a strong argument to assure their hearts, that a time of refreshing will
come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.19. when there shall be no more
place left for those silly objections against Divine Providence, Why is this
villain prosperous? and why that Saint in mifery? Cur sceleris pretium ille
crucem tulit, hic diadema? Why was that traitor dressed with an hempen halter,
and this with a gold chain or a diadem? Then the (...), Romans 2.5. the (...),
the exact justice of God will be so evident, that even his enemies shall be
forced to say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a
God that judges the earth, Psalm. 58, 11, A day of judgment then shall come.

But when?

Some profane ones ask the question 2 Pet. 3. scoffing at Gods slackness, and
thinking, because it is not yet, that it will be never. But the Lord is not
slack as they count slackness. He does but stay till his harvest be ripe; then
he will send forth his reapers, Matthew. 13.30. he tarrieth but till his elect be
accomplished, and then he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Hebr.
10.37.

Others too curious have taken on them to calculate the period of the world,
both Gentiles, Jews, and Christians. Plato and Pythagoras, among the Heathens,
said all this elementary frame shall be dissolved after six and thirty thousand
years. Elias a Jew, but not the Tishbite, but a cabalisticall Rabbine of a far
meaner stamp, allows the world but a sixth part of that term which those
Philosophers do, and says it shall endure but six thousand years; which he
equally parcelleth out thus, two thousand before the Law, two thousand under,
two thousand after. But he grossly erreth in the two first particulars; for from
the creation of the world to the giving of the Law were above five hundred
years more then his account, and from the Law to Christ almost five hundred
years less. Therefore we may well suspect him in the last particular, which was
the furthest off from his ken. But his total sum of six thousand years
passed for current with many of the ancient Fathers, whilst they compared Gods
creating the world in six days with that place of S. Peter, One day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8. It
would be endless, and indeed it is needless, to acquaint you with the several
opinions of Christian writers concerning the time of Christ's second coming;
there having been some almost in every age that have ventured to set the year,
if not the day, of these grand Assizes: Most of which conjectures Time the
mother of Truth has already convinced to be as false as they were bold; and
so without doubt it will confute the rest. For none know nor can know the end
of the world but he that began it. Times and seasons are in the Fathers power,
Acts 1.7. this especially; Mark 13.32. Of that day and that hour knows no
man, no not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father:
Not the Son, that is, not as man, or not at that time, (for his knowledge was
graduall, Luke 2.52. and mixed with some ignorance, Mark 11.13.) or not as
Mediator, so as to reveal it to his Church: Thus the Son knew not the day of
judgment. From 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. The day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the
night, some conclude, but very weakly, that Christ shall come in the night. The
uncertainty of this appears from Mark 13.35. Ye know not when the Master of
the house comes, at even, or at midnight, orat the cock-crowing, or in the
morning. Besides, it is called the day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Cor. 1.14. 2
Pet. 3.10. Moreover, when it is night with us, it is day in the other
hemisphere. Whether night or day, how near it is we may not affirm, yet that
it is not far off we may gather from those prognostics that our Savior has
given us, most whereof are come to pass already; as the arising of false
Christ's and false prophets, persecuting of true Christians, wars and rumors of
wars, pestilences and famines, quakings of the earth, and searfull signs in
heaven, iniquity everywhere abounding, and charity everywhere abating. These
buds plainly tell us that the Sun of righteousness draws nigh. Let us
therefore lift up our heads, and gird up our loins, that he may not come upon
us and pass by us before we be aware. Let the sound of the Archangels trumpet
be ever in our ears, as S. Hierome says it was in his: Let the fear and
remembrance of that dreadful tribunal be continually in our minds. But how
far soever the general Judgment be off, this let us know, that our
particular judgment is at hand: For this immediately follows our death. So
says the Apostle, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to die, but after
this the judgment. No sooner shall thy soul leave her earthly tabernacle, but
she shall stand before her Judge, who having passed an unalterable doom upon
her, she shall enter into endless joys or pains. This shall be as the
Quarter Sessions; that other like the general Assizes. Thou shall know by this
how it will go with thee then. Well, Beloved, this also is unknown to us.
Though we cannot all say as Isaac, Genesis 27. that we are old; yet we may all
say as he did, We know not the day of our death. Let this consideration
therefore press the same duty of Watchfulness. Ideo latet unus dies ut
observentur omnes: God has on purpose kept the knowledge of this one day from
us, that he might have our service every day; that we should never be
secure, but ever ready, ever doing our Masters business, ever casting up our
own accounts, ever considering our later end; like wise virgins, ever trimming
our lamps; like faithful servants, ever employing and improving our talents;
that so when our Master comes, and finds us about his work, we may receive
his wages, or rather his gift, eternal life. So much of the first point, That
there shall be a Judgment. Come we now to the second,

II. Christ shall be the Judge. To be a Judge here upon earth (though the
Manichees and Donatists of old did, and the Anabaptists their successors now
do cry it down) is an high and honorable calling. To be an oracle of justice,
a refuge for wronged innocence, a mainteiner of Truth and Peace, a prop and
pillar of the State; To give eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame; To break
the jaws of oppressors, and pluck the spoil out of their teeth, Job 29.15, 17.
To drive away wickedness and wicked men with a cast of his ey or with the
breath of his mouth, Pro. 20.8, 26. To carry the life and livelihood of others
on the tip of his tongue; Such actions as these, so great, so good, lift a man
almost above humanity. And indeed as Judges do Gods work, ( The judgment is
Gods, Deuteronomy. 1.17. and, Ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.)
so God gives Judges his own title, Psalm. 82.6. I have said, Ye are Gods, and
all of you are children of the most High. If these that ride circuits here
below, and exsecute judgment and justice but in some small province, have so
great honor and dignity laid upon them, how unconceivable will the authority
and majesty of that Person be that shall be Lord Chief Justice of heaven and
earth, that shall bring in his hand the keys of Hell and Death, and shall
cause a general Jail-deliver to be made, that shall exercise Commission of
Oyer and Terminer over all both men and angels, and shall pass an unrepealable
sentence upon both! And to this height is Christ advanced. All power is given
him in heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28.18. He is made not only Head of his
Church Ephesians. 5.23. but Lord and Judge of all, Acts 10.36, 42. All things are
put under his feet; and he is set far above all principality and power, and
might and dominion, and every name that is named not only in this world, but
also in that which is to come, Ephesians. 1.20.22.

Obj. But does not Christ say, If any man hear my words, and believe not, I
judge him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world, John
12.47? And the like we have John 3.17.

Resp. Such places are to be understood of that coming which is past, not of
that which is to come. Christ came not indeed to judge the world, but he shall
come to judge it. He came in poverty, but he shall come in power; He came in
the form of a servant, and in the similitude of sinful flesh; but he shall
come in the glory of his Father: He came to be judged, but he shall come to
judge even those that judged him: He came like a Lamb, to be sacrificed for
sin; but he shall come like a Lion, to tear all impenitent and unbelieying
sinners in pieces. At his first coming such was his meekness and humility, that
he hid himself that he might not be a King, John 6.15. but such shall be
the splendor and terror of his second coming, that even Kings and Potentates
shall seek to hide themselves from his presence, Rev. 6.15-17. When he was
upon earth, he refused to be a Judge of civil matters and a divider of
earthly inheritances; Man, who made me a Judge or a divider over you? Luke
12.14. but when he comes in the clouds of heaven, he will be a Judge and a
divider indeed: he will bestow the mansions of glory on the vessels of grace,
and, like his type Joshua, divide the heavenly Canaan among all the Israel of
God, giving to one authority over five cities, to another over ten, Luke 19.17,
19.

Qu. But how and why is Judgment attributed to Christ, since God is Judge of
all the earth, Genesis 18.25. Yea, since God is Judge himself, Psalm. 50.6?

Resp. How and why! Let the Arian and Socinian hear how and why. Christ is
therefore Judge of all, Heb. 12.23. because he is God over all, Romans 9.5. His
Divinity and his Authority infer each other. That which in the Text the
Apostle calls standing before the judgment seat of Christ, in the twelfth
verse he calls Giving account to God; So then, says he, every one of us
shall give account of himself to God. So then Christ is God. And indeed the
Father communicates both his nature and his power unto him. He has given all
things into his hand, Joh. 3.35. and he has given him authority to exsecute
judgment because he is the Son of man, Joh. 5.27. But we must not imagine
that by investing the Son with this power the Father has divested himself of
it: For he still reteineth the power he has given. As in respect of essence,
the Son is in the Father, and the Father in the Son; so in respect of action,
the Son works from the Father, and the Father by the Son, John 17.21-23.
Concerning the particular in hand; That of our Savior, Joh. 5.22. The Father
judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, is excellently
expounded by S. Paul, Acts 17.31. God has appointed a day in the which he
will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he has ordained. Yet
shall not Christ sit as a delegate or subordinate Judge, but as a Judge
Paramount, principal and absolute, from whom there shall be no appeal, whose
sentence shall not be traversed, nor his power resisted. For he shall judge
not as Man only, nor as God only, but as (...), as both together. As Man, he
shall come in the clouds of heaven, and sit on the tribunal; as God, he shall
raise the dead, and force all to stand before him* As Man, every ey shall
behold him; as God, he shall behold every thought, and discover every deed of
darkness: As Man, he shall pronounce the sentence; as God, he shall fulfill
and exsecute it. The Scripture asscribeth the last Judgment to three sorts of
Judges; to God, to Christ, to the Saints. God, even the whole Trinity, shall
be the Judge, in respect of judiciarie power: Christ shall be the Judge, in
respect of his visible appearance and audible promulgation of the sentence: The
Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.2. in respect of consent and
approbation. God shall judge, as the King who is supreme; Christ shall judge, as
a Judge sent by him for the punishment of evildoers and for the praise of them
that do well, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. The Saints shall judge, as the honest Justices,
and Gentlemen and body of the County, who when their ears hear an upright
Judge, then they bless him; and when their eyes see him, they give witness to
him, Job 29.11.

I. If Christ be Judge, then the judgment shall be according to truth, Romans
2.2. The Judge of all the earth will do right, Genesis 18.25. Judges of but part
of the earth often err in judgment. Great men are not always wise, neither do
the aged always understand judgment, says Elihu, Job 32.9. Sometimes Judges
would find out the truth, but cannot: sometimes they can find it out, but will
not; sometimes they do find it out, but are driven from it. Truth lies (as the
Philosopher said) in a pit; and some Judges have not wherewith to draw it out.
It is sometimes so covered with darkness, and the way to it so intricate and
perplexed, and Falsehood now and then meets the Judge in so handsome a
disguise, that it is no wonder to see even a good man mistaken, to see an Isaac
think well of an Esau, Genesis 25.28. a Samuel of an Eliab, 1 Samuel 16.6. a whole
college of Apostles of a Judas, Mat 26.22. Joh. 13.21-26. But error in
judgment arises oftener from want of will to do right then from want of skill,
the Judge either not having the patience to afford the cause a full hearing and
to examine and sift matters to the bottom, or else having his eyes bleared with
passion, or blinded with gifts. And it not seldom happens, that though the
Judge find out the truth, and could find in his heart to maintein it, yet he
is driven from it; either some great man's frown or letter being a Prohibition
to him; and then

Contra libertum Caesaris ire timet, he is afraid not to seem Caesar's friend,
John 19.12, 13. or he is afraid to anger the beast with many heads, the
multitude; and then Barabbas is released, and Christ is condemned by Pilate,
Mark 15.15. Luke 23.23, and Paul by Felix is left bound, Acts 24.27. Lastly, it
is a thing too often seen, that after the Judge has worthily done his part,
and justly doomed a malefactor to death, some greater power interveneth and
rescueth him from the gallows, granting him either a Pardon or a Reprive. Hence
it frequently happens, what the Prophet complains of, Isa. 59.14. that
judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar off, that truth
falls in the street, and equity cannot enter; that those old scenes are in
every age often acted over, that Joseph is condemned as a vicious person, that
Mephibosheth's estate is bestowed upon a sycophant, that Naboth fares the
worse for having a good vineyard, and Micaiah loses his liberty for not
emprisoning the truth; that, as Cyprian says, inter leges ipsas delinquitur,
that JUS is turned into VIS, Right overturned by Might. Certain it is, that
while darkness is in the minds of men, and the Prince of darkness is suffered
to tempt, amongst other Vanities that are under the Sun, that will still be
one that ye heard Solomon complaining of Eccl. 3.16. that in the place of
judgment wickedness is there, and in the place of righteousness iniquity is
there. Under the Sun it will be so: But when the Sun in the firmament shall be
put out, then the Sun of righteousness will shine forth, then a Judge will sit
in the throne that will judge right, Psalm. 9.4. and there shall be no
unrighteousness in him, Psalm. 92.15. For he has all the properties of a
complete Judge, Wisdom, Power, Justice, all infinite.

First, his Wisdom is such, that his eyes cannot be blinded. The darkness is
no darkness to him, Psalm. 139. He prieth into the closest corners, even into
those of the heart. (...) is his peculiar title, Acts 1.24. All things are
(...) stipped naked, ripped open before him, Heb. 4.13. Those that have gone in
the dark, and sought deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, shall at the day
of judgment find their cunning contrivances to have been to no purpose. All
close plots, all secret chamberings, all curtain-sins shall then be brought to
light; all hypocrisy shall be unveiled, and every mask pulled off. Even in the
days of his flesh Christ knew what was in man, John 2.25. he knew Nathanael
to be a true Israelite, John 1.47. and Judas to be a devil, John 6.70. how
much more then in the day of his glory shall he bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts? 1 Cor. 4.5.
The wicked shall at that day call to the mountains and rocks to cover them,
Rev. 6.16. but in vain. For impossible it will be for thee to be hid. For
besides the omniscience of the Judge a whole cloud of witnesses will appear
against thee. I. Every sin thou have committed, if thou suffer it to lie down
in the dust with thee, will be sure to rise up in judgment against thee. Many
sins are said to cry now, as Murder, Genesis 4.10. Uncleanness, Genesis 18.20.
Oppression, Isa. 5.7. Keeping-back the laborers hire, Jam. 5.4. but every sin
will have a voice at that day to cry for vengeance, if its mouth be not
stopped in the mean time with that blood which speaks better things, Hebr.
12.24. II. Every creature which thou have abuled will put up a bill of
endictment. The lands or livings that by fraud or violence thou have usurped,
and deteinest from the right owners, even these will cry against thee, and the
furrows thereof will complain, Job 31.38. If thou buildest thy house by
unrighteousness, and thy chambers by wrong, woe unto thee, Jer. 22.13. for the
stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer
it, Hab. 2.11. The gold and silver that thou have either ill got, or ill kept,
or ill spent, will prove an ill treasure, even a treasure of wrath, at the last
day, Jam. 5.3, 4. III. Satan, (...), that adversary in judgment, as S. Peter
calls him, 1 Pet. 5.8. who has all thy lifetime been (...), a Tempter, will
at the day of judgment especially make good his name (...), and play the Devil
indeed, accusing thee of those sins to which he tempted thee. IV. But if all
else should be silent, thou have that in thy bosom that will speak loud
enough, a book wherein all thy works, and words, and thoughts are written. This
though now perhaps seldom looked into, but closed and fast sealed, shall then
be spread wide open, and be as bad as a thousand witnesses against thee, It
will be a testimony beyond all exception: for it was written all with thine
own hand, and kept always in thine own cabinet. This is one of those books
mentioned Rev. 20.12. even the book of thy Conscience, which shall bear
witness, and either accuse or excuse thee before thy Judge, Romans 2.16. But
indeed the Judge shall need no proof or evidence, for he knows all things of
himself, and needs not that any should testify of man, John 2.25. In the
vast volume of his Omniscience all our members were written before they were
fashioned. He is not only acquainted with all our ways, but there is not a
word in our tongue that he knows not altogether: yea, he understands our
thoughts afar off, as the Psalmist most excellently, Psalm. 139. As he
puts tears into a bottle, Psalm. 58.8. so he sows and seals up
transgressions in a bag, Job 14.17. He now sets thine iniquities before
him, even thy secret sins in the light of his countenance, Psalm. 90.8. and time
will come (though thou think otherwise) when he will set all in order
before thine eyes, Psalm. 50.21.

Secondly, as in respect of his Wisdom the Judge may be said to be Totus
oculus, so in respect of his power he may be said to be Totus manus. Other
Judges are often hindered (as I said) in the exsecution of Justice: But there will
be no standing against this Judge, no appealing from him. He is higher then
the highest, Eccl. 5.8. And his Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103.19. His
hand will be found no shorter at the last day then it was at the first; but as
at the beginning of the world so at the end his Word will be his Work. He
spoke the word and we were made at first: Ps. 33.9. and when he says, Return
ye children of men, Psalm. 90.3. we shall be made anew. With his word he drew
us all out of that old Chaos (if I may so speak) and placed us here on earth;
and with his word he will people both heaven and hell, and fix that (...),
that great gulf, Luke 16.26. betwixt them.

Thirdly, his Justice is of equal dimensions with his Wisdom and Power. And
indeed where this is wanting in a Judge, the other two serve but to arm
Iniquity, and to make it so much the more mischievous. But this great Judge is
good as well as great. He is Justice it self; the true Melchisedech, the King
of righteousness. His name is, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jer. 23.6. and his
nature is, to love righteousness, and to hate wickedness, Psalm. 45.7.
Righteousness shall go before him, Psalm. 85.13. Righteousness shall be under
him: Righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne. Psalm. 97.2.
Righteousness shall be round about him: Righteousness shall be the girdle of
his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins, Isa. 11.7. So righteous
he was here upon earth, that none of his enemies could convince him of sin,
John 8.46, Neither Herod nor Pilate could find any fault in him, Luke 23.14,
15. Yea, the very devil cried out, Mark 1.24. I know thee who thou art, the
Holy one of God. But though this Judge were ever righteous in all his ways,
and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17. yet then especially will his
righteousness appear, when he comes, when he comes to judge the earth, when
he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth,
Psalm. 96.13. His judgments now though ever just yet are often secret, his
favors and his punishments being so promiscuously dealt, and all things
coming so alike to all, that there is no judging of love or hatred by outward
events, Eccl. 9.1, 2. But at the last day his judgment will be manifest as
well as just. Now he loves to sit upon his mercie-seat and his throne of
grace, to incline his ear to prayers, to be mollified with tears, to be
swayed with sighs, to receive suits, and to grant Reprives and Pardons: But at
the day of Judgment his Patience and Long-suffering will be at an end: Then
no entreaties, no tears, no promises, no friends, no mediation shall further
prevail with him; but putting-on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet
of salvation upon his head, and putting-on the garments of vengeance for
clothing, and being clad with zele as a cloak, according to their deeds
accordingly he will repay fury to his adversaries and recompense to his
enemies, Isa. 59.17, 18.

II. If Christ shall be the Judge, oh how shall Pilate tremble that condemned
him, and Judas that betrayed him, and the Jews that thirsted for his blood, and
all that any ways were consenting to his death! And that (let me tell you)
many thousands are that think themselves far enough from such horrid impiety.
They that now despise his Ministers, reject the offers of grace, disobey the
Gospel, profane the Sacrament, count the Cross foolishness, and will not rely
on a crucified Savior, such, how well soever conceited of themselves, allow
the fact of the Jews in crucifying of Christ; and, had they lived in that place
and at that time, they would have had an hand in that blood which they now
trample under foot and account as a commonthing, Hebr. 10.29. Yea, they do even
now in some sort crucify the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame, and
pierce him again and again with their sins, Heb. 6.6. When such as these
shall behold him whom they have pierced, how shall their faces gather
blackness, rottenness enter into their bones, and their hearts be overwhelmed
with fear and astonishment! They were here offended at Christ's humility: they
shall be much more offended at his glory: They were here ashamed of him: then
he will be ashamed of them: They would not hear his gentle and mild voice to
their conversion; they shall therefore hear his terrible and dreadful voice to
their confusion: They would not come to him for ease and refreshment, Mat.
11.29. they shall therefore depart from him into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.
If in the state of his humiliation he was able with a word to throw his
apprehenders on their backs, Joh. 18.6. how casily then, when he arises to
judgment, shall his enemies (that would not apprehend him by faith) be
scattered, and they that hate him, flee before him! Psalm. 68.1. Now consider
this, ye that forget God, lest he then tear you in pieces, and there be none
to deliver, Psalm. 50.22. Knowing the terror of the Lord, let us be persuaded
to look about us while we have time and place, before that great and notable
day of the Lord come, Acts 2.20. That will be the Lords day, a day of glory:
In this our day, the day of grace, while it is called To day, let us hearken to
his voice, and consider the things that belong to our peace, lest hereafter
they be hid from our eyes, Luke 19.41. Let us now curb our lusts, and break
off our sinful courses, and live in all holy conversation and godliness, 2 Pet.
3.11. Let us kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and we perish when his wrath is
kindled: Then blessed are they and only they that put their trust in him,
Psalm. 2.12. I am fallen on a third Use.

III. If Christ be Judge, then lift up your heads, and comfort your hearts, all
true Christians. Though his eyes be as a flame of fire, and his voice as the
sound of many waters, Rev. 1.14, 15. though a fiery stream issue and come forth
from before him, Dan. 7.10. though at his coming the heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the
earth and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. 2 Pet. 3.10. though as
wax melts before the fire, the wicked perish at the presence of the Judge,
yet let the righteous be glad, let them rejoice yea let them exceedingly
rejoice, Psalm. 68.2, 3. That great flame, that shall devour all things else,
shall not touch them. Let them not fear any thing, neither Sin, nor Satan, nor
Hell. They have a Friend in the Court, that is able to save them to the
uttermost, Heb. 7.25. The Judge himself that sits on the bench will be
their Advocate, and plead their cause. He is their Brother, Heb. 2.11. their
Husband, 2 Cor. 11.2. their Head, Col. 1.18. their Redeemer, Rev. 5.9. He shed
his blood for them on the Cross; shall he not then speak a word for them on the
tribunal? He appeared at his first coming like us, taking not only our
infirmities but our iniquities upon him, that at his second coming we might
be like him, and appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4. 1 John 3.2. How should
the consideration of this make us with patience bear the Cross, and run to the
Crown, make us with care to prepare for Christ's coming and with an earnest
desire and (...) Romans 8.19. to wish and long and look for it, still crying,
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly! Rev. 22.20. It remains now that we speak of
the third observable in the text, the Persons to be judged, We all: Whence
this doctrine,

III. The last Judgment shall be general. It shall be more general then
Death. Some have already escaped death as Enoch and Elijah: many shall escape
it, even all that shall be found alive at Christ's coming, 1 Cor. 15.51. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. But none shall escape judgment. All that are in the graves shall
hear Christ's voice, Joh. 5.28. All shall appear before his judgment seat, 2
Cor. 5.10. whether Small or Great, Rev. 20.12. whether Quick or Dead, Acts
10.42. whether Just or Unjust, Acts 24.15. So that the Prophets Many, Dan.
12.2. is to be expounded by the Apostles All here; All shall awake out of the
dust, for All shall stand before the tribunal; high and low, rich and poor,
one with another, from him that sits on the throne to her that grindeth at
the mill. There shall be no acception or exception of persons no sanctuary or
hiding place, no bribe, no appeal, no appearing by Proxy or Attorney, no
pleading by Counsel, but every man shall stand at the bar in his own person
to give account of himself to the Judge. Every man's actions shall be scanned,
and sifted and weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary: Every one shall be
tried and judged by Gods Law concerning every thing that he has done in his
body whether good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. Yea, not only deeds, but words shall
be accounted for, Matthew. 12.36. yea, thoughts, Acts 8.22. To. 2.16. yea, not
only commissions of evil, but omissions of good; not only the wasting of our
substance with the Prodigal, but the not employing of our talent with the
slothful servant. Thou must be reckoned with for all that God has bestowed
on thee, for all the gifts of nature, for all the means of grace, for every
Sabbath thou have enjoyed, for every Sermon thou have heard, for every blessing
received, for every correction inflicted, for the time that God has lent thee,
and the opportunitles of well-doing. Thou shall be questioned how thou have
used the members of thy body, how thou have employed the faculties of thy soul,
how thou have gotten and how thou have spent thine estate, how thou came into
and how thou have discharged thy calling. Every man shall be summoned in
particular to give an account of his stewardship, Luke 16.2. An exact and
strict survey shall be taken of all that we have done, spoken, thought; of
every roving cogitation idle word, unadvised action; of every duty omitted,
sin committed, creature abused, means neglected, time misspent. Here we take
notice but of a few matters amiss in our lives; but at that day the least
sins shall be made to appear before all the world. For as in the beams of
the Sun the least motes are discerned, so shall the smallest peccadillos be
discovered by the brightness of Christ's coming. And if the least, how much more
the greatest? If for every idle word that men speak they shall give account in
the day of judgment, Matthew. 12.36. how much more for Lying, Swearing,
Forswearing, Cursing, Blaspheming? If we must be answerable for the utmost
farthing, how much more for Covetousness Oppression, Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Theft, Adultery, Murder, Rebellion? The consideration of this strict tribunal
makes the godly themselves often to tremble and quake. Quoties diem illum
considero, toto cord contremisco, says Hierome. And if holy men be afraid,
oh what cause have profane ones to be astonished! If the righteous searcely
be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4.18. How will the
faces of all wicked wretches be covered with shame, when those abominable
sins which they now dig deep to hide from the ey of the world, shall all be
made manifest to men and angels! If ye ask me now, as they Acts 2.37. What
shall we do, that we may stand with comfort before the judgment seat of
Christ? I answer; I. Let us all judge our selves unpartially. II. Let none
judge others rashly. III. Let Magistrates judge justly.


I. Such is the Knowledge and Power of the Judge (as ye have heard) that it
will be altogether impossible for any man to hide himself from him. Neither
the mountains nor the waves will be able to cover thee from him that will
command the Sea, the Earth, Death and Hell to give-up their dead, Rev. 20.13.
But though thou can not conceal thy person, yet (which is far better) thou
may conceal thy sins from the ey of the Judge, by confessing and forsaking
them now: 1 John 1.9. Psalm. 32.5. If thou discover them now, they will be
covered then. If in the petite Court of thine own Conscience thou call thy self
to account, and condemn thy self for thy transgressions, thou shall be
acquitted at the general Assizes. Hear the Wise man's words: Prove. 28, 13. He
that hides his sins, shall not prosper; but he that confesses and forsakes
them, shall have mercy. So S. Peter, Acts 3.19. Repent ye, and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord. Every sin we committ, God sets it on our score,
till we repent: but penitent tears wash all out. This Peter having found true
by experience, Mark 14.72. and 16.7. commends a Remedy with a Probatum est.
David, Manasseh, Marie Magdalene, all Gods Saints, have proved this course
effectual. Let us take it. Let us arraign ourselves at the bar of our own
conscience, rip-up our hearts and lives, confess our sins with sorrow and
shame, condemn ourselves for them, repent unfeignedly of them, and turn from
them, and then we shall find all blotted out at that day. The Judge will take
all on himself, will plead for us, and discharge us. But if we cover our
transgressions, as Adam, by hiding our iniquity in our bosom, Job 31.33. we
shall find that as the bushes could not hide him, so neither shall the hills
hide us. For if we neglect this duty, assure we ourselves the Judge will not;
but if we forget our sins, he will remember them; and if we cast them behind
our backs, he will set them in order before our faces, Psalm. 50.21. Oh let us
not put the Judge to this, but let us save him the labor of judging by judging
ourselves. His judgment (as ye have heard) is terrible; It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Hebr. 10.31. and who may stand
in his sight when once he is angry? Psalm. 76.7. but our judging of ourselves
is prositable. For though happily for the present (as Correction, Hebr. 12.11.)
it be not joyous but grievous, yet afterward it yields the peaceable fruit
of righteousness to those that are exercised thereby. For so says the Apostle,
If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged, that is, we should
not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.31, 32, This is one Use.

II. If ye would not be judged yourselves, then judge not others. It is our
Saviors caveat, Matthew. 7.1. Judge not, that ye be not judged; yea, and the
Apostles argument in this very place, Why do thou judge thy brother? or why
do thou set at naught thy brother? for we shall all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ. So it should be read: for there is an illative
particle, (...), in the Original, which should not have been left out in the
Translation. This For ushereth-in a double argument against proud and
Pharisaicall judging, against busy and uncharitable censuring of other men, one
from the persons to be judged at the last day, another from the Judge: 1. We
shall all be judged: therefore leave meddling with thy brothers affairs, and
look well to thy self. 2. Christ is the Judge of all: therefore usurp not his
office; step not from the bar to the bench. This would be presumption and
sacrilege; the other, folly and uncharitableness. S. James argues after the
same manner, Jam. 4.11, 12. Speak not evil one of another, brethren: He that
speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil of the
law, and judges the law: but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the
law, but a judge. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy:
who art thou that judge another? What absurd and saucy impudence would it be
for prisoners, who are all in the same condemnation, to doom and damn one
another? Yet how common is this sin, this (...), this putting an oar into other
men's boats? Who is there almost that is not more curious to enquire after
others, then careful to mind his own duty? more ready to say as Peter
concerning John, John 21.21. What shall this man do? then, as they to him, Acts
2.37. What shall I do? How usual a thing is it to hear the Countryman blame
the Citizen, and the Citizen the Countryman, and both the Clergyman? how
ordinary, even among those that profess religion, to find men spying motes and
straining gnats in their brethren, and yet bearing beams and swallowing camels
in themselves! Matthew. 7.3. and 23.24. And truly for the most part such as are
so quick-sighted abroad, are, as the Lamiae, blind at home. It is a good
observation of Plutarch's, that as it is a shrewd sign that they have a durty
and an ill-ordered house of their own, who love to gad much abroad, so it is
probable that they have foul consciences in their bosoms that love to peep
much into other men's matters. This we gather from Matthew. 7.3. No ey so good at
spying a mote as that which has a beam in it. None so ready to find fault with
the wast of the ointment as he that was about to sell his Masters blood, John
12.4, 5. Know this, whoever thou art that busiest thy self with thy brothers
accounts and thy Masters office, that thy condemning of others will not excuse
thy self. I have heard it has been so sometimes in Courts below, that an
offender has escaped by impeaching his fellows: but it will be so far from
standing thee in stead at the bar above, that it will be added to the bill
of thy sins, and inflame thy rekoning. See what the Apostle says, Romans 2.1.
Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge. Leave prying
therefore into other men's actions and passing thy sentence upon them, and turn
thine ey inward, and examine thine own conscience, and I warrant thee thou shall
find matter enough at home to find fault with, and business enough to cast-up
thine own accounts, and no leisure or list at all to cast stones at others,
John 8.7.

Obj. Does not our Savior say, Matthew. 7.16, 20. By their fruits ye shall know
them? therefore judging his lawful. Or, if judging be not lawful, down with
the Magistrate.

Resp. When actions are notoriously evil, we may reprove and censure them, we
ought to beware of the persons that committ them, yea we may safely judge the
tree to be yet evil that is wont to bear such fruit: But to determine the
final condition of such a tree, and to say it shall be feuell for hell, is
high and dangerous presumption. For ought thou know God may better the
nature of it, and make it a plant of Paradise. Judge nothing therefore before
the time, 1 Cor. 4.5. nothing rashly, nothing harshly, nothing without ground,
nothing against charity. Such judging it is that the Scripture forbids.

But this makes nothing against public judging, nothing against the civil
Magistrate, whose calling is as clearly warranted by Gods Word as the
exsecution thereof is profitable to humane society. By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice: By me Princes rule and nobles, even all the Judges of
the earth, Pro. 8.15 16. The Judge here in the text would not invade the Judges
office, Luke 12.14. and commands that Caesar have his due as well as God,
Matthew. 22.21. The Apostles agree with their Master: S. Paul, Romans 13. tells
us that the Magistrate is ordained of God and that he is the Minister of God
for our good; and that we must afford him subjection tribute, fear, honor. S.
Peter says the like, 1 Pet. 11.13-17. And S. Jude sharply inveigheth against
such as despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, verse. 8. Since the
Scripture is so clear for this point, how intolerably too blame are they that
abuse this spiritual sword to blunt the edge of the temporal, and slander
Magistracy and civil Justice, as if it could not stand with Religion and
Christianity! Such affronts as these that are put upon the Judgementseat it
self me thinks should rouse up the spirit even of a Gallio, and make him,
how careless soever of other things, to take care of himself and his freehold.
God put true zele and courage into the hearts of all Magistrates, that they may
magnify their office by doing justice and judgment. That is the third Use of
the Text, That

III. Judges should judge justly. Of this but a word; Verbum sapienti. The
Apostle says, We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ: Let me
a little alter the words, and tell all Judges and Magistrates, That Christ
stands before their judgement-seats. The Aethiopians (as Franciscus Alvarez
reports) used to set many chairs about the tribunalls of Judges, imagining
their Gods would come and sit down in them. That which they did but imagine, the
Scripture assures us of, That the Lord is with Judges in the judgment, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. That God stands in the congregation of the mighty, and judges
among the Gods, Ps. 82.1. The Turkish Justicers in the Divan (they say) dare at
no time transgress the Law, because sometimes the Emperor is wont to stand
behind the hangings, and they know not when he is absent: How much more should
Christian Magistrates, and all that have to do in Courts of judicature, stand
in aw, and sin not, when they consider that the Lord is ever amongst them,
and though they see him not, yet he takes notice of every person, and
observes every particular; the ground and menaging, and issue of every suit;
what conscience the Jury make of their oath; the manner and motives of the
Lawyers pleading, and of the Judges giving sentence! How should this make them
all (as Jehoshaphat enjoyneth, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.) take heed what they do;
especially the Judge, who being Superintendent over the whole affair, is
accountable not only for his own actions, but for whatsoever miscarriages he
might have hindered, or should have punished, and did not. Let every one
therefore that sits on the Bench think of that dreadful Tribunal in the
Text, and let him not so much look about him, or below him, to consider his
power, as above him, to consider him that gave him his commission, and to whom
he must render an account. In some countries Judges were pictured without
eyes, and Justice commonly is so: But God grant our Judges and Justices may
have their eyes in their heads, and fix one on him that sees in secret, and
the other on the cause that is brought before them. And indeed let them but
bethink and bespeak themselves with Job, What shall we do when God rises up?
and when he visits, what shall we answer him? Job 31.14. and they will
readily follow Jobs practice, and not withhold the poor from their desire, nor
cause the eyes of the widow to fail, nor lift up their hand against the
fatherless, though they see their help in the gate, verse. 16, 21. They will
follow the Prophets counsel, Isa. 33.15. They will walk righteously, speak
uprightly, despise the gain of oppressions, and shake their hands from holding
of bribes; They will neither suffer the golden eloquence of Advocates that
plead in public, nor the eloquent gold of such as would bribe in private, to
blind their eyes, and cause them to pervert or deny or delay justice; They will
contemn the favors, and frowns, and threats of men, though never so mighty or
many; They will not be charmed by letters, or suits; they will not be led by
passion, or prejudice, or partiality; but they will hear the small as well as
the great, Deuteronomy. 1.17. and punish the great as well as the small, and
administer justice without respect of persons. Thus righteous will Judges be
in their judgments, if they will sadly and frequently fix their thoughts on
the judgment seat of Christ. They will serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
with trembling, Psalm. 2.11. they will fear to offend him, and be careful to
please and imitate him: And so doing, (besides the many positive blessings that
shall flow from their judgement-seats) they shall be a means to prevent and
remove temporal judgments from the places where they live; and when Death
shall summon them hence, they shall be able to stand in the judgment at the
general Assizes; and when unrighteous Judges and mighty sinners shall be
doomed to mighty torments, they shall receive a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give them at that day; and not to them
only, but to all them also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. To whom with
the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

