HONORATISSIMO CELEBERRIMOQUE VIRO, PROSAPIA NOBILISSIMA SIMVL ET SVIS ILLVSTRI
MERITIS,

IN PARLIAMENTARIO REGNI ANGLICANI CONSESSV SENATORI EXIMIO,

MECAENATI SVO NATIVO, SED CONSILIO CONSVETVDINEQVE CONFIRMATIORI,

CERTE MVLTIS NOMINIBUS PLURIMUM NEC VNQUAM SATIS OBSERVANDO,

GULIELMO PIERREPONTE ARMIGERO;

(CUJUS BENEFICIA RELIGIOSO QUODAM SILENTIO SUSPICERE AC REVERERI, QUAM
PROTERERE PROFANAREQUE SERMON NIMIS INCONGRVO SATIUS EST VISVM,)

TRACTATVS DUOS SEQUENTES (QUORUM ALTER PRIORIS SOBOLES EST ET APPENDIX,)

ANIMI SUI JUXT A AFQUE OFFICII, SED IMPAR UTRIUSQUE SYMBOLUM, L.M.D.D.C.Q.

Laurentius Sarson.

To the Reader.
The less skillful Reader may omit what is contained between page 25. and page
69. The rest was delivered in Sermons, and is both more practical and facile.

1. TIM. 1.15. This is a faithful saying ( in another translation, a true
saying) and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief.


WE may observe in this Scripture three general parts: First, the (...), the
Preface, or introduction to a doctrine preached by S. Paul, This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance. Secondly, the doctrine it self, Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners: I may fitly apply to my Text, what
is spoken of the Church, Cant. 7.2. Thy belly is a heap of wheat hedged in with
lillies. Thirdly, the (...), or Epilogue, whereof I am chief. The Preface
contains his commendation of the doctrine, and the Epilogue the application of
it to himself. Here Is meat, and sauce, and a stomach. We have in the doctrine
(...), as (...) in Clem. Alex. Admonit. ad Gentes.
spiritual food, the bread of life, the Manna which came down from heaven,
Christ's merits, sinners redemption. Here Is meat which should need no sauce were
not our stomachs vitiated, and squeamish of what most nutritive.

S. Paul in the end of the verse intimates his hungring and thirsting after
Christ's merits; For those words, of whom I am chief, although they have other
respects and moments not to be omitted, are the yawning or gasping of an
hungry soul, a groan under the weight of sin, a panting after nearer union
with Christ. Such is the stomach of each Christian, of all who are apprehensive
of their own emptiness, and affected with it, of all who have not scared
consciences, hardened hearts, and stupefied affections. These words are
likewise an application of Christ's merits to himself, Christ came into the
world to save sinners; such only efficaciously, as are, or shall be wearied
with their sins, and weary of them: such as acknowledge their sins, and
desire to be delivered from the guilt, and from the stain of them; from the
punishment and from the practice of sin; and find that they are unable to
relieve themselves, unable to justify or sanctify themselves; and therefore
are willing to accept of a Savior.

The last particle of the verse is, as you see, vox esurientis, and vox
mendicantis, and vox comedentis. I doubt not but many an honest soul here
present reads in his own heart, what no language can express, S. Paul's
affections resulting from the conjunction of two of his apprehensions expressed
in my Text, one of his own spiritual wants, the other of Gods free grace in
Christ, with what intention of love and desire, with what comfort, with what
devotion, with what zeal he embraced a Savior. We have here a full resemblance
of that in the Psalmist, Psalm. 81.10. I am the Lord thy God which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, open thy mouth wide (harcebh-pica, dilare thy mouth)
and I will fill it. If here be any who have not tasted how good and gracious
the Lord is, here is also sauce sufficient to commend unto their palates the
Gospel-provision set before them, It Is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance: (...) is the same that (...), equivalent to (...), and to (...)
used by our Savior. (...) (in Hebrew) signifies both true and faithful. See
He^^sius in his P^^^^gomena in ^^er^itat. sacr. And upon Matthew. 12.20. See
notes upon the word (...) in Theocritus his syrinx, cidyll. 32.
Nothing is more usual, then that when a word has several significations,
another word, whether in the same or in a distinct language, having properly
one of the significations, should be enlarged to the rest: (...) faithful, is
the same that (...) true.

These words, I conceive, have a double aspect, one to S. Paul, another to the
doctrine preached by him: Each brings forth twins:

First, they contain the qualities, the value, the worth, the truth and
acceptablenesse of the doctrine.

Secondly, they precede the doctrine; are a preface, an introduction to it. I
shall defer the first of these habitudes till I come to the doctrine it self.

That respect also which they have to S. Paul is double: The words speak him
who wrote them, a Saint; but may be considered as the language of one that had
been a Saul, a persecutour, (that is, of a convert, reflecting upon his
sins:) or as the words of a preacher of the Gospel. Under the former
relation, they may be termed vox exultantis; and under the other, vox
evangelizantis.

I shall premise to the main doctrine somewhat upon the words preceding, as
they are a preface or introduction; moreover as they have respect to S. Paul.

First of the first, as these words, This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptance, are a preface or introduction to the doctrine following, they
afford us this observation, viz. That men's hearts are so perverse about
spiritual things, that art, rhetoric, an holy craft and wiliness is
necessary in the delivery of points of greatest concernment, of greatest
advantage, such as hold out to them salvation. We must not conceive that S.
Paul's Epistles written to Timothy, concerned Timothy alone; each Epistle in the
New Testament, to whomsoever it is inscribed, may serve for the instruction of
each sinner (those excepted, who by the sin against the holy Ghost have
debarred themselves from heaven) and of each convert. Wicked men are averse
from attending to what would conduce most to their welfare. First I shall clear
the (...); and then the (...).

That it is so, is evinced from those many aggravations of natural men's
perverseness in Scripture.

First, from plain and direct expressions of man's perverseness. The 13. of the
2. of Jeremy is to this purpose very accommodate; For my people have committed
two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them
out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water. See also Jer. 5.3. O
Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have sticken them, but they have
not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction: they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have refused to
return. Of many other Scriptures suitable to this occasion, I shall commend to
you only the first of the Proverbs, Wisdom utters her voice in the chief
places of concourse, stretches out her hand, plays the Oratresse both for
elocution and action: but her auditors set at naught her counsel, would none
of her reproof.

Secondly, from those contained in comparisons of men with beasts. Man is
compared to the beast that perishes, Psalm. 49.12. to the dromedary in the
wilderness, Jer. 2.24. to a wild asses colt, Job 11.12. to the deaf adder,
Psalm. 58.4. Their thoughts (like cockatrice eggs) break out into viperous
words and actions. See R.D. Kimch. upon the text.
to cockatrices and spiders, Esaias 59.5. to a horse rushing into the battle,
Jer. 8.6. Brutes, because they want reason, often run away from those that would
feed them, and perform to them other good offices, and run into danger.

The dromedary in the wilderness cannot be taken but in her month, when she
is bagg'd. The wild asses colt is the wildest of wild asses. The deaf adder,
although by spitting out his poison he might renew his age, stops his ears,
by applying one to the earth, and covering the other with his tail, lest he
should hear the voice of the charmer. The war-horse rusheth upon the pikes,
upon destruction.

Man is more brutish then beasts, then the dullest of beasts, Esa. 1.3. The ox
knows his owner, and ass his masters crib; but Israel does not know, my
people does not consider. Here Is what astonisheth both heaven and earth. God
lays open his grievances to the heavens, and to the earth, things inanimate;
as if those were more intelligent, and more ingenious then men. Israel
neglected his owner and his nourisher, God who had chosen him for a peculiar
possession, who constantly, sometimes by his extraordinary providence, had
maintained him. The ox and the ass gave place to their owner and master in the
stable at Bethlehem, when as men denied him room in the inn. But this morosity
might proceed from a venial ignorance; falls much short of that more then
brutish stupidity, which is here described. Wicked men do not only refuse
Christ, an object of their beneficence in his poor members; but likewise
offering to provide for them: They know that godliness is great gain, has the
promises of this life and that to come, and yet reject it.

In the New Testament, wicked men are compared to dogs and swine, Matthew. 7.6.
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you.
Nihil aliud est totus mundus ante conversionem, nisi aut hara porcorum, vel
colluvies rabidorum canum. Aug.
Impure men are here compared to creatures unclean according to the Law, dogs
and swine. Should you cast what is precious to swine, they are ready to trample
it ((...)) inter pedes suos: if to dogs, they will turn again and bite you. But
to trample under their feet, and to turn again, and to rent those that come
near them, agree to the nature of both those creatures. In every wicked man
there is something answerable to each of those ill conditions in dogs and
swine. They neglect, contemn, and vilify grace and mercy offered in Christ:
They tread under foot the Son of God, count the blood of the Covenant an
unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29.

Thirdly, from Gods complaining of sin and sinners. This in Greek is called
(...), and is defined (...), vituperatio, utpote eorum qui contemnunt, aut
negligunt. God complains to the heavens and to the earth, that he had nourished
and brought up children, who rebelled against him, Esa. 1.2.

Fourthly, from Gods groaning under men's stubborn and stiff-necked rebellion.
He complains of Israel with a sigh, Esa. 1.4. Ah sinful nation, a people laden
with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters; they have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are
gone away backward. It Is a small thing that the whole creation groneth under
man's sin, and travelleth together in pain, Romans 8.22. God himself is pressed
with men's iniquities, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, Amos 2.13.
The Almighty expresses another sigh, Esa. 1.24. Ah, I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.

Fifthly, from God upbraiding such as have been resolute in impenitency, Christ
upbraided the cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they
repented not, Matthew. 11.20. God in holy Scriptures by many accusations, and
reprehensions, and chidings of sinners, expostulations with them, redargutions
of their perverse ways, lamentings for their destruction, expresses
emphatically men's averseness from terms of eternal peace and salvation. I may
add, that promises and threatenings are often repeated, that sometimes the hearts
of Gods children unless they be mollified with afflictions, will not kindly
receive the impressions of the Spirit. I shall have occasion of illustrating
these particulars, when I show that Christ came into the world to save sinners.
No believer so completely closes with Christ, and promises founded in him, as
that he may not seasonably be the object of exhortations, of motives and
inducements to nearer union with a Savior. The Israelites in their journey to
Canaan had a pull-back-inclination toward Egypt. Lots wife looked back toward
Sodom. David must be afflicted that he may learn Gods statutes. So you have
the (...) of the doctrine proved. I shall be brief in the (...).

Wicked men have sin reigning in them: And there is in each regenerate
person, together with the kingdom of David the house of Saul. Grace and lust
have junctas habitationes, though not divisum imperium: though they reign not
together, yet they dwell together. They exist not only prope, but una; are not
only juxta se posita, but likewise mutuo se penetrantia. They have, though not
the same father, yet the same mother; and as they are sisters, so also twins;
are together in the womb, and born together; in godly men together in each
faculty, and in each good action. There Is iniquity in the best of our
performances. The godly fall so far short of the closest union possible with
Christ, as they fall short of integrity, of perfection in grace. The godly are
not so loosed from themselves, as that S. Paul may imitate the Areopagites,
omit (...), when he speaks to them about spiritual things. He Is wont to
premise insinuations: Sometimes he conciliates affection by loving
compellations; the word Brethren is frequent with him: Sometimes by mild and
gentle entreatings, I beseech you, be followers of me, 1. Cor. 4.16. Sometimes
by both joined together, I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of
God, that you give up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service, Romans 12.1.

In my Text there is insinuatio ex re ^^ta, and ipsis causae visceribus sumta.
And insinuation of this kind is most potent. We are ready always to enquire
cui bono. If we search all Rhetoricks cells, we shall not find any trope or
figure, which was at any time so impudent or imprudent, as to persuade any
thing which had not faciem boni. The unjust judge, (Luke 18.) although he
neither feared God, nor regarded man, had his end in avenging the widow of her
adversary. He did it ad redimendum vexationem: because the widow troubles me,
I will avenge her, left by her continual coming she weary me.

S. Paul borrows a preface from his doctrine: that furnishes him with
arguments most prevalent over men's affections. It Is true and worthy of all
acceptance. Here Is Themist. Orat. 9.
(...), aditus illustris. The Rhetoricians rule concerning Exordium's is
observed: Neither is he wanting in the observance of that other rule prescribed
by Horace to Poets, (useful also for Orators,) Si vis me flere, dolendum est
Primum ipsi tibi. Himself is affected with what he writes to others.

In the verse next but one before, he commemorates that he had been a
blasphemer, a persecutour, and injurious. He adds in that verse, that he
obtained mercy. In the 14. verse he mentions his pledges of mercy obtained;
of his justification, viz. his faith and love. These graces assured him of Gods
favor. In the 15. verse he celebrates and crowns the fountain of all mercy and
grace: It Is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners. His affections strive with his
faith, and as if more nimble, first drop out of his pen, get the first vent and
expression, preface to the Gospel-doctrine he believed. So I am fallen upon the
words of the preface, as they have respect to S. Paul.

They are as so considered, in the first place (vox conversi peccatoris in
Christo exultantis) the voice of a convert triumphing in Gods free grace in
Christ. He who had so much used Esaus hands, now has got Jacobs voice: and the
context will vindicate him from dissimulation. Here Is lumen non siccum, sed
affectibus maceratum. Here are good tidings, if true; and they are as true as
profitable to souls which have been enthralled under sin and Satan. They are
as true as truth it self. That Christ come into the world to save sinners, is
the only cordial to a sinne-sick soul. Here is (...): Moreover such truth as
is suitable to the stomach, as well as pleasing to the palate, such truth as
apports nourishment to each true Christian. I shall speak of the truth and
acceptablenesse of the doctrine delivered by S. Paul, hereafter.

You see how the words of the preface respected S. Paul a sinner: I shall now
explain them more largely, as they are vox evangelizantis, as they are the
words of Paul a preacher of the Gospel.

The words of the Preface may be considered as respecting S. Paul, a preacher
of the Gospel, both as they are a preface, and as they contain the qualities of
the following doctrine. As referred to him under the first of those notions,
they commend unto us those bowels of pity, and that sincerity which he used in
the dispensing of Gospel Truths. As he freely received, so he freely and
without envy gives: with the lepers (2. Kings 7.9.) apprehends he should
contract guilt and blame to himself, if he withheld good tidings: himself eadem
opera triumphs in the rich and sure mercies of the Gospel, and with best
advantage commends them to others.

The words of the preface, as they contain the qualities of the doctrine
following, referred to S. Paul, speak him one which taught truth; moreover such
truth as was worthy of all acceptance.

1. Gods faithful Ministers, such as labor sincerely in Gods vineyard, preach
truth.

2. What is worthy of all acceptance.

3. They join these two together.

First of the first. Those who are faithful in the ministry preach truth.
This has been their constant practice: To give instances of all would take up
more time then is allowed me. I must in the proof of the point rather use an
example, then an enumeration. S. Paul, as if it was decreed that truth should
viam invenire vel facere, uses the profession of it sometimes for a preface,
and sometimes for an apology; for a preface in my Text, This is a faithful
saying: for an apology, Acts 26.25. I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak
forth the words of truth and soberness: for a preface and apology together,
Romans 9.1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me
witness in the holy Ghost. You see the practice of S. Paul; and he thought
also that he had the Spirit of God, 1. Cor. 7.40.

This argumentation although from an example, is valid. We may argue from a
part to the whole in essentialls. And to be well affected toward the truth, is
essential to each sincere preacher of the Gospel. Should we esteem the 17. of
the third of the Epistle to the Philippians, and the sixteenth of the fourth of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, in which S. Paul exhorts us to be
followers of him, to be counsel rather then precept, to have been dictated by a
private spirit; yet we could not but acknowledge the first of the 11. of the
first to the Corinthians, an Oracle: there he says, Be ye followers of me,
even as I am also of Christ: Truth is Christ's banner. The Apostles, and all who
have been his sectatours, have fought under it, and hoc signo vicerunt. Christ
is truth it self, archetypall truth. He is truth essentially, so could not but
use it in his expressions, whether theoreticall or practical. His enemies the
Pharisees and Herodians make a glorious confession, Matthew. 22.16. We know that
thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for
any man; for thou regardest not the person of men. And in John 8.40. Ye seek to
kill me a man that has told you the truth which I have heard of God. He was
born to this end, that he should bear witness of the truth, Joh. 18.37. He was
truth according to his essence, likewise according to his offices. He was, and
likewise taught, and by holy violence imposed upon his subjects the true way to
salvation. He is the way, the truth, and the life, Joh. 14.6. He is full of
grace and truth, Joh. 1.14. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. We cannot be saved by the Law; the new
Covenant, that of grace is the true way to heaven.

The sweetness of this truth is described in the Canticles, As the apple tree
among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved amongst the sons; I sat down
under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste, Cant.
2.3. The fruit of this beloved one is the good tidings of the Gospel. The hands
of those who open to Christ (who admit him into their souls) drop with myrrh,
Can. 5.5. Obedience is truth propagated (veritas protensa). Truth, like the
precious ointment wherewith the high Priests were installed, runs down from the
head into the skirts of each Christians garments. The anointing which ye have
received of him abides in you: and this anointing is truth, 1. Joh. 2.27.

But neither do I deny that (mor nghobher ngal cappoth hammanghul) myrrha
transiens super manubria serae, may fitly be interpreted grace disposing us to
admit truth, when it knocks at the doors of our hearts. Myrrh passing upon
the handles of the lock, is grace oyling the locks of our hearts: A kingdom
divided against it self cannot stand. Those who invent, or propagate falsehood,
are Satan's agents. Christ prays to the Father for his disciples (Joh. 17.17.)
that he would sanctify them through his truth. He promises his disciples
another Comforter, who should abide with them for ever, even the spirit of
truth, Joh. 14.16, 17. cap. 15.26. he foretells that the Spirit of truth
should guide them into all truth, Joh. 16.13. Christ is the head of truth,
Alpha and Omega, Apoc. 1.11. His Ministers the 24. Elders have the next place
to him. Apoc. 4:4. These are the neck of truth, Beta and Psi. With the Grecians
the Alphabet was truths statue: Veritas effingebatur ex literis Graecis, cujus
caput ex a and o, collum ex b and, and caetera deinceps membra ex literis
prioribus, deinceps ex sequentibus and posterioribus per seriem quandam. All
Gods children, and so his faithful Ministers are incorporated into truth: Gods
Ministers are ambassadors and agents for the God of truth, (and as the Jews
are wont to say in another sense) speak in the language of him that sent them.
They are anointed with the Spirit of truth.

You have proof of the point a posteriori and a priori. Here an objection is
obvious: Do none of those who have devoted themselves to the preaching of the
Gospel, swerve from truth?

I acknowledge that they frequently do. I answer, first that I spoke concerning
such as were sincere in the ministry. There are ravenous wolves in lambs
attire: many out of covetousness, pretend what ambition will not suffer them
to perform. If we roll over Ecclesiastical histories, we shall find that
ambition created all the ancient errors and heresies. Too many nowadayes are
readier to close with errors hatchd by Papists, and to arrogate to themselves
to be the first inventers of them, then to retain truth professed by those who
have ever been thought Orthodox. I yield that some betrusted with most, are
most defective in their duties. Some mancipated to themselves, abound in
dissimulation. I spoke of such as were faithful laborers in Gods harvest;
such preach not themselves, not their own inventions, but the truth of the
Gospel. Secondly, there are relics of weakness, and imperfection, and
darkness in Gods children: they sometimes embrace a cloud in stead of a
goddess. I shall now propound to you some considerations which commend truth
to us, and will be to us so many motives to love it, and use it.

First, true doctrine is to be preferred before false, because it is more firm
and permanent. Plato says in his first book de legib^^, (...). We may
pronounce the same of truth, (...). Errors and heresies are ((...))
short-lived. So much is abundantly confirmed by Ecclesiastical histories.

Secondly, truth is of a prevailing nature. He that sat upon the white horse
(Revel. 6.2.) had a bow, and a crow^ was given to him, and he went forth
conquering and to conquer. We are assured that Christ is risen from the dead
(howsoever the Jews oppugn that truth) because all who at any time rise up
against him, fall.

Thirdly, (...). Truth is sweet (as Mercuries Priests were wont to say when
they eat their figgs)* Falsehood, lies, errors, heresies are of a contrary
quality. We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in
company, Psalm. 55.14. My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in
the Lord, Psalm. 104.34. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea sweeter th^n
honey to my mouth. Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate
every false way, Psalm. 119.103, 104. They shall hear my words, for they are
sweet, Psalm. 141.6*

What Is true may be bitter and unpleasant, but this is by accident, besides the
nature of truth. The unpleasantnesse is not to be imputed to truth, but to the
subject, the matter about which it is conversant: Who wish that this or that
report may prove false, express no dislike of truth. They could wish at the
same time the contrary was true. Those palates are vitiated, diseased,
non-sensicall, which disrellish truth. Lactantius says wittily and truly (
Divin. Instit. epitom. c. 6.) Veritas licet ad praesens sit insuavie, tamen cum
fructus ejus atque utilitas apparuerit, non edium pariet (ut ait Poeta) sed
gratiam. All truth is amiable, but especially the truths of Christian religion.
Evangelicall truths are Solomon's (imrei-nongham) eloquia jucunditatis, Prove.
16.24. They are as the honey-combe, sweet to the soul, and healing to the
bones. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to
behold the sun, Eccles. 11.7. The Commeedians (...) (life is sweet) is a good
comment upon this Text. But neither is that of the Psalmist to be pretermitted
in its explication, Gods word is a light to our feet, and a lantern to our
steps.

Fourthly, truth is the power of God to the conversion of souls.

Fifthly, truth is spiritually nutritive of the soul. Painted fire will not
burn. Meat received only in a dream will not nourish. Imaginary truth,
Chimera's will not refresh and feed the soul. Error in the judgment is wont
to side with perverseness in the will and affections, wickedness in life and
conversation. Such is the destiny and lot of falsehood. If any doctrines not
faithful should be able to advance sanctity, Papists tenants concerning a
possibility of fulfilling the Law, and concerning merit, should be they. But we
see it is quite otherwise: no sect in the world is more defective in purity of
life. God, although wont often to work good out of evil, never cooperates with
evil means which spoil him of his glory. The Gospel is the bread of life,
pabulum animarum. As it is the power of God to the conversion of sinners, so
likewise to the increase of grace.

Sixthly, truth is of an healing nature.

2. In the next place, Gods Ministers preach what is worthy of all acceptance:
deliver honorable truths, likewise precious truths. They preach axioms.
(...), may be taken (...). Then (...), shall be the same that (...). Here Is
(...). The words are capable likewise of another construction, viz. to be
worthy of all acceptance shall not formally signify the truth of the
doctrine, that it is such as may safely be received, believed; but the
comfortablenesse of it, the benefit and advantage from what signified by it.

What S. Paul here expresses may in part be comprehended by the affections of
the Argives, when by the Romans delivered from the tyranny of the Macedonians
and Spartans, Quae gaudia, quae vociferationes fuerunt? quid florum in Consulem
profuderunt? The Praeco in the quinquenniall games at Nemea, is forced to
pronounce the word Liberty, iterum iterumque. It concerns not in regard of my
present use of the story, whether the falling of that fowl out of the air to
the ground ought rather to be imputed to rarefaction, or vertiginousnesse
together with astonishment, an effect thereof. Plutarch makes mention of both
these reasons in his Flaminius, and clearly prefers the latter in his Pompey.
The air was so dissipated with their acclamations, ut corvi fortuito
supervolantes, in stadium deciderent. They entertained that news of liberty as
worthy of acceptance. 'Twas to be wished that thousands were not duller in
their affections, when spiritual liberty is offered; when Christ offers to
rescue us from our ghostly enemies, from those arch-tyrants sin and Satan.
Certainly this news ought to be welcomed with greater enlargement of
affections, with fuller expressions of joy and thankfulness. Here Is news
worthy of all acceptance.

3. Truth and acceptablenesse concur together in the doctrine of Gods
faithful Ministers. Truth and acceptablenesse, I say, not truth and
acceptance. When light came into the world, when truth was incarnated, sons
of Belial preferred darkness before light. Gospel Truths are worthy of all
acceptance. That they are not at all times accepted, is to be imputed unto the
unworthiness of some to whom they are offered. There Is defectivenesse in such
Ministers, in whose doctrine truth, and worthiness of acceptance meet not
together. Some out of pusillanimity, ambition, or covetousness, wholly
accommodate their doctrine to the spirits of vain men to whom they preach;
altogether neglect truth, unless it serve as a stalking-horse to their own
ends. Others busy themselves and disturb the world with empty and worthless
curiosities. Luther justly complained of the Schoolmen, that they had changed
uses into utrums. Some spider-wits spin out themselves into cobwebs.

There are some truths not worthy of all acceptance. Probable conjectures are
much to be preferred before palpable falsehood; certain truth before
conjectures; acceptable truth before frivolous knowledge: what truths are
worthy of all acceptance, ought to have the first place in our estimations, in
our acceptations. Labor not for the meat which perishes.

I may here add an opportune caution. No one ought to arrogate such truth and
acceptablenesse to his own judgment, as may fit it for a rule to be imposed
upon others. Learned D. Davenant in his little Treatise zealous for the peace
of the Church, determines well, That the Papists, should they not err in
fundamentals, yet were not to be received into union and communion, because
they obtrude upon others for a rule of doctrine and manners, the Popes feigned
infallibility.

After this caution an advertisement will be seasonable. That we may be enabled
to preach as we ought, truths worthy of all acceptance, knowledge is
necessary. Truths statue (as I said) consisted of the Alphabet. Ignorant
Doctors are unworthy deliverers of truths worthy all acceptance. We speak
what we know, says our Savior, Joh. 3.11: We know what we worship, Joh. 4.22.
Those who take upon them to be Christ's Ministers, must propound their Master
for a pattern. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, 2. Tim. 2.15.

To divide rightly the word of truth requires knowledge, and knowledge
sufficient for this task nowadayes prerequires industry. (...), etc. The spirit
of prophecy rested upon many in the Primitive times; Eusebius says, upon some
in his age. I cannot assent to Miltiades (quoted by Eusebius out of
Apollinarius) affirming that the gift of prophesying shall remain in each
Church till Christ's last coming. His words are these, (...). See Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 17.
We have no warrant to expect it, after truth propagated, and sufficiently
confirmd by former miracles.

As we prefer the newest Philosophy, so the ancientest Divinity. We may
justly suspect them of falsehood and delusions who arrogate to themselves to
utter Oracles, to teach by revelation. Lactant. de fall. sap. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Anaxagoras complained, circumfasa esse omnia tenebri^. Empedocles, augustas
esse sensuum semitas. Democritus, quasi in puteo quodam sic alto, ut fundus sic
nullus, veritatem jacere de^^ersam. The well is deep, and these wanted buckets
wherewith to draw: we have a Doctor, who if we be not wanting to our selves
will direct us into truth, but who is not wont to expend miracles where
ordinary means may be had. We ought to be diligent in our private callings, sed
labor est inhibere volantes.

I have heard it objected against our Clergy, that many of those who were more
sober and temperate made it their chief work ( proficere rather then prodesse)
to inform themselves, more then to instruct others; to know, rather then to
teach. Some by their ambition of being Seraphims, are hindered from being
Angels; they are so much for illumination, that they are nothing at all for
ministry. (...). Fieri solet ut quicquid pauci assequi possunt, id in multorum
reprehensionem incurrat. Ptolem. Tetrab. lib. 1. cap. 1. See also Petiscus in
his Epistle prefixed to his Trigonometrie, edit. 1. The author of nuncius
propheticus, toward the end of his apology for humane learning.
I easily believe what a learned Divine, when some alleged, that he bestowed
his time in unprofitable studies, apologiz'd for himself, That they were not
angry with him for his ignorance, but for his knowledge; that he neglected not
what they knew, though he studied some things whereof they were ignorant: but
conceive also, against the other extreme, that none ought to live to
themselves; that it is not sufficient that men do no hurt, but that they are
bound to do good: likewise, that they ought to perform such offices to those
committed to their charge, as their places require. Contemplation, when
occasion of being useful to others is offered, especially if we have admitted
of any engagement, must strike sail to practice.

Knowledge alone neither commends us to God, or good men. The devils know more
then any mortal. Many of the school affirm, that the most glorious, the most
illuminated of all the Angels fell, that which was the measure of the
perfections, and durations of the rest, might be called avum. Lombard ( sent.
lib. 2. did. 9.) says, Aliqui Angeli de singulis ordinibus ceciderunt: de
ordine namque superiori Lucifer ille fuit, quo nullus dignior conditus fuit.
Apostolus etiam principatus and potestates tenebrarum nominat, ostendens de
ordinibus illi^ cecidisse. Any man's knowledge is unprofitable, whilst
sequestrated for pride, and used only in such ways as are most subservient to
vainglory.

It Is a great question, whether or no those did well who published our Saviors
miracles, when he had charged them to tell no man. Aquinas says 2.2^. q. 104.
art. 4. Dominus curatis dixit, Videte ne quis sciat, non quaesi intendens eos
per virtutem divini praecepti obligare; sed (sicut Gregor. 19. moral. c. 18. a
med.) servis suis se sequentibus exemplum dedit, ut ipsi quidem virtutes suas
occultare desiderent, and tamen ut alii eorum exemplo proficiant, prodantur
inviti.

I had now done with the first part of my Text, but that a direction to another
mean conducible to the delivery of faithful and most acceptable doctrine is
very convenient. Religion must be joined with knowledge. Many which abound in
knowledge, for want of grace invent falsehood, deliver not truth, much less
truth worthy of all acceptance. Men enabled by religion, deliver saving truths
more feelingly, more fully, and more easily.

These are like such as speak of a country or city which they have seen, which
they have before their eyes: others discourse of spiritual things, as if they
had seen them only in maps. Experimental knowledge avails most to the
efficacious preaching of Theological truths.

I have done with the testimony, This is a faithful and true saying: I come
now ad rem testatam, the doctrine it self, Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners. I shall in the handling of these words only give you summa rerum
capita, upon which as I mention them, you may expatiate by your larger
meditations.

Mankind was in a lost condition, therefore is fitly represented unto us by the
lost groat, the lost sheep, and the prodigal child, Luke 15. As in a lost
condition, so in a slavish condition, captivated by sin and Satan; which
condition was so much the more wretched, in that we wanted due apprehensions of
our own misery. We were not only Satan's captives, but mancipated to sin, and
rebels against God. We were prone and headling into our own destruction, we
stood in need of one to seek us, in that we went astray; of one to save us, in
that we were captivated; one to pardon us, in that we had contumaciously
rebelled against our Creator. These three degrees of man's wretchedness are
comprehended in the word sinners. But in this Text perhaps, such are called
sinners, who are sensible of their sins. Christ only saves such as conceive
themselves to stand in need of deliverance. He only heals such as stand in
need of a Physician, that is, such as are affected with a sense of their
maladies. I answer, to save has a double acception; sometimes it is the same
that to pay a ransom for another, or others; to give satisfaction for their
offenses: In this sense Christ may be said to save all, even such as are not
affected with their need of a Savior. Sometimes to save implies somewhat more,
to wit, after the ransom paid, to take out of the hand, out of the power of
the enemy such as are ransomed. It Is said concerning Lot, that while he
lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and the hand of his wife, and upon
the hand of his two daughters, the Lord being merciful unto him: and they
brought him forth, and set him without the city, Genesis 19.16. Christ by the
powerful workings of his Spirit, haleth such as shall be saved out of the
dominion of sin and Satan, draws them to the Father. Here is redemption
applied. None are thus saved, but such as are apprehensive of their natural
bondage. But the sense of our own wants, and such graces as are wrought into
the hearts of all that shall be saved from eternal punishments, are to be
attributed to Christ's sufferings. Grace both preventing, and concomitant, and
subsequent, that is, grace predisposing, and grace actually converting, and
grace preserving us in a state of salvation, in Gods favor, were purchased by
Christ. He came into the world to pay a sufficient price, for the redemption of
all mankind; but to save efficaciously, such as should believe on him. I shall
take sinners according to the three dimensions aforementioned, and salvation
in its largest extent. Christ came to save those who were in so forlorn a
condition, that they were even past sense of their misery.

First, Christ came. Secondly, he came to save. Thirdly, he came to save
sinners.

I shall premise a brief explication of the words Christ and Jesus, and then
endeavor to illustrate these propositions: Christ is the same that anointed.
He is called Messiah from the Chaldee participle (...) unctus, originally from
the Hebrew verb (...) unxit. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: the
scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness. Thou love
righteousness, and hate wickedness: therefore God, thy God, has anointed
thee with the (...) Oleum laetitiae magnitudo est oblectationis, Alsheach in
locum.
oil of gladness (...) Above thy fellows, viz. perfect righteous men that have
not sinned. Alsheach ibid. Perhaps he cast this dart at Christ. What he says
is true, if applied to Scribes and Pharisees, who in their own opinion were
righteous. A little after, (...) Because that blessed one loved Israel more
then the Heathen, and more then, Angels of ministry. Companions also may
signify, says he, such as have not merited: (...) because thou shall receive
their part in the garden of Eden. (...) Myrrh, and Aloes, and Cassia are
garments of honor ( or precious garments) of the soul of the righteous.
Clemens Alexandrinus agreeably upon that in the 9. verse of the Psalm quoted,
(Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in gold of Ophir) says well; (...).
P^d^gog. l. 2. c. 10.
above thy fellows, Psalm. 45.6, 7.

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at
liberty them that are bruis^d, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, Esa.
61.1, 2. Luke 4.18, 19. Our Savior (as Bishop Andrews thinks) was anointed
only according to his humane nature. I should rather think, that as he was
(...), he was Christ as well as Jesus. All who at any time have been anointed
by God, first, have been set apart for some office, some encounter (or agony);
secondly, enabled, at least in some measure, to perform what they were designed
for: thirdly, were fragrant in the nostrills even of God himself. Those who
were anointed in regard of the first qualification, were sacred persons. By
virtue of the second, they were rendered more nimble and cheerful in the
performance of their duties* The third contains their interest in others
affections. From these resulteth gladness (or joy) in themselves. We may by
gladness perhaps (not unseasonably) understand vigor of courage, and strength
(like oil) above the lees of fear, and the reach of danger; in the seventh
comma of the 45. Palm. The 3, 4, and 5. verses of that Psalm, seem to inform
us, whither the anointing attributed to our Savior alludes. He Is such a
champion against ignorance, sin, Satan, hell; against all the power of
darkness, as cannot operam and oleum perdere. Our Savior according to his
divine nature, by reason of infinite perfection, was incapable of any accession
of abilities, yet was anointed, to wit, set apart (as I may speak with
reverence) and dissigned for the Mediatourship, by the Senate of the sacred
Trinity so ordering. In our nature assumed he suffered for our sins, so
performed the office of a Priest. Illuminating and sanctifying grace, which he
purchased for us by his sufferings, are duly ascribed to him, and speak him a
Prophet and a King. Christ who according to his divine nature, had essential
dominion over all creatures, as God-man was appointed the heir of all things.
According to his humane nature he was anointed with the holy Ghost. He was
anointed in his two natures, according to several capacities, but so as he was
but one Priest, one Prophet, one King, one Mediator. God the Son was active,
the humane nature passive in the union, yet both united are one Christ. Christ's
performances for his Church, with their fragrancy and savor of rest, refresh
both God and man. God the Father pronounces concerning him, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased. Christ was inaugurated at his baptism, but
anointed in Absurdissimum est ut credamus Christu^ cum jam triginta annorum
esset, accepisse Spiritum sanctum, cum Johannes a quo baptizatus est, spiritu
sancto repletus fuerit jam inde ab utero matris, tametsi modo long inferiori
quam Christus. Aug. de Trin. lib. 15. c. 26.
the instant of the union of his two natures. He was Christ the Lord at his
birth, Luke 2.11. The Lords Christ, when seen by Simeon, Luke 2.26. Christ had
for some years a Patent-dormient. Kings, Priests, and Prophets were not deposed
or degraded in time of sleep, howsoever the functions of their offices were
intermitted. Alioqui enim Christo ab initio Spiritus vel omnino non datus, vel
ad mensuram datus fuisset, quod negat ejus praecursor. Estius in sentent l. 2.
distinct. 14. sect. 2.
His humane nature received a fullness of grace, as soon as united to the
divine. Some object against this truth what we read Luke 2.52. Jesus increased
in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man. He increased in grace
and wisdom, if not in himself, yet in others, among whom he was conversant,
and whom he instructed. He increased in grace and wisdom, if not really, yet
in the opinion of others. He acquired some knowledge acceptable to God and man.
As he grew in stature, so for some time in the exercise of wisdom; and in
favor really with men; and as they would conceive, with God. He grew in the
exercise of wisdom and grace, in the sight both of God and man. That I may
express what I conceive to be the mind of the Text, The use and exercise of
his wisdom as it was more enlarged, became more lovely in the sight of God and
man.

Maimonides notes (Halacoth Melachim Perek 1.) That no King but the first of
the family was anointed; as Saul, as David: or upon strife, as Solomon by
reason of Adonias, Joas for Athalia, Joachas for his elder brother Joachim: but
Joshua the next king to Moses was not anointed. Christ a spiritual King, a
King that reigns in men's affections, by the appointment of God the Father;
the A and O of that kind, moreover who has not his kingdom without
contradiction and strife, was according to Maimonides principles not unduly
anointed. Christ as a King, as a Priest, and as a Prophet, was anointed with
the oil of gladness above his fellows. He was each of these (...). So much is
plentifully expressed in the Ep^stle to the Hebrews. As a Priest he far
surpassed legal priests. Heb. in 7, 8, 9. and 10, chapters.

The twelve Patriarchs, Exodus 28. have each of them his precious stone
inscribed with his name, in the brestplate of judgment, a symbol of the
Church under the Law; Levy has the Calcedonie, Judah the Smaragd: But Revel.
21. in the foundation of the new Jerusalem, the Church under the Gospel, Levy
has the Smaragd, and Judah the Calcedon. (The tribes have their stones in
Aarons brestplate according to their births.) Our Saviors Calcedon in Levie's
place, tells us that he has put an end to Legal sacrifices. If Leviticall
sacrifices could have expiated sins, it had not been necessary that the
Priesthood should have been translated. As a King he far excelled all who
were types of him both in power and honor. Alsheach interprets what is
spoken Psalm. 45. concerning the Messiah, to be meant of Israel, and by their
companions, understands heathens' and Angels of ministry, etc. Sure we are,
that Christ was and is exalted above all earthly Monarchs, and above the
glorious Angels. These are but ministering spirits: None of them has dominion
over men's hearts. God said to none of them at any time, Sit thou at my right
hand till I make thine enemies my footstool. God spoke in times past by the
Prophets, but poured out himself in the latter times once for all by his Son.
Christ's prophetical office is abundantly more communicable, then either of his
other.. No one merely a creature could by sacrificing himself expiate man's
sins; or yet oversway men's perverse affections: but what light and
information Christ imparts to any dark soul, he may communicate by ministers,
angels or men. Yet the full revelation to be made of Evangelicall mysteries was
reserved for Christ, as prerogative to his Prophetical office. What Christ
performed as a Priest, and what he performs as a King, is competible to none of
his creatures. Had not his sufferings been vigorated by his divine nature, they
could not have prevailed against our sins, (by which we offended an infinite
God,) before the tribunal of divine justice. Neither can any creature create
grace in our hearts: no earthly scepter can sway our wills and affections.
These are preheminencies of Christ's Kingly office. What Christ performed or
performs as a Prophet (except that he is the fountain of truths revealed) is
not impossible to a creature. All truths which can be revealed to any, may be
communicated to the mind by the ministry of angels, may be derived by the
ear, or the eye, from these or other rational creatures. Christ (beside that
he is the author of all truths according to his divinity) deferred many truths
till the fullness of time, and then as God and man delivered them, that so he
might exalt even his humane nature, above all Prophets who were before or under
the Law, his Ministers, and but forerunners and types of truth to be
incarnated. Christ by himself, and his disciples revealed some mysteries hidden
from the beginning of the world, Where a prediction according to the plain
literal sense, was in the intention of the holy Ghost to be oftener fulfilled
then once, the Prophet which foretold it, did always distinctly foresee the
event in the first place foretold, or the first fulfilling of his own
prediction. There is not the like necessity for us to believe or think that he
had the like distinct foresight or apprehension of those events, in which one
and the self same prophecy was the second, third, or fourth time to be
fulfilled. Of such predictions as were but once to be fulfilled, and that
according to the plain literal sense, this affirmative is universally true;
(The Prophets had always a distinct knowledge or apprehension of the sum or
substance of the events which are said to come to pass, that their saying
might be fulfilled.) D. Jackson in his book entitled, The knowledge of Christ
Jesus, chap. 16.
explained many before uttered. Christ was in densitaribus sylvae, in the Old
Testament. When God gave the Law on mount Sinai, there were (says Salvianus)
nebulae Deo plena. There were nebulae Christo plena in the time of the Law: but
in the fullness of time the Sun of righteousness broke forth, dispelled
legal mists, and ceremonies, conferred upon it is the abundance of the blessing
of the Gospel, delivered to S. John a (...) of Daniels prophecies, which
concerned the last times of the world, by which they were much illustrated.
Plutarch reports (in the life of Lysander) that the priests of Apollo's temple
at Delphos, subservient to Lysanders ambition of the kingdom of Lacedemonia,
and what plotted by him and his faction, gave out, That they kept secret books
of very ancient Oracles, which they themselves durst not touch nor handle,
neither might any man read them, unless he was begotten of the seed of Apollo,
who should come after a long time, and make his birth appear unto the Priests
that kept these papers, and that by some secret mark and token, which they had
amongst them: and thereby being known for Apollo's son, he might then take the
books, and read the ancient revelations and prophesies of the same. Apollo's
priests seduced by covetousness, abused truth into falsehood, by misapplying
it. A true prediction touching the son of the only wise God, to be born of a
virgin, and his preheminency in unfolding old prophecies, and adding new,
received from Jews, or some of the Sybills, or some prophet among the Gentiles
(as was Balaam) was made the platform of this fiction.

Secondly, Christ had yet advantage incomprehensibly greater, then what
hitherto mentioned above other prophets, viz. according to his divine nature
was the donour of the spirit of prophecy. Where God the Father is said to have
spoken to the fathers ((...)) by piecemeal, (divine truths revealed to the
Prophets concerning Christ, were not revealed altogether) and after diverse
manners: God the Son who is (...), the eternal word and wisdom of the
Father, cannot be conceived to be excluded. The three sacred persons equally
concur to all the works ad extra ascribed to each. Although Christ was not in
the times of the Old Testa^^^^ the Fathers vicegerent in the revelation of
divine tru^^s, as under the New, yet he also according to his divinity then
spoke to the Prophets. (...). Homer. Iliad. (...).
No creature how sagacious soever, howsoever improved by industry and
experience, (since God can in each moment change the course of nature) can
certainly foreknow, unless informed by divine revelation any thing which may
properly be said to be future (Gods attributes, as they are by natural reason
known to be immutable, so their duration is coexsistent) much less humane
actions, or what is dispensed solely by divine providence, without mediation of
secundary causes. Prophecy strictly taken, is a prediction of what contingent.

There Is vates praeteritorum with Dr. Jackson in his Knowledge of Christ Jesus,
chap. 17. with Adrian in his Isagog. in S. Scriptur^m, Prophecy is of things
past, present, or to come. Moses by the spirit of prophecy wr^^e about the
creation. See also 1 Samuel 10.2. 2. Kings 6.12. Chalchas in Homer knew ((...))
Things present, future, and past. Elisha prophesied of things present, 2. Kings
5.26. (...). See reverend Mr. Boyse upon Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 2. p. 7. (...)
is the same that (...) (in Eusebius. demonstrat. Evang. lib. 5. procemio) one that
prophecyeth. That (...) is often the same that (...), is cleared by Exodus 7.1.
(as translated by Onkelos, (And Jehovah said unto Moses, See, I have made thee
a Master (or Prince) to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thine
interpreter.) Molinaeus his vates, lib. 1. c. 4. Scultetus his deliciae
evangel. c. 7. and authors quoted by H. Stephen in his Lexicon upon the word
(...); but if it ought always (as the Lexicographer now praised conceives) to
be interpreted according to that notion, I cannot see why Prophets should be
distinguished from other, Gods Ministers ( Ephesians. 4.11.) who were undeniably
antistites Dei and sacrorum. The most common use of the word Prophet, (besides
consent of authors; whom I might in great plenty and with little labor quote
to this purpose) assures us that the preposition (...) as an ingredient of
(...), has for the most part its proper signification. Antistites fa^orum,
with Heathens were called prophetae, because some of them were the mouths of
Oracles. We see how prophetae by a familiar Synechdoche might be enlarged to
the full signification of Antistes. Epimenides is entitled a prophet by Paul in
his Epistle to Titus, chap. 1. Besides that he is reported to have been a
prophet (properly so called) by Tully ( de Divin^t. lib. 1.) he might also
deserve the name in that (...) (which Diogenes arrogates to himself in Lucian,
(...) signifying a foreteller of things future, as well as (...), might be used
for a Poet, (ordinary practice of authentic authors sufficiently warranting)
who much more properly might be called (...). Poets feigned themselves
Enthusiasts.
To relate what is past and contingent without aid from ^emory and history, by a
Metaphor has frequently the name of prophecy, as not less difficult, and
proceeding from the same principles. Let them show the former things what they
be, or declare us things for to come, that we may know ye are gods, Esa. 41.22,
23. Tria proposuerat Porphyrius de divinis operibus: Primum ad haec anima^ esse
caus^m instrumentalem: Secundum, animam quandoque esse causam principalem*
Tertium, animam posse ita esse ex aquo concausam, ut ex ea, Spirituque divino,
tertia quaedam species substantiae, vel subsistentiae fiat. Jambl. de mist. c.
28.

Ait animam quandoque generare potestat^m, essentiamque daemoniacam imaginantem
futura, ibid.

Porphyrius ait, Vaticinium esse passionem q^^ndam phantasiae subortam, vel ex
cogitationibus nostris, vel instinctu corporalis in nobis naturae, vel
similiter incide^^tem ut and phreneticis contingit vaticinari. Ad hoc autem
adhibet signa, quod in statu vaticinis agit quidem imaginatio vehementer,
sensus autem interim ^coupantur, and cuhibentur: Item quod suffumigationes
adhibentur divinaturo, videlicet ad phantasiam afficiondam. Item ^^^^cationes
ad eandem affectionem incitand^^. Item quod non omnes, sed juvenes
simplicioresque ad hoc idonei sunt. Jambl. de Myster. c. 29.

Porphyrius conjectabat affectionem quandam nostrae naturae vel corporalem, vel
animalom ad vaticinium confer praecipue, ex eo quod qui advocabant in hominem
vaticinium, gestabant lapillos quosdam, atque herbas, ligabantque nodos sacros,
itemque ligata solvebant: mutabant quoque proposita in eis, qui talia ab illis
acceperant, and ex malis meliora reddebant: ibid.

Idem ait, Non esse contemnendam artem, quae ex certis vaporibus ad ignem sub
opportunis stellarum influ^cibus facit deorum idola in a^re protinus apparentia
similia quodammodo diis, and habentia simile^ aliquam efficaciam: ibid.

Porphyrius ait, Idolorum factores in fabrica observare coelestium cursum,
dicentes, quo potissimum coelestium currente, and cum quo, vel quibus
concurrente vaticinia vera provenient, aut falsa: item quae ibi fiunt, utrum
significativa sint, effectivave, vel contra significationis efficacia vacua.
cap. eodem.

There be some perfumes prescribed by the writers of natural magic, which
procure pleasant dreams; and some others (as they say) that procure
prophetical dreams; as the seeds of flax, fleawort, etc. Thus the Lord Verulam
in his natural history, cent. 10. exper. 933.

That the Teraphim (mentioned in Genesis, and Judges, and Hosea) were used in
divination, is conspicuous from S. Austine in's 94. question upon Genesis, from
Aben-ezra upon the 31. of Genesis, and from the names by which the word is
translated. We find in the Septuagint, in Hosea, (...) the same word by which
they interpret Urim, in the ^8. of the first of Samuel; in Zachary (...) with
Aquila the Teraphim are (...). In the Targum of Hosea, (...) declarantes. In
the 4. of Hosea, verse 12. My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their
staff declares unto them. A wisard is called (...), Levit. 20.6.27. and a
living creature whose mouth, after it had been put in the mouth of the wisard,
foretold future things, (...) by Jews from (...) to know. The devil and his
agents arrogated to themselves the faculty of foreknowing and declaring future
things, and many were so fond as to believe them. Such future events as
proceeded in an ordinary course from celestial and sublunary bodies, the devil
might foretell by his insight into nature: but predictions of this sort are
improperly termed prophecy. He might discover some future contingent things by
knowing the Scriptures; as that Alexander the great should subdue the Persians.
He might foretell also what God revealed to him: the deaths perhaps of some
persons, because God had appointed him their executioner. Sometimes he gave his
Oracles according to conjecturall knowledge, as taking notice of humane
affairs; their counsels and contrivances. (...). (Aeschilus in his (...).)
sent to Dodona (in Aeschilus his Prometheus) (...).
He dissembled his ignorance often by silence, often by ambiguous answers. He
fastened his predictions to material symbols, as accommodate to man's earthy
affections, and alienating the mind from what spiritual. In (...), now
mentioned, and other his delusions, would have the positures of the stars
observed, that so he might induce men to worship the host of heaven. But these
and See Clemens Alexand. in's Admonit. ad Gentes. Eusebius. his prooem. to his
first book dem^st. Evang. Strozzius Cigogn. de spirit. and incant. part. 1.
lib. 3. c. 2.
other such his arts settle far below prophecy. Holy Scriptures altogether
direct us to God as the fountain of those precious gifts conferred upon
Prophets, and the sole object of our praise and thankfulness due for them. S.
John (Apoc. 1.10.) heard behind him a great voice as of a trumpet. These words
behind me, as M. Brightman observes, are wont to shadow out the free mercy of
God, which recalleth us being careless, not regarding, negligent. So in Isaiah
chap. 30.21. Thy ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way,
walk in it. Jewish Doctors derogate from that freedom, according to which God
communicates himself, by the several conditions which they feign to be
prerequired, that one should become a Prophet. Their first is ((...)) a
natural disposition, to wit, a good temperature of body, even from the
conception. See Maimon. in More Nevochim, p. 2. c. 36. Secondly, that the party
be ((...)) amply accomplished with wit and fortunes. Abarbinel (in his preface
to his Comments upon Esaias) requires descent or pedigree elevating above the
vulgar (...) Dixere (Rabbini nostri) beatae memoriae non quiescere facit
sanctus benedictus ille shechinam suam, nisi super familias prosapiatas quae in
Israele. Esaias (says he) was of the seed royal, and exceeded others in the
spirit of prophecy by virtue of his family. Thirdly, ( I have learned what
(...) is from (...) (translated by Bechai from the original in Arabic into
Hebrew in a Tractate of it inscribd (...) c. 4. I find that a Pharisee is one
that celebrates a jubilee in his countenance, but mourns inwardly; his heart
is exceedingly large, but so as his soul is very humble. This I conceive to be
the meaning of (...) That he is shie of whatsoever is wont to divert from the
practice of piety, is intimated in the words following: Rambam ( de fundament.
Legis, c. 7. parag. 2.) prescrib^^ to such as would be candidates for the
spirit of prophecy, sanctimony and abstinency from commerce with the world.
(...) spiritus S. vociferatur, ^di coetum improborum, and cum impiis non
habitabo. Thus R. Isaac in Tauchuma. fol. ^6.
(...)) a sequestration from common and profane custom of life. Fourthly, See
Bava Bathra, cap. 1. Jachiad. praefat. to his comment. upon Daniel.
((...)) congruity of place: this they deny to be found any where but in Judea.
Fifthly, ((...)) opportunity of time. All ages (say they) are not accommodate
for the receiving of prophecyes. Sixthly, ((...)) a divine disposition, that
is, the free gift and suggestion of God, without which the other conditions are
by them granted to remain impotent and unfruitful.

We may almost by one glance upon sacred Scriptures, perceive that the greater
part of these conditions were not common to all prophets there mentioned. Jambh
thus is Orthodox: Verum namque vaticinium ( De mysteriis cap. 28.
says he) non est naturae passibilis, and aliquo corpore, loco, tempore
clausa, sed ab his omnibus absolutae, ut queat quocunque in loco vel tempore
facta, pariter simpliciterque prospicere: True prophecy is not of a passible
nature, cloystred up in some certain body, place or time, but free from all
these, that it may foresee alike things done in any place, and at any time.
Gregory and Thom. Aquinas (...). Ait Gregorius in homil. Pentecostes: Implet
(scilicet Spiritus Sanctus) cit haraedum puerum, and Psalmistam facit: Implet
pastorem armentarium, sycomoros vellicantem, and prophetam facit. Non ergo
requiritur aliqua dispositio praecedeus ad prophetiam, sed dependet ex sola
voluntate Spiritus sancti, de quo dicitur 1. ad Cor. 12. Haec omnia operatur
n^^s atque idem Spiritus, dividens singulis prout vult: Thom. Aquin. 2.2. Qu.
172. Art. 3.

As it is clear that God determined not the dispensation of prophecyes to
circumstances of time and place, nor yet to men's natural tempers or fortunes;
so likewise that the spirit of prophecy found Balaam mingled with malice and
covetousness, and Saul out of envy persecuting David, how abstracted soever
they were from these vices whilst they prophesied. I acknowledge that Gods
Prophets, as many of them as were sanctified, could not but be emancipated from
the tyranny of vile affections, but moreover had all corruptions settled, which
might hinder them from attending to God speaking to them. God did not always
immediately work the latter of these effects in their minds. Elisha (2. Kings
3.15.) called for a minstrell, to dispell his grief ( See R. D. Kimchi upon the
place.
say some Hebrew Doctors) for the loss of Elijah, from whose translation till
the then present occasion, the spirit of prophecy ( See R. D. Kimchi upon the
place.
say the same authors) rested not upon him: to compose his spirits, ( See R.
D. Kimchi, and Ralbag upon the place.
say some,) much moved with indignation at Jehoram. See also 1. Sam. 10.5.
chap. 16.17. Tacitus says of the Jews ( Hist. lib. 5.) Sacerdotes eorum
tibiis, timpanisque, concinebant. Grotius upon the last of the Scriptures
quoted, thus commenteth. Marinus de Proclo^ (...); Apollonius de Miris, (...).
ubi and alia ad hanc rem. Pythagore^s moris fuit, ait Quintilianus lib. 9. cap.
4. cum somnum peterent, ad lyram prius lenire mentes, ut si quid fuisset
turbidarum cogitationum componerent. Plato likewise in's laws attributes the
same virtue to music. Add that of Stesichorus, (...). See also Butler in the
Preface to his principles of Music. As Elisha's mind might be settled and
quieted by Music, so also raised up to an expectation of God communicating
himself.

Thirdly, Christ knew all truths from all eternity, depended not upon any for
information about those truths which he delivered.

Fourthly, whereas Prophets and Prophetesses in times past received divine
truths after diverse manners, Christ according to his humane nature, in all
probability, was only informed that way which is most perfect, viz. by the
word of the Lord, instilled into his mind when he was awake: That the contents
of this reason may become facile, it is necessary that I enumerate the several
ways, after which God revealed himself to Prophets under the Law, and before
the Law, and explain some of them. God spoke to Elijah by a still small voice,
1. Kings 19.12. to Samuel with a louder, 1. Sam. 3. (Samuel by reason of this
voice presented to his outward sense, was esteemed a Prophet throughout
Israel.) Such under the New Testament was that by which he signified that
Christ was his welbeloved Son, in whom he was well pleased, Matthew. 3. and
that which was heard at our Saviors transfiguration, Matthew. 17. and another
mentioned in the 12. of John. This was called Bathcol, filia vocis, and was
gradus nuus (...) ex gradibus spiritus sancti. This way of revealing himself
God used frequently after prophecy, and Urim and Thummim ceased, in the time of
the second Temple, as Paulus Fagius relates upon Pirke avoth. The still small
voice, and louder, of which I have spoken, were in all probability produced by
God, without the concourse of any creature. God long before the Law given to
Moses, prophesied to Hagar by the audible voice of an Angel, that her son
should be spread into a great nation, Genesis 21.18. God after this way several
times revealed himself (under the Law) in the Old Testament, to Zacharias and
the Virgin Mary in the New. God sometimes spoke to his Prophets by outward
visions. By fire burning the bush, but not consuming it, Exodus 3.2. signified
to Moses, that the Israelites, though heavily afflicted, should not be utterly
destroyed by the Egyptians. External voices and visions by which things future
were presignified, were created by God, or produced by the ministry of Angels.
Visions might, many of them be carved in wood, stone, other matter; more of
them (yet not all) be painted. It Is impossible to engrave fire, or to paint
sounds. The handwriting upon the wall, which Daniel read, supplied the place
of prophetical speech. Each prophetical speech might be exhibited in letters.
God spoke sometimes by Urim and Thummim, on the breast of the high Priest.
Concerning this kind of prediction, see Lev. 8.8. Numb. 27.21. 1. Sam. 28.6.
Josephus (...), l. 3. c. 9. Aben-ezra, and Menachem upon Exodus 28. Jarehi and
Aben-ezra upon Levit. 8.8. Maimon. about the implements of the Sanctuary, cap.
10. sect. 11, 12. Ainsworth upon Exodus 28. Empereur in Mosis Kimchi (...) ad
scientiam, lib. 2. cap. 7. Whether or no answers given by Urim and Thummim, and
the writing upon the wall in Belshazzars palace, were immediately from God, or
by the mediation of Angels, is concealed from us. The two Tables of the Law
given to Moses on mount Sinai, were written with the finger of God, Exodus
31.18. If we compare with this text that of the Psalmist in the 8. Psalm,
verse. 3. (When I consider the heavens the work of thy fingers) we shall
conceive with Maimonides in the 66. chap. of the first part of his More
Nevochim, that the Law was made the same way that the heavens. He tells us how:
All natural things are called the work of God: but more especially what began
by creation: such was the Law, says the same author. I shall produce his
words as construed by Buxtorfius; Quemadmodum stellas non per instrumentum
aliquod in coelo collocavit and existere fecit, sed per primam suam voluntatem.
Sic quoque Scriptura illa fuit scripta per primam ipsius voluntatem, sine
aliquo instrumento. (This his conceit I find countenanced by the fifth chap. of
Pirke Avoth.) I shall add his quotation of the Talmud to the same purpose;
Nosti, quod in hunc sensum in Mischna legitur; december res creatae sunt inter
vesperas, and ex eorum numero quoque est Scriptura Tabularum; ex quo
colligimus, extra controversiam, and in confesso apud omnes semper fuisse,
Scripturam tabularum esse sicut reliqua opera creationis, quemadmodum in
Mischna exposuimus. Cabbalists say, that God created the world in order to the
Law. In the creation of the world the holy Ghost moved upon the waters; when
the Law was to be engraven upon the tables of stone, God descended upon the
mount: The same finger which wrought the book of nature, wrote the Law: The
world's potentia divina, the Law voluntas Dei protensa: The world's a
compendious expression or copy of Gods power, the Law of his will; this in
letters, that in hieroglyphics. Who conceive from Act. 7.53. Gal. 3.19. Heb.
2.2. the Law was spoken by Angels, (besides that the Syriack interpreter Acts
7.53. has (...) Per manum mandati angeli, and by this Angel means Christ, as
may be gathered from his translation of Gal. 3.19. where he has (...) angels,
in that angels are distinguished from a Mediator, who as he thought was no
other but Christ; neither could more angels then one, unless because they
organized the air, or clouds, or some other body, be said to pronounce the
Law) may see Heinsius upon the first of those texts. Maimon. also tells us
(in his More Nevochim, par. 2. c. 41.) (...) that a Prophet is often called an
Angel. There are mentioned in the acts of the Nicene Council, part. 1. lib. 1.
c. 4. (...).
No created knowledge was the midwife to either of these births: the writing as
well as what written was immediately from God. God sometimes revealed to his
Prophets what should come to pass by (species) resemblances impressed in their
minds. These were of two sons; are resembled by those which convey sensible
objects to the ear, and the eye, and are called vision and the word of the
Lord. The Prophets were the mouth of God, and eyes of the Church. Vision by
Hebrews is called (...) (Dan. 10.7.) (...) and (...), in Greek (...). The word
of the Lord in Hebrew is (...) See Onkelus upon Genesis 20.3.
in Chalde (...), in Greek (...), in Latin verbum, (sermo, if we prefer the
term which best pleases Cyprian.) The word of the Lord is called (...) the
spirit of the Lord, Ezech. 11.5. and by Onkelus translated (...) the spirit of
prophecy. (...) the word of the Lord, Ezech. 14.2. by Onkelus is interpreted
(...) the word of prophecy. Vision, as likewise the word of the Lord, when it
denounces judgments against any people or person (...) the burden of the
Lord, Jer. 23.33 in Jonathans targum is (...) prophecy in the name of the Lord.
is called ((...)) a burden; each of them when delivered in sleep (...) a
dream; and every dream sent into the mind from God, if predictive of future
matters, (that is, (...) Prophecy although it properly signify (as the
notation of the word intimates) a prediction in outward words, is in the mind
ratione principii. Thom. Aquin. 2.2. q 171. art. 1. concludes that prophecy
first and principally consists in knowledge, secundarily in speech.
prophecy coming in a dream, as R.D. Kimchi upon Jer. 23.27.) is found under
one of these. The hand of the Lord Jehovah, Ezech. 8.1. is (as Kimchi well
glosseth) (...) the spirit of prophecy as it comes in its strength. Each
prophetical influence may be called the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of
the Lord, as because it is the gift of God, so in that it is fitly resembled by
wind: moreover in the first respect may be termed Spiritus sanctus, in the
other Spiritus sacer. On the day of Pentecost when the Apostles were to be
endued with the gift of tongues, there came a sound from heaven, as of a mighty
rushing wind. Influences, such as that which was called the word of the Lord,
enabled the Apostles to speak with several languages. These, like wind, could
not be contained. Balaam could not but speak what God said unto him. When the
spirit rested upon the seventy Elders, they prophesied and did not cease, Numb.
11.25. (...) the Spirit, is interpreted by (...) the spirit of prophecy, in
Onkelus his paraphrase upon that Comma. There Is vehemence in the spirit of
prophecy, which renders it like a rushing wind. Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus
sanctus. Those words of Ezechiel chap. 8. The hand of the Lord fell upon me,
may be understood concerning the spirit of prophecy, as it comprehends vision
and the word of the Lord. The prophet affords instances of both revealed to
him, in the three chapters next following. And Villalpand tells us, Spiritum
Dei cadere; there is irruere, aut lapsum esse desuper cum vi, and energia more
fulguris* quo illuminatus simul atque excitatus est propheta, non secus quam si
fulgure repent tangeretur. Suidas says concerning (...) (which God promises,
Ezech. 11.19. and elsewhere) that it is not the holy Spirit, but (...). I may
say the like concerning the spirit of prophecy, but with this difference; that
is of the appetitive faculty, this of the understanding. Prophecy may be
called (...) according to both respects mentioned. I adhere rather to the first
as the reason of the name. (...), majestas divina, which rested upon Prophets
with the Jews frequently is (...). And the spirit of Jacob revived, ((...))
Genesis 45.27. in Jarchie's comment, is interpreted by (...) The resting of the
spirit of prophecy upon Prophets is called descensio, Quandoquidem genus
humanum in infimo loco, infimoque gradu constitutum est respectu Dei: ipse
autem Deus in supremo gradu, non quidem ratione loci, sed ratione essentiae,
majestatis, and potentiae, ideo quando ipsi placet sapientiam largiri alicui,
vel prophetiae donum super quosdam ex nobis effundere, vocatur mansio
prophetiae super aliquo, vel habitatio majestatis, and praesentiae divinae in
loco aliquo ((...)) Descensio: and e contrario, ablatio prophetiae ab homine,
aut recessio majestatis divinae e loco quopiam ((...)) Ascensio. Maimon. in
More Nevoch. part. 1. c. 10.
quievit super eo divina majestas. In Onkelus his paraphrase by ((...)) and
quievit Spiritus sanctus super Jacobo; in Jonathan by ((...)) and quievit
Spiritus prophetiae ( (...) Non quiescit shechinah nisi super forti. See Elias
in his Tisby upon the word. See also Maimon. in (...), chap. 7. sect. 1. and 5.
The places of the Talmud, etc. quoted by Vorstius upon these of Maimonides.
to wit, which had forsaken him by reason of his mourning for the supposed
death of his son. These glosses upon Genesis 45.27. unless we conceive the
authors of them, all, or some of them heterodoxicall, will persuade that
shechina ruach hakkodesh, and the spirit of prophecy, had sometimes with
Hebrews the same signification. I shall add another author for further
confirmation. Our Doctors (says Elias Tisbites upon the word (...)) call the
holy Ghost shechinah, because it rests upon the Prophets. In the authors
words (...) In the Gemara of Massecheth Joma, cap. 1. (...) and (...) are
reckoned as two of five distinct ornaments in which the second temple came
short of the first. It Is there enquired why the word by which God signified
that he would be glorified in the second temple, Hag. 1.8. should suffer an
Apocope of He, written (...) rather then (...) (and I will be glorified)? The
answer there given is this, (...)

These five things were wanting by which the first and the second Sanctuary
differed, and these are they, Arca cum propitiatorio and Cherubim, Ignis
coelestis, Majestas divina, Spiritus sanctus, Vrim and Thummim. In Shulchan
Aruch, under the radix (...) the five things mentioned by Talmudists, in the
place quoted are thus distinguished. (...) Arca, operculum, and Cherubim, una
res: Majestas divina, res secunda: Spiritus sanctus, qui and prophetia, res
tertia: Vrim and Thummim, res quarta: ignis de coelo, res quinta. The same are
reckoned up, but in other order, by R. D. Kimchi upon Haggai 1.8. The first is
omitted by Rasi upon that text, who yet quoteth Massecheth Joma. There is
nothing in these testimonies (howsoever they have been misinterpreted)
repugnant to what I have asserted. It Is clear that by shechinah they mean the
glory of God appearing between the cherubims. I see not but that according to
the minds of Hebrew Doctors, God may be said to dwell or to abide, wheresoever
he declares himself by any supernatural effect; as in the bush in which he
appeared to Moses; or mount Sinai, where he gave the Law; in the first
Sanctuary; in the minds of Prophets, and of all sanctified persons. Nothing's
more usual, then that the effect which manifests divine power, should be
called shechinah. Divine abode or dwelling, in this notion is abstracted from
brevity and longinquity of time (unless with Ramus and his sectatours, we
comprehend eternity within the latitude of time, as common to all durations) is
indifferent to all times howsoever extended. Shechinah properly signifies
abode or dwelling any where; but tropically that which abides or rests in
any place, and (...) any extraordinary effect of divine power, such a glorious
symbol of Gods presence and power has the Name of God. Exodus 24.10. And they
saw the God of Israel, etc. is in Onkelus his Targum, And they saw the glory of
the God of Israel; in the Seventy, (...) And they saw the place where the God
of Israel stood.
Shechinah is the same that Gods presence, by supernatural manifestation of
himself. As shechinah called the spirit of the Lord (Ezech. 11.5. and with Jews
commonly the holy spirit) is said to have rested upon certain persons, and in
certain places; so the spirit of glory and of God, is said to rest upon those,
who are reproched for the name of Christ, 1. Pet. 4.14. Gods glory is
manifested by those gracious effects of his spirit, wherewith he supporteth
those, who suffer for his sake. The heart of a believer reproched for the name
of Christ, is (as Onkelus paraphraseth upon Genesis 28.17. in which Comma, the
place in which Jacob slept, is called the house of God, and the gate of heaven)
no private place, but a place wherein God takes pleasure; and over against
this place is the gate of heaven. (...) (which Beza did not apprehend) may be
an exegesis of (...). The Syriack Interpreter saw as much, with whom (...), is
construed, (...) Quia Spiritus gloriosus Dei quiescit super vos. See Esaias 4.5.
and D. Kimchi upon that text. (...) In the^e words of Kimchi, the cloud which
rested over the Tabernacle, and that which in the Sanctuary of the Temple, as
also one feigned about to over-shadow by day the houses of Jews eminent above
the vulgarin wisdom and religion, in the times of restoration and refreshment,
is called a cloud of glory.
A cloud in which God appeared to the Israelites (Exodus 16.10.) is called (in
Hebrew (...) in Onkelus (...)) the glory of the Lord. The clouds by which God
was manifested in the Sanctuary, is called by Hebrews Shechinah. God promises
Exodus 29.43. that the tabernacle should be sanctified by his glory. And verse.
45. that he would dwell among the children of Israel; (in Onkelus his
translation, that he would settle his shechinah in the midst of the children of
Israel.

We cannot doubt, but that the spirit of glory, in that place of S. Peter
quoted, if we appeal to Jews as Interpreters, will prove the same that
shechinah. Gods manifestation of his presence in his Church upon earth for a
deteermined time, is called (...) (Apoc. 21.3.) and is also shechinah. There is
in Christ's humane nature a shechinah which shall never expire. The place in
which Jacob slept, as he was going from Beersheba toward Haran, in Onkelus upon
Genesis 28.16. is a place in which ((...)) the glory of the Lord rested. To a
place so graciously visited by God, is contradistinguished in the same
paraphrase on the verse following, (...) a private place. It Is competently
clear, that each supernatural effect of divine power may be called shechinah.
I see not but Ruach hakkodesh, or the Spirit of God, (the third person of the
sacred Trinity excepted) and shechinah, are of equal latitude.
Ruach Hakkodesh, as without the sacred Trinity, and shechinah, may be esteemed
reciprocal. Prophecy is called the spirit of the Lord, Ezech. 11.5. wisdom,
understanding, counsel and might, knowledge, and the fear of the Lord, are
called the spirit of the Lord, Esa. 11.2. See also Ezech. 11.19. 1. Pet. 4.14.
Exodus 21.3. with Jews and Mahumedans (which learned M. Seldom observes in
Eutychii origines p. 21.) (...) is Spiritus sanctus super ordinatos quiescens.
Ordination with the Jews (says the author praised, ibid.) according to it is
external effect, reddebat idoneos judiciis exercendis, adeo ut in viz. sive
vigintitrium virale, sive septuaginta unius virale.
Synedriaerite cooptari possent. The internal effect was (...) the holy Ghost.
If any Jewish writers affirm that this gift was conferred in ordination,
toward the latter times of the second Temple, they must understand, if they
will consist with themselves, some virtue distinct from prophecy, which might
enable to decide causes propounded. It Is generally confessed by Jews, that God
withheld from their forefathers the spirit of prophecy, within short time after
the building of the second house. What may be objected concerning their
dissensions in judicature, may easily be removed, unless it can be proved that
Jews thought that such virtue was perpetually conferred in ordination, and
could not be forfeited. The Seventy, of which the first great Sanhedrin
consisted, as soon as they were ordained by God, were endued with the spirit of
prophecy. From this event (I conjecture) Spiritus sanctus began to signify the
inward effect of ordination, in what sense soever used afterward. No one can
doubt but ((...)) the spirit, is (as Onkelus paraphraseth) (...) the spirit of
prophecy, Number. 11.25, 29. I deny not but Ruach Hakkodesh, and Shechinah,
signify distinct things in Massecheth Joma, and some other places quoted. It Is
sufficiently known that ob defectum vocabulorum, words frequently without
additament, are by use determined to part of their primary significations. I
may add that (...) is used in this sense, John 7.39. Acts 19.1.
Ruach Hakkodesh, (the holy Ghost, or the spirit of God) is more frequently
used for the spirit of prophecy, then for other exhibitions of Gods
extraordinary presence. This occasioned a mistake in Bomberge's and Buxtorf's
edition of Onkelus upon Exodus 31.3. They insert (...) after (...). The spirit
of God conferred upon Bezaleel, (Exodus 31.3.) with Onkelus, according to the
Spanish Bible, is a spirit from before the Lord, but with Bomberge and Buxtorf
the spirit of prophecy from before the Lord. The spirit of prophecy evermore
informed what was, is, or should be done: The spirit conferred upon Bezaleel
only enabled him to do somewhat. The holy Ghost suggested to Bezaleel skill in
order to the structure of the Tabernacle. Those have mistaken them to have been
reciprocal. Those who are reproched for the name of Christ, may probably be
said to have the spirit of glory resting on them, in regard of their present
glorious condition (by reason of the value and excellency of grace) to be
preferred before worldly prosperity; to have the spirit of God resting upon
them, in that they are assured by Prophecy is archetypally in God, in those who
are instructed by Gods prophets, as commodities in the possession of those who
have purchased them at the second hand. Who instructed by a Prophet, relates
future contingent things, cannot without acyrologie be called a Prophet (
Aquin. 2.2. quaest. 173. art. 2, 3.) yet may be said to have the spirit of God
resting upon him, as affected with any prophecy applied to his own occasions,
by special aid from Gods spirit. To interpret prophecyes contained in sacred
Scriptures, is to prophecy, 1. Cor. 14.1, 3, 4, 5, 6. I deny not but (...) may
signify the same that (...), and consequently be attributed to those who
interpret Scriptures immediately doctrinall: but to prophecy seems to signify,
as I have said in 1. Cor. 14. as in the 6. verse, distinguished from doctrine.
See Beza upon the place.
divine revelation, and the comfortable influence of Gods spirit, that God will
add a gracious event to their sufferings. Their sufferings, if we subduct the
spirit of glory, and the spirit of God, will be much sunk below nothing. That I
may yet more fully explain this Scripture, the spirit of glory seems to allude
to Esaias 4.5, 6. and to the pillar of the cloud which marched before the
Israelites by day, and that of fire, which went before them by night in the
wilderness. The comfortable influences of Gods spirit in the hearts of those
who are reproched for the name of Christ, may be fitly called the spirit of
glory, in that a pledge of Gods extraordinary presence; but moreover as like
the pillar of fire, illuminating and comforting them beset with gloomy
afflictions, and like a cloud sheltring them from temptations which are
suggested by their sufferings. That I may add another gloss, a cloud of
afflictions resting upon Gods children, is so far from intercepting the light
and sunshine of Gods countenance, that with the cloud which overshadowed the
tabernacle, and that which rested in the temple, it is a token and pledge of his
more then ordinary presence. It may be enquired how ruach hakkodesh, if it
signify prophetical influence, can be said to have been wanting in the times
of the second Temple, unless Haggie, Zachary, and Malachy be denied to have
been Prophets. R. Bechai upon the paraschah in Genesis, called (...),
endeavors to remove this scruple. The Scripture says, (...), as if it
should say, The latter times, as well as the first under the second Temple, are
to be excepted. The Jews in whose age John the Baptist lived, counted him a
Prophet, Matthew. 14.5. and 21.6. Our Savior is said (in Josephus Antiquit.
Judaic. lib. 18. c. 4.) to have been ((...)) a wise man, (he means a
Prophet.) Josephus (in his Jew sh war) reports himself to have been a
Prophet, that he foretold to Vespasian Nero's death. Abarbinel upon Esaias 11.
makes the times of the second Temple altogether barren of prophecy, that he
might render them incapable of the Messiah. He misreporteth his brethren the
Rabbis into the same opinion. The Prophet (he says) reckons up ten
conditions, which must necessarily be found in King Messiah. The first of them
concerns his lineage and family. The second condition contains his degree
of prophecy. The Spirit of Jehovah which should rest upon the Messiah, is with
Abarbinel the Spirit of prophecy. This prophecy concerning the Messiah, could
not (says he) be fulfilled in Hezekiah, because he was not a Prophet; nor in
the times of the second Temple, quod non fuerit in eis prophetia, and non
Spiritus sanctus, sicut acceperunt sapientes beata memoriae.
(...) Habitare faciam in eo gloriam, quae est shechinah: sed non habitavit in
eo ita jugiter ut in templo primo. Shechinah here signifies otherwise then in
comments upon Haggie 1.8. afore-quoted, viz. the spirit of prophecy. Seder Olam
zuta determines in what year of the world prophecy expired. (...) In diebus
Meshullam floruit regnum Graeciae, anno scilicet quinquagesimo secundo Medorum
and Persarum: and mortui sunt Haggaeus, Zacharia, and Maleachi. Eo tempore
cessavit prophetia ab Israel: ipse est annus mundi ter millesimus
quadringentesimus quartus. Aben-ezra says of Malachy ( in Malach. c. 1.) (...)
that he was the last of the Prophets. The greater part of the Jews, by whom
prophecy is termed (...) forasmuch as they deny distinction of persons in the
Divine essence, attended in the use of the term, that God ((...)) that holy
blessed one (as they love to speak) was a Spirit. (The holy Spirit) does not
only signify the third person in the sacred Trinity, but likewise the essence
of God. Tropes from the cause to the effect, and from the thing signified to
the sign are usual. But perhaps the name Ruach hakkodesh as signifying
prophecy, was first borrowed from the third person of the glorious Trinity. We
gather from the writings of some Rabbis on this side Christ, (besides that
it is uncertain whether or no prophecy before Christ incarnated, was called the
holy Ghost) a Trinity of Divine Persons. Shechinah is called the spirit of the
Lord, Ezech. 11.5. the spirit of God, 1. Pet. 4.14. The word spirit in each of
these Scriptures, is by a Metonymie translated from the holy Ghost to the thing
there signified.

Lest any demand, why prophetical influences, or any other symbol of Gods
extraordinary presence, should be called by the name of the third, rather then
of the first or second person of the sacred Trinity, I propound as probable
these reasons following.

1. The Spirit of God moving upon the face of the waters, (Genesis 1.2.) supposes
for God cherishing, ripening, perfecting the rudiments of the world in the
creation. What transcends the sphere of created activity, is equivalent to
creation. The archetypall discovery of things contingent and future, is of that
rank. Should I yield that the bodies assumed by God the Son, when he preluded
to his incarnation; the fire which appeared to Moses in the bush; the pillar of
fire, and the pillar of the cloud, which went before the Israelites in the
wilderness; the cloud and lightning upon mount Sinai; the fire which consumed
the sacrifices, and the cloud over the ark in the Sanctuary, etc. were not
produced immediately out of the barren womb of nonentity, nor yet from
indisposed matter; yet by an allusion made to an expression used in the history
of the beginning of Gods works ad extra, the holy Ghost may signify Gods more
then ordinary manifestation of himself.

2. As creation (which was the first of Gods works) is attributed to the first
person of the sacred Trinity; redemption which is the foundation of all good to
be communicated to us, which fallen man cannot lay claim to titulo creaturae,
to God the Son; so Gods manifestations of himself, which confer to the
applying of Christ's merits to our selves, which bring salvation home to our
souls, are attributed to the third person. Prophecyes which illuminate our
minds, and sanctifying graces are by this account fitly ascribed to the Spirit.

3. If we attend the order of persons in the sacred Trinity, the holy Ghost is
nearest to creatures: So the absolving and perfecting of Gods works is
congruously attributed to him: He is fitly said to brood the waters, to
overshadow the Virgin Mary, to seal the elect. Apponit ultimam manum to
prophetical influences. The hand of the Lord fell upon Ezechiel, Ezech. 8.1.

In the minds of all Prophets illuminated by the word of (...) Lord, or vision
(...) insculpta est forma spiritualis, (as R. Meir in Avoda Kodesch, but in
another sense). I conceive not that God spoke to the Prophets by compounding or
dividing acquired species, although I think not that way impossible. Jamblichus
requires the same conditions to prophecy, which Plotinus (in the last book of
his last Euneade, and the last chapter;) to consummate man's happiness. De
myster. c. 22.
Praesagia (says he) sunt animae redeuntis in se, in statu simili somno, in se
(inquam, id est, in rations seminales and intellectuales. He expresses
himself more clearly in these words following: Quoniam vero sunt in anima
rations generabilium penes potentiam ejus, tum effectivam, tum etiam
cognitivam, atque hae rations dependent a rationibus, quae sunt in diis, ideo
anima his conjuncta, rations in se suscitat in actum. There is a seminall
virtue in the cognitive part of the soul, which cherished by an union made with
the divine nature, propagateth it self into prophecy. The soul withdrawing its
self from worldly affairs, is thickened into stronger virtue, and suscitated by
an union made with the idea's in the divine essence, is productive of prophecy.
Plato in his sixth book de Republ. gives the same account of Philosophy to be
attained, and was of the same opinion concerning Prophecy. Marsilius Ficinus in
his argument to that book, expresses Plato's judgment in these words;
Ostendit Plato Philasophi montem in ipsa veritatis indagatione s^jungi a
corporo, atque ex quadam sui cognitione divinae menti conjungi, ac per insitas
sibi ab initio formulas idearum, ideas ipsas attingere, ab eisque ipso contactu
lumen excutere, quo mox facta foecundior concipiat, imo facta validior pariat
veritatem, id est, per ipsas suas conceptiones ideis undique congruat. Compare
Plato's words in the book praised. To one who is (...) he prescribes this
course; (...), (...). Non ante fatigetur and expetere desinat quam propriam
cujusque naturam ea animi vi attigerit qua id apprehendere convenit. convenit
autem vi quadam cognata: qua cum adhaeserit, seque ei quod vere est, miscuerit,
atque inde revera intelligentiam veritatemque genuerit, cognoscet utique verum,
vereque vivet atque aletur. The soul by an earnest desiring and diligent
searching after truth; (that is, by love) is united (says he) to the idea's of
the chief good, is thence enlightened and strengthened, and so conceiv's and
brings forth truth, apprehensions congruous to the idea's in the divine
essence. Jews vary somewhat from this opinion, as holding that the soul whilst
the spirit of prophecy rests upon it, is mingled with the order of Angels,
called Ishim. I shall not spend time in explaining their conceit (which has in
it more subtilty then truth). See Maimon. in (...) cap. 2. sect. 2. and Jews
cited by Vorstius upon the place. Prophecy must necessarily differ also from
the beatificall vision, quia evacuabitur in patria, 1. Cor. 13.8.
Prophecy is not to be referred to innate idea's stirred up and quickened in
the mind; not to a metamorphosis of the mind, by which some Rabbines imagine it
to be elevated into Angelical perfection; but to representations produced in
the understanding. Those forms infused into the minds of Prophets, whether
visio or verbum, were in them Tho. Aquin. in 2.2. quaest. 171. art. 3.
non per modum habitus, sed per modum passionis, seu impressionis transeuntis.

As Prophets could not foretell all things, so neither had they those
supernatural impressions which they received, remaining with them at all
times. Prophetical light was in their understanding as in the air, not as in
the Sun. S. Paul spoke with tongues more then all the Corinthians, 1. Cor.
14.18. probably with more then the rest of the Apostles by acquired skill; but
God suggested language to each of his extraordinary ministers according to
necessity.

That I may yet further explain idea's impressed upon the minds of Prophets* I
shall show how they differed one kind of them from the other. The word of the
Lord in the mind of the Prophet, is of the same nature with representations
produced by words; Vision after the manner of resemblances arising from things:
Sicut humana consuetudo verbis, ita divina potentia factis loquitur, (as S.
Austine in his 49. epistle.) He who by his word created the world, does by his
power also form his creatures into words. Nor does he in this way only apply
himself to the outward senses, as did Tarquinius to the messenger sent from his
son, by lopping off the heads of the tallest poppies. Who received
Prophetical vision, had elegant characters written in their minds by the
finger of God. Here Is eloquence above the style of humane expression. In the
first chapter of Ezechiel the eighth verse, Behold, I even I am against thee,
and will execute judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of the heathen.
Here Is Verbum Domini. Thus says the Lord, is prefixed before it. In the second
verse of the tenth chap. And he spoke unto the man clothed in linen, and said,
Go in between the wheels, even under the Cherub, and fill thy hand with coals
of fire from between the Cherubims, and scatter them over the city. And he went
in my sight. Here is vision. There the species impressed in the mind of the
Prophet were immediately verborum, but there rerum* There seemed something to
be spoken, here somewhat to be done. There the Lord foretold the destruction of
Jerusalem, here by coals of fire scattered over the city, praefigur'd it. The
word of the Lord was either proper or tropicall; and sometimes was contained in
one trope, and sometimes in an allegory: of this last sort is that Esaias 6.25.
The wolf and the lamb shall feed together. The same distinction has place in
vision.

In external visions there might be tropi and allegoria rerum, by which future
things were presignified. Again, what was presented to the eye, was sometimes
real, sometimes merely an apparition: of the former sort was the cloud which
appeared to Elijahs servant; and according t^ Aben-ezra, the fire in the bush
which consumed it not. His words are these: (...) that it was in the bush,
burning round about. He conceived the fire to purify the place of the
Shechinah, or divine presence here, as afterward the Mount on which the law
was given. The mountain burned with fire, Deuteronomy. 9.15. The Shechinah had fire
with it in the first temple. Of the other sort of external visions (not
improbably) was the writing upon the wall read by Daniel (Dan. 5.17.) By the
vision of the cloud rain was foretold; by the fire in the bush not consuming
it, God revealed to Moses that the Israelites afflicted by the Egyptians should
not be consumed. That was a tropicall vision, this an allegorical. In the
minds of Prophets (which I may fitly term Theaters of future events,) we may
observe the like difference of visions. They were proper, tropicall, or
allegorical. To this last sort may be referred what we have in the 8. verse of
the 8. chapter of the Revelation. A great mountain burning with fire was cast
into the sea, and the third part of the sea became blood. As also third parts
of the sun, moon, and stars darkened, and the day and night not shining for
a third part, verse 12. And the star falling down from heaven to earth, Rev.
9.1. the locusts coming out of the smoke upon the earth, etc. verse. 3. such
also the visions of the horses, and them that sat on them, verses the 17, 18,
19. by the instances given the first difference of vision and the word of the
Lord is sufficiently illustrated.

Secondly, These differed, in that vision often times by simple appearances, by
terms of invention, as hieroglyphics, exhibited what should come to pass.
Such was the vision of the seven thunders, Rev. 10.4. this is a vision of
sounds. This question is propounded in Plato ( lib. 6. de repub.) (...),
(wherewith do we see such things as are seen by us?) the answer is, (...) (with
sight.) (...); do we not also by hearing see those things which are heard, and
by other senses other sensible objects? His answer is affirmative. Each kind of
sensible objects are seen by that sense to which they are proportionable.
Colors are seen by the eye, and sounds by the ear, etc. Both sounds and
colors, all things which were apprehended by any Prophet, such excepted as had
representations answerable to articulate and significant voices, were seen by
the mind. This of thunder is (I say) a vision of sounds. Here Deus factis
loquitur; here things exhibited to the eye of the mind, represent other things
distinct from themselves. But the word of the Lord requires axiomaticall
disposition, as we may gather from examples throughout the Scripture.

Thirdly, Prophetical vision had evermore the word of the Lord, joined with it,
unless it exhibited to the mind proper representations of things presignified.
But the word of the Lord, if conceived in tropicall, or also allegorical
terms, in which it was to be exhibited to the people; if not clear by it self,
was in proper representations, which also were verbum Domini, elucidated in the
mind of the prophet. A See Thom. Aquin 2.2. q. 173. art. 2 (in corpore
articuli) and 4. Cum autem monetur propheta, sed non cognoscit, non est
perfecta prophetia, sed instinctus quidam propheticus. See also D. Jackson in
his bhok entitled, The knowledge of Christ Jesus, chap. 16.
prophet properly so called understood the analogy between visions and the
events represented by them. Without this knowledge he remained unable to
foretell what should come to pass, and so unworthy of the name of a prophet.
He only tells what is present, but cannot foretell what is future, who
imparteth to others prophetical resemblances which he does not understand:
neither visions allegorical, or simply tropicall, sufficed to predictions.
This is clear from Genesis 41.
Pharaohs two dreams. Although he saw seven ill favored and lean-fleshed kine
to devour seven well-favoured and fat kine; and the seven thin ears of corn,
to devour the seven rank and full ears, yet he understood not that there
should ensue seven good years, and after those seven bad years, and that the
scarcity should consume the plenty, till he met with an interpreter. Joseph
through divine illumination could expound Pharaohs visions, in like manner as
if they had been originally his own. This light vouchsafed to Joseph was like
such similitudes as are wont to be produced by speech, and consequently was
verbum Domini. His understanding unless so illuminated could not certainly
apprehend from the dreams what should come to pass (although he should have
known that they were sent into Pharaohs mind by God, and that they were
significative of somewhat future) no more then by its self infallibly foreknow
contingent things. No created mind can be raised into this perspicacity.
Prescience of what is contingent is proper and peculiar to God. Prophetical
vision was often times illustrated, as we see, by the word of the Lord. The word
of the Lord was manifest in it self, or declared by prophetical influence of
the same kind. This is their third difference. I acknowledge (without
revocation of what has been said concerning vision and the word of the Lord
distinguished,) that a prophet informed by either kind of divine influences
mentioned was called ( Roeh and chozeh) a seer, and that God spoke to his
prophets by visions. I well attend that the word of the Lord to Ananias, is
called ((...)) a vision, (Acts 9.10.) that Isaiah saw the word of the Lord,
Isaiah 2.1. moreover that God spoke in diverse manners to the Fathers by the
prophets. An answer is mingled with the objection. I add that the
understanding may be called the eye of the soul, that a prophet by Heathens was
called vates (as Thom. Aquin. 2.2. quaest. 171 art. 1.
some conceive) a vi mentis, as more perspicacious then others; that the word
of the Lord, was supernatural light. Moreover that external words, ((...))
when written, became the objects of outward sight, and that Deus factis
loquitur. Abarbinel in his preface to his comment upon Esaias, conceives
(although we read often in sacred Scriptures that God spoke to Moses,) that the
Lord never revealed himself to Moses, by that kind of prophecy which is called
the word of the Lord. Hence it is clear, he thought the word of the Lord to be
a distinct kind, or (at least) manner of prophecy, and that God spoke to the
prophets by other revelations besides the prophetical word. For further
satisfaction see Aristot. (...), as digested by Goulson, chap. 13. But in his
works Graeco-Lat. printed at Paris in 4. tomes, Ann. 1639. chapter 21. (...).

Angels which appeared visibly to men might be called ((...)) visions,
according to Luke 1.22. The spirit which keeps our souls in life, performs the
offices of the soul, does abundantly compensate that scantnesse which is in its
faculties. Man's happy in his defects. These occasionally unite him to God,
who vouchsafes graciously to become their compensation. (...) moreover (...)
(see Aristotle in the fifth chapter of his third book de anima, t. 18.) the
same after an eminent manner agrees to God. Gods works within us are as
admirable as his works without us. What he made by creation without us, that he
can create again by illumination within us. By repeating what he spoke in the
beginning of the creation, Let there be light; he can make us to understand
whatsoever he has made. What Aristotle attributes to the mind is much rather
to be ascribed to God. Intellectus, as it is agens, cannot be said to make all
things, but with limitations. Any created understanding, at most is but (as
Aeschylus says of fire stolen by Prometheus) (...).
Intellectus agens ((...)) makes all things quoad cognosci. God likewise makes
all things quoad esse, (...). Such things as are known, have not only to be
known, but also to be even their essences from the chief good, (as Plato
divinely in his 6. de repub.) Again, the understanding makes all things quoad
cognosci, that is, all things which in an ordinary way are known: God can make
whatsoever has a being, to be known. Colleg. Conimbr. in 3. de anima, c. 5. q.
2. a. 1.
The Peripateticks tell us, that intellectus agens has three offices: 1.
illustrat phantasmata: 2. efficit objectum intelligibile actu: 3. producit in
intellectu species intelligibiles. Some add a fourth, viz. that it compoundeth
and divides simple representations of things intelligible. These conditions if
truly attributed to the understanding, may be attributed also to God, as
concurring with it. Plato lib. 6. de repub.
(...). He makes the sight to see, and such things as are seen to be perceived.
The understanding in all its actions depends upon God, but God in the
production of intelligible representations needs not the concourse of the
understanding, nor yet the presence of the object from whence those
intellectual forms, which are commonly said to be produced ab intellectu
agente, proceed. Vision and the word of the Lord were immediately from God; the
intellectual faculty and intelligible objects not interceding. God has
vouchsafed to perform by himself the three offices of the understanding before
mentioned. Christ, when he had expounded the Scriptures to his disciples,
opened their understandings, Luke 24.44, 45. God by giving the spirit of
prophecy, illustrated what was to be known, illuminated the minds of those to
whom he communicated himself, and made what was remote actually intelligible.
Moreover vision and the word of the Lord, in the minds of prophets were
representative of things compounded or divided. Themistius tells us that (...),
that intellectus agens is most like unto God. Alexander in his second book de
anima, chap. 20. and 21. holds that intellectus agens is God, that it is that
understanding which was the creator of all things. Plato seems to be almost of
the same opinion by his sixth book de republica. Themistius upon the third de
anima conceives as much. What Aristotle (as appears from his words before
cited) attributes to a light within us, Plato ( de repub. lib. 6.) referres to
a sun without us; to him who is the true light, that enlighteneth every one
that comes into the world, (I mean) to the eternal Son of God. Knowledge
(says Plato) is (...). Besides the eye of the mind and intelligible objects,
he judges a sun necessary to the procreation of sight, of truth, of
knowledge. (...). This sun (to wit whose beams are knowledge and truth) I
call the offspring (or son) of the chief good, whom the chief good has
begotten like and equal to himself: what this in an intelligible place to the
mind and things understood, that the other corporeal sun in a visible place
to the sight and things seen. Almost each word is big with a deity. The son
of the chief good! and whom the chief good has begotten! and begotten like to
himself! and who is that to the mind and things intelligible, which the sun
to the sight and visible objects! and that sun in an intelligible world, as
this in the visible! He could not speak more clearly that there is a Son of
God; or that this Son of God is God; or that by him mankind is illustrated.
Platonists had as good reason to conceive that S. John was one of their tribe
from the ninth as from the first verse of the first chapter of his (...), etc.
thus Amelius in Eusebius. praeparat. Evangel. lib. 11. c. 19. Vigerus thus
translateth him into latin: Atque hoc plane verbum erat, inquit, per quod
sempiternum cum esset, existebant omnia quae siebant, quemadmod m Heraclitus
loqueretur, quod ipsum videlicet Barbarus etiam ille, apud Deum in principii
gradu ac dignitate constitutum, imo and Deum simul esse pronunciat: per quod
facta simpliciter omnia s^nt, in quo quicquid factum est, and vivens and vita,
and aliquod pro sua quodque naturae fuerit, etc.
Gospel. Mankind is illuminated by Christ the eternal word and wisdom of God.
This illumination by Plato has place in Metaphysicall contemplations.
Corruptible things are (says he) confused, mingled with darkness, and (as
colors not illustrated by the sun) have a perpetual cloud upon them. The
mind converting it self to these, is perplexed and intricated in uncertainty
and diversity of opinions. Truth and knowledge are begotten by an union of the
soul with the idea's of the divine essence. According to Plato God (we see) is
intellectus agens, to wit, performs, when metaphysicall truths are
understood, what offices are commonly ascribed to that faculty. That God
performs by himself what is attributed to the said faculty, when truths are
conveyed into the mind after a metaphysicall way, viz. by the spirit of
prophecy; cannot be denied. That the lowest order of Angels, by the Rabbis
supposed to confer the spirit of prophecy, See Maimon. de sundam. legit, c.
7. sect. 2. Vorstius upon that tractate, c. 1. p. 19. c. 7. p. 90. Seldom, de
Jure Naturali and Gentium juxta disciplinam Hebraeorum, lib. 1 c 9. p. 110,
111, 112, 113, 114, 115. That learned Author in these pages confirms, that
some Pagans, Jews, Mahumedans, and Christians have conceived, that somewhat
distinct from the soul, to wit, the supreme God, or some of his ministering
spirits, or each answerably to differences of persons, and occasions, were
intellectus agens. I have not h^re produced any testimonies about Intellectus
agens, but what occasioned by discoursing of prophecy, I cited in public,
before that noble work was printed. Authentic writings intimate, as I shall
show hereafter, that God spoke to the Prophets sometimes immediately, sometimes
by his ambassadors the Angels. Later Jews (as sectatours of Plato) are more
for mediators, then were their predecessors; yet some of them as they hold
that their nation is governed immediately by divine providence (without the
intercession of the host of heaven and the Angels) so likewise that God
immediately illuminated Hebrews, which became Prophets. I may not here omit
that Ralbag upon Pro. 1.8. departs from most writers of his tribe (I mean
Jewish Doctors) as making intellectus agens the mind, or a faculty of it, and
that, against all reason, passive. Upon the comma quoted, (My son, hear the
instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother) by father he
understands God, and by mother, intellectus agens. Intellectus agens, (its
convenient here to prefer his sense before a Grammatical construction)
conceive^h Prophetical influences instilled into it by God. For this cause (as
he goes on) our Doctors of blessed memory have called it Metatron, which
signifies a mother in the Roman language
is by them called (...) intellectus agens, evidently shows that they were of
the same opinion.

The Apostles filled with the holy Ghost, began to speak with other tongues, as
the spirit gave them utterance, Acts 2.4. (...) est sententiosa quaedam and
mirifica loqui: cujusmodi erant (...), item non tam ex se quam ex numinis
afflatu and impulsu loqui, sicut de prophetis scribitur, 2. Pet. 1.21. Thus
Beza upon that text. They spoke with other tongues, as the spirit imprinted in
their minds representations, or characters, such as was the prophetical word.
It Is easy likewise by what has been spoken, to interpret that of our Savior,
Mat. 10.19. It shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak.
Divine truths contained in sacred Scriptures, by which soever of the ways
mentioned at first revealed to Prophets, when to be committed to writing, were
by the word of the Lord as a new edition imprinted in the mind of the penman,
if not known before to such a person, or if forgotten, perhaps sometimes as to
be further confirmed to him; Maimonie saw this truth, but perplexed, and as
through a cloud. See More Nevoch. part. 2. cap. 45. de secundo gradu prophetia.
at least wise God by the secret insinuation of his spirit, unless he used the
ministry of an Angel, or some other outward expression equivalent, commanded
that he should write what he perceived. And what thou see write in a book,
Rev. 1.11. Write the things which thou have seen, etc. verse. 19. We have other
instances in the Apocalypse, chap. 14.13. and 19.6. and 21.5. When any one by
divine authority wrote, what he knew by the light of nature, or what things he
had seen done, his Commission had the like signature. That divine influence
which was called the word of the Lord, was often (as I may fitly call it) the
(...), that or somewhat equivalent, was always the seal of truths, whereof God
peculiarly and by way of appropriation vouchsafed to be accounted the author.

I have reckoned up several ways, and (I believe) the heads of all, according
to which God revealed himself to his Prophets. Those who understood what should
come to pass, by notions instilled into their minds, had vast advantage if
compared with such as were informed by external resemblances, See Maimon. de
fundam. leg. c. 7. and Vorsti^^ ibid.
and are the only men by Rabbis thought worthy to be entitled Prophets. Some
Hebrew Doctors affirm, that Bathcol (filia vocis, of which I have spoken
already) was in Israel after prophecy ceased; and that Urim and Thummim is one
of the According to some Hebrew Doctors some degrees of the holy Ghost fall
short of prophecy. Urim and Thummim are disposed by Maimon. in the second
degree of (or rather to) prophecy. See More Nevoch. part. 2. cap. 45. Abarbinel
with others are divided from Maimon. etc. He affirms in his Comments upon
Esaias 11. that there was no prophecy, and that there was no holy Ghost in the
times of the second House. (...) Bath kol according to this Doctor could be no
degree of the holy Ghost.
degrees of the holy Ghost, between that voice and prophecy. But I cannot
persuade my self to rely upon Rabbinicall Scriptures, unless for history
concerning things appertaining to their own nation and their ancestors;
neither in that perpetually.

Prophecy seems to be distinguished from dreams sent into the mind by God, and
from Urim. 1. Sam. 28.6. When Saul enquired of the Lord, the Lord answered him
not, neither by dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets.

General words for several reasons are confined to part of their
signification.

Moreover, those were Prophets eminently, who had resemblances of things future
impressed upon their minds as occasions required, throughout the remainder or
Necessario enim ause^tur prophetia ab omnibus reliquis prophetis (excepto Mose)
ante mortem istorum; idque vel brevi, vel diu, sicuti patet exemplo Jeremiae,
de quo dicitur; ad finiendum: vel, quo finiebatur verbum Domini in ore
Jeremiae: and Davidis de quo legimus; and ista sunt verba Davidis postrema.
Idem enim est judicium de omnibus. More Nevoch part. 2. c. 45. Although I
approved not Maimonides his opinion, I conceived it not necessary to contradict
it.
greatest part of their lives after God once began to reveal himself in such
manner to them. God sometimes upon special occasions revealed himself to some
extraordinarily in dreams, who^ he never (if we may judge by histories
propagated to us, and other probable reasons) before or after illuminated by
prophetical influences. See Genesis 20.3. and 31.24. Matthew. 2.12. Joseph the
husband of the Virgin Mary, though God spoke to him sundry times in dreams,
according to his private exigencies, moreover when he commanded him to flee
into Egypt, communicated to him the present danger of the child Jesus; when he
enjoined him to return into Judea, the death of Herod who had sought the life
of the child, is no where called a prophet. God signified not to Saul by dreams
what he should do, or what he should omit, as to Laban, Abimelech, and to the
wise men of the east, who had visited our Savior at Bethlehem, and to Joseph.
God neither made him a prophet for his private and present necessity, nor yet
informed him by his prophets in ordinary.

Quando vero dicitur, and venit Deus ad N. in somnio noctis, id prophetia
minime nuncupari potest, neque vir tal^^ propheta: sensus etenim est quod
((...)) adm^nitio, (...) quaedam, viro ejusmodi a Deo facta fuerit; deinde quod
in somnio illa contigerit. Nam quemadmodum Deus caussatur, ut homo moveatur ad
alium vel defendendum and liberandum, vel perdendum and cccidendum: sic quoque
caussa est Deus ortus illarum rerum, quas in somniis nocturnis exoriri vult.
Notum enim est, neque ullum dubium, quin Laban Syrus perfectissime impius
fuerit and idololatra: and Abimelech, licet vir bonus in suo populo fuerit,
tamen de ipso, de terra and regno ejus dicit Abraham, Non est timor Dei in isto
loco: nihilominus de utroque, Labane, inquam, and Abimelecho legimus; and venit
Deus ad Abimelech in somnio noctis: and venit Deus ad Labanem Syrum in somnio
noctis. Quocirca observa istam differentiam inter haec duo, and venit Dominus:
Item, and dixit Dominus: and inter in somnio noctis, and in visionibus noctis.
De Jacobo dicitur, Et dixit Deus ad Israelem in visionibus noctis: de Labane
autem and Abimelecho, and venit Deus, etc. Hac de causa exposuit Onk los ista;
and venit verbum a Domino: non autem dixit de duobus istis, and revelavit se
Dominus. Maimon. part. 2. cap 41. Compare Matthew. 2.12. The wisemen being warned
of God in a dream, that they should not return to Herod* departed into their
own country another way. This Scripture in part approves what cited out of
Maimonides. Eliphaz, though not to be reckoned a Prophet, was instructed from
visions of the night, Job 4.13. Truths not contingent, but of eternal
necessity, are suggested to him after the way of prophecy, by which we are
virtually admonished not to plead with God.
Again, those more properly may be said to have been prophets, who were informed
by divine revelation what should come to pass, then those who merely what they
should do or omit. God often vouchsafed the latter to some to whom he denied the
former; but was wont to reveal the latter to whom he communicated the former.
God frequently in dreams imparted to men what he would have them to do or omit;
so by Urim and Thummim to the Israelites, that they should go up or not go up
to battle, without presignification of any event. The rest of the Israelites
were commanded to go up against the Benjamites, yet were discomfited by them.
God instructed not Saul whether or no he should go up against the Philistims,
by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by any who was wont to foretell future events. The
words are yet capable of another interpretation. God answered not Saul by
dreams or by Vrim, that is, revealed not to him whether or no he should go up
to battle; nor yet by prophets, that is, what should be the issue, if he went
up, whether or no he should be victorious.

That noted place in Homer, Il. 4. (...), etc. is explained by what I have now
commented upon 1. Sam. 28.6. Among the Egyptians the high Priest is reported by
Aelian in the last book of his history, to have worn about his neck a saphyre
stone, which was called ((...)) Truth, (in imitation of the Jews Urim and
Thummim, which also Empereur upon Moses Kimchi's (...) ad scientiam, l. 2. c.
7. and Ainsworth upon Exodus 28. observed. Urim and Thummim in regard of the
manner after which Gods will was thereby revealed, may be referred to prophecy.
And the dignity of the high Priest resulting from this ornament was the more
conspicuous, in that revelation was in the first place made to himself alone,
and by him communicated to those who came to enquire of the Lord. When any
enquired, the Priest stood with his face before the Ark; and he that enquired
stood behind him, with his face to the back of the Priest, if we may believe
Maimonie, etc. Paul instructed by a differing kind of revelation, had as great
advantage of his fellow-travellers. He heard an articulate voice, they only a
sound. God often conversed as privately, but not so familiarly, with those to
whom he communicated himself by outward, as with them into whom he inspired
inward representations of things to be made known. God was more intimate to
these transcribed himself into their minds: they were pleni Deo. But howsoever
idea's of things to be known infused into the mind, were more a man's own then
those that were objects of the ear or the eye; the word of the Lord derived by
the sense of hearing, or (when written) by sight, more enabled to prediction of
things to be accomplished. External vision, howsoever tropicall, together with
the word of the Lord interpreting it, sufficed to the foretelling of what
should come to pass; and internal vision, unless exhibited in proper
resemblances, plain terms, was impotent to that purpose.

The external word was sufficient by it self to make a Prophet. Samuel by the
Lords speaking audibly to him, was known to be a Prophet throughout Israel.

If God (as Josephus reports Antiquit. Judaic. l. 3. c. 9.) when he would be
pleased to go forth with the Israelites armies, and to deliver their enemies
into their hands, foretold victory toward them by supernatural splendor of
the twelve precious stones in the breast plate of judgment, verbum propheticum
statum determined that sign to this signification. The onyx upon the right
shoulder of the Priest, shining in time of sacrifice could not be the Urim.
Aben-ezra upon Exodus 28. observes that Urim, as also Thummim, is ((...)) res
plures. Josephus perhaps thought the twelve precious stones named Exodus 28. as
by extraordinary brightness prophesying victory, were the Urim, (lights:) and
as by their native and constant virtues representing that holiness and
integrity which God expected in his ministers were Tummim (perfections.) What
before expressed at large, and quoted, oppose some difficulties against this
opinion. Aben-ezra tells us expressly upon Levit. 8.8. that Urim and Tummim
were not the stones of the breast plate. That I may regresse whence I have
diverted; Abarbinel (in his Preface to his comments on Esaias,) dormitat, See
also Maimon. in More Nevoc. part. 2. c. 36. 42, 44. and passim.
as conceiving (...) and (...) (somnium and visio) to be species of prophecy,
adequately dividing it; moreover (with his author there cited) as believing
that the Word of the Lord is ((...)) Prophecy conveyed in a dream. Although we
find not in sacred Scriptures (...) (And the word of the Lord, was to Moses)
nor (...)) The word of the Lord, which was to Moses,) it is clear that both
Moses and Esaias were often illuminated by that kind of prophetical influence. Who
received vision or the word of the Lord, waking, had advantage of those, who
received the same kind of prophetical influence, sleeping. Hebrew Doctors are
discovered to have been of this judgment, asserting See Abarbinel in the
preface to his comments upon Esaias.
that the spirit of prophecy never came upon Moses, who by their unanimous
consent is the coriphaeus of Prophets, nor upon Isaiah eminent in prophecy,
except when his spirit was dejected with grief for Hezekiah, but when he was
waking. Christ was informed according to his humane nature by that It appears
from what precedeth that there were two kinds of prophetical resemblances, the
Word of the Lord, and vision, that each (distributed ex subjectis) was
internal or external, that inward representations of each kind, in regard of
the dispositions of the subject, may be distributed into those which fell into
the minds of Prophets waking, and those which were infused in time of sleep. I
conceive that agreeably enough to Hebr. 1.1. a distinct subject, or varying
disposition (such as mentioned) of the same, suffices to make distinctum
((...)) modum prophetiae, but that I may fully be understood; add that Christ
was altogether informed by the most perfect kind of prophecy, (viz the word of
the Lord,) conveyed after the most familiar and noble way (to wit, infused into
his mind,) and when he was most conveniently disposed ( viz. awake.)
manner of revelation, which was most noble, by the word of the Lord impressed
upon his mind, whilst he was waking. No instances can be alleged against this
assertion. Christ, as a man, was accomplished in prophecy, both for substance
and circumstances, to the extent of humane capacity.

Fifthy, Prophetical influence was not at any time conveyed into Christ's mind
by the ministry of an Angel. Deus permittit quaedam (says Julius Scaliger:
Exercit. 307. sect. 25.
) alia insinuat per se, id est, afflatu: alia per ministros immateriales: alia
per materiales, unde oriuntur disciplinae ex scientiarum communicatione: alia
per principia naturalia connata nobis: quae (...) ab Aristotele appellantur.
Plato imagined that the souls of some men departed made demons, dispensed
prophecy to the living, as De Isid. and Osyride.
Plutarch observes. Whether or no souls in statu separato, can communicate
their conceits to those in statu conjuncto, or yet one with another; and if so,
by what means, are difficulties which cannot be resolved by the light of
natural reason. I doubt not, but Scaligers immateriall ministers are the
Angels. I cannot see but these may illuminate men's souls, as well as one
another. See Vorstius upon Maimon. de fundamentis legis. c. 7.
Talis prophetiae extruitur discriptio ex Hebraeorum mente: (...) Prophetia est
influxus promanans a creatore in prophetam, interventu ultimi gradus angelorum,
seu Ischin. When the spirit (of prophecy) rests upon any one (says Maimonie
de Fundam. leg. c. 7. sect. 2.) (...) commiscebitur animae ejus cum gradu
Angelorum, qui vocantur Ishim. In's More Nevochim, he excepteth Moses. He
affirms that all other Prophets were illuminated by the ministry of Angels.
The same author ( de cultu stellarum ac planetarum, and statutis Gentium, cap.
6. sect. 2.) witnesses that Ob (that old serpent) gave answers to those who
inquired of him, Compare with this place, after Dionys. Voss. Esaias 29.4.
not perceivable by the ear, but ((...)) cogitatione. (...) Angelus praefectus
spiritibus (viz. of those who are about to die, and of the dead) by Talmudists
is called (...) perhaps from species (which are like to things represented)
impressed upon the spirits of such as are obnoxious to this Angel, about to
die, (whose souls he is supposed to call out of their bodies) or dead. Rabbines
affirm that species were sometimes instilled by Angels into the understanding,
sometimes into the fancy according to diverse degrees of prophecy. I shall
add Thom. Aquin. prima summae Theol. q. 111. art. 1. He follows Dyonis.
affirming (cap. 4. coelest. Hierarch.) that prophetical revelations are not
conferred upon men but by the mediation of Angels. Intellectus humanus (as he
fondly conceives) non potest ipsam intelligibilem veritatem nudam capere, quia
connaturale est ei ut intelligat per conversionem ad phantasmata, and ideo
intelligibilem veritatem proponunt Angels hominibus sub similitudinibus
sensibilium; secundum illud quod dicit Dionys. cap. 1. coelest. Hierar. Quod
impossible est aliter lucere nobis divinu^ radium, nisi varietate sacroru^
velaminum circumvelatum.

R. Meir in Avoda Kodesh part. 4. c. 28. is of opinion that Angels never
conveyed revelation to prophets properly so called: that according to the
opinion of some ancient writers, they were created on the first and fifth
days, and invested in aerie bodies, appeared to such as were below the degree
of Prophets, constituted in the first degree of vision, which was called
((...)) gradus vestimenti, or in the second which was called ((...)) apertio
oculorum.

These conceits may conveniently be omitted without refutation. An Angel spoke
within Zachary, Zach. 2.3. (...) That is, after Hierome, and ecce angelus, qui
loquebatur in me egrediebatur. (Yet I deny not but the words (...) may
signify what I find in the Caldee paraphrast, (...) that is (as in our English
translation) talking with me. I find in August. de spiritu and anima (if that
book be his work) this sentence; Angeli miris modis visiones suas facili quadam
ac potenti unione nostras esse faciunt, and quodam ineffabili modo in spiritu
nostro informant, atque imprimunt, ut spiritus earum non possit oblivisci.
Erasmus denies this tractate to be S. Austins; and Trithemius says that Hugo a
sancto victore compiled it. But S. Augustine in his 4. book de Trinitate, has
what to the purpose. Neque ad illud quidem digni habiti sunt (he speaks
concerning heathenish philosophers) ut eis ista per sanctos angelos
nunciarentur, sive forinsecus per sensus corporis, sive interioribus
revelationibus in spiritu expressis, sicut patribus nostris vera pietate
praeditis, haec demonstrata sunt. As God used Angels in the dispensing of
prophecies that he might honor them by so noble employment, so men are the
more enobled, when they have more immediate converse with God. I may here
seasonably add to what I before quoted out of Jews, the opinion of Mahumedans.
They tell us that God speaks to man three ways, viz per inspirationem, aut
compellando ex occulto, aut per missionem legati. He revealed (say they) to
Abraham that he should sacrifice his son. He spoke after the second way to
Moses. So he speaks to angels. Sic quoque alloquetur Deus aliquando piam
anima^, videlicet vel in morte vel in resurrectione, vel in ingressu in
paradisum. God spoke to Christ (say they) as to other prophets (Moses excepted)
by an angel vide plura apud Levin. Warner. incompend. hist. eorum quae
Muhammedani de Christo, and praecipuis aliquot religionis Christianae capitib.
tradiderunt, p. 8, 19. My Thesis (viz. That Christ according to his humane
nature was immediately illuminated) is confirmed by Jews and Mahumedans
contradicting it.
Moses, esteemed most excellent in prophecy, was thought (as I have said) to
have enjoyed immediately colloquio Dei. He stood upon the highest degree of
Jacobs ladder, and therefore needed not angels ascending and descending. I
shall here again make use of that lemma, with which I concluded the last
article of my discourse: I may here seasonably add to what I before quoted out
of Jews, the opinion of Mahumedans. They tell us that God speaks to man three
ways, viz per inspirationem, aut compellando ex occulto, aut per missionem
legati. He revealed (say they) to Abraham that he should sacrifice his son. He
spoke after the second way to Moses. So he speaks to angels. Sic quoque
alloquetur Deus aliquando piam anima^, videlicet vel in morte vel in
resurrectione, vel in ingressu in paradisum. God spoke to Christ (say they) as
to other prophets (Moses excepted) by an angel vide plura apud Levin. Warner.
incompend. hist. eorum quae Muhammedani de Christo, and praecipuis aliquot
religionis Christianae capitib. tradiderunt, p. 8, 19. My Thesis (viz. That
Christ according to his humane nature was immediately illuminated) is confirmed
by Jews and Mahumedans contradicting it.
Christ's humane nature was inspired with the spirit of prophecy, (both
substance and circumstances attended) in its perfection.

Sixthly, the soul of Christ was never, whilst it received divine revelation,
in an ecstasie; Christ according to his humane nature had in this respect great
advantage of other prophets. Ecstasis according to Lactanctius, est affectus
eorum, qui mente sunt emota. 1. (...) in Hippocrates and Galen is the same that
(...). This kind of ecstasie by Aristotle is called (...), by Plutarch (...),
by Chrysostom (...). 2. An ecstasie is taken for a peremptory sequestration
from thoughts and dealings with the world, for the ravishment of the mind by
contemplation of truths revealed to it, Acts 10.10. and 22.17. The soul raised
from the body by extraordinary converse and union with God, is ecstaticall. 3.
(...) is taken for astonishment through admiration, (Mark 5.42. Luke 5.26.)
(...).
with Suidas is interpreted by (...). 4. (...) is amazement or astonishment
arising from admiration mingled with fear, almost the same that (...), Mark
16.8. 5. Abscessus, discessus, (...). Calidorum fervor nullius rei accessu, sed
caloris abscessu refrigescit. 6. Egressio rei e natura propria. so it is the
same that (...). In this sense it is used by Theophrast. lib. 3. de cause. plant.
by Plutarch, sympos. 8. Lactantius his description of ecstasis is as we see too
narrow. Some Hebrew Doctors hold, that Prophets suffered an ecstasie in the
last acception. See Vorstius upon Maimon. de fundam. leg. c. 7. s. 2. I esteem
this opinion altogether unworthy of refutation. Montanus by words, or gestures,
or both, affirmed that Prophets were wont to be driven into ecstasies of the
first and fifth kind mentioned; that they were driven into fury, and bereaved
of the use of reason. The former of these opinions is refuted by Miltiades
quoted by Apolinarius, and out of Apolinarius by Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 17.
Eusebius: both of them by Hierome in his preface to his Comments upon Esaias,
and Cunaeus de repub. Judaeor. lib. 3. cap. 7. That God pro lumine adempto (if
we understand the light of reason) scire futura daret, implies a
contradiction. If any affirm that Gods Prophets uttered predictions, which by
reason of ecstasies into which they were transported, they were less able then
others to understand: I add, that what is reckoned the first among Gods gifts
bestowed upon his Ministers, should prejudice the receivers. I cannot suspect
that Gods prophets were not sui compotes. One main reason for which God
all-sufficient by himself, uses instruments, is that he may honor his
creatures by making them his Ministers. I readily believe that it is otherwise
with the devils agents. How savagely he deals with them we may gather from
Clem. Alex. in Admonit. ad Gentes, (edit. Paris. Anno 1641. p. 58.) Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 16. demonstr. Evang. lib. 5. prooem. Neither ought we
to measure Gods prophets who were sanctified persons, by unrighteous men to
whom upon certain occasions he communicated himself. Dicitur in V. T. Propheta
qui furore (...) correptus eructat verba quae ipse non intelligit, ad laudem
Dei pertinentia, quamvis non fundat oracula de futuris. Talis Saul qui primo
libro Samuelis cap. 19.24. prophetans abjecto paludimento, humi volutabatur:
quae quidem erat insania quaedam (...), ad avertendum ejus cogitationem a
Davide, quem quaerebat ad necem. Molin. in his Vates, lib. 1. c. 4. See also
John 11.50, 51. Caiaphas understood not his prophecy. Peter and Paul fell into
ecstasies of the second kind, Acts 10.10. and 22.17. Gods prophets (I conceive)
were often astonished through admiration and fear, (single, or both together)
whilst God revealed himself to them, especially if by instruments perceiveable
by the ear or eye, Moses hid his face: for he was afraid to look upon God,
Exodus 3.6. The women to whom an Angel appeared at Christ's sepulcher, were
affrighted, Mark 16.5. when the prophet Daniel saw a vision, (Dan. 10.8.) there
remained no strength, no comeliness in him. Frail man, ever since Adams fall,
has been wont to be afraid of messengers from heaven. We hence apprehend that
Gods prophets sometimes suffered also an ecstasie, or want of vigor in their
corporeal faculties. Their senses were undoubtedly weakened together with
their bodies. Yet I cannot believe what some Jews affirm, That a prophet,
whether receiving a vision or a dream, (they acknowledge no other way to
prophecy unless in Moses) was, during the time of his information, (...) say
Hebrew Doctors. See Abarbinel in his preface to his comments upon Esaias.
wholly bereaved of the use of his senses. Besides that fear which naturally
accompanies man in statu lapso, another reason may be rendered of that
faintness which befalls the body in prophetical revelations. Maimon.
consents, de fundam. leg. cap. 7. s. 3.
The soul neglects those offices which it is wont to perform to the body, as
occupied by those glorious objects which are offered to the mind. Thence
together with Gods goodness dilating the mind, as also from the divine
revelations, the intellectual faculty of the soul is strengthened: so far what
causes a weakness in the body, is from introducing a deliquium in the
understanding. Christ in that according to his humane nature he was pure from
guilt, could not be astonished with fear; nor yet, since nothing befell him
whereof he knew not the reason, with admiration. The inferior part of his soul
was so far conformed to the superior, and this to Gods will, that I cannot
conceive that he was obnoxious to ecstasies of the second kind. Divine truths
were familiar to him: it was as meat and drink to him to do the will of his
Father. Forasmuch as he was not touched with fear, nor yet raised above his
ordinary temper and capacity, when revelation was suggested to his humane
nature, he was illuminated without detriment to the strength of his body and
sensitive faculties. That I may conclude this article, each kind of ecstasie in
some respect or other denotes imperfection. Moses is by Jews more exempted
from them then the rest of the Prophets. Our Savior was humbled by his
sufferings, but so as he ever remained most eminent in his offices.

Seventhly, we ow to Christ's merits all revelations of divine truths since
Adams fall, whether before or under the Law. This assertion needs no
explication.

Our Savior was anointed a King, a Priest, and a Prophet. Melchisedec was a
King and a Priest; Moses, as also David was a King and a Prophet; Elijah a
Priest and a Prophet; our Savior (as Some hold that Melchisedec was a type of
Christ according to his three offices.
some conceive) was the first who was anointed King, Priest, and Prophet, was
the true Trismegistum vero ter maximum nuncuparunt, quoniam and philosophus
maximus, and sacerdos maximus, and rex maximus ex licit. Marcil. Ficin. in arg.
ad Mercurii Trismegisti Pymand.
Trismegist. He was anointed that he might be fitted to save. He was Christ
before he was Jesus. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat
which endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto
you: for him has God the Father sealed, Joh. 6.27. Christ glorified not
himself to be made an high Priest, but he that says unto him, Thou art my
Son, to day I have begotten thee.

As he says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order
of Melchisedec, Heb. 5.5, 6. see also verse 1. and 4. of the same chapter.
Christ was authorized by God to save sinners. We have the great seal of heaven
for his sufficiency: we may safely rely upon him as our Jesus. This name
imports the end of Christ's coming into the world, and what benefit is to be
received from him. Thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the
virgins love thee, Can. 1.3. Jesus is nothing else but Christus protensus or
effusus: Our high priest shed his blood, poured out his soul for us. The
ointment wherewith Christ was consecrated, Psalm. 133.2.
runs down to the skirts of his garment, perfumes each member of the Church
whereof he is Head. Non modo lux, sed and cibus quoque est nomen Jesu: oleum
quoque sine quo aridus est omnis animae cibus: sal est sine cujus conditura
insipidum est quicquid proponitur: denique est mel in ore, in aure melos,
jubilum, and simul medicina (as sweetly Bernard). O salvificum and animarum
liquefactivum superdulce nomen Jesu! This Name in these Scriptures is the same
that the person named. The number of names together were about an hundred and
twenty, Act. 1.15. Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and
shall teach men so, shall be called the least (that is, shall be the least) in
the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.19. neither were these phrases peculiar to
Hebrews.
name is above every name, Phil. 2.9, 10. There is no other Name in these
Scriptures is the same that the person named. The number of names together were
about an hundred and twenty, Act. 1.15. Whosoever shall break one of these
least commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called the least (that is,
shall be the least) in the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.19. neither were these
phrases peculiar to Hebrews.
name under heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12.

That I may omit varios lusus eruditorum ingeniorum, collected by Scultet. (
delit. evangel. c. 1.) the reason of the name imposed, expressed Matthew. 1.21.
leads us to the true notation: She shall bring forth a son, and thou shall
call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins. The name in
Greek and Latin imitateth the Syriak (...). Many ancient writers of note
affirm, that S. Matthews Gospel was first written in Hebrew. Any language used
by Hebrews, may as well be called Hebrew, as Jews Assyrians, because
(captivated) for some years they lived some of them in Assyria. Sacred
Scriptures are (...) with Themistius (...) where he quoteth the beginning of
the 21 chapter of Solomon's Proverbs, (...). I judged this whole period worthy
to be exscribed.
It Is probable they meant Syriack, the language used by Hebrews in the times of
our Savior and his Apostles. S. Matthews Gospel, and the epistle to the
Hebrews were probably first written in Syriack. Tremellius in his preface to
the translation of the Syriack Testament, conceives that the The postscript to
the Gospel of Mark in Erpenius his Arabic edition, tells us, that S. Mark
wrote it in Latin. Many writers, not of vulgar note, testify as much.
Concerning the archetypall languages, in which the Gospels of Mark and Luke
were written, see learned M. Seldom in Eutychii orig. page 152, 160, 161, 164.
rest of the Syriack Testament anciently extant, was translated out of the
Greek into that language by the Apostles themselves, or their disciples. He
uses as an argument for the antiquity of that translation, that the second
Epistle of S. Peter, the second and third of John, the epistle of Jude, the
Apocalypse, and the history of the accusation of the adulteress, John 8. are
wanting in it. I shall not need to object any thing against his reason, besides
that he acknowledged those Scriptures omitted in the ancient Syriack
translation authentic, and that it is improbable that the penmen of the New
Testament, forasmuch as they were the Amanuenses of the holy Ghost, completed
any their writings, after they were made public, by a second edition. The
history of the adulteress in S. John, is surely ex confesso, as ancient as the
rest of his Gospel.

The Gospel according to S. Matthew (says Theophylact) was translated into
Greek by John the Evangelist; by James the brother of our Lord, says
Athanasius; Hierome confesses he is ignorant who was the Greek interpreter of
that Scripture. The Syriack word for Jesus, is originally from the Hebrew word
(...) whose Hophal in writings yet extant (in sacred Scriptures) signifies
servavit, or rather salvavit. Hence Hoshea the name of the son of Nun, who
led the children of Israel into the earthly Canaan, and so prefigured Jesus who
leads true Israelites into the heavenly. His name, Jews feign that jodh was
added to the beginning of a masculine name, because it was taken from the end
of a feminine (Sarai), solicitous lest the Law should loose one iota.
jodh added, began with the same letter. Sigma in the end of our Saviors name
supposes for nghajin; a dentall for a gutturall. In the Caldee word (...)
terra, we have a gutturall for a dentall. There Is the same way from Thebes to
Athens, and from Athens to Thebes. The last letter of (...), might perhaps be
lost in some Texts of the New Testament, incuria scriptorum. Jews both
Talmudists and other, commonly call Christ (...), which unless we understand
the gutturall (which perhaps by reason of difficult expression might be omitted
by Greek writers, and Sigma sometimes added as a Greek termination) cannot
signify a Savior. Yet even this word, if we use that kind of Cabbala which is
called (...) Notaricum, according to which the first or last letters of words
are put for whole words, will direct us to our Shiloh. (...) Genesis 49.10. See
Archangelus in his Commentary in propositiones Cabalisticas Pici Mirandulani.
Morinus in Pentateuch. Samar. Exer. 2. cap 8. Jews wickedly imagine (...), as
Rasche Teboth, to signify (...), and likewise (...).
The three first letters of the three first words make (...) The sentence is
expressed in those three words, as well as by (...) that the Jews should be no
longer his people, or that he should be no longer worshipped by the Jews, Dan.
9.26.

Jesus is well interpreted by the Greek word (...), which as Tully confesses,
Latino vocabulo uno exprimi non potest. Servat is (as Manutius notes upon that
place in Tully) qui ne salus amittatur, aliqua ratione praestat: salutem dat,
qui amissam restituit. Antigonus for liberty restored to the Lacedaemonians,
(...). The Athenians restored to their laws and freedom by Antigonus and
Demetrius his son, entitled them (as I gather from Plutarch in his Demetrius)
saviors and gods. (...) (as we see) is more then servator, to wit such a one
as restores immunities lost. Christ may be said to be servator daemorum, as
preserving them from relapsing into nothing; but deserves an other name, as he
rescueth his elect from the merit of their sins. The Latin Fathers in the
Primitive Church, apprehensive of the scantnesse of the word servator, by a new
word salvator, construed Jesus and (...), I cannot so far by an opinion smile
upon Magicians, as to attribute to any names virtue which may dispossess that
strong man the devil; nor yet have I so intemperate an ear, as that I should
not esteem the name Jesus sufficiently melodious. Basilides, of all heretics
most delighted with gingling words, because the name Jesus seemed to him not
glorious enough, called Christ Goalah and Goalnah (from Gaal redemit). We shall
abundantly relish the word Jesus, if we apprehend how much we stand in need of
a Savior. It Is so big with significancy, that no one Latin word could
express it. Several kings of Syria, who had the name Antiochus common to them
were distinguished by glorious epithites. One was called (...), another (...),
a third (...), a fourth (...), a fifth (...). The glory of all their attributes
is comprehended in the name Jesus, and truly agrees to Christ. Here Is a
Savior of sinful men. Had he not been truly great, illustrious, a most
indulgent Father; had he not been God, he could not have been such a Savior.
Whereas there is nothing more glorious then temporal deliverances, which
earthly monarchs can boast of. Joseph who was but one of Christ's shadows, was
called by Pharaoh, Tsaphnath Paaneath, according to Onkelus (upon Genesis 41.45.)
(...) a man to whom secrets are revealed, after Baal Hatturim, megalloh
nistarim, one that reveals hidden things; according to Jarchey (...) one that
expounds hidden things; but according to Hierome the Savior of the world.
The learned Father thus translates the whole verse; Vertitque nomen ejus, and
vocavit eum lingua Aegyptiaca, Salvatorem mundi. Christ is the Savior of the
world in a spiritual sense, delivers from spiritual enemies which are of
all enemies most potent and most dangerous. That I may proceed to the points
before propounded, He who was Christ and Jesus came into the world to save
sinners. 1. Christ came into the world. 2. He came to save. 3. He came to save
sinners.

First of the first. Christ came. There Is a threefold coming of Christ; one by
his spirit, another in the flesh, a third to judgment. Searching what, or what
manner of time, the spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it
testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should
follow, 1. Pet. 1.11. likewise in the third chapter of the same epistle, verses
18, 19, 20. By his spirit he went and preached unto the spirits in prison in
the days of Noah. In the days of Noah he went and preached to the spirits of
unrighteous men, which by reason of their disobedience and impenitency are now
imprisoned and fettered in chains of darkness. The Author of Seder Olam Rabba
( cap. 4.) concludes from this text, that the men of the age before the flood,
neither enjoy eternal life, nor yet are condemned to eternal punishment (with
what reason I need not explain). His words are these, (...) Non fruuntur vita
in seculo venture, neque condemnati sunt, quia dictum est, Non judicabit
spiritus meus in homine in seculum.
My spirit (says God) shall not strive with man for ever, for that he also is
flesh: and his days shall be an hundrrd and twenty years, Genesis 6.3. Onkelus
thus paraphraseth upon that place: This evil generation shall not continue (or
be established) for ever before me; for that they are flesh and their works
evil: a term shall be given them of 120. years, if they will return. The
preparing of the ark could not but furnish Noah with occasions of preaching
repentance, to those who lived in the age of the flood. Rasi upon Genesis 6.
observes as much. Much space (says he) was allowed to Noah for the work, viz.
because the men of the age of the flood, who saw him employed in the building
in the 120. years, would inquire the reason thereof, and when he answered that
God was about to bring a deluge upon the world, might perhaps repent. Mr.
Ainsworth conceives that the Chaldee paraphrast understood by the spirit man's
natural life and soul, which God would take away by the flood. But the words
cited are capable of a better interpretation, import not that he understood any
other See Zohar col. 181.
then the spirit of God. By the spirit of God and of Christ in these texts
divine power is signified, which enabled Noah a preacher of righteousness, and
instructed the prophets who foretold Christ's sufferings, suggested to the
Apostles what they should speak, when they were questioned before governors.
All supernaturally illuminated partake of this spirit. This divine power wont
to be instilled into prophets, is by the Jews called (Ruach hannebhuah) the
spirit of prophecy, and also (Ruach hakk^desh,) the holy Ghost. It proceeds,
as do also the rest of Gods works, ad extra, from all the three sacred persons
of the undivided Trinity, but in Scriptures is most frequently ascribed to God
the Son, who purchased the communication of it to mankind by his sufferings.
Christ's prophetical and regal office are founded in his priestly. That any
dark souls are illuminated, that any unruly affections are subdued, is to be
attributed to Christ's merits. We should remain both in our natural blindness
and perverseness, had not Christ dyed for us. Christ may be said (prodire or
advenire) to come into the minds of his ministers the prophets, as the word
(...) (1. Pet. 3.19.) warranteth. That word, although omitted by the Syriack
interpreter, cannot be suspected to be spurious, in that it is unanimously
retained by Greek and Latin Fathers. Christ's coming after the manner
explained, is frequent, as appears from what has been spoken.

His third coming is in the last judgment: For we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done; whether it be good or bad, 2. Cor. 5.10.

His second coming was his coming in the flesh. This was twofold. First, by way
of preparation or prelude. The second person of the sacred Trinity, now and
then long before his hypostaticall union with our nature See Jarchi. upon Genesis
19.18.
appeared in the shape of a man, and so (as Calvine elegantly) preluded to his
incarnation. Eusebius is large about this subject, Hist. eccles. l. 1. c. 2.
The Lord (says he) appeared to Abraham sitting by the oak of Mamre; Abraham
(says he) sees with his eyes ( viz. his bodily eyes) a man, but worshippeth
him, and prays unto him as God. He discovered also that he knew him, by
calling him the judge of the world. S. Austine orat. 41. super Joannem, says,
Abraham saw the day of Christ's eternal emanation, when as he saw three men and
worshipped one. See also Chytraeus in Chronolog. sua, ad annum mundi 2205.
Christ was the man who wrastled with Jacob, (Genesis 32.24.) and the prince of
the host of the Lord, who appeared to Joshua, (Joshua 5.13.) according to
Eusebius in the place quoted.

We find Genesis 2.7. that the Lord formed man of the dust of the ground: and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life: and man became a living soul.
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and Tertullian conceive, that the Son of God
assuming for a time the shape of a man's body, took clay in his hands, and
formed for Adam a body ad exemplar corporeae illius formae quam gestabat; and
insufflando in nares corporis ectypi, inspired into it a soul. Here Is a
preludium to what he performed after his incarnation to his disciples, He
breathed upon his disciples when he gave them the holy Ghost. God the Son,
when at any time before his incarnation he appeared in the shape of a man,
created (as it is most probable) a body completely, such as is wont to be
informed with a reasonable soul, made it for a time his shechinah, and as he
withdrew his divine presence, dissolved it into nothing. These apparitions of
of God the Son much differed from his incarnation. When he was incarnated,
(...) but not (...), in these preludes to incarnation (...), at leastwise
(...). When he appeared to Abraham, to Jacob, to Joshuah, the body assumed was
his (...). the same cannot be affirmed of his body which he took from the
Virgin Mary. Christ incarnated dwelt amongst us in a tabernacle or tent, John
1.14. That is, The Evangelist in that phrase, (...), probably alludes to the
feast of tabernacles, in, or near the time of which celebrated, by consent of
many authors of best note, our Savior was born.
for a short time, but assumed the body conceived by the Virgin, not for some
short time but for ever. When Christ's humane nature was shattered in pieces,
the soul and body each rent from the other, both remained united to the second
person of the sacred Trinity.

Secondly, He assumed this body into the unity of his person. what we read
Coloss. 2.9. does not discountenance this truth. For in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily: that is, he is very God. The Apostle uses an
Hebrew idiome. The same word in Hebrew (viz. nghetsem.) signifies corpus,
substantia, and likewise ipsemet ipsummet. The verb is (...), not (...). The
humane nature was shechinah, not (...) to the divine: in the foresaid
resemblances of incarnation the body assumed was both. You perceive already
what was his other coming in the flesh. 'Twas his coming by way of real
exhibition. 'Twas the coming of God-man. This coming was twofold, The first was
the union of the two natures, The word was made flesh. God became man. He who
was from all eternity adorned with infinite and incomprehensible glory,
condescended to our rags, induit sordes nostras. Neither did he take upon him
our nature by creation, but became one of Adams posterity. 'Twas requisite that
the same who sinned should suffer. 'Twas requisite that he should be the Vide
Irenaeum adversus haereses lib. 4. c. 57.
Son of man. In sacred Scriptures what agrees to Christ by reason of his
divine nature is predicated of man, and what to him by reason of his humane
nature, is predicated of God, such communication of idiomes, is called (...) by
Nicephorus Bishop of Constantinople in an epistle to Leo Bishop of Rome,
annexed to the Greek Councels. (...). Thus much Zonaras promises to the Canons
of the Ephesine Synod. This Council (...). Niceph. in the epistle to Pope Leo
before praised. See also among the Councels an epistle of Acacius Bishop of
Constantinople to Peter Bishop of Antioch. And about these mentioned, and other
heresies concerning Christ, an epistle of Faustus Bishop of Apollonius to the
same Bishop of Antioch. Peter of Antioch is here censured as unworthy of the
epithet Christian, because he affirmed that (...), and in way of reproach
called (...). Communication of idiomes cleared in sacred Scriptures, vindicates
Peter Fullo Bishop of Antioch. The word (...) also, howsoever it has been
abused, may in regard of its notation, be interpreted (as Hebrews speak) rather
(...) (ad laudem) then (...) (ad contumeliam.) He must needs be (...), to whom
(...), as construed by Faustus, seems an heretic. The Bishop of Antioch his
fault is variously reported in the epistles of other Bishops who wrote to him
and against him. In an epistle written by Pamphilus Abyd. Episcop. (...). ibid.
In an epistle of Quintian Asculan. Episcop. (...).
He who had ubiquity for his palace, was contented to be enclosed in the
virgins womb. That God should so far honor man's nature, is a true saying
and worthy of acceptance. The other coming of God-man, Immanuel, was his
birth. Jesus Christ very God (against I mention Arians as most infamous for
this heresy, but well know that Arius was not among those who professed
themselves Christians, (...). Theodotus (says Eusebius Hist. Ecclesiaest. lib.
5. c. 28.) (...). Natalius persuasus erat a Theodoti discipulis, ut accepto
salario haeresis hujus vocaretur Episcopus, ita ut denarios centum quinquaginta
menstruo tempore acciperet: illis itaque conjunctus per visiones commone fiebat
a Domino. Quoniam vero negligentius visionibus attendebat, tandem ab angelis
flagellatus est, ac tota nocte haud modice verberatus. In Eusebius his words,
(...). Compare with this sentence, 1. Cor. 5.5. 1. Tim. 1.20. And Hierome,
Ambrose, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, quoted by Bishop in his perpetual
government of Christ's church, chap. 8.
Arians, likewise against Jews denying Jesus Christ to be God, abundantly
refute themselves, and one another. See Hebrew comments upon the second Psalm,
Galatinus de Arcanis Catholicae veritatis, lib. 3. Empereur in his comment upon
Abarbinel upon Esaias, in his preface to his translation of Halicoth olam, and
upon Jachiades upon Dan. c. 11. v. 38. Mr. Henry Smiths treatise entitled Gods
arrow against Atheists. Sepher Jetzirah as illustrated by Rittangle (one to
whom the Hebrew language and Jewish writers are so familiar, that he might seem
to have been born a Rabbie.)
Jews and The Alcoran acknowledges Christ to be Gods ambassador, and (...)
his Word; the Gospel to be the word of God, but by reasons the same which are
used by Jews, insinuates that a Trinity of persons in the divine essence is
impossible. It falsely supposes that if there be three persons, there must
needs be a Trinity of Gods. That article of Christian faith, concerning the
Son of God becoming the son of man is misconstrued, Azoar. 2 (...) And they
say that God assumed a Son. Christians are by Mahumedans called (...)
Associantes (that I may use the words of Erpenius in Histor. Joseph. comma.
106.) Quod Jesum Christum Deum esse dicunt, veroque Deo tanquam diversum, ut
falio illi opinantur, adjungant. Christians affirm not that God became a father
by assuming into his nature, the person of God the Son; nor yet that the two
natures of the Son of God are distinct persons, nor that God has more sons
then one, unless by adoption, and spiritual generation (by which I mean
regeneration). See in the supposed Gregory Thaumaturgus (...) and s. with their
elucidations: Christ is the Son of God the father; those who are regenerate,
although opera trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, according to Scripture
language, are born of the spirit. The faith embraced by Christians,
acknowledges for its rule the Gospel, which authors of the Alcoran confess
to be divine truth. But moreover should Christians at any time have erred, as
affirming that the divine nature was divisible, or divided, at ind^gni ^i qui
reprehenderent, who affirm that God when he had formed the body of man of mud,
breathed into it part of his own soul. As Christ is God, so he is equal to God
the Father. The same indivisible nature cannot agree to several persons
according to several degrees. Eusebius does not contradict what propounded in
sacred Scriptures to be believed, as did Arius, but also the light of natural
reason. In his Evangelicall demonstration, God the Father is (...). And cannot
(says Eusebius) assume a body: God the Son is (...) (viz. (...)) compared
with God the Father is (says Eusebius blasphemously) as an ambassador to his
prince, (...) See Demonstrat. Evangel. lib. 5 c. 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 20.
the title of the twenty fifth chapter, cap. 30. lib. sexti prooem. c. 16, 17,
20. That I may omit similitudes by which Field upon the Church, Dr. Andrews in
his sermons, and Dr. Jackson ( in his knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, chap.
30.) excellently illustrate the union of the two natures in Christ; Gregory
Thaumaturg. sermon. in Annunciat. Mariae virginis, conceives that the Margarite
consisting ((...)) ex duabus naturis, ex fulgure nimirum and aqua, is a fit
resemblance. The Trinity of persons in one undivided nature, whereof each is
infinite without infinetenesse multiplied, and duality of natures, whereof one
is finite the other infinite, in the same individual person, are mysteries
which men and angels ought to believe, and may admire, but cannot comprehend
nor perfectly represent by any resemblances.
Mahumedans) very man, (against the Marcionites) God and man together by
personal union, (against the Nestorians) came into the world, (that is) was
born. This is his advent or coming meant in my text.

He came into the world, that is, was in lucem editus. This his coming was
promised to our first parents in Paradise, prefigured by variety of types,
prophesied of by Jacob, (Genesis 49.10.) foreseen by Job, (as may be gathered from
Job 19.25.) prophesied of With whom I may join Hermes in his book inscribed
(...). See Lactantius, lib. de vera sapientia, cap. 6. Marsil. Ficin. Argument.
in Merc. Trismegist. Pymand.
by Balaam, (Number. 24.17. promised to David, 2. Sam. 7.16. and 1. Chron. 17.11,
12.) foretold by the Sea Constantines oration in Eusebius, after the life of
Constantine, cap. 18. and 20. Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. l. 6. Lactantius lib.
4. c. 6. to whom may be added Justine, Athenagoras, Austine, Virgil, Eclog. 4.
others. If any surmise that predictions attributed to Sybills, were feigned by
Primitive Christians preposterously ambitious of promoting a good cause, let
him see Constantines oration before praisd; his Epistle also to Arius and his
sectatours, extant in the acts of the Nicene Council, part. 3.
Sybills, celebrated by a quire of Angels, honored by the three Persians,
testified by God himself. God is pleased to dwell with man on earth, the
heavens cannot contain him, 2. Chron. 6.18. The voice of my beloved! behold he
comes leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills, Cant. 2.8. Vultis
ipsos ejus saltus agnoscere? (says In Evangel. Hom. 19.
Gregory upon that place) He leaped (says he) from heaven into the womb, from
from the womb into the manger, from the manger to the Cross, from the Cross
into the grave, from the sepulcher he returned into heaven. The first of these
leaps is by Chrysostom called a great stride: by the second of them he reached
into the world, according to the mind of my Text* He who was (...) in Nonnus.
eternal was born. This is a true saying. God who is truth it self, prophesied
and promised this birth to our first parents in paradise. God out of his
transcendent lenity, promised mercy, before he passed sentence upon them. Our
Savior is called the woman's seed, Genesis 3.15. Were Antiquitat. Judaic. l. 1. c.
2
Josephus orthodox in what he reports concerning the serpent which seduced our
first parents, 'twere an easy matter for the woman's seed to bruise his head.
He mistakes both in natural and theolo-history; in that, as affirming that the
serpent before he deceived our first parents, had the faculty of speech, went
upon feet, and by reason of that misdemeanour was amersd these abilities, and
also had poison as a badge of his enmity toward man put under his tongue, in
this, as esteeming what was only the instrument in tempting Eve, the
principal cause, and the promise a precept (the observance of which would
prove but of shallow advantage) that Gods meaning was, that every one, as he
met with a serpent, should strike it upon the head, which contained in it
somewhat hurtful to mankind. Onkelus attained the mind of the sentence. He
thus paraphraseth; I Will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
son and her son: he shall remember what thou did to him in the beginning,
and thou shall observe him in the end. The son of the woman, our Savior, not
the Virgin Mary (as Papists blasphemously affirm) brake the serpents head, the
first of the devils works against mankind: the devil by his malicious attempts
endeavors to hinder the consummation of Gods works of mercy, the application
of Christ's merits. No one unless the Son of God, as well as the seed of the
woman, could be able to bruise the serpents head. Behold, a virgin shall
conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name EMMANVEL, Esaias 7.14. Here Is
habitatio Dei cum carne, which the Magicians conceived impossible, Dan. 2.11.
God assumed our nature, and so became Immanuel. Behold, the Lord rides upon a
swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt, etc. Esaias 19.1. This swift cloud (in
Aquila's translation) (...), Eusebius. Demonstr. evang. lib. 6. cap. 20.
is either our Saviors body or humane nature. The hypostaticall union is
likewise foretold by Jeremy, together with intimation of our Saviors birth,
chap. 23. v. 5.6. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise
unto David a righteous branch, and a king shall reign and prosper, and shall
execute justice and judgment in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved,
and Israel shall dwell safely; and this is the name whereby he shall be called,
THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. (...) ( viz. Dionysius in an Epistle written to
Euphranor and Ammonius against Sabellius) (...). Athanas. de sentent. Dionysii
contra Arianos.
Intimations and characters of his divinity run parallel with those of his
humanity, almost throughout histories concerning him in the Gospels. His birth
spoke him man, but to be born of a Non audiendus este Kimchius, quatenus
indigitari fingit ab Esaia, prophetiae suae c. 7. commate 14. (...).
Virgin (and as some conceive without pain) together with the star and In the
exposition of the sixth chapter de Fide attributed to Gregor. Thaumuturg. its
said, he was born (the quire of angels attended) (...): that afterward he sat
in the midst of Doctors (...).
quire of Angels, proclaimed him God: His swaddling bands and the manger spoke
him man, and one disrespected amongst men; but the shepherds and wisemen
worshipping him expressed him God. His baptism administered by John, declared
him a man; but the voice from heaven to be God. He was tempted in the
wilderness, but overcame; wept for Lazarus, but raised him from the dead;
slept upon the seas, but after he was awaked stilled the waves; tempered the
clay with spittle, but opened the eyes of one born blind; Lastly, by his death
showed himself man, by his resurrection God. Man ought to suffer in that he
sinned; it was impossible for any merely a creature, to satisfy divine justice.
Whatsoever Jews, Mahumedans, heretics and heathens may conceive of Christ,
true believers after S. Peter, with much comfort acknowledge him the Son of
the living God.

That Jesus Christ God and man, was born, is (as I have proved) a true saying:
it is also worthy of acceptance. The Church in whose person Solomon speaks
(Cant. 2.8.) esteems it so. The voice of my beloved! behold! he comes leaping
upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills. She shouts and skips for joy. But
neither is rejoicing abstracted from thankfulness: both are requisite. What Is
worthy of all acceptance, when it meets with ingenuous spirits, produces
thankfulness as well as joyfulnesse. Those are swine which feed upon akorns,
but never look up to the tree. S. Paul expresses both in the commendation of
his doctrine. He thankfully acknowledges how advantageous Christ's coming into
the world was to himself the chief of sinners. And certainly that acclamation
of the Church is the voice of thankfulness, as well as of rejoicing. Their
rejoicing is the echo of their thankfulness. No man (says our Savior, Mark
9.39.) can do a miracle by my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. Who
rejoice so openly and so emphatically (as the Church in the place quoted in the
Canticles) for a benefit received, cannot easily become sons of Belial,
withdraw their necks from religion, forget the obligation cast upon them. I may
safely add, that the rejoicing expressed by the Church, if it be rightly
analyzed, will be found to have in it more de amore amicitiae, then
concupiscentiae. The godly rejoice more in the advancement of Gods free mercy,
then in their own salvation. They rather choose to enjoy, then to make use of
Christ. I shall show before I proceed to the remainder of my Text, that Christ's
coming into the world, abstracted from the end of his coming (expressed in my
Text), holds out to us ample matter both of rejoicing and thankfulness. The
approach of any good toward us is matter of joy; and if it be freely bestowed
upon us, likewise of thankfulness; and so much more of thankfulness, by how
much the more freely it comes from the Donour. Grace restored to man (as Thom.
Aquin. 2. 2. q. 106. art. 2.) more obliges to thankfulness, then grace
conferred at our creation, quatenus (that I may use his words) magis datur
gratis.

I shall first show, That Christ's coming intimated some good toward us:
secondly, That he came freely. The former of these propositions is cleared from
the terminus a quo, and the terminus ad quem of his motion, together with the
freeness of the motion it self. I must for the present take for a postulatum
what I shall hereafter prove, viz. That Christ was not compelled into the
world. What besides is repugnant to the freeness of his coming (as moral
necessity, by some fondly conceived to be cast upon him by man's merits) cannot
import that his coming should not be advantageous to us. Christ freely disrobed
himself of glory, assumed the rags of our nature, and so disguised visited
sinful mankind. That one completely well, much more a great man, a Prince,
should bestow a visit upon one sick: That any one should own a friend in great
distress, especially one guilty of treason, is wont to be esteemed a great
favor. A traitor, if his Sovereigne cast a favorable eye upon him,
interprets it a pledge of his propitious affections; erects his languishing
spirits. Here the Monarch of heaven and earth visits mankind in sickness and
distress, such as were disaffected toward him, such as were traitors against
him. What is the ordinary temper of the world, Cyprian well expresses in his
second Epistle. I have not met with any Author more elegant and copious to
this purpose, yet conceive that his expressions settle much below his subject.
I shall only give you a taste of him, you have access to the rest at your
leisure. Paulisper te creed subduci in montis ardui verticem celsiorem,
speculare inde rerum infra te jacentium facies; and oculis in diversa
porrectis, ipse a terrenis contactibus liber, fluctuantis mundi turbines
intuere. Jam seculi and ipse misereberis, tuique admonitus and plus in Deum
gratus, majori laetitia quod evaseris, gratulaberis. In the same epistle fiunt
quae nec illis ipsis possunt placere, qui faciunt. The men of the world were
more then vulgarly wicked, when our Savior came among them. The wickedness of
man was great in the earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his
heart, were only evil continually. True religion was no where to be found but
in Judea, and there only as a few imbers in an heap of ashes. How wicked that
generation was, besides testimonies in sacred Scriptures, and humane writings,
we may in part conjecture from punishments visited upon themselves, and already
upon their posterity. But neither is Gods indignation yet satisfied. Christ, as
if lest at his approach sinful man should be confounded by reason of his own
guilt, lays aside his imperial robes, (...), etc.
appears as a suppliant, rather then one who had potestatem vitae and necis.
(...). Macar. Homil. 4.
This his coming was his exinanition. He who was in the form of God, thought it
no robbery to become equal with God, made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. Philip.
2.6, 7. This is a good omen. We cannot but suspect his coming besides some good
toward us. Christ's coming into the world together with the circumstances of
it, insinuate what is clearly expressed, Matthew. 20.28. That the Son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom
for many; His coming, forasmuch as it was not forced, neither desirable in
order to his own ends, must needs be undertaken for the benefit of some others,
and of men rather then of angels. He in no sort took the Angels, but he took
the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. We have showed that our Saviors birth
contains in it matter of rejoicing.

A second scruteny will discover in it matter of thankfulness. Thankfulness
(according to Thomas Aquinas 2. 2. q. 106. art. 2.) is two ways engaged.
First, (ex quantitate dati) by the greatness of a gift. Secondly, (ex animo
dantis) by the freeness of the donour. The gift it self is naked, unless (as
Civilians speak) consensu vestiatur. The benefits about to result from Christ's
birth, by the circumstances of his coming, are intimated to be great of the
first magnitude. And what good soever acerueth to us by his birth, was
conceived in the womb of free mercy. When as sacrifice and offering, burnt
offerings and sin offerings could not appease divine justice, then I said, lo
I come, that I should do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7. He humbled himself
and became obedient to the death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8.

Our Savior was not merited into the world. 2. not compelled. First, of the
first: mankind could not by virtue of merits exact Christ's incarnation and
birth. The then present generation did not merit his coming. (...) Et inquiunt
(Rabbini nostri,) ait Rabbi Jochanan, Non venit filius David, nisi vel in
generatione qua tota est justa, vel in generatione quae tota est impia. [The
later part of the disjunction falls not much short of truth.] See R. D.
Kimchi upon Esaias, 59.15.
So far those to whom he came were from meriting his coming, that, some few
excepted, they desired him not before he came; welcomed him not into the world,
when as he came of his own accord; accepted him not when as he had declared his
gracious intentions. I shall afterward ex eadem fidelia prove, that neither
such as believed at the time of our Saviors coming, nor yet the Patriarchs
could merit his incarnation and birth. First, of the first; It Is an axiom in
the Civil Law. Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibus debet approbari. But Christ's
coming, although it most nearly concerned all the Jews, was so far from being
suffrag'd by their merits, that it was not voted by their desires. He came
unsent for. The Jews some few excepted, and Gentiles generally were affected in
like manner with our first parents in Paradise after their fall; readier to
run away from God, and to hide themselves from him, then to seek after him.
God sought out Adam and Eve, when they endeavored to shun him, and tendered to
them a gracious promise, before they cried mercy. Athanasius in his oration
against the Gentiles, illustrates Gods (...) (as discovered by arts of grace
now mentioned,) by the similitude of a prince, not permitting his subjects in
rebellion, but endeavoring by all acts to reduce them to their duties. The
holy Ghost in S. Luke (chap. 15.) uses the similitudes of a woman seeking a
lost great, and of a shepherd seeking a sheep that is run astray. A shepherd
with a sheep upon his shoulder, engravened upon the communion cup in Primitive
times of the Gospel, imported the same notion. Christ took upon him our nature:
overtook it, by running after it, as the word (...); also signifies. Those Jews
who lived when our Savior was born, were a generation of vipers, did eat
through the bowels of their mother, the more ancient Church. Two tenants they
almost generally embraced which could not consist with a desire or yet
expectation of such a Savior. 1. They cried up justification by the works of
the Law. They were so far from seeking after a Physician, that they could not
acknowledge themselves diseased. 2. They expected that their Messiah should be
an earthly Monarch; that his kingdom should be of this world, that he should
by civil power subdue the heathen. These opinions crucify the cross of
Christ, are most repugnant to that way which God in his infinite wisdom had
contrived for the saving of mankind.

Secondly, as they sent not for our Savior before he came, so neither did they
courteously entertain him coming of his own accord. He was rejected into a
stable (...).
at his first entrance. An ample signification of his condescension, as also of
the condition of those he came to save! They had sunk themselves below beasts.
Besides that it is better to be a beast then to be like one, brute creatures
were always subject unto him; men disobeyed him. The whole creation at all
times, the fallen angels and men excepted, have been observant of God. R.
Jonathan in Maimonides ( m^re Nevoc. part. 2. c. 29.) concluding that the
course of nature was settled immediately after the creation, makes one
exception, viz. that God entered into certain conditions with the red sea, that
by dividing it self it should open a passage to the Israelites coming out of
Egypt. Rabbie Jeremy the son of Eliezer says, that God did not only make a
covenant with the sea, but in like manner with all things which he had created
within the six days. This sentence is to be preferred. All creatures void of
reason have observed this covenant. All creatures wanting reason have in
themselves so much self-denial, that they are ready even against their
particular natures, and to their private detriment, to obey Gods command. The
waters of the red sea stood upon an heap, that the Israelites might be
accommodated with a way to escape from the Egyptians. The waters of the river
Jordan, that they might open to them a passage into the promised land. The
sun stood still that they might conquer the Amalekites; went backward that he
might signify time added to Hezekiah's life. The fire spared the three
children. Such creatures as have sense, and the faculty of feeling pains if
their appetites be not satisfied, have at Gods command used heroical
abstinency. The Lions, whose den was made a prison to Daniel, made good what
God promises, Psalm. 34.10. The Lions do lack and suffer hunger; but they that
seek the Lord, lack nothing which is good. The Ravens fed Elijah by the brok
Cherith, 1. Kings 17.4. When as Jonah commanded to Nineveh, endeavors to
fly to Tarshish, that is, the contrary way, a Whale brings him back again,
lands him on the right shore. Men have frequently neglected their God. When our
Savior came to seek his own, his own received him not. The Son of man has
not whereon to lay his head, Matthew. 8.20. That the Messiah when he comes shall
not have whereon to sit, where to rest his body, is affirmed by the Gemarists.
Our Savior may seem to have alluded to such a tradition in the expression
quoted.

Yet there remain other circumstances, which more aggravate Christ's love to
mankind; and in that they were foreseen, likewise the freeness of his coming.
As he came of his own accord, was not sent for, disrobed himself of majesty,
looked upon such as were his enemies, yea rebels against him with a friendly
aspect, was not welcomed not courteously entertained at his coming; so neither
was he accepted after such time as he had declared his gracious intentions. He
came among such as were contumaciously rebellious, so fastened to their lusts,
glued to this present evil world, that they would not accept of a Savior upon
most gracious terms offered. When light came into the world, they preferred
darkness. The world cannot hate you, but me it hates, because I testify of
it, that the works thereof are evil, John 7.7. If the world hate you, ye know
that it hated me before it hated you, Joh. 15.18. The Gergesens loved their
swine better then a Savior. The Jews preferred Barabbas before Christ; an
enemy to public safety, before one that came to save mankind. As he was
vilified throughout his life, so at last by a violent death thrust out of the
world. It has been confessd by ancient Jews, likewise by Talmudists, that the
Messiah was to be expected about the end of 4000 years from the Creation. (...)
Traditio domus Eliae: sex mill annos durat mundus. Bis milla annis inanitas
and vastitas. Bis item mill annis Lex. Denique bis mill annis dies Messiae.
Gemar. Sanhedr. cap. 11. But for our sins (say Talmudists ibid.) which are
many, his coming is deferred. (...) sed ob peccata nostra quae multiplicata
sunt, abierunt ex eis (viz. annis) qui abierunt. (...). Jachiades upon those
words, Dan. 12.4. (But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book
even to the time of the end) would have us believe, that God sealed up the time
of the coming of the Messiah, revealed it to Daniel, as if with Aristotle's
Acroamaticks, it should be (...). He concludes with truth his animadversions
upon that comma: (...) verum enim vero Deus non dignabitur clarissima visione,
cum Deus reduce. Zo^nem: tunc intelligemus res ipsu^ (...) sunt. They shall
acknowledge him whom they have pierced for the Messiah. Seasonably add Maimon,
in (...) chap. the last, (...) ne supputet terminos (viz. temporum) (...)
dixerunt sapientes, expirent animam, qui supputant terminos. R. Jehoshuah the
son of Levi, in the Gemara of Sanhedrin, and chapter afore-prais'd, conceives
that God had resolved that men's delinquencies should not retard his gracious
intentions, but yet that the coming of the Messiah might be accelerated by
their deserts. He thus glosseth upon that of the Prophet Esaias, (chap 60.22.) I
the Lord will hasten it in its time. (...) Si mereantur, accelerabo: si non
mereantur, tempore suo. Papists entertain this conceit as orthodox. They hold
that those who lived before, and those who in the time of our Savior, by
obedience foreseen, and the captivity of the Patriarchs in Hades, ex congruo
merited the incarnation of God the Son.
Neither such as believed in the age in which our Savior was born, nor those
in times preceding could by their merits procure or hasten his coming. There Is
(oppositum in apposito) an implicit contradiction, if we say that sick persons
by their perfect health merit a visit from a Physician. But neither can the
perfect observance of the Law, merit any thing from God.

As no creature could impose upon God the Son, a Moral, so neither a
Physical necessity of coming into the world. Astrologers most blasphemously
attribute Christ's birth to the stars. Albumazar affirms, Quoties Saturnus
denas sui orbis conversiones perfecerit, hoc est, Expletis annis trecentis,
semper quasdam magnas res and admodum insignes evenire. Post Alexandrum enim
(says he) annis trecentis, apparuit Arelasor filius Bell, qui Persas contrivit;
and proxime post transactis aliis trecentis annis, apparuit Jesus, Magister and
Dux Christianorum. Here Is (...) sufficiently betrayed. He could not (as
appears) divine at what time Arelasor foiled the Persians, or when our Savior
was born. He adds 280. years to his true distance from Alexander. Magna
Saturni and Jovis conjunctio (say some Astrologers) nascentem orbem initiavit:
alia praeparavit diluvium: alia Abraham vel Mose^ genuit: alia Jesu adventum
praenuntiavit: alia Mahumeti antecessit. Cardan upon Ptolemey's Tetrabible,
imputes Christ's birth, faith with other graces wrought in men's hearts,
Christian religion begun, continued, sometimes advanced and propagated, other
times depressed and contracted, to the stars. Dum fiunt magnae conjunctiones
in primo Trigono, quae durant annis 199. and singulis 20. fiunt annis,
nascuntur in orb inferiori imperia, monarchiae, tranquillitas, pax, ex Solis
and Jovis dominio. Item sapientes insignes, sterilitates magnae ob triangulum
igneum. Sic incipit Romanorum monarchia sub Julio Caesare in D primo, and Jesu
Dei lex, and Apostolorum prophetia, and praedicatio, and vitiorum purgatio,
idololatriae destruction, and justitiae pietatisque exaltatio, and monarchia
sacerdotalis in terra: and per 200. annos donec in primo D factae sunt
praevaluit monarchia, and lex sancta, pro qua innumeri mortui sunt significante
Mart domino Arietis. Thus Haly and Cardan as digested by Astrolog. lib. 2. c.
3. art. 1.
Campenella. Petrus de Aliaco is in points mentioned as blasphemous as these
cited, in his concordia Histor. and Astrologiae. That axiom of Pindar, (...),
in that I must be brief in the redargution of these authors, will stand me in
good stead. Pererius de divinat. Astrolog. cap. 3. number. 18.
Albumazar foretold that the Christian law should not endure above a thousand
four hundred sixty years. Time has demonstrated him a false prophet. Some
have dreamed that Asia and Afric shall be converted to Christian religion by
the fiery Trigon, consisting of Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius. Christian religion
(say they) began under this Trigon, which also continued 200. years after Christ
born therefore from the year 1600. to the year 1800. shall be much propagated
under the same triplicity. Vide Nunc. prophet. p. 8.
Not attending that in the 16. century, under the watery triplicity, consisting
of Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces, Christian religion was more disseminated, if we
attend spaces of earth, by Lusitanians, Spaniards, English, and Hollanders,
then in the 1500. preceding. See Alsted. Encycl. fol. 1084. col. 1.
Mahumetisme which (as Astrologers say) as it began under the watery, shall be
abolished under the fiery trigon, gathered strength and vigor in the ninth and
tenth centuries, that is, under the fiery triplicity. Besides that I may here
seasonably add that rule, much in use with Jews, A testament that fails in
any one point, is authentic in none; experience has demonstrated Astrologers
vain and ridiculous, in the grounds upon which they build those bold assertions
produced concerning Christianity. Astrol. lib. 2. cap. 3. art. 4.
Campanella's much more temperate then his predecessors. He takes for an
axiom, Leges and imperia quae incipiunt in tarditate anomaliarum, durant
temporibus longissimis. He gives for examples the Babylonian and Roman
Empires. He adds, Christus natus est, eligens sibi tempus primi trigoni,
omnium optimi and constantiam anomaliarum. Although this Author here tantum
ait, non probat, somewhat came into my mind which may render his conjecture
plausible. In the first (1/3) ten degrees of the Persian sphere, is placed See
learned M. Seldom, De Diis Syris, Syntag. 1. cap. 2. (viz. inscribd) de
Teraphim. Joseph. Scal. in sphaeram Barbaricam, M. Manisii.
Virgo pulchra capillitio prolixo, duas spicaes manu gestans, residens in
siliquastro, educans puerulum, lactans and cibans eum. We have here according
to Albumazar and Friar Bacon after him, a symbol of the nativity of our
Savior. The words cited by the one out of the other, are these. Intentio est
quod beatae virgo habet figuram and imaginem infra december primos gradus
virginis, and quod nata fuit quando sol est in virgin, and ita habetur
signatum in calendario, and quod nutrit filium suum Christum Jesum in terra
Hebraeorum. With whom agrees the book entitled, Ovidius de vetula ad Virginem
Mariam, O Virgo felix, o virgo significata,
Per stellas ubi spica nitet.
The sun also (say Astrologers) was in Leo at the birth of Christ, the lion
of the tribe of Judah. Should we grant these reports of the nativities of the
Virgin Mary and Christ to be true, yet besides that Christian religion (as we
have demonstrated) has been contracted under a fiery, and propagated under a
watery triplicity, its clear by undeniable authority, that God does not always
use the stars as mediating causes, nor yet as signs of what he has decreed
in the sublunary world. He created vegetables before the sun and moon (as some
conceive) least any should impute their productions to the influences of those
planets. Vt sponte sol radiat, dies illuminat, fons rigat, nubes irrorat, ita
se Spiritus coelestis infundit (as Cyprian sweetly in the epistle quoted) the
same may be applied to Christ's coming into the world. That Christ came into the
world, is as I have showed, true and acceptable doctrine.

In the next place, He came to save. Ezech. 47.
The waters of the Sanctuary now are up to the knees. We may partly conjecture
what were his intentions, by the circumstances of his coming, but in the second
proposition have them in some measure expressed. Christ Jesus came into the
world that he might become a Savior. Although my Text seem rather to point at
the birth of Christ, then the union of his two natures. God the Son was
incarnated that he might save sinners. How thankful heathens have been for
temporal deliverances, I have explained upon occasions before offered; and so
anticipated what is suitable to the point in hand. I add, that messengers sent
by the Athenians to thank Antigonus and Demetrius for their liberty, were by
them called ((...)) by the name wont to be given to those who were sent to
enquire of the Oracles. Had Christ come to rescue such as were entire and
upright, but enslaved to men; or to satisfy for such as had offended men; or
to deliver such as had offended God from temporal punishments; or only to
establish the Angels his friends, yet should he have done what all would have
looked upon, as much to be esteemed by those whom it might concern. God the
Son long before he assumed our nature, went before the Israelites in the
wilderness, and brought them into Canaan, Exodus 23.20. Some Jewish Doctors,
as Abenezra witnesses upon this text, say that by Angel here is meant the book
of the Law; others understand the Ark of the Covenant: Himself concludes that
the Angel here promised, as a conductour to the Israelites, is the Angel
Michael. (...) by a ((...)) permutation (as Cabbalists speak) becomes (...)
Michael. There Is only a Metathesis with jod inserted. Abenezra spoke a truth
which he comprehended not. The Angel which went before the Israelites is the
same with Michael, Revel. 12.7. no other then the Son of God. See Jarchey and
Bar. Nachman upon the place.
Other Hebrew Authors infer from that kind of Cabbala, which is called There
are three kinds of Cabbala called (...) permutatio, (...) notaricum, and (...)
gematria. Gematria (as Elias Levita, and David de Pomis acknowledge) is a Greek
word, Geometria; significat autem in art Cabbalistica, non terrae aut
figurarum dimensionem, sed Arithmeticam literarum supputationem, qua dictiones
diversae sibi invicem aquivalere probantur.
Gematria, that the Angel here mentioned is ((...)) metatron. (...) metatron
(says Rasi) in Gematrie, is the same that shaddi: the same number is exhibited
in the letters of each word, viz. 314. We must in that comma of Exodus before
quoted, understand an uncreated Angel. Gods name is in him, v. 21. that is, he
is God. Nachmanides says upon the place, (...): Ipse est Angelus ille
redemptor, cui nomen magnum in medio ejus, (scilicet) quoniam in illo dominus
petra seculorum, and is est qui dixit, Ego Deus Bethel, (utpote) quod mei sit
regis habitare in domo sua. R. Menachem upon the place, says. His voice is the
voice of the living God. Gods children ow to Christ, the head of the Church,
their temporal deliverances, but are further obliged to him: He came into the
world to save sinners.

So I am fallen upon my third proposition. Major est Dei misericordia quam nostra
miseria. The waters of the Sanctuary are now so risen that we may swim in
them. Here Is the great mystery of godliness, 1. Tim. 3.16. The wits of men and
Angels could not have plotted such a way for man's recovery. The devil suspected
not that his endeavors against men should by such means be frustrated. I
cannot with Clem. Alex. ( Paedaegog. lib. 3. c. 1.) so construe that of
Heraclitus, (...).) as to make it signify the hypostatical union of Christ's
two natures.
Men may believe but cannot comprehend Christ's two natures so united, as that
he who is eternal may be said to be born in time, he who is impassible and
immortal to suffer death, etc. There remain two other depths in Christ's coming
to save sinners, which render his goodness as admirable as his wisdom. 1.
'Twould be an injury with men (as Salvian well observed) to punish a good son
for a bad servant. Here Is scarce any difficulty; but I may opportunely suggest,
that as Christ's willingness to suffer for us, asserts the justice of God the
Father; so it is a remarkable part of his free mercy toward us. Christ of his
own accord laid down his life for us. 2. Take into your meditations, who were
the objects of Christ's mercy. They were his enemies. It Is too frequently a
piece of injustice amongst men, to rescue by strong hand and abuse of
authority, those from punishment who deserve to suffer. Volenti non fit
injuria. God without derogation from his justice freely remits what men had
sinned against himself. He declared together with his justice his holiness
likewise, in bringing sin to condign punishment; and moreover emphatically
his rich goodness, by suffering for sinners and such as were rebels against
himself. A young student of History (says Polibius) universam mundi historiam
debet uno intuitu complecti, and velut in corpus redigere. This work is done to
our hands in the history of Gods mercies and free love toward us. Christ by
suffering death for us, did omnem bonitatem (...). All other spiritual
blessings meet in this as the radii in the center, and as streams in the
fountain: God's pleased to accumulate one mercy upon another. God the Father
out of his (...) was pleased to send his Son into the world to die for
sinners; and to make this mercy the foundation of others necessary in order to
their salvation: To save sinners was the end, the main design of Christ's
coming into the world. Calvine chastises Servetus affirming that Christ should
have come into the world, although man had not sinned. To save sinners was the
work for which he came down from heaven. Lord speak the word only, (said the
Centurion Matthew. 8.8.) and my servant shall be healed. Jesus at a distance by
his word cured the bodily infirmity of the Centurions servant. God by his word
created the world. God said, Let there be light; and there was light, etc. Many
conceive that God in regard of his holiness could not remit man's sins
without satisfaction. All agree, that the way of which he was pleased to make
choice for our recovery; was in many respects most convenient. That our
spiritual infirmities might be cured, that man might be re-created, 'twas
requisite that God should come down from heaven, and that he should not merely
speak the word, (be ye saved) but that he should do and suffer many things for
us. Our redemption put God to greater expense then did our creation. A sign
that we had sunk our selves below nothing! Vbi virtus (says Pliny) ibi etiam
fortuna. Here are good tidings for those, who were altogether void of virtue:
here is salvation for sinners.

That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, is a doctrine worthy of
all acceptance. 1. This doctrine is acceptable in regard of its author.
Should an earthly Prince speak, we should hear him with greedy attention. 2.
Acceptable in regard of those by whom it was delivered. It was preached by
Angels to Joseph the husband of Mary, and the shepherds; by the Apostles, by
Christ himself. 3. Acceptable in that contained in plain terms. Many parts of
Philosophy are obscure, and the answers of oracles were often ambiguous: vitreum
vas lambimus, sed pultem non attingimus. This doctrine is so clear, that he
that runs may read and understand. Those who are of weak capacities, are not
debarred from it. They may taste how good and gracious the Lord is. But some
truths not fundamental have their share in these conditions. 4. This doctrine
in regard of its matter, is worthy of all acceptance. This is the very life
and soul of the Gospel, the fundamental of fundamentalls. That substantial
truth which almost all the types in the Law prefigured; that cardinal truth
upon which depends the rest of the Gospel. This doctrine contains good
tidings of great joy which shall be to all people. Luke 2.10. (...) in my text,
is I conceive, the same that (...). Here are tidings worthy to be received with
full, with complete acceptance. One soul is more precious then the fabric of
the world; certainly each man's soul ought to be more dear to him, as the
principal part of himself. What will it profit a man, if he shall gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul? Mark 8.36, 37.

Secondly, as the soul is more precious then all worldly honors, treasures and
delight, so salvation is much better then the soul. That which is the
happiness, the end of man, must needs be better then man. Grace is better then
nature. An habit is extremum potentiae. But our happiness is better then
grace. It Is better not to be, then to be eternally miserable; and the fruition
of God is much above our beings, and means conducing to it. There Is a wide
hiatus, a vast gulf between the largest of worldly blessings and the narrowest
of spiritual conferred upon Gods children. Those have an interest in one who
knows all their wants, who is ready and able to help upon all occasions. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous; and his ears are open unto their cry,
Psalm 34.15. Should not God see, as well as hear, his children should want
many things. We apprehend not all our own wants, and so cannot pray to God for
the releif of all. God knows what we stand in need of, before we pray unto
him, and of his own accord, (without any monitour) is wont to aid us. Gods
favor likewise is constant. Acceptablenesse with him is, (what Thucidides said
of a well composed history) (...). Our friends upon earth are often times
ignorant of our necessities; often times impotent, not able to relieve us;
sometimes slack, and not forward to help; and very unconstant. Temporal good
things are scant cannot fill up the capacities of the soul. Neither is the
understanding satisfied with humane knowledge, nor yet the will with worldly
enjoyments. Nothing besides God can quiet the mind.

Thirdly, The recovery of what has been lost, occasioneth more joy then does
immunity from damage. So much is expressed in three several parables, (Luke
15.) one of the lost sheep, a second of the lost great, a third of the
prodigal son. There Is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents, more
then over ninety nine just persons who need not repentance, Luke 15.7. God's
more glorified in the conversion of sinners, then he could have been by man
persisting in integre^ity. Converts have much more reason of rejoicing, then
they should have had, had they never fallen. We reflect with joy upon evils,
which we have escaped. Hac olim m^minisse juvabit. And our joy bears
proportion to our dangers. That our affections might be enlarged in spiritual
joy and thankfulness, God has appointed out of his rich wisdom the Law a
Schoolmaster to scourge us to Christ. Dives was right for the substance of his
request, containing his affection toward his brethren yet living. A taste of
hell much commends to us the delights of heaven. S. Paul, as I showed
heretofore, is a very pregnant example to this purpose. But moreover the glad
tidings preached by S. Paul are worthy to be accepted by all men, as well as to
be received with all acceptance. The most righteous among men, Christ himself
excepted, stand in need of a Savior. It Is just, (that I may borrow a sentence
from Euripides) that (...), who do what is not good suffer what is not
delightful. (...). (says Herodotus in his Terpsicore) Nullus homo poenam
sceleris reus effugit unquam. Forasmuch as we all have sinned, it is necessary
that we all suffer in our own persons, or some other for us. God the Son took
upon him sceleris nostri expiandi parts, was pleased to become our Savior.

That Christ came into the world, is a doctrine as true as acceptable. Its an
honorable truth, an axiom in faith. The words (...) express as much; if we
admit they are an exegesis of (...), the epithet of (...). For proof of the
Thesis, I appeal, 1. To direct and immediate expressions in sacred Scripture.
2. To Christ's sufferings. 3. To means added for the conversion of sinners. 4.
To the consciences of sanctified men, those who are most sincere in their
lives, and most competent judges. 5. To the prevalency of this doctrine over
the power of darkness, over errors and heresies in men's judgments,
perverseness in their wills and affections, and corruption in their lives.

First of the first. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. To save from sin, is to save from
sin together with its evil consequents. The Son of man is come to save that
which was lost, Matthew. 8.11. He came to save those who had gone astray, those
that were sons of perdition, and to save them so as they should become lost
in their own apprehensions. For God sent not his Son into the world to
condemn the world: but that the world through him might be saved, Joh. 3.17.
Here Is deliverance from the sad effects of sin, viz. riddance from pain, and
a restoring to happiness. I may add, that those who receive Christ, obtain a
better condition then that which we lost in our first parents; Felix lapsus qui
talem ^^ruit Servatorem. Holy Job foresaw this Savior, I know (says he) that
my Redeemer lives.

Secondly, let us take a survey of Christ's sufferings. God the Father
covenanted with the Son, that for his sufferings he should see his seed.
Christ was the second Adam, by way of representation a public person. S.
August. is clear to this purpose: Primus homo Adam sic olim defunctus est
(says he) ut tamen post illum secundus homo sit Christus; cum tot hominum
millia inter illum and hunc orta sunt: and ideo manifestum est pertinere ad
illum omnem qui ex illa successione propagatus nascitur; sicut ad istum
pertinet omnis qui gratiae largitate in illo nascitur. Vnde fit ut totum genus
humanum quodammodo sint hominis duo, primus and secundus. Our Savior is often
called the son of man, that is, of Adam. Ezechiel with the Septuagint is
(...), but Christ is said to be (...), that is, the son of the first (Adam)
man. He was the next, and only other common person. Had himself been created,
or the son of some one besides Adam created, either God through him should
have been reconcilable toward some who sinned, not suffering, or some should
have wanted access to Christ's merits. Christ, as he was a branch of David,
(Jer. 23.5.) and a rod out of the stem of Jesse, (Esaias 11.1.) so likewise of
Adam. This branch offered up to God sanctifies the tree. Christ declared
abundantly that he came to save sinners, by what he suffered for them. He
suffered for us what satisfied divine justice. In burnt-offerings and
sacrifices for sin thou had no pleasure: Then said I, Lo I come (in the
volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.6, 7.
Gods will ((...)) here, as in Hebrew (...) often, and in Chaldee (...) and (...),
is that in which God is well pleased. (...) voluntas, signifies as I have
said, (viz. beneplacitum). In Jonathans Targum (ancienter then any Scriptures
whereof S. Paul was the penman) upon Esaias, in a sentence for substance of sense
the same with what was quoted out of the epistle to the Hebrews. He thus
paraphraseth upon Esaias 59.16. Et manifestum est coram eo, quod non sit vir
cujus opera bona sint. Et notum est coram eo, quod non sit homo qui stet and
deprecetur pro eis: and salvavit eos in brachio fortitudinis suae, ((...)) and
in verbo voluntatis suae auxiliatus est eis. (...) verbum voluntatis ejus, is
no other thing, then his only begotten Son in whom he is well pleased.
Christ's sufferings, though but short as considered in themselves, nor longer in
his expectation, (he could not despair of victory) received vigor from his
divine nature, triumphed over the demerits of sinful men. The sun of
righteousness (as Pelbartus allegorizing Gods covenant signified by the
rainbow) falling into a cloud of passion, is our security against a deluge of
damnation. Christ, as he came, so he overcame. He lost not his labor: God
cannot be frustrated in his undertakings. As we may safely believe God in
regard of his faithfulness (or truth), so we may safely hope in him in regard
of his power and authority to perform what at any time he promises. He paid a
price sufficient for sins at all times committed, although his merits become
efficacious only to those who believe. Sufferings are wont to be esteemed
according to the value of persons who undergo them; as what a Magistrate
suffers, much more then what a private person. But neither did our Savior
redeem us at a low rate; He was pleased to demonstrate his love toward us, by
sustaining the wrath of God, and shedding his most precious blood for us.
Sappho tells us, that love came down from heaven clothed with purple. Sure I
am, that he was of that color before he returned thither. (...). Christ is the
rose of Sharon, Cant. ^.1. He is ruddy. Cant, 5.10. Who is this that comes
from Edom with (...) garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his
apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save, Esaias 63.1.

Our Saviors sufferings were much sharpened and imbittered by circumstances.
1. He was betrayed of one of his disciples. 2. Valued at the rate of a servant.
If the ox gore a servant, or a maid, he shall give unto the master thirty
shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned, Exodus 21.32 3. He died an
accursed death. And being found in fashion in a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. He that is
hunged is accursed of God, Deuteronomy. 21.23. Gal. 3.13. 4. He was condemned and
executed by man whom he came to save. We may here take notice of the
omnipotency of divine wisdom, which is wont to abuse men's malicious
intentions. Men's wicked plots and contrivances improved by Gods wise
superintendency become ecstaticall, produce effects and issues above their own
sphere, besides their own nature. God is able and wont to work good out of
evil. Hermes tells us, in the fourth of his 100. Aphorisms. that Jupiter
configuratus malevolis mutat eorum malitiam in bonum.

Sacraments used by Gods people before and under the Law, looked forward, as
these now used by Christians backward to Christ. The Passover and the
Eucharist are pregnant resemblances both of what Christ suffered for us, and
likewise of what benefit we receive from him. See Beza upon Acts 15.20. 1. Cor.
10.18. and 21.
Beza is right, as conceiving that the cup of devils, and the table of devils
(1. Cor, 10.21.) were an appendix of idololatricall sacrifice, a feast in which
idolaters partaked of the altar; and that the cup of the Lord, and the table of
the Lord, in regard of analogy was fitly opposed to the cup of devils and the
table of devils: yet forasmuch as transubstantiation is impossible, there must
needs be much dissimilitude between the sacrificiall feasts of heathens, and
the Lords Supper, as compared to sacrifices whereof they were appendices. The
bread and wine which Christians receive in the Eucharist, are not materially,
but only representatively the same thing which was sacrificed for us. The
Lords Supper when first instituted by Christ, resembled what he intended to do
for us, and since his passion is a commemorative sign of his sufferings:
Christ had not yet offered up himself, when he instituted the Eucharist, and
administered it to his disciples. He instructs the then present, and ensuing
ages, that no transubstantiation is to be imagined, by injoyning that this
service should be performed in remembrance of him, Luke 22.29. 1. Cor. 11.24,
25. Circumcision and baptism set before us what Christ underwent for us,
rather as in its effects, then as in it self. That any are circumcised in the
inward man. washed from the pollution and guilt of sin, is wholly to be
attributed to Christ's merits. In circumcision blood was shed; both blood and
water streamed out of our Saviors side. He is the fountain of all true
Sacraments. Moses by Zipporah is called sponsus sanguinum, (Exodus 4.25.)
because his life was saved by the circumcision of his son. An husband of
blood art thou to me, is translated in Onkelus, For the blood of this
circumcision my husband is given me. He paraphraseth thus upon the latter part
of the verse following, But for the blood of this circumcision my husband must
needs have been killed. The Arabic Interpreter of the Pentateuch, made public
by Erpenius, upon that comma in the fourth of Exodus, may be construed by this
Latin; Et arripuit Tseforah petram, and abscidit praeputium filii sui, and
ostendit inter manus suas, and dixit, Quia sponsus occisus tu mihi. The sense
here is the same clearly, that before in the Chaldee. Zipporah circumcised her
son, because her husband was but as a dead man, otherwise had been slain.

Thirdly, Christ has plentifully demonstrated that he came to save sinners, by
means which he uses that he may make them partakers of his merits. He uses,
says Clemens Alexandrinus in his Paedagog. lib. 1. c. 9. (...), that he may
convert them.

1. He puts them in mind of their faults. This people draws nigh unto me with
their mouths, and honors me with their lips; but their heart is far from
me, Esaias 29.13. Matthew. 15.8. This engine by Clemens Alexandrinus is called
(...).

2. He reprehendeth peremptory sinners, signifies his displeasure against them
and endeavors to shame them out of their lewd and vile courses. These
reprehensions the Greeks call (...) is defined (...). They were as fed horses
in the morning: every one neighed after his neighbors wife, Jer. 5.6. We have
another example Hos. 4.15, 16, 17.

3. God expostulates with froward sinners. Expostulation in Greek is called
(...), It Is (...). Expostulatio est quae artificiali auxilio clam peragitur
vituperatio, quae ipsa quoque saluti providet, sub integument^. What could have
been done more unto my vineyard, that I have not done in it? Esa. 3.4. For why
will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezech. 18.3.

4. In the next place (I shall only suggest hints to your meditations)
consider how often God repeats threatenings and promises, inculcates rewards and
punishments.

5. God chides sinners as refractory, and perverse to their own destruction.
This kind of reprehension is called by the Greeks (...), and (...). Woe to the
rebellious children (says the Lord) that take counsel but not of me, that
cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin,
Esaias 30.1.

6. He refuteth sinners. (...) (redargution of sinners) (...). They have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy one of Israel to anger, Esaias 1.4.

7. I may add his upbraiding of sinners. Then he began to upbraid the cities
wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not: Woe unto
thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which were done
in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for
Tire and Sidon, then for you. And thou Capernaum which art exalted to heaven,
shall be brought down to hell: For if the mighty works which have been done in
thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day, Matthew.
11.20, 21, 22, 23.

8. Christ lamenteth the death of sinners. Christ lamented for the folly of
Jerusalem, which would not take notice of the day of her visitation.

9. Christ in the Sacraments which he enjoined us, condescendeth to our earthly
apprehensions, renders his goodness visible, sets salvation before our
eyes.

10. God writes his laws in the hearts of his elect, enableth them to perform
what he requires from them, to believe, to repent, to observe in some measure
each precept of the Moral Law. The new covenant is founded upon better
promises, then was the old, Heb. 8.6. God as the Legislatour of the Moral Law,
with the Egyptian taskmasters, required the full tale of brick, but allowed no
stubble. He no where promises that he would dispense to any in this life (our
Savior excepted) grace enabling to fulfill the Moral Law. Those graces which
enable us to observe conditions required in those who shall be saved, are to be
referred to Christ's merits. He is the Mediator of this better covenant. Hence
it appears that he came to save sinners.

Fourthly, the consciences of Gods children attest abundantly the truth of this
doctrine. God has sealed them, and given them the earnest of the spirit in
their hearts, 2. Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13. These Scriptures (I conceive)
do not only concern the preachers of the Gospel, but exhibit to us the
condition likewise of other believers. 1. God immediately inclines his
children to rely upon his goodness and free mercy. 2. He teaches them to be
observant of him, as well as to expect good from him; to observe him in duties
of both tables. They have experience of reformation in themselves, which they
know to be above the strength of nature. They know it to be as impossible for
them so to reform themselves, as for a camel to enter through the eye of a
needle. They perhaps also sometimes conceived (their affections rendering their
judgments partial) that victory over some lust or other, was above the power
of ordinary grace, or at least thought that they should one day perish under
this or that corruption. How great a change is wrought in their souls, we may
judge from that of the Prophet Esaias, chap. 11.6. The wolf also shall dwell with
the lamb, and the leopard shall ly down with the kid: and the calf and the
young lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. We
know how hard a task it is to change what is natural. Can the leopard change
his spots, or the blackamore his skin. It Is more difficult to change nature it
self. Water may for some time loose coldness, a quality natural to it, so as
it may retain its nature. Gods children are born again by regeneration, and
made partakers of a new nature. Grace wrought in the heart is a pledge of
salvation, the first fruits of heaven. This gracious reformation whereof
Christians have experience, was purchased hy Christ's merits. First, it
resembles Christ's death and resurrection. We may often by certain lineaments in
children discern their parents. Secondly, the Gospel is the great power of God
to conversion. The conversion of souls is above created strength, and God is
not wont to cooperate with false means. The Gospel directs us to Christ, as
the fountain of grace and salvation. What Manilius fabulously reports of
Orpheus, is true of Christ. Et sensus scopulis, and sylvis addidit aures,
Et Diti lacrymas and morti denique finem.
Christ, (that I may omit Sozomen reporting that a tree in Egypt bowed it self
in honor to our Savior there present; which story, or rather fiction,
Scultetus also mentions, exercit. evangel. l. 1. c. 59.) moves stocks and
stones, our stupid and stony hearts. Here Is also finis mortis, the death of
death. The remnant of the distich quoted out of Manilius (and Diti lacrymas) is
capable of such an interpretation as may illustrate another argument
propounded, viz. that the prevalency of the Gospel over Satan's kingdom,
demonstrates that Christ came into the world to save sinners. That the Gospel
has prevailed over perverseness in men's wills and affections, and corruption
in their lives, is evident to the consciences of believers, and often
acknowledged by profane persons. Many who will not themselves have Christ to
rule over them (sons of Belial) perceive and confess in others the powers of
godliness. Add the demolition of the Jews Ecclesiastical policy, the
downfall of heathenish oracles, See Plutarch de oracultrum defectu, in his
history about the death of the great Pa^.
the shriekings of damned spirits, the triumphs of the Gospel over heathenisme,
over errors and heresies in the Primitive Church, and in later times over
Popish superstition.

Use 1. Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Hence take notice of
that great evil which is in sin. As it thrust our first parents out of
Paradise, so likewise occasionally brought the Son of God down from heaven.

2. Learn we also hence how to esteem the Ministers of the Gospel; they preach
true and acceptable doctrine. How beautiful are the feet of them that preach
the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? Romans 10.5. Let a
man so account of us as the Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries
of God, 1. Cor. 4.1. Whereas many sit in darkness and in the shadow of death,
God is known in Judah. Should God send a famine of the word (which judgment he
threatens the Israelites, Amos 8.11.) those Gospel-priviledges would be more
precious in our sights, which we now in plentiful measure enjoy, but
under-value. Then might we say, ( Genesis 42.1, 2.
almost in Jacobs language) Why look we one upon another? Behold, we have heard
that there is spiritual food in such or such a country, let us remove thither
that our souls may live, and not die.

3. Did Christ Jesus come into the world to save sinners? Let none dare to
profane these names in cursing or swearing. Corruption optimi est pessima. Some
learned men have conceived (as Plutarch tells us in his Agis and Cleomenes)
that as of oxen being dead and rotten there breed bees, of horses wasps, of
asses beetles; so men's bodies when the marrow melts and gathers together,
do bring forth serpents. The grace of God, if turned into wantonness, becomes
the savor of death unto death. And those sink themselves deep into
condemnation, whose sins mention what should induce to repentance.

4. Neglect not salvation purchased by Christ. O taste and see that the Lord is
good, Psalm. 34.8. Divine goodness has condescended so far, that it is
obvious to sense, to the sight in a body assumed, born, conversing with men
upon earth, dying, rising from the dead, ascending into heaven; but moreover to
the taste (Popish transubstantiation disclaimed) in the Eucharist. But to be
affected only with what tickleth our senses, with what pleases the fantasy,
does not transcend Popish superstition. We must see Gods goodness with our
understandings, and taste it with rational affections. I deny not but both
seeing and tasting may well agree to the understanding. The intellect as it
contains eminently some one sense, cannot comprehend sufficiently Gods
clemency. Yet I should choose rather to attribute tasting to the affections. We
should at least but Tantalize, if we should see and not taste. We must taste,
otherwise we cannot see how gracious the Lord is. We may learn who receive
Christ aright, and likewise be incited so to receive him, from John 1.12, 13.
But to as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God; even to them that believe on his name: which were born, not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Those who receive
Christ aright, are not overswayed by natural corruptions, nor yet by the
commandments of men; moreover attain somewhat both beyond the reach of nature
and education, are by regeneration conformed to Gods will. See Field concerning
several degrees of Love, in the Apendix to his third book of the Church, chap.
5
They embrace Christ not only as a Priest offering up himself for their
sins, but likewise as a Prophet to direct them, and as a King to rule over
them. They are made the sons of God, and heirs of eternal life, and shall
for ever enjoy the presence of God. Bonum, honestum, and utile, and jucundum
meet together, as we see, in the receiving of Christ. Christ's blood, the true
Pactolus ((...)) flows with riches. One drop of it is enough to enrich
thousands of worlds to all eternity. Uranople (the new Jerusalem) has its
foundations garnished with all manner of precious stones, Apocalyp. 21.19. If
heaven upon earth be so glorious, what shall we conceive of heaven in its
proper place. As it cannot seem a new thing, that truths so precious should
want acceptance, so undoubtedly some time or other each truth will obtain
audience. When any of us is in danger of death, or at furthest immediately
after death, S. Paul's doctrine will be confessed worthy of all acceptance. All
who have heard it, and not received it, will acknowledge themselves fools at
the day of judgment.

5. Let us offer up all possible praise, honor, glory, and thankfulness to
the sacred Trinity contriving such a way for our recovery; to God the Father
who gave his only begotten Son, in whom he was well pleased, to be a ransom
for us; to God the Son who suffered an accursed death for us; to that Spirit
which sanctifies us. Let us propagate our thankfulness into our lives: Let us
not think any piece of self-denial, any service too dear for God. Christ has
descended lower for us then it is possible for us to debase our selves for him.
The saints upon earth sing a new song in the honor of Christ; Thou art worthy
to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: For thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
and nation, Rev. 5.9, 10. Heaven answers as by an echo, the music upon earth
in the mean time continuing, verse 11, 12. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain,
to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and blessing. This song of Angels puts Christ in the third person. He took
not upon him the nature of Angels: He is nearer to us. All creatures come in as
the Chorus, v. 13. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and
under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I,
saying, Blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. As man began, so he concludes the
song, v. 14. And the four living creatures said, Amen. And the four and
twenty Elders fell down and worshipped him that lives for ever and ever.

Because there are several degrees of thankfulness, I shall add to these
examples, some motives, which may quicken us in the duties mentioned.

1. We are unable in our own persons to fulfill the moral law. Let us exceed
the Scribes and Pharisees, who so far relied upon self-sufficiency, that they
conceived the Gospel in regard of themselves impertinent doctrine.

2. Could we avoid all actual transgressions, yet original sin is able to
damn us.

3. No one merely a creature can supererogate, can spare us any part of his
obedience. The blessed Angels, of all creatures most nimble and cheerful in
obedience, have oil little enough in their lamps for themselves.

4. No one merely a creature, nor yet all creatures could by sufferings redeem
so much as one soul. They should always be suffering, but never satisfy. If
any commend any other way to salvation, (as the fulfilling of the moral Law,
the intercession of the Virgin Mary, etc.) besides Christ, that proverb
mentioned by Aristotle in his Meteorologie is verified of him, viz. (...) manus
Christi (to wit, nailed to the cross) is the only physic for a sin-sick
soul. We stand in need (as you see) of Christ's merits: but let us prefer
ingenuity before necessity, let us expose our hearts to the woundings of a
friend. Christ (as Anacreon upon a worse occasion) (...). Suffer his love to
wound your hearts. Meditate returns answerable in some proportion to his
sufferings. Let us propagate our thankfulness into our lives; and praise and
honor God, by doing his will. So shall his will be done in earth, as it is in
heaven. Let none who makes profession of Christianity, carry himself
scandalously. Muta nomen, vel age fortius.

6. Forasmuch as Christ came into the world to save sinners, and is a
sufficient Mediator, able abundantly to save, let us not seek unto any other.
Let us not go about to alienate any part of his office, to confer honor,
prerogative to him, upon saints, angels, or images. The Scripture speaks
expressly, that in the later times some shall depart from the faith, giving
heed to seducing spirits and the doctrine of demons, 1. Tim. 4.1. Beza upon
the last word of that comma thus commenteth: Notum est quid hoc nomine
Platonici presertim intellexerint: sacri vero scriptores noxios illos and
impuros spiritus sic vocant. That opus post humum of a late judicious author
inscribed, The Apostasy of the later times, well prefers the signification
of that word demons, which learned Beza seems to reject, and fully
demonstrates that Gods spirit has forewarned us in the Scripture now quoted,
to beware of Mediators and Mediatresses forged by the Papists.

7. What Christ has done for us calls for spiritual rejoicing. And it shall
be said in that day, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will
save us: this is the Lord we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice
in his salvation, Esaias 25.9. The same motives which I commended to you in the
fifth use, will likewise suggest spirits and alacrity in the performance of
this duty. The Hollander, when he had obtained from Queen Elizabeth a promise
of assistance against the Spaniard, took for a Motto, Luctor and emergo. We
may, since Christ has so far appeared for us, take for our word the name of
the altar built by Moses, Exodus 17.15. (...) The Lord is my banner. What
greater occasion of rejoicing then invincible salvation? God is the tower of
the salvations of his anointed. What Christ has purchased for us is
sufficiently fortified and secured. Those cannot be exanimated and disheartened
by any evil tidings, and cross events upon earth, whose joy is heavenly.

8. S. Paul's doctrine chastises those who murmer and repine at the salvation
of others. Vide Socrat. Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. c. 25.
The Novatians apprehended that some sinners were during their lives, to be
debarred from outward communion with the church, whom yet they conceived
capable of divine mercy. They either attended not to what our Savior says
Matthew. 12.32. viz. That the sin against the holy Ghost shall neither be
pardoned in this world, nor that to come; or else misconstruing S. John.
(epist. 1. c. 5.16.) distinguished between that sin which is unto death, and
the sin against the holy Ghost. Sure I am that those are not utterly rendered
incapable of sharing with us in outward privileges of the Church, who may for
any thing we know, become partakers with us in glory. Howsoever
fellow laborers may murmr against such as enter into the vineyard in the
last hour of the day, God is ready at all times to accept all who cleave unto
him by serious and unfeigned repentance.

9. Let us endeavor the conversion of others, pull them out of the fire. Jude
23. God (as ye see) both by example and precept requires this office from us.
(And that I may suggest another incitement) what more rational, then that we
should be subservient to Gods ends. Christ came into the world to save sinners,
then let us likewise endeavor their salvation.

10. Let us walk charitably and compassionately toward all such as are capable
of salvation, but more largely toward the household of faith, Gal. 6.10. If thy
brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone, Matthew. 18.15. Who so shall offend one of these little ones,
which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea, Matt. 18.6. Besides
that men often times aggravate small faults, with Momus exclaim against the
creaking of Venus her pantofle; and sometimes impute crimes to those in whose
lives, in whose goings there is best harmony; to reprehend openly intimates a
greater disaffection toward the person offending, then toward the offense.
Neither is it sufficient, not to be ill affected toward Gods children: We must
sympathize with our brethren in afflictions. Christ did not only sympathize
with, or suffer for his friends, but condescended to an accursed death for his
enemies.

11. Let us do good against evil. Christ came to save enemies. After his
example bless them that curse you, perform good offices to those who
despitefully use you. Romans 5.6, 8. 1. Cor. 8.11. 2. Cor. 5.14, 15. Men are wont
to esteem those fools, and to brand them with this ignominious name, who do
good to their enemies, who when they are reviled reply not again. This part of
honesty is accounted folly. Solomon's rule is out of date, viz. When a man is
silent, he is to be reputed able to speak. As drunkenness is veiled with the
name of good fellowship, covetousness reckoned good husbandry, so pride is
ordinarily applauded under the name of animosity and a good spirit. I commend
to your meditations, that Christ, when he was condemned, as he was led to be
executed opened not his mouth by reviling his persecutours, but by praying that
their sin might not be laid to their charge.

The last part of my text yet remains, viz. the Epilogue, whereof I am chief.
S. Paul here applies his doctrine to himself, and omitting other men's faults
confesses himself the greatest of sinners. I shall here only exhort every one
to take a survey of himself, and to be a follower of S. Paul in his faith,
charity, and humility.

(...). An Appendix to the former Treatise.
I Am come to the end of my stadium, but not of my dolichus. It remains after
the contents of my Text explained, that I repress some groundless opinions,
which vie with S. Paul's doctrine both for truth and acceptablenesse.

Those who have affirmed that Aristotle was Christ's prodromus in natural
sciences, See Salmeron. tom. 1. p. 380.
as John Baptist was in supernatural mysteries, may be dismissed with laughter.

I am not able nor willing to give a catalogue of all those empty curiosities,
frothy conceits, ecstaticall paradoxes, brainsick phansies, Bethlehem ravings,
which have been obtruded for truths authentic or fundamental. I shall single
out some one or two, which may be here seasonably chastized, as not permitting
the circumstantialls of Christ's coming into the world to retain their due rank
and order, but thrusting them forward into equipage with what is most
substantial in religion.

One conceives that to misinterpret our Saviors two genealogies, (one of
which, viz. that in Matthew chap. 1. contains his pedigree as he was (...) the
son of a kingdom; the other of his natural descent) is, at least in regard
of bad consequences, an error not venial. The falsity of this petty conceit
is easily deprehended; but also some other may occasion discourse (as much as I
may conveniently superadde) more profitable.

Another will fear, least the history of Christ's birth, unless the positure of
the place in which he was born, in respect of the parts of heaven (or the
superior world), its longitude and latitude be duly attested, may in process
of time (in men's opinions) vanish into a fiction. Either experience or reason
(that I may not object the (...) of sacred Scripture) might challenge a better
opinion concerning succeeding ages. Its well known, that many have given full
credit to divine stories, (who never consulted with any map) who knew not in
what parts of the world the scenes were situate. Many true believers are
incapable of such knowledge. Sacred Scripture often wholly omits the circumstance
of place.

I shall not need to repeat here what has been said before against
Astrologers, who have imagined that the time of God the Son incarnated, was
determined by the stars. I could wish that none out-strip'd them in madness
and blasphemy. Those conceive, some of them, that God has designed the stars
for harbingers of what he intends to bring to pass in the sublunary world;
others who ascribe to the^ efficacy above their sphere of activity, acknowledge
that it was conferred upon them by God. To subordinate an eternal God to time,
to make omnipotency depend upon times and seasons, to affirm that God could not
sooner or later have performed what was requisite for the redemption of sinful
men, that he could not but effect what things were done or suffered for us, at
what times they were accomplished, far surpasses the wildest conceits of
vainest Astrologers. No one who is compos sui, will imagine that God more
depended upon time for the union of the two natures of Christ, or his suffering
death for us, then in the creation of the world. Time had no existence, before
the Genesis of the world begun. Time, says Spensippus, is (...) with the
Stoics it is (...) after Plato (...). Aristotle neither expresses what thing
time is, nor adequately what things are thereby measured, describing it (...).
The rest quoted express not the relative nature, or formality of time. Motions
measure themselves, and other motions distinct from them; and beings which were
for their kind complete, (or all whose parts coexisted) in the least time, and
in the least part of time conceiveable as well as those which were extended
into succession, were made up of prius and posterius. (...) Saturn, the same
that (...) time, with the Poets is the offspring of heaven; with Eratosthenes
(...), the motion of the sun. I cannot with these confine time to the
heavens. I cannot see but that the motion of a sublunary body may measure the
duration of things, and consequently be called time, agreeably enough to
reason, and some authorities cited. I conceive there was no artificial motion
before man was created: but certainly there was natural, at leastwise of the
firmament, or of the earth. Whether or no Angels are able to comprehend the
durations of things permanent, without some measure applied, or extrinsecall
time, I shall not need to determine. Months and years (most properly so
called) are the same with the proper motions of the Moon and Sun. We owe days
(whether natural or artificial) as they denote time, to the motion of the
earth; or else to the common, or participated (that I may so speak with
Philosophers) motion of the Sun. Time as distinguished from eternity (which
limitation I insert, as knowing how largely some late authors have used the
word) necessarily succeeded (it is existence supposed) in order of nature,
somewhat created. It is clear that time depended upon the Creation, not God
about to create the world upon time. Old Saturn should now be more aged, had
God been pleased to have anticipated the creation. Neither can I see how God is
intrinsecally more determined to one time (whether imaginary or real) rather
then another in creation, and the sending of his Son into the world, then to
one person before another in election, and the application of Christ's merits.

I know also who thought it a crime mortal, not to assent without doubting,
that the number of years between man's creation and his redemption, might be
infallibly gathered from Scripture. Others deem that events mentioned in sacred
Scripture, as the Exodus, and the destruction of the first Temple, the
beginning and end of the seventy years captivity; God the Son incarnated;
Christ's nativity, passion, resurrection and ascension, See bold Determinations
concerning the days of the birth and death of Adam (that I may quote authors
not inaccessible) apud Joannem Stadium, Astronom. Histor. page 17. and Doctiss.
Seldom. De Ann. Civ. vet Judaeorum cap. 8. page 44.
etc. may be applied to years months and days on which they came to pass in
Cyclicall accounts.

Chytraeus in a preface to his lectures upon Herodotus and Thucidides,
determines both which were the years and days of Christ's incarnation and
passion. As for the year of his birth, he approves our common account, See
Origan. Ephemerid. part. 1. c 1. Lansbergius in the dedication of his three
books of sacred Chronol. Joseph. Scalig. in Pro^egom. ad libros de Emend. Temp
p. 22. and de emendat Temp. l. 6. Sethus Calvisius Isagoges Chronol. cap. 46.
Gerardus Johan. Vossius, de natali anno Christi, p. 11.
which (as it is well known) is rejected by Chronologers of best judgment. We
have not a clear computation of the years between our Saviors birth, and the
first assembly at Nice, transmitted to us. Neither is it agreed what time
interceded between his birth and passion. He assumed our nature, (if we may
beleieve Chytraeus) on the 25. of March, and 34. years after suffered Chrysostom.
and August. went before him in this opinion. The Tesserescaedecatitae boasted,
that they had learned from the acts of Pilate, that Christ suffered on the 25
of March. Epiphanius reports that he found an History of the acts of Pilate,
which told him that Christ suffered on the 15. of the kalends of April, (that
is, on the 18 of March.
on the same day of the month. On the same day (according to this Author)
1509 years backward, (or before his incarnation) the first passover was
celebrated by the Israelites before their Exodus from Egypt. And our first
parents on the same day, 2453 years upward were created. Eusebius. and many after
him in several ages, affirm that Christ rose from the dead on the 25 of March,
on which day (they conceive) the world was created, not more to be excused then
Chytraeus.
It Is not difficult to discover how Chronologers, both Jewish and Christian
dissent from this Doctor, were it lawful to digress so far. Its obvious to
suspect him, with many others, to be seduced by an ambition of making things
answerable in nature, to be likewise suitable to in time. He had an eye upon the
correspondency between the first and the second Adam, and between man formed,
and reformed. Again between the Paschall Lamb and the Antitype, the Lamb
which takes away the sins of the world. Christ (says Chrysostom) ought
necessarily to suffer on the 25th of March, because he was on that day
conceived.
Moreover between Christ's coming and the end of his coming, He came to save
sinners. He assumed a body, that he might be fitted to suffer for men's
iniquities. His conceits were much to be applauded, were they as true as
specious. Our Jewish Doctors, as I have learned from Jose Ben Chilpetha, in
sedor Olam Rabba, chap. 4. and 7. Seder olam Rabba, (the Jews great Chronicle
of the world, from the Creation to the reign of Adrian) is attributed to R.
Jose. Ben. Chilpetha, by Alsted. in his Chronology of Jewish Doctors, by
Buxtorf. in his bibliotheca Rabbinica. Mr. Seldom, de diu Syru Syntag. 1. c. 2.
p. 100. and de jure naturali and gentium, lib. 1. cap. 10. p. 124. videtur
seipsum in fine libri prodere. dum inquit (...) inquit R. Jose (says Buxtorf.)
But R. Jose is frequently quoted in that Chronicle.
(was he, as he is supposed, the author of the treatise) were much tickled
with such like fancies. Astrologers also (whom I have already mentioned) who
feigned most remarkable events to be nearer one to another, or more remote then
true Chronology permitted, that they might seem introduced and effected by
several great conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter. We are wont to be much
affected, when we hear that effects which have some famous relation or respect
one to another, or are each of them eminent above vulgar events, have fallen out
on the same day of the month, especially if they be many years distant. And
many study to write what is pleasing more then what is true. It Is our comfort
that we may believe the second person of the sacred Trinity was incarnated and
born, although we know not punctually the time of his birth or incarnation.

Celebramus tam nos quam Judaei quinquagesimum diem, sed illi in typo; nos
autem in veritate, non tam significamus quam agimus. Pentecosten igitur
celebrantes, commemoramus quae olim sub Mose in veteri testamento sunt acta,
and quae sub Christo facta sunt.
Cyprian (sermon. de Spiritu sancto) and many writers after him affirm, that the
gift of tongues was dispensed at the feast of Pentecost, that there might be
correspondency between the two Testaments. The new Law (the Gospel) Esaias. 2.3.
Kimchi (upon this comma) affirms that the last days perpetually in the old
Testament signify the days of the Messiah. (...)
went out of Sion on the day, on which the old law given on mount Sinai was
commemorated. Christ was born about the feast of tabernacles; near the time of
the immolation of the Passover, was offered for us. A fast for entrance into
the land of Canaan denied to the Israelites, who provoked God in the
wilderness, and desolations of the first and later Temple, is observed by the
Jews on the same day, viz. the 9. of Ab, their fifth month. (...) (Seder olam
Rabba cap. 30.) that is, (that I may use Genebrards translation) Auctore R.
Jose, devolvitur meritum in diem meriti, and peccatum in diem peccati. Exempli
gratia. Quando Templum primo destructum est, dies ille erat vespera Sabbati,
atque adeo extremum anni septimi (id est, remissionis) erat etiam custodia and
hebdomas ipsius Joarib, itemque nonus dies Ab, similiter quando secundo est
eversum: atque in utraque eversione Levitae stabant in suis suggestis and
dicebant Canticum. Quodnam, obsecro, canticum? Et reddet illis iniqui tatem
ipsorum, and in malitia eorum disperdet eos, disperdet eos Dominus Deus noster.
On the ninth of Ab these rythmicall verses are wont to be sung in the person of
the presbytery.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Die nona mensis, hora vespertini temporis,
Cum essem in vigilia mea, vigilia Joiarib,
Introiit hostis, and sacrificia sua obtulit.
Ingressus est in Sanctuarium injussu Domini.
The first Temple is said to have been destroyed, when it was fully demolished.
They began this work on the seventh day of the fifth month, finished it on the
ninth, and burned the materials of the temple on the Sea Jer. 52.12.
tenth. Chap. 27. of the Jews great Chronicle. What Chytraeus asserted is not
hence confirmed. So much will seem clear, unless what ordinary experience
refuteth, be thought necessary, viz. that there should be the like
correspondency between times, as between events which fall out in them.
Contingent attributes have not the like reason to the whole kind, which they
have to one, or more individualls. Besides that there is much difficulty about
the day of the Jewish month, on which Christ celebrated his last Passover,
and consequently about the day of his Passion, no histories so well inform us
concerning the number of years by which the affairs of the Jews and their
forefathers were computed from the creation of the first, to the death of the
second Adam; and acquaint us with the general rules (which sure were not the
same throughout so long time, and so many changes both of their habitation and
polity) to which all their years were conformed, and particular occasions, by
reason of which their months and years ofttimes varied, as that we may be able
to reduce events, described by their times in sacred Scriptures, to their due
positures in any cyclical account. Those merit laughter rather then refutation,
who conceive that the feasts observed by the Jews, returned annually on the
same days of Julian months. (...) We shall easily believe that the day of
Christ's incarnation is unknown if we conceive the day and year of his birth
uncertain. Some Chronologers have been confident, that authentic registers
without assistance of humane writings, fully declare the distance of time
between the creation of the first, and birth of the second Adam. But if we
endeavor to give an account of that segment of time, we shall meet with many
rubbs and difficulties.

We cannot be certain without revelation, in what quadrant of the year our
Savior was born; but probably may conceive, at, or near the beginning of the
Hebrew year, as for reasons alleged by Scaliger, ( De emendat. Temp. lib.
6.) so also by the authorities of Jews, who expect the birth of their Messiah
in the month Ethanim; and by the testimony of Cyrill. Alexand. witnessing that
the Church of Alexandria celebrated the nativity of John the Baptist, on the
28. of Pharmuth, that is, as some compute, on the 23. of April.
Gerardus Joannes Vossius in his Treatise, De mense dieque natali Jesu Christi,
recites four famous opinions concerning the day on which Christ was born. The
ancient Roman Church assign to Christ's nativity, the 8. of the calends of
January, that is, the 25. of December: Greek Churches the sixth of January;
Eutychius places our Saviors birth in the 29. of Choiac, which answers to
the 25. of December: The Alexandrine Chronicle four days sooner.
some of the Egyptians the 24. or 25. of Parmuthus, others the 25. of Pachon.
Many other opinions might be added concerning the day of Christ's birth.
Beroaldus, Scaliger, others, confess that their skill is here non-plus'd, upon
the month (at most) conjectured, inscribe their ne plus ultra, acknowledge
that it is only in Gods power to define the day of Christ's nativity. Tacente
Scriptura, taceamus and nos, and Christum Servatorem in tempore natum adoremus,
et si in quo temporis puncto natus sit, ignoramus. Scultetus Delit. Evangel.
cap. 14. See chronology distracted about this point, ibid.

The year of the world likewise in which Christ was born, is uncertain: Certe
de vero natali Christi anno, tot fere sunt sententiae, quot chronologi. As
humane writers are almost every where uncertain, so also much divided about
pieces of time, of which they endeavor to give us an account, one from others,
and sometimes the same from himself. That the year of Christ's birth may be
cleared from Scriptures, first its requisite that it be fixed in Daniels
seavens. That this may be attained, it is necessary to know how far his
baptism was on this side the beginning of those sevens. At his baptism he
began to be about thirty years old, Luke 3.23. There Is no where else throughout
the New Testament any expression of his age, which can without the mediation of
this, be reduced to any determined year in Daniels weeks. Christ's passion by
some thought to precede the end of Daniels sevens exactly three years and an
half, cannot be discovered to be any set time distant from his birth, without
the intercession of humane authors, or the place quoted in S. Luke. First, the
participle (...), has occasioned in some a suspicion, that he was but then in
his 29. year. This scruple's easily removed. He began to be, that is, he was;
as he began to say the same that he said, Matthew. 11.7. The word (...), is
conveniently omitted by the Syriack Interpreter. The particle (...) more
perplexeth, intimates that he was not just thirty years old, but somewhat more
or less. Epiphanius lib. 2. tom. 2. haeres. 51. affirms, that Christ at his
baptism wanted 60. days to complete the distance from his birth into thirty
years. It Is further requisite in order to the end mentioned, to know whether or
no Daniels sevens succeeded immediately the 70. years captivity; how wide the
chasma, if any. Furthermore, that numbers of parts of time preceding, in which
the age of the world is thought to be contained, be clear and remote from all
perplexities. I shall demonstrate, but with as much briefnesse as may be
convenient, that there is so large variety of opinions concerning events before
and after Christ born, to be applied to certain years in Daniels weeks, 7. 62.
1. and the half week; touching the space of time contained in them, their
Epoch, and whether or no they were continuous; moreover such difficulty about
other segments of time preceding, that conditions showed to be necessary for
the infallible reducing of the year of our Saviors birth to a determined
year from the Creation, must needs all be wanting.

The two first articles of time, to wit, one from Adams Creation to the Flood,
the second from the Flood to the promise made to Abraham, Genesis 12.3. according
to Beroaldus and Broughton, and some other Chronologers, contain 2083. years.

The vulgar Hebrew.
Genesis 5.3. From Adams creation till he begat Seth, years 130. Genesis 5.6. Seths
life till he begat Enos 105 Genesis 5.9. Enos his life till he begat Cainan 90.
Genesis 5.12. Cainan's life till he begat Mahalaleel 70. Genesis 5.15. Mahalaleels
life till he begat Jared 65. Genesis 5.18. Jared's life till he begat Enoch 162.
Pentateuch. Samarit. -100 Genesis 5.21. Enoch's life till he begat Methuselah 65.
Genesis 5.25. Methuselahs life till he begat Lamech 187. Pentateuch. Samarit. -120
Genesis 5.28. Lamechs life till he begat Noah 182. Pentateuch. Samarit. -129 Genesis
5.32. The age of Noah when he begat his first son 500. Genesis 11.10. The age of
Shem when he begat Arphaxad 100. Genesis 11.12. The life of Arphaxad till he begat
Salah 35. Pentateuch. Samarit. +100 Genesis 11.14. The life of Salah till he begat
Eber 30. Pentateuch. Samarit. +100 Genesis 11.16. The life of Eber till he begat
Peleg 34. Pentateuch. Samarit. +100 Genesis 11.18. The life of Peleg till he begat
Reu 30. Pentateuch. Samarit. +100 Genesis 11.20. The life of Reu till he begat
Serug 32. Pentateuch. Samarit. +100 Genesis 11.22. The life of Serug till he begat
Nahor 30. Pentateuch. Samarit. +100 Genesis 11.24. The life of Nahor till he begat
Terah 29. Pentateuch. Samarit. +40 Genesis 11.26. The life of Terah till he begat
his eldest son 70. Pentateuch. Samarit. -60 Genesis 11.32. Terahs life after he
begat his first son 135. Pentateuch. Samarit. -60 For the days of Terah were
205. years. The land of Canaan was promised to Abraham after his fathers death,
as we may clearly gather from Genesis 12. and Acts 7. and immediately after his
death, as seems to be intimated by these Scriptures. God at the same time
promised that the Messiah should issue from the loins of Abraham, Genesis 12.3. In
thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. The distance between them
and Noah's eldest son according to Broughtons account 002. Noah was 500. years
old when he begat his first son; 600. years old when the flood of waters came
upon the earth, Genesis 7.6. Said Batricid. affirms that when the flood came
upon the earth, (...) that Noah was 600. years old, and that his son Sem was
an 100. years old. This Author is wont with more then ordinary facility to be
false and fabulous. Ramban observes ( in Parascham (...)) that Sem is said to
be the brother of Japhet the elder, Genesis 10.21. Sem (says he) is preferred
(...) by reason of his dignity. So the sons of Abraham, Isaac and Ishmael, 1.
Chron. 1.28.
Sem was an 100. years old two years after the flood, Genesis 11.15. The total
sum is 2083.


Many difficulties may be objected, which much perplex this computation.

1. It may be questioned whether or no the lives of the Patriarchs are to be
reckoned punctually from the times at which they are said to have been
begotten. The affirmative part is most probable; otherwise sacred Chronology
(in which I cannot suspect that there is any hiatus) should be discontinuous. I
doubt not but authentic Scriptures exhibit to us a continued order of times
from Adams creation to the end of Daniels weeks, and that expressions used by
those who were Spiritus sancti amanuenses, were intelligible to all of ordinary
judgments who were contemporary, to those also at least who lived in ages not
much remote.

2. It may be enquired, what to beget signifies, in the 5. and 11. chapters of
Genesis. Adam probably (that I may give an instance) begat Seth according to
the sense of the Scriptures, when Seth was born. Besides that what was begotten
was then manifested, Marinus in's Arca Noae thus interprets the word used in
the Original. (...) genuit, peperit, parturiit, proprium foeminarum videlicet,
quamvis eleganter de viro etiam and aliis rebus dicatur.

3. The distance between Sem and Noah's eldest son is questioned. Wolphius (
de tempore lib. 1. page 50.) affirms virtually, that three years interceded.
Arphaxad (he says) was born (whence we may take notice that in his opinion
likewise to be begotten, was the same that to be born) three years after the
beginning of the flood. Noah was 500. years old, when he begat his eldest son,
Genesis 5.32. He was 500. years old, and begat Sem, Ham, and Japheth; that is, he
begat none of them till he was of such age. They were not any of them in the
womb together. Noah was 600. years old when the flood of waters came upon the
earth, Gen 7.6. Sem was 100. years old two years after the flood, Genesis 11.10. I
conceive with Broughton, that the flood is the same that the beginning of the
flood in that Scripture. So Chronologers speaking of years from the Temple,
mean from the Temple built, not from the same demolished.

4. It Is altogether improbable that each of the Patriarchs mentioned in Genesis 5.
and 11. was exactly of that number of years, which is attributed to him when he
begat another, or when he died. I cannot doubt but in those chapters quoted,
years current are often reputed years, as well as those which were complete:
which granted, the particulars before summed up for the two first articles of
time, must needs exceed the distance of the promise from the creation. The like
happens in the chronology of the Kings of Judah and Israel, but with this
difference: See Empereur in his comment upon Jachiades on Daniel, c. 1. v. 1.
and David de pomis, there quoted. But I must confess, I cannot perceive that
the year^ which the Kings of Israel reigned, were more reckoned by the years of
the Kings of Judah, then vice versa. See 2. Kings, 12.1. and 14.1. 2. Kings
16.12. 2. Kings 16.1. 2. Kings 18.1. and passim.
Of the years which this or that king was said to reign, both the first and
the last were sometimes incomplete, here probably only the last of years
attributed to this or that Patriarch, whether for the time from his birth, till
he begat a son, or between birth and death.

5. There Is much difference (which I esteem a difficulty insoluble) between the
Samaritane, and the vulgar Hebrew Pentateuch. According to the Samaritane.
Pentateuch, Jared lived 62. years, and begat Enoch. Genesis 5.18. Jared lived
after he begat Enoch, Ne mireris Lector, e Pentateuch^ Samaritano citata
literis exarari Caldaeis, (seu Hebraeis recenti^ (...).) ^phus Samaritanis
(quibus ante captivitatem Babylon. usa est tota Hebr^ (...)) defici^batur.
(...) (...) 785. years, etc. v. 19. (...) 785. years, etc. v. 19. And all the
days of Jared were 847. years, v. 20. And Methuselah lived (...) 67. years,
and begat Lamech, v. 25. And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech (...) 653.
years, v. 26. And all the days of Methuselah were (...) 720. years, v. 27. And
Lamech lived (...) 53. years, and begat a son. v. 28. And Lamech lived after
he begat Noah (...) 600. years, and begat sons and daughters, v. 30. And all
the days of Lamech were (...) 653. years, v. 31. The Samaritane Pentateuch
adds to the end the eleventh comma of the eleventh chapter of Genesis (as in
usual copies) (...) And all the days of Sem were 600. years, and he dyed. The
days which Arphaxad, Salah, Eber, Peleg. Reu, Serug, Nahor, lived, are after
the same manner distinctly summed up, otherwise then in usual Hebrew. And
Arphaxad lived (...) 135. years, and begat Salah, Genesis 11.12. And Arphaxad
lived after he begat Salah, (...) 303. years, and begat sons and daughters,
v. 13. And Salah lived (...) 130. years, and begat Eber, v. 14. And Salah lived
after he begat Eber (...) 303. years, and begat sons and daughters, v. 15.
And Eber lived (...) 134. years, and begat Peleg, v. 16. And Eber lived after
he begat Peleg (...) 270. years, and begat sons and daughters. v. 17. and
Peleg lived 130. years, and begat Reu, v. 18. And Peleg lived after he begat
Reu, 109. years, and begat sons and daughters. v. 19. And Reu lived 132.
years, and begat Serug; after he begat Serug, 107. years, and begat sons and
daughters. v. 20. And Serug lived 130 years, and begat Nahor. v. 22. And Serug
lived after he begat Nah^r 100. years, and begat sons and daughters. v. 23.
And Nahor lived (...) 79. years, and begat Terah. v. 24. And Nahor lived after
he begat Terah (...) 69 years, and begat sons and daughters, v. 25. And the
days of Terah were 145. years, and Terah died in Haran, v. 32. Besides
differences between the Samaritane and ordinary Hebrew, about years which other
Patriarchs lived after they had begotten their immediate successors in the
catologues of the generations of Adam and Sem, that about Terah together with
those about the years which they lived before they begat, amount to 231. years.
The space of time from Adams creation to the promise made to Abraham, by the
Samaritane Pentateuch so much exceeds that exhibited in the ordinary Hebrew.
2083. and 231. added, complete 2314.

For the facile understanding of those two columns, in which the common account
and the Samaritane are compared together, take these rules.

Oughtred clavis Mathematicae, c. 1.
Signum additionis, sive affirmationis, est + plus.

Signum subductionis, sive negations est - minus.

6. Cainan mentioned Luke 3.36. as father to Salah and son to Arphaxad, has
130. years allowed him by the Septuagint, for the space between his birth and
the birth of Sala, Genesis 11.13. yet is not mentioned in the usual or Samaritane
Hebrew.

7. Forasmuch as the next article of time contains exactly 430. years, as is
cleared by Exodus 12.41. The greater part of Hebrew commentatours upon Genesis 1.1.
and chap. 7.8. Exodus 11.2. Jonathan Ben Uziel upon 1. Kings 8.2. Josephus
Archaeologia Judaice, lib. 1. cap. 4. consent that the world was created at, or
near the beginning of Autumn. Its sufficiently known, that many other, both
ancient and late writers, have entertained the same opinion. See Elias
Cuchlerus in his dissertation de Tempore Mundi conditi. In that Treatise he
gives a competent account of them, as also of those who have conceived the
world was created in the spring. Besides that those who held the world was
created in Autumn, are prevalent in credit, were more able then their
Antagonists to decide the controversy in hand, authentic Scriptures
countenance their assertion. Its probable the trees in the garden of Eden, were
created conformable to the season of the year. We are certified that they bare
fruit before the fall of our first parents. This argument (I acknowledge
attending to the diversity of conditions of some climates, and some other
reasons) only persuades, but does not demonstrate that the world was created
in Autumn. The beginning of the year was changed at the Exodus, Exodus 11.2.
Had Nisan been the first month of the Hebrews year, before their Egyptian
bondage, they of their own accord without any command, would after their
deliverance have reassumed it for the first of months, and the first month of
their year. Moreover, God enjoined them the observance of Nisan, as a
memorial of their deliverance from Egypt. Lastly, the tenth of Tisri was to
Israelites the day of atonement for the year past, and the beginning of the
year of Jubilee. Levit. 25.9. (...) Prim^ die Tisri initium anni anni^, and
dimissionibus, and Jubileis. Thus the Talmud in Massecheth Rosch Haschanah.
Josephus in the place praised, tells us that Moses for humane affairs
retained the ancient order of the year after the Exodus. (...). Thysius
Exercitat. Miscellan. 4. after his second thoughts bids adieu to his opinion
that the world was created in the Spring.
if the world was created in Autumn, (which is most probable) we must needs
grant that besides complete years, an half year interceded between the
beginning of the world and Abraham's peregrination.

The next joint of time is less knotty, yet not wholly exempted from
perplexity. Tht Law was not given till 430. years after the promise made to
Abraham, Gal. 3.17. The Law which was 430. years after cannot disanull the
covenant that was confirmed before of God, in respect of Christ. The 430. years
mentioned, Exodus 12.40. are the same with these, only 50. days interceded
between the departure of the Israelites from Egypt and the Law given on Sinai,
a number not considerable.

Whereas we read in our English translation for that text of Exodus quoted, the
dwelling of the children of Israel, while they dwelled in Egypt, was 430.
years, we ought thus (as does Master Ainsworth) to translate the original: The
dwelling of the sons of Israel who dwelt in Egypt was 430. years. Moschabh in
this Scripture, signifies peregrination, or abode in strange countries, viz.
Canaan and Egypt. The dwelling of the children of Israel, is that peregrine
dwelling which concerned the children of Israel. Their fathers, as far as
Abraham, are are to be taken in. We may together with the sons of Israel, as
well comprehend their fathers as their sisters. Onkelus in his Chaldee
paraphrase, exactly expresses the Hebrew, but is as unhappily translated into
Latin, as the Hebrew into English. The article, which ought to be referred to
the children of Israel, is unduly referred to their peregrination, and so their
peregrination wholly related to Egypt. The 72. interpreters, (in which, the
dwelling of the sons of Israel, which they and their fathers dwelt in the
land of Egypt, and the land of Canaan, are 430. years,) apprehended the true
sense. These 430. years added to 2083. preceding, (according to M. Broughtons
account,) complete 2513. The 400. years, in which Abraham's seed should be evil
entreated, (Genesis 15.13. Acts 7.6. are to be reckoned from the time, in which
Ismael the son of Egyptirn Hagar, began to afflict Isaac. Isaac, when six
years old, might understand Ismael mocking him. We must not conceive that all
intermission of afflictions, and Lucida intervalla, are to be excluded from
these 400. years. The whole distance between the beginning and the end is to be
attended.

From the children of Israel coming out of Egypt, to the building of the
temple, were 480 years. (1. Kings 6.1.) These added to Broughtons 2513.)
preceding, make up 2993. I should omit lesser numbers (mentioned in sacred
Scripture) of which the 480. years, (in the first of the sixth of the first of
Kings,) are compounded, did not the twentieth verse of the thirteenth of the
Acts, suggest a scruple to be removed. In the Scripture the time of Judges,
viz. between Joshuah and Samuel, is 450. years. Moses led the Israelites 40.
years in the wilderness. Joshua governed the Israelites 17. years after Moses
his death. 40. years are given to Saul. Acts 13.21. The time which Samuel
judged Israel, is comprehended with the reign of Saul, in that number. David
reigned 40. years, 1. Chron. 29.27. And Solomon 4. years before the temple
began to be builded. The sum is 141. The time for judges (Abimelech's three
years are included) between Joshuah and Samuel is 450. years. These numbers
added, make 591. And so exceed that mentioned. 1. Kings 6.1. by 111. years.
Beroaldus is of the same opinion with Mr. Broughton. Luther and Beza for (...)
read (...). Who desire more variety, may see the ancient Latin translation,
the Arabic translated into Latin by Junius, (which omitteth 40. years given
to Saul in the verse following, that it may make more room for the 450.) The
Arabic Testament set out by Erpenius, expresses Saul's 40. years. See a
reading also of the 20. verse of the 13. of the Acts, of which we speak,
transcribed by Beza out of a Greek copy printed at Paris, conformed to the
ancient Latin.
M. Broughton with admirable subtilty and acuteness, conceives that in the
twentieth of the thirteenth of the Acts, where the time for judges is said to
be 450. years, the numbers of years for defenders of Israel, and those for
offenders are added together.

The years for offenders are expressed in six texts of the book of Judges; for
Chusan, 8. (Judges 3.8.) Eglon, 18. (Judges 3.14.) Sisera, 20. (Judges 4.3.)
Midian, 7. (Judge. 6.1.) Ammon, 18. (Judge. 10.8.) Philistines, 40. (Judge. 13.1.)
the total sum is 111.

We find in Judges twelve places for the defenders of Israel. So many
particular numbers of years for them, amount to 299; which Elies 40. years make
up 339. These added to 111. make up the number aforementioned in the Acts. The
times of Isreal's afflictions mentioned in the book of Judges, are contained (as
the learned Author already praised conceivs) in times given to defenders.
Their Judges came sometimes by the worse. Yet in the 13. of the Acts, after
what manner some segments of a line to the whole) are added to the whole time
between Joshuah and Samuel. Master Broughtons wit perhaps in this conceit is to
be preferred before his judgment. Some places in Judges seem clearly to
intimate, that the times of sufferings were not comprehended in the years
attributed to those who judged Israel. Part of the third chapter much
patronizeth this opinion. In the 11. verse Othniel died, when the land had
enjoyed rest forty years under his government. Then the children of Israel
again committed wickedness in the sight of the Lord: and the Lord
strengthened. Eglon king of Moab aginst Israel, because they had committed
wickedness before the Lord. And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and
Amalek, and went and smote Israel, and they possessed the city of palm trees.
So the children of Israel served Eglon king of Moab eighteen year^, verse. 12,
13, 14. But when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord stirred
them up a savior, Ehud (in the verse following). The children of Israel cried
unto the Lord, when they had been vexed 18. years. Ehud saved them not till
after they cried unto the Lord. The 80. years mentioned in the 30. verse,
cannot contain all the time from Othniels death to the end of Ehuds affairs.
It Is said that the land had rest 80. years. They wanted rest (which seems to
be clear from what has been quoted) 18. years, immediately succeeding the
death of Othneil. Rest here cannot be conceived to be any other thing, then
freedom from vexation by enemies. As great a difficulty is suggested by the 8.
of the 10. of Judges. 18. years of affliction there mentioned, cannot well be
conceived, if we consider the context, to have preceded the death of Jair, who
judged Israel 22. years; nor can possibly be reckoned to have fallen out in the
time of Jephta, the succeeding Judge, who ruled but six years, and delivered
Israel from these afflictions. S. Paul's words taken in that sense which is most
plain and simple, may well consist with what we find in 1. Kings 6.1.

The holy Ghost pleased to register the time of the building of the Temple,
takes for an Epoche the deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt, a type of
deliverances (in which Christ to be figured by the Temple should be the Ante
signanus) from spiritual Egypts, the power of Satan in Heathens and in
Antichrist. That Epoch also was very accommodate, in that the Temple was to
Gods people a pledge of temporal deliverances. If in the lands of their
enemies they should pray toward it, God would hear in heaven, and answer upon
earth; would upon their repentance restore them to their country. Times of
afflictions which they had suffered, are conveniently omitted in the account,
as which would have eclipsed and obscured the luster, the pomp and glory of
present happiness. Tears are wiped from their eyes, and the times of their
adversity not remembered.

Times in which the building of the second Temple was hindered (as Empereur
believes upon the ninth of Daniel) are neither part of the 7. nor yet of the
70. weeks mentioned by the Angel Gabriel. See also Ras^ upon Ezech. 4.5.
Josephus much countenanceth my conjecture, in his Jewish Antiquities, lib. 8.
cap. 2. (...). Solomon began the building of the Temple in the fourth year of
his reign, in the second month which the Macedonians term Artemisius, the
Hebrews Jair, 492. years after the Israelites exodus from Egypt. He makes no
mention of years for offenders in the book of Judges doubled, viz. comprehended
in the years for defenders, moreover superadded. He admits into his account
the year immediately preceding the 40. of Moses leading the Israelites into
the wilderness, (in the end of which the Israelites came out of Egypt) also
the fourth of Solomon's kingdom (in the beginning of which the temple began to
be builded). No one will condemn his judgment, who has seen Emperor upon
Dan. 1.1. He there approves this way of computing upon another occasion. Plus
minus may venially be understood (though not expressed) for years current, and
parts of years completely past. I am less willing to believe that Josephus
erred as adding two years above those due for the space between the deliverance
of the Israelites from Egypt, and the building of the Temple, in that he
substracteth two years due for time between Adams creation and the said period.
(...). He allows only 3102. years for time between the first man born of God
by creation, and the Temple begun to be builded. Between the Creation and the
Temple, if we take in besides the years for those who judged Israel, 111. years
for intervals in which the Israelites were oppressed by their enemies, and the
year in which the Temple began to be builded, interceded 3104. years. He
allows for the time between Terahs death and the building of the Temple 1020.
years, between the flood and the temple 1440. For the first one year, for the
other, if he mean from the beginning of the rain which caused the deluge, six
years short. It necessarily follows that he must have reckoned 4. years too
much between the creation and the flood. I may not here omit, how Josephus in
his second book against Apion, is inconsistent with what I have quoted out of
his 8. book of antiquities, concerning distance of the building of the Temple
from the deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt. (...). Solomon builded the
Temple 612. years after the Jews came out of Egypt.

Sulpitius Histor. sacr. lib. 1. starteth another difficulty about the times of
Judges. He objecteth an interregnum between Samson and Heli. Ambigit (that I
may propound his scruple, as represented by Sigonius) quot anni intercesserint
inter Samsonis exitum, and Heli Pontificatum, ac judicatum, quod id scriptura
non prodiderit, ac post Samsonem ^er Israel sine regibus fuisse adjecerit.
Sigonius subscribeth this answer: Cum Heli 40. annos judicasse dicitur, primo
Samnelis, cap. 4. intelligendum est illos annos complecti, and interregnum ante
Heli, and pontificatum ejus. Atque ita Eusebius, and caeteri observarunt. That
interregnum (as Sigonius judges) was comprehended within the 40. years
attributed to Samuel.

Lastly, The author of Seder Olam Rabba (cap. 12.) substracteth one year from
23. and 22. attributed to Tolah and Jair, (Judges 10.) (...) because it was
given to each of them, viz. reckoned the last of Tola's 23, and the first of
Jair's 22. He substracteth a year likewise from those given to Jephthah and
Ibzan, conceiving the last year of Jephthah was the first of Ibzan.

The Temple began to be builded according to Master Broughtons account in the
2993. year of the world. Solomon reigned 40. years, 1. Kings 11.42. The
kingdom was divided immediately after his death. 1. Kings 12. verses 1, 2, 16,
17, 19, 20. so we have 37. years from the foundation of the Temple to the
division of the Kingdom. (The Temple was founded in the beginning of the
fourth year of Solomon's reign.) To these 37. years add 390. Ezech. 4.5.
Beroaldus is of the same judgment, as computing 408. years, for that article
of time between the foundation of the Temple, and 70. years of the Babylonian
captivity, which he reckons from the first year of Nebuchad-nezzar.
Lansberg. also consents Chronol. sac. l. 2. c. 6 and Capell. Historiae sacrae
and Exoticae l. 1.
The sum is 427. the space (as Master Broughton thought) between the
foundation of the Temple and the last captivity. These added to the age of the
world (as computed by the same author) at the founding of the temple, make up
3420. years. The breach of the covenant made between God and the Israelites at
the building of the Temple, as Junius conceives is the epoch of 390. years
mentioned by Ezechiel, which he disposes toward the end of the 27. year of
the reign of Solomon. Then (as this author conceives) began that idolatrous
rebellion against God, which was both an exemplary and meritorious cause to the
ten tribes revolting from the house of David. See Junius upon Ezech. 4.5.
He concludes these 390. years in the deportation made by Nebuzaradan, Jer.
52.30. that is, in 23. years of Nebuchad-rezzar. The 40. years for the iniquity
of the house of Judah, Ezech. 4.6. are according to the same Commentatour, the
last of the 390. Josiah's reformation, (he thinks) had not this antidote been
interposed, might have occasioned a presumption of Gods displeasure removed.
Rasi makes the 390. years discontinuous; the entrance of the Israelites into
Canaan the beginning, the deportation of the ten tribes, the clause of them.
See variety of opinions about these, and the 40. years for Judah, in Abarbinel
upon Ezech. c. 4. Besides the difference mentioned between Junius and Broughton
about the Epoch of Ezechiels 390. years, Bullinger reckons the duration of
the first temple, years 440. Gualtherus 435. With whom Flinspachius agrees.
Mangoldus 420. Bibliander 432. Mercator 428.
Others might be added dissenting from these and amongst themselves. Sure
authors now quoted, and others as they consented not all of them about the
number of years to which Ezechiels 430. days answered, (Ezech. 4.5, 6.) were
also much distracted about the Epoch of years there exhibited. It Is an hard
task to remove this difficulty, neither can I jurare in verba magistrorum, who
affirm that the 40. days (Ezech. 4.6.) which Ezechiel was commanded to lie on
his right side, signified the same years, that 40. of the 390 days in the
verse preceding. These Scriptures nakedly considered, will seem to express the
contrary:

If I anatomize this joint of time which I have now in hand, I shall meet with
more perplexities. Solomon reigned after he began to build the Temple, 36.
years at least, as may be gathered from 1. Kings 11.42. compared with 1. Kings
6.1. Rehoboam 17. years, 1. Kings 14.21. Abi^ 3. years, 1. Kings 15.2. Asa 41.
years, 1. Kings 15.10. Jehoshaphat 25. years, 1. Kings 22.42. Jehoram seems
to have reigned five years, by 1. Kings 22.42. verse 51. of the same chapter,
and 2. Kings 1.17. c. 8.25. compared together. Ahaziah one year, 2. Kings
8.26. Ath^liah 7. years, plus minus. compare 2. Kings 11.4. with the preceding
verses of the same chapter. Joash 40. years, 2. Kings 12.1. Amaziah 29. years,
2. Kings 14.2. There succeeded an anarchie of 13. years, or thereabouts. For in
the 15. year of Amaziah King of Judah, Jeroboam the son of Joash King of
Israel began to reign, 2. Kings 14.23. Azariah (called likewise Uzziah and
Ozias) the next King of Judah after Amaziah, began to reign in the twenty
seventh year of Jeroboam, 2. Kings 15.1. Substract from 27. the complement of
15. as they are a part of 29. viz. 14. (so many years Amaziah and Jeroboam
reigned together) there remain 13. for the space between Amaziahs death and
Azariah's inauguration. Azariah reigned 52. years, 2. Kings 15.2. Jotham 16.
years. 2. Kings 15.33. Ahaz 16. years, 2. Kings 16.2. Hezekiah 29. years, 2.
Kings 18.2. Manasseh 55. years, 2. Kings 21.1. Amon 2. years, 2. Kings 21.29.
Josiah 31. years, 2. Kings 22.1. Jehoahaz 3. months, 2. Kings 23.31. Johoiakim
11. years, 2. Kings 23.36. Jehoiachin 3. months, 2. Kings 24.8. Zedekiah 11.
years, 2. Kings 24.18. The sum is 440. years. 6. months. The difference
between this and that approved by Beroaldos and and Broughton, is 13. years and
six months. Imperfect years, wherewith Kings of Judah began and ended their
reigns, and parcels of time in which some of them reigned together with their
fathers, inextricably perplex this way of computation.

To 3420. years add 50. years, the remnant of the captivity after the burning
of the Temple mentioned 2. Chro. 36.19. The summe's 3470.

Beroaldus and Broughton are of opinion that the 70. years of the Babylonian
captivity are to be reckoned from the first year of Nebuchadnezzar King of
Babel. Broughton alleges for proof of his assertion, Jer. 25. v. 1. and 11.
These Scriptures evince that God denounced against Judea 70. years desolation,
in the first year of Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon, but not likewise that the
desolation began in the same year. Junius upon 2. Chron. 26.21. conjectureth
that the 70. years of captivity began a deportatione Jehoiachinis sive
Jechoniae. But neither can so much be evinced from Ezech. 40.1. upon which he
relyeth for confirmation of his opinion. (...) The word there used, is not
peculiar to that deportation or captivity. That the 70. years are to be
reckoned from the burning of the Temple, or some time afterward, seems to be
cleared by 2. Chron. 36.21. compared with those verses of Jer. 25. now quoted.
To fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah until the land had
enjoyed her Sabbaths; for as long as she lay desolate, she kept sabbath, to
fulfill threescore and ten years. The 70. years desolation seem only to have
been foretold, and threatened in the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, and begun to
be fulfilled Scalig. in Prolegom. ad libros de Emendat. Temp. and alibi.
Lansbergius Chron. Sacrae l. 2. c. 1. In Seder olam Rabba, c. 29. The 70. years
of desolation are bounded by the destruction of Jerusalem and the first Temple,
and the building of the second Temple. The Israelites (according to the author
of that Chronicle) after they had lived in the kingdom of the Chaldeans 52.
years, were restored to their own country. To these 52. years are added 3.
years for Cyrus, 14. of Ahassuerus, one whole year for Darius. In the second
year of Darius the Temple was builded. The same Epoch is assigned by the
Author of the Jews great Chronicle, to the 70. years desolation, and to
Daniels 70. weeks.
at the demolishing of Jerusalem, Wolphius de Tempore, lib. 1. cap. 6.
or when some relics of the Jews went into Egypt, that is, within a years
space; or else in the 23. year of Nebuchad-rezzar, when Nebuzaradan carried
away captive of the Jews Jer. 52.30.
745. persons, (which came to pass within the space of five years at most
after the burning of the Temple.)

Seventy sevens of years mentioned Dan. 9.24. (that is, 490. years) make up the
age of the world, (according to Broughtons computation) Wolphius adds 31.
years, De Tempore lib. 1. c. 6.
3960. years. The last of those, as Broughton, and Ibid.
Wolphius, and In his Harmony of the Evangelists, upon Luke 3. v. 21.
M. Lightfoot (with some others) conceive, was the year of our Saviors
passion. His birth, according to M. Broughton, preceded by the space of 33.
years and an half. He places it in the Scaliger adds 20. years.
3927. of the world. The time of Christ's death (says he) shall be after seven
seventies. These sevens are divided into three parts: and proper stories joined
to the first and the last part: Wolphius is of the same opinion. Hic temporis
articulus incipit ab anno primo Cyri, qui Jubilaeus fuit, and desinit in
Jubilaeum omnium jubilaeorum laetissimum and celeberrimum, veritatem inquam
illius umbrae, in annum passionis Domini. De tempore lib. and cap. citatis. To
these add as consenting for the beginning of Daniels sevens, Lansbergius,
Empereur, Huit, etc.
Seven of them from Cyrus first year, and permission to return to build
Jerusalem, (Esaias 44.28. Ezra 4.12.) shall pass before they shall have walled
it. Thence are 62. sevens to the last seven, set apart for the Lord his
preaching. Of that last seven the first part is passed in silence, as for a
preparation: (...) may signify, in the latter half of the last week.
that latter half does Christ bestow in confirming the Testament for many;
beginning at his baptism, ending at his death. The Temple was 49. years in
building, Empereur upon the ninth of Daniel, much differs from Broughton in
his account of the seven first weeks, or 49. years, and somewhat concerning the
46. years mentioned John 2.20. A primo anno Cyri, quo per totam regnans Asiam
(non tantum in Persia, vel etiam Chaldea) copiam faciet Judais Templum, etc.
aedificandi, usque dum per Xerxem opus impediatur, excurrent anni 46. His ferme
aedificabitur Templum; quamvis interea varii varia sint molituri. Opus deinde
continue perficietur; sed intermittetur ad annum secundum Darii Nothi: quo
resumptum ad fastigium perducetur circa annum illius 6. id est, spatio ad
minimum 3. annorum: quos si addas praecedentibus 46. exurgent anni 49. id est,
septimanae septem. The seventy weeks (as he thinks) concerned only times in
which the city and temple should be builded, and the city inhabited. Times in
which the building was intermitted, that is, 107. years, as Joseph Scalig.
computeth, De emendat. Temp. lib. 6. were rather to be esteemed an appendix of
the captivity, the part of the enlargement.
The 46. John 2.20. are reckoned after the third of Cyrus, in which the
building was hindered by Artaxast. Thus far the author praised. After Junius
his account, siege began to be laid to Jerusalem by Vespasian, in the fifth
year of the last seven.

Empereur upon Jachiades is of opinion, that the last week succeeded the
thirtieth year of Christ born, in which he was baptized; and that he suffered
in the middle of this week; to wit, Christ in the middle of the last seven,
should put an end to sacrifice and oblation, by offering himsself once upon the
cross for all. (...) (Dan. 9.27.) the half week comprehended three years and
an half, or four years and an half (ut medium, sic and dimidium Hebr. late
sumitur). He Is rather for the greater number. Christ was born in October,
suffered about the time of the Passover. Thence arises the half year above
three or four whole ones. The last half of the last week reached to the Gospel
begun to be preached by the Apostles to the Gentiles. The same author conceivs
that the seventy weeks were not continuous. So you have also his judgment. M.
Mede in his Daniels weeks, makes the sixth year of Darius Nothus (when the
Temple was finished) the Epoch of the seventy weeks, and places the
destruction of the Temple and city by Titus, in the midst of the last week.
Those who reckon by years, when the year designed answers the event, will
not stand upon the completenesse of months and days; nor those who reckon any
thing by days, upon the completenesse of hours and minutes: no more in the
angels reckoning here by weeks, if so the number of weeks be complete, are the
part of a week to be exacted. If the angel had said, that 490. years were
allotted for the holy city, then to make good the prediction, the city must
have been destroyed in the lost year. But when he says 70. weeks, it is
sufficient that the destruction happened in the last week. So you have the
judgment of another judicious writer.

Joseph Scaliger ( de emendat. temporum lib. 6.) dissenteth from all other
writers whom I have seen upon this subject, as adding the half week, (Dan.
9.27.) to 7.22.1. (or 70. Dan. 9.24.) His seventy weeks and an half, contain
493. years and an half: the beginning of which he reckons from the second year
of Darius Nothus, that is, from the 4290. in the Julian period; the end of them
in the destruction of Jerusalem, in the 4783. of the Julian account.

Funcius begins to reckon from the seventh year of Artaxerxes Longimanus,
between which and Christ's passion he accounts 490. years.

Some terminate 70. weeks in the beginning of Herod's kingdom, that is,
(according to Scaliger) in the 4675. year of the Julian period, from which the
490. backward, will fall into the 4187. year of the same account, and
(according to the same author) into the second of Cambyses. Munster
conjectures, that the seventy weeks succeed immediately the 70 years captivity,
and are terminated in the beginning of Herod's kingdom. Herod (as Scaliger
computes) reigned 37. years before the nativity of the Messiah. Master Huit
in's comment upon Daniel, places the beginning of the seventy weeks in the
first year of Cyrus, conceivs the end of them was the beginning of the
Gentiles called, and Jews rejected. Scaliger commemorates other opinions (De
emendat. Tempor. lib. 6. in Epilogismo Hebdomadum Danielis) Its controverted as
we see, whether Cyrus his edict was the Epoch of Daniels sevens, or some time
on this side it, and at what time since Cyrus his decree by those of the later
opinion; moreover whether they expired before or after Christ's birth; if after
his birth, whether at his passion or afterward; if after his passion, whether
at the destruction of Jerusalem, or before it: likewise whether or no the
angels prophecy exhibit exactly seventy weeks; by those who defend the
affirmative part, whether seventy continuous or interrupted; by those who are
for the negative, whether more or less time. Both those who hold that the
seventy weeks expired before Christ's birth, and those who place the end of them
between Christ's passion, and the destruction of Jerusalem, are divided into
several opinions.

(...) R. Jose numerandas docet hebdomadas 70. ab excidio templi prioris usque
ad posterioris (per Romanos) excidium. Seder Olam Rabba, cap. 28. Seder Olam
Zuta assigns the same bounds to Daniels sevens.
'Twas an easy matter to add many other both late and ancient writers, who
assign Epocha's and periods to Daniels weeks differing among themselves, and
from these mentioned, were not these produced already (authors excellent in
parts and learning, moreover who stood upon the shoulders of Rabbis, and
Christian writers of the Primitive Church, and Heathens, whose writings may
illustrate historical and chronologicall parcels of sacred Scripture)
sufficient to make any one suspect Parum inter se consentiunt, qui rationem
temporum investigatam ediderunt. Quod cum vel Dei nutu, vel viti^ vetustatis
eveniat, calumnia carere debebit. Sulpitius Severus.
that nothing can be attained beyond conjectures for any event after Christ's
birth, terminating all or any known part of Daniels weeks.

Israelites who lived between the seventy years captivity and the birth of the
Messiah, might receive comfort from Daniels prophecy, although uncertain
concerning the distance of events foretold. Although it was not clear to some
of them, how long the building of their city and Temple should be interrupted,
nor whether or no those times of affliction to be excepted from the seventy
weeks, yet might all of them be supported with glad tidings of great joy
shortly to be accomplished, and fore-armed against evils that should befall
them. Neither do I doubt but that howsoever they were disturbed by their
enemies, they kept almost till the destruction of the Temple, an exact account
of years past on this side the angel Gabriels prophecy to Daniel; so that
believers among them might be much confirmed in their faith, and comforted by
apprehensions of divine providence, as they saw events listed, to issue out at
their appointed times. We can easily believe that many of their records did
perish in their wars with Vespasian and Titus, before, or with their city.
Those who fled to Pella probably neither had leisure or power to secure them.
Somewhat might be alleged against each of the accounts (for Daniels sevens)
quoted. I entertain as most probable,

1. That Cyrus his decree concerning the holy city and the Temple to be
reedified, was the beginning (...) ^hiels weeks. Quis audita prophetia de
edicto, postea Cyri edictum audiens secus cogitasset, quam hoc in prophetia
designatum fuisse? Thus Empereur in his discourse to the Reader, before his
Comments on Jachiad. on Daniel. At cujusmodi mandatum Dan. 9.25. denotatur, ab
Artaxerxe promulgatum non legitur; verum de Cyro res in confesso est: similiter
Darius Nothus novum edictum non promulgavit, sed Cyri mandatum approbavit and
confirmavit atque explicavit, Ezr. 6. coll. cum 1. capite. idem ibid.

2. That the Holy of holies may seem to have been anointed Our Mediator was
then inauguriz'd, an heavenly Oracle pronouncing him to be the Son, or
Mediator, and requiring al to hear him. Huit. upon Daniel 9.
at his baptism; consequently when about thirty years old, by Luk 3.23.

3. That afterward in one week he confirmed the covenant with many; by himself
before his death, by his disciples after his resurrection.

4. That the seven weeks preceded whole 62, and 62 the one week, and that the
half week was part of the one.

5. That the half week was the first part of the one week.

6. That at the end of this first half of the last week Messiah was That is,
was slain. In a Manuscript Syriack translation of Daniel (and some other parts
of the Old Testament) a precious (...) of the Public Library of our University
at Cambridge, nethketel meschicho velo eith leh Messiah is slain, and there is
not to him.
cut off. I cannot apprehend how after 62. weeks, or 69. from the beginning of
the seventy weeks, can signify the same, that at the end of the one week, or
at the end of the seventy weeks.

I cannot but observe before I proceed, that the Jews after their seventy years
captivity, have seven seventies of years granted for the enjoying of their own
country. Gods mercies bear the same proportion to his punishments, which seven
a complete number has to an unite.

It Is a task of vast difficulty (as we see already) (...) applicare (...). We
shall conceive the time of Christ's birth, and the distances of other events
((...) (...) from the creation, yet more uncertain, if it can be proved that
the quantity of all or any years between the creation and our Saviors nativity
is unknown to us. Those who have undertaken to measure out to us years
mentioned in the Old Testament; or those used afterward by Jews till the
destruction of Jerusalem are many of them of such note, and so much dissent
among themselves, that the authority of each is inconsiderable, compared with
other who oppose it. But moreover all of them have builded upon false grounds,
if Jews for any part of time mentioned had not certum anni modum, by which in
any year present they might form a Calender of the year following. That the
antecedent is true, is averred by a learned writer, the glory of his age M.
Seldom in his Treatise de anno civili veterum Judaeorum.

Jews anciently began their civil months, Cap. 1. p. 3.
as they were parts of ye^rs (say the Karites or Scripturary Jews) from the
phasis of the moon after a conjunction, if she appeared in the Here understand
vesperam tertiam, seu initium tenebrarum, non crepusculum, neque temporis
spacium ab occidente sole ad occasus finem. See my Author, cap. 4. page 16, 17.
evening beginning the thirtieth day, reckoned from the Neomenia last past; or
(if she was not seen in that evening) together with the sun on the thirtieth
day (but so as the whole day should be counted the first of the new month).
Cap. 12. page 61, 62.
If clouds intercepted the moon throughout the thirtieth day, they expected a
phasis on the day succeding, and if the moon was seen on the evening which
began this day, or together with the sun near his setting, the 31. day was
sanctified; but if together with the sun ((...) dum fuerit dies maguus) die
aperto, viz. two or three hours before sun set, the thirtieth day was to be
sanctified. Talmudists, if the moon was seen on the thirtieth day, reckoned
that the first of the month; but if on that day there was no phasis, Cap. 3.
p. 13.
pro arbitrio, the 30. or 31. after the new moon next preceding.

If the phasis of the moon, was for many months together intercepted by
clouds, 'twas in use according to Karites, to make many (but so as the number
should not exceed four,) complete months together. See that oracle of
Antiquity before quoted, in the said work, c. 4. p. 18. the reason for which
they admit not above four complete months continually succeeding one another,
is also there expressed. But according to that sect of jews there might not
above three defective months continually succeed one another. See learned M.
Seldom De Anno Civili veterum Judaeorum, cap. 4. p. 19. yet we are perplexed
with more uncertainty by reason of interculated years. The reasons of
intercalation were not the same with Talmudists and Karites. Karites conceive
no other reason was anciently attended in intercalation, then that the
passover might be celebrated in the month Abib (that is, tempore
maturescentium frugum) according to what commanded Deuteronomy. 16.1. Observe the
month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the Lord thy God: for in the month
of Abib the Lord thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night. Talmudists
conceive that the vernall Equinox was also regarded; that, unless 12. months
only being reputed for a year, the vernall Equinox should fall Josephus (
Archiologiae Judaiecae l. 3. cap. 10.) affirms that on the 14. of Nisan the
sun was in Aries. His words intimate that he meant for the whole space of
time between the Exodus and the last destruction of Jerusalem. (...). Others
have taken notice of this sentence, Lansbergius Chronol. sacra l^b. 1. c 7.
Master Seldom de Anno civili veterum Judaeorum, cap. 20. Any one clearly sees
that the Passover could not precede the vernall Equinox, unless it was
celebrated before such time as the sun entered Aries. Forasmuch as the fixed
stars have made progress in the Zodiac, or else the sun has anticipated
the vernall intersection, the entrance of the sun into Aries, (Sive hoc
nomine indigitetur dodecatemorion intersectioni vernae proximum versus tropicum
cancri, vel dodecatemorion ariete signatum) cannot possibly precede the vernall
Equinox, Josephus (I conceive) by ^ries means the Dodecatemorion (or 30.
degrees) next after the vernall intersection, but in the sentence praised
means that the sun on the 14. of Nisan was in Aries according to the
opinion of Jews, not attending whether or no it was so in truth. If the sun
was in Aries perpetually on the 14. of Nisan (as Josephus affirms) the
immolation of the passover, (or 14. of Nisan) could not fall on the day
before, much less (what Karites admit of) by some days prevent the vernall
Equinox. It follows also from the same testimony approved that the day, on
which the Jews did eat the passover, (or 15. of Nisan) the vernall Equinox
being fastened on the 25. of March, could not fall later then the 26. of
April: but part of Nisan might fall within May. Sol in ariete moratur dies 30.
b. 15.
on the day after the immolation of the passover, (viz. the 15. of Nisan) or
sooner in the year following, a thirteenth month ought to be added, that so
Nisan might be protruded. Quonam (vero) temporis momento aut die in certorum
atque in se aequabiliter recurrentium annorum, veluti Egyptiorum aut
Julianorum, calculo, aequinoctium vernum seu Tekupham Nisan, sic dictam
collocarint Mathematici veterum Judaeorum, non liquet. See my Author, c. 6. p.
24. De Tempore Dominicae passionis.
Gerardas Joannes Vossius says, that the jews before Augustus his Empire
placed the Vernall Equinox in the third of April. Aliae fuere intercalandi
causae, eaeque ferme triplices; ut serotina frugum, agnorum, hadorum maturitas;
itinerum ad urbem ducentium incommoda, veluti pontes diffracti, aquarum
colluvies, viae canosae; and minime idoneus fornacum Hierosolymis agnis
paschalibus assandis status. chap. 5. of the elaborate work quoted, concerning
the Jews civil year. Quin and aliae fuere subinde nec minus incertae
intercalandi causae, pro arbitrio eorum qui huic rei praerant. Ibid.

According to the scheme of 7. years in the noble treatise before praised, De
Anno civili veterum Judaeorum, c. 6. p. 26. (The vernall Equinox is placed ex
hypothesi in the 25. day of March in the Julian year, and in the first of 7.
years the first day of Nisan answers to the 23. of March in the Julian
account; moreover the sixth year is ex hypothesi intercalated propter serotinam
fructuum maturitatem pravisam, itinerum incommoda, fornacum defectus, alia
ejusmodi, quorum causa, pro arbitrio qui rei praecrant, intercalatione annali
usi sunt,) the first Passover (or fourteenth of Nisan) falls on April 5.
the second on March 25. the third on April 12. the fourth on April 1. the
fifth on April 21. the sixth on April 10. the seventh on April 20. Yet
greater variety is expressed by Mr. Seldom De Anno civ. veterum Judaorum, c. 9.
p. 51. His words are these. Ex ostensis liquet, ita citra ultraque vagari
solitum Nisan mensem, seu anni civilis primum, ut non solum tam Aprilem quam
Martium, verum etiam Maium Julianum subinde occuparet. Neomeniam autem ejus die
undecimo Martii, juxta jam admissa, nunquam fuisse citeriorem.
So much variety happens in so little space. I shall conclude this part of my
discourse in the words of my author (in his Preface p. 12. 13.) Frustranea
sunt chronologorum maximorum argumenta quibus nimio cum sudore contendunt ex
Cycliea seu astronomica temporis, apud Judaeos, ratione adeoque ex 14. Inna in
ipsa passione dominica (quasi illa die 14. a Synodo naturali alilerve
astronomice evenisset) vera passionis, paschatum in novo foedere, ac demum
nativitatis, retro putando, tempora ^ruere.

Why Jews anciently, whether Talmudists or Karites, did not rather expect the
phasis on the 29. then on the 30. night after a full month, I cannot divine.
Although the phasis, should no gross body be interposed, between man's sight
and the place of the moon in the sky, observe not always the same distance
from a conjunction, yet there seems to be the same reason of expecting the
appearance of the moon in the 29. night after a solid month, and on the 30.
after an hollow month. Neither do I comprehend what hindered them, whether
after a month of 29. or 30. days from beginning a new month from the first
appearance of the moon after a conjunction, although it happened before the 29.
day.

It remains that I explain, when Karites conceive the beginning of the
month, or Neomenia, began first to be reckoned from the first phasis of the
moon after a conjunction; or if the moon was not seen in the night immediately
succeeding the 29. of the month, from the beginning of the next following,
etc. or yet where Talmudists fix the Epoch of their manner of accompting
before mentioned, not much distinct from that of the Karites.

How far I may call years mentioned in the old Testament, Jewish, wants
general consent. Calvine upon the epistle to the Romans, chap. 2. v. 17.
conjectureth that the Israelites some time before Christ's birth, by reason of
disturbances from their enemies were disinabled to distinguish exactly their
tribes. He adds, Sive igitur in posterum prospicere voluerint, sive accepto
jam malo succurrere; puto simul omnes ad nomen ejus tribus se contulisse, in
qua religionis puritas diutius steterat, in qua redemptor expectabatur
proditurus: siquidem hoc erat in rebus ultimis suffugium, Messiae expectatione
se consolari. Josephus in the eleventh of his Antiquities conceives, that the
Israelites were called Jews from Judas Macchabeus. But in his second book
against Apion, the Israelites who came out of Egypt are called Jews. His 20.
books which contain the history of jews and their Ancestors from the creation,
are entitled (I know not by whom first) (...). Talmudists hold that their
doctrine concerning months to be inchoated by the phasis, and years to be
intercalated, was ((...)) traditio Mosaica e monte Sinai, and was to be
executed by the Sanhedrin in the holy land. Maymon, Halach, Kiddush-hachodesh.
c. 5. I find in Seder olam Rabba. c. 11. (...) (according to Genebrards
translation) Hac illa hora Israelitae coeperunt obligari and astringi ad
praecepta de polenta, and de praeputio, and neomenia. (He speaks of the hour
next after the Israelites passage over Jordan.) But I conceive that by chodesch
he means the month Nisan to be observed as the beginning of the year,
rather then the phasis of the moon. By challah he means the feast of
unleavened bread. Who desire to be informed, at what time the Talmudists left
off their uncertain account, may have recourse to M. Seldom, De Anno Civ. vet.
Judaeorum, c. 17. p. 80.

The manuscript Karite used by M. Seldom, affirms that the Israelites (...)
from the time of the kingdom sanctified their months at the phasis of the
moon. This place I find praised in an elegant discourse composed by the owner
of that manuscript author. What M. Seldom ( de anno civili veterum Judaeorum,
cap. 4.) quoteth out of the same Karite, imports that the Karites imagined
their lunatic observations as ancient at least as the deluge. Perhaps they
thought they were for some time intermitted. The 150. days mentioned Genesis
7.24. and chap. 8.3. they conceive to have for their Epoch the 17. day of the
second month (which they suppose to have been Jiar) on which Noah entered into
the Ark, and to expire at the end of the seventeenth day of the seventh month,
on which the ark rested on the mountains of Ararat. If Jiar and the four
months next following had all been solid, the sum should have been 151.
days. Hence they conclude, that about four solid months ought not to be
continuous. Besides that The author of Bereshith Rabba, Jarchi, and others
(after Eliezer) in Parasch. Noah Seder Olam Rabba, c. 4.
some Jewish writers conceive, that 150. days which the waters are said to
have prevailed on the earth, succeeded the 40. days of rain. According to
Seder Olam Rabba, c 4. the last day of the 150. in which the waters prevailed,
was the last of Jair; and the ark began to rest upon the mountains of Ararat on
the 17. of Siwan (which was the 7. month to Casleu, in which the 40. days of
rain ended) Nachmanid. in Parasch (...) tells us that some reckoned the 150.
days for the prevailing of the waters to reach to the 17. of Nisan; and the
17. of the 7. month, on which the ark rested on the mountains of Ararat, to be
the 17. of Jair, the 7. to Marcheschvan in which the rain began to descend.
Some that space is to be allowed after the 150. days for the abaiting of the
waters, before the ark rested upon the mountains of Ararat, and though neither
of these opinions should be true, it is not necessary that the 17. day of the
second month, and 17. of the seventh month, should be included in the 150.
days; whence will they evince that there were not fewer then four solid
months continuous: or if they will admit as many solid together as are
possible by their suppositions concerning the 150. days in which the waters
prevailed, how will they prove that the seventh month was hollow, viz. but of
29. days?

Another place in Eliah Ben Moseh, (quoted by my author so often already
praised, cap. 10. p. 54.) clearly expresses that Scripturary Jews esteem their
way of computing years as ancient Noah. Nullibi reperimus (for this Latin well
interprets the Original) in Scriptura praeceptam hoc (de sanctificandis
Neomeniis) peculiare fuisse terrae Israeliticae. Sed vero manavit a seculis
vetussimis adeoque a tempore Noachi and Abrahae Patris nostri (quibus paex) mos
ille sanctificandi lunam quocunque locorum. Some perhaps will object against
Eliah Ben Moseh, what Josephus says of Apion, ( lib. 2. against him,) (...)
non animadvertit a seipso adductum quo coargueretur. Karites, who are wont to
confine themselves rigourously to written truths, are zealous beyond Pharisees
for an orall tradition, by which they may parcel out time into months, and
years. They are easily reconciled to themselves. It Is no unusual thing, that
some one objection should hinder a rule from being general. If either sect of
jews report truth, 'twas sometimes impossible to make beforehand a Calender
for the year following: neither are we enabled by any histories to reduce days
of such uncertain years, as have been mentioned, to their due positures in any
equable account.

Joseph Scaliger (as also many other writers before and since) affirms two
things, from either of which granted it necessarily follows that months and
years, such as I have described according to the opinions of Talmudists and
Karites, were not used in our Saviors age.

1. De emendat. temp. l. 2. page 105. Lansbergius compendiously shows how the
Jewish and Grecian years (in his opinion) differed, Chron. sa^r. l. 1. c. 11.
He contendeth that Jews from what time the Syro-Macedonians became Lords over
them till after the destruction of Jerusalem used a cyclicall account, viz.
Calippus his period, which consisted of 76. years, 27759. days, 940.
Lunations; contained four metonicall cycles, one day subducted. (I shall not
need to explain how the Jews according to Scaliger, varied from Calippus in the
disposition of full and hollow months, since it suffices to my purpose to show
that Scaliger thought they used a cyclicall account, and what were the reasons
of his opinion.)

2. That translatio feriarum was in use throughout the same segment of time,

The first assertion he endeavors to confirm by the testimonies of Josephus,
and R. Adda. This Doctor assigns to the Jewish year 365. days, 5. hours,
scrupl. 997/1080. moment. 48/76. Quid aliud vult (says Scaliger) quam periodum
Judaicam fuisse annorum 76. R. Adda's period of 76. years, (as De emendat.
temp. l. ^. page 109 and lib. 4. page 279.
Scaliger thought) were the same with so many of Hipparchus his period (which
bears the same proportion to Calippus his period, that Calippus his period to
Meton's) that is, Calippus his period, one quadrant of a day subducted.
Hipparchus intra sexdecem cyclos lunares unum diem de rationibus Calippicis
perire sentiebat, Scal. de emen. temp. lib. 4 p. 282.
Hipparchus his period contained 111035. four Calippicall periods 111036.
days, sixteen Metonicall periods 111040, days.

The noble Author praised endeavors also to commend his opinion by Josephus
his authority. He alleges, De temp. emendat. lib. 2, p. 106, 107.) that the
feriae of the Jewish months, in years to which memorable events are disposed
by Josephus, were according to that Historian in several years the same which
by his account. I have now summarily represented what is most solid and sincere
in Scaligers arguments, for the Calippicall period used by the Jews in our
Saviors time. He mis-applieth significations, whereof (...) and (...) are
capable.

In his chapter de anno Judaorum novitio (lib. 2. p. 121.) he intimates how
long he thought the Jews retained the Calippicall period, viz. till the vulgar
year of Christ 344. qui erat Seleucidarum 656. and quadragesimus octavus post
duas periodos Hipparcheas. Then (he says) the Jews apprehended their error,
viz. that the beginning of the year was protruded the space of two days
(besides hours and scruples). He insinuates that they then reformed their
account. But we shall easily perceive, if we compare Scaliger with himself,
that his judgment was not clear in this particular. The Jews (says Prolegom.
page 6.
Scaliger) whilst they used the Calippicall period, in omnibus Neomeniis Lunae
(...) observabant, non quod eam ex praescripto periodi non indicerent, sed
ideo, ut eam sanctificarent. Nam and hodie quoque observant (...), non ut ex ea
neomeniam indicant, sed ut eam sanctificent.

I cannot but observe that R. Adda contributeth little to the supporting of
Scaligers opinion. Scaliger never saw any work of this Author, only learned
from * R. Haie a Spaniard, his judgment concerning the solar year. Besides
that, the Talmudists conceive that the Jews were no where bound to observe the
phasis of the moon in order to the beginning of their months, but in the holy
land; nor there longer then there remained a Sanhedrin among them, it implies
no contradiction that those should express their opinions concerning solar
years, who for the epochaes of the month attended to the phasis, and and whose
civil years were not solar.

The Talmudists also witness, that the Jews by their intercalations, provided
that their feasts should return each of them about the same time of the solar
year.

Scaliger acknowledges that 76 years, such as are defined by R. Adda, were by
a quadrante of a day, less then Calippus his period. R. Ada's last fraction
might possibly intimate no more then that he described a year as part of a
quadrant of Hipparchus his period. R. Ada seems rather to have suggested a
new way of computation to the Jews, then to have reported what was their manner
of account. His endeavor afterward took effect. (...) Hillel princeps Filius
Juda Principis ordinavit computum secundum Tekupham Rab. Ada, donec veniat
Messiah filius David. Fuit antem seculo Abai and Rabba. Atque ideo ita scripsit
Rabbi Simeon Duran in expositione exhortationum: fuitque anno 670. contractuum.
Thus Rabbi Abraham Zacuth in Sepher Juchasin, fol. 90.

Take notice also that R. Adda's year, if we may believe R. Haie, differed a
little from the year defined by Hipparchus.

Josephus his testimonies cited by Scaliger, at most only persuade, do not
prove what he thence concluded. Feasts might sometimes fall out on the same
days of weeks or months, according to an uncertain, as according to a
cyclicall account. He substracteth a year from 27. assigned by Josephus to the
space between Jerusalem taken by Pompey, and afterward by Sosius. Perhaps
should any conceive it operae pretium, he might find more instances dissonant,
then Scaliger produces as agreeable to his supposed Jewish cyclicall
computation. But moreover any indifferent judge will readily give sentence,
that Scaliger, unless he was resolved to dissemble his skill in history,
divined that the Jews, before the destruction of Jerusalem used the Calyppicall
period. I shall not need after Petavius, to explain what violence he offered to
Josephus. Most certain it is that Scaligers invention much out-pas'd his
judgment. He might by his skill in languages have much advanced the Literarie
Republic, had he not more seriously affected to show himself witty, then
judicious. His doctrine de emendatione temporum, is almost wholly fictitious,
and founded upon the confines of nothing.

What Scaliger alleges for the translation of Jewish feasts, may be
pretermitted without detriment to the defense of his opinion. Petavius likewise
here is easily victorious. Scaligers second book de emendat. Temp. is the seat
of his discourse about this subject. But in his Page 642.
seventh book he thus expresses himself; Non omnis feria novilunii erit idonea
ad KEVIA, unde in sequentem aut tertiam diem diffunditur: quod dicitur (...).
Quamobrem illae dies vocantur (...) Epiphanio, capite (...). Epiphanius tells
us, in the place quoted by Scaliger, that the Jews in the year of our Saviors
passion, (...). He meant See also Petitus, E^log. Chronol. l. 1. cap. 8.
(if we may rely upon Petavius his judgment) that some of the Jews (the
Scribes and Pharisees) protruded the Passover a day beyond the time at which
it ought to have been celebrated according to their account, because so it
would be Epiphanius reports that the Jews celebrated the Passover before the
Vernall equinox. Aherravit Epiphanius qu^m longissime a ver^ vi^ quando
existimavit Christi aetate Judaeos usurpasse illam octa eteridem, qua nonnisi
anno Christi Dionysiano ducentesimo septimo instituta est and publicata cum
^ype Tekupharum R. Samuelis Jarchinai. Obtinuitque ad tempora Constantini
Magni. Observat enim Constantinus in epistola ad Ecclesias, Judeos bi^ in uno
anno Pascha celebrasse, quia nempe quartadecima ante vertebat aequinoctium, a
quo primus numerabatur anni mensis ex instituto non minus Mosis and veterum
Judaeorum quam Nicaenorum Patruus, etc. Petit. Eclog Chron. lib. 1. cap. 14.
(...)
nearer the Equinox. He does not intimate that they translated it, because the
feria, upon which it fell according to their account, was (...). I shall
briefly produce others who side with Scaliger, before I relinquish this
occasion of discourse.

Gerardus joannes Vossius ( de tempore Dominicae passionis, number. 13.) after
mention made of that opinion which refers the distance between our Saviors
(...), and the Passover celebrated by the Jews the same year, to the Jews
illegal translation of feasts, thus goes on; Firmantur haec e Seder Olam, ubi
legas exstructo templo secundo, a R. Eliezero, and aequalibus, esse
constitutum, ne secundo, quarto, vel sexto die ageretur Pascha.

Vossius here attributes to Seder Olam, what is not exstant in any book of
that name. I find in Munsters Calendarium Hebraicum (cap. de observatione primi
mensis scilicet Tisri) and in his Comment upon Matthew 26. a sentence in
Hebrew, containing the history touching the Jewish translations of feasts,
which Vossius ascribes to Seder Olam. It is translated by Munster into this
Latin, Sic statuerunt magistri nostri Sanhedrin, Magnates seculi; In domo
Sanctuarii 2d^, cum extructa and consummata esset, apparuit cathedra ignea
parata, and super eam Rex seculi, majestate sublimis, stans scilicet inter
porticum, and accipientes coronam, apprehendent esque sigillum secretum,
statuerunt and fecerunt ordinem seculi: traditumque est in manum Rabbi Eliezer
qui major omnibus caeteris fuit, and ordinavit (...)
non fieri festum Sortis feria 2. 4. 7. neque Understand the 15. of Nisan.
Vossius in the tractate lately quoted, and some other late writers misapply it
to the 14. Some Authors say Nisan for Pesach. The Neomenia of Nisan is never
Bad^.
Pascha feria 2. 4. 6. neque Pentecosten feria 3. 5. 7. neque caput anni feria
1. 4. 6. neque diem expiationis feria 1. 3. 6. in aeternum.

Such translations of feasts likewise are approved in the Treatise de invent.
Neomeniar. and Tecuph. (translated by Munster) and by R. Nachshon's Canones
Festivitatum.

Maimon. in his Tractate entitled Kiddusch hachodesh, says that the Jews fix
not the Neomenia ( viz. of Tisri) in (Adu) the 1. 4. or 6. feria, because their
account is accommodated to the conjunctions of the sun and moon, according to
their middle motion. The same author affirms, that they had respect to the
true motion of the moon, both before and for some time after the destruction of
Jerusalem.

Philo lib. 3. de vita Mosis, says of Moses, (...). Primum mensem facit
initium verni aequinoctii. If the first neomenia of the year were in a
rigorous sense, the beginning of the equinox, the 15. of Nisan, whilst the
vernall equinox was placed in the 25. of March, could not fall later then the
8. of April; which in part destroys such an uncertain account as has been
attributed to the Jews. Moreover, the neomenia of Nisan should be excepted from
that account. But (...) cannot so well signify both a month, and the new
moon, as (...) in Hebrew, which is derived from (...) renovare. Again, if we
admit that (...) has both those significations, it is not necessary that Philo
should intend the latter. He might perhaps mean in the sentence praised, that
the first month of the Jewish civil year, according to some part or other
indifferently in the beginning, or middle, or end of it, was quotannis (...).
Moreover, (...) (forasmuch as the inequality of day and night for some time
after the Tecupha of Nisan was not sensible) and likewise (...), may admit of
latitude, The Jews (as some affirm) in our Saviors age reputed the 25. of
March the vernall equinox. Sed aequinoctium vernum medium, anno Ch^isti nati
primo Dyonysiano (qui 10. erat cycli solaris) incepit Martii die 12. scr. 3.
and Hierosolymis minut. 47. post horam septimam pomeridianam.
so that the one shall not necessarily be confined to the space of 24. hours,
nor the other to the point which inchoateth that time.

Another sentence quoted out of Philo in the Treatise so often mentioned, de anno
civili veterum Judaeorum, c. 20. assures us that Philo thought (as do the
Talmudists and Karites) that the phasis was observed by the Jews, in order to
the beginning of their civil month. The words are these; (...). Neomenia
incipit sol splendore sensibili lunam illustrare, ipsa vero proprium decus tum
patefacit spectantibus. The Neomenia here described had place if the Moon
appeared ((...)) in tempore suo.

What Anatolius Apud Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 7. cap. 32.
testifies concerning the Passover (viz. (...), etc. in primo anno (Pascha)
novilunium primi mensis occupat: quod est circuli decennovennalis principium,
etc.) seems to be inconsistent with the testimony of the Talmudists and
Karites.

Galatinus (de Arcanis catholicae veritatis l. 4. c. 14.) speaking of the
Hebrews, but to whom Nisan was the first month of the year (which he feigneth
to be the same with our March) and consequently on this side the delivery from
Egypt, says: Etsi menses lunares habeant, tertius tamen quisque annus apud eos
tredecim menses sive lunationes habet, caeterorum vero unusquisque duodecim
duntaxat continet menses. Ita ut per embolismos temporum adaequationes ipsi
facientes, per annos solares quemadmodum and nos, tempora metiantur. This
Author as he affirms without reason, may be dismissed without refutation.

Wolphius de Tempore lib. 1. c. 3. tells us, but falsely, that the author of
Seder Olam reckons for the (...) of the moon 24. hours, and fixes the
Jewish Neomenia in the beginning of the nineteenth.

There Is neither in Seder Olam Rabba, nor in Seder Olam Zuta any shadow of such
a kabbala. He was deceived (I conjecture) by taking (...) Some have conceived
that Munster compiled the Hebrew of that treatise; but in Epist. nuncupator.
before his Hebrew Calendar, he seems to intimate that it had some other
author. His words are these: Deinde ascripsimus Hebraice and Latin tractatum,
qui apud Hebraeos de neomeni^s and aequinoctiis inscribitur, etc.
(...) liber de inventione neomeniarum and tecupharum, to be part of Seder
Olam. Munster (in his Calendarium Hebraicum) has annexed this Treatise to
Seder Olam Zuta, and R. Abraham Levita's Sepher Hakkabbala. I find in it (p.
88. according to the edition at Basil. Ann. 1527.) (...) Quemadmodum inquiunt
capite primo, Rosch Hasshana, 24. horis luna absconditur, 18. vetus, and 6.
nova. Scaliger ( de Emend. temp. p. 636.) well conjectureth the occasion of
this Canon. His words are these: Sed observandum, si novilunium attigerit horas
18. praecise, aut amplius, transferendam esse feriam. Caussa in promptu est,
18. horae Computi Judaici sunt 24. horae astronomice, hoc est, a meridie. Nam
primum novilunium, uti diximus, De Computo Judaeorum novitio loquitur.
Judaice est Novilunium Tobu fer. 2. h. 5. scr. 204.
hor. 5. 204. ab occasu solis, astronomice, 11. 204. a meridie. Hoc ne
doctiores quidem Judaei adverterunt: cujus rei ignoratione illud oraculum
sciverunt. (...) Viginti quatuor horis luna latet, id est, silet. Sex novella
fit, and december octo fit vetus.

The Author of the book quoted, De inventione neomeniarum and tecupharum,
reckons (as I have said) for the (...) of the moon 24. hours, and the
Neomenia in the beginning of the nineteenth. According to this author the
civil year used by the Israelites in Canaan, and their forefathers from the
creation, consisted of 12. lunary months* but in the third or second, a full
month was intercalated. In ordinary years (that is, such as were Triplex est
genus anni, ordinaerius, cavus, sive defectivus, plenus, vel abundans. Horum
quisque communis est, vel embolismaeus. Annum fecit abundantem (...) in
Marchescbuan; deficientem^ seu cavum, (...) in Cisteu.
neither abundant nor deficient) the 1, 3. 5. 7. 9. 11. months were full; the
rest hollow. An hour contained 1080. ((...)) parts; a day 24. hours, and
began a sexta hora post meridiem; a month d. 29. h. 12. scrup. Epilogismus
Syzygiae Judaicae, dierum 29. horaru^ 12. moment. 793. quae quid^m 793. momenta
sunt scrupula sexagenaria 44. 3. 20. At verus Epilogismus astronomicus hor. 12.
44. 3. 11. Differentia, scrup, 0. 0. 9. quae quidem tertia in Syzygias unius
cycli solidi ducta fiunt scrup. 0. 35. 15. Scalig. de Emendat. temp. page 640.
793. a year which had neither month nor day inserted, d. 354. h. 8. scrup.
876. For the extent of this month he appealeth to R. Simeon, the son of
Gamaliel. (...) Dixit princeps Abarbinel (in Parasch. (...)) attributes to
Gamaliel what here is given to Simeon, deriveth from him this kabbala.
Simeon filius Gamalielis: Sic accepi a domo patris patris mei, quod non
renovatur Luna spatio minori 29. diebus, and dimidio and duabus horae partibus,
and 73. chelakim.

The Solar year exceeds the common ordinary Lunar year by d. 10. h. 21.
scrup. 204. had 365. days, 6. hours. That the motions of the sun and moon
might be reconciled, seven years in the enneadecaeteris (or cycle of 19. years)
were embolismaei, viz. the 3. 6. 8. 11. 14. 17. 19.

For the combination of months to be intercalated he quoteth R. Gamaliel in
the Talmudicall Tractate; Concerning the beginning of the year, (...) Et
tradiderunt in Massecheth de principio any annos embolismaeos: inquit, R.
Gamaliel: tres, tres, duo, tres, tres, duo. The author of the book de
Neomeniis and Tecuphis (now quoted,) observes, that at the end of the cycle
there remained 1. hour, 485. chelakim of the excess of solar years. In years
which have a month inserted, Adar is doubled: The first has 30. the other 29.
days.

I cannot but take occasion here to correct an error, which has been
propagated by this author. He concludes that no month but the last could be
doubled in anno embolismaeo without violation of the Scripture; because the
months there have their order assigned them, (he makes particular mention of
Adar, viz. it is said to be the twelfth month) yet acknowledges that the
first Adar is the month intercalated. The last Adar has been mistaken by some
late Writers for the month intercalated. Neither may I omit that the Author
praised is inconsistent with himself, as in several places defining the extent
of the intercalated month to be 29. days, 12. hours, 795. scruples, (which
is the quantity of common months) yet elsewhere making it 30. days. This
perplexity is not peculiar to this author. It Is agreed that the intercalated
Adar had 30. days, yet 29. days and 12. hours subtracted seven times from
the excess of the Solar enneadecaeteris compared with the Lunar, leaves but
one hour and 485. scruples. What more was requisite to the filling up of 7.
intercalated months, was subducted (I conjecture) from the hours and parts of
hours by which lunary years exceeded 354. days.

The 12. hours of each lunary month above 29. days, multiplied by 12. make
6. days, which are disposed of each year The 30. day of a full month is
(...). The beginning of an hollow month has two days, the 30. of the month
preceding, and the day following. Abarbinel upon Exodus 12. says of the month
mentioned 1. Sam. 20.17. (...) fuerunt in illo mense dies bini capitis mensis
secundum consuetudinem nostram (id est, hodiernam.) I cannot doubt, comparing
this sentence with Jonathan Ben Uziels paraphrase, and R. Isaiah's marginal
Comment upon the 1. Sam. 20.27. but that Abarbinels two days of the Beginning
of the month, were the last of a full month, and the first of an hollow
month.
in 6. full months. The scruples of a month besides complete days and
hours, viz. 793. multiplied by 12. make 9516. that is, 8. hours, 876.
scruples. Some tell us that days were intercalated severally in second months
of years, viz. Marcheschvans, accordingly as 8. hours, 876. scruples, by which
ordinary lunar years exceed each of them 354. days, to be digested into
several years, required. But part of them, (as I said) seem to have completed
intercalated months. According to the author before quoted, Marcheschvan,
which is naturally an hollow month, is sometimes made full, and Cisleu which
is naturally a full month, is sometimes made hollow, by reason of translation
of feasts.

What some other writers deliver about the Epoch of the Jewish month, by it
self much perplexed, is extricated from difficulty by what I have produced out
of the book de Neomeniis and Tecuphis. Among several Hebrew and Latin
authors, who express themselves in this point alike, I shall make choice of
Abarbinel for an instance, but shall explain likewise what he thought
concerning times before the Exodus.

He affirms ( in Parasch. (...)) that each nation before the Exodus
determined the beginnings of their months by computation, not by the phasis.

2. That the Israelites and their forefathers before the Exodus, used the civil
months and years of the nations amongst whom they conversed.

3. That God on mount Sinai determined, what months, and years, and neomenia's
the Israelites should afterward observe.

4. He seems to conceive that neither they, nor any nation had exactly the
same in any times preceding.

5. That the Israelites were determined to a set computation of days, and
hours, and scruples, according to which they ordered their months, and years,
but yet that the phasis was not neglected. (...) Non dubium est, quin tunc
temporis monstrata fuerit Mosi via sanctificationis neomenia ad phasin, and via
sanctificationis ejus secundum rationem computi, and regulae ad deducendum
illam ex iis, quia lex nostra ligata est in traditione Mosis e Sinai. The hour
or time which he points at in these words ((...)) was that in which God first
commanded that Nisan should be the beginning of months. So much is clear from
what immediately precedeth; but also toward the end of his Comment upon Exodus
12.2. he affirms that the account to be used by the Israelites, was delivered
to Moses by word of mouth, that he might transmit it to the great Sanhedrin,
and that it began to be observed in Egypt. It Is manifest he thought the same
account was again enjoined on mount Sinai. Five months (says he) are
perpetually full (each of them of 30. days,) five perpetually hollow (each of
them of 29. days) and two months, viz. Marcheschvan and Cisleu sometimes have
each of them 30. days, sometimes each of them but 29. days. He affirms that
the neomenia (or beginning of the month) was fastened by computation from the
days of Moses to Antigonus; and that Antigonus his two scholars Sadoc and
Baitus (ringleaders to the sect of the Sadduces, whom that faction of the
Jews, which are now called Karites, succeed in most of their opinions) first
taught that the beginning of the month ought to be ratified by the phasis.
(...) Et coguntur sapientes (istius) seculi retractare verba sua. What I have
quoted, intimates that Sadoc and Baitus prevail, that the phasis should be
generally received for the epoch of the civil year.

R. Gamaliel (he says) had shapes of moons upon his wall, in order to the
instruction of his scholars, and the sectatours of Sadoc and Baitus. The times
of Jewish festivalls (according to the same author) were determined by by the
Sanhedrin; but according to computation, not according to the phasis. Whereas
the appearance of the moon is obvious to the sense of any private persons, he
conceives this office of defining the time of the neomenia, and the ordering
of the year, to have been so mysterious, that a vide p. 39.
schechina was necessary for the direction of the judges. He insinuates that
the Karites violate that precept which forbids to add any thing to the Law.
They begin their months, (...) nixi traditione (hominis) privati, vel
privatorum.
according to some private tradition, by the phasis (I represent Abarbinels
sense) without warrant from the written or traditionall Law, and dimetrally
against a Kabbala which Moses received on mount Sinai. He condemns their
other customs about the ordering of their months or years; that they
sanctify the neomenia when there is no phasis, that when the moon appears
not for four months together, According to Eliah Ben Mosch, the Karites grant
that four full months may be continuous.
they make three of them full, and one hollow, that they admit not of any other
reasons of months to be intercalated, besides that Nisan may fall in Abib.

What I have quoted out of Abarbinel, assures us that he believed not that the
phasis was the beginning of the Hebrew civil month, unless accidentally, to
wit, as it happened in that time which began the civil month according to
computation. I shall now extricate his doctrine from a grand difficulty, which
unless it meet with candide interpreters, will be construed into a
contradiction.

The question is this: How can (...) consist with (...)? How can the neomenia
be sanctified both by the phasis, and by computation in the same civil account?

Answ. The word kiddusch in the sentence quoted out of Abarbinel, has two
significations. As it has respect to (...) the Phasis, it imports Judei
hodierni luna statim visa adhihibent hanc benedictionis formulam: (...). Idem
faciunt and Muhammedani, quamvis neomenias ex scripto indicere soleant.
(...) benediction; but as it is related to (...) (...) est praeparare and (...)
sixio neomeniae quaedam mensis est praeparatio: sed and kiddusch, quod
benedictio, seu consecratio, cum sanctione and initiatione non raro conjuncta
sit, transitu facili and hanc and illam scorsum denotat.
is the same that (...) sanction. In (...) Adam blessed the moon when he first
saw it; but the month began six hours sooner. The determination of the
Neomenia to this or that time (called (...)) by Abarbinel is referred to
computation: but he seems to have thought that the month was consecrated at
the Phasis, if the moon appeared in due time.

The knot may be otherwise loosed, perhaps more agreeably to Abarbinel's mind.
He might by Kiddusch Hachodesch nghal pi^ hareijah, mean only that the epoch
of their civil month was so ordered by computation, that it was wont to fall
out at, or near the time of the Phasis. He says that in Saul's time, (...)
Those who hold that the Jewish month anciently began with the 19. hour after
a conjunction, sometimes say that it began at the Phasis, meaning that it began
much nearer to the Phasis, then to the conjunction.

I shall now explain how these authors may be reconciled to themselves, who
make the Hebrew months of the same quantity with Synodicall, yet affirm that
in common ordinary years (that is, such as were neither embolismaei, nor
abundantes, nor deficientes) they were alternatively full and hollow. They
speak of the Hebrew months according to a double acception; viz. as they
import distances which the Hebrews conceived equal with those of conjunctions
next one another; or as they denote months founded in such as were for their
quantity the same with synodicall. This sort may properly, and the first sort
tropically, according to the opinions of the same authors, be said to have
been the ancient Hebrew months. The first kind of months are the adequate
matter of the other, which were alternatively full and hollow, from the era of
such account.

The Hebrews (as the same authors conceive) endeavored that their civil
months and years should maintain correspondency between the motions of the
sun and moon. The (...) secretum computi (for (...) intercalatio, here by a
Synechdoche is the same that (...) computum) which the Hebrew Doctors so much
mention, especially aimed at this mark. 'Twas requisite that they took notice
of the motions of each luminary, that they might fitly digest them into their
civil months and years.

Epiphanius in his 51. Heresy (entitled (...)) reports that the Jews in our
Saviors time used a double cycle, a lesser of 14. years, a greater of 85.
years. Simple years, that is, such as had nothing intercalated, contained each
of them 354. days, and four hours, such as were 1/3. of the (...). In each
Tessaradecaeteris five months were intercalated.

The greater cycle according to the Chetib in Epiphanius, contained 85 years.
One month, (besides the five of each lesser cycle) was intercalated in the 85.
year. Their civil years ought to reconcile the motions of the sun and moon,
as far as they conceived it possible, within the compass of the greater
cycle. Some perhaps attending that Cyrill makes mention of a cycle of 84 years
used by some Christians, or regarding the proportion between 84 and 14 (the
number of years in Epiphanius his lesser cycle) which is exactly sextuple, have
derogated a year from Epiphanius his greater Jewish cycle. The Jews (says
Epiphanius) in 85 years intercalated 31 months, Petitus thus reads the end
of Epiphanius his paragraph touching the Jewish cycles.
(...). eleven hours here are 11/12. of a day. Their intercalations, according
to Epiphanius, in their greater cycle exceeded a due measure by the space of
two days and two hours. The Neomenia of Nisan in the 86th. year, was
protruded two days by the default of their cycle. But the 27 days and 22
hours might be completed into a month, by the excess of Lunary years above
354. days, 8. hours. The measure of the Lunar year according to our Hebrew
Doctors is 354. days, 8. hours, 876. scruples. Those who had the managing of
the Jewish account, might conceal from the vulgar the 876 scruples which were
to 354. days, 8. hours, the complement in the lunar year, yet opportunely
intercalate them.

Epiphanius (in Haeres. Audianorum) attributes to the Jews beyond the
destruction of Jerusalem, a cycle of eight years.

Africanus in Hierome (upon Dan. 9.) and in Eusebius, Demonstrat. Evangel. lib.
8. assigns to the Jews for the same times, a cycle containing the same number
of years.

To explain the measure of years exhibited by Africanus, or Epiphanius, will
nothing promove my purpose.

There Is much controversy (as I have showed) about the account which was used
by the Israelites, between the Exodus and the destruction of Jerusalem.

The Talmudists uncertain account is exhibited in R. Jehuda's (...), but how
long, and when it was used, are not there expressed. These circumstances are
determined by Maimon. in the Tractate Kiddusch Hachodesch. The place is noted
by See Scalig. in Canon. Isagog. l. 3. c. 6. Petavius de doctrina temp. lib. 2.
and in Epiphan. ad Haeres. Alogor. Samuel. Petit. Eclog. Chronolog. l. 1. c. 3.
and 8.
Petavius, and others who have been conversant in this subject. Maimonies
suffrage for the uncertain account, adds (I confess) nothing to the
authority of the Talmud, if his information was from thence wholly propagated
to him. Scaliger believes that the phasis, as often as it was had when it was
expected, was the epoch of the jewish month, from the Exodus till the era
contractuum.

Abarbinels opinion (as it is clear from what I cited out of him) is almost
diametrally opposite. Some Hebrew writers hold, that the Israelites used a
cyclicall account (the same which they now use, or one a little differing)
throughout the whole time which they inhabited the holy land.

Tractat. de variis annorum formis cap. 16.
Lydiat objecteth against Epiphanius, his falsification about the Roman
Consuls, and that in Haeres. 70. ( viz. Audianorum) he speaks of the Paschall
cycle of Christians, as if generally it had been Octaeteris. Epiphanius might
far more venially attribute any cycles to the Jews who lived in our Saviors
time, which were forged by some private person, and never publicly used by
that nation.

I may add, that Epiphanius might perhaps pronounce of the Jews who lived
before the destruction of Jerusalem, Vide Samuel. Petitum Eglog. Chronol. lib.
1. cap. 14. Lydyat Tract. de variis annorum formis, cap. 16.
by the practices of some of that nation in the present age. He lived after
Hillels edition of the Jewish account. Hillels account if the hours and
scruples by which Lunar years exceed 354. days, wont to be inserted before
they exceeded a day, in some intercalated month, or in Marcheshvan, be
reserved (part of a day excepted, which might be disposed of before or after
the month intercalated in the end of 85. years) till they become a month,
differs only in some inconsiderable circumstances from that of Epiphanius.
The Jewish account explained by Munster in his Calendarium Hebraicum, and by
Scaliger de emendat. Temp. lib. 7. is Hillels. Scaliger ( de emend. temp. lib.
2.) is angry with those who make it as ancient as the Creation. There Is
frequent mention of this account in the Hebrew Doctors. Some seem to believe
that it began in Paradise: others are misconstrued into the same error by late
writers. R. Abraham Zacuth informs us, that Hillel composed it. Former ages
made way for it. Hillel (as the same author witnesses) ordinavit computum
secundam tecupham Rabbi Adae: And Ada imitated Samuel Jarchinai, (and (...)
Hipparchus ille Astrologus summus celeberrimus speculatus est Epilogismos
antiquos ab annis propemodum quadringentis super defectibus lunae:
terminavitque horas, scrupula, momenta, and minutias: adeo ut summa rationum
ejus conveniens sit rationibus doctorum nostroru^ felicis memoria in modo
mensis Lunaris, qui est 29. 12. 793. Some of the Jews ancienter then Jarchinai,
approved this measure of the Lunar month.
Jarchinai probably some more ancient.) They differed not considerably from one
another. (...) (...) Horam and quadraginta octoginta quinque scrupula
excurrentia in omni cyclo e sententia Samuelis, ut constat omnibus autoribus
computi, is Rab. Adda illam horam, and quadraginta octoginta quinque scrupula
distribuit per scientiam fractionis Arithmeticae in omnes septuaginta sex
tecuphas, quae sunt in cyclo; adeo ut unumquodque scrupulum diviserit in
septuaginta sex scrupula secunda, quae vocavit momenta, and singulis cycli
tecuphis competunt viginti scrupula, momenta quadraginta quinque. (...)
secundum rations Rab. Adda desinunt anni solis cum aennis lunae in singulis
cyclis aequatione absoluta, sine accessione aut decessione, vel unius momenti.

The years in which seven months within each lunar cycle were intercalated,
were according to R. Adda the 2. 5. 7. 10. 13. 15. 18. The account which the
Jews now use, was attributed to R. Hillel, because he altered R. Adda's
astronomicall computation in some circumstances.

Hillel endeavored to reconcile R. Jaichinai and R. Adda, See Scalig. in
Canon. Isagog. lib. 3. c. 6. Petit. Eclog. Chronol. l. 1. c. 15. and 16.
The Jews, before it was decreed by their great Senate, that R. Hillels account
should be generally used until the days of the Messiah, some of them computed
their affairs by R. Sam. Jarchina's astronomicall account, See Scalig. in
Canon. Isagog. lib. 3. c. 6. Petit. Eclog. Chronol. l. 1. c. 15. and 16.
others by R. Adda's: some retained the uncertain account used before the
destruction of Jerusalem. R. Hillel went in the middle way between Jarchinai
and Adda, yet was not able to reduce the Jews to uniformity.

Jose Ben Chilpetha in Seder Olam Rabba, Nachman in Bereshith Rabba, and Jarchi
upon the history of the deluge, affirm that months in the Primitive world were
one full, another hollow. Each of these quoteth R. Eliezer for his opinion. R.
Jose, and Rabba Bar Nachman were ancienter then Hillel, the Founder of that
account which the Jews now use. Hillel (in that place of Juchasin which I
before quoted) (...) fuit anno 670. contractuum. Hic annus (says Scaliger)
erat 358. Christi, annis 14. post ordinationem, quae incidit in annum So we
must read him. 354. is (...) typographicum.
344. We can easily believe that the author of Bereshith Rabba, etc. was
ancienter then Hillel, though they were for some time contemporary; and that
Nachman had written at least Bereshith Rabba before the publishing of Hillels
cycle. R. Abraham Zacuth affirms that Hillel lived in the time of Abhai and
Rabba. Rabba is Bar Nachman, and Abhai one who was educated by him, and adopted
his son. R. Bar Nachman (according to Buxtorf and Alstede) flourished about
the year of Christ 300. R. Jose and Nachmanides, etc. since there is no ground
for their opinion in sacred Scriptures seem to have attributed to the times
before the exodus, such civil months, and such a form of years, as themselves
esteemed most absolute; or else to have thought some astronomicall account
approved in later times to have been propagated from the civil use of times
most ancient. It Is probable enough that some later writers, whether Jews or of
any other nation, might understand what maxims were delivered by authors more
ancient touching the Hebrews astronomicall or civil account of present ages,
to be spoken of the civil account of ages preceding. Any one perceives that
the Astronomicall account, whether public or private might as easily be
mistaken for the Civil of the same age.

Besides that there is no vestigium in Rosch Hasschanah of that conceit
concerning the beginning of the 19. hour after a conjunction, nor yet of the
Canon touching the number of months intercalated in the cycle of 19 years,
it is obvious to perceive from what has been spoken, that the same might be
propagated from authors of undeniable credit, and ancienter then R. Jehudah,
who compiled the Mischna, yet not infer that the Phasis was not the Epoch of
the Jews civil month.

That I may further explain what I have spoken touching the occasions of false
opinions about the ancient Jewish year, I shall add somewhat concerning
several accounts coexsistent.

Eclog. Chronol. l. 1. c. 4. and 14.
Petitus affirms that the Jews had besides their account by the Phasis, a
cycle of 8. years, such an one as suffered not the Passover to prevent the
Equinox, which they retained till the 207. year of the Christian Era; that
then an Octaeteris of a new stamp succeeded, which could not so well tueri
fines anni. Epiphanius (he says) was deceived, as suppossing the latter cycle
to be the same which was observed in the year of Christ's passion. Epiphanius
besides the double cycle which be attributes to the Jews in his 51. Heresy,
makes mention of an Octaeteris in the Heresy of the Audians, according to
which the Passover sometimes happened twice within the compass of a year,
that is, no vernall equinox interceding. That the Jews erred this error about
the time of the Nicene Council, is witnessed in an epistle Apud Theod. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 1. c. 10.
written by Constantine to the Bishops who were absent from the Assembly at
Nice. (...). This place and that in Epiphanius ( Hares. 70.) were not happily
interpreted by Scaliger, who takes occasion hence to conjecture that the Jews
when their plenilunium Paschale came before the vernall intersection, kept two
Passeovers in two months which were continuous, viz. one in the first, another
in the second month.

According to Epiphanius, our Saviors last Passover fell into the last year,
(to wit, the 85.) of the Jews greater cycle. And he with the vulgar Jews, kept
the Passover according to the cycle of 8. years; but the Scribes and Pharisees
who were ((...)) according to their og do contapentaeteris, in which they
intercalated two days supra rations lunares. The more mysterious account was
not imparted to the common people. the Scribes and Pharisees also added to the
two days mentioned (...).

I cannot consent to Epiphanius, that in times so ancient the feast of the
Passover anteverted the vernall equinox. That according to the doctrine of the
Karites, it was provided by intercalations that the Passover should fall in
Abib, is confirmed by Eliah Ben Moseh, and Upon (...)
Abarbinel. (...) ( Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 32.) sunt etiam quaedam velut
regulae ac praeceptiones in libro qui inscribitur Enoch, quae declarant primum
mensem apud Hebraeos circiter aequinoctium esse. The Talmudists deny that the
equinox was later then the 15. of Nisan. Josephus affirms ( Archaeolog.
Judaicae lib. 3. cap. 10.) that on the 14. of Nisan the sun was in Aries. The
Agathobuli, instructers of Aristobulus, one of the Septuagint (in Anatolius
praised by Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 32.
Eusebius) transmitted to posterity this Canon, (...).

To these add Aristobulus and Anatolius. According to these witnesses, the
sacrificing of the Passover, or 14. of Nisan was not regularly sooner then the
vernall equinox. Many learned Authors have concluded (but by what Logic I
cannot divine) from that place in Josephus and this in Eusebius now cited, that
the 14. of Nisan ought to fall upon the vernall (...). Had I the faculty of
wondering. I might here take occasion to exercise it. (...), is the sum of
those authorities. (...) in Aristobulus his testimony is (...), 1/12 of the
Zodiac, viz. Aries or Libra. By the suffrages of this author and Josephus,
the Passover was celebrated whilst the sun was in Aries. Anatolius
affirms that in the first year of the enneadecaeteris, the Passover was
celebrated on the first day of the first month. Perhaps he conceived that to
be the (...) which had day and night equal. If so, yet his expression implies
that the Passover might fall out otherwise in other years of the cycle. As the
testimonies produced by Anatolius, limit not the immolation of the Passover to
that (...) in the Spring, which had day and night equal, so neither do they
exclude it thence. (...) may be interpreted by (...). They seem to mean that
the sun was in Aries at the immolation of the Passover. The intention of the
Passover is resembled by the time, at which it was observed.

Exodus 12.18. Levit. 23.5. Numb. 28.17.
Some texts of sacred Scripture in which it is said, On the fourteenth day of
the first month at even, is the Lords Passover, were perhaps to Josephus, the
Agathobuli, Aristobulus, etc. an occasion of attributing to the 14. of Nisan,
what the Talmudists say of the 15. viz. that it cannot be sooner then the
vernall (...). In Haeres. Audianorum, seu 70.
Epiphanius himself informs us, that the Christians in the Primitive times
judged that the Passover ought not to be kept before the equinox. They
conceived that the equinoctial was ((...), seu (...)) by divine appointment
the partition of years. They supposed that the Passover ought to be celebrated
in the first month. But moreover their reason does not conclude those who are
southern to the equator. If the entrance of the sun into Aries, be the
natural beginning of the year to us, then the entrance of the sun into
Libra to them.

Petavius in several parts of his works expresses himself to be of opinion,
that the Jews whilst they inhabited their own country, regarded a cyclicall
account; yet approves Maimonides his doctrine touching the uncertainty of the
Jewish civil months. The Synedrium (as Maimonides teaches us in his Jad
Chazaka, in the Tractate Kiddusch Hachodesch) if there came no witnesses of the
Phasis on the 30. day, (reckoned from the last neomenia,) by intercalating a
day made the month full, or of 30. days, and decreed that the 31. day should
be the epoch of the next month; but if after four or five days, or at the
end of the month (Nisan and Tisri being excepted) it were confirmed to them by
sufficient testimonies, that the moon had been seen at her time ( viz. on the
30. night) they began to reckon the 30. day the beginning of the month.
Petavius upon Epiphan. ( ad haeres. Alogor. p. 183. and 186.) imputes the
Scribes and Pharisees celebration of the Passover after our Savior's with his
disciples, to the Senates ill managing of their uncertain account. What
Petavius seems to suspect in particular, viz. that the month was new
molded, the epoch being cast backward to the 30. day, (...) quia venerunt
testes longinqui, ac se lunam suo tempore prospexisse confirmaverunt; should
rather (as we easily discern) have occasioned the Sanhedrins, observing of the
Passover before our Savior, then (what he conceives) vice versa. He
supposes that our Savior judged it more convenient, that the epoch of the
month, though for want of information it was unduly fixed, should be rata and
grata, rather then the erratum should cause a new edition of the month.

Petitus conceives, that the Jews before the Halosis of jerusalem had a cycle
of eight years, and in the same times their account according to the phasis.
The Talmud and Maimonides represent them so well skilled in Astronomy, that
they could disprove false witnesses of the phasis, who failed in circumstances,
the positure and figure of the moon, and likewise by intercalations accommodate
their uncertain months to the motions of the sun and moon.

What Petitus (occasioned by Epiphanius his (...) in the year of our Saviors
Passion) quoteth out of the third chapter of that famous Tractate in Maimon.
his Jad, Kiddusch Hachodesch, suggesteth an account of the difference between
Christ and the Pharisees about the time of the Passover, much to be preferred
before that given by Petavius. The words are these: (...) The sense of the
place is sufficiently expressed by Petitus in these words, Non defuerunt tamene
veteribus Magistris, qui docerent, si opus esset mense dierum triginta, judicum
consessum, quamvis testes dicerent se vidisse primam lunae visionem nocte
tricesima, non tamen retexuisse mensem, neque Neomeniam statuisse eo die
tricesimo, qui intercalatus fuerat. Some of the Hebrew Doctors affirm, that
the great Consistory, although they were certified that the moon was seen on
the 30 day, sometimes for necessary reasons permitted the Calends of the month
to remain as before their information. It Is not improbable that by such a
method they should provide that the Passover prevented not the equinox.
Gerardus Joannes Vossius (in his Treatise De Tempore Dominicae Passionis, so
often cited) thinks that our Savior approved not this reason of a day to be
embolis'd. Abarbinel (in his Comments upon Exodus 12.2. so often quoted) tells
us. That the embolisations of years, and sanctions of the beginnings of
months, are prerogative to the great Senate, and that what they do, is
according to the Law, and what the Law says, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it, is not spoken but as before
the vulgar, that they innovate not above their understanding, nor exalt their
wisdom above their skill in the precept, as do the Karites; but that we should
hearken to the Prophets, and Priests, and Judges, as who are helped by a
Schechina. (...) (...)

The sentence meriteth to be made public. The Schoolmen say; God can dispense
with the materiality of any precept in the Decalogue, the three first excepted.

The Israelites understood by the Prophet Moses, that God had signed them a
dispensation for the spoiling of the Egyptians. God by his Prophets and
Apostles added other sacred Scriptures to the Pentateuch. These were enabled by
a Schechina. The high Priests gave answers by Urim and Thummim. I cannot doubt
but God often by a Schechina taught the Senators judgment. But neither can I
believe that divine assistance and infallibility were entayled upon the
Sanhedrin. We are sufficiently informed that it was otherwise in our Saviors
time. It Is credible enough that our Savior, if the moon appeared at her time,
and the time of her appearance ought to be counted the beginning of the month,
would give notice of the Phasis. The Sanhedrin perhaps near the time of our
Saviors passion, might refuse due testimonies of the moon's appearance on the
30. day; or else judge it necessary that a day should be inserted.

Lastly, the Karites (as Abarbinel witnesses) have a cycle of 19. years, to
which by embolismes they conform their uncertain account.

I may here opportunely give notice, that Maimon. in his interpretation of the
first Perech of Rosch Hasschana in part excepteth Elul and Tisri from the rules
of their uncertain account. (...)

Thus the Mischna of Rosch Hasschana. Messengers were sent out from Jerusalem
(the seat of the great Senate) to give notice of the neomenia of Elul to those
who were distant, that they might observe the beginning of the year at due
time. Maimonides commenteth upon this part of the text in these words: (...) Et
dixerunt, propter Elul ratione principii anni, quia Elul secundum multitudinem
viginti and novem dierum; and unde cognoverunt initium mensis Elul, inde
cognoverunt initium anni in numero (seu computo) annorum. The modus of the
month Elul was certain, ( viz. 29. days) and consequently determined the
beginning of the month following.

It may be objected that messengers were sent to give notice of the neomenia of
Tisri, that the solemnities of that month might be observed in their due
times, Maimonie's comment upon the Talmudicall tradition, will extricate us
from the difficulty. (...) Et egrediuntur propter Tisri, ut notum faciant
initium anni verum, quia fieri non potest Elul triginta dierum. The beginning
of the year (as we see) was twofold; one ((...)) in computo annorum; another
((...)) in veritate. The 30. day from the Neomenia of Elul, if the moon then
appeared, was the beginning of the year, both berobh hasschanim, and beemeth:
otherwise only berobh hasschanim, and the next beemeth. When these beginnings
of the year fell on several days, the feasts in Tisri (the Rosch hasschana
it self must needs be excepted) were reckoned from the later, which was in
truth the beginning of that month, not from the other which was the first of
Tisri by dispensation, in regard of the Jews distant from Jerusalem. It was
provided by this dispensation, that the beginning of the year might be
celebrated by all the Jews on the same day. We see that Messengers were
requisite for the ordering of the festivalls in Tisri, besides those who gave
notice of the neomenia of Elul. It Is clear from what has been said, that one
and thirty days might possibly intercede between Elul and Marcheschvan, to
wit, when the Phasis was neither the Epoch of Tisri nor of Marcheschvan.

If such an uncertain computation as has been spoken of, obtained for any
segment of time, we cannot by knowing the number of Jewish years, comprehend
the distance of events between which it interceded. Scaliger, though he affirms
that the Jews used the Syro-Macedonian months and years, after the Seleucidae
had power over them, till the 344. year at least of the Christian Era (and so
contradicts Maimonie before quoted); De emend. Temp. lib. 2. page 105.
denies not but that in times more ancient, Epocha's of months, were perhaps
such as are exhibited in the Talmud, and in Maimonides.

Such an account should derogate much less from the certainty of Chronology,
were it confined to the times on this side the Nabonassarean epoch, (which
according to Ptolemy, preceded the death of Alexander the great, 4^4. years,
Augustus Caesar, 719.) then if it be cast backward into ages nearer the
creation. Ptolemies history of Astronomicall observations compared with the
times of events upon earth, and the histories written by Diodorus and Josephus,
(and downward from Gyges king of the Lydians) Herodotus, Thucidides, and
Xenophon, inform us better in order to the applying of some things which came
to pass between the beginning of the reign of Nabonassar and our Saviors
nativity, mentioned in authentic or Ecclesiastical scriptures, to years,
months, and days in periodicall accounts, then do any humane writers about
times preceding.

I may here seasonably take occasion to demonstrate* that knowledge of the
positures of the stars at any distance backward from the present instant,
together with the history of Astronomicall observations, cannot enable us to
assign to all remarkable events, their distances from the time present, or
from the creation. Scarce any events mentioned in Scripture above Nabonassar's
Epoch, are uncharacterized in ancient writers by perfect conjunctions, or any
aspects of any stars, or by the observation of either of the equinoxes, or
solstices, or by eclipses. The (...) attributed to times nearer the present
age, are reported to us some of them (that I may not suspect the skill or
credit of those who profess themselves to have observed any of them) by those
only who by many centuries succeeded the events to which they are applied, and
to whom they were perhaps transmitted only by unwritten traditions.

Moreover, sit^ remarkable accidents are by ancient historians, whether sacred
or humane, almost wholly referred to civil years, months, and days (few of
them, if any, apprehended the true measure of the solar year) we cannot
measure their distances from the creation, or from any time downward, unless
civil times interceding be known to us, as well as the motions of celestial
bodies, and events or parts of civil times thereby uncharacterized.

Were we sure that any event fell out, when the sun or when the moon was
eclipsed, we might probably discover a false distance assigned it from the time
present, or if the space of time on this side the event be certain, from any
time beyond it, but cannot by mere skill in the circumvolutions of the stars
attain to so much as a probability of the truth. Our discovery of a false
distance given (as I said) is but probable. It Is possible that the whole space
between two eclipses of either of the Luminaries may be unduly added, or
subtracted; likewise that a time may be assigned to the eclipse and to the
event thereby uncharacterized, in which an eclipse was possible, but not
necessary.

That I may return whence I have digressed, Scaliger changes his note, Canon.
Isagog. lib. 3. cap. 6. Et certe major pars priscorum Judaeorum (in ea
sententia est, quod (...) sanctificabant neomeniam secundum visionem; and
testibus jurantibus se vidisse lunam corniculatam, statim judices clamabant
((...)) sanctificata est, sanctificata est (neomenia). Sanctificare (neomeniam)
is here with Scaliger the same that sancire, as it is clear from what follows.

Saul and Jonathan and David (1. Sam. 20.) knew that the next day should be the
new moon, yet could not divine that the moon should appear in the night
following. Their knowledge might be merely conjecturall; or they might be
certain that the morrow should be the new moon, because their expectation of
the phasis was frustrated in the night preceding.

My purpose is satisfied, if (as Abarbinel seems to acknowledge) the sanction
of the Neomenia by the Phasis began to be used publicly in the times of Sadoc
and Baitus. But moreover, those authors who affirm that the Jews always used
a cyclicall account, are so many, and so much differ in their opinions, that
although the uncertain account testified by the Talmudists and Karites, was
quite expunged, we should remain doubtful about sacred Chonology.

I cannot believe that the phasis of the moon was, as the Karites affirm, the
epoch of the month in the age of the flood; nor with Eliah Ben Moseh one of
that sect, that Nisan was then the first of months; nor yet that the measure
of years mentioned in Genesis, is sufficiently known to us. Honor,
existimatione, authoritate, uti and vetustate Talmudicos Karitis nunquam non
praecelluisse satis est receptum. Thus M. Seldom in his Preface to his Treatise
de anno Civili veterum Judaeorum. The Talmudists extend not their uncertain
account into times beyond the Law given on Sinai. Eliah ben Moseh (the
manuscript Karite used by M. Seldom) Seldom de Ann. Civil. vet. Judaeor. cap. 2.
flourished sub annum 240 chiliadis Judaicae sextae, id est, Christi 1480. I
shall show what Talmudists much ancienter conceived, and what may be gathered
from sacred Scripture concerning months and years which preceded the
deliverance of the Israelites from their Egyptian bondage. I shall speak
briefly, first of the Rosch Hasschana; secondly, of months; lastly of years.
The Neomenia of Tisri, if we stand to the traditions of the Hebrew Doctors,
will seem to have been in the primitive times of the world, for all affairs
whether sacred or civil: the Rosch Hasschana. Tisri is voted the first month
by a prevailing faction of suffrages, whether we attend number or value. Among
the Jews who wrote in Greek, Philo and Josephus, and among the ancient Rabbines
Sec Seder O. lam Rabba cap. 4. Abarbinel upon the history of the flood.
Eliezer and Jehosuah are divided about this question.

Josephus and R. Eliezer affirm, that Tisri was the first month of the year,
till the institution of the Passover. To these may be added Jonathan Ben Uziel
who was more ancient, and the author of Mechilta, who was later then Philo,
Josephus, and Eliezer. Jonathan Ben Uziel thus paraphraseth upon 1. Kings 8.2.
(...) Ex quo data est lex and scriptum est de Nisan, quod ille caput mensiu^,
vocatus est Tisri (mensis) septimus. Thus R. S. Jarchi upon 1. Kings 8.2.
(...) Et congregati sunt ad Regem Solomonem, omnes viri Israelitae in mense
Ethanim, quem vocabant mensem primum, infestivitate: sed nunc ille mensis est
septimus.

The Latin translation of the Chaldee paraphrase in the Spanish Bibles, and
Buxtorf's Rabbinicall Lexicon (upon the word (...)) omit the article prefixed
to (...), and interpret part of Jonathans sentence by in mense quem veteres
vocabant mensem primum, etc. The sense for substance is the same, but I should
rather construe (...) as before, if the prefix be added, Its added likewise by
Rasi, and R.D. Kimchi according to Bomberge and Buxtorfe.
as in Bomberg's and Buxturf's editions of Jonathan Ben Uziel. (...) may
signify indifferently, in mense quem veteres, or in mense Ethanim. (...) as
well as (...) is interpreted by fortis: (...) is pluralis emphaticus, the same
that (...); and the prefix may be a note of the genitive case, as well as a
relative.

R. D. Kimchi upon that text in the first of Kings now quoted, suggesteth five
reasons of moment for which the month that in Solomon's time was the seventh,
is called Ethanim, two of which speak out that the seventh was the first till
the Israelites were brought out of Egypt. 1. The fruits which are gathered in
Tisri, strengthen man. 2. There are in that month solemnitates honorabiles and
fortes, seu celebres. 3. Thsre's strength and validity in the authority by
which the festivals of that month were enjoined. 4. The strong ones of the
world, our first parents were in that month created. 5. Then were laid the
strong foundations of the earth. This Doctor in the same place observes, that
the Israelites only were commanded to celebrate Nisan as the first month of
the year. (...) Quia sic dixit illis Deus benedictus: M^nsis hic vobis (^rit)
principium mensium, vobis omnino, quia caeteris nationibus non est mensis
primus. Nam Tisri (illis) est primus. In the Chaldee paraphrase upon the
Pentateuch known by the name of Jonathan Ben Vziel, the seventh month (Genesis
8.4.) in which the ark rested on the mountains of Ararat, is ((...)) the month
of Nisan. I should have omitted this testimony, See Elias Levita in his Preface
to his Methurgeman
were it not much suspected that Jonathan Ben Vziel, whose suffrage I before
cited, paraphrased not upon the Law.

Eliezers judgment touching the most ancient beginning of the year, is quoted
and approved in Bereshit Rabba by Rasi, Abarbinel, and others. Nachmanides
likewise upon the history of the flood, says, the world was created in Tisri;
and that the year began in Tisri till Israel came out of Egypt.

Rambam in his Perusch of Rosch Hasschana, upon those words in the first
Chapter of that Tractate (...) Primo die* Tisri initium anni annis, has this
gloss, (...) the first of Tisri (according to the Talmud explained by Maimon.)
is the beginning of years by which we number the age of the world.

Those who make Tisri the most ancient beginning of the year, See page 122,
123. Babilonia in which our first parents are supposed to have been created, so
little varieth from Canaan in longitude and latitude, that they have almost the
same autumn. But moreover the greater part of the testimonies produced, depend
not upon the situation of Eden. They affirm that the world was created in or
near that season which was autumn to Chaldea, Canaan, Egypt, and other
countries not much distant from these. I may add to the testimonies before
cited, the opinion of the ancient Egyptians. They affirm that the world was
created in Libra. In istis enim posterioribus partibus (viz. Librae) terra
dicitur esse composita, ut Barbarica ratio confirmat. Pirmicus lib. 7 cap. 3.
are countenanced by those reasons which contend that the world was created in
Autumn, and by Exodus 23.16. (and 34.22.) where the feast of in-gathering
(which was wont to be celebrated in Tisri) is said to be in the end of the
year. The year which ended in autumn, necessarily began in autumn. But De
variis annorum formis, cap. 2.
Lydiat (I confess) prevails so far with me, that I conceive neither the
time in which the world was created, nor yet the most ancient beginning of the
year to be fully cleared by sacred Scripture.

The sentence before praised which I find in Eusebius, quoted out of Enoch (
viz. (...)) determines not whether the first month of the Hebrews year, was
near the Autumnall or Vernall Equinox. But unless the vernall equinox be
intimated by Enoch, the place is (...) to the purpose for which it is alleged.
For larger satisfaction see Sixtus Senensis Bibliothecae Sanctae l. 2. p. 84.
and 85. Petrus Gassendus de vita Peireskii, lib. 5. p. 169.
The work ascribed to Enoch the Patriarch (quoted by S. Jude) which seems to be
here pointed at, (besides that it was esteemed spurious by the Jews, and the
Doctors of the Primitive Christian Church) cannot pretend beyond a prophecy
for the time of the Israelites after the Exodus. We receive as most probable,
that Tisri in those times was the beginning of the Civil, Nisan of the
Ecclesiastical year.

It remains that I relate what the Talmudists deliver concerning months, for
the times before the deliverance from Egypt.

Aben Ezra upon Exodus 12. tells us that we find in in Scripture only three
names of months, Zif, Ethanim, Bull, ((...)) in the holy language (or Hebrew)
that the rest are ((...)) in the language of the Caldeans; and occur only in
Zachary, Daniel, Ezra, and Hester ((...)) who were in the captivity. That
month which was the first of the year before the deliverance of the
Israelites from Egypt, (afterward called Tisri) is named Ethanim, 1. Kings
8.2. that which was the second (since called Marcheschvan) is Bull, 1. Kings
6.38. And the eighth (now called Jiar) is Zif, 1. King. 6.1. Some (I know) have
thought that Abib was the proper name of a month; but Aben Ezra dissenteth
from them in the place quoted, and justly, unless R. D. Kimchi in's Sepher
haschoraschim, and Elias Levita in's Methurgeman, be defective in their
explications of the word Abib. The word must needs be otherwise construed, in
Lev. 2.14. we have mention of a second month; Genesis 7.11. and 8.14. of a
seventh month, Genesis 8.4. of a tenth, v. 5. of a first month, v. 13. Moses in
his Chronology of the flood, probably was directed to write in the dialect of
the age in which the flood happened. It Is impossible to prove that in those
times months were otherwise distinguished, then by numbers expressing their
order.

The Talmudists, some of them, so express that the observing of the phasis was
enjoined at what time the Passover was instituted, or afterward on mount
Sinai, as that they intimate it was not in use in times more ancient. (I shall
not here repeat what testimonies I before quoted to this purpose.) Baal
Hatturim upon Exodus 12. observes, that (...) Speak ye unto all the
congregation of Israel, is near to (...) it shall be the first month of the
year to you, (...) quia non consecrant [neomenias ad phasin] nisi in Synedrio
magno. Some Hebrew Doctors by (...) Exodus 12, 2. understand the moon newly
appearing after a conjunction. God, say they, showed Moses the new moon in the
firmament, and commanded that the phasis should be reckoned ((...)) the
beginning of each month. Rasi upon the comma quoted, makes mention of this
conceit, but rejects it. Rambam in his comment upon the second chapter of
Rosch Hasschana believes it.

Abarbinel tells us ( in Parasch. (...)) that every nation before the
deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt, numbered months and years; (...) Et
notum est, quod non fiebat hoc ab iis figendo neomenias ad phasim lunae, sed ad
suos uniuscujusque gentis epilogismos.

We cannot conclude from the notation of Chodesch, ^he word by which a month
is signified in the history of the flood, that the first phasis of the moon
after a conjunction was in times so ancient, the beginning of the civil
month. There Is (...) renovatio in the beginnings of the months of peragration,
and of consecution. The quantity of the months mentioned in the history of the
deluge is variously defined among the Talmudists.

R.S. Jarchi consents with (...)
Eliezer, that months in the age of the flood were alternatim full and hollow*
viz. (that I may with Hebrew authors call the months by those names which
they obtained not till many generations after) Tisri had 30 days, Marcheschvan
29, Casleu 30. Tebat 29, etc. To these add Sedar Olam Rabba. The computation
of months and days mentioned in the history of the flood, is the same in the
fourth chapter of that chronicle, and with Rasi. With Abarbinel the 150. days,
in which the waters prevailed upon the earth, are the whole distance between
the beginning of the rain, and the ark resting upon the mountains of Ararat,
and ((...)) five perfect months. He must necessarily mean by five perfect
months, the extent of five perfect months; he could not but take notice, that
one fifth part of the time between the beginning of the rain, and the resting
of the ark consisted, according to his own supposition, of two pieces of
months added together, viz. part of Marcheschvan, and part of Nisan. He
conceived not (as it is manifest from what I lately cited out of his comment
upon Exodus) with the Karites, that the four months between the second and
the seventh, obtained each of them 30 days, by reason of the phasis
intercepted, but that the modus of the civil month in the age of the deluge
was 30. days.

Nachmanides in Parasc. Noah. differs from some Hebrew Doctors, whose
opinion he there cites, about the distance between the beginning of the rain,
and the ark resting upon the mountains of Ararat; but together with those and
Abarbinel, extends the 150. days of the prevailing of the waters, from the
beginning of the rain, to the 17 of Nisan.

It Is clear, that had the civil months in the age of the flood been conformed
as near as 'twas possible, to the distances between conjunctions, Eliezer and
Rasi, etc. were much to be preferred before these last quoted. The twelve
hours by which (besides minutes) the month of consecution (or space between
two conjunctions) exceeds 29 days, multiplied by 12. make six days, which
according to these authors, were digested each year into so many full
months. But it is sufficiently known, that the civil months of most nations
anciently, as do the Julian one excepted, exceeded the space between
conjunctions.

The notation of Chodesch, the word by which a month is signified in the
history of the flood, no more intimates that the civil month in Noah's time,
was rigourously conformed to Naturalis mensis est duplex, aut enim lunaris, aut
solaris: rursus lunaris t^iplicis generis: aut quatenus luna ab eadem puncto
z^d^aci profecta, ad idem revertitur; qui dicitur (...), ^tem (...) quod
intervallum minus est, quam viginti octo dierum, majus quam viginti septem.
Secundum genus est ejusdem syderis a sole profecti, ad eundem reditus Haec
dicitur (...) Tertii generis mensis est secundus dies (...), quae dicitur
(...), and (...), Scalig. de emendat. temporum lib. 1. page 9.
any kind of natural month, then does the derivation of the word month, that
our months now used are such.

About months there are (as I have showed) three opinions, into which the
Hebrew Doctors are parted, one of the Karites, and two of the Talmudists.

The Karites who would obtrude upon the times before the Exodus, their
uncertain account are overpowred, and born down by the authority of the
Talmudists. This other sect of Jews hold part of them, that months were
alternatively full and hollow; other of them, that each month had 30 days.
Among those who embraced the former opinion, the author of Seder Olam Rabba,
and jarchi reckon the 17. day of Marcheschvan the first, and the 27. of Casleu
the last day of the forty in which the rain descended; the 28. of Casleu the
first, and the 29. (or last day) of Jiar the last day of the 150. in which the
waters prevailed upon the earth; and the 17. of Siwan (which is the seventh
month to Casleu in which the rain ceased) the day on which the ark began to
rest on the mountains of Ararat; and the tenth month, on the first day of
which the mountains appeared, to be Ab, the tenth to Marcheschvan in which the
rain began to descend. The first of Siwan, on which the waters began to
decrease, is computed the first of the forty days, after which Noah opened
the window of the ark.

Some writers, who believe that the months in Noah's time were one full, and
another hollow throughout the year, conceive that the ark rested on the
mountains of Ararat on the 17. of Nisan, and least there should want room for
the 150. days, affirm that the year of the flood was embolismaeus.

Those who hold that in the year of the deluge, Casleu Tebat, Sebat, and Adar
(were (...)) had each of them 30. days, and at least seem all of them to have
thought each month in the age of the flood and times adjoining, to have been
of the same measure, entertained several opinions concerning the time of the
resting of the ark.

Augustine, and Bid, and many other Christians* affirm that the month in
which he ark rested, was the seventh of the deluge, not of the year; and that
hereby an eternal sabbath is shadowed out unto us. The ark (with S. Peter) is
a type of the Church, which according to an ancient Cabbala (whether derived
from some divine revelation; or only from some private spirit, I know not)
shall about the beginning of the 7. chiliade be completely received into
eternal rest. Nachmanides and Abarbinel affirm, that it rested upon the
mountains of Ararat on the seventeenth of Nisan.
Some quoted by Nachmanides prefer the 17. of Jiar. They allow a month for
the abating of the waters after the end of 150. days in which the waters
prevailed upon the earth. There Is yet place for another opinion, viz. that
there was a double Adar in the time of the deluge, and the 150. days expired
the space of a full month before the 17. of Nisan. Those who held that months
then in the age of the flood were throughout common years one full and the next
hollow, cannot unless they intercalate a month between Marcheschvan and
Nisan, with any face of reason affirm that the ark rested on the 17. of Nisan
upon the mountains of Ararat. The space between the beginning of the rain, and
the resting of the ark, unless a month extraordinary intercede, cannot
possibly according to their supposition, amount to so much as 148. days.
Casleu should contain 30. days, Tebat 29, Sebat 30. Adar 29. to which must be
added, should the rain have begun together with the 17. of the second month,
Some Jews affirm that the rain begun in the day time.
(which some deny) 13. days of Marcheschvan. The sum is 131. 16 days of
Nisan added, produce 147. Former ages have not sufficiently informed us whether
or no any days or months were intercalated before the beginning of the year
was altered, much less that this or that kind of embolisation was then used. I
should believe, were it cleared that there was intercalation in those times,
that there was a Weelul rather then a Weadar. The author of (...) thus
reasons, that when Nisan was the first month of the year, no month but
Adar ought to be doubled by intercalation. (...) etc. Non autem embolisant nisi
Adar: cujus rationem inveni, quod scilicet impossible sit alium mensem in anno
superaddere praeter Adar, quem faciunt Adar secundum: Nam Nisan est caput anni
a quo computamus menses, cum scriptum sit, Primus ille est vobis: and de Sivan
dicitur, In mense tertio: and de Tisri dicitur, In mense septimo: and de Tebat
dicitur, In mense decimo: and de Adar dicitur, in mense duodecimo, qui est
mensis Adar. Quod si duplicarent mensem alium, non satisfieret Scripturae.

The Hebrew author de neomeniis and tecuphis, translated into Latin by
Munster, sub titulo (...) translationes and sanctiones, has this sentence
(...) Dicimus autem a diebus Ezrae and deinceps, non inveniri Elul embolisatum.
But he means, I conceive, a day was not inserted in Elul, but in
Marcheschvan, when an accession of a day was made to the ordinary year by
reason of translations of feasts, which being granted, his sentence implies
not that Elul was doubled in times more ancient. The Chaldeans, as Scaliger
affirms De Emend. Temp. l. 2. after they had received the calippicall period,
as often as a month was to be inserted, had Elul alterum in the end of their
year. Scaliger (in the book now praised) speaking of the year of the ancient
Hebrews, which began in Autumn, says, Fine anni, ut solet, intercalabatur
mensis.

Other arguments are obvious against those who hold that an Adar was
intercalated in the year of the deluge.

1. Their opinion has no foundation in sacred history, nor yet in humane of
any antiquity.

2. Were it granted that the ordinary civil year in Noah's time consisted of
354. days, no one can attain by mere conjectures whether or no they conformed
their civil years to solar years, much less what kind of intercalation, if
any, was then used. The excess of the solar year might several ways be
digested into their civil account.

Those who repute the month in which the ark rested on Ararat, the seventh to
the beginning or end of the rain, not to the beginning of the year, are
sufficiently refuted by Abarbinel. He well observes (upon the Paraschah (...))
that the Scripture says, (...) and the waters prevailed 150. days, not (...)
and the waters yet prevailed 150. days. He uses another reason not to be
pretermitted, which he thus expresses, (...) Quis auscultabit huic sententiae
scil. Quod commemorentur in eadem parascha mensis secundus, and septimus, and
decimus, and primus, and secundus, neque referantur ad idem notum initium.

Abarbinel judges those, as altogether irrational, not to be heard, who
reckon not a second, and seventh, and tenth, and a first, and a second month,
mentioned in the same paraschah, from the same beginning He means, that
months mentioned in the same paraschah, and described by their order, have all
of them the same individual Epoch, or Epochas ejusdem rationis. Those five
months mentioned in the 7. and 8. chapter of Genesis, are all to be reckoned
from the beginning of the year, but three of them are described by their
posture in the 600. the other two by their order in the 601. year of Noah's
life. Sacred Chronology contained in the history of the deluge, is much
disordered, if the beginning of Siwan be made (as in Seder Olam Rabba) the
epoch of the 40 days, at the end of which Noah opened the window of the ark,
or if part of them be disposed before the first of the tenth month.

I cannot but much prefer that opinion, which makes the measure of the
civil month in Noah's time 30. days. Nothing is repugnant to it in the
history of the flood. According to such computation, although no month were
intercalated between the second and the seventh, the resting of the ark should
not be protruded by the 150 days in which the waters prevailed, beyond the 17.
of Nisan.

The Karites who make the second month (which they conceive to have been Jiar)
hollow, include in the 150. days of rain, both the whole 17. of the second,
and likewise of the 7. month. But the ark rested on the 17. of the 7. month,
yet not till after the space of 150. days in which the waters prevailed. It
may be objected, that Luke 2.21. eight days are said to be accomplished, which
were not completely past, (...). And when eight days were accomplished for the
circumcision of the child. He was circumcised on the eighth day. Eight days
may be said to be accomplished, or the number of eight days to be filled up,
whether the eighth day be current or completed.

1. Had the same phrase been used, Genesis 8.3. had it been said, When 150 days
were accomplished, the waters were abated, the words might possibly, but should
not necessarily signify, that the waters were abated before the end of 150
days.

2. We ought rather to conceive, that the waters were not abated till the end
of 150 days. Such constructions of the place should be as consistent with
other sacred Scriptures, and humane history, and the light of natural reason,
as that other, whereof the words should be capable; and more proper and usual.
'Twas otherwise in that place of Luke now cited. God had determined
circumcision to the eighth day. Christ came to fulfill the Law. We read of no
necessity by which his circumcision should be deferred.

In the interpretation of Scripture, that sense is to be preferred, caeteris
paribus, which is most proper and usual.

3. The words Genesis 8.3. are (...) from the end of an hundred and fifty days.
The particle prepos'd is a partition between the 150. days, and the times in
which the waters were so much abated, that the ark might rest upon the
mountains of Ararat. Scaliger ( De Emend. Temp. l. 5.) assigns to the months
in the time of the deluge, the same quantity. The common year in Noah's time,
contained as we see 360. days.

According to Scaliger, the days by which the solar year exceeds annum
aequabilem, (...), consisting of 360 days, (which the Hebrews call (...) annum
dierum) when they became 30, were intercalated at the end of the year.
Moreover, for quadrants of days in solar years above 365 complete days, a
month was intercalated after 120 years.

I cannot assent to Lydyat, endeavoring to demonstrate the measure of the
year used in times ancienter then the confusion of languages, a priori. I
cannot see why I should believe, that the long-lived Patriarchs used the most
exact form of civil years, rather then that they were complete in all arts and
sciences.

Neither can I conceive that Scaliger's doctrine concerning intercalations used
in those ancient times, is confirmed unto us by due testimonies.

We are uncertain (as I have proved) both concerning the number of years
between the creation of the first, and the birth of the second Adam, and
likewise concerning the measures of years by which the affairs of the
Israelites and their forefathers were computed in that segment of time.
Incerta haec si quis postulat ratione certa facere, nihilo plus agat, quam si
det operam ut cum ratione insauiat. My labor will not be thought needless,
unless by such as are ignorant, or else attend not that many have arrogated a
kind of certainty to chronology in those parts, which I have demonstrated to be
most uncertain, and that others have been so fond as to believe them. Sacred
Chronology enableth us not to assign to the events registered in the
Scriptures, their true positures in the age of the world. Humane Chronology
leaves us much more perplexed and doubtful. Besides that it is not agreed by
writers of good note, what is the distance of any other ancient remarkable
epoch from the creation, or from any time near us, scarce about the distance
of any epoch from another, whether on this side or beyond it; famous events
are variously disposed in time reckoned from each Era. Learned Master
Broughton has plentifully discovered, that there is much difference among the
Greek writers in chronicling things according to the Olympiads. The Roman
Consuls are diversely listed in the Capitoline and Sicilian Calenders; and
Epiphanius departs from both. The Jews are divided about the account used by
their forefathers in the land of Canaan, and some of them derive their present
account from our first parents. It Is sufficiently cleared, that Chronology
(besides that detriment which it sustaineth by reason of the Jews uncertain
account) compared with other parts of the Encyclopaedia, labors with a
triple disadvantage.

1. It depends much upon humane authority. 2. Upon expressions which without
new revelation cannot be understood. 3. It contains contradictions, neither
part of which can without a miracle be disproved. The first and second
difficulty are frequent (I confess) in other parcells of history (usually so
called) the third is almost peculiar to Chronology; many parts of learning are
wholly exempted from them all. Some, left they should not be ^^pu^ed to know
somewhat unknown to others, profess skill beyond the peripherie of possible
knowledge. Among all the sects of students, Chronologers and Astrologers are
most frequently guilty of this flushed boasting. I affect not to be a sceptick
in Chronology. I acknowledge that there is singular use of this piece of
history; but would have those who profess skill in it, contained within due
bounds, nor dare to attempt any thing beyond sobriety.

Chronology in its full dimensions, since God who is adequately perfection it
self, knows the moments of all changes, the birth and age of each being, all
opinions and expressions concerning these circumstances; cannot but be in it
self desirable; yet because ((...)) Man's life is short, and art long, (I may
add) and our proficiency in knowledge but slow, ought to give place to some
other studies. (...), and vice versa, a lesser good has in it rationem mali.
The history of things applied to times (in which they began, endured, ended)
has not immediate influence into our spiritual or temporal affairs; yet is
to be preferred before other studies, more directly useful in our lives, when
it ushereth in any knowledge more advantageous then improvements yet wanting,
which may be obtained without it.

1. To attain skiil in the greatest part of the Encyclopaedia, viz. in the
fundamental points of Divinity, Languages, Grammar, Rhetoric, Arithmetic,
Music, Geometry, Metaphysics, Moral Philosophy, the greatest part of
Natural Philosophy and Astronomy, depends nothing at all upon Chronology.

2. We can easily believe that there is truth in contingent axioms contained in
sacred Scriptures, although we attend not to the times in which things came to
pass.

3. We can as easily believe humane writers relating what came to pass, as
reporting the time in which it came to pass.

4. Some knowledge of things applied to certain times (or places) neither
immediately nor remotely conferreth any thing (...).

I readily acknowledge that some parts of Chronology confer much to the
knowledge of things which are applied to time, and of things distinct from
them. Astronomy relieth much upon the records of the times in which
Astronomicall observations were made. Natural Philosophy and Astrology may be
advanced by the times of the events upon earth; compared with the positures of
the heavens. A rule cannot be founded upon a single observation. Histories
which are conversant about the same times, mutually explain one another. The
Chronology in heathens, if we deal with infidels may con^^liate credit to the
sacred Scriptures. We are much enabled to judge of testimonies concerning the
customs and events of former ages, by knowing in what riches the authors
lived. Lastly, Gods providence is much illustrated by Chronology, as it
informs us that sin has sometimes been punished whilst it was in act, or
immediately after; and that Gods servants have been delivered in times of their
greatest straits and necessities. These advantages we may receive in some
measure from such chronology as former ages have transmitted to us, howsoever
perplexed and imperfect. Of such I spoke before, not of Chronology in the
abstract, nor according to such actuated perfection as it was capable of.
Historiographers often vary in their reports, and sometimes are so counterpoiz'd,
that it is difficult to pronounce any party victorious. Caeteris paribus, the
more ancient are to be preferred before later, who were more intelligent before
such as were less skillful; those who wrote without prejudice, before such
whose affections were engaged; the more honest, before such as were less
conscientious, and a greater number before a less. Advantages are sometimes so
distributed, that the controversy cannot be determined. But what is averred
only by one author, much more what by many, if it neither be repugnant to any
artificial reason, nor yet contradicted by any testimony, may justly challenge
our assent. The concurrence of some events and order of others are confirmed
unto us by full consent of witnesses. The (...) of Natural Philosophy may for
the most part be approved or disproved by new experience.

It Is already confessed that Chronology abstracted from its usefulness (which
may fitly be termd Chronology spoliata) is an ornament to the understanding;
moreover, that Chronology is helpful to the judgment; memory and
reminiscencie likewise receive much aid from the circumstances of time and
place, but almost equal from these true and feigned.

I have showed the use of Chronology, and where those who study to apply (...),
must write their ne plus ultrae.

Its clear that learning might have been much advanced above her present (...),
had some of most able parts been contented with truth, and not preferred their
divinations and fictions.

FINIS.
Inserenda.
Page 51. lin. 14. after immediately from God, (add) or an Angel;

Page 53. lin. 4. -- by himself, (add) or by an Angel,

Page 122. lin. 16. -- complete 2314. The Samaritane (as we see) differs from
the Jews Pentateuch. Scaliger divined not right in his seventh book De Emendat.
Temperum. His words are these: Tantum abest, ut aliquid assuerint (Samaritani)
Pentateuche, ut totidem literis quot Judaei, scriptum habeant. Petrus Gassendus
De vita Peiriskii. l. 2. page 113.
tells us, (what I could not but suspect from the sentence now quoted) that
Scaliger never saw the Samaritane Pentateuch. The Samaritanes Chronicle no more
derogateth from their Pentateuch, by commending to us a differing account of
the years of the Patriarchs, then do some Hebrew and other Chronologers (who
dissent among themselves, and from the Scripture,) from the authority of the
Pentateuch transmitted to us by the Jews.

Page 129. lin. 23. -- make up 3420 years. But one year must be subtracted,
in that the year in which the Temple began to be builded, is given to the
segment of time preceding, and also to that between the foundation of the
Temple, and the destruction of Jerusalem. I cannot divine under what pretense
M. Broughton could admit that (...) into his Chronology.

Page 152. In margin ad sententiam istam. For the extent of this month he
appealeth to R. Simeon, the son of Gamaliel.

Scriptor Hebraeus anonymus, (quem Latinitate donatum una cum Messahala de
elementis and orbibus coelestibus, etc. edidit Hillerus Mathematum Noribergae
professor, aerae Christi anno 1549.) hanc mensis Lunaris quantitate^ acceptam
refert cuidam sapienti, qui dicebat se eam accepisse a quodam antiquo, qui fuit
de domo David. Cisleu ibid. Lerusleph appellatur, and Siwan Vuan, deinde
secundus Adar intercalaris indigitatur.

Page 154. lin. 31. Quod si quis vocabulo (...) radices computorum significari
mavelit, non admodum repugno: sed nisi Abarbinel ad pauca respexerit, saltem
minus Grammatice quam par erat, conceptus suos expresserit, altera praeferenda
videtur interpretatio.

Page 161. lin. 17. -- vel unius momenti. The Anonymous Hebrew writer before
quoted, thus speaks in the Latin translation set out by Hillerus: Veruntamen
remanebunt nobis semper in omnibus novendecim annis; inter solares and lunares
una hora; and 485 minuta, secundum intentionem gentium and plebiscita earum.
Sed secundum intentionem certam, qua est apud nos; inter annos solares and
lunares exacto decemnovenali annorum circulo; nulla reliqua est differentia:
sed perpetuo redeunt ad idem transacti circuli punctum, and revertitur
computatio ad primum principium. He confirms in these words, that the lunar
enneadecaeteris which exceeds 19 Julian years by one hour and 485 scruples,
was transmitted from the Heathens to the Jews, and that the Jews had another
enneadecacteris (which he seems to prefer) invented by some one of their
own nation, that made equal the motions of the two luminaries.

Two other periods of the anonymous Hebrew writer now praised, might have been
digested into the Treatise next preceding, which are these: Prima conjunctio
super quam componuntur computationes ad extrahendum omnes con^unctionet, est
conjunctio anni imaginati, de quo non habemus nisi sex dies. Sicut legitur,
Dixerunt nostri antiqui in vigesimo quinto die mensis Elul, creatus fuit mundus.

Corrigenda.
Page 5. lin. 7. lege. ingenuous, p. 29. in marg. lin. 6. pro first lege fifth.
page 38. l. 22. cloud. p. 41. l. ult. (...). p. 44. l. penult. (...), lin. ult.
(...). p. 45. l. 1. (...). p. 48. l. 27. simple. p. 58. l. 21. pro (...) repone
(...). p. 60. l. 2. lege (...). p. 62. l. 4. Lactantius. l. 19. (...). p. 63.
l. 22. paluda. mento. p. 73. l. antepenult (...). In notis ad page cand. p^o
Apollonius repone Apol^onias. p. 74. l. 36. insere only between not and
contradict. p. 75. l. 2. lege twenty fifth. p. 76. Theological. p. 77 in marg.
l. 8. lege (...). l. 13. est. p. 80. l. 17. pro besides repone betides. p. 81.
l. 32. acts. p 82. l. 2. engraved. in marg. page ejusd. (...). p. 86. l. 8.
(...). ibid. (...) p. 86. in marg. Ba^ Nachman. p. 93. l. 4. integrity. l. 23.
Terpsichore. l. 29. after That Christ came into the world, adae to save
sinners. p. 99. l. 10. lege (...). p. 112. l. ult. dele to. p 114. l 9. lege
(...). p. 116. l. 11. and 12. Pharmuthus. p. 118. in stead of Whence some
errors in Chronology are occasioned, inscribe this title, The uncertainty of
Chronology. l. 30. pro them repone Sem. p. 120. in marg. l. antepenult. lege
Chaldaeis. p. 121. l. 2. dele 785. years, etc. v. 19 l. 14. lege to the end of
the eleventh comma. p. 124. l 17. Egyptian. l. 30. in that Scripture. p. 127.
l. 19. (...). p. 128. l. 24. (...). p. 129. l. 33. in the 23. year of
Nebuchad-rezzar. in marg. l. 5. 480. p. 134. insere between lin. 32. and 33. as
he computeth. p. 141. Karaeorum sententia de veteribus gen^s suae neomeniis, ad
paginae hujusce calcem imperfecte tradita. emendetur per ea quae praecedunt
pagina 138. p. 142. l 23. lege Maimon. Halach. Kiddusch Hachodesch. p. 143. l.
1. (...). l, 18. above. p. 144 l. 5. pax. p. ejusd. l. 14. pro objection repone
exception. p. 145. in marg. l. 6. sexdecim. p. 147. l. 19. outpac'd. p. 149. l
31. (...). ibid. (...). p. 152 l. 22. anni. p. 153. l. 8. 793. p. 155. l. 11.
post 29 days, add sometimes one of them 30, the other 29 days. p. 156. l. 1.
and 2. diametrally. p. 155. l. 4. pro or lege and. p 160. l. 22. secundum. p.
171. l. 24. after beyond it, add duly characterized by some Astronomicall
observation. page 172. l. 31. lege Eliah Ben Mosch (who was the author of the
manuscript used. p. 173. l 19. pro (...) repone (...). p. 175. l. 24. (...). p.
183. l* 15. pro rain repone the prevailing of the waters.


