CHEIRAGOGIA HELIANA. A MANUDUCTION To the Philosopher's MAGICAL GOLD: Out of
which Profound, and Subtle Discourse; Two of the particular Tinctures, That of
Saturn and Jupiter Conflate; and of Jupiter Single, are recommended as short
and profitable Works, by the Restorer of It to the Light. To which is added;
ANTPON ITPAS; ZOROASTER'S CAVE: Or, an Intellectual Echo, etc. Together with
The Famous Catholic Epistle of JOHN PONTANUS upon the Mineral Fire.

By Geo. Thor. Astromagus.

London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

To the Students in Magic, for Astrall Secrets:
FOr to those who look upon this Sacred Science, (so the wise Democritus calls
it) as on the Poet's (...)- Aristophan's Cuccow-Town in the Clouds, and name it
our Sparta; I have nothing to say but only this: That they are such as are shut
up, by a wonderful, and necessary providence of God, under the vast, heavy
cloud of the vulgar, from which they are never like to escape: And to the Giant
of Conceit, him that comes up boldly to lay his hands on this Vestal, without
the Ordinary Dignifications, competent Learning, Wit, and Manners, only, two
words -- (...); utrum homo, an Priapus? And so, I bid them both Farewell.

It is to you that I send this Golden Manual; a precious discourse on the
Magical Gold: Aurum enim nostrum non est aurum vulgi; and I shall give you an
account of my Election of This out of some hundreds that I have readd, after a
short Introit.

It is not unknown to you, that there is a certain Tongue, that is the Tongue
of Mysteries, called by Ficinus, Lingua Magica, and sometimes Lingua Angelorum;
and indeed, it is Lingua Ipsius Ternarii Sancti; for almost all the Hagiography
is in it; all the Cabalism of the Hebrews; and without the ambit of that,
nothing that is Admirable. This Tongue is not only absolutely necessary, and
wisely fitted to vail her Secrets from the unworthy and profane: but is also
bravely proportioned to the Olympus, or the Intellectual Imaginations of Man
(to speak the language while I praise it; and withal interpret the sublime
Demonstrations) (...) --.That Man, who is descended from God; has in himself a
sense of him; and turns his mind toward him; might, like a generous Scholar
be taught by Mystic words. -- And yet it is not every Artist who has offered at
this Tongue, that has the right felicity to it; nay indeed, not very many out
of the whole Sacra Corona, can be shown, who have offered so much as a Rose to
the true Venus of the Language, the sweet and secret Cytherea! (...) Cytherea!
Their words are often barbarous, their clauses and periods rude and harsh,
their whole composure so careless and loose; that the common Dignity of a man,
who comes to read, is utterly forgot and lost with the dignity of the Argument
it self. Then again, their most industrious Involutions; their Inversions of
Method; their confusions of the Works; their perversions of the sense of one
place by another, makes all so dark and intricate, that Lycophron's Cassandra,
where she beginns, and holds on, her heavy I ambics over Troy

(...). From the top of Ate, whither the Cow wandered; to theirs is mere
transient, and pervious Reading. But this Anonymus, whosoever he was, is so far
from such unskilfulnesse, and needless envy, that in an endeavor to give us
more frequent, and brighter strictures of the Light, he has run himself
almost out of the Magic Tongue. And is not that somewhat raru? Besides the
Discourse, a Charta Lacera of his says it, Scripta est igitur horis subcisivis
Aperta haec Tractatio a nobis, de Auro Philosophico, nec dum cognito, non
Chymicorum Stylo (ut solent) allegorico, sed plano, ut Intelligatur Tinctura
Solis, hactenus occultata, additis alijs, etc. And yet, you need not fear but
that he had a spark in him of that Custodia Theomaga which comes from God, and
holds to him; of which the learned Friar Bachon, Ubi Deus magnam posuit
virtutem, ibi etiam magnam posuit Custodiam; uti patet in Viperis, and Magorum
Lapide: for he has writ to the only fixed law of the Tongue -- Nil aperte, nil
operte; of which more in his Programma to the Book. -- And This I name the
first, though not the greatest of many Incitements, that made me choose it for
you, and bring it forth out of that Lethe where it has layen un-observed.

The second is, That in an extraordinary manner, and to some peculiarity too,
it treats de Ente primo Universalissimi Mineralis; Or, of the Universal most
universal. Atque haec est anceps Sententia!

The Third; That under the Most Universal, it represents and asserts to us,
several Tinctures particular; A thing somewhat doubted by an able Philosopher
of my acquaintance, who is now at the Greater Pyrotechny; and I was desirous to
give him my Authorities, from These Great Names, as well as my reasons, from
our Electricall Compositions.

The Fourth; That there are in it so many and such open glances at the Keys of
Art and Nature, as are not to be spied, and caught, in any other that I know.

The Fifth, That two of the particular Tinctures, that of Saturn and Jupiter
Conflate; and of Jupiter Single; are apparently short, and profitable works:
And those I would recommend to such as know the Initiall mother to all
Tinctures, and are not yet able to bear the charge (though not much) or wait
the time of the great Work.

The Sixth, That it is a little golden Tripos, ready to move it self, and give
answers to Enquiries concerning the Mineral and Metallic Tinctures of Isaac
Flander, Basil Valentine, and Theophrastus Paracelsus; and so may serve as a
brief Complex of all, or most of their Astral Learning.

The Seventh; That by Citations, it touches upon certain Curious Manuscripts,
no where else to be seen in their Sparks, and such Semantics to what they are.
Cum enim (says his Charta to This) perlongo Tempore hanc Artem sectatus
fuerim, nec tantum perpetuis Cogitationibus, and Studio Theoretico, multorumque
Manuscriptorum Inspectione, quorum mentio passim a nobis fit; sed manuali
insuper labor, and experientia propria, and attentaverim and compererim
plurima; licebit mihi hujus Rei conditionem, etc.

And these are the Reasons why you should highly Accept of it, as well as they
were to me to make the Choice.

The Second Tractate (collected from various reading, and not without some
experience of my own) is an Echo to this, and within it self; as on the other
hand, to old Pontan's Mineral Fire. I call it (...), The Cave of Mitra, and
render it Zoroaster's Cave; because in the Solitary horror of a huge Cave, the
ceremonies of Mitra, that is, of the Sun, were anciently erected by that great
Chaldean, and those no doubt of Magical Institute: such as were the Sacra
Eleusinia, the Holyes of Ceres Eleusina; concerning which, Eschylus was thought
to have spoken too much, and Sophocles has his Scintillations.

(...).

The Golden Key that locks the the Tongues of the Eumolpidae, the Priests of
Ceres.

ANd now upon the view of this little Astromagic Trias, and its in auguration to
the public light, I cannot let it pass without its own Aucile, That Scutcheon
that it wears from Heaven, that by its Stature it may not be taken for a
Parvus Demon Minorum Gentium. For a Genius of a lower order, or of the lesser
Nations. I say therefore, It has in it, the Green Salina; The viriditie of
Nature to Mineral Stars in Our Mercury, the spinging Emerald, analogous to
the Universal Spirit. And whosoever reads this book, though indeed but a small
volum to that Idea that it is ready to make, shall have no reason to, lament
the (...)- the loss of those books- The Sacred Commentaries of the Egyptians,
named to us by the Greeks: For by this, in a short time, he may not only
become a learned Initiant; but, by the favor of heaven upon his practice, a
perfect Hierophant to the best of Secrets.

Other curious Pieces I have in my eye, for those who are carious, and of a
various reading; those I resolve to draw out as I fit at my Athanar this
winter, and send them abroad with the same subscription to your service.

GEO. THOR: Astromagus.

PROGRAMMA AUTHORIS.
Sunt qui Saepe legant Chymicos Multumque libellos,
Nec dena atting ant post quoque Lustra scopum:
Nunc huc, nunc illuc incertis passibus acti,
Quos Labyrinthaeis flexibus ire patet.
Sunt alij invidia tacti, qui cuncta recondunt
Offusis Tenebris, impediuntque bonos.
Scilicet ut Solisapiant, Solique ptentur
Esse Sophi, queis nil quam sua sponsa placet.
Aequoris hanc inter Scyllam, vastamque Charybdin
Alchymicam, in medio nostra Carina natat.
Cholcidos Auriferam ut si quando ad littora Lanam,
Technophilus per me forte refer queat,
Inscribat Spoliis Anagrammate nominis apto,
Mi Nicolaus erat dux Niger Hapelius.
CHEIRAGOGIA HELIANA.
A MANUDUCTION to the Philosopher's Magical GOLD.
BASILIUS VALENTIN a Benedictin monk, and, by his country, of the higher
Alsatia, who, in the memory of our nearer ancestors, excelled in Magic and
Chemistry, in his Triumphal Chariot of Antimony, page 242. where he treats of
the Stone of Fire made of the Mercury of Antimony, writes directly to this
Sense: But the Stone of Fire (says he) does not Tinge Universally, as the
Philosophers Stone does, which is prepared out of the Essence of Gold: No
assuredly. For it has not alloited to It such an Efficacy by Its Virtue: but It
Tinges particularly, to wit, Luna into Sol besides Saturn and Jupiter, omitting
Mars and Venus, save only, that a little Gold, after projection upon Them, may
be had from them too by way of Separation: Item; This Tincture (says he) by
one part of it, cannot Transmute above five, that remain fixed in Saturn,
Antimony, quartation, and Adurents: when on the other side, The True, ancient,
and Great Stone of the Philosophers, transmutes to a kind of Immensity. In
like manner, The Stone of Fire in Augmentation of Itself, cannot further be
Exalted: But the Gold is pure and fixed. So a little after, page 244, The reader
(he adds) is to be advertised, That there are Stones to be found of more than
One kind, that Tinge particularly. For All the fixed powders That Tinge, I call
Stones; but One gives Tincture more Efficaciously and deeply than Another: as
the Philosophers Stone first, That has its right of precedence to All. This,
The Tincture of Sol and Luna, to Red and White, follows in Order: next to That,
the Tincture of the Vitriol of Venus and Mars, both of which have in their own
depth, the Tincture of Sol, if they be brought to a permanent fixity. The
Elixir of Jupiter and Saturn, for the Coagulation of Common Mercury to Gold,
follows That Tincture next. Last, comes the Tincture of Mercury It self. And
This is the Difference (says he) and Multiplicity of Stones, and Tinctures.
All these Tinctures, (he further adds) proceed from One and The same Seed, from
One and The same Initial mother, from whence the True Universal springs. Out of
the Compass of These (he adds) there is no other Metallic Tincture to be found
in any Thing, whatsoever name it is called by. The other Nobler and Ignobler
Stones, I mind not now; and will have nothing to do with them here, because
they are of no force but only to Medicin. In like manaer of Animal, Vegetal,
and Min (...) one, I make no mention, as they stand and are ordained only to
Med'cinal Use, and have not the least ability to the least Metallic work; the
power of All which, is to be found in an Excess under One Complex of the
Philosophers Great Stone. None of the Salts have any Tingent power: They are
only keys to the preparation of Stones, otherwise of themselves they can do
nothing; but as for the Salts of metals and minerals (now I say something to
thee, if thou can perceive aright what Difference of mineral Salts I think
upon) They are not to be omitted or rejected from thy works as to Astral
Tincture and this because we cannot want Them in our Compositions. For in These
is to be found that excellent Treasure, whence all sixation with perseverance,
takes its original, and has its True and Genuine Base. Thus far Basilius
Valentin.

This Sublime and Incomparable Philosopher before the Time of Paracelsus, lays
here the Foundation of the whole Universal Most Universal, and of all the
Stones and Tinctures in the mineral Kingdom; out of which, metallic Tinctures
(in other Things, by Themselves) ought not to be sought, as he attests in many
places. But in This, he most evidently shows, besides the Original, Great
Universal of the Seed and Initial mother, out of which the other Tinctures
proceed (although he names Them not expressly), that there are Six distinct
differing Stones and Tinctures, of which one Tinges still more powerfully then
Another can. And in the beginning of his Triumphal Chariot of Antimony, he
describes fairly to us The Stone of Fire, or Tincture of Antimony, whose
Mercury he teaches to precipitate with Oil of Vitriol out of Mars, and in his
own proper Sweet, red Oil, that is extracted from the Sulphur and Salt of
Antimony by the mean of the Spirit of Wine, and driven by the Retort, to
dissolve and afterward to fix it into a Tingent, fluent Stone. This indeed is
a particular Tincture of Antimony, and yet it is certain Paracelsus did so
Exalt it, and by subtle preparations, then by reverberations, afterward by
Sublimations, Digestions, Separations and Distillations; at last, by various
reductions and resolutions, (as himself affirms in the fourth of his
Archidoxes) brought it to such a point of high Temper, that all the admirable
virtue of it was not to be found by the Wit of man; That by which it past
through even all metals without diminution of its force, and made them perfect,
and yet to it self was still sufficient to Tinge more and more yet; nor That,
by which it was apparently able to propagate humane bodies Sound and Strong to
the Tenth Generation.

To Antimony, Sulphur is not unlike. The mineral (for both of Them are to be
referred to the vitriolates) of which, Theo hrastus says thus: That, That is
not In It, we may attain by the help of the Other; by, It, meaning the
magnetic Spirit of the World, which is the Philosophers True Magnesia. And
That (says he) will follow the Captain of Art (that is, Helias the Artist)
close. But after what manner the Stone of Fire out of the Three Intrinsics of
Antimony, by intervention of Oil of the vitriol of Mars and Venus, ought to be
prepared, Basilius teaches, not only in his Triumphal Chariot here and there,
but more collectedly, and in an open method, he seems to have treated of it in
the manuscript of his Manual practice.

After the Stone of Fire, next he mentions the Philosophers Stone, and gives it
the highest place, to wit, in respect of the other Tinctures Universal, but not
of the Universal Most Universal, as I shall show and prove anon. But he affirms
the Stone is made out of the Essence of Gold, and Truly indeed; but not as we
shall hear, without the Addition of the Salt of Nature both Simple and
Compound: whence Alchymia, the name of the Art, is pointed out; Halchymia, that
is, a fusion of Salt, by the Ingenious Chrysippus Fannian.

The third is the Tincture of the Sun, or of Gold The most Philosophical, and
follows immediately The Philosophers Stone. This consists of Gold Alone or
chiefly, and That Philosophical described by me, for which Cause it differs
from the Stone Itself, although there are various preparations of it. For
indeed, the Great Stone is made out of the Essence, and the very astral
Tincture of Gold: But this Tincture of the Sun, instead of the fusile Salt of
Nature, is content with his own Salt, and comes out of the three principles of
Gold Philosophical resolved, depurated, and conjoined, as we shall tell you
toward the End.

The fourth Tincture according to the Sentence of our Basil, is the Tincture of
Mars and Venus Conflate, that is, of the white, and red Spirit of their
vitriol, which is the Mercury and Sulphur of both, together with their fixed
Salt, out of which this Tincture is had: although without the vulgar Sol,
wherewith it is to be Incorporated, it cannot be perfected; because with It, it
is first to be fixed, as Basil witnesses, in his book of Naturals, and
Supernaturals, Chapter 2. page 28. in these very words, Because (says he) he
Tincture of the Sun is no where more abundantly found, then in Mars and Venus,
as in male and female, Their bodies are destroyed, and their Tingent Spirit is
driven forth, to Satiate opened prepared Gold with Its own blood, and by its
proper meat and drink to make it fugitive and volatile. Then anon, This volatile
Gold thus Satiate with Its own meat and its own drink, resumes its own blood,
and Dryes it up by Its own Internal Heat, by the help of a vaporous fire,
whence ensues another victory, which makes it fully fixed, and highly
perseverant, so that now the Gold is med'cin more then fixed. To the same Sense,
the same Author, some pages after adds; Although the Mars and Venus (of this
Art) do not stand in need of any vesture, but are able to give it to the other
five; yet I dare constantly affirm and assert it, that without Our Lion, (that
is, without Gold reserate and prepared as aforesaid) they can do just nothing
at all, because we do not see, and provide against the peremptory fixity of
their Mercury, and the malleability of their Salt, to have gain from them:
unless the Lion conquer them again in a great Scuffle, and both be brought not
only to perfect Solution, but final fixation, as he taught before.

But here we meet with a Great and notable Objection, that bids us stand to
answer it. For Basil, in the twenty ninth page of this Chapter, does not only
say plainly, That the Tincture of Venus and Mars without Gold resolved (as was
said a little before) can do nothing: but he also affirms of the vulgar Gold,
whose Tincture is to be joined with the Tincture of Mars and Venus; That the
Lord of all the planets (namely Gold) is not able to impart to his Subjects any
thing of his own vesture: because nature has given to it but only One rich
Suit; unless the Servant first do further enrich his Lord. And a little after,
he adds: The King cannot communicate with his Servants any of his hereditary
honor, nor give them a lasting Court-gallantry of habit, unless that first he
do receive, pensions and Tributes from his Subjects. And now, since This is so,
It may be asked, and that indeed not without an eminent cause, How it should be,
That the Tincture of Sol, according to its Essential Difference can stand off
from the Tincture of Venus and Mars, or any other of the Tinctures; namely if
the vulgar Gold be not able to Tinge, unless Itself be first Tinged by the
Spirit of Its Subjects? Some to untie this knot have betaken Themselves to the
minera of Gold as yet Green, as also to the Marcasits; and I deny not but They
may do very much, because they are not destitute of Spirits. And thence, as
they contend, the Tincture of Sol, and not from fused Gold, is to be prepared
and had. Others look for the Tincture of Sol, not out of Gold simply resolved,
but such as is first brought into his principles distinct, and after certain
Depurations, made up again, by a handsome natural coalition. For the Artists
(such as they are) that do not add to the Mercury of Gold, the Sulphur of Sol,
but Sol it self, do not properly belong to us here, and therefore without
contemning them, we answer thus; That the Silver and Gold that Nature has put
into our hands upon her own Simple provision, is not so much required to the
Tinging of Sol, as is Another more Sublime, and much better, Our Gold, the
Philosophers Gold, in which there is the Tingent Spirit; of which I shall
presently discourse, when first I have run over all the Tinctures of Basil.

The fifth Tincture Basil proposes in Jupiter and Saturn, and that as extending
to the Coagulation only of Common mercury to Silver namely, and to Gold, to
wit, by their red and sweet Oil by Art prolected from their Centers, as he, in
more then one place intimates to those that can read. And to this place also
belongs the Doctrine that Paracelsus delivers in his book of Vexations,
concerning the composition of Saturn, Luna, and Mercury. But here, I cannot
hold from telling you plainly, that Basil speaks of the vulgar Saturn, and
vulgar Jupiter; both of which, while they still remain in their own minera, are
of a higher consideration, virtue, and force: and to That purpose, in his
Triumphal Chariot of Antimony, where he speaks of the fixation of vulgar
mercury, he has these words, page. 87. Mercury can be brought to no
Coagulation, unless there be an addition to it of the other metallic Spirits,
and that Coagulation is most efficaciously, and most powerfully of all effused
in the mother of Saturn, without which it cannot be done, unless thou have the
Philosophers Stone itself. And so again of Saturn, in his book of Natural, and
Supernatural Things, cap. 9. page 121. Every man is to know, and think upon it,
That no Transmutation of metal can be had out of Saturn, because of his most
excessive Cold, except only the Coagulation of the common mercury: because the
Cold Sulphur of Lead, can stop and tame the current, vagrant, hot spirit of
Mercury, and take it away, if the process be rightly instituted. And to these
a little after he subjoynes: Wherefore see thou do not reject Saturn, or look
scornfully upon it to fling it behind thee: for indeed his nature and virtue is
yet known but to a few; and it is from this Saturn that the True and great
Stone takes the Initials of its Celestial, flagrant color; it is from this
metal, and this alone; and by the Influence of this Planet is given to It a key
of perseverance through putrefaction: because of Citrine no read can be made,
unless, from the beginning, out of Black, a White be raised. These Things he
--.Which as they are of a higher search and consideration, so they seem to
belong to a Secreter Saturn, namely, the Philosophical, which does arise out of
the putrefaction of Sol, and the Salt of nature, although a certain excellent
Doctor of Law labors to evince in his Ruricola, That in the very minera of
Lead of a certain sort, whose flowers are double, there is a very great force:
the same also appears to be proved by the Tincture called the Aromatic of the
Philosophers out of the mercury of Lead; to say no more of particular
Tinctures. Hence Paracelsus, in his book of Vexations, are rather of fixations,
cannot sufficiently extol that Interior Spirit of Saturn, which is able to kill
and slay the other Spirits, or mercuries of the metals: as I my self have
sometimes seen bars of perfect proved Gold out of the mercury of common Lead,
as they were shown to me five years ago by a very learned, wise man.

In the sixth and last place, Basil makes mention of the Tincture of mercury It
self. But That Tincture is prepared either by the mediation of the Calx of
Egge-shels, as Paracelsus has it in the fifth book of Ulcers patent; or is
elevated by the vitriol of Mars and Venus, resolved, distilled, and coagulated,
as you may see in the same Author, concerning the Death and Metamorphosis of
Things and more to That in Rupecissa, to whom I restore that little book of the
Tincture of mercury in the Second part of Gratarolus: or else Its Sublimate, by
help of the malagma of Jupiter, is resolved and distilled, in which the mercury
is calcined, and coagulated with metals, the very way that Basil himself seems
to have taken, in his book of the Twofold Mercury of Sol, page 108. in that
part of the Repetition of the Great Stone. For, the way of proceeding with
mercury is very various and multiform: and yet it is easily reduced into a
liquor by fire with the help of the powder of beaten coal; which liquor
afterward by a certain Artifice, is able to Extract the Soul of Sol. It is
also precipitated by it self, and fixed with the Tinctures of Venus, Mars, and
Sol: but chiefly it is nourisht with its own milk, to which perchance thou
may Interpret that of Sybilla Enimeria, when She says: Sitting upon a plain
and well-disposed Seat, thou give It of its own broth, that is, milk sent
down from heaven; which yet again may be applied to the Universal, great stone,
etc. in the Sybillin fragments of Philip de Lignamine the Sicilian Knight. Of
This too, take that speech of Geber the Arab. when he says: If of mercury
alone, (mineral he means, though taken from another place) thou can tell how
to make the Stone, thou have looked for and found a most excellent nature, and
precious skill. Hence Basil, in his Triumphal Chariot, page 88. For mercury
(says he) is a pure mere fire and nothing else. And thence it is that It is
burnt by no fire, and that no kind of fire can captivate it to its final
Destruction. It either flies away suddenly, resolving it self spiritually
into an Oil Incombustible; or remains after its fixation so constant, that it
is not possible for any man to take any thing from it: insomuch that whatsoever
can be made out of Gold, the same may be made out of It by Art. For after the
right Coagulation of It, it is in all things like to Gold: because it comes
from the same root, the same Stock, and that same Unity that Gold does. With
these agree those other precious Sayings of his that he has scattered up and
down when he speaks of the Star of Sol, and the star of Mercury, which Two
being joined together in their radious power, opens to us at a certain time the
Clossets of the most secret Wisdom. See his Triumphal Chariot, page 71, and
72. 91, and 92. I should not need to take much pains in explaining the words of
Basil, if That Tractate which he writ upon the Astrum of Sol and Mercury, were
not so enviously suppressed by some. Nor are we ignorant that those by some are
applied to the minera of Sol, the process whereof by the wet way and the
mediation of Nitre and Sal-gemme is instituted so, that first Three Principles
are sequestered, and then depurated by Spirit of Wine: and first of all ascends
the Astrum of Mercury White, his Sulphur and Salt remaining downwards, whereof
the Salt is extracted from the Sulphur by distilled rainwater, and when it is
purged of all its Terrestrial faeculence, it congeales into a vitriol under a
triangular and quadrangular form. Out of these Three Depurates, is again
extracted a new entire minera of Sol, and the Extract for some Times cohobated
by affusion of a New Aqua Regis, until the mouth of the Lion (as it is called)
be well opend, which in Digestion is circulated; and afterward, the water
being drawn away, ascends the bright Mercurial Spirit. In This the Vitriol
prepared before is first Dissolved, and Digested, till it deposes all its
feculence. And this oleaginous, clear water, dissolves the Sulphur above named
and in a double proportion of it. To these Three parts are added four of the
Mercurial Astrum, and so Digested into a Balny for forty days, till all pass
into a Green, viscous Liquor, and afterward in a Physic furnace be coagulate
to a fixed med'cin. Others following the dry way separate a minera from Gold,
and this Gold Impregnant by its own Spirit they distill gently by Retort, and
so, that of a pound they have scant a dram of its sweet Spirit. An ounce of
this for the purpose prepared, they shut up in a small Glass, decocting it
carefully six months by degrees of fire, till it turn to a fixed redness, which
passes through the Argent vive mineral collected without fire, and makes it fit
and able to turn the body of Gold into Tincture. Now whether These, or the
other look better for the Astrum of Basil's Sol and Mercury, I leave for others
to Judge, because I have not yet seen That Tractate of Basil de Astro Solis.

But that I may speak yet more clearly of that Mercury that is known among the
vulgar, we must compare those things that Theophrastus gives us about
Congealing the Spirit of mercury into a Saphir Stone by the Oil of Vitriol, in
his book of minerals, with Those that his Scholar Phaedro the Great, relates of
the Soul of the Hermaphrodite, and thence it will easily appear to them of the
Chemical monarchy, from whence exists, and how is had, That Sapphiric Flower of
the Hermaphrodite, which is the admirable mystery of the Greater world; Of
which (says he) even one dram after its projection upon three thousand drams
of melted Gold and those cast upon a thousand of Brass, turns all into most
perfect pure Gold. Thus says Phaedro Rodochaeus: whose process in this Secret
is not yet known to all of Us.

To These deservedly we may add, what the most experienced man, and the
profoundest searcher of Nature, John Isaac the Flandrian (for from him all
others after him, learnt as from another Hermes) has in his Tractate of the
Oil of vitriol; And also of the Oils of Mercury, and of Antimony brought to
Tincture perfectly fixed. Nor can I involve This in silence, That of many
metals and minerals put together, the same Author Teaches a Tincture does
arise; and such a Tincture as is able to fall upon a Thousand parts of Silver,
to transmute and Tinge it to Gold. And not Inferior to This, is that Mercurial
and Solar Tincture of the most Illustrious Duke of Bavaria, Lord George The
Rich, to whom, as our Ancestors have left to us, immense riches did accrue from
this Art. But besides, That old saying; Make mercury by mercury, by water
mercurial (to wit, out of Gold) presents to us in Truth The same Things. And
does not Palingenius in his Capricorn-book, the tenth, allude near to the same
sense? when he says,

Hunc Juvenem Arcadium Infidum, nimiumque fugacem
Prendite, and immersum stygiis occidite lymphis: etc.
This young Arcadian faithless, vagrant knave
Snap up, and drown him in the stygian wave. and That that follows.
But of This enough already. For I do not certainly know, whether that of the
Helvetian Doctor, in his book of the Treasure of Treasures, writing of
minerals, may be referred hither, or not: Nature (says he) begets a mineral in
the bowels of the Earth, of which there are Two kinds, which are found in many
places and Lands of Europe. But the best, in the figure of the Greater world,
is in the rising of the Astrum of the Sphere of the Sun. The Other, in a
meridional Astrum, which is in its first flower, produced by the Astre of the
Viscus terrae, the Glue of the Earth; and in its first Coagulation is found
redd, in which all the mineral flowers and colors lie concluded. Which words
literally understood seem to be spoken of the minera of Mercury and Gold,
because Theophrastus (as also his Scholar Phaedro Magnus) attributes all the
Colors of minerals, in his book of the Generation and Metamorphosis of Things,
to Argent vive as the mother of metals. Although there are some, that
pertinaciously fit This to the Redd Translucid minera of Silver, called
Rotguldigertz by the Germans. But I, instead of Gold, should think it rather to
agree to Another certain minera, which is feracious of Gold, and fertile to It,
and yet not Gold It self. To this is not unlike, what Basil in his books of
Supernatural and Natural Things, Chap. 3. page 45. says of the Spirit of
mercury in these words: Here the question might very well be put to me, How
this Spirit of Mercury, is to be got, and had by Us? Upon This Great question
(he adds) One might very well with a strong desire expect the Answer; which
yet I will not conceal from any one, but lay it open faithfully, so far as by
the will of God, it is lawful to do it, in manner following: Take (says he) In
the name of God, The Redd minera of Mercury, that looks like Cinnabar
(factitious.) Take, besides, The best Minera of Gold that thou can get:
bruise and powder Them both together in an Equal pondus, before They have come
at any fire, etc --.in the same place.

It is very well known, That of a certain minera fertile to Sol, and the liquor
of Mercury, by a monthly Apposition of It, there grew up to a German Lady, a
perpetual harvest, or Crop of Gold. The Gold rising first in its Color Green
as Grass: afterward by little and little the Spires passing into Gold, ready
to be reapt by Cizars. There is, besides, Another particular Tincture that
terminates in the Deep-red Crystals of Sol; when it is sublimed, and has before
grown out into sprayes, and is almost consentaneous to the Other.

But we are to take notice, That Basil does not speak of the Spirit of Mercury
and Sulphur after One way, but diversely; sometimes of the Stone, sometimes of
the Tincture of Venus and Mars; sometimes again of the most Universal: whence
not much after, Chap. 4th of the Spirit of vitriol out of Venus and Mars: The
Genuine and True Sulphur (says he) is Incombustible. For It is a True and a
mere Spirit, out of which Incombustible Oil is prepared and had: and It is
That very Sulphur, out of which the Sulphur of Gold from the same root proceeds
and is made. By which words it is not hard to be conjectured, what he would
have us secretly to Understand by his best Minera of Gold, as he speaks of It
in other and other places, according to the variety of the Subject, of which he
treats: Therefore he adds; For this Sulphur is rightly to be called and
baptized, The Sulphur of All the Philosophers (as Paracelsus points It out too
in his book of minerals, Chap. 8th. of vitriol; and Basil likewise in the
Chapter of vitriol, page 133.) because in It is all wisdom found even to the
Spirit of mercury, which antecedes it --. But what That Spirit of Mercury is,
of which he writes there, whether That expressed in the Tincture in the
Manuscript, to wit, the white Spirit of the vitriol of Venus from Mars, or of
the Universal Most Universal, I leave it to the judgment of the learned. For he
says, That the Astrum both of Sol and Mercury, and the Mercury and Sulphur of
the Philosophers, proceed from One root, at first indeed a white Spirit, and
That he plainly calls the Philosophers Mercury: for afterward there follows
(says he) a red Spirit, that is, the Sulphur of the Philosophers and their
oil Incombustible, from both the Tinctures of Venus and Mars meeting together
in one womb. To this purpose in his Chapter of Vitriol see more page 132. and
how profoundly he plays the Philosopher the Analogically de Spiritu Albo ad
Album, and ad Rubeum de Rubeo -- Of the white Spirit to the white, and to the
Red of the Red.

It appears therefore, That the red minera of Paracelsus his Cinnabar, and the
red minera of Basilius his Mercury, agree very near; and that the best minera
of Gold, with both, may be understood not only of the common Mines which nature
gives us, but of others, to wit of Antimony, the minera of Mars, and chiefly of
the vitriol of Venus out of Mars. But of these, as the Greeks speak, (...), by
the way, to help us to understand Basilius speaking so variously of the Spirit
of Mercury; which is the manner of those Chemists that have tried many Things,
and draw on one shoo upon many. For there are Many ways that aim particularly
at One End, not only by One, but by many, and indeed diverse, Things: Against
which Doctrine many have their Opinations.

Therefore since our Basil reckons up to Us distinctly these Six Explicit
Tinctures, which we have discoursed so freely before: and yet in the 244 page of
his Triumphal Chariot, professes also openly, That All the Six Stones of
metallic Tinctures arise from One Seed, and are All by One Initial mother in
their first Generation; So proseminated and bred, that from The same mother the
True Universal has its lineal profluence; it is clear as noonday, that besides
and above the Solific Essence both of the vulgar, and Our Philosophical Gold,
there is yet Another sort of Gold, and That more Secret and hid, from which the
Universal Most Universal issues forth, as the Seventh and most perfect of All,
rising from its own proper root, that is, its own Earth and Water, and in That
much exceeds the very Philosophers stone Itself; because out of It alone, both
That Stone, and the Other particular Tingents, are formed and flow
primordially: and more then that, because from It all the other Things of all
the world, not only in the Mineral, but also in the Vegetal, and Animal
Kingdom derive their life, hold it still, and by the Crearor are so ordained
to their Increment and multiplication. But now what manner of thing this is,
and in what thing placed, although it may in some sort be conjectured by what
was said before, (The Green Line casting it self every where, and encompassing
all); yet we shall speak more of it below in its place.

All the question now, after we have reckoned up all the Tinctures, with their
Multiplicity and diversity in the Mineral Kingdom, is to be transferred by
us, Ad Aurum Philosophorum Nostrum, to Our Philosophers Gold. What it should
be, viz. out of which, the Tincture of Sol is chiefly to be prepared, besides
the Universal Most Universal, and the other Tinctures named above. We say
therefore; That this Gold of the Philosophers, (for of the others, as of the
Universal Most Universal, we speak not now), is Gold, that is produced by the
Philosophers out of the Metalls Inferior, and of lesser value; and not by
separation alone, but by the benefit of nature working by Art in an Actual
transmutation. Therefore it is not vulgar Gold, which by nature in her degree
is only simply perfect, and therefore now lies under rather an Expiration, or
declination of its Seed; than that it should be vegetous and fruitful to a
progeneration of other Gold. Concerning this thing the most Expecienced
Minerallist and Metall-man Andreas Solea, published by the famous Montanus, is
to be heard, who in his Book of Minerals Metallic, Chap. the 9th. Of expiring
Metal, Septurie the second, writes thus: When Nature with the body of Metal
is come as high as Gold, then it descends again, or moves down ward for want of
Aliment by its hunger. Again, in the end of the Seventh Chapter, Septurie the
first, Of the Ascent and Descent of Metalls; after he has recounted, how finely
nature ascending Calcines the whole body of Luna, which Calx is nothing else
but the body of Sol, he adds thus: As for Descention, thou may easily
perceive and understand it by Ascension. For this is the difference, that in
the Ascent it first acquires Tincture, before a body: but in the Descent,
sooner looses that Tincture. And therefore Metalls that are Descendent are much
more imperfect then those that are Ascendent. Thus he. Therefore showing where
the Seed and Tincture is fruitful or not fruitful in the Metalls, The
Ascension (says he) and Descension of Metalls, could not be made, but that
they all agree in their seed and are of a Consanguinity. Item; In their Ascent
Silver and Gold have the same seed, which in the Ascent transmutes Silver to
Gold: but in the Descent, transferrs it into Copper. Then concluding, he says
most openly: The Seed must pass out of its own body into another, or else it
cannot be fruitful, or fertile. Thus far Solea. And whosoever will not give
Credit to his various experience, will believe no body at all. The cause
therefore appears, why Tinctures are not made out of Common Gold, unless that
(as Basil says) be first exalted by the Spirit of Its Subjects. For we must
look for a more noble, and more perfect Gold, that is in its Ascent, in which
the Tingent, Green, Vegetant spirit and fruitful Seed is; which by Solea's
intimation and pointing out, is Gold produced from Inferior Metalls. Why else
(says Count Trevisan) should we take nine Months time to serve our turn (to
spend it, he means, upon the Exaltation of Common Gold by the Tincture of
Venus, as Basil teaches)? For we might take that body, as nature has made it,
and laid it ready for our use. Here you see that Gold simply given us by
nature, cannot of it self produce Tinctures: but another sort of Gold.
Therefore he adds: Our Gold is not the Gold of the Vulgar, as all Philosophers
say, because the common Gold is dead: but ours is impregnate with Spirit and is
a hueing Gold. Hence John Clopinel de Mehun in his answer to the Lamentation of
Nature; Gold (says he) is known to be the Treasure of all the Mines: and yet
it has neither matter, nor form of so great power, as to exceed its own
perfection. For it has no greater power then to perfect it self, let the Artist
strive, and do what he can. To destroy it, and to reduce It, would be a foolish
work, since out of it no more virtue, nor power can be had, than what it has
from its proper nature to complete it self.

No Reduction can be made of those things, that Nature perfects into a species
or Individual, unless first they be corrupted. And after Corruption no
Generation is made like to the species, unless perchance there be a Regresse
to the Genus. Wherefore the Destruction of Gold makes nothing to the
Construction, or making of it, because by its destruction nothing can be made.
For it being once dead, its Substance dies too, and So that out of It no other
Argent vive, or Metal, can be had any more, etc.

That therefore we may expressly and solidly confirm our Sentence and
Conclusion concerning the Philosophers Gold from the lower Metalls, we will
give you evident Testimonies from many eminent Philosophers. And first,
Basilius in his manuscript, Declaration of his manual practice, writing thus of
the Tincture of Sol: Thou ought to know (says he) that Our Stone is made of
Its own proper Essence, and that it transmutes Other metals into Gold. Which
Gold (he adds) must again be Destroyed, and Turned into a better Stone. Here
very evidently (as I think) he shows, That This Gold is first to be made,
before it can again be destroyed, or Turned into a better Stone: whence
likewise in his German poetry, near the beginning, he delivers the same Sense:

O Sol, Regis in hoc qui munere fungeris Orb:
Luna Genus servat multiplicatque tuum.
O Sol, Thou do the Office of a King in this World:
And, It is Luna that preserves and multiplyes thy Kind.
In which he shows that Luna is required to the propagation of Sol, as in the
following lines, when expressly he adds;

Sum, Luna, precor, ne deseruisse velis me,
Quum Venus in bivio jam sit, ut illa decus.
Induviasque tuas ipsa induat: ut libet Ambo
Ex illa compti, divitiisque Simul
Ditati simus! quod Te meminisse subinde
Addecet. Hoc etenim nunc Tibi linquo. Vale.
I earnestly pray Thee, Good Luna, forsake me
not, when Venus now stands doubting between
Two-wayes; that She may put upon her self
Thy Clothes and beauty: and that Both of Us,
being so made Fine, may also be made Rich
By her! This thou should Think upon;
This I leave to Thee! And farewell.
So in his following Verses upon Venus, he witnesses further, saying thus: Ejus
filium (nempe Antimonium,) etc --. That her Son (to wit, Antimony) does warm
and heat the body of Luna, that she may be made pregnant, and leave behind her
a progeny of mighty virtue and vast Increase: meaning our Gold Philosophical.
But from Basilius more below: Now let us come to that most Excellent Author of
Twelve Tractates upon the Stone, whose Anagram is, Qui Divi Lesch Genus Amo,
that is, Michael Sendivogius, That Polander, whom Oswald Crollius in the
preface of his Basilica, calls Heliocantharus Borealis, The Northern Beetle, in
whose hands he saw with great admiration and amazement, the wonderful Virtue
and Operation of that Tincture commonly called the Philosophers Stone. Thus
therefore Sendivow in the proaem to his Tractates. Although there are to be
found some Idle fellows which either out of Envy or malice, or fear of the
detection of their Impostures, cry it abroad, That the Soul of Gold may be
extracted from Gold, and so returned to Another body with vain and pompous
Ostentation, not without the loss of Time, Labor, and Cost: Let the Sons of
Hermes for certain know, that their Extraction of Souls (as they call it)
whether from Gold or Silver, by any vulgar Alchymistical way, is nothing but a
mere persuasion: which yet is not believed by many, till at length by
Experience, the only Sole mistrisse of Truth, its verified to Them to their
Loss. On the otherside, (he goes on) he that in the Philosophers way can Tinge
the least piece of metal, with gain, or without gain, really to the Color of
Sol, or Luna, permanent in all the probates requisite: he, I dare very well
affirm, has Nature's Doors set open to him, to search out further and higher
Secrets, and by the blessing of God, to be an Adeptus, and attain them. These
words do not so much refer to the artifice of Extracting a Tingent Anima, by
which a way should be laid open to higher Secrets: as to the very, right
Philosophical Gold produced out of the Inferior metals; by the Use of which
Gold (as I shall show out of the Author) a way is made to us of higher Things.
But what he discourses of the Anima of Gold vulgarly Extracted, we must know
that Anima cannot transmute, although It may induce Color, as Paracelsus does
witness abundantly to us in his book of Minerals, Chap. the seventh, to these
words; This is altogether True, If the Sulphur of Gold be projected upon
Silver, it colors it indeed, but does not fix it. And Basil glances at the
same in his Repetition of the Great Stone, page 113. Rightly therefore
Sendivogius in his ninth Tractate of the Commixture of Metals. The Chemists
(says he) know very well how to transmute Iron to Copper, or Venus, without
Sol: But if they could tell (he further adds) how to administer the Nature of
Sol to these mutations, they should find the most precious Treasure of all, a
Thing more precious then any is. And what Other Thing I beseech you is This,
than, not the Common Gold, but Our Gold Philosophical; of which the Tincture of
Sol, the most precious Treasure may afterward be prepared? wherefore (says
he) we are not to be Ignorant, what metals are to be put together and
conjoined, and what nature corresponds to what. Then concluding; There is
(says he) One metal (metal he says) that has the power of Consuming others
(videlicer, by Corroding): And why? For it is almost (says he) as Their water,
and almost Their mother. Only One Thing, videlicet the Radical humidity of Sol
and Luna, holds out and resists, and is meliorated by It. Here he might seem by
the letter to speak altogether of the vulgar Saturn. But Gold and Silver are
not properly made Intrinsically better by vulgar Saturn, although they be
forinsically purged. Therefore thou must take it of another Saturn, with which
if Gold close eleven times, it is brought down to Death, and afterward put
into its own matrix (namely Mercury) it conceives and generates the most
excellent fruits. But since no other Saturn but the vulgar, or That which is
made by Transmutation out of the Regulus of Antimony per Coementum, as also out
of the vulgar Mercury resolved in an Aqua fort, is actually metal; the words
before, may not unfitly be referred, to the Tincture of the Vitriol of Venus
and Mars (for this is almost as their water, and almost their mother, by which
the Radical moisture of Sol is indeed meliorated:) for our reserate prepared
Gold, is saturated by It, and promoted to fixed Tincture, as Basil himself
witnesses: because Gold cannot Tinge of Itself, unless Itself be first
Tinged. Therefore Sendivogius adds: Sed ut detegam, etc. But that I may
discover it (says he) It is called Chalybs, or our Steel; And Truly Chalybs,
yet not vulgar, but Such as is Transmuted into Venus, to which the Nature of
Sol is to be intimately mingled, videlicet by the Vitriol of Both, not common
Vitriol. And to This sense That rwordr Apotelesma belongs: Visitans In eriora
Terrae Rectificando Invenies Occultum Lapidem Veram Medicinam; By its Initials
making the word VITRIOLUM. But That Send vogius adds: Si undecies coit Auram
cum eo, If Gold close eleven times with It (for it does not come over the helm
unless it be often joined with Gold) The Gold emits its Seed and is
debilitated almost to death, as we may see in the manuscript practice of
Basil's Tincture; it is to be thus taken, that by putrefaction after the
distillation of Both, it is at length mortified, that thence it may be raised
again into a New Life: Then (says he) The Chalybs conceives and breeds a Son
more noble than the father (vulgar Gold), that is, It generates for us a Sol,
or magical Gold, from whence afterward the Tincture of Sol, from Sol
Philosophical exists. Hence he adds: postea cum Semen jam Nati: Afterward when
the Seed of that which is now born (that is, the Sulphur of Gold Philosophical)
is put into its own matrix (that is, it be admixt to his own Salt and Mercury)
it purges the matrix, and makes it a thousand times fitter to bring forth the
most excellent fruit, that is, it brings forth for us a Tincture from Gold
Philosophical, which after Its fermentation tinges thousands, as Basil affirms.
But Sendivogius tells us more, and that we ought intensely to mind; There is
besides Another Chalybs, which is like to this, made ready to our hand by
Nature, such as is able by its admirable virtue, out of the rays of Sol to
Elicite that, that somany men have sought, and is the Beginning of our Work:
understanding not so much the minera of Mars, or Chalybs native, as a certain
kind of mineral Opposed to Mars, of which in his last Tractate he says: Our
Salt is mercury: and then adds Our Sol and Luna (whence this Stone of the
Philosophers exists) is Obducted, or covered over with the Sphere of Saturn:
which mineral indeed receives into Itself the beams of Sol (that is, its
quintessence), and by a very wonderful power promotes it to a tingent Stone.
Nihil nis magis Opertum, nihil magis etiam Apertum: si modo habeamas apertos
oculos ad ixtelligendum rad ces minerarum and Simplices and Compositas.

Nothing more hid, nothing more open then these things; If we but have our Eyes
open to see and understand the roots of mines both Simple and Compound. To this
sense the same Author, tract, the 10th. Gold (says he) can give its fruit and
Seed; in which It multiplyes itself by the Care and Wit of an Artist, that
knows how to promote Nature. But, both in the practice of the eleventh
Tractare, and in the Theorie of the third, he strictly caution's that we take
not vulgar Gold by Itself simply to make the tincture of the Sun: And in his
practice thus he does it. But be thou admonisht by me in this, that thou take
not Gold and Silver vulgar: for those are dead. Take ours (says he) for those
are living. Then in his Theorie: But take along this Caution with thee, that
thou seek not that point of nature, in vulgar metals, in which It is not: for
those metals, and especially vulgar Gold, are Dead; but Ours are Living, and
have Spirit, and they by all means are to be taken. Thus Senaivogius: In which
(I confess) he does not only discourse of this our Philosophical Gold, but
also of the Great Universal. However it is, he does altogether Exclude the
vulgar Gold Simple, unless it be first driven from the minera's, and Exalted
by Art.

But let us consult Theophrastus Paracelsus, and see what he says, or rather
demonstrates in his Praxis, of this our Gold Philosophical. He teaches in his
book of minerals, Chapter the seventh, to make the Epatica of mineral Sulphur,
from whence afterward the red Oil is distilled, where to these words. Here we
must observe (says he) that any Silver that is put into this Oil, and there
remains its due time, remains black, and casts its Solar Calx to the bottom.
But before its due time, it leaves a Calx not fixed, but somewhat Volatile and
Immature, (note the word Immature for that that follows) but if it attain its
term (he adds) and come to its just petiod, then It Fffects All Things that
are to be done: It is not good to say more of this thing. Out of this one place
alone, it more then evidently appears, what this Gold springing from Silver can
do, of which (he says) it would not conduce to speak more: and yet he
confesses it does do all things that are to be done, videlicet, whatever the
Artist desires, or wants. This is a most Conspicuous place, and by no means to
be infirmed, or eluded, that it may not be the palmary of Confirmation to our
Sentence, concerning the living magical Gold, and so much (I say) the more
certain One, by how much Paracelsus is Greater then All. But this Oil of
Sulphur is nothing else, but the first Ens of Vitriol, which by its Acidity is
sufficiently argued; as also from this, that if you put to This oil, of the
common Sulphur, and twice as much of fountain water, and afterward boil in it
Lamels of Steel till a Third remain, presently as soon as it is cold, a most
Green Vitriol is generated there. And This a certain late Writer, taking it
from a Disquisition of mine, and mistaking me, inserted to his Tyrociny, and
bragged, It was the Sal of Mars. But let us return to Paracelsus. He writes in
his Manual, where he treats of the preparation of the Tincture of Sol, as
appears by the End of that discourse (for there he speaks in plain Terms of
Potable Gold, and the liquor of Sol) in these words to our purpose, Sum
Electri Mineralis Immaturi, etc. Take of the Mineral Elect um Immature (that
is, such as is between mature and immature). And what is this Electrum I pray
you? Electrum, with Paracelsus, is no other Thing but a metal which is made by
Art out of another metal; So that the white Venus out the Red, is called an
Electrum by him, although to Color only, and not to Things, they stand Distant
from one Another. Hence in the book of Minerals thus defining; Electrum (says
he) is a metal from another metal (namely by the benefit of Nature, and help of
Art). Whence also, in another place, The Crama of all the metals joined
together in Mercury, as a certain thing elicit from Seven, he calls Electrum.
It is therefore consequent that he here, by the name Electrum, does not speak
of vulgar metals by nature's hand simply given, or as they are constituted in
their mines, or fused above; but of those that out of other metals are produced
by Art, as when Venus is made of Mars, which indeed is much better, and of
greater power (as Experience teaches) than Common Venus. And so likewise, the
Gold produced out of Luna by the oil of the Epatica of Sulphur (as he taught
above) is much better then the vulgar, because it effects even All things (as
Paracelsus says) that are to be Effected: and may indeed be so Exalted that it
would drive any man to admiration. But why does he call it Mineral, and
Immature? Because it is from the Mineral, and That Immature. For it is made by
minerals, as by the Oil of Sulphur from Luna which is imperfect, but yet in a
very near way to be brought up to maturity. Therefore before it compleats its
term, it is immature, having still Extraneous Superfluities: wherefore he
teaches us to wash and purge the Electrum from all Superfluity the Chemical way
by Stybium, till it attain the Exquisit Degrees of Gold. And what do you say,
that Gold Itself (although produced from Luna) in comparison of the Stone and
Solar Tincture, is a thing yet Imperfect, and so in a manner Immature? as
Paracelsus himself in the same place a little after declares: Nature (says
he) has left it imperfect in its place, because she did not intend to make the
Stone, but the Matter of It, which indeed without preparation is but a
dimidiate, lame Thing. This place is accurately to be perpended, that we may
understand, what he here calls the work of nature respectively (as is the
natural Transmutation of Our Argent into Gold by the Oil of the Epatica of
Sulphur) and what the work of Art, videlicet, in preparing the Tincture
Philosophical, because where Nature Ends in making our Gold, there Art begins
in the preparation of the Tincture of magical Gold: although on both hands the
Artist comes as minister of Nature, bestowing indeed more labor in the work of
Art, less in the work of ready Nature. To Theophrastus in astipulation
Bartholomeus Korndorferus is succenturiat, by whom the Gross, and not yet
Clarified Gold, is commonly called Corpus, and Corpus Iners, a Body, and an
Inert Body. And now to produce him here as a fit witness in so great a cause,
in his Tractate of Luna and its Defects, not unlike to that of Truh^^ius, thus
he writes: There is a short way by which Silver may be brought to Such a point,
that it may be made the best Gold, and best of all to be esteemed, because to
Our Tinctures no better can be used. What more express then these words, what
I pray you more evident, and with Theophrastus more consentient? But he adds
somewhat more, by which he wonderfully illustrates Theophrastus about the
Solution of the Immature Electrum. Whosoever (says he) can maturate Immature
Gold (so he calls Our Argent) and turn It into a right liquor, so that it is
separate from its Earth, has got the fountain of Sanity. Hence he extols that
Saying of Paracelsus when in his book of Vexations he affirms: That true
Alchymie only by one Art teaches us to make Silver and Gold of the five
Imperfect metals: And to use no other Receipts but only these, Tantum de
metallis, ex metallis, per metalla, and cum metallis, fieri perfecta metalla.
And then explicating that Oracle, and showing how it is to be understood: Magna
Arcana in metallis abscondita, etc. Many Arcana's are hid (says he) in metals,
and are to be drawn out by an easier way then any one would believe, or think
to do any good by it. I now say nothing (he further adds) how wonders above
wonders, are Effected by it, if, in the Philosophical way, they be awakened and
raised up into their Primitive mercury, not into the Current, that which
vagrant Impostors talk so loud about, serd in Sementem viscidam, but into a
viscid, limous Sement, or Seedplot, out of which a living Germen, Leo
Suavissimus the mercury of the Magicians, shows it self. Hence it appears what
manner of Mercury it is, and into what principles the metals are to be
resolved, unless we would have Tinctures to pass into a useless dust, or
powder, that has no Ingression into metals fused, but swims upon them to no
purpose. From metals, indeed are made Tinctures, when out of their Substance
primordials are drawn, which move themselves on (if They be right handled) into
a viscous Sement. But Out of metals, when perfect metals are compounded with
their primordials in a form or appearance oleaginous materiallys: By metals
again Tincture are made, in the projection of Tinctures upon perfect metals
namely, that by Them as the mean, They may acquire their due Consistence. And
then lastly with metals fused, are perfect metals made, namely by Transmutation
of Those that are Imperfect to perfect by help of med'cins already perfect. In
These we see Parace sus have most Signally and briefly comprehended the Sum
of the whole Art. See those Things which not only Guido de monte delivers to us
concerning this kind of preparation (for he is somewhat tedious in his prolix
Circulations) but also what the most Experienced Isaac Hollandus proposes in a
Tractate peculiar de Salibus and Oleis metallorum, of the Salts and Oils of
metals (although they require That furnus clausus Reverberii, with its little
mount within, known but to few, and used by Paracelsus otherwise they cannot so
well be prepared) the other Things are of themselves open enough, especially if
they be joined, and compared with what he says in his Tractate of the Oil of
Vitriol, and in That of Antimony, and That of Mercury.

Yet in this place I cannot forbear, but I must add to Those Two Testimonies of
Bartholomeus Korndorferus, and the most Excellent Paracelsus, Another too of
that most monstrous Franciscan monk, who in the year 1419. writ a book in the
German Tongue in Open words, to Burgrave Frederic Marquis of Brandeburg: but
the book for many causes was never brought abroad by the Press. In It, many
Tinctures of metals, gemmes, and pearls, are contained; with many other choice
Arcana's. He therefore in that place, where he comes to the Tincture of Venus
and Sol, by the help of which he teaches how to convert Luna into Sol, This Sol
(says he in open words) does more than another Sol: and shows the way that we
must proceed. Leonhardus Turniserus complains very much that he lost a
Compendium of It in the Tower of Kussenberg some years ago: but there is yet
extant in Schobinger's Library an older Copy. To these there is a near
correspondence of those five particular Tinctures that go about inscribed in
little books of bark, rising almost from the same foundation with the former,
only in them the pure is not Separate from the Impure Terrestrial Sulphur:
otherwise then with the Monk, who shows how to cast away the leprous Earth: by
which it comes about that his particular Tinctures are so much the better, and
tinge deeper, by how much they exceed the other in Subtilty and Penetration.

But let us now return to Count Bernhard Trevisan, who in the second part of
his book writes expressly in these words: Curr, damno tan tem expertus sum, quod
in metallis, etc. To my loss, I found at length by Experience; That it must
needs be hid in metals, etc. Where he alleadges that saying of Geber, No thing
that is Extraneous, and that is not compounded of metals, or born of them, is
able to perfect them, or cause their regeneration, or Transmutation. But the
same Bernhard again says: Corpora perfecta, etc. Perfect Bodies, which by
nature are simply perfect are only perfect in their Simple degree, and unless
by Art they can be made (plusquam perfecta) more then perfect, they cannot
contribute to Imperfect bodies: but if (says he) they be handled by Art, and
according to Art be perfected in the Philosophers manner (mark the words) then
the way lies open, and it is easily deprehended what they are able to effect.
For Our Gold is not vulgar Gold, nor our Silver the Silver of the vulgar:
because they, so long as they remain in their own Substance, are no better then
dead; nor have they any Efficient power, as we may see in the Codex of truth,
that is, the Turba Philosophorum. Hence alleging that Golden Saying from
Geber the Arab: Quicunque ignorant Radices Minerarum, and. Simplices and
Compositas, etc. Whosoever knows not the Roots of Mines both Simple and
Compound, he knows not the principles of Nature, and therefore not of Art: and
by Consequence is a Sophister, not a Chemist. By Simple roots, understand,
those that are in the Universal most Universal: by compounded, those that are
made up out of Mercury resolved together with a certain mineral homogeneous
Earth, into a Viscous Liquor; in all which the germinant and Tingent force of
the Universal most Universal abides spiritually, and flows in the fire like to
wax without noise after a due Rectification; by which also (namely such
compound roots) Gold attenuated melts like butter, and grows into the
Philosophers stone. therefore Bernhard having intensely searched into Nature
affirms, that he had always before him that Saying of old Osthanes, ((...),
etc.) Natura naturam continet: Natura naturam separat: natura obvians naturae
suae laetatur, and in alienas transmutatur naturas, Nature contains nature,
nature separates nature, nature meeting with its own nature rejoices in it, and
is transmuted into other Natures. Whereof the two first, teach that the metals
as they are in themselves are not to be taken, but that those things are to be
Extracted from them that are Contained in them (for he confesses that he learnt
by his loss, that the thing he sought for should be hid in metals). And the
two last show the friendly, Conjunction of Gold with the roots of the Mines,
and comprehend the Tincture consequent from thence: which things it is
sufficient to have pointed at, and shown distinctly so far. And now, since I
have proved as much as can be desired, that our Philosophical Gold, produced
out of the Inferior metals by Nature and Art, does yield us a Tincture of Gold
Philosophical Distinct from the Stone; I shall conclude the whole matter out of
Basil. Valentin therefore in his Occult Philosophy toward the End, writes of a
Stagge, whose horns were of pure Gold, and had got many thousands of antlets,
or branches budding from them, which Stagge ran into a Green wood, and many
huntsmen to this day range for him, and pursue him. The meaning of this riddle
is not hard to be conjectured from what is said above: besides that of Basil
himself in the end of his Triumphal Chariot it is sufficiently declared,
namely how this Stagg so much sought for, may be taken by lively and
Industrious hunting. For he teaches to pursue him by the multiplied Stone of
Fire, of which one part falls upon five of Luna, and the other things that
follow in the same place. By which it more then abundantly appears what sort of
metal our Philosophical Gold is, and whence it is produced, of Luna namely
Tinged into Sol, whence the Golden Stagge exists: which Gold indeed (as Basil
is witness) must again be bruised, opened, and further subtiliated, before it
pass into a better Stone, that is, the Tincture of the Sun: Paracelsus
likewise glancing at the same Thing in his book of minerals writes thus: If the
Alchymists could find that Sulphur of Gold, as very well it may be found (says
he) In Arbore Auri and Ejus Radice, in the Tree of Gold and the Root of It,
(for this is their great Scruple: Non alterum illud, not That other Gold) they
might indeed rejoice at it, etc. Thus far then of our Magical Gold unknown to
most men, and hitherto unobserved, and undistinguisht. Now toward the end of
our Manuduction for a Close and a Crown, we shall, out of Basil, annex a short
way of the preparation of the Tincture of Sol, and of the chief stone of the
Philosophers, when in a few words I have premised This, That even in common
Salt, and in a certain Other almost Congenerous to it, there are very hidden
powers and secret forces, which are able to do many wondrous things for us
compounded with Gold, and with the Oiles of Vitriol and Antimonie rightly
prepared. Most sure it is, that common Salt gives us an excellent Potable Gold
by the Spirit of wine, if after its due Calcination it be Crystalliz'd, and
distilled by it self into a sweet Oil. Which process, plainly conform to
that of Basil, we owe to a Noble person, and a dear companion of mine, who had
it from him; to say nothing of other Arcana's out of Salt, For indeed it is
Paracelsus his circulatum minus, his lesser Circulat, which he calls by its
peculiar right, the Matrix of all Metalls, especially the Sea Salt, with which
the Majus Circulatum, his great Circulat from Mercury Sublimate agrees: What
should I say of the sweet Oil of Antimony, so industriously sought by
Crollius, and mist, not so faithfully communicated to me by the same friend as
other things?

Now as for the Tincture of Sol Philosophical; if it be truly prepared, it must
be a done by a just and cue Anatomy of Gold: so that first his purest Sulphur,
and most highly graduat must be extracted without any Corrosive, and Separate
from all its extremities and dregs. Afterward, the Salt of our Philosophical
Gold, which will appear white as milk, must not only be extracted, but must
also be brought to a Transparent Serenity, by which afterward, it may more
easily melt like butter in the extract of the sulphur of Gold, and together
with it come over the helm. And when these two are thus exalted, then
superfused to the residue of their mercury, presently after the Solution made,
they will precipitate it to the bottom of the vessel. Hence all the Three
viscous principles must be putrified in the philosophers glass, and going on,
from thence be raised again to a new life by their own proper body and Salt,
till they pass into a Regenerat astral fixed and perseverant Essence, which by
the Initial Crasis of its three principles may be multiplied and augmented in
the space of a month, both in its virtue and quantity. Thus much briefly, of
the Tincture of Sol.

But as for the Philosophers Stone, another way is to be taken, for it admitts
(against the common opinion) of a duplicity of prepreparation, namely, either
by Composition of its mineral root Simple with Gold Resolved, the way of Basil
in his Twelve keys, or by Conjunction of Gold with the Compounded roots of
the mines, from which line the Stone of fire prepared out of the Mercury of
Antimony, and the vitriol of Venus and Mars by their own Sulphur reced es
little, or nothing at all. But of the nature of this, I have said enough
before, from which likewise differs not that parabolicall Description de nobili
Solis flore, not long ago brought out of the Archivis of some eminent City of
the Empire, which delivers the whole process very freely, although it dazzle
the Eyes of many pretending Sophisters. But out of this compound, various
particular Tinctures may be had, of which I forbear to speak more now. But
following the mineral root Simple of the Universal Most Universal, we say with
Basil in the end of his Memorial Table, that here there is no need, as we
taught in the tincture of Sol, that Gold should be so much destroyed that it may
be Justified in its Elements, and so the first essence of its root be sought
and brought forth to the light. Nor is it a necessity, that That in the
compounds should be done: for there are some who by an Essence Mercuriall,
extract the soul of Gold, the Gold Itself remaining almost entire, by which
they exalt their work to such an excellence, that a knife being perpendicularly
let down into that Tincture of their Stone, and taken up so again, then only
wiped with a little papyr, and that papyr cast upon molten Gold although
nothing at all seemed to adhere to the knife yet only by the odor of the
Tincture, they have converted a whole ounce of Lead into perfect Gold in all
probates, as those have told me that saw it done, whose minds when as before
they were much averse from this study, became afterward eager pursuers of the
Art. -- But (says Basil), It is every man's part that adheres to this Science,
and will be in love with so precious a thing, to search diligently after the
Golden Magnet, (viz. of the Universal most Universal) to know it very well,
which he shall find in unica re unice, in one thing alone and none but that;
and its root in one only matter, (wherewith Subtiliated Gold by help of a
kindly liquor is to be resolved and with continual fire, and in a furnace
Philosophical, to be excited, cherisht, and so long decocted, till it pass
into a transparent Stone like a Ruby) of which, says Basil, our potable Gold is
made more perfect, than it can of Gold Itself, which ought first to be made
Spiritual, before potable Gold can be prepared out of it, as he has it Chap.
the sixth of things Supernatural, and Chap. the seventh page 93. For this
Caerule, or Azurine Spirit, which is both in the Saphir and in Luna, is the
Sulphur and the soul (says he) from whence both Gold and Silver enjoy and
exercise their vegetall life. Hence Basilius in the Repetition of the Great
stone page 114 Lunae spiritum spiritui Solis perinde appropriari ait, atque
viro faeminam etc, says, The spirit of Luna is appropriated to the spirit of
Sol, as a woman to a man, both in the Earth (where metalls are first generated)
and then upon it where the metalls are made by Art. Then again, the white
Tincture (says he) is placed in the Magnetic Form of that one only thing, in
which likewise is found the first ens of Gold. And with words to the same
sense, after the rectification of the Lunar Tincture described, together with
the preparation of it, he shuts up that Chapter: But if thou do know (says
he) the primum Mobile of the mall (there needs not so much of the circulations
of compositions) quandoquidem opus ex uno perficere potes, because thou may
do thy work by one. But what this one is, we must seek in the nature of the
Mineral kingdom. But yet, that he might not leave it altogether untoucht upon,
and so desert his reader in the midst of his course, he everywhere intimates
that it is not far from every one of us. For so, in his book of Naturalls chap.
the 4th, page the 56, he complains that the sons of men do not observe, but
rather contemn that which God has laid before us in nature, in which there is
a great secret. To the same sentence, in the end of his Memorial Table: The
true root (says he) is vile, and even visibly exposed to the eyes of the
vulgar, and yet unknown; and, if not by a various proof premonstrated, it
still lies hid to a man in the Dark. For all the world (as Bernhard likewise
bears witness) looks upon it, sees it, and does not know it. So of the great
mystery of the lesser world, toward the endpag. 220. The Materia prima, The
first matter (says he) is manifest before the eyes of the whole world, and yet
known to very few, and in all places to be found, to wit, Mercurius, Sulphur,
and Sal, and Mineral water, or Metallic liquor, tanquam-centrum as a center, a
Forma sua separata, separated from its from (the prima materia or mineral water
understand separated) and made up of these three Incipients. But chiefly, in
the end of his last chapter de rebus naturalibus, Omnia (inquit) quae post
Antimonium, Vitriolum, Sulphur, Magnetem, praecipue dotata sunt praealiis, et
affinia its, ex quibus Aurum et Argentum principium, medium, et finem suum
sortiuntar etc. All those things (says he) which after Antimony, Vitriol,
Sulphur, and the Magnet, are in an eminent manner above others endowed with,
and nearer a kin to those principles, from which Gold and Silver derive their
beginning, middle, and end, together with true transmutation and alteration
particularly; received their virtue, force, and power ex unare, from one thing,
in which all these are Secretly and Invisibly laid up-till their birth,
together with all the metalls: To which he adds: Quae materia manifesta est
coram oculis omnium: Which matter is manifest before the eyes of all men. But
because the virtue, force, and power of It, is buried very deep, and so unknown
to most, it comes about that this Materia is accounted as nothing, and by
Ignorance thought and reputed utterly insignificant and unfit, to the purpose
of Art.

The name of it (says he) is Hermes, who carries for his ensign a Serpent
volant, and has to his wife, her who is called Aphrodita; that knows the
hearts of all mortals: and yet all these are but one thing, Unica Res Unice et
Essentia, One single only Thing or Essence, which (says he) is common in all
coasts, known in all places, every one takes it in his hand, and uses it to
vile things; the vile he accounts precious, and rejects the precious. In sum,
says he. It is nothing else but Water and Fire, whence Earth with the
additament of Air is born, and still preserved. In these he fully setts before
the eyes of all men the matter of the Interior Root.

Therefore here, as at the Goal of the Universal most Universal, we too must
stop and make our stand in the mineral kingdom, after the Recount of
Universals, and almost all particular Tinctures, of which we have hitherto had
any notice. Only one thing I thought good to add for their sakes, who think,
There it nothing at all true, or profitable, extra Universale Universalissimum,
without, or besides the Universal most Universal; and therefore deny that
particular Tinctures are to be sought and had, without the compass of That. To
Those indeed I can easily grant, that, the Universal matter had, and rightly
known, posse ex ea certiffima parari particularia, most certain particulars may
be made out of it. But it is not therefore consequent, that in this and the
other bough and branch, growing out of the universal Materia, although in the
species differing from it, there should be no power of transmutation, which
both experience bears witness to, and the learned acknowledge, as Chrysippus
Fannian in his Metamorphosis, and Aqinas himself de Corporibus Supercelastibus
et Inferioribus cap. 4 et deinceps. Nor does it follow, Count Trevisan in all
his life found no particular of any moment, therefore nobody else can find one,
or, that it is falsely affirmed by others. For to say nothing how Count Bernhard
sought for the Universal (which certainly is to be found in no Particular extra
Universale) both what not only Basilius had said of the Stone of fire, and of
the distinct Tinctures of metalls, and what Others, sufficiently refutes him:
but also what Paracelsus of the Epatica of Sulphur, and Luna converted into Sol
by the oil of ir; and That which Korndorferus relates de Lapide Schisto, of
the Stone Schistus, for an ability to the fixing of Luna, although both in the
vulgar Sulphur, and in Korndorfer's Schistus, which is a certain very eager
sharp salt, even Basil himself by a mistake denies any power of transmutation.
So on the other side there are some, who, having got some either universal, or
particular Tincture, forthwith insolently cry it out, That there is no other
Universal, but that of theirs; Adeo plaerique nobis Suffaeni sumus omnes, So
apt are we all to hug ourselves in our own conceits, and ours. But to have
pointed at this by the way, is enough for us. May the great and good God grant
by his eternal Spirit, in his only begotten Son, consubstantial to him, our
Emanuel, that we fix not our hearts on these Terrestrial goods the Mammon of
this world, neglecting the celestial, but that we may seriously look after a
better treasure laid up in heaven, and, apprehending it by Faith, expecting it
in certain hope, in a course of unwearied piety joined with love, we may aspire
to it, and attain it, through and for Jesus Christ: who with the Father, and
the Holy Spirit, is the One only Jehovah, blessed for ever. To whom be the
Praise and Glory to all eternity, Amen.

Finis Cherragogiae Helianiae,
per Adeptum Anonymum.
ANTPON ITPAS. ZOROASTER'S CAVE. OR, The Philosopher's Intellectual Echo to
One another from their CELLS.
Of Mercury and Sulphur.
ECHO Prima.
DRy water from the Philosophers Clouds! Look for it, and be sure to have it,
for it is the key to inaccessibles, and those locks that otherwise would keep
thee out. Chorus omnium.

It is a middle nature between fixed, and not fixed, and partakes of a Sulphur
Azurine. Isaacus Flander, and Gymnosophistae apud Philostratum.

It is a Raw, Cooling, Feminine fire, and expects its Impregnation from a
Masculine, Solar Sulphur. Aristot. Arabs. It is the only complete Angel to the
Infern, or Bottom of the earth, where all the Treasures are hid. (...). Apollo
apud Homerum in Hymno ad Mercurium.

All that are conversant in this Art, learn from Experience, and all good
Authors, That the true matter and subject of this stone, has Gold and Silver in
potentiality, and Argent vive naturally, or actually: Which Gold and Silver are
much better than those men commonly see and handle, because these are alive and
can increase; the other dead: And if this could not be effected, the matter
would never be brought to its perfection, which this art promises; which is
indeed so efficacious as to perfect Imperfect metalls. But this same invisible
Gold or Silver, which by this Magistery is exalted to so sublime a degree,
cannot communicate its perfection to imperfect metalls, without the help and
service of vulgar Gold and Silver. Adeptus Anonymus apnd Combachium.

The Sun and the Moon must be in Conjunction that they may absolve perfect
generation. Arnoldus Villanovan in flore florum. No corruption, that is, no
mutation or passage of one form into another can be made, without the mediation
of Putrefaction, (which is the sole mean and way to Generation) nor any
putrefaction be had, without some Mercury, or Argent vive, which is the special
delator, or conductor of the vegetant faculty, called by Philosophers, The
viridity of Nature.

Anonymi Adepti-Sal, Lunien, et Spiritus Universi. Minerals have their Roots in
the Air, their Heads and Tops in the earth. Our Mercury is Aereal; look for it
therefore in the Air, and in the Earth. Calid Aegyptius. It is the potentiall
vapor of metals. Aegidius de Vadis.

Our Stone is the conjunction of Sol and Luna, till Sol has drawn the
substance of Luna to his Nature and color. Lullii Codicillus. And this is done
by the inward fire, or sulphur of the stone Idem ibidem.

Minerals made of living Mercury, and living Sulphur, are to be chosen: work
with them sweerly, not swiftly with precipitance. Dastinus-pag 55.

The thing that works perfection in metalls is the substance of Argent vive and
Sulphur proportionally mixed, by long and temperate Decoction inspissate and
fixed in a Womb of clean earth; with conservation of his radical not
corrumpent humidity, wrought up to a solid substance, with due ignition
fusible, and under the hammer Extensible. Geber, de Investig: cap. 2. Those
that know the Mercury and Sulphur of the Philosophers: know that they are made
of pure Gold and the finest Luna, and Argent vive, which are daily seen, and
looked upon, from which our Argent vive is elicited. Bernardus de Granpag. 1.
Manuser. vetustiss:

Our Stone is the potentiall vapor of Metal; and how to get this, thou must be
very careful and wary.

Aegidius de Vadis

Our Water is a lustral, or expiaring essence, and the cause efficient of the
clarity of the whole body, and med cine. Two things it works in the earth: It
washes it, It tinges it: As it washes, it is Water; as it tinges, it is Air
Ludus puerorum. The ancients called our Argentvive Aqua Sicca, Dry water,

Tauladan.

It is apparent, what that Argent vive is that Geber points at, in his Summa to
be taken, namely, the Clean substance of fixed Mercury, shut up in Sol and Luna.

Idem, page, 193.

Argent vive in its first root is compounded of white earth, subtle, and
sulphurous strongly mingled with a bright and clear water, united with such an
union, per minima, till the moist be tempered with the dry, and the dry with
the moist equally into one Intimate substance, that will not rest on a plain
Surface, nor adhere to the Tangent because of its Siccity, which has altered
and cohibited the Aqueity in it. But it is homogeneous in its nature: for it
either remains all in the fire, and fixed; or else, all flies away in fume;
because it is Incombustible, and Aereal. And this is a sign of perfection.
Richardus Anglicus Philosoph.

Vetustus.

Mercurius crudus, Mercury crude, dissolves bodies, and reduces them to their
Materia prima: but the Mercurius corporum the Mercury of Bodies cannot do it.
Holcot Anglus. The Mercury of the Philosophers is compounded of Mercury Crude
and the Mercury of Bodies, by an Union Intimate and Inseparable, as there is in
Simple water mixed with Simple water. Libanius Gallus, apud Trithemium

By a Lucid Key he opened secret places, otherwise inaccessible, and within was
great store of Siver and Gold. (...)
(...)
Mercurius Antiquoruum apud Homerum.

The Names of the Materia to the Magical practice. Echo II.
WHen our materials are Amalgamated, that Amalgam, to conceal it from the
unworthy, is called by Philosophers our Venus, our Gold, The earth of Magnesia,
the whole Compound. Jodocus Greverius page 21. I tell thee that our Semen is
the true Salamander, conceived by fire, nursed by fire, and perfected by fire.

Idem page 36.

The matter which we need to our work, is not the Hyle, or the Chaos, but the
Materia prima propinqua, The first matter in a propinquity, that is, the
second; which in Animals is Sperm, in vegetals Seed, in minerals Sulphur, and
Argent vive. Ripleus Anglus. Sendivogius Polonus.

Sulphur perfectly clarified and dealbate, Philosophers call Their foliated
Earth. Vogelius manuscriptus. The work yet Crude is called our Argent vive,
water permanent, Our Lead, Our Saturn, the spittle of Luna, our Jupiter. When
better decocted, then it is Argent, then Magnesia, and white Sulphur. When it
is Red, it is called Auripigment, Coral, Gold, Ferment, a Stone, a Lucid Water
of celestial color. Adeptus Anonymus, Desiderabile etc.

Magnesia is That whole mixture from whence is drawn our humidity called Argent
vive. Ludus puerorum. p: 136. The Dragon is the Sulphur that is Extracted from
the Bodies by the Magistery, Nich: Flamellus Annot. in Democritum.

The liquor of Lunary, the vegetable Mercury, the quintessence, and water
Ardent, are all one thing. With our liquor of Lunary, known but to few, is our
Solution made, and our potable Gold; but without it, not at all. Rosarium
Philosoph: p: 173.

Trouble not yourselves about the diversity of names, and the regiment of the
work; for if we would make Sol, we must take Sol, if Luna, Luna for our Ferment.

Dastinus page: 30.

Our Black Materia dealbated is called the Terra Foliata, Ashes of Ashes,
ferment of ferment, and white Sulphur enduring the fire: and yet without
Ferment neither Sol nor Luna will come forth, but somewhat that is as good as
nothing.

Lib: duorum verborum: p. 47.

Our Stone in the beginning is called water; when the body is dissolved, Air,
or Wind; when it tends to consolidation, then it is named Earth, and when it is
perfect and fixed, it is called Fire. Dominus Vobiscum. p. 54.

Argent Vive is called Wind, that is, Aereal Argent Vive, the strongest
vinegar, poison Tingent, Virgins Milk, Burning fire, burning worse than the
fire of Hell.

Incertus Author.

The Sone is called Adrop, that is Saturnus; because, as Saturn is the chiefest
of the Planets; So our mercuriall Saturnine Stone, is the highest and most
precious of Stones.

Saturninus.

Our compound is called by Philosophers White Earth when it is white; and Red
when it is Red. Scotus de Bufone:

When our limous earth is whitened, we call it yharit, that is, Silver; and
when it is made red we call it Temeinchum, that is, Gold: And it is whiteness
that tinges Venus and makes it Yharit, and that redness that tinges Yharit,
and makes it Temeinchum, that is, Gold.

Calid Egyptius, Philosophus nobilis

Our matter is called the elementall Stone, because the four elements are
extracted from it: The mineral Stone, because it is made only of mineralls: The
vegetable Stone, because it is nourisht and augmented, which are the properties
of the vegetative Soul: The Animal Stone, because it is refresht with sweet
odors, and corrupted with stinking.

Scotus de Bufone.

Our Stone is called Adrop, that is, Saturn.

Speculum Arnaldi.

Our Stone after its putrefaction is called Magnesia, and in the putrefaction
it is called Saturnus, Idem ibidem. All the metalls when they are prepared by
Art, then they are called Sol, Luna, Mercurius etc. For before they were only
Gold, Silver, and Quicksilver. Marcilius Ficinus. The Incombustible Grain of
metalls, is their radical humidity; and is as a certain Seed of Sol, and Luna,
which nature has inserted to them, that upon opportunity they may be Excocted
to Sol and Luna by Nature in a long, by Art in a very short, Time. Vogelius.

Azot is a fifth Essence, a body of itself Subsistent, differing from all the
Elements, and all the Elementals both in Matter and Form, Nature and Virtue,
having nothing of the Corruptible: and it is called a fifth Essence because it
is Extracted from four, and has in it no Elemental motion, as other Elemental
bodies, Tinging and purisying metallic bodies by its Color, and Keeping from
Corruption all other Bodies that are joined with it.

Incertus Author.

Terra Alba, White Earth, White Sulphur, White Fume, Auripigment, Magnesia, and
Ethel, signify the same, in this Art. Tertia Synodus Pythagorica Manuscripta.

No way but one to the Sulphur of Nature. Echo III.
NEmo habet in Sulphur nisi Unum Iter. No road but one to find the quick
Sulphur. David Arabs.

Thou need but one thing, namely Water, and one operation, to wit Decoction,
to White and Red, in one vessel, understand of one kind.

Alphid Arabs.

Although the wise men have varied names, and perplexed their sayings, yet they
always would have us think but of One Thing, one Disposition, one Way. The
wisemen know this one thing; and, that it is one, they have often proved,

Morienus Eremita Hrerosolymitanus.

In a multiplicity of things our art is not perfected. For it is one stone, one
med'cin, in which consists the whole magistery: to which we add nothing
extraneous, nor take away any thing, but only, in our preparation, that that is
superfluous

Idem Eremita.

White and Red proceed from The same Root without any other Kind intervenient.
For it dissolves, and conjoyns It self, makes it self Black and Citrine,
white and red, espouses Itself, conceives, brings forth, and does all to the
perfect end*

Rhasis Arabs. Et Idem Haly.

If you Govern Our Brass, Our Venus, with Our Water, then you shall find all
that is said; otherwise, you do nothing,

Turba Philosoph.

There is noway for the Rectifying of Bodies entirely and compleately without
our Tincture, which is a Clean Seed, and has upon it the blessing of
multiplication from Heaven,

Aurora.

Our water Gilded with Solar Sulphur is the Secret of the Egyptians,
Chaldeans, Arabians, Persians, and Greeks, Hallelujah per Anonymum.

The Number of the Components of the Magical Stone. ECHO. IV.
OF Sol and Luna thou may make the perfect med'cin without Separation of the
Elements, without labor, without fear without danger; they need a long time,
but they are safe. Isaacus Flander. lib. 2. mineral.

The Ancients labored in the Almagamation of Sol and Luna, which is indeed the
most perfect work, and the Care little. Idem ibidem.

Mercury alone perfects the works, in it we find all that we need, to it we
add nothing extraneous. Sol and Luna are not Extraneous to one another,
because they in the beginning of the work are reduced into their first Nature
(that is, Mercury), therefore from It they took their beginning.

Divus Thom: Aquinas cap 3.

Wherefore I counsel you my friends, that you work not on any thing but Sol
and Luna, reducing them into their first matter, that is, Our Sulphur and
Argent vive. Lullii Codicillus.

Of Sol vulgar, and Luna vulgar, both Solute there is a preparation of Mercury
vulgar. Of those Three without any other Species, the Physic-Stone is
generated, and of no other can it be made by the Wit of Nature. Incertus.
Incipiens. Desidrrabile.

The difference betwixt the Solar and the Lunar Tincture is This: The Solar
contains Solar Sulphur; The Lunar, Lunar Sulphur, Albertus Magnus.

The Stone is one: Yet This one, is not one in Number, but in kind.

Scala Philosoph.

Rebis is the first part of the work; Elixir the Second; Tincture the Third;
and Medicin the fourth. Therefore it appears, That to Azoth Elixir is required,
because Elixir in this work precedes Azoth; For from Elixir, Azoth is
extracted. But Azoth is that which is extracted by our Mercury from the bodies
dissolved; and That is counted the Maturer, Desiderabile. 169.

Elixir is no other then the body resolved into Mercurial Water, after which
resolution Azoth is extracted out of it, that is, a Spirituous Animated
Essence. Idem.

In one Thing for speices, and Two Individuals It consists and is perfected,
first to White, then to Red, finally by increasing the the fire.

Petrus Valentiae.

In the first Regimen, set the Crude and pure Elements upon an Easy fire, that
they may be mingled and joined together; govern them so that they may be
desiccate, or dried, and all be black; from which blackness an Occult
Witness is drawn, and afterward a Redness by decoction. And when it is in
the perfect White, it is in Dust Impalpable.

Zininus. p. 68.

The Generation of Metalls and the Philosophers stone is to conjoyn proper
principles: videlicet, Man with Woman, Active with a Pssive, Sulphur with
Mercury, that so Generation may ensue Corruption. Argent Vive is the Recipient
of the Form, and Gold the very Philosophers Stone,

Saturninus. page 71.

The whole work consists in Sol, Luna, and Mercury. Tersim. pagin: 103. Gold
and Silver are Metalls, out of which the Golden and Silver Elixirs are made.

Tauladan Page 184.

Tinge with Gold, and Silver: because Gold gives the Golden; and Silver, the
Silver Nature and Color.

Richardus Anglicus.

It is necessary that the Stone before it be made Elixir, be extracted from the
Nature of Two bodies. Monachus. The fire ought to be very soft, till the Spirit
be separated from the Body, ascending into black clouds above the body: By a
Spirit Crude, a spirit Digested is Extracted from the body dissolved.

Idem page 167.

Take the Stone Suspended upon the Sea, his name is Victor; with him slay the
living, and enliven the slain; for in his power are Death, and Life.

Incognitus qui incipit Exemplum Scientiae.

Our Mercury is drawn from the Calx of Metalls by putrefaction, till the
Compound put off one nature, and put on another. And so by such Operations, is
made the Mercury of the Philosophers.

Jacobus de Sancto Saturnino.

The Operations of Art in her Ministry and Attendance to Nature. ECHO. V.
NAture begins all her Actions from Separation. Mortification is the first step
to Separation, and the only way to that End: for, as long as Bodies remain in
their old Origin, Separation without putrefaction, or mortification, cannot
reach them, Anonymus Adeptus.

Amalgama, which is the first Work, is made with one of Sol, and four of
Mercury. And this beginning of the Work the Philosophers have called by many
names, Our Venus, Our Gold, The Earth of Magnesia, The whole Compound. Jodocus
Greverius.

In the first Decoction, when thou art blacking, there will rise from the Earth
a certain humidity of Argent vive like a Cloud, and will stick to the upper
part of thy vacant Oval by its sides, which thou must let alone untoucht. Idem.

Blackness like that of the blackest Coal, is the Secret of True Dissolution,
Raym. Lullius in Clavicula.

Turn thy clouds into rain to water thy Earth, and make it fruitful. This
Reduction of clouds into rain, is called by some Cauda Draconis, The Dragons
Tail: and others say, that new Mercury is to be added. Idem Greverius. page 22.

The bodies are first to be Subtiliated by Dissolution, which is the first
Degree of the Work. And this Dissolution is nothing else, but that bodies be
returned into Mercury and Sulphur from whence they took their Original. But no
other body can be resolved into Mercury, but a Metallic, consisting of Mercury
and Sulphur.

The Spirit of Metalls is part of Our Stone; and That we must evacuate from the
bodies of metalls: namely from the two perfect by putrefaction, division of
Elements, and their fixation, Raym. Lullius.

When the matter Ascends by Wind, that is, by fume, the Philosophers call it
Sublimation: when it is cast into the bottom of the vessel, and Converted into
Water, they call it Solution, or Distillation: When the Earth is Inspissate,
they say it is Corruption: and when it begins to change from black, they call
it Ablution. Extraction of Water from the Earth, and turning it on the Earth
again, till the Earth putrefie, and be clear again, is the Sum of our
magistery. And when the Philosophers saw their Water diminished, and their
Earth increased, they called it Ceration; Then, when all became Earth, they
called their Work Congelation; and when White, Calcination. Monachus. ex
manuscripto vetustiss. Dissolution begets blackness, Reduction Whiteness,
Fixion Citrinity, Inceration Redness. Blackness is the Earth, Whiteness the
Water, Citrinity the Air, Redness the fire, Anonymus.

Solution turns the Stone into its Materia prima, that is, into Water:
Ablution into Air: Conjunction into fire: Fixion into Earth Spiritual and
Tingent. Scala Philosoph.

Putrefaction is made by a most Gentle fire hot and moist, and no other, so
that nothing Ascend. Desponsation and Conception is made by a kind putridnesse
in the Bottom of the vessel. Rosarium page 198. Burn with Water, wash with
Fire,

Idem ibidem.

Labor not to make thy Mercury Diaphan that is, into a clear, Transparent
Water; for so it is too highly Inflamed, and Irrestrinctible, and will never be
fixed, never congealed. Aureola.

When we Dissolve, without any Intervall, we Calcine, Sublime, Separate, and
Compound and between Solution, and Composition of the body and Spirit, there
intervenes no space of Time.

Alphid Arabs.

The Watering of Pegasus at his own Fountain; and of his Other food out of the
Air and Earth. ECHO. VI.
WIth the Water of Paradise bedew the Earth now clarified, and that Water will
again Ascend to heaven, and Descend again to the Earth to make it fertile, and
bring forth White, Citrine, and Flamye Red flowers. Isaac Flander.

Cibation is the Nutrition of our Materia Sicca with milk and meat, both
moderately given, till it be brought to the third order. Ripleus Aglus.

Our Great business is to make the Body a spirit, and the Spirit a body. But
it is True, That if the Sum of the volatile exceed and Subdue the Sum of the
fixed, it will finally be turned into a Spiritual body White or Red,

Rosarius Minor.

The Earth does not Germinate without frequent Irrigation, nor receive
Irrigation without Desiccation. Therefore at every Turn after desiccation power
Water on it temperatly, neither too much, nor too little. If too much, it will
be a Sea of Conturbation. If too little, all is burnt to a light Cindar.
Daustricus, page 25.

Our divine Water, the Spume of Silver mingled with Magnesia, rids away the
Dark Umbra of the body. Democritus Apud Flamellum. The Dragon born in
Darkness, is fed with his own Mercury, submerged in it, and then a little
dealbated by it.

Keep a soft fire, till there be patience between Water and Fire, and till the
Spirit and Body become one.

Monachus, page 14.

See that thou water it temperatly: for if it abound, it will be a Sea; and if
there want, a Combustion will be made.

Desiderabile.

As in this work in its first Composition, nothing that is extraneous to its
Nature enters: So neither does any thing Multiply it, that is not of its first
Disposition.

Trevisanus.

The Magistery of the Philosophers does not need a Commistion of any extraneous
thing; but out of the proper seed metallic cast into Philosophical earth
prepared, it produces a Stone infinitely multiplicable, if it be nourisht with
its own menstrnum, or humor Connatural, and be excited by the heat of the
Philosophers Sun from its Potentia into Act.

Theobaldus Hoghelandus.

Take the quantity, know the weight of it, and add to it as much of the
humidity as it can drink; of which humidity, we have not the pondus
determinate. Calrd Aegyptius. The Time of every Imbibition to its Exsiccation
is Twenty or Thirty Natural days.

Clangor Buccinae.

IGNIS MAGORVM. The Philosophers Fire. ECHO VII.
OUr fire is Mineral, Equal, Continual* it vapors not unless excited too
much, it partakes of Sulphur, it is taken from some other Thing than the
Materia, it breaks down all before it, Dissolves, Congeales, and Calcines: That
Fire, with a Fire Remiss, perfects the whole work, and makes all the right
Sublimations.

Pontanus page 75. uti et in Epistola.

The Fire against Nature must torment the bodies, That is the Dragon burning
violently, like fire of hell, Ripleus. All along, the fire must be gentle till
the Water be congealed in Whiteness. A stronger heat given, the Mercury flies
the fire by reason of its Frigiditie. Therefore keep thy fire soft, till thou
have a white Congelation. Benedictus.

By a Temperate fire a little quantity of the Dry Desiccates ethe moist, and
this by little and little, and not suddenly. And by how much the Stone has
more of the Ablution, so much the more Intense is the whiteness.

Scotus de Bufone.

The fire of the first Degree, that is of Solution, and Putrefaction, ought to
be so weak, that Nothing Ascend of the Nature to be Sublimed, and so a gentle
fire gives Mercury Ingresse into the body, when with a strong one all is
destroyed.

Saturninus page 71.

The heat Dealbant must not be too much, else all is gone. But understand this
of the first White after Nutrition, Anonym. Make thy Contritions with fire, not
with thy hands. Argent vive is fiery, and burns the bodies more then fire;
whatever Metallic body is joined to it, it slayes it and brings it down to dust.

Synodus Pythagorica.

Although we always speak of Slow-fire, yet in earnest we think, that in the
Government of the work, by little and little, and at Turns, the fire to the
End, is to be Augmented. Bacho. Spec. Alchym. cap. 4.

There are only Two fires found in the books of the Philosophers: The one dry,
the other moist: The Dry is the Elemental, The moist is Mercury. Alanus Niger.

As often as occasion shall require, heat and cool, moysten and desiccate thy
Earth, and there is no Error. So often as thy vessels are broke, thy matter must
cool, to be reposed in a like vessel, and put again to the fire. Greverius
Sacerdos.

The Philosophers vessel; The Cone, or Oval; The Colors of the Chao's;
Transienr, and Critical. ECHO. VIII.
THE vessel must be Glass, and Round, with a long Neck, firmly Sealed on the
Top, and is to be Enclosed with another Vessel, that the heat enter not the
matter immediately, and so the Digestion is in a Triple vessel. Liber Trium
Verborum, page 49.

Put thy Amalgam carefully into a Glasse-vessel of such a capacity, that thy
Earth that is sown and harrowed, may take up only the Third part of it, the
other two left vacant. Close up the orifice with the wisest Lute. Jodoc. Grever.

Set one half of the round of the Vessel into Ashes, the other bear above,
that thou may look at pleasure upon the work.

Alanus.

The vessels are Glass, wide below, terminating in an Acute, like the figure
called a Cone. Vogelius.

Think not That the Philosophers lie when they say, The whole Magistery is
perfected, in one only vessel: when thou hear them say so, think presently
of the Species of the vessel, not of the Individual, and thou have found the
Truth. Greverius.

We need but one Vessel, one Furnace, one Disposition; which is to be
understood, After the preparation of the first Stone.

Flamellus in Democritum.

Our vessel is a Glass, firmly shut, round bellied, of a neck strict and
long, half a foot, or thereabout. This vessel is called an Egg, a
Sublimatory, a Sphere, a Sepulcher, a Cucurbit, etc.

Laurentius ventura Italus.

Put thy matter into a Glasse-vessel Round and strong, the Orifice strait, and
sealed that it cannot expire the least fume.

Scotus de Bufone.

The Colors.
When the matter has stood for the space of forty days in a moderate heat,
there will begin to appear above, a blackness like to pitch, which is the
Caput Corvi of the Philosophers, and the wise men's Mercury.

Alanus.

Blackness once seen, thou may be sure a True Conjunction of the principles
is made.

Before the clear Splendent color comes, all the Colors in the world will
appear and disappear: then thou shall see an admirable whiteness, that it will
seem to thee the True whiteness, and yet it is not so. Before the True
whiteness comes, thou shall see all about in the margin of the Glass as it
were Oriental pearls, in the matter of the Stone, glittering like the Eyes of
fishes, and when thou see the Matter white as Snow, and shining like
oriental gemms, The white stone is then perfect. Let it cool of Itself.
Isaacus Flander.

The Colors are only Three, the others that come are called the middle
Colors, that vanish away: But the Black, White, and Red, are Eminent and
lasting Scenes.

Trithemius.

When in the work blackness appears, know that thou have found the right way
of working. Then rejoice, for God has given thee a very Great and precious Gift.

Phoenix. page 71.

In hora Conjunctionis mirabilia maxima apparent. Nam omnes Colores quotquot
Excogrtari possunt, etc. In the hour of Conjunction wonderful things present
themselves apparent to us. For all the Colors that can be Imagined, appear in
the work; and the Imperfect body is colored with a firm Coloration, by
mediation of the Ferment.

Arnaldus in Flore Florum.

The Time to perfect the physick-work. ECHO. IX.
This work cannot be perfected in a little space of Time; therefore the Artist
must be patient. Greverius.

The shortest Time of the preparation is the Circuit and Revolution of the
Greater luminary. For the Stone must be kept in the fire, till it cannot any
more be changed from one nature to another, from one Color to another, but
become like the Reddest blood running like wax in the fire, and yet diminishing
nothing at all. Laurentius Ventura, Italus.

We take a year for our Expectation; for our Calx, in less Time, cannot be
made. Ripleus.

The Philosophers seeing a sort of whiteness come, after a long Time, of the
Color of Ashes, called it Incineration, or Dealbation.

Idem cap 112.

In purification there cannot be a determinated Time, but in ninety days the
Red work is completed.

Variation of Times happens from the quantity of the med'cin, and according to
the Industry of the Artist.

Monach. page 17.

After the first fifty days, the Caput Corvi shows it self; from thence in an
hundred and fifty the Dove is made; and in another hundred and fifty, the Red
is wrought. Till you come up to whiteness, use a Gentle fire.

Saturninus.

When it has stood under an Eclipse for five months, and the Darkness recedes,
the light supervening, Increase your fire.

Scala philos. Ripleus etiam.

The Time for perfection of Elixir is at least one year.

Rosarius. page 179.

Be patient in extracting thy Tincture; for haste is the first Error of Art,
and burns all.

Anonymus.

In forty days and nights, after the True purification of the Stone, the work
to White is complete: because in the purification there cannot be a Set time;
but in ninety days and nights, the work to the Red is perfected.

Rosarium Vetustum.

The first Decoction has no certain Time and indeed is somewhat Taedious: yet
wait upon it, and Expect it with joy. Many have perished with haste and
affected with Tediousnes given over all. Phoenix. Liber pretiosissimus.

The Fermentation of The Stone. ECHO. X.
FErment is made after the Ortus, or Birth of the Infant. And Ferment is
nothing but meat Disposed to a Convertibility into the Essence of the Infant,
that all may be made of one nature. This fermentation Cibal, ought to be de sua
propria natura of the Infant's own nature, and assimilated to it; else there
will be no Incorporation, no conversion into Sulphur.

Lullius in Codrcrl.

Ferment must not be of this or that, but of Sol or Luna only: For we look for
nothing but that the Stone be turned into his like and from them is the whole
Temperament: nor is it Ferment before the Bodies be turned into their first
matter.

Vogelius page 10.

Infermentation see that the Sum of the volatile do not exceed the Sum of
the fixed: otherwise the Sponsal Ligament of the body would be put to flight.
But if a little of the Sulphur be cast upon much of the body, so that it has
the dominion over it, it soon converts it into Dust; the Color whereof is as
the Color of the body, one ounce of the Dust four of the Body.

Anonymus Incipiens Desiderabile.

Know that there is no Ferment, but Sol and Luna.

Arnaldus in Flore Florum.

Fermentation is the Animation of the Stone.

Clauger. page 46.

Of the nature of both, and the mutation of their substance.
He that is able to turn the Soul to a Body, and the Body to a Soul, and
mingle with it Subtle Spirits, is able to Tinge every Body.

Calid Egyptius.

The Multiplication, and Projection of the Tincture. ECHO. XI.
IT is impossible to multiply the central salt without Gold, But the Sons of
Art only know the True seed of Metalls.

Novum lumen Chymicum.

Multiplication is either Virtual; Such as is made by Alteration, by Dissolving
and Congealing; or Quantitative, by Apposition of new Matter.

Scotus de Bufone.

The Quantitative is Nothing else but the Augmentation of the Tincture from one
pondus ad infinitum: So that the Work is never again to be begun, and this
Without the Diminution of its force. Incertus.

Projection upon Metalls,
No Projection of the Red stone but upon Luna,

Isaac Flander.

If thou would make Projection upon Jupiter, melt it in a Crucibrrr rrd put
to one pound of Jupiter one orrce of pure Luna, and melt them together; then
cast on it thy White Tincture, and the Jupiter animation of the Stone. Clang:

If Thou put to It but Little of Ferment thou shall have but little Tincture.
Dastinus page 30.

When the stone is liquefied by Decoction, it must then be Coagulated, But this
Coagulation is made with Ferment, or with its own body, which is the same
thing.

When the Anima Candida is perfectly risen, the Artist must join it, the same
moment, with its body: For the Anima without its body cannot be held. But such
an Union must be made by mediation of the Spirit: because the Anima cannot have
life in the body nor perseverance in it, but by the Spirit: And such an Union
and Conjunction is the end of the Work. The Soul must be joined with the First
body whence it was, and with no other; which if thou do not, thou shall fail
of thy purpose, as many Ignorants have done who knew not this Secret

Margarita Novella.

Spirits are fugitive, until such Time as bodies are joined with them, and
help them to fight against the fire: and yet those parts agree but little,
unless with good Operation, and Continued labor: because the nature of the
rwordr Tendent Upwards, where the Center rr the Anima is. And who is he of
those that have tried, that was able to Conjoyne Two Things that are Diverse,
whose Centers too are Diverse? unless after the Conversion shall be transmuted
into True Luna, less or more, according to the Spirituality of the stone? And
if thou would Work with thy Red Stone, project it upon Luna Molten, and thou
shall find the purest Sol.

Cast thy medicin upon thy Ferment, then it is frangible as Glasle. Take that
frangible mass, and cast it upon metals first cleared, and thou shall have
metal of proof.

Ripleus Anglus,

This Secret thou must not be Ignorant of, That our Red man, and his wife do
not Tinge till they are Tinged.

Evoaldus.

Would any man by the Physic Stone turn lead into Gold or Silver? Then he must
first mingle with it the Substance of Lead, that both may become one Thing; In
the same way he must proceed with Tin, and Copper.

Idem. pagin. 123.

The Virtues of the Great Elixir, or Astral medicin. ECHO XII.
THIS Chymic-powder, whether you call it the Philosophers stone or fulsile
Salt; Sulphur, Elixit, or potable Gold, has in it a wonderful power over the
Three Divisions of nature, the Animal, Vegetal, and Mineral Kinds. Thus first
on the Animal: Every Animal, brute, or man, it brings to Sanity from every
disease within, or without. All defections from natural Symmetry are reduced by
it to Temperament, because there is in it a perfect Aequation of Elements
separate from their dreggs, and all Sulphurous Adustions. On the Vegetal; It
acts wonderfully by Exciting their Genital power in their seasons, or out of
them, to a most florid vegetation. In the mineral; Every Imperfect metallic
body, Lead, Tin, Copper, common Argent vive, it transformes to Silver, or Gold
better then the natural in every probat. Precious Stones too.; the Emerald, the
Carbuncle, the Anthrax, or Rubie, Chrysoprase, Adamant, Chrysolite, and many
others, are made by it, Rob. Vallensis.

By long Inquisition, Labor, and certain Experience, we have found one
medicin; by which, that which is hard may be made soft, and that which is soft
may be made hard, that which is fugitive be fixed, that which is foul and dark,
be Illustrated with a wonderful splendour. Geber Arabs.

Wrincles of the face, every litura or spot, gray hairs, it takes away, and
keeps us in perpetual youth, and cheerfulness. Clangor.

The Crystallin Lamen cures the most Diseases; the Red Elixir all; makes a man
grow young like the Eagle, and has produced the lives of some to above five
hundred years.

Geber.

Arteph the Jew when he wrote his book, affirms he had lived a thousand and
five and twenty years.

Rogerius Bacho, de Artis mirabili potestate.

By its Ethereal, humid, oleous fire, it gives us youth; by its Tincture, it
transforms the Imperfect, to the perfect Mines; makes various sorts of precious
stones, with the most precious malleable Glass.

Charta Sacer dorum. Et Chorus Omnium.

The way to attain to this Sacred Science. ECHO. XIII.
FEar God, you that look after this Sacred Skill: For that which you seek is
not a small Thing, but the Treasure of Treasures, the Gift of God, most
Excellent, and Admirable. Bacaser in Synod. Pythag.

He that is Idle and Negligent in the Reading of books, shall never be prompt
in the preparation of Things: for one book opens another, one speech explicates
another; and that which in one is Incomplete, in another is completed. And how
can he that refuses the Theorie, apply himself to the regular practice?
Arnaldus in Rosario.

Follow it with the Instance of labor, but first exercise thyself in a
diuturnity of Intense Imagination: for so thou may find the complete Elixit;
but without that, never at all.

Idem lib. 2 Rosar.

Serious Study (our Doctors say) removes Ignorance, and brings the human
Intellect up to the knowledge of Every Thing.

Richardus Anglicus.

Think not to find out our profound sense by the sound of the letter: for he
that takes the sound of the words, and has not the hidden sense too, shall lose
his Labor, and his Cost. Aurora.

If thou can Resolve even the least of our Sayings, the Greatest cannot be
hid from thee. Aurora Consurgens prolog.

All wisdom is from God, and was always with him from eternity. Whosoever
therefore loves wisdom, let him seek it, and beg it from him: for he is the
Altitude and profundity of all Science, the Treasure of all wisdom; because
from him, in him, and by him all things are, and without his will nothing can
be: To whom be glory for evermore.

Albertus magnus de Alchymia.

It is impossible that This should beknown unless it be known from God, or from
a master. Rosarium Philosoph: page: 230

The Artist must be prudent, and of a wit naturally subtle, and profound, and
excellent in the Ability to Judge. He must be learned likewise; that what his
wit reaches not to, that may be supplied by his learning: For whosoever aspires
to this Science, and is not a philosopher, is a fool. He must be Industrious,
Laborious, and of a Constant mind; not precipitant; but very patient: For all
hastiness (says our Geber) is from the Devil. He must be at his own
election, and free; not held by other businesses and cares.

He must have money enough for his practice, and books enough for his study.
Theobald Hogheland.

And above all he must be jealous over the Secret, and keep it severely to
himself. Idem Hogheland,

I adjure thee by the living God, whosoever thou art that have this book in thy
hands, that thou offer it not to any of the Unworthy; such as are Fools,
Tyrants, Opressors, Covetous, Proud persons, Adulterers, soft Amorato's, or
such whose belly is their God. Place thy hope in the Lord God, work in his
fear to the good of man, expecting the blessing from above. Jodoc: Grever.
initio Lib.

Thou who have this book, hide it in thy bosom, discover it to none, offer it
not to Impious hands: for it fully contains in it, the very Secretum
Secretorum of the Philosophers. Such a precious Jewel as This, is not to be
cast before Swine. Therefore thou that have the book, lay thy hand upon thy
mouth, that deservedly thou may be said to be, and be, of the Number of the
Ancient Magi.

Arnaldus in Rosario. lib 2. cap. 32.

FINIS Antri.
JOHN PONTANUS UPON The mineral Fire; and the Great Elixir, commonly called The
Philosophers STONE.
I John Pontan have traveled over many Regions, That I might learn something
that was certain concerning the Philosophers stone; and, compassing almost the
whole World, met with none but Impostors, false Deceivers, and no Philosophers:
But studying always, doubting much, and casting every way, at length I found
the Truth: But when I knew the matter, I erred two hundred Times before I found
the True Matter, which the operation, and practice upon it. First, I fell to
putrefie the matter nine months together, and found nothing: I put it in St.
Mary's Bath for a certain Time, and erred in That, as before. Then for Three
months I put it to a fire of Calcination, and wrought amiss: all manner of
Distillations, and Sublimations, such as the Philosophers, as Geber, Archelaus,
and almost all the rest, say, or seem to say, should be used, I practiced; and
found nothing still. Then again I tried to perfect the subject of the whole
Alchymical Art, all the ways that can be imagined; by baths, by dungs, by
Ashes, and a multiplicity of other fires, which yet are found in the
Philosophers books; and yet for all that I found no good. Wherefore, for Three
years continued, I studied in the Philosophers books, but chiefly the books of
Hermes alone, whose shorter words comprehend the whole Stone; although he
speaks obscurely of the Superior, and Inferior, of the Heaven, and of the
Earth. The first Instrument therefore that brings the matter to its Esse in the
First, Second, and Third work, is not the Fire of the Bath, nor of Dung, nor
Ashes, nor of the other heats which the Philosophers have in their books. What
therefore is That Fire that perfects the whole work from the Beginning to the
End? Certainly the Philosophers have alwais concealed it; but I being moved
with piety, and kindness to men, will declare it to you, together with the
complement of the whole work. It is then the Philosophers Stone, but is called
by various names, and thou shall find it hard to know: For it is Watery, Aerie,
Fiery and Earthy; Phegmatic Choleric, and Melancholic; it is Sulphurous, and
is likewise Argent vive: and has many superfluities in it: all which, by the
Living God, are turned into a True Essence, Our Fire mediating: And he that
seperates any thing from the Subject thinking that necessary, knows, nothing
in Philosophy; because what ever is superfluous, unclean, foul or faeculent,
finally the whole Substance of the Subject; is perfected to a Spiritual body
fixed, by mediation of Our fire. And this the Philosophers never revealed, and
therefore few come at the Art, thinking there is, Some such superfluous Nature
to be removed. And now we are to draw out the properties of Our Fire, and try,
whether according to the manner that I have said, It be so fitted to our
matter, that it may be Transmuted by it, since That Fire burns not the matter,
separates nothing from it, parts not the pure from the Impure (as all
philosophers say) but turns the whole subject to purity: It does not sublime
as Geber make his Sublimations and as Arnaldus, and other speaking of
Subbli-mation and and Distillations, Such as are perfected in a short time.

It is Mineral, it is Equal, It is Continual, it vapors not away unless it be
stirred up too much; it also partakes of Sulphur, and is taken from some where
else than from the matter; it pulls down all, dissolves and congeales, congeales
and Calcines: the Invention of It is Artifical: it is a Compendium without
Cost, or with very little; and That Fire is of a moderate Ignition, because
with a remiss Fire the whole work is perfected, and all the right sublimations
made. Whosoever should read Geber, and all the rest, if they should live an
hundred thousand years, would not be able to comprehend it, because that Fire
is found only by profound Imagination; and then it may be comprehended in the
books, and not before. The Error therefore of this Art, is, not to find the
Fire, which turns the whole matter into the true Stone of the Philosophers.
Take it then for thy study; for if I had found this Fire at first, I had not
erred two hundred Times in my practice upon the matter: wherefore I wonder not,
that so many, and great Wits, have not come at the work. They err, have erred,
and will err still, because the Philosophers have not set down the proper
Agent; one only excepted, Artephius by name, but he speaks for himself; and if
I had not read Artephius and heard him what he said, I had never attained the
perfect work. But this is the practice. Take it, bruise it, and bring it down
diligently by Natural Contrition, and put it to the Fire, and know the
proportion of your Fire, namely that it is to be no stronger then only to
Excite the matter, and in a short time even that Fire without any apposition of
hands, will certainly complete the whole work; for it will putrefy, Corrupt,
Generate, and perfect, and make to appear in their times the three Principal
Colors, Black, White, and Red. And by mediation of our Fire, the Med'cin will
be multiplied if it be joined with Crude matter, not only in quantity, but also
in virtue. Therefore with all thy power look after thy Fire, and thou may
prosper in thy Work, because it does the whole Work, and is the key of the
Philosophers which they never discovered. But thou shall come to know it by a
right, profound thinking upon the properties of the Fire set down before, and
no otherwise. This I writ out of piety, and that I may satisfy thee finally;
The Fire is not Transmuted with the matter, because It is not of the Matter, as
I told you before. Thus much I had a mind to say, and admonish the prudent,
that they spend not their money to no purpose, but that they should know what
they are to look for, and so they may attain to the Truth and no Other way.

FINIS.

