THE LEARNED MAID; OR, Whether a MAID may be a Scholar?

A LOGIC EXERCISE Written In Latin by that incomparable Virgin Anna Maria a
Schurman of Vtrecht.

With some Epistles to the famous Gassendus and others.

(...). Ignat. LONDON, Printed by JOHN REDMAYNE. 1659.

ANNA MARIA A. SCHVRMAN. ANo. AETAT. LII. MDCLIX
Cernitis hic picta nostros in imagine vultus:
Si negat ars forma, gratia vestra dabit.


FR. SPANHEMIUS.
THe Low Countries show you a Virgin, excellent, not only in the learned
Languages, but almost in all kinds of Literature; whose admirable wit and mind
capable of all things, you may justly call the utmost Essay of Nature in this
Sex. So largely has the Divine bounty powered forth it self upon one person. If
she has a vast understanding piercing into all things, she has also a skilful
hand marvellously obedient to that guide, executing and expressing in all
materials whatsoever that commands. But these Gifts are far inferior to those
which she accounts chief; Piety without Ostentation, Modesty beyond Example,
and most Exemplary Holiness of Life and Conversation. And though she most
deserves Praise, yet (which is above all Praise) She desires nothing less,
etc.

In Epist. ad Lect.

TO THE HONORABLE LADY, THE LADY A. H.
Madam,
THis strange maid, being now the second time, dressed up in her English Habit,
comes to kiss your hand. She hopes you will admit her to your Closet, and
speak a good word for her to your worthy Friends, and endear her to Them also.
Her Company will be the more delightful, because her discourse is very
rational, and much tending to the perfection of that Sex, whereof you,
excellent Lady, by your Noble Virtues are so great an Ornament and Example.

The Honourer of your Piety, more then of your Fortune; C. B.

The Learned Maid. A Logical Exercise upon this Question.
Whether a Maid may be a Scholar?
WE hold the Affirmative, and will endeavor to make it good.

These Praecognita we premit: First on the part of the Subject, and then of the
Predicate.

By a Maid or Woman, I understand her that is a Christian, and that not in
Profession only, but really and indeed.

By a Scholar, I mean one that is given to the study of Letters, that is, the
knowledge of Tongues and Histories, all kinds of Learning, both superior
entitled Faculties; and inferior, called Philosophy. We except only
Scriptural Theology, properly so named, as that which without Controversy
belongs to all Christians.

When we enquire, whether she may be, we mean whether it be convenient, that
is, expedient, fit, decent.

The words being thus distinguished, the Things are to be distinguished also.

For some Maids are ingenious, others not so: some are rich, some poor: some
engaged in Domestic cares, others at liberty.

The studies of a Scholar are either universal, when we give our selves to all
sorts of Learning: or particular, when we learn some one Language or Science,
or one distinct Faculty.

Wherefore we make use of these Limitations:

First of the Subject; and first, that our Maid Of the erudition of Maids you
may read in Live. 3. Plin. Epist. 17. l. 1. Athen. 1. Plutarch. de educ. lib.
Gord. l. 16. de Negat. Fornar. ad Cas
be endued at least with an indifferent good wit, and not unapt for learning.

Secondly, that she be provided of necessaries and not oppressed with want:
which exception I therefore put in, because few are so happy to have Parents to
bread them up in studies, and Teachers are chargeable.

Thirdly, that the condition of the Times, and her quality be such, that she
may have spare hours from her general and special Calling, that is, from the
Exercises of Piety and household Affairs. To which end will conduce, partly her
immunity from cares and employments in her younger years, partly in her elder
age either celibate, or the Ministry of handmaids, which are wont to free the
richer sort of Matrons also from Domestic troubles.

Fourthly, let her end be, not vain glory and ostentation, or unprofitable
curiosity: but beside the general end, Gods Glory and the salvation of her
own soul; that both her self may be the more virtuous and the more happy, and
that she may (if that chargely upon her) instruct and direct her Family, and
also be useful, as much as may be to her whole Sex.

Next, Limitations of the Predicate, Scholarship, or the study of Letters I so
limit, that I clearly affirm all honest Discipline, or the whole (...) the
Circle and Crown of liberal Arts and Sciences (as the proper and universal Good
and Ornament of Mankind) to be convenient for the Head of our Christian Maid:
yet so, that according to the Dignity and Nature of every Art or Science, and
according to the capacity and condition of the Maid herself, all in their
order, place and time succeed each other in the learning of them, or be
commodiously conjoined. But especially let regard be had unto those Arts which
have nearest alliance to Theology and the Moral Virtues, and are Principally
subservient to them. In which number we reckon Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric;
especially Logic, fitly called The Key of all Sciences: and then, Physics,
Metaphysics, History, etc. and also the knowledge of Languages, chiefly of the
Hebrew and Greek. All which may advance to the more facile and full
understanding of Holy Scripture: to say nothing now of other Books. The rest,
i. e. Mathematics (to which is also referred Music) Poesy, Picture, an^ the
like, not illiberall Arts, may obtain the place of pretty Ornaments and
ingenious Recreations.

Lastly, those studies which pertain to the practice of the Law, Military
Discipline, Oratory in the Church, Court, University, as less proper and less
necessary, we do not very much urge. And yet we in no wise yield that our Maid
should be excluded from the Scholastic knowledge or Theory of those;
especially, not from understanding the most noble Doctrine of the Politics or
Civil Government.

And when we say a Maid may be a Scholar, it is plain we do not affirm Learning
to be a property, or a thing requisite, and precisely needful to eternal
salvation: no, nor as such a good thing which makes to the very Essence of
Happiness in this life: but as a mean and very useful, conferring much to the
integrity and perfection thereof: and as that, which by the contemplation of
excellent things will promote us to a higher degree in the Love of God, and
everlasting Felicity.

Therefore let our Thesis or Proposition be: A Maid may be a Scholar.

For the confirmation whereof we bring these Arguments: 1. On the part of the
Subject: 2. On the part of the Predicate.

I. Argument, from the Property of the Subject.
WHosoever is naturally endu'd with the Principles, or powers of the principles
of all Arts and Sciences, may be a student in all Arts and Sciences:

But Maids are naturally endued with the Principles, etc. Therefore, etc.

The Proposition is thus proved.

They that may have the knowledge of Conclusions deduced from Principles may be
Students, etc.

But they that are naturally endued with the Principles may have the knowledge
of Conclusions deduced from those Principles. Therefore, etc.

The Assertion may be proved both from the property of the form of this
Subject, or the rational soul: and from the very acts and effects themselves.
For it is manifest that Maids do actually learn any Arts and Sciences.

Now, no Acts can be without their Principles.

II. Argument. Again from the property of the Subject.
Whosoever has naturally a desire of Arts and Sciences, may study the Arts and
Sciences.

But a Maid has naturally a desire of Arts and Sciences. Therefore, etc.

The Reason of the Major is manifest: because Nature does nothing in vain.

The Minor is thus confirmed.

That which is in the whole Species or kind, is in every Individual or
particular person; in Maids also.

But all Mankind have in them by Nature a desire of knowledge. ( Aristot.
Metaph. 1. 2.) Therefore, etc.

III. Argument, from the external Property, or Adjunct.
Whosoever is by God created with a sublime countenance, and erected toward
Heaven, may (and ought) give himself to the contemplation and knowledge of
sublime and heavenly things.

But God has created woman also with a sublime and erected countenance: Os
homini sublime, etc. Therefore, etc.

IV. Argument.
Whosoever is in most need of solid and continual employment, may conveniently
give himself to learning:

But woman is in most need of solid and continual employment: Therefore, etc.

The Major is good, because nothing does more exercise and intend all the
nerves and powers of the mind; (and as the great Erasmus says In his Epistle
to Budaeus, where he discourses of the Institution of Sir Tho. Moors
daughters.
) nothing takes so full possession of the fair Temple of a Virgins breast, as
learning and study, whither, on all occasions she may fly for refuge.

The Minor is proved by these two reasons.

1. Whosoever through imbecility and inconstancy of disposition or temper, and
the innumerable snares of the world, is in most danger of vanity, is in most
need of solid and perpetual employment.

But woman, through the imbecility and inconstancy, etc. Therefore, etc.

The Major in this Syllogism is true; because contraries are best cured by
contraries: and nothing does more effectually oppose vanity, then serious and
constant employment.

The Minor. we take to be without controversy: for hardly any, though Heroical
Virtue can safely pass by the Sirens of the world and of youth, unless it be
busied about serious and solid things.

2. The second reason to prove the Assumption or Minor of the IV. Argument is
this:

They that abound with leisure have most need of solid and continual employment:

But women of higher rank, most part abound with leisure. Therefore.

The Major of this syllogism is good, because leisure (or idleness) is of it
self tedious, yea, burdensome, so that Divine Nazianzen justly said, (...). It Is
the greatest pain to be out of action. And because Idleness is the Mother of
wickedness: Homines nihil agendo male agere discunt. Men by doing nothing learn
to do ill.

V. Argument.
They that have the happiness of a more quiet and free course of life, may with
most convenience follow their studies:

But Maids for the most part, have the happiness of a more quiet and free
course of life: Therefore.

The reason of the Major is evident: for nothing is so great a friend to
studies as Tranquillity and Liberty.

The Minor is proved thus:

They which for the most part have their time to bestow upon themselves, and
are exempt from public cares and employments, have the happiness of a more
quiet and free course of life:

But Maids (especially during their celibate, or single life) most part have
their time to bestow on themselves, etc. Therefore.

VI. Argument.
To whom is agreeable the study of the principal Sciences, to the same is also
agreeable the study of Sciences instrumental and subservient:

But, to a Christian woman agrees the study of the Principal Sciences.
Therefore:

The Major is firm for this reason:

To whom the end agrees, to the same is convenient also the lawful means,
whereby we are most easily brought unto that end:

But the instrumental or subservient Sciences are the lawful means, etc.

Therefore.

The Minor is true, because to a Christian woman agrees the study, or assiduous
and serious Meditation of Gods Word, the knowledge of God, and contemplation of
his most beautiful works, as being of most concernment to all Christians
whatsoever.

VII. Argument
The study of Letters is convenient for them, for whom it is more decent to
find themselves both business and Recreation at home and in private, then
abroad among others.

But it is more decent for a Christian Maid to find her self both work and
recreation at home then abroad: therefore etc.

The Major is most true: because studies have this prerogative, to give us a
delightful exercise, and to recreate us when we have no other company, whence
in the Greek proverb, A wise man is (...), self sufficient.

The Minor is no less: because the Apostle requires Women to be (...), Keepers
at home.
Tit. 2.5. And moreover, Experience testifies; whose tongues, Ears, eyes often
travail abroad, hunting after pleasures; their faith, diligence, and modesty
too, is generally called into question.

VIII. Argument, from the Genus of the predicate, or, of Learning.
Arts and Sciences are convenient for those, to whom all Virtue in general is
convenient:

But all Virtue in general is convenient for a Maid. Therefore:

The Major is evident from the division of Virtue into Intellectual and Moral:
under the former whereof, the Philosopher comprehends Arts and Sciences.

The Minor has no need of proof: for Virtue, as Seneca says, chooses her
servants, neither by their State nor Sex.

IX. Argument, from the end of Sciences.
Whatsoever perfects and adorns the intellect of Man, that is fit and decent
for a Christian woman:

But Arts and Sciences do perfect and adorn the intellect. Therefore:

The reason of the Major is, because all creatures tend unto their last and
highest perfections as that which is most convenient for them.

The Minor is plain, because Arts and Sciences are Habits, and by these Habits
are the natural powers and faculties of the soul proved and perfected.

X. Argument.
The things that by their nature conduce to the greater Love of God and the
exciting of his greater reverence in us, are convenient and fit for a Christian
Woman:

But Arts and Sciences by their nature conduce, etc. Therefore:

The Verity of the Major is clearer then the Light. For the most perfect love
and reverence of God becomes all mankind; so that none can here offend in the
excess.

The Minor is thus confirmed:

That which exhibiteth and proposes God and his works to be seen and known by
us in a more eminent degree, naturally conduces to the stirring up in us the
greater love of God and reverence:

But Arts and Sciences exhibit and propose God and his Works, etc.

Therefore.

The Major in this last syllogism is proved by this reason:

Whatsoever is indeed most beautiful, most excellent and most perfect, that,
the more it is known, the more it is loved, and accounted more worthy of
reverence or celebration:

But God and his Works are indeed most beautiful, etc.

Therefore.

The Minor likewise may be proved from the end or effects of Sciences, which do
all confer somewhat to the more facile and more distinct knowledge of God and
his Works.

XI. Argument.
That which arms us against Heresies, and detecteth their fraud, is convenient
for a Christian Woman:

But Sciences arm us, etc,

Therefore.

The reason of the Major is evident: because no Christians in this common
danger, ought to neglect their duty.

The Minor is proved, because sound Philosophy is as a hedge and sense (to use
the words of Clemens Alexandrinus) of the Lords Vineyard, or of our Saviors
Doctrine: Or, being compared with the Gospel, it is (in Saint Basil's
similitude) like the leaves which are an Ornament and Muniment to the fruit.
Indeed by right reason, that corrupt and false reason, upon which heresies
mainly depend, may most easily be refuted.

XII. Argument.
What teaches Prudence without any detriment of Fame or Modesty, is convenient
for a Christian Woman:

But the studies of good Learning teach Prudence, etc.

Therefore:

The Major is confessed: for no man is ignorant, that the Honor of the Female
Sex is most tender, and needs nothing more then Prudence: and how hard a
thing it is and full of hazard, to draw Prudence from use and Experience.

The Minor is proved, because the Writings of Learned men do offer us not
only excellent Precepts, but notable Examples, and do lead us as it were by
the hand to Virtue,

XIII. Argument.
That which makes to true Magnanimity, is Convenient for a Christian Woman:

But the study of Letters makes to true magnanimity.

Therefore.

I prove the Major: because, the more any one is by nature prone to the vice of
pusillanimity, so much the more ^eed there is of aid from the opposite Virtue.
But a Woman is by Nature prone, etc.

Therefore:

The Minor is proved, because Learning erecteth the Mind and puts courage into
the heart, and takes off the vizor from those things which are feared by the
vulgar, or impotenly affected.

XIV. Argument.
That which affects and replenisheth the Mind with honest and ingenuous
delight, is convenient for a Christian Woman:

But, Learning does so.

Therefore.

The reason of the Major is, because nothing is more agreeable to humane
nature, then honest and ingenuous delight, which represents in Man a certain
similitude of Divine gladness. Which Aristotle also highly extolleth. vii. Eth.
xiii. Pleasure is by nature a Divine thing implanted in the hearts of Men.

The Minor is proved thus: Because there is no delight or pleasure (except that
of Christians which is supernatural) either more worthy of an ingenuous soul,
or greater then this, which arises from the study of Letters: as by examples
and various reasons might easily be evinced.

XV. Argument, from the Opposite.
Where ignorance and want of knowledge is not convenient, there the study of
knowledge is convenient:

But ignorance and want of knowledge is not convenient for a Christian Woman.

Therefore.

The Minor is confirmed thus:

That which is of it self, not only the cause of error in the understanding,
but of vice in the will or action is not convenient for a Christian Woman:

But ignorance and want of knowle^ge is of it self the cause of error, etc.

Therefore.

The Major of this syllogism is demonstrated; First, in respect of error in
the understanding; Because ignorance in the understanding (which is called the
Eye (...) If the light that is in the be darkness, how great is that darkness.
Matt. vi.
of the Soul) is nothing else but blindness, and darkness which is the cause of
all error. Secondly, in respect of vice in the Will or Action: because,
Whatsoever makes men proud, fierce, etc. that is the cause of Vice in the will
or action:

But ignorance and want of knowledge makes men proud, etc.

Therefore.

The Major is evident, the Minor is proved hence; because, the less a man
knows himself, the more will he please himself and contemn others: And he who
knows not how much he is ignorant of, will be wise in his own conceit. And
then (as to fierceness) nothing is more intractable then ignorance, as Erasmus
upon much experience testifies: And that I may relate a Sentence of Divine
Plato vi. De Legibus.
(...). Man well bred and instructed becomes the mildest and Gentlest of
Creatures, but being ill brought up is the wildest of all the beasts of the
Earth. Add quod ingenuas etc. Learning mollifies and sweetens a man and takes
away roughness of manners and rusticity.

Lastly, the danger of ignorance, in respect of vice, may he shown from the
nature of vice and virtue. For, whereas to every virtuous action is required
such (...).
Exactness, that it must be conformable on every part to the Rule of right
reason; to the Nature of vice even the least (...).
Inordination, which follows ignorance, may be sufficient.

Testimonies and Examples I do here omit for brevity sake.

A REFUTATION OF THE ADVERSARIES.
These Praecognita are to be premitted.
FIrst, there are some of the Adversaries, who being as it were blinded by I
know not what prejudices, do not limit our Subject; but think it follows from
our Thesis, that there is no choice neither of Wits, nor of Conditions, to make
the predicate agree unto it.

Others there are, who seem to acknowledge no other end of studies, then either
Gain or vain Glory: which is the (...).
prime error, and shameful enough: as if it were supervacaneous to
Philosophize (...). Arist. Metaph. l. 2.
for the avoiding of ignorance.

And some there are lasty who deny not altogether that studies are convenient
for a Maid, but only an eminent degree of Knowledge. Who are perhaps vexed
with Emulation, or certainly with fear, least that should at any time come to
pass.

(...). Many Scholars excel their Masters: and that other saying of a very
ancient Poet, Vos etenim juvenes animos geritis Muliebres: Illa Virago Viri.

Those Men are spirited like Women, that Virgin like a Man.

THE THESIS OF THE ADVERSARIES.
A Christian Maid (or Woman) except she be perhaps divinely excited to it by
some peculiar motion or instinct, may not conveniently give her self to the
study of Letters.
I. Argument. On the part of the Subject.
Whosoever has a weak wit may not give her self to the study of Letters:

But Women are of weak wits.

Therefore.

They will prove the Major; because, to the study of Letters is required a wit
firm and strong: unless we will labor in vain, or fall into the danger (...).
of a disease of the Intellect.

The Minor, they think, needs no Proof.

We answer to the Major: that by our limitation such are exempted, which by
imbecility of their wit are altogether unapt for studies; when we state it,
that at least indifferent good wits are here required. Then, we say, not
always heroical wits are precisely necessary to studies: for the number even
of learned Men, we see, is made up in good part, of those that are of the
middle sort.

To the Minor we answer: It is not absolutely true, but comparatively only, in
respect of the male Sex. For, though Women cannot be equalled for their wit
with those more excellent Men, (who are (...). Eagles in the Clouds:) yet, the
matter it self speaks thus much; Not a few are found of so good wit, that they
may be admitted to studies, not without fruit. But On the contrary we infer

They that are less able by dexterity of wit, may most conveniently addict
themselves to studies:

But Women are less able by dexterity of wit. Therefore.

We prove the Major, because studies do supply us with aids and helps for our
weakness:

Therefore.

II. Objection.
Whose mind is not inclined to studies, they are not fit to study;

But the minds of Women are not inclined to studies.

They prove the Major, because nothing is to be done invita Minerva, as we say,
Against the hair.

The Minor they will prove from use and custom; because very seldom do Women
apply their mind to study.

We answer to the Major. It should be thus: Whose mind, after all means duly
tried, is not inclined to studies: otherwise it is denied.

To the Minor we say, no man can rightly judge of our Inclination to studies,
before he has encouraged us by the best reasons and means to set upon them:
and withal has given us some taste of their sweetness, although in the mean
time we do not want examples to evince t^^ contrary to be true.

III. Objection.
The studies of Learning are not convenient for those that are destitute of
means necessary to their studies.

But Women are destitute of means, etc.

Therefore.

The Major is without controversy.

They endeavor to prove the Minor, because there be no Academies and
Colleges, wherein they may exercise themselves.

But we deny this consequence; for it suffices, that under the conduct of
their Parents, or of some private Teacher, they may exercise themselves at home.

IV. Objection.
Studies are not fit for them whose labor misseth of its proper End.

But the labor of Women misseth of its proper End.

Therefore.

The Major may be proved, because the End is that for which all things are done.

They prove the Minor by this, that Women are seldom or never preferred to
public Offices, Political, Ecclesiastical, or Academicall.

We answer to the Major: Women, in speculative Sciences are never frustrated of
their End: and in the Practical (now spoken of) though they attain not the
Primary, or that public End; yet do they attain a Secondary End, as I may
say, and more private.

V. Objection.
To whom, for their Vocation, it is sufficient to know a little, to them is not
convenient the Encyclopaedy, or a more sublime degree of knowledge.

But it is sufficient to Women, etc.

Therefore.

They prove the Major, because it is not convenient for any one to study things
superfluous and impertinent to his Calling.

The Minor they will prove; because forsooth the Vocation of a Maid, or Woman,
is included in very narrow limits, the terms of a private or Oeconomicall life.

Let the Major pass, we answer to the Minor. There is an ambiguity in the
words; First, Vocation: for, if here they understand the Vocation of a private
life, opposed to public Offices, We say, by the same reason the Encyclopaedy
or a more sublime degree of Knowledge is denied all men too, that lead a
private life: When yet, that most grave Sentence of Plutarch is pronounced of
all men of what rank soever, without exception; It becomes a perfect Man, (...).
to know what is to be known, and to do what is to be done. But if they
understand a special Vocation, in order to a Family and Oeconomicall cares; We
say, that the uniuersall Calling which pertains chiefly to us all, either as
Christians, or at least as men, is in no wise excluded by it. Yea, I may be
bold to affirm, that a Virgin both may and ought especially to attend upon this
Universal Calling, as being usually more free from the impediments of the
former. (...).
She that is unmarried cares for the things of the Lord: 1 Cor. vii. 34.
Again, there is ambiguity in the words, it is sufficient, which is sufficiently
taken away by what is above said in the limitation of the convenience and
necessity of studies.

Wherefore our Thesis stands firm:

A Christian Maid, or Woman, may conveniently give her self to Learning:

Whence we draw this Consectary.

That Maids may and ought to be excited and encouraged by the best and
strongest Reasons, by the Testimonies of wise men: and lastly, by the examples
of illustrious Women, to the embracing of this kind of life especially those
who are above others provided of leisure, and other means and aides for their
studies, And, because it is best, that the mind be seasoned with Learning from
the very Infancy: therefore the Parents themselves are chiefly to be stirred
up, as we suppose, and to be admonished of their duty.

ANNA MARIA a SCHVRMAN TO THE Famous Scholar PETRUS GASSENDUS.
SIR,
YOU have lately in your most courteous Letters given such a favorable
Character of me, and described me after the Pattern of Virtue herself, that I
would not desire any other Statue to be decreed to my eternal Memory, if your
Good Will here had not carried you beyond the bounds of Truth. But, seeing you,
that are in other things a most severe Patron of Truth, are so far transported,
either by the fair wind of flattering Fame, or by an excessive Affection to us,
that in accumulating praises on me, you have rather expressed the Candor of
your own Mind, then my Effigies, I should offend against your Genius and
veracity, unless I did without delay deliver you out of this loving error. I
perceive, you have so kindly interpreted our short Dissertation of the more
polite studies of the Femal Sex, that from thence has proceeded no small
accession to your esteem of me. And yet, what I pray is greatly to be praised
in this writing, besides my endeavor seriously to maintain a liberal Cause,
and (if I may have any suffrage here) most reasonable, so far as Modesty would
permit? But it is an illustrious Argument of your Love to true Wisdom, that
you are so far from contemning the least spark of it, even in our Sex; that you
are pleased to cherish it, and raise it up into a Flame. Wherefore, though for
diverse reasons, I have heretofore resolved to send no Letters unto Strangers;
nevertheless, because your Virtue and your excellent Benefits conferred upon
the whole World of Learning, exempt you out of that number, I should incur the
displeasure of all the Graces, should I not by some Monument or other testify,
how much cause of joy I have, from the Approbation you have vouchsafed to my
course of Life, My ambition is to please the Few and Good (for to please the
Many is to displease the wise) and you especially, whom I behold furnished with
such Arms, and Forces, that as of late you have excellently vindicated the
Reputation of ancient Philosophy; so if need be, you can easily defend the
common Cause of Good Arts and Learning, against the professed Enemies thereof,
or at least the contemners of the Female Glory.

Farewell Vtrecht xii. Kalend. Ian. MDCXLIV.
ANNA MARIA a SCHVRMAN, To the excellent IOANNES BEVEROVICIVS.
Sir,
I Have seen your Treatise, Of the excellency of the Female Sex: but I have
only seen it, (...) on the By, both by reason of various little businesses,
wherein I am even against my will many times engaged; and because I feared,
least by detaining it with me, I should be a hindrance to you, and have more
regard to my own desire then your design. Truly, I admired your overflowing
kindness, whereby you have been pleased, not only, by your most Elegant
style, to assert that, which alone I lately requested of you, the glory of
Learning and Wisdom to our Sex: but so favor our Cause, as to equal us
every where to Men, that I may not say to prefer us above them in some things.
Do not think I am altogether of your Opinion, especially, having raised up so
many Examples of illustrious Women to so high renown, that your discourse
seems to procure them more Envy then Admiration. Wherefore, I do heartily
entreat you, yea by our inviolable Friendship I beseech you, that you would not
(as according to your accustomed favor toward me, you seem to intend) Dedicate
this Book to me. For, you are not ignorant, with what evil eyes the greatest
part of men (I mean not so much Men of the meanest rank, whom it is easy to
contemn, as Men of great Esteem) do bebold what tends to our praise. So
that, they think we are well dealt with, if we obtain Pardon for aspiring to
these higher studies; so far are they from being pleased, if they should
suspect me to have given the least Occasion of sounding forth our praises after
that manner.

I need not therefore, use many words to prevail with you, not to give our
Adversaries new matter of Calumniation, after you have done so much in this
work to stop their mouths. But if you seek some illustrious Name to
prefixe in the Frontispice of this Book, you will not find, in my Opinion,
any more auspicious then the Name of N. N. For, you cannot but receive much
Favor from this Noble Lady, who, as she is exceedingly delighted with good
Letters, and the study of Languages, so is she safely placed above all danger
of Envy.

And, which is the Principal thing, she is able both by her Authority and
Example, to afford no small Honor to our Cause.

Farewell, my excellent Friend. M.DC.XXXIX.
ANNA MARIA a SCHVRMAN TO THE Most Noble Lady MOOR.
Most Noble Lady,
YOur Letters seemed unto me sweeter then Nectar; to which, because I am highly
delighted in confferring with you, I had returned a more speedy Answer, had I
not waited for the Bearer my Brother's going that way toward England. He will
declare unto you the manner of my Life, and open to your view the closet of my
heart, (where you will find your self to have a chief place.) Yet I cannot
choose but say something to the grave and serious Argument of your Epistle. You
enquire, how I order and dispose of my affairs, that with least offense, I may
especially in these calamitous times, pass through the troubles of this Life.
Though I acknowledge your singular Modesty and Civility, that you esteem my
Example not unworthy of your Imitation: yet I doubt not, if by Gods Grace, we
might once enjoy the happiness of living together in the same house, we may be
able in so great a Conspiration of studies and affections, to excite each other
unto Virtue. However, I will tell you in a word, not what I always attain to,
but what mark I aim at, to come as near as I can. The compendious and safest
way is pointed out unto us by the Pole-Starre of Heavenly Truth. For it was
excellently said, by that great Earl of Mirandula: Philosophy seeks Truth;
Theology finds it; Religion possesses it. But, that I may not go from the
purpose; we determine with the notable Philosopher Epictetus not amiss; That
Humane Affairs have two Handles: yet not, as He, One convenient, the other
inconvenient: but, Both most convenient, if they be well and orderly taken.
Thus, Whatsoever pertains to a Virtuous and happy life, must either be
referred to Divine Providence, or to our Duty. As to the first, my business
is, that in things out of our power, I may have one only care, namely, to cast
all my cares upon God: according to that Advice of the Apostle; Cast ye all
your care upon him, for he cares for you. For indeed, here is the Original of
all our inquietude, that we use to roull in our minds too anxiously the events
of things, which alone depend upon the pleasure of Almighty God. Next, as to
our Duty: it belongs to us to moderate and govern those things only which
fall under our deliberation, both by our industry and prudence.

Nothing does so much throw us out of the Castle of Tranquillity, as evil
Examples, and the fallacious enticements of this World: (That I may omit the
tediousness and trouble, perpetually attending their Condition, who act as it
were, upon the public Stage.) And for this Malady, I find no remedy more
present and effectual then the retirement of Studies. For, since the manners
of Men are so corrupted, one can hardly, raise so much heat in others for the
prosecution of Virtue, as he shall abate of his own, for the most part, by
frequent Conversation with the Men of this Age. But here, in our recesse, the
vanities and deceits of the World, being far removed, we judge of all things
more rightly, and securely contemn the vanities that fill prophaner souls with
admiration.

Here, sweetly passing away our time with the Muses, we erect our minds to
higher matters, and without impediment run the course of Philosophy. Whereof
you may read more in the Printed Epistle enclosed. To which I have added my
Effigies done to the Life with my own hand: that, every way, so far as I can, I
may make my self known unto you.

Farewell, the immortal Honor of our Sex, and continue your Love to Her, who
loves you most affectionately.
Vtrecht, Call. April. MDCXLI.
ANNA MARIA a SCHVRMAN, To the Honorable. Sr. SIMOND D'EWES.
I Have received your Letters, illustrious Sir, with great joy, as it was fit
to receive Letters that carry with them the purest candor, and most polite
Humanity. And truly, I would not have so long delayed my Answer, but that for
diverse reasons, I have resolved to write to my Country Men not often, to
strangers very seldom. Nevertheless, having lately understood by the most
Noble and most faithful Lord Strickland, how much you excelled in Honor, and
all kind of Learning, my Virgin-bashfulnesse (to which I am used to yield very
much) blusheth not to give place to your affable Virtues, as the chiefest of
all. Wherefore in Contemplation hereof, I laid hold upon my Pen with an earnest
desire to do them that reverence by my Letters, which they justly require at
my hands. And I was not a little encouraged hereunto by your most equitable
Sentence concerning our Sex: which I heartily wish I could as well make good
by my Example, (according to your too favorable Censure) as by reasons, and
Arguments.

As to what you write concerning the most Learned Matron, Madam Bathsua
Metkins, that she so highly commended my Industry in sublimer studies, and
that you were upon that account inflamed with an incredible desire of having
conference with me: All this, I impute both to her undeserved affection toward
me, and to your courtesy in giving so easy an Assent. For you ascribe unto me
such glory of Learning, which if I should willingly admit, I should greatly
offend against the Laws of Truth and soberness. And yet I will not deny,
that I am very much delighted with the best and noblest things, though some
times they exceed my capacity. And I beseech you think not I am insensible of
that Concussion and shaking of your Commonwealth: for whose safety my
incessant Prayers are sent up to Heaven. Wherefore, you will do me a very
great favor if, as you promise, you please to communicate unto us (partakers
of the same cause) whatsoever shall be achieved by your Honorable Assembly
either in Peace or War.

Farewell, the great Patron of Learning, with your most generous Wife, whom I
entreat you most humbly to salute in my name. Vtrecht pride. Calend. November.
MDCXLV.
TO THE Reverend Doctor FREDERICVS SPANHEMIVS ANNA MARIA a SCHVRMAN.
I Have received your Letters, Reverend Sir, but saw not the Minister whom you
commended to me De meliore nota, as a man of the better mark. As to the Edition
of my Trifles, which you still persuade me to yield unto: though I have been
hitherto irresolute, yet now because it is your pleasure, I cannot any longer
resist your counsels, proceeding from so much candor and friendship.

Yet because many of the Letters contain little beside words and complements,
I will take a care that the best of them (such as they are) shall be selected
and transmitted to your hand. But do you correct, form and reform them
according to your own mind: and take the same power over this Epistle which I
send to N. and if you suspect any syllable in it that may justly offend him,
blot it out, and then be pleased to seal it up and deliver it.

Farewell my most loving friend: We do also very affectionately salute you and
your dear Wife. Vtrecht ix. Call. Ian* MDCXLVI.
Out of an Epistle TO Dr. RIVET.
TO conclude, I will here allege one Example which is ever before my eyes: the
Example of that incomparable Princess Jane Gray, to whom no Nation, no Age,
(Let me speak it with the good leave of all) will afford an equal. Michael
Angelo, a Florentine who describes the History of her Life and Death fully
and pathetically, has among other things noted this, in the Conference she had
which Fecknam the Messenger of her Death: Namely that slighting those other
excellent endowments she had received from God; such as Nobility, Beauty, and
Youth; whereby she might have acquired Greatness and Glory to her self in
this World; She magnanimously pronounced; Nothing in all her Life was so
pleasant to her, as that she had the Knowledge of the three Learned Tongues.
And, if the delight, thence arising to us in this Life, may be called by the
name of true Felicity, She confessed, her self had found it in the study of
good Letters, and especially of the Holy Scripture. And, although many men do
greatly blame such studies in a Woman; yet she, for the great comfort of her
Soul which she had at last perceived thence, and still did perceive within,
judged their Opinion contrary to all reason.

Oh sweet words, pronounced not under shade of the Schools, but at a last Act
of a most Glorious Martyrdom! Who would not reverence this saying, and take it
for an Oracle.

FINIS.

