HYMNVS TABACI; A POEM In honor of TABACO. Heroically Composed BY RAPHAEL
THORIVS: Made English by PETER HAVSTED Mr of Arts CAMB.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard, 1651.

LUDOWIC a KINSCHOT, To the READER.
IT is almost two years, (Courteous Reader) since this Elegant Poem of Tabaco,
by some notwithstanding either through negligence or ignorance main'd and
mangled, came to our hands. Which being approved by men of most learned
judgments, I thought it was in no wise longer by me to be suppressed. But a
perfect copy being hitherto wanting, I blushed not to require it of the Author;
although at that time I was altogether unacquainted with him. Who, as he is
most loving and Courteous, soon subscribed to our petition. He therefore sent me
a copy, partly more adorned, and partly more augmented: With which he also sent
other companions full of wit and pleasantness. These were certain letters,
which to set in place of a preface, will be neither strange from the argument
of the book or our intention. For it is far from me to arrogate to my self the
labors of another man. The Author therefore of this work is Raphael Thorius,
who as he is a Physician famous, if any at this day, so is he also no vulgar
Poet. The Argument indeed seems light, but what is handled by such a Physician,
does not only delight, but teach; unless any man will object against the
Siphylide of Fracastorius, who by an argument almost infamous got to himself so
great a name. Thou shall here see the invention of Tabaco ascribed to Bacchus;
how fitly, they cannot be ignorant, who as the Poet says, Plerunque alternis
admiscent pocula fumis.

Be favorable therefore Courteous Reader, to this work, and enjoy it, and when
thou do recreate thy mind with reading it, remember the common Verse,

Usus habet laudem, crimen abusus habet. LUD. a KINSCHOT.

RAPHAEL THORIUS To LUDOWIC a KINSCHOT.
FOr so great a benefit I give my utmost thanks most renowned Sir, not to you
alone but to those great men also, Rutgersius, and Heinsius, by whose
liberality and your own I have been so spendidly entertained: not as a
stranger, but as the familiar Parish Priest, intending perhaps with my conceits
to add unto your merriment. I never thought Apollo had bequeathed so good an
omen to this little Poem, as to make it acceptable to such palats, or that
indeed it would have become the age of sixteen years being rashly put forth,
unwarily undertak'n, and without care composed. Notwithstanding since by its
own good fate, it has found such courteous entertainment; I will neither take
from it the benefit of its own happy genious, nor deceive your expectation. But
shall be rather liberal to those who are liberal, joining a younger brother to
it, something better habited: Both I freely offer to the judgments both of
your self, and those before mentioned. Send it to the Press when you think best
convenient: but being abroad, cherish it; be favouroble also to the father, and
defend against the censure of severe Cato's, an old man playing among children.
But that I have given to you what to other friends has been denied, the place
and persons are sufficient reasons: for here it is a crime to be a Poet,
neither is he accounted wise that after the first appearance of his beard,
sleeps in Pernassus: Otherwise is your opinion, to whom the Muses in gray
hairs are acceptable, and who easily acquit Sophocles, his Tragedy being read,
from the accusation of madness; Moreover, being in this kind of learning
esteemed Princes, not undeservedly ye sustain the part of Judges, no man daring
to contradict your sentence. And this does also comfort me in throwing so
hazardous a die, that what you have once approved, no man will venture to
disprove. But to you, the best of men, I give many and particular thanks, that
being in face unknown, you abounded in so much friendship toward me, that you
thought me worthy of your love, and lastly have undertaken the care of this
infant and helpless Poem: Which to requite, I can only subscribe to your
requests and remain a willing observe of your commands. I send you therefore
the first hymn corrected, to which, more furniture being added, I have joined
the second. Although I had rather entitle them a book then a hymn: I should
more carefully excuse the lightness of the subject, were not the argument
suitable to my art: However it be, I never shall repent to appear upon the scene
with such authorities. Your elegant Epigram I shall be glad to see in the
front, to the ornament both of the Work and of the Workman; who, in the
threshold of our friendship, gives you his hand as the pledge of his eternal
fidelity. Farewell.

London, Febr. 18. 1625.
Omnibus Paeti-Sugis.
MOrbifugae vires plantae, miracula stirpis
Caelitus ostensae, parts diducit in omnes
Thorius, and primo fumos orditur ab ovo.
Vos quibus ad Patum vigilanti stertere naso,
Fumigerisque placet replere vaporibus auras,
Ore favete omnes. Coelo delabitur alto
Planta beata, udo non aspernanda cerebro;
Scilicet in medijs habitat vis enthea fum^s,
Et parvo ingentes clauduntur cortice vires.
Ludicra narrantur; sed and haec quoque seria ducunt
Veraque sub ficto latitat sapientia Paeto.
LUD. a KINSCHOT.

In Paetologiam Doctissimi Raph. Thorij D. M. Amici intimi.
QVod jam summa procul villarum culmina fumant,
Quod fumos bibit omnis ager, bibit omnis ab Aula
Ad caulam fumosa domus, quod pascere fumos
Fumosos equitum cum Dictatore magistros,
Quod pueros fumare juvat, fumare puellas,
Mollius indignor: quin tecum ignosco puellis
Et pueris, aulis, caulis, equitumque Magistris.
Prime pater Paeti, fumantum gloria, THORI,
Non fumum ex fulgore, sed ex fumo dare lucem
Sedule; Te praetore magis lippire decenter
Quam lachryma ridente putant; jucunda cuique
Te Medico tussis cui nec pituita molesta est,
Creditur instanes membris emungere morbos.
At mihi quod sacra latet in vertigine multo
Praecipuum est; Hos te calices fecisse disertum:
Haec aliquid certe fumo facundia debet.
Faecundi calices, felix vertigo, saliva
Nobilis, insignes lachrymae, gratissima tussis.
Me quoque, si parce videor laudare merentes
Insolitas calicumque super praeconia lauds,
Me quoque vicinis afflatum credit fumis,
Et sicco titubare mero; brevis iste futurus
Est furor: exierit sensim vesania primi
Turbinis, aggrediar stabilis de nare tepenti
Fundere cum fumis quae vor per saecula vectent
Verba vetentque mori, nolint Jovis ira velignes.
Profumi! sed and hic furor est; ignosci evobis,
Fumosoque mihi: cessem fumare, tacebo
Sobrius, and sapiam, labris is encomia, lingua,
Dentibus occludam: quid enim, si THORIUS unum
Arguit ipse sui reliquum fecisse stuporem?
IN EANDEM.
CArmina sputantur fumi potoribus, audi
Massiliae si quem fumea vina juvant,
THORIUS exemplo docuit spumantia multum
Pocula, fumantes omnia posse tubos.
CONSTANTER.

TABACO.
BOOK I.
OF harmelsse Bowls I mean to sing the praise,
And th'Herb which does the Poets fancy raise;
Aid me, O I make bold to change the Poets Patron, and in stead of Sir W.
Paddie, to entitle Phoebus to it:
Phoebus; Thee I do invoke.
Fill me a Pipe (boy) of that lusty smoke,
That I may drink the God into my brain,
And so enabled, write a buskined strain,
For nothing great or high can come from thence,
Where that blessed Plant denies his influence.
No Mortal had the honor to descry
This noble Herb first, but a Diety;
'Twas found by Bacchus, when the God wound up
To his true height, by his own charming Cup,
Led the Indians forth under the warlike Thyrsus, or a spear wound about with
Ivy was the Ensign of Bacchus, as the Club of Hercules, the Trident of Neptune,
etc. And this may seem to be given to him Emblematically to show us, that Wine
does secretly wounds, carrying a Cuspis, a sting, or sharp and pointed weapon
hid under the Ivy leaves, the pleasure of drinking it and beholding it dancing
and sparkling in the glass.
Spear,
Whose glittering head an Ivy Twine did wear;
And the all-Soveraign Weed being found out thus,
Too late (alas) has been made known to us.
The twice-born Liber seeing that his Foes
(Whom the parched desert Cliffs as yet enclose)
Had furious war begun, with hot alarms,
Does call his Ivy-crowned troops to arms,
And the swift Lynxes to be yoked, commands;
The great Bassarides in ordered bands,
March with their valiant Leader to the Field;
And all his furious Priests obedience yield
To his behests, and follow: nor yet will
The Foster Father to Bacchus, whom the Poets feign to be the Superintendent or
Governor of the Satyrs.
Silenus (though grown old) at home sit still.
The Drugdges and the Carriages go next,
And amongst them is led ("an ample Text,
For Antiquaries to gloss on) the sage
Silenus saddle- Ass, grown lame with age;
The fearful Indians here and there do fly;
And while they sought their flying enemy,
The weary Troops having too long in vain
Wandered about upon the sandy Plain,
Grow faint, and their provisions all are spent,
And Bacchus wants what he himself first lent
Unto us Men, the liquor of the Vine.
("Pity that he who gave, should e're lack Wine!)
The Silenus.
old man's Vessel too being quite drawn dry,
Does in this Chariot overturned ly.
The Furious women, who served in the sacrifices of Bacchus; (...), insanire.
Maenades and Satyrs, and the rout
Of untamed youth (impatient of the drought)
Do wound the intrals of their Mother Earth,
Longing to see some gentle spring gush forth.
But all in vain, necessity makes them bold
To taste the salt drink; their own bladder hold
Unnatural draughts! but yet such is their woe,
That those unnatural draughts do fail them too.
So Tyrant-like, Thirst in their bodies reigns,
All moisture does forsake their dried veins.
The sterner face of horror now controuls
The sinking Troops; Some breathe their toasted souls
Out of their reeking jaws; others are found
To own borrow supplies from their mutual wound;
Who finding too those Fountains to grow dry,
In a despair drink their last Cup and die.
While thus the Army is about to fall,
And general death is threatened over all,
The first finding of Tabaco.
A Courteous Vale, which not far off did die,
Presents a fair hope to the fainting Eye;
An obscure Herbage shows a doubtful face,
Confused made by distance of the place.
At which the nimble-sighted Evius cried,
O my companions, let us awhile abide:
Why with disgrace should we forsake the Field?
Yon neighbour-Vale will us wished succor yield.
These words applied Balsame to their sore,
And made them close those veins they broached before.
Which having done slow, yet labored pace,
(As weakness would permit) they reach the place.
And being there, behold a Wood over spread
With vast thick leaves, lifts up its brisking head,
Offering his aid, "a wel-grown Plant, and tall,
Which we of later times Tabaco call.
Bacchus o're-joy'd, salutes the powerful Weed,
Hail thou that art our help in greatest need;
I do acknowledge thee a gift Divine,
And of near kindred to that The Vine.
Tree of mine.
More he had said, but that his followers deaf
Unto such Courtship, pluck the longed-for leaf,
Which they betwixt their green-di^d teeth do bite,
And with if slake their barking appetite.
Not so, Silenus: many years had made
Him wiser far, to taste he is afraid:
Not his own ill, the danger of his Mates
Shall teach the virtue of their newfound Cates.
Not is it long before the event discries
The uncouth power that in Tabaco lies;
Through the whole Camp (a wondrous thing to tell,)
Like drunken men, they vomited and fell.
The Earth does seem to glide in Circlewise,
(" Whose opinion is, that the Sun stands still, and the Earth (being one of
the Planets) moves.
Copernicus from hence learnt his device,)
And their sick brains believe the Heavens in love
To meet the rising Earth, do downwards move.
A most invincible desire of sleep
Does seize them all; the Goat-foot Satyrs keep
Loud snortings on the Lands, and by their side
The The women-Priests of Bacchus spoken of before: so called from the mountain
Mimas sacred to Bacchus; or (as others) from the Gr. word (...), to imitate;
because it was their use (carrying horns and spears wrapped about with Ivy in
their hands) to imitate his expedition into India.
Mimallons (or femall Priests) abide
Locked up in Silence, (in a happy hour.
"Most blessed Drug, had thou no other power?)
But this not long: New life and Spirits apace
Run back t'inform each member, and do chase
Dull drowsinesse from them; now again they rise,
Their feet are firm, lightning comes from their eyes.
With brawny arms they shake the leavy Spear,
And with loud cries do wish the Foe were near.
Silenus sees, and wonders to behold
The infeebled Host so suddenly grown bold;
O my good Friends, he cries, we came not hither
Without some God propitious to us; neither
Let us forget still to confess the same,
And sing just praises to great Bacchus name.
Nor let us be ashamed now to call
Tabaco our Health, our Spirit, our Life, our All;
Who but for that had fell, for ought we know,
A sacrifice to the insulting Foe;
The weak unto the powerful; and so we
Had yielded them a bloudlesse victory:
But let them now come on, and they shall find
Our strength grown great, to that as great a mind.
Yet let us careful be; though we have gained
A Gift from Heaven, it must not be profaned
By blind and ignorant usage: for this know,
If old Silenus any skill does owe
To his gray hairs, some secret poison lies
In the rare Plant, hid from our outward eyes.
Trust not the green juice then unto your Maw,
Eat not the Leaf, there is danger in it raw:
Phoebus shall cook it for us, so we may
Take wholesome draughts purged by his searching ray.
For sure kind Nature, if we may be bold
So far her Cabinet-Councels to unfold,
Invented it a Banquet for the Brain,
Not for the Belly. Let each lusty Swain
Rub the dried herb then twixt his hands; which done
And housed in Pipes, let us entreat the Sun
To fire it for us, that the warm Cloud may
(Being subtle grown, and apt to find the way)
With the more ease the winding Stair obtain,
Which leads unto the Chamber of the Brain.
Silenus thus commanded, they obey;
Part of the Satyrs without all delay
Prepare the Canes, and some the Leaves do break
Into a dust-like substance; others take
The Pipes and fill them, nothing now but fire
Is wanting to them; which they all desire.
The old Silenus.
Man from his Wallet draws a Glass
Which in old time the quaint invention was
Of bold Prometheus, when (to get a name)
He from Heavens Furnace stole The Eternal Flame.
Lo, here is fire, he says; that said, he lays
Dried Leaves together; and that done, assays
To catch the Sunbeams; to those leaves applies
His Glass, which round does from the Center rise.
The darted rays like to sword points, do wound
The yiedling fuel on the parched ground;
Heat by degrees steals in, and lodges there,
Whence Smoke is sent to tell that fire is near.
The Satyrs all applaud him, and do bear
Their Silenus.
Master on their Shoulders, up they rear
Their voices to the stars: but the old Sire first
Adventures with the Pipe to quench his thirst.
From thence he gently sucks a precious Cloud,
Which his wide nosthrils vent again: aloud
The Satyrs laugh; but he filled with delight
To taste the sudden sweetness, finds new might
Dispersed through his whole body, like as when
Crowned Bowls do add quick Spirits unto men.
Moisture returns into his mouth; no more
Salt thirst or bitter hunger (as before)
Afflicts him; only a short giddiness
Makes his legs fail, and temperate sweat does dress
His face in pearly drops: but yet not long,
They vanish, he remains unhurt and strong.
Under the Covert of the cooling shade,
Which by the thick-leav'd Indian plant was made,
Silenus lays him down, and being there,
Began to tell how Sciences first were
Made known to Mortals; and most liberal
Of the rich treasure of his mind, does fall
To speak of Natures Secrets, and rare powers,
So with sweet talk cheating the slow-paced hours.
The youthful Crew do imitate their Sire,
And their Tabaco in their Pipes they fire;
But yet unskilled to nose it right, it rears
A Coughing, not without some grieflesse tears.
While merry thus they sport them on the grass,
Behold, their Messengers, who long (alas)
Had been expected, do return, and bring
Plenty of Wine and Victuals to their King
And Camp, at which Eccho's of joy do tear
With loud and pleasant notes the passive air.
Their Pipes they tune to song, and high in mirth,
Low they do bow their knees toward the Earth
Unto the Men which did the Bottles bring;
(Such petulant Sport through the whole Host did ring)
Nor yet the old man's lame and crazie Ass
Being returned, can unsaluted pass.
With junkets first, next they do cheer their Souls
With lusty Wines, Checkering their Pipes and Bowls.
All things are filled with Smoke, songs, dances, cries;
Till midnight pours sweet sleep into their eyes.
The Morn no sooner with her rosy wing,
Had fanned cool air upon them, but their King,
The careful Bacchus, summons them to rise:
The like does good Silenus, and applies
Sage counsel to the Army, who the night
Before had been steeped in soft delight.
Enough, my friends, enough, y' have given the reign
To Wine and Mirth, be now your selves again;
Call back your wonted Anger to your brow,
And think of naught but Wars and Conquest now.
Compose your Arms then to a present Fight,
The Foe is near perhaps, though out of sight;
In ordered ranks march on; but first take heed
To store your selves with our new precious Weed,
Made ready for your Pipes, your Pipes made fit
Unto your mouths, with fire to kindle it,
And suddenly with this prodigious face
Of smoke and horror, we the Foe shall chase.
Be men, and doubt not but eternal Fame
Shall Trumpet unto aftertimes, your name.
This said, with nimble diligence they all
Strive who shall first obey their General;
Who by this time is in his Chariot, pressed
For Action, eminent above the rest:
And by his Chariot (slowly as he can)
The unkemb'd Ass carries the good Silenus.
old man;
For war unmeet, yet eloquent, and fit
For sage advice, when dangers call for it.
The numerous Host with equal wings does fly,
And with stout spirits wish for the Enemy,
Who is at hand; for presently The enemy.
he rears
Over the neighbor Hill his growing Spears.
The blood begins to boil in Bacchus breast,
Some shake their brazen Timbrels, and the rest
Beat up their warlike Drums: but all combine
To whet their resty anger with good Wine.
Their ready Pipes are fired, and with their breath,
They cast a mist before the face of death:
Breathing out fire and smoke, they forward go
In Enquipage to meet the coming Foe.
A sudden fear and trembling does possess
The affrighted The enemies of Bacchus.
Indians, who suppose no less
Then the dire sooty powers of Hell to be
Marching against them; part of their Army flee,
And wisely wary, fearing future harms,
Trust rather to their Legs, then to their Arms:
Some do for mercy crave, and without stroke,
Submit their willing necks unto the yoke:
But quickly (though too late) their eyes grow clear,
To see their error and their Panick fear.
Ashamed to be deluded so, they cry,
They blush and sigh for their lost liberty,
But Bacchus chears them, (...) whom cannot Bacchus cheer?
So tempered with a sweetness he does bear
His awful Majesty, that they grow glad
By such a band so to be vanquished;
One day does see, ("as they would mingle souls,)
The Victors and the Conquered mingling Bowls
Without all diffrence, as if equally
They both had sacrificed to Victory.
The Wine grows busy, and betwixt each Cup
("As in a Play 'twixt the Acts) their Pipes strike up;
They do admire their native Herb, but yet
Grieve they no sooner knew the use of it.
Thus they with Smoke their inward Cares do smother,
And so by one Cloud do expel another.
Thence was the famous Plant at first made known
To men; and thus have I it is Cradle shown.
What virtues in the noble Weed do rest,
What Constitutions it agrees with best,
And what diseases it will cure, is now
Thy Task, my Muse. "Rub my contracted brow,
And waken all the heat that is in my Brain,
To add a Genius to another Strain.
Tabaco King of Plants I well may call; Tabaco the Catholic medicine.

Others have single virtues, this has all.
All Herbs to him do loyal homage yield,
The vanqush'd Hellebore leaves him the Field,
The loos'ning Rhubarb too, and merry Vine,
The Balsam good for wounds, the Beans for swine;
Field Pennyroyal which the mind does cheer,
And Poppy, which a heavy head does wear.
O the great goodness of the Gods, who set
So rich a Jem in a small Cabinet!
Whose seed, though small as dust or atoms light,
Deceiving both the touch and nimble sight,
Like a thick wood strait covers all the fields,
And surest aid in doubtful sickness yields;
Of which effects who seeks the cause to know,
A labor difficult does undergo:
For whether a salt mixture do abound,
This Plants admired substance to compound;
Or whether nature grown more liberal,
Her richest bounties on this Herb let fall:
Or that each Countries various situation,
The soil or seasons cause the alteration;
Or that it have an inbred sympathy
With young and aged tempers to agree,
In natures secret bosom lies concealed,
Nor is by humane studies yet revealed;
Yet by examples, if we may advance
so search the winding ways of ignorance:
First, to dissolve the whole into like parts,
Perhaps may give some light to furture Arts,
Whereby at length the discontented mind,
Of not the truth, Truth's image yet may find.
What ever is in Nature which does fall
Under the power of Taste, men Salt do call;
Which is twofold; or that which does inhere
In the corporeal Mass, and dwells there,
From which not subtle Vulcans looser flame,
With all the art he has, can woo the same,
But couchant in the Ashes does remain,
From whence it does the name of fixed gain; Fixed Salt.

Or else that lighter fugitive, that flies
With the kind Smoke up toward the airy Skies.
("With which we see in candles pointed flames,
"On whited seilings drunkards write their names)
To this our learnedest Physicians give
The name of Flying Salt, or Fugitive. Flying Salt.

Nor must we forget how the teeming Earth,
Pregnant with much salt mixture, gives birth
To her dear Offspring, from whose womb is sent
To every Plant his proper nutriment;
("The hand of Nature ordering things so well,)
Hence have the fruits their taste, the flowers their Smell.
In whose dark Caverns most confused lies
The bitter Nitre imitating Ice;
Fountains of Sulphur here a place does claim,
There Brimstone, cozen Germance to the flame,
With deadly Arsnick, here Quicksilver flows,
Which is resolved with hurt of Head and Nose:
Sharp Coppras, and these Elements among
The biting Alome that contracts the tongue;
With many more, from whose large Fountains springs
That great diversity of Taste in Things.
If there be any now who fain would know
To which of all these Tabaco does owe
It Is Birth and Virtues, he with ease may see
It from the Tabaco. The Pedigree. I am conscious that Bitumen is not properly
Brimstone, but a fat clay, clammy like pitch, of the nature of Brimstone: but
because I know not in our English tongue one word which can fully and truly
express it; therefore I am bold to borrow the name of one of his nearest
kindred.
Brimstone draws his Pedigree.
For who is he so blind, but well may gather,
Seeing the Child, who it is that is the Father?
Both The Symptoms.
fat, both smelling strong, both do inherit
An ambitious height fed by a nitrous spirit,
Equally sharp, they both hold fast amain,
Both loving fire, "and are beloved again.
Rub't with thy hand, "to recompense that toil,
In gratitude it bribes thee with an Oil:
The Virtues.
Green Wounds it closes with a safe delay,
And from the ulcer'd, drives the filth away;
A quick and vigorous Taste it does beget,
And in the mouth it leaves a lasting heat:
So sovereign, if diffused, is the smell,
It does Contagion from bad aires expel.
The heavy head it has a power to rear,
And with smart sneezings makes the nostrils clear.
Once turned to airy vapor by the flame,
Big with that active salt, whose pride does aim
At heavenly Towers, it climbes the Capitol,
Where like a Goddess sits the humane soul;
There gives supplies to the exhausted brain,
And makes the drowsy minds grow quick again.
Thou glory of the Earth, a gift from Heaven,
Most happy Plant, who were not only given
TO refresh the Pesants limbs, whom toil and sweat
Have weary made, or kill the love of meat;
Nor yet to infuse without the help of food
Into decayed Nerves new strength, new blood;
But have a nobler office; thou art Eyes
To the dark mind, a Lantern to the wise,
When e're a sudden night the brains possess
By too much cockering of the Genius:
Or when the tired understanding brings
Forth only shadows of disjoynted things,
Unapt to frame Ideas that are clear,
Or being framed, unapt to keep them there.
For thou no sooner armed with light do come,
But (like a shining Taper into a room
Obscure before) all things turn clear and bright;
The black Clouds fly, and Cares that fast do bite;
The inventing Power shines forth, and now descries
The worlds large Fabric to the mental eyes.
The eternal Species now do naked stand
In comely order ranked by Natures hand,
And all the notions of the enlightened brain
Do now return to their true shapes again.
How often have I seen (a mighty throng
Of greedy ears hanging upon his tongue)
A learned Orator trembling for fear,
Confound his Heads, unable quite to bear
His studied Method out --
When at the last (amazement so prevailed)
That words and matter have together failed!
Who has no sooner sacrificed unto
His pettish Memory a grain or two
Of the generous Plant, but he could straightways find
All his lost Figures in his scattered mind;
His runnagate words too which were lately fled,
And hid in some dark corner of his head,
He apprehends now, ("as if a Torch
Were lighted up in favor of his search,)
And to the wondering people does dispense,
The ample Treasures of his Eloquence;
Moreover if two Disputants.
Warriors shall join fight,
Trained up in the Camp of the old Aristotle.
Stagirite,
Whom a desire to know, or love of praise
Has urged on a mortal war to raise,
Who with all spleen an angry soul affords
Against each other draw their Bilbo words;
Striving by weight of reason t'overthrow,
Or subtle windings to entrap the Foe.
Encompassed they are with youthful bands,
Among whom the Judge of the fair quarrel stands,
Applauding all their equal nerves of wit,
And by applauding, adding strength to it;
Till at the last their strength does fade away,
("As what humane force but will at length decay?)
In which decay of soul, let one of them
But take a single whiffe of the sacred fume,
And ye shall straight discover a new birth
Of Spirits, (as when Antaeus touched the Earth
His Mother, and from thence did stronger rise
Giving new battle to his In uno Hercule plures Hosts sentit An^aeus.
Enemies.)
The waiward Faster vanquished does ly,
And it is the Drinker's crowned with victory.
But if they both shall it convenient hold
To fetch new weapons, or to whet the old,
At this true Vulcans Forge, with wonder then
Ye shall behold those two recovered men,
Draw out a cruel bloody war in length,
Maintained by equal Nerves, by equal strength;
Nor will they part until the far-spent night
And weary Judge cuts off the tedious fight.
So at the Trojan war fame tells of old,
How that heroic pair of Podalyrius and Machaon, two excellent Physicians and
Surgeons, the sons of Aesculapius, who were both present at the Trojan war, and
maintained a fierce Disputation concerning the nature of Simples.
Brethren bold,
Betwixt themselves a friendly strife did raise,
'Cause one of them the Indian Plant did praise;
The Elder damned it, yet dissemblingly,
Loving indeed what he did seem to fly:
Hot darts the younger at his brother aimed,
And for the Herb a solemn war proclaimed.
But e're the Trumpets sounded to the fight,
Our warriors both take care their Pipes to light;
Eager upon it, each other they provoke,
And fire their Wits with the most precious smoke,
Loading the Empty Quivers of their mind
With headed arrows, which they (most unkind)
Mutually shoot; their nimble tougue's the Bow,
Their Breasts the Buts at which their shafts do go;
Many are sent, many retorted be
Upon the spenders head as cruelly.
Nor are there any pawses in the Field,
But what the draughts of the sweet Fume do yield,
From whose warm aid repaired strength did grow,
And eager fury which should overthrow.
Until their rage increasing with their might,
The sentence of the Agamenon, who procured and fomented the disputation
betwixt the two brethren.
King, who took delight
To see such pretty and unheard of play,
Commands a period to the doubtful fray.
Thus fell the Herb, and stood by his own power,
And wars there be about it at this hour;
Naught being so certain, but a present wit
And grace of speech will doubtful render it.
-- But I have lost my self, and am at gaze,
VVandring too far in the Academick Lycaeum was Aristotle's School at Athens,
also the intricate and winding Groves and pleasant walks about it.
maze.
An other Web I have to weave, "I will
Retire awhile, and sharpen my blunt Quill.
The Birth and Composition I have shown
OF the wholesome Herb, in a verse which I dare own:
To whom the Plant does show a smiling brow,
On whom it frowns: to which diseases, now,
It does profess it self an Enemy,
To which a Friend, shall my next labor be;
As soon as some Tabaco I have taken,
Impoverished the Pipe, to enrich my brain.
The End of the First BOOK.
TABACO.
Book II.
Remove the Candle and the Pipes; (ho there!)
We Have taken a large draught of the fired air:
While our inventions haste, and there remain
Perfect Ideas in our hight'ned brain;
Let us make good the words which we have spoke,
We scorn to feed the world with naught but smoke;
Dullness will seize us, and gray-hairs (a thing
Beardless Apollo cannot brook) will bring
Mandates for a divorce 'twixt us and thee,
Cirrha, A Town in the little Country of Phocis in Greece, where Apollo was
most religiously worshipped: Or otherwise one of the tops of the mountain
Parnassus, the other being called Nissa.
thy Temple and our piety.
Say Muses how the Indians conquered were
What Trophaees great god Bacchus raised there,
How that fierce nation was with pleasing awe
Soft'ned to the observation of his Law,
How he their bloody banquets changed, and made
Of the destroying sword a saving spade;
And with what ease (as one who plays) the Silenus.
old
Man did the virtues of Tabaco
that leaf unfold.
Perchance the north-commanding King, who led
The Muses.
You through the calm Sea from the cloven head
Of Mount Parnassus to his gilded hall,
This your discourse unto his ear may call,
Who though on its natural sent he no price sets,
Yet if perfumed with your violets,
And odoriferous breath (as sweet as those)
Amongst his pillowes it may find repose.
The conqueror once planted in his throne,
Did not with bloody weapons prey upon
Their lives or goods, nor did he go about
To make strange lords driving the natives out:
Nor like a Tyrant sought with violence
To force his trembling Subjects to obedience;
Experience having tutored him that where
Fear is thick sown, nothing is reaped but fear.
With smiling brow and gentle compellation
He crept into the favor of the Nation,
Whose easy love did their hard hearts incline
To capability of discipline;
And with its powerful Retorick provoke
The churlish Soil to undergo the yoke.
The Land had ill report for Beasts which there
Inhabited, the spotted Linx, "the Bear,
Wolves, Tigers, swift-foot Lybards, and the stout
Lions ("as Captains) mingled with the rout,
There all unpunished in ambush lay
For lives of beasts and men which were their prey;
Nor had they care those enemies to destroy;
In mutual slaughter was their only joy;
Their great delight it was, their chiefest good
To spoil the neighboring field with fire and blood;
And having slain, inhumanly t'appose
Upon their reeking table their boiled foes:
The gentle Victor Bacchus.
hated much to be
A partner in their savage gluttony,
Who in their thirst of blood did not surceafe
To sprinkle on them a desire of peace.
Their King he longd to see, and those vast parts,
And into their gross minds to instill the Arts.
Out of his many such as he knew to be
Of civil garb smoothed by urbanity,
A few he did select, (these liberty,
The larger use of Wine and Venery
Had feeble made, until the heroic air
OF the noble plant, and business did repair
Their near exhausted nature, and restore
Them to that strength which they had lost before)
Balanus and Amphoria he did call,
Merry Neander too, good fellows all;
To these the one-ey'd Pelias he thought fit
To join, and Idmon famous for his wit,
"Nimble to break a jest in verse or prose,
But laughed at for the blew bunch on his nose;
The mumping Trullus too, who always feared
He should be mockd for having of no beard:
Close at their backs creeps Aper, who of late
A jolly drinker was, but wayward fate
("Knowing his belly to have no need of ears)
Had robbed him of his hearing, who now bears
A presence not so welcome as before;
Ill chance into The Brain.
Mirth's Palace bard the The Ear.
door,
Commanded to retire he was, but he
(Poor soul) was deaf to leave good company.
The petty King From (...) Blood: A King amongst the Canibals.
Haematoes, then whom
None crueller to bring the captives home,
And being there, devour them, proved to have
His Empire not far off, whom a large Cave
Shut up from sight of Sun: there ye might see
Shambles of human flesh (o cruelty!)
Bodies of young and old men there did lie
Pined up in Coops, fatted with Paste to die
By the Buchers hand. Hither with dogs and darts,
With wide-mash'd Nets and all their hunting arts,
With merry Cornet, and the horns shril sound
Mixed with the filling cries of the deep-mouth hound;
The Troup turns in. Here does the Tyrant dwell,
(Just such a Palace has the god of Hell)
The Caves large mouth gaped wide about the door,
("A fearful sight!) men's bones did pave the floor,
The Turrets of the same with horrid looks
Showed like a garden set with Hartichokes
When their rough heads into long scales are grown,
And their proud tops are almost Thistle-down.
It fortuned here to be a feast that day,
And their fat things unto the fire they lay;
The noise without did summon from his cave
The King, on whose head a green plume did wave:
He stares a while, then flies into his den,
So does a second, so a third again,
Forgetting all (such was their sudden fear)
To bar the gate and keep the strangers there:
In this amazement Idmon first did enter
The unknown passage (famous for that venture)
Led by a quick-nos'd dog; then followed
The youthful Crew groping as they were led;
For there no windows were, nor any light,
Only a little glimmering struck down right
From the Grotts mouth, which with a doubtful ray
Seemed as they passed to stammer out the way;
Silenus in the midst does nothing fear,
But Bacchus thought him safest in the Rear:
At length they come drawn by the stink of meat
Nastily dressed, into a hall repleat
With steam and noise, where the most horrid face
Of a cruel Kitchen that ever eye did trace
Struck the first Ent'rers dumb; full Caldrons here
Of reeking heads played over the fire, and there
Fast'ned to dog-tree spits shoulders and thighs
Of men dropped into dishes; ("drop mine eyes)
And the preparers of this goodly feast
Were Women-Cookes girded about the wast:
Hard by in Francks (like fatted Boares) there lay
(Reserved as dainties for the next feast day)
The bodies of ten men; these passed by
Not without tears, god Bacchus on does hye
To seek Haematoes, whom the trusty nose
Of the fierce Mastie does at length disclose
Lurking in a dark hole, whom (being found)
He thus accosts, low lowting on the ground;
Rise O thou, wretch, and learn to look on men;
Harmless we come, nor mind to pay again
Thy slaughters void of all humanity,
With the just slaughter both of thine and thee;
We do forgive, to pity we incline;
Our manners are not steeped in blood, but wine.
Yet if in blood ye take so great delight,
And have so burning a desire to fight;
Make war with beasts, from the herds the Lions drive,
But spare your Neighbour-men, keep them alive:
Into your bellies cram not such odious meats,
Nor with such The bones of the Slain.
filthy Trophies deck your gates:
Wolves do not know such rage; Tigers invade
Not Tigers, nor yet is the Lion made
A feast to the angry Lion; take away
This most inhuman Diet then, and lay
These sadder Relics of your Tyranny
Low under earth forgotten; happily
We shall find honester dishes: "And your Feast,
"By our new Cates shall not be spoild, but graced.
Haematoes.
He nothing clear did answer, through his throat
Was only sent an obscure grunting note;
And with a look worthy his speech, he' obeyed
The Bacchus.
Monitor unwillingly, and laid
Commands upon his trembling Clients, "who
Prepared to act what he did bid them do.
The cursed meat gave place, and in its room
On cleanly Spits Pleasanter viands come;
Shoulders of Staggs, and Sowes, the fearful Hare,
The Duck and Mallard, and what else their care,
And Hunters labor did provide --
The ground's their their table, (time will not allow
Them to provide them better tables now)
Bacchus sat first, Silenus next, the third
Haematoes; which done, the humble board
Without all order was encompassed round
By the lords of Bacchus Court; then on the ground
In jolly Knots the common soldiers sat,
Each with a painted Target on his back.
"The Courtly Liber gently his hands does wring,
"And with soft words thus strokes the Haematoes.
barbarous King.
The Fates be kind unto us, never may
We have a just case to repent this day
The joining of our hands, but happy be
These fair beginnings of our amity.
Banish (my Friends) these unclean rites, and live
The life of men, "merit the name I give:
And thou my brother, King, forgive I pray
Our ruder entrance "and our longer stay,
Condemn not our free language, which shall prove
Signs to confirm, and bonds to tie our love:
This entertainment may hereafter be
A benefit to your posterity;
Nor shall your youth repent they heard us tell
(The best of human things) how to live well.
Be this thy pledge, then which no holier thing
Is in thy vows; thus spoke the God and King.
This said, a bowl of liquor straight he drunk,
Which flowed but lately from a tall tree trunk
That stood hard by in leather bags. The Haematoes.
beast
Next took the bowl, "which quakes to be embraced
By such a hand, and though unknown till then,
Belching the clotted blood of wretched men,
The Nectar forces down, ("O cruel doom
"So good a Guest should have so bad a room!)
"The noble liquor hating such disgrace
"Made offer to return and quit the place,
"But he not willing to it, sends forth raw
"And filthy belches from his stinking maw;
At which laughed Pelias, Idmon held his nose,
But Liber becken'd to them to compose
Themselves, and with words fitted to that end,
Settled the wavering Countenance of his Haemat.
Friend.
You' have played the man, he cries, but pray you show
Whether the Liquour pleases you or no.
With that his front and eyebrowes being drawn
To the crown of 's head, thus the great Beast did yawn;
Believe me (stranger-guest) the sort of blood
From whatsoever Throat it flowed, is good:
Not better comes from 'a beardlesse youth then this;
I do not fear to drink the second dish
If any proves so kind to fill it me.
Bacchus replied, it shall be given thee;
But yet take heed, alas thou can not tell
(Good man) what danger in this blood does dwell.
To add Bowls to Bowls is an unseemly thing,
And hurtful too, by thine own harm (O King)
I willingly will not permit thee know;
Better thy 'experience to another owe.
But it is to me a miracle to see
How of your homebred riches ye should be
So ignorant! this pleasing liquour which
Your duller palate does so much bewitch,
The tribute is but of an obvious Tree,
Which by small pains, less cost obtained may be;
Whose willing branches ever open stand
Ready t'imbrace the knife and wounding hand,
Pouring forth rivers that do know no ending,
Eternal streams from living fountains sending.
Be ruled, and let the Earth's good bounty then
Obtain its lawful use; why ("being men)
Should ye account it a brave thing to owe
Your fat to humane veins? and lurking low
In The Earths close womb, like Serpents, removed quite
From Men and Sun, t'extinguish Natures light?
Ye have the Shape of Men, the Breasts, nor are
Courage and Strength wanting in you for war;
So many good things then why will ye have
To lie intombed in a lazy Grave?
Your manly Character is loss, and though
Your food be blood, your color is not so:
But a blue Palenesse on your swollen face sits,
And your retired eyes are two deep pits.
No difference is betwixt your Cheeks and Nose;
Your Face a Bladder seem;s, Scurf only grows,
Not Hair upon your Temples; your lips swell
With Putrefaction; your loose Teeth distill
Black blood, and not without great pains ye draw
Your often stopped breath --
Your Nerves have not the power (though you the will)
To thrust your Ribs out when your Lungs do fill.
Your weakness by short pantings is bewrayed
As on your Breast there were a Mountain laid;
Slow is your pace, your knees each other beat,
And no desire ye have of wholesome meat;
It is your chief delight, your greatest praise,
On the dull ground to slumber out your days.
Which Plagues by this dark irksom Cave are bred,
(Through which nor winds nor Sun e're travailed,)
Helped by your noysom Fare; or rather sent
By the angry Gods unto your punishment;
But for your Barbarism you dearly pay,
Your foul draughts now returning the same way.
They entered through your mouths, as if the would
Admonish you at length to know your good.
But oh (such stupidness does you possess!)
Your harm ye know not, you own good much less.
Saw ye that jolly smoke, which now arose
(As through a Chimney) from the old Silenus
man's nose?
That smoke but now was dust, and it is scant
A brace of days since that dust was a Plant,
On which a neighbor Tabaca, an Island in the Indies from whence the Herb had
its name.
Island of small fame
Once has bestowed an honorable name.
The end of all your mischiefs hope from hence.
You gray-hair'd Sire, who can with ease dispense
The Secrets of Dame Nature; tell I pray
The virtue of the remedy, and the way
It cures; be sudden and defer not then
To breathe wished health upon these wretched men.
Silenus laid his Pipe from out his hand,
And said, great things they are which you command:
Yet if you think these ears to which I speak
Worthy of such great mysteries to partake,
I will begin. But first let liberty
Unto those poor sick men be given, whom I
Beheld not long ago with fetters bound,
In nasty straw lying upon the ground.
Haematoes nodded a consent, their bands
Are loosed, which done, creeping on both their hands,
Bearing the sad marks of their foul disgrace
Each in his sullied and unmanlike face,
Afraid of light like beasts from out a stall,
Trembling, they are led into the merry Hall.
The old Father could not hold his tears, yet said,
O my companions live, be not dismayed;
A better fortune waits ye: ("then descries
The Pipe) here, says he, your recovery lies,
Only be willing to be cured: First, than
("Pointing to one) thou poor and weak One of those who by the Cannibals were
reserved for the next Feast.
old man,
Whose veins salt Rhewm does fill in stead of blood;
Whose feeble legs though they have long withstood
And wrastled with the Gout, do faulter now;
Whose blear-eyes run, and narrower do grow:
Thou shall be blind, despise my aid; embrace
My Art, thou shall see clear as the Eagles race.
That said, a Cloud of smoke the forthwith blows
Into his greazy Cap, and clapping close
The limber brims unto his head, shuts in
The old man's face ("as in a bag t'had bin.)
The biting Smoke into his eyes did go,
And caused a shower of tears from thence to flow.
All things about him plainer far appeared,
And light comes in, his Window's being cleared:
And now with ease he able is to say,
How many Carbuncles themselves display
Upon his Silenus
Master's rough and cragged nose,
Who in examination farther goes
Asking him what they were, how great their number;
He shows his fingers and replies with wonder,
So many Strawberries I there do see,
And such as in our woods are wont to be.
The old Blade shook his sides, his fellows too
Laughed out aloud, "they could none other do.
Worthy to have joints without one gouty knot,
Silenus cries, come suck, but fail you not
To close your lips, and open your nosthrils wide,
That easily the smoke from thence may glide
As from a pair of Tunnels: he did so.
The Cave turns round, and the man sick does grow;
He feels a tempest in his belly grumbling,
And the raw morsels up and down are tumbling
In his disorderd Stomach, till at last
They find the way, and up he does them cast.
Behold your Gouts destruction, he cried,
Thus is the humor at the Fountain dried.
Twice shall thou do this, (" in its proper place)
When the Moon At the Change and Full.
lies hid, or shines with biggest face;
(Like a full Tide, for then the moisture In men's bodies.
springs,)
After a dinner of fat Chitterlings.
The Cisterns purged thus, the dregs being gone,
The nourishment will then much purer run,
Flattering the joints as it does pass, and free
From all Malignant relics will it be;
Nor the distorted sinews be grown over
With Chaulkie hardness as they were before:
Then shall thy feet be nimble as thy mind,
TO out-dance the Satyrs, and outrun the wind.
Yet if there should some footsteps still remain
Of the salt Rhewm, fly to thy Pipe again,
'Twill vanish straight, and thou possess from thence
A far more active and an able Sense.
Nor does this sovereign medicine assuage
The Gouts sad torment, but the Colicks rage;
It cures the fearful The stopping of the small guts, suffering nothing to
pass downwards, by reason of which is caused a great griping in that plaee;
and also a filthy stink sent up by the throat, making one to smell alike at
both ends. This Disease is called in Latin Volvulus, from Volvo, to wrap about
or intwine, quia pluribus orbibus and anfractibus involutum est. From whence
the Greeks call it (...) from (...), ver^ere or volvere, which indeed gives the
name of Ilia to the small guts; although some would have the name of this
disease to come from (...), misericordia, quia doler miserandus est; for a
miserable disease it is indeed.
stopping of the guts,
Which 'twixt the Throat and Seat no difference puts;
The swelling of the head it drives away,
And bribes the A whistling or singing in the Head.
Ears musicians not to play.
Thus it will do, where it a Lover finds
That constant is, nor (like a Coward) minds
The rival Chidings of his wife, when she
Against the harmless smoke venteth her Cruelty,
Because ("forsooth) their kissing it does sour,
And with forced rhewm spatters her clean-rub'd floor.
There was a man, as ancient stories tell,
That on the sea's unwholesome shore did dwell;
The noisome shore abounded with diseases,
Among which they say thus one the body seizes:
First, a fierce pain the belly seems to bore,
But as its violence increases more,
The members all are stretc'd as with a rope,
Nor any strength remains, nor any hope.
Thus he afflicted, Phoebus did implore,
And Phoebus soon with medicines does him store;
But his endeavors all were vanity,
Till better fortune gave this remedy;
Tabaco freeing him from pains and fears,
Hence he adored Heavens gift, and many years
In health from former evils did obtain,
Nor was he more vexed with this vanquished pain.
Nor will it suffer that fierce The toothache.
Friend of Hell
Which in a hollow tooth does love to dwell,
T'inhabit there, but conjures him from thence:
For when the Humor once is felt to pinch
The roots of the Teeth, and a swollen Cheek forth puts,
(Such as an Ape shows when he cracketh nuts;)
Mouth but the smoke awhile, and thou shall see
Both pain and swelling banished will be.
Many griefs else which an ill air has bred,
Here have their cure, thus are they vanquished.
The drilling A flux of Rhewm.
showers which from the The Brain.
Roofs arched top,
Do on the tender The Lungs.
Bellows daily drop,
Hindering the blasts which keep the flame alive,
And thickened in the middle Region, strive
To hang like Phlegm.
Clouds, stopping the door of th'voice,
Light as gnawn Parchment, are in a small trice
("Taking the powerful smoke) brought forth, "and there
"No bur remains, but straightway all is clear.
Why should I tell ye of the Mumps? or be
Troubled to name the Rope invisible?
The vertiginous disease, "that sudden Devil,
"Sometimes a prologue to the Falling Evil?
Or the The word is Hellucus, which is nothing else but Gravitas capitis vino
create; and some would derive it from the word (...). Hesterno enim vino
languentem (...) vocant Graeci,
Wine-Sicknesse, "when the wit's i'th'Suds?
Or It is in the Latin Clangosas nares, which word is referred unto the voice
quando gravi tono incepta in acutum desinit; piping noses, or noses sounding
like a trumpet: but I hope I have no whit injured my Author by rendering the
word in a nearer cause.
dropping Noses shortly threatening Floods?
All these are cured by smoke, if it be tried
When the disease is ripe, and then applied.
Nor do there want whose Youth and sinful Arts
Have drawn diseases on their hidden parts;
Whether the Channels of the Urine be
Coroded by a nitrous spurcity,
Or bounteous Nature freely does bestow
Her broken meat; keeps open House below:
Let such men too from hence expect their cure;
Nor let them fear who do the Stone endure,
From whom the Pot such horrid cries does hear,
"That it does wish it had not that one ear;
Who At the Chamber Pot.
there screw faces, and such looks express,
As does Prometheus on Mount Caucasus.
I do not play the Poet now, nor fain
Dreams of Parnassus, but my words are plain:
Known things I speak, and such as heretofore
My self have felt, e're I began to implore
Tabaco's aid, e're, at my greatest need,
I found the virtues of the admired weed.
For (I Will confess) my better days worn out
With the high-feeding Bacchus, and the rout
Of drinking Satyrs did my old Vessel fill
With Leaks, and made it subject to that ill,
To know which pleasure is, to cure is more
And greater profit. What I heretofore
Did in my self not without pain endure,
In others now shall be my joy to cure.
But seeing there an equal care should be
TO expel diseases, and to keep us free;
Listen all ye who do desire to know,
Being once well, how to preserve ye so.
Some do by nature (as a poison) hate
Tabaco, some most foolishly do prate
Against it, cause they of the former days
Lived long and sound without it. Let both these
Abstain, for it is not comely, or to fight
Against prudent Nature, or t'infuse a right
Mind into him who (stubborn) does despise
His Ancestors, being Fools to grow more wise.
He who does love it, let him know his why,
Not like an imitating Ape let fly
At all, without or council, or end known,
Advent'ring upon actions not his own.
A Generation there be again,
Who drink it that they may seem Gentlemen,
And show their breeding only, who never think
Whether the things be good or bad, they drink.
It is rustic shamefac'tness, and can
Never show comely in a well-bred man.
"So have I seen, at Christmasse, when my Lord
"Has set a Clownish Tenant at his board,
"The amazed wretch takes all that is carved him, why?
"Because he wanted wit how to deny.
Tabaco is not an indifferent thing,
But to the Drinker good or bad does bring:
First, try thy body then, and learn to know
Whether thy Chimny carry smoke or no.
Have thou a great Who may take Tabaco.
round head? a Front that sta^ds
Like a fair Foreland? brawny arms and hands?
Large Shoulders, a broad breast, fat Flesh, a Tongue
That Is ever moist? take it, and fear no wrong.
But let Who not.
lean men forbear, whose Necks are hard,
Their Foreheads narrow, small their head, their lard
And puddings pinching, cheeks that up do rear
Their fleshlesse bones, and nosthrils that are clear.
For as the force of Lean men have but few spirits, which Tabaco overcomes.
spirits to their brain
Comes in but in thin Troops and weak: so again,
When the smoke appears, they all away do run
As mists are frighted with the winters Sun.
Nor set the Tabaco not good for such as have sudden flushings, inveterate
coughs, and short breath, which are Symptoms of Consumptions and Feverish
distempers.
ruddy man on whose cheek glowes
A flushing that does imitate the Roses
Whose breath draws thick, and whose coughs frequent are,
Once touch the Pipe, but utterly forswear
Both in and all good fellowship, for fear
He buys his pleasure at a rate too dean:
For he a fire already kindled has
Within his Lungs, and cherishes (alas)
A Fever in his heart, "his own decay,
And in a lingering flame does melt away.
But if to smoke thy love be grown so great,
That not thy solemn'st vows can conquer it,
But reason must yield unto blind desire,
Take then the For such men Coltsfoot better.
Coltsfoot, for his temperate fire
Warms but in flames not, whose light brushing air
Cleanses the inward Ulcers, and makes fair
The In what cases Tabaco is to be refused.
Cabin of the Breast. Once, if thou have
Some hidden cause which makes thy body wast,
Or if a general distemper dwells
In every ill-affected part, or else
An active Fever in thy blood be found,
Or thou endur'st the raging of a wound,
Eschew that Syren-weed Tabaco than,
Which pleasing kills, 'appear to be a man.
Hard though it be, yet from the flatterer run,
And do not feed thine own destruction.
Besides all this, sometimes it fortunes so,
That streams of blood upwards and downwards flow
In plenteous manner, which a death portends,
Nature having given the reyns unto both ends.
In such a case what ever happen may,
Then from the Tabaco.
deadly Bowls fly, fly away.
For thence the current of thy blood does swell,
Thy fits of vomiting do grow more fell,
Till at the last ("to make an end of woe,)
Thy Life and Lease will out together go.
But I am here arrested, and bid stand
By a Writ of Reason, seeming with one hand
To pluck down what I with the other built,
And thus I am accused of the guilt.
Objection.
If from Tabaco heavy sleep be sent,
And sleep a chain to bind the excrement,
Unjustly then is that condemned to be
Hurtful, which merits praise, not obloquie.
Answer.
Know then that in the Indian Herb does ly
A double power, a diverse quality.
The Salt on one hand spurs slow Nature on,
And like a furious rider makes her run:
The sleep- creating clouds, and sulphurous smother
Uses the reyns, and stops her on the other.
But as the lusty and untamed Steed
When on the small guts he is made to bleed,
Flies out enraged, and scorneth ("as before)
To obey the ruling Bridle any more:
So is it here, when the retentive force
Begins to fail, ("as it is with that wild horse)
Every light touch disorders Nature quite,
And makes her forward rush with all her might;
Nor is it easy when she is at the top
Of all her speed, quickly to take her up:
"Thus it appears if rightly understood,
"The The 'Sal volatilis, or the Flying Salt, which is in Tabaco, pricking
Nature forward to the avoiding of excrements.
spur more harm does, then the The sulphurous quality in Tabaco, which courts
Nature to sleep and by consequence restrains the excrements.
bridle good.
So much it does conduce to the good of men
TO observe the nature, manner, and the when;
With the just measure and the weight of things,
So bodies gather strength, so virtue springs;
Both by too much, or by too little fall.
What better thing then Wine? yet not to all,
Nor at all hours must it be given; For then
'Twould hurtful prove; there is a season when
It Is certain death to drink it, and again
It makes mad, there is a season when.
Sometime too large a draught does take away
The reason quite for a whole night and day;
When if the surfeit loses not his ty,
The Drunkard dies, or at least seems to die.
Near is our Pattern: blithe Adonis (late)
While he thy Bacchanals did celebrate
(O King Lenaeus) steeped in wine and sleep,
The rest of thy Feast under Earth did keep.
Buried alive, supposed dead he was,
But the next day dug up again (alas!)
Manifest signs of returned life were read
In'his bloody hands and in his broken head,
With knee and elbow he bad fought against death,
And in the narrow Coffin lost his breath.
This can be said against Wine: but against us
And our By Tabaco.
Art of healing, what so barbarous
Can be objected by an adversary?
Who by Tabaco has been known to die?
Or from what man has it his reason stole?
In great Feasts rather when the spacious Bowl
Keeps ordered rounds; if there be any known
So desperate that he will with loss of 's own
Take others healths, and (superstitious) think
TO observe the mad Laws made by'th' State of drink;
That nor his reason nor his feet decline,
Give him the Pipe, with the hot fuming wine;
Let him he med'cinall vapor interpose,
And with the smoke damask his wrinckled nose:
With an unblemished face he then shall rise,
And with a well-fram'd speech he shall seem wise;
When the rude multitude who ignorant be
Of the sovereign Herb, or else incapable,
Shall carrying Torches in their Nose appear,
'Yet stumble too with all the light they bear.
For even thy The hot fume sent from wine.
fire (Twice-born) by the smoke is staid,
Thy active rage is by the fume allaid.
(Nor let that envy move that praises thee)
A more strict league and friendship cannot be
Betwixt the Loadstone and the Steel, then is
Between thy Spirit-raising Vine and this.
For (" like a pair of friends an ages wonder)
They taste far nobler Tabaco and Wine best when joined.
joined, then when asunder.
Nothing Tabaco has but what is good;
As of a slain sow, every part is food.
The Ashes which after the flame do ly
As of no use, do turn to Ivory
Tabaco ashes a good Dentifrice.
Rusty and yellow Teeth; the Smoke obeys,
And (strange to hear) being commanded, Stays in oil.
stays:
For lay thy finger to thy mouth, and blow,
Narrowing the passage first, but gently through,
And thou shall straight discern it will not fail
To leave an Oil upon the yellow nail:
Good for young girls who have rough and The oil good against scabs and tetters.
scabby hands,
On which, as on fen grounds, the water stands.
For being applied, it smooths and drains them quite,
And renders them, even unto wonder white.
For the piercing Air through the secret pores
Shakes the heart, and having set both doors
Of The stomach open, from thence wind-musick plays,
To the hearers mirth, and to the minstrels ease.
Thus they the laughter of their friends do gain,
And purchase beauty with a little pain.
The Virtues I have told; what Mischiefs are,
Or only seem to be, I Will now declare.
First, it is objected, that Objections against Tabaco answered.
Tabaco duls
The edge of the enlightened mind, and pulls
A cloudy darkness on the active brain,
Bringing in black oblivion there to reign:
That when to seek his Notions he shall come,
Misplaced and lost they will be in the smokie room.
A heinous crime: but such as Calumny
Has feigned, or nice simplicity.
I answer it is not, 'cause it cannot be,
That the immortal Soul whose Pedigree
Is drawn from Heaven, should in poor manner thus
Unto Corporeal harms b' obnoxious.
If the Instrument be lame, I do confess
The Action halts, yet with the Cause does cease.
But the mind of man untouched remains, although
As with black clouds encompassed, it does throw
No lazy beams abroad. Just so the Sun,
When 'twixt his Globe and us the Moon does run,
Or else some cloud does for a time keep close:
("As if the world for him were at a loss)
Though even then in his full glory bright,
And to the darker stars lends more light.
The mind no spot receives but from the mind;
Idleness, luxury, and the giddy wind
Of light Inconstancy, with the sudden fire
Of Anger, these indeed do all conspire
To shadow reason, and overthrow the wit,
Blotting the notions which before were writ.
That which we love we can remember well;
Of The many drinkers of Tabaco, tell
Me but of one who readily cannot say
Into which Chest he did his treasure lay;
(So stupifi'd a brain he had) or else
Who has forgotten where his Mistress dwells;
And I of the few haters will give you
A dozen for that one, ("good men and true)
Who shall be so far dos'd, they shall not say,
When being asked, what they did yesterday;
To whom their names have been forgotten long,
And the Elements even of their mother Tongue.
For in these men either pestiferous flames,
A hurtful poison, or the disease that claims
His name from a sudden stroke, or being too bold
With the Hor. Car. lib. 1. Ode 13.
fifth part of Venus when grown old,
Have hurt the Brain --
Nor will the Which informs the Brain.
spirit (of a near kin to the air)
His office overthrown, stay longer there.
For if by the excellent leaf the memory
Should receive injury, how could it be
That Troops of Learned men should love it so,
Who know as much as lawful is to know.
Whose Breasts do swell with wisdom, whose chief pleasure
Is in their stored minds to heap up treasure,
And then pour forth what they were hoarding long
To rings of people with a ready tongue.
But it makes sad the marriage bed far more
Chaste then the Agnus Castus is a certain Shrub, which in Latin is called also
Vitex, like unto a willow, it takes the name from Chastity which it procures;
and the Athenian women were wont in their Thosmophoria, or feasts of Ceres, to
carry leaves of this about them, and to lie upon them, that they might preserve
themselves chaste.
leaf the Athenian Matrons wore
At Ceres feasts, I hear the women say;
Nor is this quarrel but of yesterday:
Tas been the Matrons hate since Venus.
Mars his whore
Set forth a law it should be brought no more
Into her loved Cyprus as before:
Which thus was caused. Bacchus from being at ods
With men, returns to the banquet of the gods;
Store of Tabaco with him he did bring
As signs of victory (then a new found thing)
"Till that did burn, the gods were all on fire:
" Liber begun to take it, they admire;
Jove was the next, then Mars and Vulcan follow,
Mercury those, and last the boury Apolla:
Lustily through their nose the smoke they take,
As if an other Aetna they would make.
The Goddesses pleas^d with the novelty
Laughed all the while, but they, when they did see
How much to sleep that night the gods were given,
Angry, decreed it should be banished Heaven;
The rites of Thessaly be still admired,
To keep their husbands waking was they desired:
Therefore next day 'soon as the smoaky feast
Began again, (fiercer then all the rest)
The goodly Matron Venus on it flies;
Pipes, fire, Tabaco, broke and scattred lies;
And being down she spurns them with her feet,
(Wonder such wrath should come from one so
The warlike Pallas who stood by was sad (sweet)
To see the wanton Queen of Love so mad;
Diana smiled, and the The Muses. Prosit mihi vos dixisse Puellas. Sat. 4. So
Juvenall makes himself merry with them calling them girls, who could not choose
but he very old, being so often called upon by the ancient Poets: but he
supposed them to be of the same nature with other women, who though they be
never so old, yet delight to be acounted young; and therefore the seems in a
jeer to bribe them for Poetic fury with the flattering name of girls.
nine girls who sport
Themselves on A mountain in Thessaly consecrated to Apollo and the Muses.
Pindus top was sorry for it.
The scattered relics up they take, and place
Them in their bosoms with a solemn grace;
Entreating Bacchus for a new supply,
A sovereign aid to the vow of Chastity.
A foul reproach it is (forsooth) to tame
The rage of Venus, so called from the ^^le Cyprus.
Cyprus and her lustful flame;
To strengthen virtue, with a rare tie to bind
To the limbs vigor, Empire to the mind.
For it is a scandal to the plant to doubt
That it the instinct of Nature should put out
Like Hemp, or water Lillies; happily
It may the number bate, not utterly
Destroy the gift of procreation:
Forth natural heat having this The allaying virtue of Tabaco.
bridle on,
What it does from the number take away
IN the goodness of the breed it does repay.
An excellent benefit where the fortun's mean,
Not able numerous offspring to maintain,
Or where the Commonwealth rejoices more
In the strength and quality then in the store.
Hence has it ever good esteemed bin
For the white beard, and for the downy chin,
Teaching them both good Husbandry, how they are
Both in the bottom, and the top to spare,
While nimble flames of youth it does suppress,
And though The fainter lust of old men.
lukewarm ashes makes lukewarm less,
Freeing the world from giddiness, the jolly
Stripling from rage, and the gray head from folly.
"But O ye, Ladies, why should your hatred be
Unto the noble herb inplacable?
Within your gardens give't place it is fit,
For even you may stand in need of it;
Can ye be cruel still when I assure
You, that it will fits of the Tabaco good against the Mother.
Mother cure?
When the womb beyond the bounds does upwards rush,
And at the belly like a Quid si ego hic nostrum dicerem ad uteri fominei
similitudinem aliudere qui inde nemen uteri sortire videtur quod duplex sit. et
ab uiraque in auas se dividit parts quae in diversum diffusae ac replexae
circumplicantur in medu^ eor^^^m Arietis? Nee ideo labas^it conjectura mea si
Arietem hoc in loce pro machina militari accipi contendas: tant^^dem enim est.
Ram does push,
Righly applied 'twill bear her back a main
And force her take her proper seat again,
Sooner and easier then the heavy weight
Of two great Captains on thy belly laid;
Or a whole pregnant Sow of Lead, --
Moreover set thy Princely bowls aside
(Thou twice-born god) and then the bounteous wide
Earth can afford no dainty half so good
For an old man; whether you will call it food
For the humor radical, or a gentle draught
For the dry brain, or else a weapon caught
Up to expel his Senses enemies:
For it does add a quickness to blear eyes,
It takes the prendent Isicle from the nose,
The mutiny in the ear it does compose:
"And if thy ill-spent youth has fill^d thy bones
With griping aches, and thy breast with groans,
"And the waiting maid which cross thy back does ly
From rest blocks up the Haven of thine eye
Here seek thy help and find; for the kind smoke
Stealing into the veins shall not provoke
Only thy grief and thee to sleep, but shall,
To make the night seem short, before thee call
The lively shapes and images of things:
Nor such dire monsters as the Onion brings
To the late eater, or the Pulse, the Bean,
The Lintless, "which are known to banish clean
All pleasant dreams. The Garlic who does eat,
Or takes the foolish Henbane for his meat,
Who makes a supper of the Mad Night shade,
Him horrid looks shall in his sleep invade;
A strange confused generation
Of living creatures fore his eyes shall run,
Such as are not, nor yet shall ever be
In the air Centaures, Harpyes in the Sea:
A Troop of Dragons from the cloven earth
Shall with black Devils spitting fire come forth:
Sometimes a Storm at Sea shall seem to rave;
And he near drowned shall graple with a wave:
Then he shall stand upon a rock on high,
Seeming shall fall, and really shall cry;
Sometimes the swords of Thieves shall make him fear;
Sometimes again he shall behold a Bear
Broke from the Chain, ready his life to take,
And in the moment he should die, shall wake.
But The Godof sleep; or (as some) minister seu filius Somni, qui jussu domini
vel patris (...) hoc est formus vel vulius hominum, verba ipsa, mores, et
gestus imitatur.
Morpheus with our Tabaco, which causes pleasant and rational dreams.
incense being appeased
Shall with much better Tapestry be pleased
To hang the bedchamber of the brain, and yield
To the contented fancy a rich field
Charged with fresh stories and fair pleasing shapes,
Not such as men may say are Monsters as the other.
Natures scapes,
But such as true born children shall be,
And to each private genius shall agree:
For what men waking love and do turn over
With pleasure, they shall in their sleep recover.
The Courtier, Orator, and the Soldier,
The Juggler, Merchant, and the Mariner,
The Fisher, Waggoner, and Husbandman,
The Painter, Coryer, and Physician,
The Poet, Lover, and the Advocate,
"The Projector too, that cankor of the State,
By our soft potion lul'd asleep before,
In The night their daily business shall act over
In perfect figures; not as when fools behold
Forms in the doubtful twilight, and grow bold
To judge them so as they do seem to be:
Or when the newly-risen Moon they see,
When through a sea of racking Clouds it stears
An even race; nor do they clog men's ears
With any tedious discourse, or frame
(Though in a dream an argument that is lame:)
Fair Structures oftentimes they build in verse,
And in the morning clearly them rehearse:
Others, do other things as clearly too
That thou would swear sleep here had naught to do.
For it is not like the drowsiness gotten by
The deadly Poppy, which the mind does tie
In Iron chains, nor the disturbing shade
Which is by the uncertain Hemlock made,
Whose weaker Geivs thrown over the members, keep,
Them nor entirely awake nor yet asleep.
So good Philemon and his aged Spouse
The unhappy Baucis, ("ever their simple house
Was turned into a Temple) having made
A Supper of Hemlocks.
them, by their shape betrayed
Thinking them Parsneps, when at night they spead
Their weary limbs upon their humble bed,
Nor fully awake, nor weight upon their eyes
Enough to make them sleep, they both did rise,
And through their cottage narrow entrance, quite
Bereaved of mind, they wandered in the night,
Shaking with cold and horror till at last
Having a great part of the time thus past)
With rough saluting of the Posts half dead,
Brought back their Bruished limbs unto their bed.
But whom Tabacos clearer Spirit shall bind
In silken ties, shall in the morning find
Both mind and body strong, and with delight
Shall tell how quietly he pass^d the night.
Only be sure he has a prudent care
He does not trade in vile and common ware,
Sophisticate by Art, but natural:
For the same goodness does not reach to all.
"He who desires to find out the true breed
"Of the heroical and generous weed,
While it is in the Leaf, may thus his longing crown,
It Is Symptoms of the best Tabaco.
sharp and thick, in the ^and, in the eye brown,
IN the nose a violet, the root of Tuscany
Gives not so large and rich a sent as he.
Burned in the Pipe, it will a taste disclose
Like Castors Ragwort, or our Otherwise called the rose of Jerusalem.
Ladies rose.
But the thin limber leaf Bormuda yields,
Or such as grows in the Virginian fields,
Regard it not, "but send it to the Fen:
And leave such hay unto the beasts of men.
For it does The effects of ill Tabaco.
prick the tunicles of the eye,
To the pia matter is an enemy;
Who drink shall idle be, unapt for pains,
A laziness shall creep through all their veins,
They shall be ever yawning, and above
All things they shall the Chimny corner love.
And except hunger raise them, take delight
To snort by the fire till it be late in the night.
But O ye sacred offspring of the Muses.
Nine,
("Whose birth, whose life, whose works are al divine)
You who do dig from Wisdoms Paper pits,
Learnings bright Ore, and fine it with your wits,
Above all other men see ye do fly
That Bad and sophisticate Tabaco.
Hucksters mischief and damned villainy;
And found out by his Symptoms, without fail
Send it to the flames in gross, not by retail.
The dainties wafted from an other shore
Some do adulterate while the deadly gore
Of rank Goats (which a Scythian's Club did slay)
They mingle with them; some an other way
Do manifest injury to the noble weed,
Dropping into 't the oil of Annis seed,
Or the less greazy Fennel, and to these
To give 't a touch of vitriol some do please,
Whereby a taste unto the tongue they gain
Much like the sweetness of a Lybian Cane.
All these are naught and womanish; for he
Who unto nature will add art, must be
At natures mouth instructed first, or shall
Disturb the work, giving no help at all.
Yet if thou will be wanton to thy praise,
With a light Chip of the wood Aloes,
Give fire unto thy Pipe, so shall thou reap
A fragrant savor spread through the whole heap,
And with a grateful odor cheer the brain.
But above all things see that ye refrain
The Take it not too suddenly 'after meat; it causes too hasty a concoction.
smoke awhile; do not the Pipe repeat
Too suddenly after y' have taken meat;
For then the The digestive heat in the stomach.
Cooke's at work, the The mouth of the stomach.
Kitchen door
Close to them shut; Knock not too soon therefore
At the' upper gate, for fear he angry grow,
And the half boiled dishes from him throw,
Which to the guts conveyed with too much speed,
Do windy murmurings in the belly breed,
The happy quiet of the mind devour,
And from our business steal the precious hour.
It Is Keep your head warm when you take it.
alike dangerous with naked Head,
With open roof, and chimny uncovered,
To take the Smoke; for the cold air will then
The pores being open, quickly pierce the skin,
And suddenly reclose them, whence is bred
To the hairs horror, heaviness to the head.
Love not to drink't Take it not alone, or if you do, let there be pauses
interposed.
alone, nor take thou pleasure
To fill thy brain beyond his true just measure.
With a compunion take it; "if thou have none,
"Let Books or business act the part of one:
"With comely pauses use 't, in such a fashion,
"That thou a Dialogue make 't, not an Oration.
To speak and do by turns, the Muses love,
And Nature surfets never did approve.
At the first When to leave.
giddiness thou feel'st, forbear;
And for that time write thy nil ultra there:
And if it vanish not, for help repair
To a draught of beer, or to the open air,
And suddenly the Tumult shall be staid,
And by a little art the Tempest laid.
" To close up all, take this for thy last ground,
" Study thine own Dimensions, and having found
The measure of thy head, turn then about
In thine own sphere, seek not thy self without:
For who observes the Laws of Nature, he
Shall be sound, wise, and fortunate to me.
Thus the Sienus.
old man in his discourse did play,
While Bacchus Lords, as on their backs they lay,
Did silent hang upon the speakers tongue.
The virtues they had learned, but still they long
Of such a noble herb to know the breed,
The Art of Planting, and the choice of the seed:
But good Silenus stammering for thirst.
And withal drowsy too, none of the durst
Entreat him to proceed --
For Wine, for Wine, a calling he did keep,
And having largely drunk, he fell asleep.
What he has left imperfect shall now be
Our work to finish though as dry as he.
"Your gentle gales and influence we want,
"Who are true lovers of the honored Plant:
"For though far short of his high sounding string
"We'll now the Georgicks of Tabaco sing.
First, that the Harvest answer may the pain,
From off a lusty stock a The choice of the seed.
plump seed gain,
Whose leaf is long and thick: side-slips despise,
The best does still from the main branch arise.
The next care is the The soil.
Place, an Herb so strong,
By a hungry soil cannot be nourished long.
In hearty grounds it thrives; and takes delight,
(Like to the Vine) where the Glebe is full of might.
Fair Hills be loves, and fields that pleasantly
Toward the warm south in the Suns bright ey:
Where the Earth is light, no moss by nature laid,
No binding Clay, nor Marle to check the spade;
And where the valiant furrows hard and dry,
Suffer the rending Plow-shears cruelty.
When thou have found a soil thus rich, take heed
Thou do not Sow not two years together in one place.
twice in one place sow thy seed:
For with the first birth all that is good does come
Leaving behind naught but a barren womb.
Change every year thy earth, for thy wandering guest
Prepare new seats, so shall thy furrows rest,
And a new Genius gain. The field being found,
Let none be cunninger to till the ground
In his right season; In one small hole shut
The manner of Planting.
Three seeds or more, in equal spaces put,
That Nature may (like to a loving mother)
Give equal portions as to one to the other:
So though some prove for Mice or Moles a feast,
Thou may preserve a hope yet in the rest.
But if they prosper all, and thou do see
Their multitude will their destruction be,
"Drive then all foolish pity from thy heart;
Take from the number, act a Thracian's part;
That, having room, the better it may thrive,
Of many Brothers, leave but one alive.
When the fat soil and Sun's drawn out in length,
To'th' leaves rankness give, to the stock strength;
Then is thy time, the lower boughs cut down,
That greater virtues may the other crown.
The time when to gather it.
Reap not too soon; when the leaves turned are,
And the seed grows black within his bowl, prepare
Thy knives, and let thy weapons ready stand,
For know the noble Vintage is at hand.
Close to your Prayers ye honourers of the smoke,
And with your best devotions see y' invoke
The Heavens for smiles: fair weather now we need
For showers t'th 'leaf do no less damage breed,
Then does a wet September to ripe grapes,
When it is gathered, half thy labor's done;
Yet flag not here, with equal courage run
Through that behind: thy industry, thy cost,
If thou shall fail in the last act, are lost.
Take 'speciall care of the two things remain.
First from the leaf the watery humor drain,
(Corruptions Parent) else thou shall inherit
For thy leaves dung. Next let the fiery spirit
Which sleeping does in the fat oil lie hid,
Be' awaked, and roused, and through each vein be spread.
That therefore on the Herb no spoil be made
By' the thirsty Sunbeams dry it in the shade,
On small cords hung: then take it down and lay
It on a heap together, that it may
From the bottom heat and rise, and from thence dart
The hidden virtue to each outward part;
So shall the heap grow warm, swell, sweat and smoke,
And fire too if the meeting be not broke.
Be sure you do dissolve the Diet then,
And when dispersed, hang them up again.
This Method use, till by heating it be made
Active, and by the drying fixed and staid.
And that on neither hand thou wander wide,
Let thine own eyes and reason be thy guide:
For as the line too little in like sort
That of too much unto perfection's short:
In a just measure Nature takes delight.
But if an error happen, set it right
Not with the burning wine, salt pickle, not
With Honey, least of all by'th' Chamber Pot;
Such trash as this your Hucksters use, who prize
Above the health, the smell of the Merchandise.
From the Herb it self expect thy aid, press then
The juice A cleanly and wholesome way to recover decaid Tabaco.
from out the courser leaves, which when
The gathering was, did escape the careless hand,
And over the coals see it does boiling stand.
In which " Mede as Tub dip thy Decrepid Tabaco.
old Swain,
And he (like Aeson) shall turn young again.
Let these suffice to board with it bless thy Lot,
For now thou have an ample treasure got,
Which to the Planter large revenue brings,
To the Merchants Chests, and Custom House of Kings.
Physicians peradventure curse it sore,
For making Autumnes healthful, and them poor,
And it sometimes affords (such things will be)
To the Crows a Dinner from the Gallow tree;
When poor knaves buy t, and so do fondly spend
Their coin and hours given them for better end.
But while we see a fair and happy day
To'th' good and frugall, they who' will perish, may:
And he who shall an offered Gemme deny,
May that man live to want it e're he die.
From whom a ship at sea, a suit in law,
A scolding wife, or an ill debtour draw
Sleep from the eyes, and quiet from the mind,
In the gentle leaf he a soft truce may find;
And for the gift, giv't the deserved meed.
What swelling words against the noble weed
The peevish man may vomit (too unkind!)
We to the waves commit them and the wind.
Let it be damned to Hell, and called from thence
Proserpines Wine, the Furies Frankincense
The Devils addle eggs, or else to these,
A sacrifice grim Pluto to appease,
A deadly weed which it is beginning had
From the foam of Cerberus when the Cur was mad.
We at the Titles laugh; praise, and proclaim
The wideness of the Bore from whence they came.
Pretty Poetic styles! and when we please
With the like Art we can return all these.
If any lover of the Truth shall now
What is by me here written, disallow,
Against my opinion let his reasons fight;
His Arguments let him commit to white:
"So, without hate did Monopolies, run
"A course to make Paper dear, as we have done.
The End.

