AN Exhortation to Friends In and about the County of WORCESTER, and elsewhere.
Dear and Well-beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters, my Spirit salutes you in
the Lord Jesus Christ, who has Gathered us Together out of the Land of
Darkness into his Mavelous Light, that we might Walk before God in the Land
of the Living, to the Praise and Glory of God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, World without End, Amen.
NOW Dear Friends, there is something upon my Mind to writ unto you. Viz. That
you Be all Diligent to Meet Together to Wait upon the Lord in your Spirits; for
the Lord has Appeared to you for that End to Gather you Near unto Himself, to
Worship him in Spirit, and in Truth, in this the Day of his Great Power, that
has Made many of You willing to Bear Reproach for his Heavenly names Sake;
Esteem the Reproach for Christ's Sake Great Riches, and lend no Ear to the
Unfruitful Works of Darkness of what name soever they may be, or how fair
soever they may speak; nor to the Unfruitful Works of Darkness in your selves,
but rather Reprove them, and Keep you Under the Cross of Christ, which is the
Power of God in You, that would Crucify Every Evil Thought, Word and Work in
You, that through the Cross you may all come to be Heirs of the Crown Immortal;
that your Souls being Risen with Christ, you may seek those Things which are
Above, Where Christ is at the Right Hand of God, Administering Eternal Life to
Every Hungry, and Refreshing Every Thirsty Soul with his Heavenly Divine
Presence, thereby to Grow in his Strength over the World, and the Evils
therein; The Pride of Life, the Deceitfulness of Riches and the Praise of Men.

And Friends, trust not in Man, nor in the Favorableness of Times, But Trust
you in the Lord; for in his Almighty Power is Everlasting Strength, which will
Strengthen your Immortal Souls to live and Love His Heavenly Appearance, in
which is Eternal Life.

And what Christ said unto One, he said unto All, Watch; So Friends, be Ye
Watchful, and Wait with Retired Minds on the Lord, that you may Receive Daily
Bread from the Hand of your Heavenly Father, By which you Will Grow up into A
Good Understanding in the Things of God's Kingdom, wherein you may give Answer
to the Men of this Generation that may ask you Questions of the Hope in you;
You may Answer with Meekness and Godly Fear, Having your Eye to the Seed of God
in you.

What we have heard, what we have seen, what our Hands have Handled of, Viz.
The Good God of Life, that we show unto you.

And as you Keep your Eye to the Seed of God in You; it will Keep you from
desiring Discourse with Men of Corrupt Minds who are Destitute of the Faith of
God's Elect; yet Rich in Profession, Fair in Discourse, full of Deceit to Draw
your Minds by little and little, to Love and Affect them and Their Doings; So
may you Lose God's Kingdom by Flattery, and become Vain.

Now the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Keep your Minds staid in Him;
that when you are Absent one from another in Body you may be Watchful, that
your Soul's Enemy Prevails not over You, To the Wounding of your Innocent Life;

And when you are Assembled Together to Wait upon the Lord, Be Diligent and
Watchful, that A Spirit of Slumber or Sleeping get not over you, but like Good
Servants and Diligent Waiters in true Silence for their Lord's Coming, for as
much as you have Found your Labor has not been in Vain in the Lord,

Into whose Hand I leave you with my own self who am imprisoned in Body for
Testifying against Tithes in this Free Gospel-Day, yet at Liberty in Spirit in
his Love to Praise Him, who has not only Called me to Believe, but made me
Truly Willing to Leave All, and suffer for his Sake, to Him be Praise and
Glory, and Everlasting Renown who is God Blessed for ever, Amen. William Sankey.
Worcester County. Goal, the 27th. of the Seventh Month. 1687.
Published on the behalf of Truth in the Year 1689, the Prisoner being yet
retained.

London, Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lombard street, 1689.


