Tho. Sawyer of Magd. Coll was the author of Antigamus following*

See A^ ^t Fa^^ Oxon Vol. 2. P. 884.

ANTIGAMUS OR A Satyr against MARRIAGE.
1.
HEnce, hence ye Matrymonial tools,
Ye thin-leg'd, pale-faced, meagre train,
Ye Proselites to empty rules,
Formed by some nice Adulterers brain;
Hence chilly threadbare Stoic Chastity
Lust pinched and starved by rude Morality,
And welcome well-fed sprightly Leachery.
Methinks I feel the noble god-like guest,
Briskly advancing to command my breast.
My thoughts, Seraglio-like are richly stored
With the best Girls the Universe afford:
My wishes burn my imaginations glow,
And my free choice distracts me what to do
But Pilot-like, I will attack each Whore
'Till Natures Helm shall steer me to some shore.
2.
Marriage that religious Cheat,
By which man kind their freedom loose,
Shall never my use of sense defear,
Or in its specious Hamprings noose.
Marriage that state of slavish drudgery
The clog that cramps and galls our Liberty,
The blind effect of doting foolery.
Let Court-born Brats, like Frogs, complete
Their births, scarce born Engender in the heat;
Let 'Squires their Bridgets to their beds prefer,
Choused by the cuuning well fee'd Hous-keeper;
I Will propagate my universal Love
While the quick-motion'd springs of youth can move
When age steals on, and life becomes a curse,
Perhaps I Will then vouchsafe to keep a Nurse.
3
Tell me some humble Hen-peck'd Citt
The numerous wracks attend thy life;
What crowds of Ills together mere,
And Center in a snarlish Wife.
No zealous Drab mad or prophetic grown
Or pale Fanatic bawling down the Crown
Storms half so loud or with so shrill a tone.
How sneaking must the lesson'd Schoolboy stand
With heavy down-cast-eye, and Cap in hand,
And if her chattering Clack one Note she rears,
He dreads the present forfeiture of his ears:
Dare he reply, Stools, Chairs, and all she will hurl
Or worry with her nails the saucy Churl.
The Victrix-spouse scorns ever to comply,
Unless with ends to serve her Leachery.
4
Brag on thou fondling fawning Sot
Who art by modest outsides gulled
Thou blinded credulous Idiot,
In mere conceits of virtue lul'd.
Let but thy darling Nest-bird take the air
From place to place she will flutter first with care,
Then try her wings and prove a wonderer.
In harmless wanton sports she will freely join,
And with her fellow Innocents combine
Till we the well-flown Vulture hungry rome
And seize the harmless Captives far from home.
Grasped in our Talons they become the prey
And at their deaths perceive th've gone astray:
Thus we brave souls to Luxury are fed
With the fat Quarry of the Marriage Bed.
5.
I challenge all tame wedlock Drones
Who the dull badge of Husband wear
TO allege their consolations
Secure from jealousies and fear,
How could the mighty Caesar's luster shine,
Though crowding Laurels round his temples twine
Ecclyps'd by hot-tail'd bawdy Messaline?
How wisely did the wandering Trojan 'Squire
Leave his Cerusa scorching in Troy's fire!
The Carthage Dames well liked his manly face,
He promised much because of Bastard-race
Maugre Tar-breeches, Maugre sunburned meene
He boldly ventured and debauched a Queen.
Thus piously endew'd the Hero fled,
Where fates ordained and choice of Whoreing led,
6.
Curse on that Grecian * Spinning Spouse,
Who when Brisk Lovers daily came
Was making Cheese, or Sweeping house,
And would not entertain their flame
This Idle, Old, Cold, Drousie, Rusty, Mome.
Was glad to see her tottered* Wisdom come;
Kis'd wrinckled Dear, and bid him welcome home.
He underwent the shocks of Fire and Steel,
While Chaste Chickney sat purring at the Wheel.
But Oh! the Embraces when these Lovers met,
The Furrows of their Cheeks with slobbering wet.
One would have thought the Hero's long delay
Had made him pampered for Venereal play;
But he must first the Trojan wars repeat,
His Love with too long fasting could not eat.
7
Arm, arm, my Lads to Venus Wars,
My faithful, dauntless Volunteers,
Courageously withstand all jarrs
And ransack Cuckold Mutineers.
Thus the old Romans their first Conquest made,
The Sabine Virgins they at first betrayed
This flushed their Valor, then the world obeyed.
Cannot your blood Jone's great Example stir,
Jove the most Famed and Grand Adulterer?
He, who in Incest first his power begun,
Gave Earthly Empires to each Bastard Son.
We are his Race, our Actions speak us so,
Nor need we doubt reward if on we go.
Sound Loves Trumpet, fill all the Cyprian plain,
We Will Fight, and Wheel, and Rally up again.
8
The Battle's done, and Ours the day,
And though the short dispute was hot,
The Captives will our Labor pay,
The Pretty Amozons we have got.
This Merchants wife brings store of Silks and Wine,
That Goldsmiths Consort's fraught with bags of Coin.
All, all their Husbands Treasuries purloyn.
These are the fields we Lusty Champions fight,
Our Labors please us, and our Pains delight;
While easy Cowards lazily content
Themselves with one a Nuptial Curse has sent.
Let the head-aching mortals grunt and groan,
And bind their swelling Foreheads making moan;
Let Snivelling Mopsa run at Nose and cry,
Oh Dear! my husband I Am afraid he will dye.
9.
May I (ye Gods) who Patrons are
To Lust and sweet Debauchery,
Brow-Antlers on my Frontlets waer,
Stamped with the mark of Cuckoldry.
If I to Ill-natured peevishness submit,
And Curb my reason in a Marriage bit,
May Boys deriding at me Turnips hit;
May I set Smoking in a Country Cot;
Yoked with my Heifer skimming of a Pot;
May I like Starveling Prigg to Market trot
On sober Ball, sell Eggs to get a Groat;
May the Black, Rude, Companion of my bed
Cry Hastings ripe, or Cheef cakes on her head;
May Smiths and Tinkers, either out of spo.
Or Spite, my homespun Doxy court.
10.
Strongly I feel my rageing blood
Beat and attempt to overflow;
The Channels scarce contain the Flood,
And Natures Springs Luxuriant grow.
As when Nile swells with fat impetuous Tides,
Richly insulting over the Banks he rides,
Over beauteous flowers and Plants he gently glides.
Thus I though furious and tempestuous made,
Will gently force, and calmly Nymphs invade.
I am resolved, and nothing hinders me,
No Shanker pox, or running Ghonorrhy,
I Will on with all my lusty Myrmidons,
Straight-limb'd, well built, with firmly marrow'd bones;
Let Deformed wretches with all Ill humor crammed,
Go Marry if they can, and so be damned.
FINIS.

