OOLOGIA: OR, THE HISTORY OF ANIMALS As they are useful in Physic and
Surgery.

Divided into Four Parts; The First treats of the more perfect Terrestrial
Creatures. Second of Birds. Third of Fishes. Fourth of Insects.


By JOHN SCHRODER, Dr. of Physic.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes, for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane, and
Rob. Clavel at the Stags-Head near St. Gregory's in St. Pauls-church-yard, 1659.

To the Readers.
GOod leave have you to blame the Translaters weakness, so you derogate nothing
from the Authors worth, and if you acquit the Original of fault, impute what
you please to the Transcript. For the Protoplasts sublime knowledge speaks him
Natures Secretary, and his manifold experiments the Artists singular friend,
whereby he has more advanced and illustrated true Philosophy, then all those
high pretenders to the Medicine have performed in their equivocal language, and
Allegorical allusions. For mine own part, I will neither court your favor, nor
value your dislike; for I shall account my self no better for the former, no
worse for the latter; and therefore without guilt of offense, or need of
defense, I forbear to make any Apology for the one, or supplication for the
other, but am resolved to endure the censure of all with Withers Motto, Nec
habeo, nec careo, nec curo; and Bias his saying, Omnia mea mecum porto.

T. B.

In T. B. ob Schroderi (...) in publicum patriae bonum Anglice redditam.
"(...),
"(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
In Librum.
Qui cupit amissam parvo reparare salutem,
Qua gratum miseris nil queat esse magis;
Perlegat hunc librum, quem mecum appellet opportet
Selectum ingenii candidioris opus:
Commoda ubi invenier vel multi digna laboris,
Commoda quae multis non patuere prius.
Nempe salutiferi genus hic medicaminis omne est,
Curandis aegris quod satis esse potest.
Hinc proprias promunt animalia quaeque medelas,
Atque homini ostendunt quam been cuncta velint.
Sive urat Febris corpus grassata per omne,
Sive oculi tristes Somnia non capiant;
Seu noceat Cephalaea, graves Angina dolores
Excitet, aut Vlcus vel Phagedaena premat.
Denique ^it ^^^^bigenus est cui Pharmaca certa,
Ac tibi parta levi, non dabit iste Liber.
Vtere foelici successu, and reddito dignas
Authori l^^des, tam b^ne qui meruit.
Cui mage nil cordi est patriae quam ^t commodet; unde
Solliciti metas hic posuit studii.
Hocque quod aegrorum Fratrum conscripsit in usum
Longi^s aeterno marmore vivet opus.
Gratitudinis ergo posuit, T. N. (...).

The First Classis Of the more perfect TERRESTRIAL ANIMALS.
I. Agnus, the Lamb.
OF which these are medicinable; 1. The lungs both new and also dried. 2. The
gall. 3. The wool. 4. The bones burnt to ashes. 5. The Runnet.


Their Virtues.
1. The lungs preserve the feet from inflammation occasioned by the shoes,
(laid on, see further concerning the Sheep.)

2. The gall is given against the Falling sickness.

3. The wool (with the skin) helps the Squinsie, and mollifies other tumors
of the neck (applied thereto.)

4. The bones burnt to to ashes consolidate wounds, even such as are of a more
difficult consolidation.

5. The Runnet prevails against poison, against curdled milk, and venomous
bitings, (drunk with Vinegar.)

II. Alces, the Elk,
IS a cloven footed Animal, in shape like a Heart, but greater, by nature
fearful, and subject to the falling sickness.

Of this we have in Physical use, 1. The hoof. 2. The sinews.


Their virtues.
1. The hoof is famous for its specificall virtue against the falling
sickness, both by preventing and also curing it, and that as well inwardly
taken, as outwardly used: Inwardly is given its powder, and the preparations
subjoyned. Outwardly a piece of it is enclosed in a Ring, and is worn on the
fourth finger, so that it look toward the palm of the hand. In like manner it
is 1. held in the hand; 2. is applied to the pulse; 3. is put into the left
ear; 4. is hanged about the neck that it touch the skin.

The Dose 10. grains to 20. and above.

N. 1. It is known by the pleasant smell, which it gives in fumigation.

N. 2. Authors report that every Animal of this kind, is not troubled with the
Epilepsie, nor all endued with the same property, but according to their age,
sex, time, and also in regard of the hoof it self they differ very much. The
hoof of the female has not this faculty but of the male only, not young but
grown to full age, and at that time when he begins to be moved with the desire
of venery (between the feast of the Assumption of the Virgin, and her
Nativity.) Some attribute more to the hinder hoofs then to the former, and some
to the right foot (which is more common) others to the left. Some would have
these hoofs at the aforesaid season to be cut off from the Animal while he is
living. Andr. Bacc. l. de Alce.

2. The nerves are tied about members subject to the Crampe.

Preparations of the hoofs.
1. The hoofs prepared after the ordinary or common manner.

2. A Magistery is made after the common manner with Vinegar (others choose
rather the spirit of Salt) and with oil of Tartar.

N. This Magistery represents almost the color of ashes.

3. Some distill a water of the marrow of the Brain, and account it a secret
against the Epilepsie. See further in the Chapt. concerning Man*

4. It will yield an oil, water and a volatile Salt after the common manner.

III. Aper, the Bore.
HE eats Acorns, Beechen nuts, Chestnuts, roots of Fern, Angelica, and such like.

Their Coition is in the beginning of Winter, their Parturition in the Spring.

These of this Animal are in Physical use; 1. The grease. 2. The tooth. 3. The
Genitals. 4. The gall. 5. The dung. 6. The urine.


Their virtues in particular.
1. The wild Bore as he is very like to the tame and domestic, so he has the
same virtues but stronger. Hence the grease is received into the Weapon Salve.
It is commended specially in mitigating the pains of the sides, and in
mollifying the matter thereof. It stays the voiding of blood (drunk in Vinegar
or Wine) It is good for parts broken and taken with the Crampe (if drunk in
Vinegar) It cures members dislocated (drunk with Vinegar of roses.)

2. The tooth or tuske is given specifically in the Pleurisy. It cures the
Squinsie (anointed or used with oil of Line seed.)

The Dose is one Dram.

3. The Genitals and testicles conduce to the weakness of Venery, and
Prolification.

4. The gall dissolveth the Evil.

5. The dry dung (drunk) is supposed to stay the casting up of the blood, which
it also does perform, being outwardly applied.

6. The urine specifically breaks the stones of the bladder and drives them out.

Preparat.
1. The tooth prepared after the common manner.

2. Of it also may be made a Magistery, by dissolving it in distilled Vinegar,
and precipitating it with Spirit of Vitriol or oil of Tartar.

N. The Tusk of the Bore is very mucilaginous, and therefore its preparation
often waxes hard in the bottom This hardening that they may prevent, they use
to set it to the fire a little while and burn it.

3. Some distill a water of the blood with cooling and moistning herbs, and
highly commend it in an Atrophy.

IV. Asinus, the Ass,
IS a slow beast, melancholic, of long life, (living 30. years) foaling the
twelfth month.

Of which these are medicinable; 1. The hoof. 2. The blood. 3. The milk. 4. The
urine. 5. The dung. 6. The grease. 7. The skin.


The virtues.
1. The hoof in the Falling sickness is accounted nothing inferior to the
Alce's. (It is given every day for a month, to half a dram.)

Outwardly the ashes thereof are commended for dissolving the Evil, and
healing kibed heels (anointed with oil) for Consolidating the chaps of the
skin, dissolving Apostumes, taking away the nail or web of the eye (dropped in
with woman's milk) excluding the dead birth (in a fume) raising up the
Epileptick and Hysteric (by the smell.)

2. The blood moves sweat. The blood extracted from behind the ears, or out of
the ear, and received in a linen cloth, and the infusion of that cloth taken,
is said to mitigate the fierceness of the melancholic humor, and to drive
away diseases effected by witchcraft. Some use the same to a Quotidian.

The blood of the foal of an Ass cures the Jaundise.

3. The milk nourishes and strangely absterges. Hence it is profitable in a
Consumption, in diseases of the ventricle, in an Abscesse of the kidneys, stone
of the bladder, and ach of the gowt, for it makes the belly soluble,
abstergeth the urinary passages, provokes women's flowers.

Outwardly used, it strengthens the gummes, mitigates the pains of the gowt
(the dung made with it into a Cataplasme) and procures a pleasant paleness to
the face (if anointed.)

It is given from 4 ounces to 10.

4. The urine properly heals the diseases of the kidneys, and also the scab,
(mud wall moystned with the urine is applied) Warts and callous parts, the
Atrophy of members, and Palsy, and Gowt-aches, etc.

For example.
Take the urine of an Asses foal, the hoof of a she Ass burnt into ashes,
knead them together, and add some grease of an Ass with a little Indian Spike
for the better smell. Let it be made into an ointment.

5. The grease makes skars all of the same color.

6. The dung stays bleeding, drunk or burnt, or applied like a Plaster, or
applied to the nostrils

7. The skin in lieu of a Feather-bed, is said to drive away the frighting of
children.

V. Bos, the Bull or Cow,
IS an Animal commonly known, living twenty years naturally. Their Coition, for
the most part is in the middle of the Spring, or in the Autumn.

This Animal supplies us with these medicinables.

1. The horn. 2. The gall. 3. The liver. 4. The milt. 5. The blood. 6. The
marrow. 7. The tallow. 8. The oil of the feet 9. The hoofs. 10. The urine. 11.
The dung. 12. Little stones. 13. The milk* 14. Butter. 15. Cheese. 16. The
pistle. 17. The bones.
1. The horn is seldom used, yet have I seen the powder thereof given against
the Epilepsie. It is also used in a fume to correct the contagious air.

2. The gall of a Bull is preferred before the gals almost of all four-footed
beasts: Specially it cures the noise and dolor of the ears (mixed with Woman's
or Goats milk, and put in with Cotton:) it moves the belly (in a Glyster.)

3. The liver is seldom used, in stead whereof the liver of a Calf to
corroborate the liver, for the most part is used in decoctions.

4. The milt is of chief use in Decoctions and extractions, for softning of the
milt and suppression of the flowers of women. Some apply it outwardly to the
milt.

5. The blood inwardly taken brings singular help to those that have the
Boudy-flix, and to internal voiding of blood. Outwardly it disperseth and
mollyfyeth tumors, and cleanses the spots of the face (if anointed therewith.)

6. The Marrow has the next place after Hearts and Calves marrow. Besides the
general virtues (anointed with wine) it refreshes trembling members, and helps
hard sinews.

7. The tallow besides the general virtues is specially used to the Excoriation
of the bowels, and Tenesmus, as also Ulcers and chaps of the lips, it cures
Gowty and schirrous affects.

N. The best is taken from the kidneys.

8. The oil of the feet is commonly used in mollifying tumors, in mitigating
aches, and in the dislocation of the joints.

9. The hoofs burnt into ashes, plenty of milk (being inwardly taken) in like
manner they are used to drive away malignant air (in a fume.)

N. Mice are driven away by the fume of the hoofs.

10. The urine mitigates the pains of the ears (if it be dropped in with myrrh.)

11. Cows dung cools and dryes moderately, disperses notably, mitigates pains.
It is applied with good success to Burnings, Inflammations, the Gowt, the
stingings of Bees and Wasps. In a fume it hinders the falling down of the
matrix.

N. The common people tun it up in drink for those that have a burning Fever,
or are tormented with the Colic, or give them to drink the juice pressed out,
and that with good success.

12. The little stone taken out of the maw (in March) or out of the bladder of
the gall (in May) cures the Jaundise; specifically lessens and wastes the stone
(if drunk with wine) it performs the same if daily it be put into the wine
which is for his drink, till it be altogether wasted.

Quercetan.

The stone of the gall made into powder is an excellent Errhine.

13. Cows milk is thick, it nourishes well, and is good for the pain of the
kidneys and bladder, it helps the Diarrhoea, Dysentery, Tenesmus, and the
excoriation of the bowels (being drunk.)

N. 1. Milk hurts the Splenetick, Hepatick, those that are subject to the
Epilepsie, Vertigo, Fever, and Headache. And this is generally to be observed
concerning milk.

N. 2. Cream with Camomil, Watercresses, and Juniper Berries boiled in milk,
help mightily the Scorbutic aches (in a Cataplasme.)

14. Butter heals moderately, mollifies, digests, mitigates, dissolves,
loosens, is good for the dimness of the eyes, (put into them) etc.

15. Cheese new and soft, mitigates the aches of the Gowt, and the heat of the
Liver, helps the standing forth of the Navill of Infants (applied on the place.)

16. The pisle of a red Bull helps those that are troubled with the Bloudy-flix
(made in powder and used.)

N. 1. It is believed to make women averse from venery.

N. 2. The spermatick vessels burnt, stay the flux of blood.

N. 3. This is the medicine of the Jews in the circumcised. Forest. in Chirurg.

17. The bones are used of some for the strengthening of the bowels, and driving
away the Epilepsie.

Preparat.
1. A water, called The water of all flowers, is distilled in Balneo M. or out
of ashes in the Spring or May, of the fresh dung of a Cow feeding on herbs
Hence there also comes an oil.

The virtues.
It cools, dissolves, it is used inwardly in the Colic, the inflammation of
the Kidneys, suppression of Urine, Fevers, etc.

Outwardly it is applied on pained places, as abovesaid; it is also commended
against cancrous Ulcers, etc.

2. A water of the blood is made (in May) in Balneo M.

The virtues.
It mightily mitigates the Gowt.

3. The Decoction of the milt of an Ox is thus made; Take the whole milt of an
Ox or Cow cut into pieces, one ounce of Cinnamon grossly beaten, half an ounce
of Cloves, two drams of Saffron, white Wine or Malmesey as much as is
sufficient, put all into a capacious glass, which being well covered must
boil 24 hours in a very hot Balneo M. until the milt be boiled into very
little bits, and there remain a great quantity of broth excellently boiled, and
most fragrant.

The virtues.
This is a proper medicine for the hardness and obstruction of the milt and
suppression of the flowers in Women.

The dose 4 ounces, continuing 4 or 5 days when the flowers used to flow.
Quercetan.

4. The extract of the milt of an Ox.

N. Crollius,

Takes the milt of a young Ox, cuts it into thin slices, infuses it a few days
in spirit of wine essentificated with Myrrh, afterward he dryes it in the
air, then according to art extracts the essence thereof with spirit of Wine,
and for the more efficacy adds a few drops of the distilled oil of Angelica.

The virtues.
It dispatches the obstructions of the milt, and provokes the flowers in Women.

The dose one scruple in some proper water.

N. It may fitly be dried in an Oven.

5. The oil of Butter.

6. The tincture of the gall of a Bull.

Take the gals of Bulls dried leasurely in the sun, then extract the tincture
with spirit of wine.

The virtues.
It is a most excellent beautifying medicine procuring miraculously a most
pleasant whiteness.

It is anointed on the place and suffered to remain three or four days, so
that they expose not themselves to the air, then let it be washed off with the
water of the flowers of Beans, Water Lillies, or Knot-grasse, and the like.
Hartman.

VI. Bubulus, the Buffle,
IS like to an Ox in figure and nature, yet greater and more cruel, and black
of color.

Of which in Physic and Surgery we have, 1. Horns and hoofs. 2. Tallow and
dung, etc.


The virtues.
1. The horns and hoofs cure the Cramp (a ring made thereof worn on the finger
or toe)

2. The suet and the dung has the virtues of the Oxes, etc.

Preparat.
The extract of the liver of the Buffle, is made after the same manner that the
extract of the milt of the Ox is.

N. It is accounted more excellent if the proper salt extracted out of the
Caput mortuum be mixed with it.

The virtues.
It is of the same use with the extract of the milt of the Ox, but more
efficacious.

The Dose is also the same. Hartman.

VII. Bufo, the Toad.
THere is a very great Antipathy betwixt Toads and Spiders; if a Toad be set
under a Spider* she presently descends with might and force to destroy him.

In Physical use are, 1. Toads themselves. 2. The Toad stone.


1. Toads are dried in the air being thrust through the head or neck, and being
dried, are kept for use.

The virtues.
Though a Toad be a venomous and abominable Animal, yet shuns it not Physical
practice; and that both inwardly, and also outwardly.

A certain Hydropick man despairing of recovery, used the powder of Toads, by
which he experimentally found that the waters were vented by the urine, and he
beyond all hope attained his health. Petraeus in Nosolog. Wierus in Observat.

The Dose half a dram.

N. I allow of a less quantity.

Outwardly a Toad is applied to biles (a little infused in Vinegar) to draw out
the venom (which it so well performs, that it swells with the venom so attracted
to it) it is an ingredient in Amulets ordained for driving away contagious air.

By certain experience, it stays bleeding at nose (if it be applied behind the
ears of it self, or be kept in the hand to grow warm, or put under the
armpits, or appended to the neck.)

The same is the ashes or powder reported to do (sprinkled on the place
affected.)

(Applied on the kidneys) it is said to drive out by urine the intercutall
water (tied to the navill) it draws back and restrains hysteric fluxes
(applied to the soles of the feet) it is thought to help the diseases of the
head and heart, the Frenzy and Fevers.

2. The Toad-stone is like a bubble of water, hollow on one part, and unequal on
the other, of a dark pale color, sometime black, white (which is better)
green, of diverse colors.

N. They are found in the fields, yet others affirm that they are bred in the
heads of old Toads which live among brambles, and bushes, and thorns, but the
greatness of some of them dissuade me from giving credit to this opinion.

The virtues.
It is commended as a Sovereign remedy against the Plague and poison. Yea some
affirm that those who wear it, are safe from poison, and that by gentle rubbing
it disperseth swellings occasioned by venomous beasts, and draws away all
poison. Caspar Baubin. de lap. Bezord. cap. 3.

N. This stone is said to change its color, and to sweat when a poisoned cup
is present.

Preparat.
1. Amulets of diverse descriptions.

The ashes of a Toad (a Toad burnt) cures involuntary pissing arising from the
tearing of the neck of the bladder (hanged about the neck.) Observat. Henr. ab
Here. 18.

2. The powder is made by only rubbing, whereby Toads very well dried are
brought into powder.

N. I had rather have Toades burnt to ashes.

3. Salt may be drawn out of Calcined Toads, and be used in lieu of the powder
in the Dropsy.

The Dose to grains iij etc

4. Simple Oil of Toads.

Take living Toads in number three or four, boil them one hour in two pounds of
Oil Olive, strain it, and keep it for use.

The Virtues.
It is very highly commended in cleansing the spots of the face, morphew and
other affects or inveterate Ulcers (by the spotted signature the Toad is judged
to avail against spots) it is to be anointed every day once.

N. I would prefer spotted Frogs.

5. The compounded Oil of Toads.

Take Oil of Sheeps feet as much as you will, let it boil with Sulphur
powdered, till it become a red Oil; then let the Sulphur be separated from the
Oil, into which while it is as yet hot, let Toads be put and suffocated, and
after pressing out distilled.

The Virtues.
It is most excellent in digesting tumors in the Dropsy.

VIII. Canis, the Dog.
IN medicine are used of this Animal, 1. The whole dog. 2. The head. 3. The
grease. 4. The gall. 5. The blood. 6. The dung: 7. The urine. 8. The tooth. 9.
The skin. 10. The hair.


The Virtues.
1. The whole living Whelp laid on the belly, asswages the pains of the Colic,
bathing in the Decoction of Whelps, and the grease gathered from this
Decoction, comforts Paralytick members.

2. The head, viz. the brain pan burnt to ashes, dries Ulcers, heals the
diseases of the fundament, chaps, and the swelling of the testicles.

Inwardly used, it cures the Jaundise.

3. Dogs grease is hotter than the rest, and it is inwardly used in cleansing
and consolidating wounds and Exulcerations, and in a Consumption and dissolving
clotted blood from a fall.

Outwardly it is good in asswaging the aches of the Gowt, and of the ears;
driving away the nits of the head, recovering hearing, helping the Scab and
Itch.

4. The gall of a black Whelp wonderfully cures the Epilepsie, (being new and
drunk with Vinegar, or given in powder.)

Outwardly it cleanses the spots of the face (anointed with the dung of a
Calf) it helps white specks of the eyes (anointed with Honey).

5. The blood is commended against the poison of Witches, and it is said to be
drunk with success against the biting of a mad Dog, and against poison.

6. The dung (called Album Graecum in shops) dries, cleanses, disperses, opens,
breaks Apostumes, cleanses Exulcerations, and therefore profits in a Dysentery,
Colic and the like.

Outwardly it helps the Squinsie (blown into the throat) malignant Ulcers
(sprinkled on them) it softens hard tumors (in plaster) it draws forth
Hydropick waters (anointing the belly) it puts away Warts, (the ashes applied
of themselves, or with the Oil of Roses.)

N. That is accounted best, which is gathered in July, the Dog being fed with
bones, it being white, pure, and not stinking.

7. The urine helps Warts, cleanses the running Ulcers and skales of the head.

8. The ashes of the teeth (anointed with Honey or Butter on the Mandibles)
facilitates the Toothing of children, asswages the Toothache, (being mixed in
Gargarisms.)

9. The skin prepared mitigates the Itch of the hands, and mollifies the
contracted sinews (Gloves worn.)

10. The hair cures the bitings of Dogs (applied on the place.)

Preparat.
Balsom of Whelps compound,

Is made of Whelps strangled in white Wine and boiled with Nervall herbs, Oils
and Rosin into a Balsom.

This heals contracted members, mitigates the Sciatick and Arthritick aches.

IX. Caper, the Buck Goat,
IS a Beast cheerful, swift, proud, quick of hearing, greedy, etc. subject to
Fevers, Plague, and the like, whereof we have in medicine, 1. The horn. 2. The
blood. 3. The milt. 4. The marrow. 5. The tallow. 6. The milk. 7. Little
stones. 8. The dung. 9. The urine. 10. The bladder. 11. The caul. 12. The
skin. 13. The Gall.


The virtues.
1. The horn, as also the hairs we use in fumes in the time of the Plague, as
likewise to raise up the Lethargick and Epileptick.

2. Goats blood is accounted Alexipharmacal, it obstructs, it is good for the
Dysenterick, dissolves concreted blood (dried and given) wastes the Stone.

Outwardly it ripens tumors.

N. They feed at home for a month a Goat of a middle age (about four years
old) giving him nothing but herbs proper for breaking the Stone, then they kill
him when the Sun is entered into Cancer, and dry in an Oven the arterious blood,
casting away the corrupt or mattery parts. Vid. Disp. A^g. and Norimb.

Of Goats blood no less than of other kinds of blood may be made, a Spirit,
Oil (which is highly commended against the Stone) and a Salt: but excellent
above the rest is an Antipodagrical Balsom of the blood, which as in manner of
making, so in virtues agrees with that made of the blood of an Heart. Vid. suo
loco.

N. Some of this make a Tincture most excellent against the Stone and concreted
blood.

3. The milt: They bind the milt of a she Goat upon the milt of the Patient for
a day, and the next day they hang it in the Sun, or to the heat of an Oven, as
much as it shall be dried, so much do they affirm the milt of the Patient to be
lessened. Thesaur. Pauperum. Petr. Hispan.

4. Goats marrow is sharper and dryer then the rest, and therefore more
effectual.

5. Goats suet or tallow disperseth most forcibly, helps the Gowt, eases the
Strangury (put into the Navil) mitigates the pain of the Hemroids (in a
Suppository.)

6. Goats milk nourishes and cleanses, it is very good for those that are in
a Hectic Fever, Consumptive and grown decayed.

The Whey thereof is more excellent then other Wheys, it opens, cleanses,
divides, it is laxative, whereupon it is frequently received into infusions
for purging of Melancholy.

7. The little stones found in the ventricle and gall are commended for their
Diaphoretick and dissolving virtue.

8. The dung heateth, dries, cleanses, digesteth, opens, and is of a sharp
operation.

The use thereof is in hard tumors of the milt and other parts, in swelling of
the Almonds and Botches, in consolidating desperate Ulcers (strained with old
Wine and applied) in the Dropsy (it is applied on the belly) in the Sciatica:
being burnt it is of a more thin substance, and is available to all affects
which need cleansing, as to Alopecia, Tetter, etc.

Inwardly it helps the Splenetick, it is used likewise in the Jaundise, in the
suppression of the flowers, and the like diseases.

9. The urine of a Buck Goat is commended above all other for breaking of the
Stone and moving of Urine (drunk hot as it comes from the Goat.)

It is useful also in the Dropsy, etc. distilled.

10. The urinary bladder dried and powdered is said properly to heal the
incontinencie of urine.

The Dose one Dram.

11. The caul mitigateth the fierce and boiling spirits (applied hot) it is
profitable in the Colic, Madness, etc. besides it moves the Urine obstructed
(applied on the belly.)

12. The skin asswageth the Diarrhoea (the decoction thereof drunk) stays
bleeding, and chiefly of the nosthrils (the ashes of the hairs sprinkled)

N. A Kid is a young Goat not above six months old; as it has the same
nature, so the same virtues with the Goat, which notwithstanding are weaker in
respect of its tender age.

13. The gall cures a Quotidian (with bread.)

The white of an Egg and oil of Bay made into a Pultise and applied to the
belly.

X. Capra Alpina seu Rupicapra, the wild Goat, or Rock goat;
IS a kind of wild Goat, like to the tame in greatness and figure, loving
the high mountains, feeding on mountainous herbs that grow out of the gravel,
and especially the black root of Doronicum.

Of which these are medicinable; 1. The blood. 2. The tallow. 3. The liver. 4.
The gall. 5. The dung. 4. The stone.


Their virtues.
1. The new blood cures the Vertigo (if drunk.)

2. The suet helps the Consumption and ulceration of the lungs (taken with
milk.)

3. The liver stays the flux of the belly (the powder taken.)

4. The gall helps the spots of the eyes and Nyctalopia, viz. night-blindness.

5. The dung wastes and drives out the stone.

6. A stone is wont to be found in the chest above the ventricle (as Bezoar is
found) of a different greatness, the greatest as big as a walnut, black and of
a very pleasant smell, when it is broken.

Experience teaches the virtues hereof to be excellent against malignant
Fevers, Poisons, Plague, and the like, from whence they called it Germane
Bezoar.

The Dose is from 15. grains to 20.

For prevention 4. or 5. grains may be the Dose.

XI. Capricerva Orientalis, the Eastern Goat,
IS a beast of Persia, and the East India, partly like to a Heart, partly to a
Goat.

From this we have the Oriental Bezoar-stone, which is found in the said
Animal (and chiefly in a part above the Ventricle, also in the ventricle and
other internal cavities) of a different shape, ovall, round, and hollow within
(the middle containing chafe, hairs, or the like) of a smooth and shining
outside, the substance compact after the manner of onyons, it is also of a
different color (for the most part blackish green, sometime more purely green,
pale, ash-colored, yellowish, of the color of honey, etc.) of no smell, of a
different greatness, and weight, most being less than a Walnut, sometime
somewhat bigger.

N. There are also adulterated or false stones, made of pieces of stones and
pitch artificially joined together, as also of Chalk, the ashes of Snails
shells, dry blood, and the less Bezoar stones powdered, and made into a body
with a proper liquor.

It is also made of Vermilion, Antimony, and Mercury compact and tincted, etc.
by the help of fire, which are brought into use not only without profit, but
with loss and detriment.

The notes or marks of its goodness every where observed of Authors are;

1. The form, differing from the form of the kidneys, or a Pigeons egg,
smooth on the outside, which is a sign of a fictitious or false stone.

2. The structure or frame, with many thin plates like onions lying one upon
another, and all of them smooth, light, and shining; which notwithstanding
others do disallow.

3. The hollow or middle, without all Heterogeneal matter, except powder.

4. The weight, lighter then others, heavyer then some.

5. Mixing with lime, that is, if the stone moistened and rubbed on a wall, die
it with a green color (if the stone anointed with quick lime (with which water
is mixed) grow yellow a little after, if the stone rubbed on paper colored
with chalk make a green line: if the powder mixed with quick lime represent a
pale green (which notwithstanding cannot be true concerning all.)

6. Friability and dissolution in water, which notwithstanding cannot but be
proper to the false stone.

7. Liquation; that is, if a hot needle may be thrust into it.

8. Disparity of the fragments boiled with mortar or earth ( viz. in hardness.)

9. Trial or Experience.

Verily there is very great caution to be used in judging of the stone, neither
is it meet to determine any thing for certain, concerning the goodness of it,
without the concurrence of the marks. Yet the Persian stone is accounted the
best.

The virtues.
It strengthens, it provokes sweat, it is Alexipharmacal, and therefore is
profitable in the Vertigo, Epilepsie, swooning, palpitation of the heart, the
Jaundise, Colic, Dysentery, Worms, Stone, suppression of the flowers, hard
childbirth, Melancholy. But chiefly in the Plague, malignant Fevers and
poisons.

It may also be outwardly applied in the Kings-evill, that is opened in an
ulcerated Cancer, and the like.

The Dose from 3 grains to 12.

XII. Capricerva Occidentalis, the Western Goat,
IS a beast of Peru, like to the former, with horns, feeding on wholesome herbs.

The Occidentall Bezoar stone grows together in thin coats in the same places
of the beast, as the former, without any heterogeneall thing contained in the
middle cavity; it is greater for the most part than the Oriental, rough on the
outside, of an ash color, white, black, or dark green (which is best.)

N. They are accounted better, which are taken out of the mountainous Beast.

The virtues.
It has the same virtues with the Oriental, but yet is inferior to it in
goodness. It is found to be profitable in the passions of the heart, in
poisons, Fevers, Plague, Quartane ague, whose symptoms it mitigates,
Melancholy, in inveterate diseases, Worms, Epilepsie, and the like. Neither
less is it good outwardly in venomous wounds (sprinkled on Monard.)

The Dose greater than of the Oriental, from 6 grains to 20.

N. This it has peculiar, that it also a little moves the belly.

N. 2. There is brought a Bezoar stone out of New-Spain, but somewhat weaker
then that of Peru.

XIII. Capreolus, the Roebuck,
IS a Beast representing a Heart in body, having little horns, fearful,
pleasant, cheerful, most swift in running, quick of sight as well by night as
by day.

Of which we use in medicine, 1. The flesh. 2. The runnet. 3. The liver. 4. The
gall. 5. The milt. 6. The dung.


Their virtues.
1. The flesh in meat is good for the Diarrhoea and Dysentery.

2. The runnet is good for the same (drunk in Wine.)

3. The liver is supposed to repair the sight of the eyes (eaten, drunk,
outwardly fumed or instilled) it stays bleeding, chiefly at the nose (the
ashes blown up.)

4. The gall cleanses the spots of the face (anointed) cures the white
speckes, spots, and other diseases of the eyes (put in with honey) hinders
the ringing of the ears (instilled with oil of Roses) assawgeth the Toothache
(after the same manner.)

5. The dung cures the Jaundise (drunk.)

N. In the virtues of other parts it agrees with Goats, but yet they are
stronger.

XIV. Castor, the Bever,
IS an Amphibious Animal, living on fishes, and fruits, and barks of trees.

Whence we have in Physical use, 1. The grease. 2. The testicles. 3. The skin.


The virtues.
1. The grease is specially good for the nerves and womb, for the Epilepsie,
Palsy, Convulsion, Apoplexy, etc.

2. The testicles are called Castoreum. These being cut off and well purged are
dried in the shade, and there are kept hanged up. They continue seven years
uncorrupted.

N. 1. Castoreum is adulterated, 1. By Gum Ammoniack, which mixed with the
blood of a Bever and Castoreum, is made into a littie bladder and dried. 2. The
kidneys of a Bever is put into a bladder and dried.

But to find out this fraud, these marks of difference must be observed.

1. The genuine testicles arise both from one beginning.

2. The adulterate or counterfeit testicles are for the most part greater.

3. The genuine testicles are of an unpleasant smell, strong, sharp biting and
of bitter taste, of a brittle substance. Moreover the black and rancid is to be
avoided.

The virtues.
It heateth in the third, dries in the second degree, opens, disperseth
wind, strengthens the sinews and nervous parts and the head, stirs up the
animal drooping spirits, resists poison, provokes sneezing, it is anodyne,
and moves Women's courses; from hence it is profitable in the Lethargy,
Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Palsy, Vertigo, trembling of the members, defluxions to
the joints, suffocation of the matrix, the Colic both inwardly and outwardly
used. Moreover it helps the noise of the ears, and difficulty of hearing (put
into the ear) and the toothach.

N. 1. In the suffocation it is used diverse ways, it is applied to the
nostrils, tied under the arm pits put into the Navill.

N. 2. It corrects the malignity of Opium.

N. 3. The skin helps the Gowty and Paralytick (prepared and worn.)

Preparat.
1. The Oil of Bever infused. Vide Disp. August. and Norimberg.

2. The distilled Oil.

Take Castoreum as much as thou will, dissolve it in Vinegar, or infuse it in
Wine or its spirit, then distill it with a gentle fire in a glass Retort.

N. 1. Rectify it with Vinegar.

N. 2. The same proceeding may be in this, as in the Philosophers Oil, imbibing
red hot bricks, etc.

N. 3. The Electuary called Diacastoreum. Vide Dispenstor.

4. The extract is made after the common manner with spirit of wine rectified.

N. Others extract it with Vinegar, which being again abstracted, they do it
again with spirit of Wine.

Quercetan uses a convenient distilled water, as of Balm, Marygolds, Piony,
and like Antepileptick and Cephalic herbs, and infuseth it in B. M. 4. or 5.
days.

The Dose from 5. grains to 12.

XV. Catus Domesticus, the House Cat,
IS a lustful Animal, quick of sight.

Whence we have in use, 1. The grease. 2. The blood. 3. The head. 4. The dung.
5. The skin. 6. The secondine.


The virtues.
1. The grease of a lib'd Cat, heateth, mollifyeth, discusseth, and wonderfully
helps the griefs of the joints.

N. The grease of a wild Cat is best.

2. Three drops of the blood (out of the vein of a male Cat under the tail)
cure the Falling sickness (drunk,) also the blood (drawn from the ear) anointed
upon the Shingles is not without success.

3. The head of a black Cat burnt to powder, is a most excellent remedy for the
diseases of the eyes, pin, web, specks, etc. if it be blown thereinto three
times a day; as writes Misaldus.

N. The poison, which is attributed to Cats, remains in the head alone and
brain, in no other part of the body, as that which is made meat of many.

4. The dung (with as much mustard, and anointed with Vinegar) cures the
shedding of the hair, and helps the Gowt.

5. The skin is worn to warm the stomach and contracted joints.

6. They hang the secundine about the neck for the diseases of the eyes. They
prefer that of a Cat that first has young, and also black.

XVI. Catus Zibethinus, the Civet Cat,
IS a strange beast, brought to our Coasts, and is of some nourished for
delight and pleasure.

Civet, which is his excrement (or sweat) concrete together betwixt the
testicles, is wrapped in a bladder, out of which being cut is the Civet taken.

The virtues.
It is hot, moist, and anodyne, it is used frequently in the Colic (anointed
upon the navil) in the belly-ach of Infants, in the suffocation of the matrix
(applied to the matrix or the hollownesse of the navil.)

XVII. Cervus, the Heart,
IS a beast of a very long life (living 100 years) most swift in running,
casting his horns yearly in April, goes to rut in August and September; and
the female brings forth young the eighth month after.

From him we borrow for Physical practice, 1. The horn. 2. The skin. 3. Bone of
the heart. 4. Pisle. 5. The testicles. 6. The blood. 7. The tears. 8. The
marrow. 9. The tallow. 10. The huckle bone. 11. The stone.


Their virtues in particular.
1. The crude horn and unprepared resists putrefaction, corrects malignity,
provokes sweat, strengthens man's Balsome, whereupon the use of it is
profitable in the Measels, Small Pocks, putrid and malignant Fevers, and other
diseases where there is need of sweating, (it may be boiled in Decoctions, or
infused in Infusions, because given in substance, it is in a manner cast out
crude or unchanged.)

N. That is commended which is gathered betwixt the two Lady days, viz. betwixt
the 15. of August, and the 8. of September.

Preparation of the horn.
1. Hearts horn burnt, till after blackness it become white.

2. Hearts horn prepared is made of the burnt, which is made smooth and small
with some cordial water according to Art.

The virtues.
By its drying force, it resists putrefaction, it stays fluxes of the belly,
kills Worms, moves sweat, and it is a medicine very fit for Infants.

The Dose from a scruple to a dram and more.

3. Hearts horn Philosophically calcined thus: The horns are hanged or put in
the head, or upper part of a Bladder, which is filled with some quantity of
water, then is there a fire put under, that the vapor being lift up by the
force of the fire piercing the horns, may by little and little make them
friable and white.

N. It is a work almost of three days.

It moves sweat, and helps malignant diseases.

The Dose to half a dram.

4. A Magistery. The rasped horns are dissolved in Vinegar, precipitated with
Oil of Tartar, or Vitriol, and made sweet by washing with water, then being
dried are kept for use.

N. 1. Others dissolve them with Spirit of Niter, which being again abstracted,
they sweeten the Magistery left in the bottom. In the abstraction of the Spirit
of Niter there is heed to be taken, lest the flame, which may easily happen,
bring loss; therefore they proceed more warily, who on four ounces of the
dissolution pour one measure of Fountain water, and filter it, and having
filtred it, if need be, do precipitate it by instilling Oil of Tartar.

N. 2. Others dissolve them with Aqua fortis, precipitate them with Spirit of
Vitriol, and sweeten them.

N. 3. The Magistery precipitated with Oil of Tartar, is yellow, on the
contrary with any mineral Oil, as of Vitriol, is white.

5. Gelly. Take shavings of Hearts horn, digest them a while in common or some
proper distilled water, then boil them and filter the liquor hot, and make it
into gelly.

6. The liquor or Spirit which is drawn by a Retort luted, with the force of
fire.

7. The Oil.

N. See the description of the true Oil of Hearts horn in Kesler.

8. The Volatile Salt.

Some digest the Salt of Hearts horn fixed two ounces, with one ounce of Spirit
of Wine, rectified twelve days, and then abstract the Spirit of Wine to the
half, and keep the remainder under the notion of the tincture of the Salt of
Hearts horn.

The Dose from 5 grains to 10.

The Extract of Hearts horn is made by pouring upon the branches of the horns, a
proper water, and extracting the Tincture by a Menstrual digestion.

9. Water of the new horns of a Heart.

Take the tender horns of a Heart, having a bloody juice in them, cut them into
pieces, and distill them in Baln. M. or B. V. by themselves, or with a little
good Wine until all the liquor be exhausted.

The virtues.
It is most profitable in burning malignant Fevers.

The Dose half a spoonful by it self, or with some proper water. Hartman.

10. The Ointment of Hearts horn anodyne.

Take a Hearts horn cut into small pieces, let it be put into a kettle full of
Wine, boil it to the consumption the of Wine, then casting away the grosser
part of the horn, let the remainder be rubbed with thy hands, and add to it Oil
of Southernwood, Hypericon, Dill, Scorpions, Earthworms, Nuts, Bays, Rue,
Spike, Savine, of each half an ounce, Man's grease one ounce and half, Castor
two drams, Niter one dram and half, Euphorbium one dram, mix them according to
Art for an Ointment.

The virtues.
It is very profitable in the most grievous pains of the Scurvy and Colic, as
also in the Paralytick and Gowty, and other torments.

2. The hide, of it is made a girdlde which women use to gird their hips, and
restrain the passions of the womb.

3. The bone of the Heart (there is a concourse of Arteries in the Bases of the
Heart, which with age, and especial in the time of their pride becomes harder
and turn into a bone) it is especially good for the heart, and preserves it
from malignity, it keeps the birth, and wonderfully helps those with child.

4. The pisle is diuretic, provokes Venery, helps the Dysenterick and pained
with the Colic (it is used both in powder and in decoction, yea it is good to
give the water, wherewith the pisle is washed.)

5. The dried testicles drunk in Wine stir up Venery.

6. The blood fried in a frying pan stays the Dysentery and Caeliack flux. It
is also efficacious against poison. It is commended in pain of the hip and side
(boiled with Oil).

Preparat.
Although out of Hearts and Goats blood, there may no less be drawn a Spirit,
Oil, and the like, than out of man's blood; yet into Physical use chiefly come

A Balsome Antipodagrical prepared after the manner which is given concerning
Man's blood.

N. Of the said Animals, if the inwards, viz. the lights, heart, and liver, be
cut into pieces and infused in the blood, their more excellent Essence is
together drawn.

The virtues.
It is of very good use in mitigating the Gout (anointed) in contractions of
what cause soever they arise, because by the virtue of the Salt, it has a
great faculty of resolving. Gluchr.

7. The tears, viz. filth found in the corners of the eyes as hardened wax, of
a smell somewhat grievous but at length fragrant (it is commonly called a
stone) dry, bind, corroborate, move sweat, and are therefore highly commended
against poison and infectious diseases, and are said to contend even with the
Bezoar in virtue.

Moreover they are profitable in the hard travail of child, and their virtue of
late has been found to drive out the dead child.

The Dose 3. 4. grains, vid. Casp. Bauhin. in his book of Bezoar, the 8. and 9.
chapter.

8. The marrow is most to be commended of all, and excels above the rest in
malignant Ulcers, and also in Ulcers of the legs.

9. The tallow is commended above others in mollifying tumors, astringing
wounds, it heals kibes, and mitigateth pains.

Preparat.
The distilled Oil is made after the common manner.

The virtues.
It mollifies, it is a very great lenitive in the Gowt, once or twice anointed
on a day.

10. Talus the pastern bone is profitable to the Dysenterick.

11. The stone found in the heart, stomach, or intestines, is said to agree
with the Bezoar in virtues: but chiefly the stone taken out of the matrix is
reported to be preservative to a woman with child, that she miscarry not.

N. 1. All things are accounted the best which are gathered from an Heart in his
lust, which is about the beginning of September.

N. 2. The tail of an Heart is poisonous.

XVIII. Cochlea, the Snail.
THose have the pre-eminence, which live in open places, and in Vineyards, and
on sweet herbs, gathered before the rising of the Sun.

N. River Snails have the same virtues, but are seldom used. They are generated
of the mud of the earth, they live on dew and diverse herbs; they hate the Quayl
and Heron, to whom they are made a prey and for food. There is an Antipathy
betwixt them and Lizards, and Apes, for these so fear the presence of Snails,
even their shells, that they crouch together, and for fear vent their
excrements.

In Physical use are, 1. The whole Snails. 2. The shells. 3. The fat. 4. The
slime.


The virtues.
1. Snails cool, thicken, consolidate, mitigate, they are profitable to the
nerves and lungs, and therefore they are inwardly used against the Cough,
Consumption, spitting of blood, and other diseases of the lungs, and they are
also used against the heat of the liver, and pain of the Colic.

Outwardly applied they ripen and break Biles (called Anthraces) (either alone,
or with the gall of a Bull) they consolidate wounds, chiefly of the nerves,
they heal Ulcers, (especially of the legs) they mitigate gowty inflammations;
they make the belly of the Hydropick, and the watery Rupture of those that are
bursten to decrease, (beaten with the shells and applied), they restrain
bleeding (applied to the forehead): the froath of Snails laid to the fire
without water, is said to help Fistula's.

2. The shells powdered are given to those that have the Stone, they dry and
consolidate the chaps of the hands.

3. The fat (in boiling broth swimming on the top when it is cold) heals the
redness and pain of the eyes, it intercepteth the defluxions to the eyes
(applied to the forehead with the white of an Egg.)

4. The slavering slime (which when they are pricked, they afford) is
emplastick and glewing, intercepting the flowing of humors to the eyes (in a
Frontall.)

Preparat.
1. The distilled water of the flesh in May or October, in B. M. is reported to
help the Consumptive, and to strengthen the Liver.

Outwardly applied it beautifieth the face.

2. The ashes of Snails dry and thicken, dry up the chaps and roughness of the
skin, stay the Sinovia.

3. The liquor of Snails.

Take red Snails, cut and mix them with equal weight of common Salt, and put
them into Hippocrates his sleeve, that in a cellar they may fall into liquor:
which is good to anoint gowty and pained parts, and to root out Warts being
first pared with a Penknife.

XIX. Cuniculus, the Coney,
IS a little creature, fearful and very fruitful.

Of this we have in use, 1. The whole burnt. 2. The grease. 3. The brain.


The virtues.
1. The whole Coney burnt, cures the Q^insie (anointed with Costmary.)

2. The fat is profitable for the joints and the hard sinews.

3. The brain is believed to resist poison, otherwise answering to the brain of
the Hare.

XX. Elephas, the Elephant,
IS a very rare beast, of a long life, gentle and docible.

His teeth are only used in Medicine, vulgarly called Ivory.

The virtues.
It cools and dryes, moderately binds, cuts, strengthens the inward parts,
stays the whites. It is good for the Jaundise; it chaseth away Worms, it is
good for inveterate obstructions; it takes away the pains and weakness of the
stomach; it heals the Epilepsie; drives away Melancholy, resists rottenness and
poisons; It is used rasped in infusions, and the powder is given in substance.

The Dose half a dram.

Preparat.
1. Burnt Ivory called Spodium, and to distinguish it from the Mineral
Spodium, Spodium of Ivory.

2. Trochilces of Spodium, vid. Dispensat.

N. Some commend Ivory for fruitfulness, yet seeing the beast is of a small
issue and slowly brings forth (going with young two years) it is imagined
rather to conduce to barrenness, and the retention of the birth, then to
advance conception.

XXI. Equus, the Horse.
WHence in Physical use we borrow, 1. The blood. 2. The runnet. 3. The milk.
4. The dung. 5. Lichenes. 6. The testicles* 7. The fat of the neck. 8. The
hoofs. 9. The hairs. 10. The foam. 11. The teeth. 12. The stone.


Their virtues in particular.
1. The blood (some would have it to be of Mares having been covered with the
Stallion) is mixed with Causticks.

2. The runnet is specially good for the Celiack, and Dysenterick.

3. The milk is accounted good for the Epileptick, Consumptive, those that
Cough, and the Asthmatick.

4. The dung outwardly restrains breaking out of blou^ (as well raw as burnt)
expels the dead child, and the secundine (in a fume.)

Inwardly it is taken in the Colic, and suffocation of the matriz, and in like
manner in expelling the dead child and afterbirth.

N. That is best, which is of a Horse fed with Oats not gelded.

5. Lichenes (callous excrements growing on the legs of Horses) are chiefly
commended against the suffocation of the Matrix (a fume made below) as also
against the Falling Sickness and the Stone (the powder drunk.)

Preparat.
The extract of these is made of them dried, with spirit of Wine, or some other
appropriate spirit.

The Dose from 5 grains to half a scruple.

N. Hartman makes the Menstruum of Balm and Wine of each three pounds, which he
distills by a Retort in ashes upon two ounces of Amber and Jet, with a fire hot
in the end, then he uses the water separated from the Oil.

6. The testicles are a most present Remedy to expel the secundine (made into
powder) they are also commended in the Colic.

The fat of the neck is fitly anointed on weak joints.

8. The hoof expels the dead birth (in fume) it drives away Lice (in fume.)

9. The hairs restrain the flux of blood.

10. The foam of the mouth, drunk three days, cures the Cough, abates the heat
of the jaws.

N. Cold water falling out of the mouth of a stoned horse, when he drinks in a
river, and suddenly taken in a platter helps sterility (drunk once and again.)

11. The teeth first growing are said to facilitate childrens toothing (hung
about the neck) they whiten the teeth (the ashes rubbed on them.)

12. The stone (called Hippolithus) found in the ventricle or bowels of some
horses, as it is like to the Occidental Bezoar in figure and structure, so in
virtues.

XXII. Erinaceus, the Hedg-hog,
IS a Beast set with pricks, in the winter it is hid in the hollow of trees,
eating mice, walnuts, apples, pears and the like.

Hence in use we have, 1. The Hedg-hog it self. 2. The liver. 3. The grease. 4.
The ventricle.


Their virtues.
1. The Hedgehog (boiled or made into ashes and drunk) helps those that piss
against their will, it is grateful to the stomach, and moves the belly and
urine.

Outwardly anointed it helps the shedding of hair.

2. The liver or the body also dried and taken with Oxymel is a help to the
disease of the Kidneys, it cures the Cachexy, Dropsy, Convulsions and
Leprosy. It dryes up the fluxes of the belly.

3. The grease most happily cures Ruptures.

4. The inner coat of the stomach is commended against the Colic (taken.)

XXIII. Homo, Man and Woman.
HEnce we have in Medicine, either from the parts of the living body of a man,
1. The hairs. 2. The nails. 3. The spittle. 4. The ear-wax. 5. Sweat. 6. Milk.
7. The Flowers. 8. The afterbirth. 9. The urine. 10. The ordure. 11. The seed.
12. The blood. 13. The stones. 14. The Membrane compassing the head of the
Infant.


Or from the parts of the dead body of a man, 1. The whole corpse or flesh. 2.
The skin. 3. The fat or grease. 4. The bones. 5. The skull. 6. The moss of the
skull. 7. The brain. 8. The gall. 9. The heart.


The virtues of these follow.
I. The hairs are commended for the growth of hairs (the liquor from thence
distilled and anointed with honey) for the Jaundise (the powder drunk) for
members out of joint (the ashes anointed with Sheeps suet) for bleeding of
wounds.

N. Some for a Quartain take the hair of the patient, and mixing them with
other hairs dispersed on the body, put them into an egg, and having boiled it
hard, cast it to be devoured of birds, by which means they would have the
Quartain cured.

Preparat.
It is distilled by it self in a Retort in sand with no very strong fire.

II. The nails move vomit (taken inwardly both in powder and infusion) they are
said to draw away the waters of the Hydropick (cut from the hands and feet, and
tied to the navill.)

N. 1. Some to cure the Fever put the parings of the hands and feet into an
egg, and lay it to be carried away of the birds. Others wrap the same in wax,
and fasten it to the gate in the morning before the rising of the sun. Others
bind them on the back of a living Crevise, and then commit it to the river.

N. 2. For recovering the strength they put the hairs and nails into the root
of a Cherry tree, and cover the wound with dung.

Preparat.
Take the parings of the nails in powder one dram, Wine one pound, infuse them
till they become mucilaginous; then filter it, and having added one ounce of
spirit of Wine, keep it for use.

The Dose from one dram to 6 or an ounce.

III. The spittle of a man fasting is commended against the venomous bitings of
Serpents, mad-dogs, and the like.

IV. Ear-wax is accounted a most present Remedy for the Colic (if taken in
drink.)

Outwardly it cures the stinging of Scorpions, conglutinates wounds, clefts and
chaps of the skin.

V. Sweat is good against the Evil, if mixed with the herb and root of Mullein
it be wrapped in a leaf, and made hot in the ashes, be applied.

VI. The milk refrigerates, mitigates, ripens and helps the redness of the eyes.

Preparat.
1. The vitriolated water of milk.

Take milk and white Vitriol of each a like, distill them that the Phlegm may
only ascend, the sharper spirits left behind.

The virtues.
It wonderfully helps the redness of the eyes and other inflammations.

2. The butter. It is an excellent eye salve.

VII. The menstruous blood being dried is commended inwardly for the stone and
Epilepsie.

Outwardly it appeases the Gowt (anointed with beasts tallow) it is also said
to profit in the Plague, Apostemes, and Carbuncles (a linen cloth applied which
was moistened in Vinegar, or Rose Water impregnated with the menstruous blood.)
It extinguishes Erysipelas, and cleanses the spots of the face

N. 1. That menstruum is commended, which breaks out the first time.

N. 2. For restraining the immoderate flux of the flowers, some put a cloth
imbrued in the menstruous blood at a certain time into the root of a Cherry
tree opened in the bark, and they again cover up the wound.

VIII. The secundine (or in stead thereof the navil of the child) is much
commended for the taking away of the strumes of the throat (calcined and every
day given in water of Sothernwood to half a dram, the moon decreasing) for the
Epilepsie and restraining Philtres, for expelling the mole and birth, and also
for killing Animals, which through witchcraft are in man.

Hartman commends it against spots, marks, or moles from the mother. Others
against the pain of the Colic (worn in stead of an Amulet.)

IX. Urine heateth, dries, resolves, cleanses, discusseth, mundifyeth,
resists putrefaction, and therefore is of special use inwardly in the
obstruction of the Liver, Milt, Gall, preserving from the Plague, Dropsy,
Jaundise. Moreover urine of the husband drunk, is said to facilitate the hard
travel.

Outwardly it dries the scab, resolves tumors, mundifyeth wounds though
venomous, prevails against the Gangrene, loses the belly (in a Glyster)
cleanses the scales of the head (mixed with Niter) restrains Feverish
paroxysmes (applied to the pulse) heals exulcerated ears (the urine of a boy
dropped in) helps the redness of the eyes (dropped in) takes away the
trembling of the joints (in a lotion) discusseth the swelling of the Uvula
(gargled) mitigateth the pains of the Milt (made into a poultise with ashes.)

Preparat.
1. A spirit volatile, a salt volatile.

Take the Urine of a boy (twelve years old,) who drinks good wine. Distill it
in an Alembeck in a hot Baln. M. then by cohobation distill it again upon the
feces, and there shall come a spirit of urine mixed with its phlegm, which
separate from the phlegm if thou please, and thou shall have the spirit. This
if thou elevate in the vial thou shall obtain a most white salt.

The virtues.
It is accounted of very great force to expel the Stone (drunk with a proper
liquor) but it stincks grievously.

N. 1. It is most famous for the blew tincture of the Emarald, to whose
preparation it is a menstruum (with the phlegm.)

N. 2. Libanius rectifies it, and applies it to the Gowty, Asthmatick and to
those that are troubled with the Stone. He injects is into the bladder by a
syringe (but it is impregnated first with the essence of such as break the
Stone; as for example, of the Crystal, stone of the Lynx and the like.)

2. Another way a fiery Spirit of Urine or Volatile Salt.

Take the urine of a boy that drinks Wine, as much as is sufficient, let it
evaporate with a very gentle fire, to the consistence of a syrup; put this in a
vial with a very long neck, and distill it in a cold air (that it may be
condensed in the Alembeck) in ashes or sand, and there will come forth a Spirit
like snow heaving up it self, coagulable by cold, but easily melted by a little
heat. Oswald.

N. 1. If thou join this Spirit to its purified salt, elixiviated out of the
feces, and make it volatile by some cohobations, thou have an excellent
Menstruum to draw Vitriol out of Metals, and specially out of Luna.

N. 2. The same Spirit (of Salt) very well purified by dissolutions and
coagulations, if (for 8 days) thou digest in Baln. vapor. it will be dissolved:
the dissolution if thou again shall moysten with Spirit of Wine (8 days) thou
art made partaker of a Menstruum fit for dissolving Sol.

3. A Spirit by putrefaction;

Take the urine of a child (twelves years old) that drinks Wine, a great
quantity, set it into Horses dung, or Baln. M. 40 days to putrify, then decant
it from the faeces, and distill it by an Alembeck (or bladder) in sand so long
till all the moisture be drawn away by distilling, this humidity cohobate three
times from its Caput mortuum. At length it being distilled in a Cucurbite, with
a long neck, set it to the heat; yet so, that the Alembeck may always be cold,
so there ascends a spirit like Crystal without any moisture, rectify the
Crystals by dissolving them in rain water distilled, and by distilling them in
a Vial as before, six times, always pouring on new rain water distilled;
afterward digest the Crystals in an Hermetical vial, shut 15 days, with a
gentle fire, until they change into a most clear liquor.

N. 1. Sennertus from the Urine defecated after the said manner, by distilling,
draws at least a fourth or sixth part, it being sublimated after the said
manner, with a gentle heat in a glass, with a long neck.

N. 2. Others distill the Urine putrified in a Cucurbit, whose orifice they stop
with a threefold paper imbrewed ^ith Oil, or a Sponge moistened in like manner,
by which the fiery Spirit of the Urine only may pass.

N. 3. Because Urine by distilling does easily boil over, thou must warily use
the fire.

N. 4. Some to correct the stench (which also by the aforesaid manner is in
some manner corrected) pour on the Spirit of Wine, and again abstract it with a
gentle fire; and they do it often, always pouring on new Spirit of Wine: but
the Salt of Urine by this means corrected, deserves to be called not the simple
Salt of Urine, but rather the Magisterium, that is, Salt of Urine impregnated
with Salt of Wine. See concerning these distillations Hartman in his Prax. and
upon Crollius, Sennertus in his Instit. kesl. in his first book and second
chapter, fourth book, and twenty fourth chapter, etc.

The virtues.
It is an excellent Anodyne in aches (if rubbed on with some convenient liquor)
it opens also the tartareous obstructions of the bowels and Mesentery, whence
the use of it might be great in the Scurvy, Hypochondriack, Cachexy, yellow and
black Jaundise; it wastes the stone of the kidneys and of the bladder, and
mitigates the pains arising from thence, etc. The same Salt if it be dissolved
in spirit of Vitriol, and again distilled in sand, there comes a liquor most
efficacious in the Epilepsie. The same spirit very well purified (dissolving it
often in rain water, and distilling it) and joined with spirit of Wine, of each
alike, dissolveth Sol, whence is potable Sol.

4. The Antepileptick Spirit of Urine is made of Urine, and twice as much
Vitriol digested and distilled.

N. Quercetan. Of the signature of things describes it in many words, and by
the same labor draws it in Baln. M.

1. An Ophthalmick Phlegm (first coming out).

2. An Antipodagrick.

3. By a Retort, an Icy spirit, i. e. coagulable, which he highly commends to
open the obstructions of the liver, and milt, to provoke urine and dissolve the
stone; as also to allay Inflammations and Gangrenes.

5. The Magistery of Urine;

Take Urine putrified (as already said) and cleared from the dregs, distill it
with a gentle fire out of B. M. until all the phlegm be come forth, then cease,
and rectify the Spirit out of a Vial with a long neck, so shall thou have a
Volatile salt; which gather, and the phlegm cast away. Distill the remainder out
of sand, and there shall ascend a Volatile salt out of the Colcothar;
elixiviate the fixed salt, and coagulate it to dryness, and being mixed with
thrice as much clay, and made into balls (after the balls be dried) distill by a
Retort (as the spirit of Salt is distilled) upon this spirit pour the former
spirit by drops on the Volatile Salt, until the crack cease, then give fire of
Sublimation in sand, and there shall be sublimed a most excellent Salt of
Urine, and pleasant to the sight.

The virtues.
This Sublimate works more efficaciously then the former, by cutting the Tartar
of the whole body, and expelling it by sweat, urine, or the belly: it cures
many diseases arising from thence, or at least eases them, as are Atrophy, etc.
it preserves also from the pain of the Stone (if it be taken every month
before the new Moon)

The Dose 7. 8. 9. 10. grains in a convenient liquor.

The daily use thereof may be continued for some time.

6. The Oil of Ludus;

That is to say, of the tartareous matter, which sticks to the Chamber Pot,
is made by calcining and by dissolving in a moist place.

The virtues.
It is excellent to dissolve the Stone.

The Dose is one scruple.

X. The ordure mollifies, procures matter, and is Anodyne. It is of notable use
to mitigate dolors from Incantations (applied on the place) to procure matter
in Plague sores, to cure the Squinsie (dried, powdered, and anointed on with
Honey) to remedy the Inflammations of wounds. Moreover, it is inwardly used of
many in the Squinsie (burnt and given to drink) in Fevers to prevent the fits
(taken in the manner). The Dose two drams in the Epilepsie (which as the report
is, the first ordure of an Infant dried and powdered, and given for many days,
does pull up by the roots.)

Preparat.
1. The distilled water is made with the Oil with one and the same labor.

The virtues.
It is said to cure the nayl or web of the eye, and other diseases of the white
of the eye, (one or two drops instilled) to procure a good color to the face,
to beget hairs, to cure corroding Ulcers and Fistulaes, and to take away the
skars of the hands.

It is accounted inwardly to profit those that have the Falling Sickness and
the Dropsy, it drives out the Stone of the reyns and bladder, and helps the
bitings of a mad Dog, and of venomous beasts.

2. The Oil.

Take the ordure of a young man (not a boy) as much as you will, let be it
dried in the air, or in an Oven, with an easy fire; then distill it by an
Alembeck first with a gentle fire, so there shall come forth a phlegm, and at
length with the white Spirits an Oil; let both be rectified by B. M.

Poterius makes it thus.

Take a great quantity of man's ordure, let it putrify of it self, and be
turned into certain little creatures, and then let it pass almost into air.
This ordure thus prepared, distill out of a Retort, first with an easy fire,
after with a stronger, so there shall come forth an Oil and water.

N. The strong smell of both is taken away by repeated rectifications and
cohobations.

The virtues.
It helps sores of the Head, Erysipelas ulcerated, Tetters (anointed), it
eases pains of the Gout, it cures and mortifies the Cancer.

Inwardly it cures the Jaundise.

3. The Western Civet is nothing else but ordure brought to a sweetness by
digestion, by which it resembles Civet.

XI. The seed or sperm; we find this used of many, not only to unloose the
bewitched ligature of Venus, but also thereof a Magnetic Mumy made, by which
the heat of love is procured. Moreover from hence does Paracelsus feign his
homunculus, or little man.

XII. The blood (fresh and drunk hot) is said to avail against the Epilepsie,
if being drunk there be used a more violent motion and swift pace to the
breaking out of sweat. It stays all bleeding (drunk new, or made into powder.)
Moreover outwardly it heals the eruption of blood, especially at the nostrils
(the powder put up, or the fresh blood anointed on the forehead, that there it
may be dried)

N. 1. The drinking of the blood requires great caution, because it not only
brings a Truculency to the takers, but also the Epilepsie.

N. 2. The blood of a childbed woman heals the running scab (being fresh, and
anointed once or twice with the secundine.)

Preparat.
1. The water distilled is made with one labor with the Oil.

The virtues.
It is profitable in Consumptive and withered bodies; (an ounce drunk and
rubbed on the members) it is good in cleansing and healing Fistulaes, and
cooling burnt places.

N. There is also distilled a water of blood, and woman's milk, of each a like
quantity, and it is commended for taking away the spots of the skin.

2. The Oil distilled.

Take a great quantity of young men's blood (extracted in the Spring) Alcohol,
of Wine one third part, the vials well closed, digest in Horses dung 40 days,
then distill it in an Alembeck out of ashes, and with the water there comes
forth an Oil, rectify both, the water by M.B. the Oil by a Retort out of
ashes, distilling it 9 or 10 times.

The virtues.
It is very much commended for rooting out the Epilepsie (if half a scruple
thereof be taken every day for a whole month, beginning at the new of the
Moon, and afterward every new Moon once in a year a scruple) for the Palsy,
Apoplexy, Lungs ulcerated, Pleurisy.

N. The distillation of man's blood is not found ordered after the same manner.

For some distill it fresh and as yet hot, and that two ways of it self, and
without addition, and with some part of spirit of Wine rectified mixed with it.

Others distill it not fresh and new, but either dried or digested for some
time: some make the digestion of the blood alone (adding a little salt) others
of the blood with spirit of Wine rectified.

The Anatomy of blood affords first a water, 2. A Spirit, that is, water
rectified. 3. An Oil, that is, a thicker liquor. 4. A Volatile Salt. 5. A fixed
Salt: but we mention only the more usual.

3. The Oil rectified.

Take the blood of a healthful young man drawn from a vein in May, receive it
in a Cucurbit, that only a fourth part be filled, then let it be kept in the
vessel being shut, in an indifferent heat, that by the swelling of the blood,
the whole Cucurbit may be filled, then let the Distillation be made, and first
comes forth a water (of no great virtue unless that being more fully wrought,
it is used of some to extract the Salt) let the rest be driven out b^ a Retort
in ashes, the joints well closed. Let that which is distilled be poured again
upon the feces, and cohobation be made nine times, that a red color may follow.

N. In distilling, observe that thou burn not the feces with too much fire, and
bring them to a coal; and therefore thou must only distill them to dryness.

The virtues.
It is accounted of very great force to refresh the sick.

4. An Antipodagrical Balsome, or Oil of Man's blood Alcasitated: It is made
after the same manner.

Take man's blood, while it is hot, one measure, putrefie it 9 days, then distill
it out of sand by degrees; first with an easy fire, then with a stronger by a
Retort, and there shall come forth a red Oil and stinking, the Volatile Salt
sticking to the joints of the neck. Rectify the Oil by the Colcothar out of a
Cucurbit with the heat of sand, distilling it often from the fresh Colcothar;
at length dissolve the Salt in this corrected Oil, and keep it for use.

The virtues.
It is of wonderful force in the Gout, anointed twice or thrice a day for six
days together. It appeaseth the pain, the tumor and redness vanishing away.

N. Of like virtue is the Balsom drawn from the blood of Goats and Hearts, in
which it is requisite to add the bowels, viz. the lights, heart and liver.

5. An Antepileptick spirit.

Take the spirit of man's blood dephlegmated and rectified three times, two
pounds Infusion of Lavender flowers (in Wine) two pounds, mingle and distill
t^em in B. M. to the half, repeat it thrice, then add Spirit of Wine rectified
two ounces, and keep it for use.

The vertu^s.
It cures the Apoplexy, Palsy, Asthma, etc.

N. Beguinus has other preparations of Man's blood, which may be seen in the
Author.

6. An Alexiterian Mummy of life,

Is the blood of a lusty and healthful man dried with a gentle fire,
impregnated with the Spirit of Limons, and Spirit of Vitriol, and with a little
myrrh made into Trochisces.

The virtues.
It is very efficacious in curing Carbuncles.

The Dose half a dram in water of Cinnamon drunk in the morning fasting.

7. The Arcanum of man's blood, see it in Faber his Myrothec. the 8 chapter.
Bylnick. of the nature of Spagyr. n. 66.

XIII. The stone dissolves Tartar, viz. the stone in all parts, and causes it
to be driven out, and therefore it helps all obstructions.

The Dose of the powder one dram.

Preparat.
1. A Crystalline salt,

Take the stone very well calcined (that the hardness be softened) boil it in
water, and it will be dissolved into a certain colored water. Then the
filtrature being evaporated, there remains the salt in the bottom, which
calcine again if you please, and dissolve it in boiling water, coagulate it and
set it to Crystallize.

N. The calcination may be ordered diversely, some calcine it with Niter 6
hours, some with Sulphur and Niter, others with twice as much of beechen coals.

Sennertus calcines the stone powdered with a circular fire, then
reverberatory, and at length with beechen coals, (in a potters furnace,)
Instit. lib. 5. p. 3, s. 3. cap. 5.

2. Oil or liquor,

It is made if the Salt be dissolved in the moist air.

The Dose from 6 grains to 10.

N. Sennertus calcines it with Niter, then extracts the Salt with Spirit of
Wine, and the Spirit of Wine being separated he sets the Salt to melt.

3. The Essence or Elixir.

Take the Salt of the stone crystallized, volatize it with Spirit of Wine, then
abstract with a gentle heat the Spirit of Wine, and the Oil remains.

The Dose from 5 grains to 10.

XIV. The Membrane which covers the head of some children, is said to have very
great virtue against the pain of the Colic.

Of a Carcass or Dead Man.
I. The whole carcass or flesh in shops comes under the name of Mumy.

This dissolves coagulated blood (two drams taken) and it is said to be good
for purging the head, punction of the milt, cough, puffing up of the body, the
courses obstructed, and other affects of the womb, and the like.

Outwardly, it is used in consolidating wounds.

N. Mumy commonly signifies four things;

1. The Mumy of the Arabians, which is a concrete liquor, sweating in
Sepulchers out of carcasses condited with myrrh, Aloes and Balsome.

2. Of the Egyptians, which is a liquor from carcasses condited with
Pissalphaltum, for with this the carcasses of the meaner rank, being preserved
are to be sold.

3. Pissalphaltum counterfeit, i. e. Bitumen mixed with Pitch, which they sell
for Mumy.

4. A carcass in the sand scorched with the heat of the Sun. It happens, that
in the land of the Hammonians, which is betwixt the land of Cyrene and
Alexandria, the heaps of sands heaved up by the whirlwind over-whelm the
heedlesse travelers, whence their carcasses are scorched with the burning heat
of the Sun.

5. To these may the Mumy of the more modern be added, which is thus made: Let
there be chosen the carcass of a red hair'd man (because in such the blood is
accounted thinner, and in that respect the flesh more excellent) int re, new,
without blemish, about 24 years of age, killed by a violent death (not a
disease) hang it in the beams of the Luminaries by day and night, when the
weather is clear. Of this cut the musculous parts into little pieces, and
sprinkle them with the powder of Myrrh and a little Aloes; afterward imbibe it
by infusion in Spirit of Wine for some days, then let it be hanged up 6 or 10
hours, and be again imbibed with Spirit of Wine: at length let the pieces dry
being hanged in a dry air and shady place; then is it like to flesh hardened
with smoke without stench.

N. Of these kinds of Mumy now rehearsed, although I derogate not from the
former, if they can be had from sound bodies, especially the first, which yet I
scarce believe is brought to us: notwithstanding I affirm, the two latter are
to be preferred before the other, as in whom we are free from the fear which
Renodeus intimates, affirming the Mumy of the shops to be nothing but the juice
of a rotten carcass pressed out and thickened, and therefore sold to the great
hurt of mankind.

Preparat.
The common medicines in which the Mumy of the shops is an ingredient, do every
where occur. And they are.

The powder for a fall or bruise, Athanasia the great, the Balsom of Peter de
Ebano, the sympathetick ointment, the black Emplaister called of the Apostles,
The Cerot, for those that are bursten, Laudanum, Opiat, etc.

Besides the less common are,

1. The tincture or extract of Mumy. Quercet.

It is made of common Mumy extracting it with spirit of Wine, and Turpentine of
each a like quantity, and again separating the menstruum to the consistence of
honey.

The virtues.
It is Alexipharmacal, and very much resists rottenness, it is also commended
for the diseases of the breast, the Asthma, Consumption, etc.

N. The remaining feces are very Anodyne.

2. The Tincture or Elixir of Mumy. Croll.

It is made of the Mumy of the more modern, with the spirit of Wine, or spirir
of Elder.

N. Of this Crollius makes Treacle of Mumy, which takes of the tincture of Mumy
half a pound, Treacle of Andromach 4 ounces, oil Olive mumiated 2 ounces, salt
of Coral, and Pearl, of each 2 drams, sealed earth 2 ounces, Musk one dram,
digest them a month.

The virtues.
It is commended against all poisons and infections, it preserves from the
Plague taken the quantity of a scruple, and cures it taken the quantity of a
dram, or a dram and half.

N. In poisons it may be given with oil of sweet Almonds to provoke vomit.

3. The Tincture Alcolisated or Elixir of Mumy.

Take Mumy (man's flesh dried) cut into thin slices, power upon it the spirit of
Turpentine, and set it in an Hermetical vessel close stopped for a month to
putrefie. Pour some spirit of Wine rectified upon the expression received in
beasts bladders. Put it in a blind Alembeck upon a gourd, the joints very well
fenced, so that the gourd being set into cold water, the sand and coals about
the Alembeck may do their office with a gentle heat, by the benefit whereof the
liquor or Quintessence in a very subtle manner, with the spirit of Wine falls
through the bladder. The remaining matter is to be reverberated and by
sublimation to be brought into salt, and at length to be united with the
Quintessence by the means of circulation, after it be separated from the
spririt of Wine by B. M. which being finished the Quintessence of the Mumy may
further be digested with the treacle and the musk, and so kept in the form of
an Elixir.

The virtues.
It is a present Remedy both of the plague, as also of other venomous medicines
or things.

N. There is a report of a tincture of Mumy of its four elements separated from
themselves by course, and again joined together, which who desires to see, may
in Tetzel in Med. Diastat.

4. Another tincture or secret of Man's flesh.

1. The rectified spirit of Wine is powered upon Man's flesh for four days, the
spirit of Wine being decanted, the same is again moistened.

2. The spirit of Salt at several times that it may drink up a great quantity
thereof, then dry it, thou have the flesh seasoned very profitable.

3. From this extract the Tincture with Spirit of Wine, brought by the force of
digestion to the highest fragrancy. Defecate it by circulation, extract the
Salt from the feces calcined, and that being cleared, mingle it with the
tincture and extract it.

5. Oil Olive mumiated.

Take Mumy first prepared (or hardened) cut it into pieces and digest it with
Oil Olive in an Hermetical vessel close shut for a month. Then power it into
a glass gourd, and let the Mercury exhale in B. M. until no stench come
forth, and all the Mumy be dissolved. Digest the solution 20 days, with spirit
of Wine, afterward abstract the same, and there remains a red and odoriferous
oil.

N. Quercetan takes fresh Mumy.

The virtues.
It has all the virtues and properties of natural Balsom; it is good in
venomous and pestilent affects.

6. An Oil exalted.

Oil after the said manner prepared, may be further exalted if it be digested
with spirit of Wine, and the spirit of Wine again abstracted, and so repeated 3
or 4 times.

The virtues.
This tincture or exalted Oil of Mumy, is said to excel with such a reviving
faculty, that there is not a past which it pierces not, no Ulcer, no
corruption which it cures not if you give thereof daily twice for some
continuance of time 4 or 5 grains with a convenient decoction.

N. Libavius to the fresh flesh cut into pieces, adds a little salt and spirit
of Turpentine, infuses it in a close vessel, strains it and suffers the stink
to exhale the vessel being open, afterward he distills it by a Retort, or a
straight Alembick, and adding musk and spirit of Wine he digesteth it.

7. The divine water.

Take a whole carcass with the bone, flesh, bowels (of one killed by a violent
death) let it be cut into pieces very small, and all the parts of the body so
pounded, that nothing remain unmixed, then distill it two times.

The virtues.
Some extol this divine Water for its Magnetic virtue.

As thus.
They mingle some drops of blood (3 or 9) drawn from some patient with a part
(a dram) of the said water, and they set it to the fire, if the blood and water
be mixed together, they promise health within a short space (24 hours) but if
they shall remain unmixt, they affirm death to follow shortly. For want of the
blood they proceed in the same manner with the excrements, urine, ordure,
sweat, corrupted matter or the like, which yet they use in a greater Dose.

II. The skin is commended in hard labor and diseases Hystericall (if the
belly be bound therewith) in the withering and contraction of the joints (if
gloves be made thereof and worn.)

III. The fat or grease corroborates, discusses, asswages pains, removes
shrinkings, mitigates the hardness of skars, fills the pits left after Smalpox.

Preparat.
A Liniment, mingle the grease with spirit of Vitrioll, whence is left a
certain clammy substance.

The virtues.
It is piercing, and is used in Blastings.

IV. Man's bones do dry, discuss, bind, stay all fluxes, and are profitable in
Catarrhes, flowing of the Menstrues, Dysentery, Lientery. Moreover they
mitigate the aches of the joints.

N. 1. It is usual to mix them with purging medicines.

N. 2. The teeth plucked out of the jaw of one dead, are used and commended
against diseases by Witchcraft (in fume) and to pull out worm-eaten teeth (if
they be often touched therewith.)

Preparat.
1. The powder or ashes made after the common manner by calcination in a
Potters furnace.

2. The bones prepared are made after the common manner, by making them smooth
with a convenient water.

3. The Magistery may be made after the common manner.

4. The Oil is made by Distillation in a Retort.

The Virtues.
It discusses, it is anodyne, and therefore an excellent medicine against the
Gowt.

V. The marrow of the bones, is chiefly commended against the shrinking of
members.

VI. The skull is found to prevail against the diseases of the head, and namely
the Epilepsie, whence it is that it enters many Antepilepticall compositions.

The triangular bone of the temples is very much commended as a specificall
Remedy against the Epilepsie.

Preparat.
1. The skull calcined is made after the common manner in Potters furnace.

2. The skull prepared, is made of the calcined with an Antepileptick water, as
of water of the Linden tree.

3. The Magistery of the skull is made after the common manner, dissolving it
in some acid spirit, as of Vitrioll, and precipitating it.

The Dose a scruple or half a dram.

4. The compound Magistery or essentificated spirit of the skull, is made if
with the acid liquor, Oil or volatile salt, there be joined the fixed salt
drawn out of the dead head, and afterward be digested and united together in
ashes for a Philosophical month.

The virtues.
It is Antepileptick, whose virtues far exceed ordinary Antepilepticks.

5. The Oil is made by distilling the bruised skuls in a Retort, there comes
forth an oil and a volatile salt.

N This vulgar Oil in shops is uncorrected, but it were better to rectify it
with spirit of Wine.

The Dose from 4 grains to 6.

6. The Volatile salt is gotten by the same labor with the Oil.

7. The extract or tincture of the skull,

Take 2 or 3 skuls grossly beaten, digest them 14 days, and cohobate them
with spirit of Juniper or Sage powered 4 or 5 fingers high, infuse them in a
vial with a long neck very well joined in B. V. 12, 13, or 14 days, then
press them very strongly through a press, and there will come forth a red
oily liquor, strain it and abstract it in B. V. to the consistence of Sapa or
Rob.

The virtues.
This extract digested, and perfectly purifyed is to be carefully kept as a
precious treasure against the Epilepsie.

The Dose half a scruple to a scruple, with its proper sublimated water.

8. The extract or gelly of Theophrastus.

Take the filings of the skull, digest them with spirit of Wine (saged) 15
days, then distill it in a Retort (and having infused them 15 days) cohobate
3 times, at length circulate 5 or 6 days, and the spirit of Wine being
separated in B. M. keep the essence which will be like Rennet.

The Dose 5 or 6 grains daily.

VII. The Vsnea of the skull (i. e. the moss growing on the skull of one
slain, and exposed to the air) is very astringent.

And it is of great use in staying every flux of blood, as of the nose (put in.)

N. 1. Some affirm that the Moss holden in the hands like a charm stays all
bleeding.

N. 2. There grows also upon other bones laid in the air a certain Vsnea,
which some account inferior, but it is found by experience to have also a
great power of astringing.

The Vsnea of the skull enters the Composition of the Sympathetick or Magnetic
ointment.

VIII. Of the brain are made,

1. The spirit of Man's brain called the golden water.

Take the brain of a young man (not 24. years old) healthful, killed by a
violent death, with all the membrains, arteries, veins, and sinews, with all
the marrow of the back bone, bruise them and upon them power of Cephalic
waters (flowers of the Linden, Peony, Betony, Black-cherry, Lavander, Lilly,
Convall, chiefly Diaphoretick in acute diseases) as much as is sufficient to 4
or 5 fingers height, leave it for a time, afterward distill it by Cohobes, out
of the calcined feces, draw the Salt, which after join with the spirit, and
keep all careful.

The virtues.
It is accounted a notable Antepileptick.

The Dose from one scruple to 4.

N. Of the brain of an Alce in like manner may an excellent Antepileptick be
prepared.

2. Oil of the brain.

Mingle with the substance of the brain some common Salt, and distill it by a
Retort of glass in sand.

The virtues.
It is also an excellent Antepileptick, and very much comforts the head.

N. Almost the whole substance of the brain may be brought to Oil, then there
is little Salt to be expected.

3. An Antepileptick water.

Take of man's brain 3 pounds, water of Lilly Convall, of Lavander, of primrose,
of Malmesey, of each three pounds, let them stand in infusion 5 days and be
then distilled in B. M.

IX. Of man's gall is made an extract with spirit of Wine, which dropped into
the ear wonderfully helps deafness.

X. The heart helps the Epilepsie (dried and given.)

And these are the medicines taken from Man, which the straightness of an
Epitome would give leave to describe; he that desires more at large, may find
plenty in Authors. Daniel Berker has written a whole Treatise thereof.

XXIV. Lepus, the Hare,
IS a very fearful creature and fruitful, engendering at any time.

Whence we have many medicinals, 1. The ashes of a Hare. 2. The head. 3. The
eye. 4. The blood. 5. The lungs. 6. The brain. 7. The heart. 8. The liver. 9.
The gall. 10. The kidneys. 11. The testicles. 12. The matrix. 13. The rennet.
14. The ancle-bone. 15. The fat. 16. The dung. 17. The hairs.


Their virtues.
1. The ashes is made of a whole Hare burnt (that is best which is taken in the
spring) or of the whole skin incinerated. It is a most excellent medicine in
the Stone.

The Dose to one scruple and half dram or dram.

It cures also shedding of hair, and kibed heels.

N. Laurenburg calcines not the Hare, but cuts off the head and dryes it in a
pot in an Oven, and uses the powder.

2. The head helps the shedding of the hair (the ashes anointed with honey)
whitens the teeth (the ashes in Dentifrices.)

3. The eyes of a Hare taken in March, are good for hard travel in
childe-birth, drives out the mole and secundine (dried with pepper) without any
compression, and applied on the crown of the head, that the pupil may touch
the crown.

4. The blood anointed cures the diseases of the skin of the face, as pimples
and the morphew (roasted) it stays Dysenteries and Celiack purging, it breaks
the stone.

5. The lungs help those that are troubled with sighing. It is also said to
cure the Epilepsie (seasoned with brine and daily eaten with Myrrh for a
month, it cures kibes (applied.)

6. The brains rubbed on the gums of Infants facilitates their toothing, mends
the trembling members (roasted and eaten.)

7. The heart is said also to cure the Epilepsie (used as the lungs) to ease
the pains of the womb (the powder taken) in special manner to cure the
Quartain (cut into three parts and general evacuation having gone before a
third part drunk in the beginning of three fits every time.)

8. The liver stops the flux of the belly and helps the Liver-grown.

9. The gall is an excellent Ophthalmick, and Odontalgick medicine.

10. The kidneys and testicles are given to those that are troubled with the
Stone (dried) they further conception (taken after the terms) they help
involuntary pissing.

11. The Testicles free from the incontinency of urine, help the diseases of
the bladder, conduce to conception (powdered and taken.)

12. The matrix in like manner conduces to conception (dried and taken after
the terms.)

13. The Rennet disperseth congealed blood, helps conception (after the terms
applied on the Matrix with Butter) but being drunk it kills the child, drives
away the Epilepsie, etc.

N. That is most excellent which is taken before the young have tasted any
other thing but the Mothers milk.

14. The little bone of the ancle is commended against gravel, the Colic,
Epilepsie and the throws in childe-bearing (powdered and taken.)

N. The same is affirmed of the vertebres of the tail.

15. The fat outwardly applied, especially if it be old, excels with so great
force of drawing, that it will draw out darts fastened in the skin. Moreover it
breaks apostumes, heals the toothache (applied behind the ears.)

16. The dung is said to help those that are troubled with the Stone (the ashes
given) it helps the Dysentery (being drunk) heals burnings (applied on the
place.)

17. The hairs are mingled with liniments for staying of blood.

XXV. Lupus, the Wolf,
IS a beast adventurous, greedy, ravenous, not unlike to a Dog.

In medicine there is use made of, 1. Teeth. 2. Heart. 3. Liver. 4. Bowels. 5.
Grease. 6. Bones. 7. Ordure. 8. Skin.


Their virtues.
1. The teeth enclosed in silver are proper for children to rub their gums
withal, they cause the teeth when they are ready to break out, to appear,
being bound to them they hinder their frighting.

2. The heart is accounted profitable for those that are liable to the
Falling Sickness (roasted and powdered.)

3. The liver helps the diseases of the liver, the Hydropick and Consumptive,
and those that cough, (dried and used.)

4. The bowels or intestines are chiefly given against the Colic, which also
they are said to drive away, if tied about one; this is also reported of the
skin.

The Dose of them dried and powdered is one dram.

5. The grease is of no less virtue then Dogs grease, it heats, digests, cures
the diseases of the joints, helps the blearednesse of the eyes (if rubbed
therewith.)

6. The bones are good against the Pleurisy, and also strokes and prickings.

7. The dung helps the Colic (given one dram, or tied about the arms or
thighs with a band made of the wool of a sheep torn in pieces of a Wolf, or
of the skin of an Heart.)

8. The skin of a Wolf is commended against the Colic (a bed coverlet made
thereof, or a girdle, whose hairs may touch the belly.)

Preparat.
1. An Oil is made of a Wolf boiled in Oil.

The virtues thereof are to mitigate the pain of the Gout.

2. The Essence of the blood of a Wolf is efficacious to dissolve clotted blood.

XXVI. Lynx.
HEnce are medicinal, 1. The fat. 2. The nayl of the foot.


1. The grease is good for the Paralytick joints, or troubled with the Cramp,
or out of joint.

2. The nayl is set in gold or silver, and is worn against the
Falling Sickness, the Cramp or Convulsion.

N. That is best, which is on the right foot in place of the thumb.

XXVII. Moschius, S. Moschi Capreolus,
IS an outlandish Beast not much unlike to a Do, common in the Kingdom of
Cathai Pegu (under the great Cham) and as others write, in Egypt and other
places; it loves the Alps, feeds on Spikenard, and other odoriferous herbs.

N. It is carried into Italy, but without profit, for it neither affords Musk,
nor is it long of life.

Moschus, Musk,
Is an excrement enclosed in a bag, grown about the navil, while that beast is
pricked with the heat of venery. It rubs this bag, while it pains it, against
the stones or boughs of trees, and so breaks it, causing the matter therein
contained to flow forth and stick to the stones, then by the heat of the Sun
being further concocted, it becomes Musk of a most sweet smell.

N. Some gather the Musk, cutting the bag, and lay it in the air; but as this
is less digested than the former, so is it inferior to it in goodness. It is
adulterated many ways, but whosoever knows that which is pure and perfect, may
easily find out the Imposture, from the smell and taste; and also from the
weight. Many try the Musk whether it be right after this manner: They put a
weight of it examined by the skales upon the lip moistened, then a little after
they weigh it again, which if it be carried up, they account it right and good;
if otherwise, spurious and adulterate.

The virtues.
It heats in the second degree, dryes in the third; it attenuates, disperses;
it is cordial, and Alexipharmacal and Cephalical.

It is of special use in all passions of the heart, in the palpitation thereof
(drunk and anointed) for it refreshes the vital spirits, and raises them: it
is used in the affects of the head and sinews arising from cold and gross
humors, as also in the Colic, etc.

Outwardly used, it wipes off the thin spots of the eyes, and dryes up moist
defluxions; it stirs up Venery, restores decayed hearing (put into the Ears
with Cotton.)

The Dose 4 or 5 grains.

N. Because by its sweet odor it moves the Matrix, it is less conveniently
given to women liable to the suffocation of the Matrix, but on the contrary
with more benefit is it anointed upon the secrets to draw down the womb.

XXVIII. Mulus, Mula, the Mule,
IS a beast of long life, bred on a Mare and an Ass, and therefore barren.

In medicine are used, 1. The hoof. 2. Urine. 3. The dung. 4. The dung. 5. The
liver, etc.


1. The hoof in fume stays the too much flowing of the terms; the ashes drunk,
makes one barren; anointed, helps shedding of hair.

2. The urine with its own mud or gravel, cures the corns of the feet.

3. The dung stays the flowing of the terms, and helps the Dysentery (burnt,
beaten, sifted, and drunk) It helps the pain of the milt.

4. The heart, liver, kidneys, womb, testicles, foam of the mouth, every one of
these is said to cause sterility.

XXIX. Mus, the Mouse.
THE Mouse is a little Beast, very well known, of a short life, very venereous.

In use are, 1. The Mouse it self. 2. The dung.


The virtues.
1. A living Mouse cut asunder and applied, draws out pricks, darts, arrows,
etc. cures the biting of Scorpions; draws out the poison. The ashes cure
involuntary pissing by night (drunk) helps the shedding of hair (anointed)
heals an old cough, (the ashes) see Forest.

2. The dung moves childrens bodies, (given to the quantity of 3. 4. 5. 6.
grains; or put up in a Suppository) it is useful in Clysters and Supositories,
it helps the shedding of the hair, cleanses the scales of the head (anointed)
breaks the stones of the Kidneys and Bladder; it takes away the swelling of the
Fundament, and Warts of all sorts, and the Piles, (the ashes boiled with Wine
and applied).

Mus araneus, the Shrew,
Is a special experiment for the diseases of the fundament, burnt and anointed
with Goose grease.

Mus Alpinus, the Alpine Mouse,
Is a Beast inhabiting in the highest Alps, almost exceeding a Coney in
greatness, sleeping all the Winter.

The fat is commended as good for the sinews and joints contracted, stiff, etc.

Mus major, a Rat.
N. It is said to carry poison in its tail.

The virtues.
The dung of Rats, to the number of 9 swallowed, are accounted of some women a
singular experiment, whereby they endeavor to help the obstruction of the terms.

XXX. Ovis, the Sheep,
IS a tame beast and fearful.

In medicine from hence we have, 1. The brain. 2. The gall. 3. Oesypus. 4. Lana
succida. 5. Suet. 6. Lungs. 7. The Caul. 8. The dung. 9. The piss. 10. The
bladder. 11. Head and feet. 12. Lice.


Their virtues.
1. They say that the brain of a Ram is good in driving away immoderate sleep
in Epidemick diseases (they fry the brain, and with fat make it into a cake,
adding thereto Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and then use it) It facilitates toothing
(anointed with honey.)

2. The gall (in wool and applied on the navill of infants) looses the belly,
heals an outward Canker (anointed) helps mattery ears (dropped in with woman's
milk.)

3. Oesypus (the grease of moist wool commonly called Isopus humida) is thus
made.

Moist greasy wool from the neck, bellies and thighs of Sheep are infused 6,
7, or 8 hours in boiling water, then is it again made hot and stirred with a
stick until it has sent all its grease into the water. This water (the wool
removed) is stirred very much with a wooden stick, or is powered from on high
out of one vessel into another that it foam, so the filth thereof sticking to
the foam may be separated. Let this cleansing be used, till no more foam arise.
Let the gathered fat or grease be washed in pure water (others prefer
seawater) and wrought with the hands till it be white, and no more infect the
water, and put on the tongue is lightly astringent. And all these ought to be
done in the hot sun.

The virtues.
It mollifies, dissolves, heats, eases pains, it is good for those that are
dislocated, bruised, and the like.

4. The greasy wool is gathered in summer from the neck and thighs, which is
soft and full of sweat.

The virtues.
It heats, softens, mitigates, it is very good for those that are bruised,
beaten and dislocated (applied with Vinegar, Oil, Wine) Being burnt, it has an
heating, drying, sharp, biting and discussing faculty, and therefore it helps
moist and soft tumors, and inveterate Ulcers. It restrains Excrescences, brings
Ulcers to a skar, heals Fistulas, and suppurated ears (put into them.)

5. The suet given in red wine, stays blood, cures the Diarrhea, Dysentery,
and the tormenting pain of the belly in a Clyster.)

6. The lights, (as also the fleshy bowels of other beasts) applied unto the
head, mitigate the pain and heat thereof, and bring to quietness the unruly
spirits.

They are of great use in the Frenzy, watchings, etc.

7. The Caul (hot) cures the Colic (applied.)

8. The dung has a cooling, drying, opening and discussing quality.

It is of very great use in the Jaundise (taken with parsley.)

Outwardly it is good in the swelling of the milt, in great warts, corns,
tumors of the skin, etc. in like manner it is confortative in burnings
(powdered and sprinkled.)

9. The urine (of a black or red Sheep) taken drives away the water between the
skin (The same it does being distilled.)

The Dose 5 or 6 ounces.

10. The bladder (as of a Goat) burned and used, helps those that piss against
their will.

11. The head and feet of a Weather very well boiled in fountain water, helps a
Consumption and shrinking of sinews (in a bath.)

12. The lice are said to do excellently in the cure of the running Gowt (taken
in number 9.)

XXXI. Ranunculus Viridis, the Green-frog,
IS a kind of an earthen Frog, less then others, very green in color, loving
bushes and sharp places.

In use are, 1. The Frog. 2. The blood.


The virtues.
1. It agrees in virtues with the Water-frog, and its ashes sprinkled on wounds
is said wonderfully to restrain bleeding.

2. The blood is especially commended for a philtre to procure love.

XXXII. Rhinoceros,
IS a beast as great as a Bull, like in shape to a Boar, having one horn on his
snout, black, a cubit long, and spired, resembling the horn of a Buffe, solid
without hollowness.

N. He is said to have another little horn on the back, of the same color with
the former.

The virtues.
It is commended against poison, infection and other diseases having need of
sweat, and may be used for want of the Unicorns horn, in stead thereof.

It is given in powder to half or a whole scruple.

XXXIII. Serpens, a Serpent,
IS a most subtle beast, casting his skin every year twice, viz. in the Spring
and Autumn, resting asleep in the Winter in the earth, chiefly under the roots
of trees (Birch, Hasle) most hurtful to man.

N. The name of Serpent is general comprehending under it many species of
Serpents, but in this place we understand the common sort distinguished from
Vipers, etc.

N. 2. They are best which are gathered in the beginning of the Spring, when
they cast their skin, yet not immediately after their coming forth out of their
Winter dens.

In medicinal use are, 1. The whole ones burnt. 2. The fat. 3. The skin. 4.
The gall.


The virtues in particular.
1. The whole ones burnt, viz. the flesh, heart, bones and liver, are
Alexipharmacall, and have a sudorifick quality (not venomous.)

They are of especial use outwardly in all venomous and malignant diseases, as
the Plague, Fever, Leprosy, and the like. Moreover Cardan brags of it as a
secret, that the Consumptive, and those that have the French disease are helped
chiefly by the use of Vipers, if the flesh boiled be eaten, the broth drunken
and the grease anointed on the spine and joints. Neither is there cause that
thou should so much fear the internal use of Serpents, for thou may take
the flesh, the skin pulled off the gall, tail, and bowels cast away, and use it
in stead of meat.

N. 1. The head is rejected because it is very venomous, the tail is cast away
not because it is venomous, but because it only consists of bones, the bladder
with the gall is rejected because it is the nearest receptacle of venomous
matter, which thence by two passages is carried to the sockets of the teeth in
which it becomes more full of spirit and more strong in effect, in so much that
if any be pricked with the teeth of a Viper though dead long before, he is
infected with the poison; otherwise the gall, with which being new Dogs do die,
but they eat it dried without harm; we use not the bowels or puddings, because
of the excrements or eggs sticking thereto, otherwise these being cast away
they may become useful without harm.

N. 2. According to some if thou keep asunder the heart and the liver, thou
have gotten a most precious medicinal treasure: but thou art mistaken if thou
persuade thy self to have any thing of virtue distinct from the flesh and
bones; in like manner thou art deceived if (as the common opinion is) by
swallowing down the serpentine powder (or of the heart, newly extracted and as
yet moving it self) thou imagine thy self free from the stingings of Serpents.

2. The Fat softens strumes, cures the redness and spots of the eyes, sharpens
the sight, asswages the pains of the Gowt.

3. The skin is thought to facilitate childbearing (tied to the belly or
loins) and to assuage toothache (in Gargarisms) It cures Tetters (made into
powder and applied) helps shedding of hair, and makes hairs to grow (anointed.)

4. The gall applied on the stingings of Serpents, draws the poison to it. The
same they affirm of the head applied or laid to the place.

Preparat.
1. The powder.

The powders of Serpents are of so many composions that every Mountibank
imagines something proper to himself. But what need is there of any
composition, for Serpents unbowelled neither need to be corrected nor acuated,
their force and virtue being sufficient, their fleshy and bony substance safe
enough (the heart, liver, tongue, flesh, bones no whit venomous) if the whole
Serpent be burnt, it exhales out the venomous quality (I would cast away the
head) nevertheless I will add one or two preparations.

1. Take a Serpent cased (the bowels, head and tail cast away) wash and dry
him, then powder him with the vertebres of the back, keep the powder for your
use.

The Dose from half to a dram.

2. Take living Serpents (neither bowelled nor flayed) cast them into a pot
covered, and boil them at an easy fire, that all the fat and moisture may be
wasted (without burning) then let them be made into powder.

N. The former is the better, for in this there is fear lest the venomous parts
have not sufficiently exhaled.

Of this is made 2 An Animal compound Bezoartick.

Take the powder of Serpents two ounces, root of Valerian, Angelica, Pimpinell,
Rue, of each one dram, make them into powder, and mingle them with it.

The Dose from one to two scruples or more.

N. 1. The only powder is good against quick Spiders, and arsnick, but not to
cure the Plague by the experiment of Vntzer.

N. 2. Out of the dried flesh, is extracted the tincture with spirit of Wine,
or with spirit of Juniper which is better.

XXXIV. Sus, a Swine,
IS a beast very flegmatique and moist, obnoxious to many diseases, as
hoarsenesse, Squinsie, Strumes, Fever, Measels.

N. There is no beast more like to man in the inward parts then a Swine.

Hence we borrow, 1. Gall. 2. Lungs. 3. Grease. 4. Bones. 5. Huckle bone. 6.
Dung. 7. Bladder.


The virtues.
1. Diascorides writes that a Swines gall is used against the Ulcers of the
ears, and all other with good success. It hinders the growing of hair with
Swines fat, of each a like, and one third part of sharp Vinegar and oil of
Almonds, of each a like digested and anointed.

2. The lungs wonderfully profit, applied to gallings by shoes.

3. The grease heats less, and therefore is used in cooling ointments, it
asswageth the old griefs of the loins and joints (anointed with ashes of bean
straw or lime)

Lard boiled and tied about conglutinates happily the fractures of bones.

N. 1. The grease of an old Swine, or which is seasoned with salt, is hotter
and more efficacious then that which is taken out of young pigs, and is
unsalted. So is old grease sharper then new.

N. 2. Some use only Boars grease in lieu of the sympathetick ointment.

4. They say that the bones hung about the neck helps the Quartain. Believe
thou that have tried it.

5. The huckle bone is commended against fractures of bones, as also Colic and
pains of the head (burnt and used.)

6. The dung mollifies, discusses, is profitable in the Itch, Wheales and
Corns of the feet and other hard swellings (applied hot) it heals the
stingings of venomous creatures (boiled with Vinegar) it stays bleeding at the
Nose (mixed with water and anointed)

7. The bladder helps those that piss against their will (boiled or burnt, and
used) it performs the same, applied on the secrets. It is said to provoke
Urine. Pliny.

Preparat.
1. Diverse ointments are made of the grease, as ointment of Roses, Pomatum.

2. A water for an Atrophy,

Is made of the blood purged from the strings, and distilled in B. M. with
bechicall cooling and moystning herbs.

XXXV. Talpa, a Mole,
IS a beast very quick of hearing, having this as a peculiar thing, that it
cannot live but under the earth.

Into Physical use are brought, 1. The Mole it self. 2. The heart. 3. The blood.


The virtues.
1. The ashes thereof helps the Leprosy, Evils and Fistulaes, (anointed with
the white of an egg, or honey.)

Inwardly drunk with Ale or Wine, it cures the running Gowt, and the Evil.

The Dose 10 grains taken daily.

2. The heart cures bursting (dried, powdered and used for 3 or 4 days, viz.
every day one.)

N. It is best which is taken in May.

The new blood anointed, adornes baldness with hairs.

N. It is a vulgar opinion, that if any compresse a Mole in his hand till she
die, he shall be free from a Fever that year. Moreover in the fit of a Fever
holden in the hand, it is thought to restrain the fits.

XXXVI. Taxus, a Badger,
IS of two sorts, dog-like, having feet like dogs feet, and Swine-like,
imitating Swine in the feet.

Hence to be used are, 1. The whole Badger made into ashes. 2. The Blood. 3.
The Grease.


The virtues.
1. The whole Badger burnt to ashes is given with success to those that are
diseased in the lungs, and spit blood.

2. The blood made into powder, is said to be good for the Leprosy, and being
distilled helps the plague.

3. The grease is the chief in shops, which as it is a little grosser, so it is
a little hotter and of more efficacy then Swines grease. It helps the pain of
the kidneys rising from the stone (anointed or given in Clyster) It mitigates
the heat of Fevers, helps the contraction and weakness of the members (with
grease of a Fox or wild Cat.)

XXX. Vipera, the Viper,
IS a kind of Serpent bringing forth her young alive, more venomous then
common Serpents, lurking in Winter in Rocks, or covered with earth.

N. 1. Some make the name of a Viper general, and attribute it to every kind
of Serpents, yet here in particular is it used for that which the Italians call
Marassi, though as yet it be a question, whether Italian Vipers be the same
with the Vipers required of our Elders for Treacle.

N. 2. It is accounted proper to Vipers alone to bring forth a living brood,
whence they are called in Latin Viperae quasi Viviparae.

N. 3. Not the whole Viper is venomous and deadly, but only the head and gall;
the rest, as the flesh, liver, bones, are void of poison. See above of the
Serpent.

1. Those are best which are females gathered in the Spring, after that for
some time they have been out of their Winter quarters, and in some measure
refreshed with food.

2. The young females (not great with young) which when the parts which ought
are taken away, are moved long, and which live in dry and mountainous places.
For their virtues, see in the description of Serpents. For verily the virtues
there rehearsed, above other kinds of Serpents Vipers obtain. Besides these,
some commend the head of a Viper against a bastard Quinsie (hung about the
neck.)

Preparat.
1. Oil of Vipers.

Take of the black Vipers 3 pounds, of Oil of Sesama, one Sextary and a half,
let them be boiled in a glased vessel with a narrow mouth well stopped, (lest the
vapor exhale) till the flesh fall from the bones, then when they are cold, let
them be laid up.

N. Others by descent draw it out of Vipers without the head, tail, etc.

The virtues.
It cleanses the skin, heals Tetters and other diseases of that sort.

2. Theriacal Salt. See August. Dispensatory, and Quecetan.

3. Trochisces of Vipers. See the Dispensatory.

N. 1. Some have made Treacle of the blind worm, and with very good success
have given it once or twice in the time of the Plague to provoke sweat.

N. 2. There may also be made Vipers Wine (that is, in which Vipers are killed)
famous against the Leprosy (drunk.)

4. Thou shall find another excellent powder in Poterius his Pharmacop.

5. The Essence of Vipers in Myroth. Fabri.

Salt of Vipers Volatile, Oil, Spirit and Salt fixed, Let dried Vipers be cut
into pieces, and lightly bruised together with the heart and liver, be put into
a Retort armed till it be filled. Distill them into a vessel with a large
receiver by degrees. It affords a phlegm and spirit, the Volatile Salt sticks
to the sides of the Receiver and the neck of the Retort, and at length comes a
fetid and gross Oil, which is to be separated with a paper, let the Salt taken
out be purified by subliming it in a large Vial in sand, with a moderate fire,
left any waterinesse follow the Salt, which uses to happen when the fire is
increased. The sublimed parts of this Salt are of a more piercing odor then the
rest, and therefore must be kept in an Alembeck very well closed.

It is a medicine very piercing, driving away putrefaction, resolves all Fevers
and Quartanes, if it be given to drink one or two hours before the fit in a
proper liquor, which may somewhat blunt, not destroy its Acrimony, as in
Emulsions of seed of Melons or sweet Almonds, adding a part of Rose Water or
Cinnamon, and white Sugar.

The Dose from 6 grains to half a scruple.

It is fixed as the Salt Volatile of the Microcosme, except that in stead of
the proper spirit of the fixed Salt (which is little in Vipers, and is drawn
out of the dead head) is taken the Spirit of common Salt.

The virtues.
Thus fixed it is an unchangeable medicine going over all the body: for it
resolves all excrements, and cleanses them clean like Soap, in what place
soever they stick, not assimilated, that they may easily and conveniently be
repulsed from the matter, either by sweat, insensible transpiration, or which
for the most part happens, by Urine. Therefore in every melancholic Gowt, the
Stone of the reyns and bladder, all obstructions of the bowels, and
rottenness, it is a most present remedy: In decayed strength it reaches to
the parts affected, it comforts nature, helps by purging it, and resolving the
excrements contrary to nature.

The Dose from half to a whole scruple.

The Essence of Vipers.
Take the livers and hearts of Vipers, in number 100, dried and bruised with
Spirit of Wine, rectified 3 or 4 days, digest and extract them according to
Art. The Distillations being joined, add (to one pound of the Essence) one
ounce of Volatile Salt, half ounce of the fixed. Digest them that they may be
very well united, one or two months, and thou shall have the chiefest medicine
that can be expected from Vipers.

N. These medicines are very usual in Italy, and are said to be used with good
success and applause of the people.

XXXVIII. Vitulus, a Calf.
WHence in medicine are, 1. The Marrow. 2. Dung.


The virtues.
1. The marrow is next in goodness to the Hearts, it has virtue to mollify
hard and schirrous bodies, whether the hardness happen to the muscles, or
tendons, or ligaments. Moreover pessaries are made thereof, softning the womb.

2. The dung helps an Erysipelas (new and anointed.)

XXXIX. Unicornis, the Unicorn,
IS said to be a Beast not unlike to an Horse, in respect of his body, with
cloven feet, having an horn in his forehead.

In medicine the Horn is used, which may be distinguished from Ivory by the
threads or fibers which are more subtle. It is also more solid and more heavy,
in other things it is like unto Ivory.

The virtues.
It is Sudorifick, Alexipharmacal and cordial, hence it is that it is commended
good against poisons, infectious diseases, etc. It is also accounted profitable
in the Epilepsie of Infants.

The Dose from 4 grains to half a scruple, sometimes a whole scruple and more.

XL. Ursus, a Bear,
IS a cruel Beast, catarrhous, phlegmatique, with a weak head, most strong
loins, lascivious. It is at enmity with H^rts, Asses, Lions; it sleeps certain
weeks together.

Whence we use, 1. The fat. 2. Gall. 3. The Eye.


The virtues.
1. The fat heats, resolves, mollifies, discusses, etc. It is chiefly used in
the shedding of the hair, (anointed with a burnt Mouse) it helps the aches of
the Gowt, the swellings behind the ear and other tumors (made into a plaster
with Bulls suet and Wax, of each a like quantity) it heals the Ulcers of the
thighs and legs.

N. 1. In the Rupture Enterocele and the falling out of the womb, it is an
ordinary medicine of women (anointed on the back, viz. on the os sacrum.)

N. 2. It is fit to observe, that in the external use of this fat, it makes
hairs white.

2. The gall is inwardly commended against the Falling Sickness, Asthma and
the Jaundise. Outwardly against Cancrous and creeping Ulcers, (anointed)
against the Toothache, dimnesse of the Eyes, etc.

N. In Finland, where there is plenty of Bears, it is ordinary for the common
people to give the gall dried as a Panacea, and by sweat ensuing thereon, I
have heard that many diseases have been cured.

3. The right eye taken out, dried and hanged about the neck of Infants, is
said to drive away the frighting wherewith they are vexed in sleep.

Some say that the eye of a Bear tied to the left arm heals a Quartane.

XLI. Vulpes, the Fox,
IS a very crafty Beast, in a manner partaker of the nature of the Dog.

In medicinal use are, 1. The grease. 2. The lungs. 3. The liver. 4. The gall.
5. The milt. 6. The skin. 7. The blood. 8. The whole Fox. 9. The dung.


The virtues.
1. The grease helps Convulsions, Contractions, Tremblings, etc. (anointed) the
pain of the ears, wounds of the head, and shedding of hair.

2. The lungs consolidate, cleanse, and from hence they are good against the
diseases of the lungs, and straitness of the breast (dried and taken.)

3. The liver helps the Hepatick and Splenetick (used as the lungs.)

4. The gall helps the Haw of the eyes (anointed)

5. The milt heals the hardness and swelling of the milt (laid on or applied
to it.)

6. The hairy skin is successefully applied on cold members and troubled with
the Gowt.

7. The blood dried and powdered heals the Stone of the reyns and bladder. The
same is the fresh blood reported to do better (drunk to the quantity of a
cyath, or anointed on the belly, privities, groins, and reyns.)

8. The whole Fox or the flesh burnt is commended against the diseases of the
breast.

A Fox boiled very well in water or Oil heals the diseases of the sinews,
Convulsions, and aches of the joints (if the place affected be therewith
bathed.)

9. The dung cures the ruggedness of the skin (anointed with Vinegar.)

Preparat.
Oil of Foxes. See the Dispensatory.

Looch of Foxes lunges. See the Dispensatory.

The lungs prepared, or washed and dried.

The End of the First Classis.
The Second Classis OF BIRDS.
I. Accipiter, the Hauk,
IS a ravenous, greedy and daring bird, of a strong sight.

In medicine we use, 1. The whole Hawk. 2. The fat. 3. The excrements.


The virtues.
1. The whole Hauk helps the diseases of the eyes (boiled in Oil and anointed
on the eye.)

2. The same is to be thought of the fat. Moreover it cures all the diseases of
the skin (anointed.)

3. The excrements excel with such a heating quality, that of Galen they are
debarred from Physic, notwithstanding some do use them in the diseases of the
eyes, others to provoke childebirth (given or used in a fumigation) Hippocrates
and Pliny give them to help barrenness.

II. Alauda, the Lark.
HEnce we have, 1. The heart or whole Lark. 2. The blood.


The virtues.
1. The heart of the Lark with the comb tied to the thigh, drives away the
Colic. The same is reported of the new or fresh heart swallowed down, as also
of the whole Lark (roasted or made into ashes with the feathers) which in the
Dose of an ounce, or the quantity of one or two spoonfuls may be used for some
days.

2. The fresh blood drunk with sharp Vinegar or hot Wine, helps most
effectually those that are troubled with the Stone.

III. Alcedo, the Kings fisher,
IS a beautiful Bird, bigger then a Sparrow, with a long bill, sometime
purple, sometime blew, sometime green of color, living by the edges of Rivers.

The heart is used, which being dried and hung about the neck of Infants,
drives away the falling sickness.

IV. Anas, a Duck or Drake,
IS a Bird fit for the Kitchen; it begets gross, melancholic and superfluous
humors.

In Physical use are, 1. The living Duck. 2. The fat or grease. 3. The blood.
4. The dung.


The virtues.
1. A living Duck asswageth the pain of the Colic (if it be applied to the
belly, the part deplumed.)

2. The grease heats, moystens, softens, digests, resolves, whereupon we use it
in inward aches, and outward, viz. of the sides, joints, in the cold distemper
of the sinews, etc.

N. This grease has the pre-eminence above others, chiefly that of the wild
Duck.

3. The blood is Alexipharmacall, and is brought sometimes into the composition
of Antidotes.

4. The dung is applied upon the biting of venomous beasts.

V. Anser, the Goose,
IS a Bird very much used in the Kitchen, affording an excrementitious and
melancholic nourishment.

Whence we use, 1. The grease. 2. The blood. 3. The dung. 4. The thin skin of
the feet.


The virtues.
1. The grease, exceeds Swines grease in heat, and in respect of its subtlety
more readily pierces and resolves, and therefore is rightly cast into the
fundament to blunt the gnawing in the body, it fills Alopecies with hairs, it
cures the chaps of the lips, it helps the ringing of the ears (put thereinto)
it cures Convulsion and stiff sinews (the fat of a Goose stuffed with the
flesh of a Cat, and other nervall herbs and roasted) it loses the belly,
chiefly of Infants (put into the Navill or applied on the belly.)

2. The blood is accounted Alexipharmacal.

The Dose to 2 drams.

3. The dung heats and dryes very much, cuts, opens, moves powerfully the
terms, secundine and urine.

Hence it is of great use in the Evil, Scurvey, Dropsy (with a spoonful of
the urine of a Goat or Calf, distilled; the use hereof may be continued for 8
days. The same is also accounted to heal the cough.

N. 1. It heats so much that it burns the grass where it lies; whereupon it is
judged of Galen to be unprofitable.

N. 2. The green is best gathered in the spring in meadows, which being dried
with a moderate heat and powdered, may be given from half a dram to a whole
dram.

Others give it new in drink, strained with a convenient liquor.

The Dose one or two drams.

4. The skin of the feet dried and powdered, for its astringent faculty is
commended in staying the flowing of the terms.

The Dose half a dram.

Outwardly it is with good success applied on kibed heels.

N. Some mix it with Antictericall medicines.

VI. Ardea, the Heron.
OF which is used the fat or grease, but the use hereof is rare, yet is it said
to mitigate the pain of the Gowt, to disperse the clouds of the eyes, and to
clear the sight (anointed) it also profits those that are subject to deafness
(put into the ears.)

N. It is good for Fishers, who thereby may allure Fishes, for the Fishes
because they hate the Heron, at the smell hereof run together ready to set upon
the Heron as their enemy.

VII. Ciconia, the Stork.
WHence we use, 1. The Stork it self. 2. The dung. 3. The ventricle. 4. The
grease. 5. The gall.


The virtues in particular.
1. The Stork has an excellent Alexipharmacall quality, so that it is thought
most efficacious against poisons of all sorts, and especially against the
Plague (eaten or the ashes thereof taken) Moreover it helps diseases of the
sinews and joints.

2. The dung if it be drunk with water, is thought to help the Falling
sickness, and other diseases of the head.

3. The stomach dried and powdered, is accounted for the greatest secret in
poisons.

N. Others approve of the inner coat or skin only.

4. The grease is profitably anointed on Gowty and trembling joints.

5. The gall is commended against the diseases of the eyes.

Preparat.
1. An Antepileptick water.

Is made of a whole young stork deplumed, and the guts taken out and cut into
pieces, other Antepilepticks added and distilled in B. M.

2. An Oil distilled which it yields in abundance.

3. A volatile salt.

4. Crollius his Alexipharmacall secret of a Stork.

VIII. Columba, the Pigeon,
IS a very fruitful Bird, very hot, living on Corn.

In use are, 1. The whole Pigeon. 2. The blood. 3. The thin coat of the
ventricle. 4. The dung.


The virtues.
1. A living Pigeon cut into two and applied to the head while the blood is
hot, mitigates sharp and raging humors, discusses melancholic sadness.

Hence it is a most convenient medicine in the Frenzy, Headache, melancholy,
Gowt.

2. The warm blood instilled into the eyes asswages pain and bloud-shotnesse,
discusses suffusions and blood, heals green wounds.

It specially restrains blood breaking out of the membranes of the brain; it
asswages the Gowt-ach.

N. 1. The blood of a male Pigeon is best, and that taken out of the right wing
(for its hotter nature.)

N. 2. The bloody juice squeezed out of the feathers, may be used in stead of
the blood, and that is best which is taken from young ones.

3. The thin tunicle of the ventricle dried and powdered is commended in the
Dysentery.

4. The dung heats extremely (in respect of the nitrous quality in which it
excels) and therefore it burns, discusses, stirs up the redness of the skin by
drawing the blood thereto.

Hence it is frequently used in Cataplasmes and rubifying playsters. Powdered
and sifted and applied with the seed of Cresses, it availes against inveterate
diseases, as Gowts, Hemicrany, Vertigo, Headache, the old pains in the sides,
shoulders, back, and loins, Colic, Apoplexy, Lethargy and the like.

It discusses the strumes, and other tumors (mixed with Barley meal and
Vinegar and applied) it helps the shedding of the hair (anointed) the (Colic
in Glysters) it discusses the defluxions having recourse to the knees (with
Salt and Oil.)

Inwardly it wastes the Stone, and provokes Urine.

The Dose from one scruple to two.

IX. Cornix, the Crow.
KIranides says, that the dung drunk in Wine cures the Dysentery.

X. Corvus, the Raven.
FRom whence we have in use, 1. The young ones. 2. The brain. 3. The fat and
blood. 4. The dung.


The Virtues.
1. The young Ravens are commended when they are burnt to ashes, against the
falling sickness.

The Dose one dram given every day for 2 or 3 days together.

In like manner the ashes of Ravens, are commended against the Gowt and morphew.

2. The brain is good against the Epilepsie.

3. The fat and blood make the hairs black, which is affirmed of the eggs.

4. The dung mitigates the Cough of Infants, and the pains of the teeth (hanged
about the neck.)

5. Some give the Eggs in a Dysentery one or two.

XI. Coturnix, the Quail.
N. A Quail eaten is thought to be hurtful to those that are liable to a
Convulsion.

Of it there is in use, 1. The fat. 2. The excrements.


The virtues.
1. The fat or grease helps the eyes, and wipes away their spots.

2. Some will have the excrements of Quails feeding on Hellebore (which as some
say is nourishment to it) to help the Epilepsie by a certain singular propriety.

XII. Cuculus, the Cuckoo.
IN medicine are used, 1. The Cuckoo it self. 2. The dung.


The virtues.
1. A Cuckoo burnt is commended against the Stone, pain and moystnesse of the
stomach.

It is also given profitably to the sick of a Fever in the time of the fit, it
cures the Epileptick, etc.

2. The dung cures the biting of a mad-dog (drunk.)

XIII. Ficedula, a Gnatsnapper.
SO called in Latin from the eating of figs.

The virtues.
It is said to sharpen the sight in meat.

XIV. Gallus, the Cock; Gallina, the Hen.
INto medicines are received, 1. The Cock or Hen. 2. The brain. 3. The Tunicle
of the stomach. 4. The stones. 5. The gall. 6. The grease. 7. The throat. 8.
The dung. 9. The eggs.


The virtues in particular.
1. A Hen dissected (a black one is best) the blood as yet hot is applied to
the head in the Frenzy, Headache, etc. it is said to heal the bitings of
venomous beasts, being applied to byles called Anthraces, it draws out the
poison: neither is it to be unobserved that it stays the breaking out of blood
in green wounds.

2. A living Hen (or Cock) deplumed about the fundament, draws venom out of
venereous botches (applied.)

Preparat.
1. A Jelly of an old Hen is made of the flesh of an Hen cut into pieces, with
Calves feet, or of a Weather boiled 6 or 7 hours in a double vessel shut and
pressed out.

N. Spices may be added, and Cordial waters.

The virtues.
It is very nourishing and strengthening.

2. A Jelly bruised is made of the flesh of an Hen which is boiled till the
flesh fall from the bones, then is it pounded together with the bones and an
expression is made to be mingled with Wine and spiced as you please.

N. The flesh of Hens is better then that of Cocks, unless they be libbed; and
of black hens, it is better and lighter which never have laid eggs.

3. The broth of an old Cock. Let an old Cock (of 2, 3, 4, years old) be
wearyed till he fall, then let him be killed, deplumed, bowelled and stuffed
with fitting medicines, and boiled in a quantity of water till the flesh fall
from the bones, and then strained.

The virtues.
This broth of it self has a mollifying faculty. And for the nitrous parts
wherewith that old Bird is endued, and which are stirred up by that weariness,
it excels in the faculty of cutting, cleansing, moving the belly, and that so
much the more if in it be boiled medicines of like virtue. Hence it is most
renowned in the Colic (boiled with purging and discussing things) in the Cough
and tartar of the lungs (boiled with pectorals.)

2. The brain has the virtue to thicken and restrain fluxes: as the flux of
the belly (taken in Wine) It is rubbed by Women ore the gums to help toothing.

3. The inner tunicle of the ventricle extracted, dried (in the sun) and
powdered, has a singular virtue both to bind and also to corroborate the
ventricle, and to restrain vomiting, and the flux of the belly, and also to
waste the stone.

4. The testicles are said to restore strength decayed by sickness, they
furnish with a fruitful seed, and strengthen the venerean acts (used when they
are new) they also cure Fevers (taken.)

5. The gall takes away the spots of the skin (anointed) and helps the eyes.

6. The grease of hens and capons heats, moystens, mollifies, asswages, and is
of a middle nature betwixt Goose and Swines grease, and duls their acrimony. It
is good for the chaps of the lips, the pains of the ears, the pustles of the
eyes, etc.

7. The throat of a Cock parched and dried, given before supper, by propriety
cures the nocturnall involuntary pissing.

8. The dung performs all which Pigeons dung does, but less effectually, yet
specially is it good for the Colic, and pain of the womb. It prevails much
against the Jaundise, Stone, and suppression of urine.

N. That is accounted best, which is the whitest in the dung.

The Dose half a dram given morning and evening for 4 or 5 days and continued.

Outwardly it dries scurffe of the head and other running scabs (the ashes
sprinkled.)

The yellow of the dung consolidates the ulceration of the bladder (boiled in
fresh butter or Oil Olive and cast into cold water that the filth may separate,
and the liquor of the Oil swim above, it is to be injected into the passage of
the yard.)

9. The Eggs in medicine supply us with the shells, thin skins white and yelk.

The shells have virtue to break the stone, and to cut the Tartareous mucilage.

The thin skins have a Diuretic faculty used inwardly and outwardly (and they
are applied to the foreskin of Infants.)

The white has virtue to cool, bind, agglutinate, and it is of frequent use
in the redness of the eyes, in the conglutination of wounds (with common bole)
in fractures, etc. It serves also for frontals.

N. Hippocrates gives to Feverish persons 2 or 3 whites to cool, etc.

The yelk has an anodyne virtue, it maturates, digests, loosens, therefore is
it frequently used in Glysters and also mixed with a little salt it is used to
be applied on the Navil of Infants (in a walnut shell) to move the belly.

Preparat.
An Oil is made thereof, which is frequently used in consolidating wounds, and
chaps, in maturation of tumors, etc.

N. There is made thereof a drink most used of our childbearing women.

Take the yelks of eggs 2 or 3, water a quantity, Wine half as much, let them
be boiled very well for her drink.

XV. Grus, a Crane.
IN medicinal use are, 1. The Crane it self. 2. The fat or grease. 3. The
gall. 4. The head, eyes, ventricle. 5. The marrow of the leg.


The virtues.
1. This bird, because it is nervous, is accounted properly to be good for
sinewy and membranous parts; whence the use thereof is commended in the Colic.

2. The grease helps deafness (dropped into the ears) it mollifies the
hardness of the milt, and other tumors (mixed with Vinegar of Squils) it
speedily helps the stiffness of the neck.

N. It is said to be of the same nature with Goose grease.

3. The gall helps the eyes.

4. The head, eyes, ventricle, powdered, are sprinkled upon Fistulaes, Cancers,
and varicous Ulcers.

5. The marrow of the shank is for an eye salve to be made thereof.

XVI. Hirundo, the Swallow.
Domestic Swallows build their nests in houses.

The bank Swallows on the banks of waters, whence they are called water
Swallows.

Wall Swallows hang their nests on the walls of Churches or Rocks.

N. The bank Swallows are best.

In medicinal use are, 1. The whole Swallow. 2. The heart. 3. The blood. 4. The
stones. 5. The nest. 6. The dung.


The virtues.
1. Swallows specifically help the Epilepsie, the dullness of the sight and
bloudshotnesse (the ashes anointed with honey.) They heal the Quinsie, and
inflamed Uvula (eaten, or their ashes taken.)

2. The heart is said to help the Epilepsie, and strengthen the memory. Others
eat it against the Quartain.

3. The blood is thought especially to help the eyes, and that chiefly which is
drawn out of the right wing.

4. A stone is found in the Ventricle of some young Swallows (though seldom)
to the bigness of a grain of Lentill or pease. This they would have to be good
for the Epilepsie of children (tied to the arm, or hung about the neck.)

N. They report that this is found chiefly the Moon decreasing, and that in the
young one first hatched.

Others take it out in August about the full Moon.

5. The nest helps the Quinsie (outwardly applied) cures the redness of the
eyes. It is good against the biting of a Viper (applied.)

6. The dung heats exceedingly, discusses and is sharp.

The use thereof is chiefly in the bitings of a mad-dog (inwardly and
outwardly) in the Colic and pains of the back (given in drink) it provokes the
womb (put up.)

Preparat.
The water of Swallows is usually made of bank Swallows. See the August.
Dispensatory.

XVII. Milvus, the Kite,
IS a bird of the kind of Hawks, quick of sight, liable to ache of the joints.

In use are, 1. The Kite burnt to ashes. 2. The head. 3. The liver. 4. The
blood. 5. The gall. 6. The dung. 7. The fat or grease.


The Virtues.
1. The Kite burnt to ashes, is said to help the Gowt and Epilepsie (given.)

The Dose from half to a whole scruple.

2. The same is said of the head and liver burnt to ashes.

3. The liver moreover is used in the medicines for the eyes.

4. The blood helps the Gowty (mixed with a nettle and applied.)

5. The gall is added to Collyries.

6. The dung is applied on the joints with success.

7. The fat is anointed on joynt-aches.

Preparat.
Some bury a living Kite in Horse dung 40 days, and of the worms which arise
from him, make an ointment against gowty aches.

XVIII. Motacilla, a Wag-tail,
IS a Bird living chiefly about Rivers, with a trembling tail.

The whole bird it self is used, whose virtue is said to be wonderful in
breaking the Stone (the powder drunk.)

XIX. Noctua, an Owl.
IN Physical use are, 1. The flesh. 2. The gall. 3. The grease.


The virtues.
1. The flesh cures the Paralytick, Melancholic, and the like. It wonderfully
opens the Apostem of the Quinsie, and breaks it (the ashes of the whole Owl not
deplumed taken into the throat.)

2. The gall is good against the spots of the eyes.

3. The grease sharpens the sight.

XX. Olor, the Swan,
IS a Bird like to a Goose in shape, manner of living and in virtues.

Into use are taken, 1. The Cygnets. 2. The grease. 3. The skin.


The virtues.
1. The Cygnets boiled in Oil with marrow of an Heart are good for those that
are Gowty.

2. The fat mollifies, asswages, attenuates, and is good for the Hemroids, the
hardness of the matrix; it purges the eyes.

3. The skin beset with very soft feathers helps the Colic and the weakness
of the stomach.

XXI. Palumbus, a Stock Dove,
AGrees with the Pigeon in virtues. The feathers burnt are accounted to refresh
the Jaundise, to help those that are troubled with the Stone and difficulty of
urine.

XXII. Parus, the Tit-mouse,
IS accounted efficacious against the Stone of the kidneys, and Colic (used in
meat or the ashes taken.)

XXIII. Passer, a Sparrow.
SOme distinguish it from the Wren, and would have it a little bigger then the
other, and to want those golden feathers which the Wren has on her head, but
because the virtues of them both agree, the one may supply the place of the
other.

The virtues.
The Hedge Sparrow is very much commended for breaking the Stone and expelling
it, whether it be eaten raw, seasoned with salt, or be taken being made into
powder, or burnt to ashes.

The Common Sparrow, because it is a most lascivious Bird, is commended for
provoking venery (eaten) chiefly the brain.

A few grains of the dung are given to infants to move the belly.

XXV. Pavo, a Peacock,
IS a most beautiful bird, and of a long life (it may live 30 years) from
whence it is also vigorous in Balsamic virtue, so that the flesh may be long
preserved of it self without corruption.

In Physical use are, 1. The whole bird. 2. The fat. 3. The gall. 4. The dung.
5. The feathers. 6. The eggs.


The virtues.
1. The broth of a Peacock is said to help the Pleuritick, especially if it be
fat.

2. The fat (with juice of Rue and Honey) helps the Colic passions.

3. The gall cures the dimnesse of the eyes, defluxion and rough eyebrows.

4. The dung by propriety heals the Vertigo, and Epilepsie (used many days)
dried and powdered (one dram) it is one night to be infused in Wine, then
strained and given continuing from new Moon to the full, or further if need be.

Crato mixes it with Sugar, and gives it.

5. The feathers are used in a fume against the rising of the womb.

6. The eggs are given to cure the running Gowt.

XXV. Perdix, a Partridge,
IS very lascivious, and lives long (16 years) eating the buds of Hasle and
Birch, grass and green corn.

Whence in Physical use are, 1. The flesh. 2. Marrow. 3. The blood. 4. The
Liver. 5. The gall. 6. The feathers.


The virtues.
1. The flesh eaten increases the seed and milk, and provokes venery.

2. The marrow, as also the brain, is said to cure the Jaundise being drunk.

3. The gall is preferred before others for the diseases of the eyes.

4. The blood is anointed upon eyes bloud-shot and newly wounded.

5. The liver dried at the fire and powdered resists the Evil, and is
accounted a singular Antidote against a Fever, if it be often taken in water of
Milfoyle.

6. The feathers serve against the suffocation of the womb (the fume put to the
nostrils) for asswaging the Colic and other pains and discussing them (used by
way of fomentation) and with Mint, and Sothernwood in a bag, are a familiar
remedy for Children to mitigate the pangs of the belly.

XXVI. Pica, the Pie.
The virtues.
THis Bird is very much commended against the dimnesse, redness, and pain of
the eyes (eaten or made into powder and put into the eyes or any way applied.)

It is good for these that are mad, Epileptick, Melancholic (the ashes used.)

Preparat.
The Antepileptick water of Magpies, which is thus prepared:

Take seeds and roots of Peony and of Pellitory of Spain, of each one dram, of
Aristoloch the long 3 drams, of Misselto of the Oak half an ounce, of Castor
one dram, and as much of flowers of Stechas, of Lilly of the valley one scruple
and half, of Cowflips, of Peony, of each six drams, of Lavander and Rosemary,
of each 5 drams, Sage, Marjoram, Bettony, Hysop, of each half an ounce,
Cinnamon, Clouds, Grains, Nutmeg, Cubebs, of each one dram and half. When they
are all severally beaten into a gross powder, and cut, let them be infused in
3 pounds of the water of Lilly convall, a pound and half of the water of the
flowers of Luiden, one pound of water of Primroses, then add thereto young
Pies, in number 12. which must be bruised, the greater feathers cast away and
added to the said infusion, after steeping let distillation be made in B. M.

The virtues.
It is a notable Cephalic and Antepileptick water.

The Dose one or two spoonfuls.

XXVII. Struthio, an Ostrich,
IS a Bird very great, forain, famous for its chylifick quality.

In Physical use are, 1. The tunicle of the ventricle. 2. The fat.


The virtues.
1. The inner coat of the ventricle, strengthens the stomach, and wonderfully
breaks the Stone.

2. The fat is good for nervous parts, mollifies the hardness of the milt,
asswages the Nephritick pains (anointed.)

XXIII. Turtur, the Turtle.
IN use are, 1. The whole Turtle. 2. The fat.


The virtues.
1. The Turtle agrees with the Pigeon in virtues, but yet is specially
commended in the Dysentery, and chiefly in staying the flux of the terms:

Whether the ashes of a burnt Turtle, or the extract thereof be given (the Dose
4 or 6 grains) or the Turtle deplumed and bowelled be roasted with Mastick in
its belly and rose Vinegar sprinkled upon it while it is in roasting in lieu of
Butter, and afterward be dried in a close pot and be made into powder, and one
spoonful given every morning.

2. The fat gathered from it while it is in roasting, is anointed on the
kidneys, belly, breast, groyn, etc.

N. Some that are Gowty persuade themselves that the fits are driven away, and
the Gowt prevented, if they nourish Turtles in their Chambers.

XXIX. Upupa, the Lapwing,
IS a melancholic Bird, most nasty, living on Worms found in dung-hils.

In Physical use are, 1. The flesh. 2. The feathers.


The virtues.
1. The flesh and its decoction helps the Colic by a propriety of its own
(taken.)

2. The feathers are said to assuage the Headache (applied.)

XXX. Vultur, a Vultur,
IS a Bird excelling in the animal faculties, chiefly in smelling.

In Physical use are, 1. The flesh. 2. The fat.


The virtues.
1. The flesh is judged to be good for the diseases of the head, Epilepsie,
Hemicrany, and the like.

The decoction is accounted to cure the diseases of the skin.

2. The fat is good for the sinews.

3. The brain helps the weakness of the head (anointed or put into the
nostrils.)

4. The gall is said to take away the Epilepsie (taken with wine.)

5. Of the feathers they fable, that if they be put under the feet, they
powerfully provoke the birth.

6. The dung provokes the birth by its stench.

The End of the Second Classis.
The Third Classis OF FISHES.
I. Anguilla, an Eele.
IN medicinal use from this we borrow, 1. The fat. 2. The head. 3. The blood.


1. The fat is good for wounds, begets hairs (anointed in the disease Alopecia)
restores hearing (dropped into the ear) asswages the Hemroids.

2. They say that the head of an Eele cures warts, if the bloody head wherewith
the warts are touched, be buried in the earth that it may putrefie.

3. The blood as yet warm, is said to mitigate the pain of the Colic (taken
with Wine.)

N. Some say that the Wine wherein Eeles are suffocated makes men abstemious
(if the Wine be drunk.)

II. Barbo, a Barble,
IS a fish very commendable in Kitchens.

It is not in Physical use, except the eggs are taken of some country people
to provoke vomit and stool, which they do very violently.

III. Blatta Bizantia
IS the shell or covering of a fish called Conchylium, smelling like Castoreum.

N. 1. Conchylium is the species of long Shell-fishes, which breeding in lakes
where Nard does grow, feed on it, whence the shell smells like Castor.

N. 2. Some confound the Conchylium and the Purple fish, but absurdly; for that
is of the kind of long shell-fishes, this of the round.

The virtues.
Inwardly taken it loosens the belly, softens the milt, and discusses vicious
humors.

Outwardly by fume it stirs up women oppressed with the suffocation of the
womb, and Falling Sickness. In other things it performs what other shells of
Shell-fishes do.

IV. Cancer, a Crab.
IN use are, 1. The whole meat of the Crab. 2. The eyes. 3. The shell.


The virtues.
1 Crabs cool, moysten, assuage pain, fix the raging spirits:

Therefore are they of chief use in the heat and pain of the head and reyns,
(bruised and applied in form of a Pultise) in the Quinsie (a Gargarism is made
of the juice of Crabs, and also inwardly the juice may be given.) In an Atrophy
(inwardly the juice is used with water, or juice of Celandine; outwardly a
plaster may be made of Crabs bruised, the liver of a Calf, Oil Olive, and Oil
of Bay) They draw darts out of the body (bruised and applied) they are good in
St. Anthony's fire, and burnings.

2. Crabs eyes cool, dry, cleanse, discuss, waste the Stone, resolve the
Tartar, and clodded blood.

Wherefore they are of great use in the Stone-colick, Pleurisy, Asthma,
Colic, etc. whether they be taken raw and powdered, or burnt and prepared;
they serve likewise for cleansing the teeth.

3. The shell has the same virtue with the eyes. Moreover it cures the scab of
children arising from salt humors (mixed with Oil of Roses and anointed.) It
drives away the fits of intermitting Fevers.

N. The thin new one is best after they have yearly cast the thicker.

Preparat
1. The ashes of Crabs (that is Crabs burnt) are drying* they excel by property
against the biting of a mad Dog (taken with root of Gentian) with Honey they
mollify the chaps of the feet, the knobs and Cancers of the fundament. Some
give burnt Crabs in a Dysentery.

N. Galen very highly commends this kind of medicine, which he confesses,
that he learned of Aeschrion the Emperick, against the biting of a mad Dog. And
says, that Aeschrion burnt the Crabs alive in a brazen vessel, till they might
be brought into a smooth powder, and that about the rising of the Dog Star, the
Sun passing into Leo.

The Dose one little spoonful for 40 days.

2. The eyes of Crabs prepared are made after the common manner, making them
smooth with water of Fennel.

3. The Magistery of Crabs eyes.

4. The water of Crabs is made of Crabs distilled in B. M. or ashes.

The virtues.
It moves Urine, wastes the Stone, quenches thirst.

N. Quercetan steeps Crabs in water of housleek for a day, then he distilleth
them, using three cohobations, and applies it to inflammation, burnings, and
Cancers, which he says they help much, especially if the water be impregnated
with the Salt, elixiviated from the relics.

5. The Oil or liquor of Crabs eyes is made after the common manner per
deliquium.

Otherwise

Take Crabs eyes 5 ounces, Oil of Tartar per deliquium 6 ounces, digest them in
Horse dung (13 days) then coagulate and extract with the Spirit of Wine, at
length abstract the Spirit of Wine, and there remains the Oil.

The Dose from 4 grains to 6.

V. Carpio, the Carp,
IS a known fish living in mud and slyme.

Whence we use 1. The gall. 2. The grease. 3. The triangular stone. 4. The long
stones.


The virtues.
1. The gall helps the dullness and the cloud of the eyes.

2. The grease helps the hot diseaseas of the sinews.

3. The triangular stone found in the head of a Carp, is holden to be good
against the Colic, Stone, and Falling Sickness.

4. The two stones appearing above the eyes are commended against the Epilepsie.

VI. Cetus, a Whale.
WHich name generally signifies huge fishes bringing forth living young, yet in
particular it is taken for the greatest species of them, which for its vast
bigness and shape is like a four-footed Beast.

In use is the grease, which heals the scab (anointed.)

N. Some would have the Sperma Ceti of the shops to be taken out of this fish,
but falsely.

Others account Amber-greese as taken from hence, but falsely.

Manati.
Among the kinds of Whales is reckoned a fish called Manati from the two
former feet, which only it represents, and these the Spaniards call hands,
whence also they call it the handed fish. The Germans for the likeness of its
head, whereby it resembles a Cow, call it a Sea-cow.

In use is the stone of the Manati, which is a crusty bone taken out of its
head, and it is of diverse shapes; for some time it represents the teeth, and of
some is called the tooth of a Sea-cow, sometime the ^ones of the ears, and are
called the bones of hearing.

Preparat.
1. Preparation is made of it calcined or burn.

N. It is good to bedew it with some convenient water, as of Fennel, etc.

The virtues.
It is very much commended for breaking the Stones of the veins and bladder,
for asswaging the Nephritick and Colic pains.

The Dose 1 dram and upward.

N. Some ascend to an ounce.

2. A Magistery may be made by dissolving it with Spirit of Salt or Niter, and
precipitating it with water.

VII. Concha, the Shellfish,
IS a kind of Fish wanting an head, entrenched within shells, whether it be a
single or double shell. Of this kind are also those that have Pearl in them.
It comprehends under it diverse species for the most part, having names
according to their figure and color, or distinguished by a special name.

N. 1. The Concha increases and decreaseth with the Moon.

N. 2. Amongst water Animals none is accounted to be taken with a greater
desire of eating man's flesh than this.

In medicinal use are,

1. The shells. 2. The flesh. 3. The Pearls.

The Virtues.
1. The shells have the virtue to dry, to move sweat, to cleanse, etc.

Hence their internal use chiefly is in Fevers, which they cure by sweat.

Outwardly they are good in dentifrices, in repressing the swellings of the
fundament (the ashes applied.)

Preparat.
The shells are used both powdered only, and also calcined and powdered, or
prepared after the common manner, and made smooth with water of Carduus
Benedictus, and the like.

Of the shells of the long sort is made that famous medicine of Crollius
against the Fever after this manner;

Pour Vinegar upon the shells, let it stand for a night, then it extracteth the
filth, which being scraped off, calcine the shells to whiteness, and keep the
powder.

The virtues.
It moves sweat in abundance, and therefore used the fit approaching (chiefly
in a Tertian) it dissolves Fevers, especially if used the second or third time.

The Dose from one scruple and half to a dram.

N. Crollius gives it in a draught of hot Ale with a little Butter.

2. The flesh, that is to say, the eatable substance belongs chiefly to
Kitchens, and in meat is said to be good for Quartanes.

3. Pearls are round stones found in many Shell-fishes, of the same excrement
where of their shells are made.

They are accounted twofold, Oriental and Occidental; the former are more
bright, and are preferred before the rest; the latter are white and less
bright: they are found also in many places of Europe, as in Scotland, Sil^sia,
Bohemia, Frisia, and other Maritine lands, but they are of less worth. In like
manner the greater, and those which have a hole through them are esteemed riper
and more excellent than the less and not perforated.

The virtues.
They make a most excellent Cordial, by which the Balsom of life oppressed, and
strength decayed are notably refreshed and comforted, therefore they resist
poison, the Plague and putrefaction, they exhilarate the mind, and for this
cause they are in such repute, that the last help even of those that are ready
to die, is usually from thence expected.

Preparat.
1. They are prepared after the common manner, by making them smooth upon a
Marble, now and then sprinkling them with Cordial water (as of Roses, Balm, and
the like.)

2. Salt of Pearls is made by dissolving them in Vinegar, or in the juice of
Barberies and Limons, thickning the filtration to the remaining of Salt, and
being thick by washing or dissolving it again, purifying it and sweetning it.

N. They need not be powdered, because whole, and without digestion they yield
to Vinegar.

N. 2. Pearls washed, and if you please, bruised, are dissolved in the juice of
Citrons poured on to the height of four fingers by digestion, on the
dissolution is poured May dew distilled, or Balm water, and the dissolution is
poured off. Then new juice of Citrons is infused, digested, and May dew is
again infused, or Balm water, and decanted, etc. And this work is often
repeated, till the Pearls be almost wholly dissolved, a very few feces
remaining. At l^st the dissolution is made thick with a gentle fire, to the
remaining of the powder.

The Dose from 6 grains to 10. in the water of May dew distilled with Manna, or
in Cinnamon water with Rose water.

N. Pa^acalsus attributes great virtues to the Salt of Pearl, as to other
medicines thereof prepared: the processes (quoth he) of these, though simple,
yet wonderful is the operation of them; yet this action of virtues is not made
by Art, but is in their very nature. Which is hid in the gross substance, and
cannot operate as a dead body, but after dissolution is made its body is
revived.

2. Unto this is very like the Salt or Magistery of Pearls of Riverius.

Take Pearls most finely powdered as much as thou will, make a paste thereof
with juice of Citrons or Oranges, and let it alone for a time. Then dissolve it
with Vinegar distilled according to Art, till the Pearls be almost altogether
dissolved: mingle the Vinegar with a third p^rt of River water, distill it in
sand with a gentle fire, then with a stronger; being distilled, pour it again
upon the Caput mortuum remaining, and dissolve it again, then filter it, and
evaporate it very easily, and the remainder will be the Magistery of the Pearls.

The virtues.
Besides the virtues above said, it is a chief Preservative against the Gowt.

The Dose one scruple at the most.

3. The Magistery of Pearls.

1. Common is made by dissolving it with Vinegar distilled, and precipitating
it with Oil of Tartar.

2. Butter is made, as that Buttery Magistery of Coral thus;

Dissolve Pearls in the Spirit of May dew, or in distilled Vinegar, precipitate
it with Oil of Sulphur per C then sweeten and digest it for a time with Spirit
of Wine, which being abstracted, thou have a Magistery melting in the mouth
like Butter.

3. The feathery Dissolve Pearls according to art in spirit of Niter, then
filter it, pouring distilled rain water upon it, then precipitate it with Oil
of Sulphur per C. sweeten and dry it.

The virtues
Are to be gathered out of the aforesaid.

The Dose from 6 grains to 15.

4. The Oil or liquor of pearls,

Is made per Deliquium; the manner is easy.

5. The Essence, Tincture, Arcanum of Pearls.

Take Pearls as much as thou will, dissolve them with distilled Vinegar, and
make a Salt; purify the salt thus made by frequent dissolutions in Vinegar and
coagulations (the feces always cast away) until no more feces shall remain
after the last dissolution, and the Pearls by that freed from all uncleanness:
then dissolve them with rain water, or May dew, and by distillation abstract
the humidity, and repeat this so often, till the Pearls become sweet (this the
sweetnessse of the water last distilled shows.) This Salt so freed from the
feces, digest in a close vessel in M. B. 8 or 10 days with Spirit of Wine
poured on to the height of two fingers; so the Pearls in that time will send
their Essence like thick Oil to the top of the Spirit of Wine, which warily
separate, and pouring on new Spirit of Wine, repeat the labor as often as thou
please: for almost all the Salt is converted, a very few feces left, into an
Essence. This circulate a fresh with Spirit of Wine for a time, afterward by
gentle distillation in B. M. separate the Spirit of Wine, and keep it for use.

The virtues
Are according to the rest, but stronger by far in respect of its very great
subtilty.

The Dose from 6 grains to 14.

A secret by the Spirit of Guaiacum.

Take of Pearls powdered very small, as much as thou will, extract according to
Art a most red tincture with the Spirit of Guaiacum rectified, the remaining
powder calcine gently, and extract again twice or thrice with new Spirit of
Guaiacum. Coagulate the Extracts in B. M. to the appearance of a diverse
colored thin skin, which is a sign that the phlegm being abstracted there
remains in a coagulated form, the sole secret or Essence of Pearls with the
Spirit of Guaiacum.

N 1. This Essence and Spirit can scarce be separated asunder.

N. 2. The same Essence or Arcanum of Pearls is suddenly dissolved with water
of Balm, and the like, a sufficient quantity, and is turned into a red
transparent color, of an excellent taste.

The virtues.
It cleans^th the blood excellently, and is of great virtue in the French
disease.

The Dose from 6 grains to 14.

Another Tincture.

Take Pearls half ounce, Spirit of Salt a sufficient quantity, dissolve them
according to Art, decant, abstract that it may become like pap, which wash off
by a distilled water, circulate with Spirit of Wine 6 weeks, then abstract the
Spirit of Wine, with a gentle heat of B. M.

5. The flowers of Pearls.

Pearls are dissolved with distilled Vinegar, the dissolution is digested for a
month, then the Vinegar is abstracted, and at length the flowers are elevated
with a stronger fire.

6. The Spirit of Pearls, or the pearled Spirit of the earth.

Take of the Salt or Magistery of Pearls 6 ounces, terra sigillat. one pound,
mingle and imbibe with a sufficient quantity of Oil of Pearls, and make Balls,
which being dried by a Retort, as the Spirit of Salt is distilled, rectify it,
and keep it for use.

The virtues.
It is a very great secret in the Gowt.

LIII. Dentalium and Entalium,
IS a little Shellfish somewhat long, rough on the outside, smooth within,
hollow after the manner of a reed, and in one part having a chink like a Dogs
tooth, whence it is called Dentalium.

N. Not a fish, but a long and slender worm is the Inhabitant of the Dentalium.

It grows to Rocks of the Sea, and to old Shell-fishes.

The Entalium is a Sea Shellfish, long like a little horn, right and hollow,
chamfered without, smooth within, seldom exceeding the length of ones finger.

N. It seems to be the Dactylus of Pliny.

The virtues.
Though both of these are hitherto little used in Medicine, but only in the
Citrine Unguent, yet is it likely, that they may be used with other kinds of
shells to the like affects.

IX. Halec, the Hering,
IS a Seafish ordinary in the Baltic Sea, and other Seas of Germany.

In medicinal use are, 1. The roes. 2. The hering it self. 3. The brine or
pickle.


The virtues.
1. The roes in number 9 are said to move Urine.

2. The whole hering salted is laid to the soles of the feet to derive humors
from the head, and to mitigate Feverish heat: The ashes are used for breaking
the Stone (it is made as that of Crabs.)

3. The brine or pickle is the broth wherein the Hering or other fish is kept.
It serves for Clysters in the Sciatick and Dropsy, it cleanses stinking
ulcers, restrains the Gangreen, disperser strumes; and is good against Quinsies
(anointed with Honey.)

X. Huso Ichthiocolla,
IS one of the greatest sort of fishes (24 foot in length weighing 400 pounds)
grisly without bones (except those in the head) withoutscales, etc. It is a
fish ordinary in Danubius, swimming out of the Sea into Danubius, for the
desire of sweet waters.

It furnishes us with Fish glue, white in color, made of its skin,
intestines, ventricle, fins, and tail, after this manner.

The said parts being cut into very thin pieces are steeped in a sufficient
quantity of water, then they are boiled to the consistence of a pultise with a
gentle fire, and are malaxed into a mass before they be cold.

The virtues.
It dries, fills up, and in some respect mollifies. Wherefore it is used in
glewing plasters.

N. It is also used to jelly broth; of the same with Sugar Candy is boiled a
transparent and yellow kind of glue, which melted in the mouth is used to glue
papers together; it is called Mouth-glew.

XI Lucius, a Lucy.
N. SOme confound a Lucy and a Wolf, which though it may be granted in respect
of the name, seeing both are ravenous fishes, as the Land-wolf, yet are they
really distinguished, for the Wolf of the Ancients is a Seafish, of a
different shape from the Lucy.

In medicine are used, 1. The gall. 2. The heart. 3. The mandible. 4. A little
bone crosse-like. 5. The grease. 6. The eggs.


The virtues.
1. The gall is said to drive away the Fever (if three in number be taken.

Outwardly it serves for the spots of the eyes, dimness and other diseases.

2. The heart is eaten against the fits of Fevers.

N. Some command to swallow the heart, the Lucy as yet alive, and to throw the
Lucy again into the River.

3. The mandible dryes, cleanses, therefore is it given in the Pleurisy, as a
specifical remedy; it profits also as the rest of the bones of the head in the
stone; in the whites and hard labor of women.

Outwardly, the ashes stay fleeting humors [synoviam] mundifies inveterate
wounds, dryes the Hemroids.

4. The bone of the form of a Cross taken out of the head of a Lucy is
commended of some against the Epilepsie (taken.)

N. It is accounted of some a singular amulet against charms.

5. The fat or grease is a vulgar medicine, and is anointed on the soles of the
feet, and breasts of Infants for Revulsion of Catarrhs, and to assuage the
Cough.

6. The eggs are fit to move the belly and vomit; and for this cause they are
used of the common people in stead of medicine.

Preparat.
The water of the gall distilled cures the eyes.

XII. Matter Perlarum, Mother of Pearls,
IS a species of Shell-fishes taking their name from Pearls, which are oftener
found in them then in other.

The virtues.
Besides the common virtues of Shell-fishes, some attribute a Cordial virtue to
this; but let them see with what success.

Others make a medicine against the Fever of this, after the manner which we
have described above concerning long Shell-fishes.

XIII. Mustela, a Lamprey.
WHence are in Medicinal use, 1. The liver. 2. The ventricle. 3. The backbone.


The virtues.
1. The liver hanged in a glass, and exposed to the heat, melts into a yellow
liquor, very good for the dimnesse and spots of the eyes.

2. The ventricle is commended very much against the diseases of the womb, but
chiefly it is said to expel the secundine, and to help the Colic (drunk.)

3. The back bone powdered, is said to cure the Falling Sickness.

XIV. Ostrea, the Oyster,
IS a Shellfish of the kind of round ones.

The virtues.
Oysters move pestilential botches from their place, and draw all the poison to
themselves; but they are to be tied to that part of the arm where the axillarie
vein runs, if it be in the armpits; but if it possess the groyn, the
lineaments of the thigh, which the vein of the thigh describes.

N. The Shells may be used in stead of other shells.

XV. Perca, the Perch.
IT is understood of the River Perch, to distinguish it from that of the Sea.

In use are stones found in the head near the beginning of the backbone.

These agree in virtue with the rest of shelly-stones, and are used in wasting
the Stone and cleansing the Kidneys.

Outwardly in dentrifrices and drying of wounds.

XVI. Rana Aquatica, the Water Frog.
THat is best which is found in clear Rivers and Springs, and is green.

For the red Frog (rubeta) and that which lives in Pools, is condemned as
pernicious.

The Earth-frog is inferior to the Water-frogs, and those which are spotted,
are accounted venomous.

In medicinal use are, 1. Frogs themselves. 2. The heart. 3. The liver. 4. The
gall 5. The fat. 6. The sperm.


The virtues.
1. Dioscorides accounts Frogs as an Antidote against the poison of all
Serpents, if they be eaten with Salt, Oil, or Butter, and their broth supped:
they are also good against the tendons. It brings a loathing of Wine, if the
Wine in which a living Frog has been drowned, be drunk: a living one applied
on a pestilential botch till it dye, does draw out the poison. A whole living
one is used against the heat of burning Fevers, asswages the pain of the
joints, and quenches St. Anthonies fire (applied either alive or bruised) it
helps the Toothache (boiled and used in a Gargarism.)

N. If it be applied to the pained belly, it is said that the disease presently
passes into it.

2. The heart of a Frog tied to the spine of the lick of a Fever, mitigates the
feverish chillness: some apply it to the region of the heart, to assuage the
heat of burning Fevers.

3. The liver dried and powdered in the access of Quartanes, and other Fevers,
is taken with good success. Crato gives it in water of Milfoyl.

N. They commend the livers of green Frogs living in Fens, as a specific
medicine against the Epilepsie. They order it to be in the Conjunction of the
Luminaries, the Moon in Cancer.

4. The gall peculiarly helps the eyes, and is said to cure the Quartane, made
into powder, and given to half a dram.

5. The fat put into the ears cures the pains thereof.

6. The sperm cools, thickens, asswages pains, cures the scabbinesse of the
hands, (if they be washed with it in March.) It kills Impostumations under the
nayls, and the wild fire; it helps Erisypelas and burnings, and other
inflammations (applied on the place) It cures the redness of the face, the flux
of the terms, and Hemroids (put into the Matrix or Fundament.)

N. A linen cloth often wet in this sperm, and dried, is kept for use; others
put the same sperm in a pot under the earth till it be turned into water.

Preparat.
1. The ashes sprinkled, stays the flowing of blood of wounds and nosthrils. It
restrains the Bloody flux of the womb by fume, it is with liquid pitch anointed
on Alopecies.

Inwardly it stays a Gonorrhea (one dram taken.)

2. Distilled water of Frogs,

Is made of living Frogs taken about the end of March, or beginning of April,
by an Alembeck.

3. The distilled water of the sperm,

Is made by an Alembeck of the sperm gathered in March.

N. 2. They use to add Salt.

Virtues.
They are manifest from the precedent, besides which it is a notable medicine
for the bladder, ulcerated from the acrimony of humors. It is also good to beat
back and stay the issue of blood, and redness of the face; it cures Tetters,
Erisypelas, and Gangrene.

4. The Oil,

Is made by boiling Frogs with common Oil, or Oil of Roses.

5. The compound powder of the sperm.

Take good Myrrh, male Frankincense, of each two ounces, Saffron powdered half
a dram, Camphire three drams; powder all and mingle them; miosten this powder
with the distilled water of the sperm of Frogs, twenty or thirty times, yet so,
that the former be always dried of its own accord; then keep it for use.

N. The sperm is to be gathered about three d^ys before the new Moon in March
(then it stinks not) and is to be distilled in B. M.

The virtues.
It is a chief remedy against bleeding of the nose, throat, womb, because by
its coldness it coagulates the blood. It helps also if it be dissolved with
Vinegar, and applied on Erisypelas and hot Gowts. It likewise stays the
bleeding of wounds, it kills Impostumation under the nayls.

The Dose 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. grains.

N. 1. If the bleeding arise from the corruption of the blood, it is no ill
medicine, because it drives away rottenness; but in the diseases of the womb,
for the Myrrh and Saffron I had rather use another.

N. 2. When Frogs and their sperm, or Snayls, Worms, and Crabs are to be
distilled, they are to be enclosed in a clean linen cloth, and hanged in the
middle of the vessel, otherwise the waters will partake of the stench, and in
the same linnens will remain the powder of the said creatures very well
prepared, to which for the better correcting of it, instill some few drops of
spirit of Wine, and dry it again, or extract the tincture with the said spirit
of Wine.

N. 2. Fabricius de Gangr. commends the powder as good against malign ulcers,
and to restrain all inflammations.

XVII. Sepia, the Cuttle,
IN Physical use are, 1. The Cuttle bone. 2. The black humor. 3. The eggs.


The virtues.
1. The bone dries, cleanses (powdered or burnt to ashes) it cures the spots,
moles, the moist scab, it is good for the eyes, (the ashes put in with Honey)
it helps the swollen gums (in dentrifices) it is a remedy for the Asthmatick
(taken) it stays the running of the reins, it expels stones, it moves urine
(the powder taken to the quantity of a scruple.)

2. The black humor found within a bladder in the body, is said to move the
belly (taken.)

3. The eggs cleanse the reins and ureters, move the terms and urine.

XVIII. Sturio, the Sturgeon,
IS a fish set with pricks on the back and belly, loving both fresh and salt
waters, of a great bigness.

The virtues.
The bones of the Sturgeon are commended in the running Gowt (used.)

As also in discussing the pains of the Colic.

XIX. Testudo, the Tortoyse,
IS a creature living as well in the water as on land, of the kind of
shell-fishes, having a shell-buckler on his back.

In medicinal use are,

1. The shanks. 2. The blood. 3. The gall.

The virtues.
1. The shanks are used for a most approved Amulet against the Gowt.

Take a male Tortoyse (he is known among other things from the difference of
his tail, and a litttle slit under the inner shell) when the Moon shall be in
the wane, before she be joined with the Sun. Let his shanks be cut off he being
alive, and being sowed in bags made of a Kids skin, let them be tied to the
patients members, so that the right shank of the Tortoyse answer to the right
thigh of the patient, and the left to the left, and in like manner, the right
shank of the former leg be applied to the right arm, and the left to the left.

2. The blood of a Sea and Land Tortoyse in inward medicines, is given for an
Antidote to 2 drams.

The blood of a land Tortoyse is used against the Hectic (new and raw to an
ounce) being dried, it is commended against the Epilepsie.

3. The gall is good for the eyes.

XX. Thymallus, called Pagrus.
IN use is the fat or grease.

The virtues.
It cleanses the spots and web of the eyes (melted in the Sun, and mixed with
Honey) it takes away the spots of the skin, and fills up the pits remaining
after the Small pocks (anointed.)

XXI. Tinca, the Tench,
IS a slimy fish loving Fenny waters and muddy, it is bred both by propagation,
and also of its own accord, It loves the Lucy.

In Physical use are, 1. The whole fish. 2. The gall.


The virtues.
1. The whole fish cut into two parts is laid upon the pulses of the hands, and
soles of the feet, to mitigate the heat of Fevers, or to divert the
pestilential venom. In like manner it is used in the pain of the head and
joints. Living Tenches (one after another) applied on the navel and liver until
they dye, are said to cure the Jaundise, for they attract the yellow color. I
have seen a Tench burnt to ashes (especially the skin) with success given in
the whites of women.

2. The gall is commended against the diseases of the ears.

3. In the head it has a stone as the Carp, which may be used for the same
diseases that the stone of the Carp is.

XXII. Truta, the Trout,
IS a fish very much used in kitchens and much commended.

In use is the fat, which is anointed on the chaps of the fundament.

The End of the Third Classis.
The Fourth Classis OF INSETCS.
I. Apes, the Be,
IS an Insect that makes honey living both on the dew of herbs, and also of the
honey made of that dew.

In medicine we use, 1. The Be. 2. The Honey. 3. The wax. 4. Bee-glew.


1. Bees dried and powdered, restore hair on Alopecies anointed therewith.

2. Honey is to be chosen yellow, transparent, pleasant in smell and taste,
neither thick in consistence, nor very thin, but in every part united; the
white is next to the yellow, which is not to be contemned, if the rest of the
signs be not wanting, which betoken its goodness. But in the choice of honey
shun the comb full of Spider webs, that which is called Virgins honey is best
of all, that is it which young and tender Bees make, being of color white and
yellow.

The virtues.
Honey is accounted hot and dry in the second degree (the white is thought
less hot) It nourishes, cleanses, opens, is good for the lungs, moves
Urine, cures the Cough, resists putrefaction.

Outwardly it discusseth the dimnesse of the eyes, and helps other diseases of
them.

A caution.
1. Because honey is easily turned into Choler, it is not so profitable for the
liver or hot bodies.

1. Crude honey puffes up the belly, provokes Cough, and causes nauseousnesse.

N. Honey according to Galen is the juice of heavenly dew gathered of Bees;
according to Paracelsus it is a certain rosinous thing of the earth
transplanted into a vegetable kind by the virtue of the Planets, and heavenly
influences, and gathered from hence of Bees and further digested.

Hence it varyeth 1. For the variety of Plants, in which respect that is
accounted best of Bees living among Roses or Lillies. 2. For the diversity of
the influence. So honey is best which is made in the Spring and Summer, the
year being clear and wholesome. It is called of Quercetan dew or heavenly
M^nna, and from hence he prepares his Philosophical Vinegars.

Preparat.
1. Clarified honey.

Take honey as much as thou will, power a quantity of water thereon (as much as
the honey, or twice as much, or thrice as much if it be very impure, or if free
from impurity, without adding any thing) boil it and skim it with a spoon.

N. If by this means it be not sufficiently purified, it may be done with
whites of eggs to every pound one white.

N. 2. Conrad. Kunrath disallowes the aforesaid clarifying of honey, because by
it the better spirits wherewith it is very much impregnated vanish into air,
therefore he appoints this:

Take Virgin honey, not set to the fire, together with the Combs, put it into
Hippocrates his sleeve, and hang it in a warm place of the Sun, or in a stove
made hot with watery vapors that the honey may flow thorough.

2. Distilled honey.

Whence 1. Water of honey, Spirit and Oil.

Take one pound of honey, add thereto salt or flints bruised, or sand three
ounces (others add chips of Juniper wood) distill it by a Retort by degrees,
and there goes out a white water, then a yellow with Oil, as also a spirit
which may be rectified diverse times.

Others draw out first a water in a gourd by B. M. to the honey remaining in
the gourd, they add sand, or calcined flints broken in pieces, and distill by a
Retort a yellow water with Oil, these they digest diverse times 5 or 6 days,
then they distill them, and at length separate the oil swimming about from the
water.

N. 1. Some think, but not rightly, that this yellow water is the Menstruum of
Franc. Auton.

N. 2. Sand is added, or flints, or glass, that the fervency to which honey is
most inclinable may be prevented, which others do by putting in little bags
full of sand.

N. 3. Some power the water first drawn upon new Honey and rectify it.

The virtues.
Both the white and the yellow water heal Cataracks and white spots of the
eyes, they are good for making hair grow. They serve for drawing out the
tincture of Coral^.

Inwardly they unlock obstructions, moves urine, wastes the stone.

The Oil, which burns like Aqua vitae, has admirable virtues, chiefly if it
be circulated some days with spirit of Wine, for that spirit of Wine separated
again, there remains a sweet Oil, and of a most pleasant taste very good for
wounds by gunshot and running sores. It is also singular for mitigating
Podagricall aches, it discusses the blemishes of the face with Oil of Camphire.

2. The Compound Oil of Honey.

Take Honey 2 pounds, Vitrioll Calcined one pound, spirit of Wine rectified
half a pound, Tartar one pound, distill it by a Retort, first there comes forth
phlegm, then the spirit. Force it 20 hours.

The virtues.
It asswages the ach of the Gowt, if the place affected be therewith anointed.

3. Vinegar of honey.

Take of the best honey one part, River water 8 parts, boil them to the half,
afterward hang therein the seed of Rocket in a cloth, and set it in a hot
place, or the Sun, till they be hot. It becomes by little and little very
sharp Vinegar, which may be distilled.

The virtues.
Besides other uses it dissolves flints and other stones even without any
precedent calcination.

4. Tincture of Honey.

Beguinus extracts the tincture out of raw honey, pasted with sand, and gives
it to the consumptive for nourishment.

5. The Quintessence of honey.

Take Honey with the Combs, as much as thou will, draw a water in B. M. then
let there remain the water in a boiling B. M. 5 days: then secondly pour water
thereon, and extract according to art the Tincture, and being decanted, purify
it by digestion and settling, at length distill the Tincture in B. M. to
dryness (the distilled is called the element of air, the remaining essence
fire.) Thirdly, out of the feces burnt to ashes (the Oil first taken out by
descent or a Retort if it seem good) extract the salt with common water after
the usual manner and purify it very well (it is called the element of earth)
Fourthly, now join all together and distill them in ashes by an Alembeck,
cohobating them so often until all be volatile and transcend the Alembeck, so
thou have the Quintessence of honey.

The virtues.
It may be in lieu of a Panacea.

The Dose 3, 4, 5 grains, etc.

6. The Elixir of Honey.

Take Honey purified through Hippocrates his sleeve, draw the Water, Oil, and
Salt. The Salt drawn moisten by course with its own water, then with the Oil
until it has drunk up all, and there be a coagulation.

The virtues.
It has the same virtues with the Quintessence of Honey.

6. There are sundry Medicines in Shops which own Honey both as the basis, as
the kinds of Hydromels, and also a means of preservation, as many syrups. etc.

3. Wax holds in a manner a mean betwixt heating, cooling, moistning and
drying, yet so that it inclines to heat. It is of parts in some respect thick
and emplastick, and therefore digests, ripens, etc.

N. It is so usual in shops, that scarce thou can find an Emplaster, of
which it does not afford the consistence.

Preparat.
1. Oil of Wax is distilled out of a gourd or a glass Retort by ashes or sand
mixed either with bricks made into powder, or with calcined flints, or with
ashes or sand that the Oil may more easily ascend.

The virtues.
It is diuretic, and is given inwardly.

The Dose 3, 4 or 5 drops.

Oil of Wax of a good odor and color.

Is made if it be rectified upon fresh pieces of wax by a fire of ashes. Of it
is made,

2. A vulnerary Balsome.

By a menstrual infusion of the flowers of St. John's Wort and the rose of
Comfrey.

3. The Magistery of Wax.

Is made of it being dissolved in spirit of Wine, and filtered that it remain
in the paperlike Butter, which being sweetened and given to drink to one dram,
excellently prevails against a Dysentery.

4. Propolis is a rude and gross matter or glue found at the entrance of the
hives.

That is to be chosen which is yellow representing Styrax or Galbanum.

The virtues.
It heats in the second or beginning of the third degree, it gently cleanses
and draws, it extracts pricks and all things fastened in the body, it concocts
hard things, it asswages aches, it fills up desperate Ulcers. In an old Cough it
helps by fume.

II. Araneus, the Spider,
IS a poysonful Insect, hurtful by her prickings.

There are diverse sorts very usual.

For there is a Spider which is greater of diverse colors, or lesser of a black
color; they are distinguished by their sex, they couple in the Spring and
beginning of Summer, and sometime in Autumn and beginning of Winter, whereupon
it is that they are accounted more hurtful at those seasons they live on
flies, for the taking of which they spread their nets.

In medicinal use are,

1. The Spiders. 2. The Spiders web.

The virtues.
1. The Spider is said to drive away the fits of Fevers (applied to the wrists
or the temples) but especially it is commended against the Quartane (enclosed
in a nutshell, and hanged about the neck or arm.)

2. The web astringes, conglutinates, and therefore is vulnerary, restraining
blood and preventing inflammation. It is used not only outwardly, but also
inwardly (boldly enough) to drive away Feverish fits.

Preparat.
The Oil of Spiders simple and compound, may be made by infusion, as the Oil of
Scorpions.

The virtues.
It is an ingredient in the Emplaister against the Fever.

III. Aselli, Cheeslips
BReed in moist place, Cellars, and the like, under stones and vessels full of
water; if they be touched, they contract and gather themselves round.

The virtues.
They are of thin parts, they digest, make thin, cleanse, open. Whereupon they
are specially profitable in dissolving the Tartarous mucilage, and bringing the
stone to mucilage, in opening the obstructions of the bowels, in the Kings
evil, in the Nephritick pain, difficulty of making water, in the Colic, and
in the appetite empaired by the mucilage of the stomach, in the Asthma, etc.

Outwardly the powder is commended for the diseases of the eyes, pains of the
ears, and Quinsie (anointed with honey.)

A living one applied on a Phagedena or running sore kills it.

The Dose from a scruple to a dram in powder with Wine or any Nephritick water.

Preparat.
Some wash them in Wine, and dry them, and again wash and dry them, then they
powder them, and moysten them with spirit of Vitrioll.

The Dose 4, 5, 6 drops.

Others beat them with Wine, strain them and use them. Others only infuse them
in Wine, and strain them.

N. 1. I go not beyond one scruple, neither continue I their use because by
their exceeding resolving quality they may cause no small inconveniences.

N. As the natural stony place shows that they are good against the stone, so
their aptness and inclination to contract themselves declare, that
peradventure they may not be unprofitable against Convulsions.

IV. Bombyx, the Silkworm,
BReeds both of its own accord, as also of eggs.

N. It undergoeth a wonderful Metamorphosis; of little eggs is produced a
small creature not unlike to the Palmer-worm. This worm nourished with the
leaves of the berries of the Elm increases daily till it shine again with
swelling, then being put into a box, it girds it self with a silken web till it
die; after a while it revives, having wings as a butterfly, and after three
days copulation (and then the male presently dies) the female brings forth
eggs in abundance and dies.

In Physical use are, 1. The Silkworm. 2. The Silk. 3. The silken-pouches.


The virtues.
1. Silkworms dried and powdered are sprinkled on the crown of the head to
help the Vertigo and Convulsion.

2. The silken web is temperate in heat and cold (some say hot in the first
degree) dry in the first, it strengthens the heart, refreshes the vital,
natural and animal spirits.

Preparat.
It is sometimes burned that being dryer it may be brought into a smooth
powder: sometimes it is mixed with decoctions; but it is better to use it raw
and only cut.

There are usual medicines, whose composition it enters, as Confect. Algermes.
Diamosch. etc.

N. In Physical use also is the Skarlet silk dyed with grains of Kermes, and is
used for staying of blood, astringing wounds, drying and sowing them together.
Moreover it is used of the vulgar for an Erysipelas (tied about it.)

3. The silken pouches, have the same virtues with the web.

N. Take heed of those which are defiled with the filth of their excrements, or
in whom as yet a Necydalus lies dead and eaten with worms.

The wild Bombyx is a certain kind of green Palmer-worm, changeable after the
manner of Domestic Silkworms.

V. Cantharides, Spanish-flies, or French-flies;
ARe bred of certain kind of Worms not unlike to Palmer-wormes, which grow
from moisture sticking on the leaves of Ash, Poplar, Privet and Wheat.

They are accounted best which are found in Corn or Medows, of diverse colors,
and which have yellow lines overthwart on their wings with a long body, thick
and fresh.

They are killed with the vapor of very sharp Vinegar, which exhales while it
is hot.

Then are they dried and kept for two years.

The virtues.
They are hot and very dry, corrosive or blistering, Diuretic, emetick,
wherefore they are frequently used in vesicatories. Their inward use is very
rare, because they are commonly reckoned among poisons. Verily they are so
offensive to the bladder that outwardly tied to the skin they do exulcerate the
same. But some are so bold that they dare mix them with diuretics. There are
also wicked harlots which by them do kill and drive forth the tender Infant.

N. 1. The later Physicians cut away the wings, feet and heads, only reserving
the body for use.

N. 2. Galen uses the wings and feet for an antidote against their own poison.

N. 3. Oil of Cantharides is drawn by the spirit of Wine, and is profitable
against the Stone.

VI. Cicada, the Grasshopper
IS an Insect like to a Cricket, very stridulous, living on dew.

N. This only creature of those that live, has no mouth, for in lieu of it, it
has a sharp pointed thing in its breast, with which it lickes the dew. In
Italy it is commonly known, not so with us.

In Physical use are dried Grasshoppers.

The Virtues:
We use dried Grasshoppers against the Colic with so many grains of Pepper,
viz. 3, 5, 7.

Others use them burnt to those whose bladder is diseased. The ashes notably
wast the stone.

VII. Cicendela, the Gloe-worm,
IS a feathered Insect shining in darkness like fire.

It is unknown in shops, except that Cardanus seems to attribute an Anodyne
virtue thereto, lib. 9. subtle.

Others commend it in the stone.

N. Roderick Castrens. 4. Book of Meteors Microcosm 16. Chapter says:
Gloe-wormes having their heads and wings cut off, are set in the sun till they
may be powdered, the powder must be made into Trochisces, with water of
dissolved Tragac. adding a little Oil of Almonds. Let the dried Trochisc. be
again powdered, and again formed, and that 4 times (it is good in the stone.)
They mix them in Ointments.

The Dose two scruples.

VIII. Cimex, the Punie,
IS a little worm, broad and flat, ruddy, stinking abominably, very noisome in
their bitings, by which they suck out blood.

The virtues.
The later use them to provoke urine, putting living ones into the yard (
Diascorides puts dead ones and powdered) I have seen them powdered ( viz. 3.)
and given with good success to expel the birth and secundine. Diascorides is
the author that if 7 of them enclosed in the hollow of Beans be swallowed
before the fit, are curable for the Quartane.

They by the smell drive away the suffocation of the Matrix.

IX. Eruca, a Palmer-worme,
IS an Insect commonly known, deriving its original, either from the
excrements of plants, or eggs of Butter-flies. There are as many species of
them as of plants.

N It is subject to the like metamorphosis that the Silkworm is, and at length
becomes a B^tter-flie.

X. Formica, a Pismire, or Ant,
IS an Insect of a wonderful providence, whereby she diligently gathers
provision for a ye^r in the Summer, full-moons (she rests in the new mons)
if needful she dries what she gathers, bites off the ends of the dried
seeds lest they should bud again, and so made fit for continuance, she lays
them up.

Having engendered in Winter they bring forth little worms now and then apt to
be changed into eggs, and in the Spring after i^ Ants. Old age makes them
winged but not long to live.

They are accounted better, which live under rosin-bearing trees and smell tart.

It is best to gather the moon decreasing or in the new moon.

In medicinal use are, 1. The Ants. 2. The eggs. 3. The heap.


The virtues.
1. Ants heat and dry, provoke venery. The acid smell does wonderfully refresh
the vital spirit. The greater are said to cure Manginesse, Leprosy, and
pimples (powdered with a little Salt and anointed.)

2. The eggs are good for dullness of hearing: being rubbed on the cheeks of
children they mend their hairinesse.

3. The hillock or Ant-hill, heats, and dryes, and strengthens the sinews.
Wherefore it is used in the Palsy, Gowt, Hysterical passions, Cachexie, and
the like (used in a lotion)

Preparat.
1. The Oil of the infusion of Ants (the winged are best) in common Oil 40
days.

The virtues.
It provokes venery.

2. The distilled water called water of Magnanimity.

Take Ants (the greater are best) two handfuls, spirit of Wine as much as is
sufficient, digest them in a close vessel until they be putrefied and turn
into a liquor. Then distill them by B. M. and aromatize it with a little
Cinnamon.

The virtues.
It heats very much, it cuts. Its chief use is in an Atrophy, whether thou use
it inwardly or outwardly.

3. The liquor is made in an oven after the manner of liquor of worms.

The virtues.
It is an excellent Ophthalmick medicine for the Cataract of the eyes.

XI. Gryllus, the Cricket,
IS a winged Insect of the kind of Locusts like to Grasshoppers, an inhabitant
of hearths and dry grounds, making a stridulous singing.

The virtues.
It is commended for provoking urine (the ashes used) Against the weakness of
the sight (the juice pressed and dropped in) it mitigateth the tonsils (rubbed
on.)

XII. Hirudo, the Horse-leech,
IS an Insect living in marshes long like a worm, it is bred of putrefaction.

The less are preferred before the greater as less hurtful, and of these
which are distinguished with lines on their backs. Nine great ones are able to
kill an Horse by sucking his blood. Whence they are called Horse-leeches.

The use.
They serve for sucking out of blood, and therefore agree with cupping-glasses.

N Before their application, they are to be kept in clear water that they may
be well purged, then the place being rubbed with Salt of Ni^er, and anointed
with blood or Potters clay they are to be applied. When thou would have them
removed, sprinkle on them a little Salt, or ashes, or burnt lime.

XII. Lacertus, the Lizard,
IS an Insect of a known shape, varying in color, an enemy to Toads and
Spiders.

N. If a Lizard be dissected, both parts are moved a while, and if they meet,
grow together again. Some say that if their eyes be pulled out, they will grow
again, which also Pliny confirms of the tail cut off. They live in caverns of
the earth, rubbish of walls and other rough places, they eat Grasshoppers,
Snails, Crickets, Bees.

N. The green and great kind of Lizard is preferred before the rest, but
because in these Countries it is less usual, we here describe the common
Lizard.

The virtues.
It draws out of the body darts, glass, etc. (cut or bruised with Salt, and
applied (especially the head) it makes hairs to grow again (the flesh anointed
with the sat or the ashes applied) it heals the biting of Scorpions. It is
commended likewise for the Rupture of Infants (if they be bathed in the
decoction of a Lizard) for the easy pulling out of teeth (the powder of a
water Lizard rubbed thereon.)

N. Some say that the powder of a Lizard dried, anointed on the gums, makes
teeth to be drawn out without difficulty, or pain, and without instruments.

Preparat.
The infused Oil is made of the infusion of living Lizards, in number 7, in a
pound and half of common Oil.

The virtues.
It is commended for amending the redness of the face (anointed.)

XIV. Locusta, the Locust,
IS an Insect unknown almost to no Nation, for the mischief it brings (by
biting Herbs, and Corn, and by burning the earth with its touch and spittle.)
They are bred of the Summer coming on of the feture, of the former year, not
unlike to an honey comb, from thence there arise little worms having the shape
of an egg enclosed in a very thin earth or membrane, which being cast aside,
the Locusts come forth and fly away.

They are of several sorts, as some great, little and very little (wanting
wings) some green, yellow, blackish, or of diverse colors, etc.

The virtues.
They help the difficulties of Urine, by the fume, especially which trouble
Women; Diascorides. Some say that if hung about the neck, they cure the
Quartane.

XV. Lumbrici terreni, Earth-wormes
ARe Insects commonly known, both bred, and also nourished by earth.

They are preferred before the rest, whose necks are girt with red rings.

The virtues.
They are very Diuretic, Diaphoretick, Anodyne, they discuss, soften, open
Obstructions, increase milk, glue up wounds, and sinews cut.

They are of special use in the Apoplexy, Convulsion (from the signature) and
other diseases of the sinews and muscles, in both the kinds of Jaundies,
Dropsy, worms of children, Colic, but chiefly they profit in that Scorbutic
Gowt called the running Gowt.

They may be used inwardly and outwardly.

Inwardly they are used either wholly bruised, and newly strained through a
linen cloth with white Wine, or dried and powdered.

Outwardly they are applied alive or dead, being applied alive till they die,
they are good for the Panaritium, a disease in the fingers; being dead, they
are used in Puitises. The ashes are said to be good for the toothache, put into
the hollownesse of the teeth. They mitigate podagricall pains (the powder
applied hot with meal.)

Preparat.
1. A water, and it is made in B. M.

It is very profitable for the Hydropick.

2. A boiled Oil. See the Dispensatory.

N. Of this Oil is distilled with water of Radish, an Oil which powerfully
moves urine and sweat.

3. A liquor which is made in an O^en after this manner:

Worms washed and purged through a course cloth are put into a glass with a
narrow mouth. Then is the glass stopped, and being enclosed in a loaf of
bread, is set in an Oven until it be drawn with the rest of the bread,
afterward the liquor is filtred and kept for internal and external use.

The Dose from 2 drams to half ounce.

4. A powder, it is made of Worms dried in a Furnace.

The Dose from a scruple to a scruple and half.

XVI. Lumbrici intestinorum, the Worms of the bowels,
ARe bred of the crudity of the bowels.

The virtue.
Some give them powdered to expel Worms.

XVII. Musca, the Fly.
THere are many sorts of flies, yet the vulgar is only in use.

In medicinal use is the Flies or rather their heads.

The virtue.
They cure Alopecies.

Preparat.
A distilled water, and it is made by it self or with Honey.

The virtue.
Besides that it helps the growth of hair, it is commended against the diseases
of the eyes (dropped in.)

XVIII. Pediculus, the Louse,
IS of diverse sorts, of which the Man's Louse belongs to this place.

The virtue.
They are swallowed of Country people against the Jaundise; used in like
manner, they are approved of some against an Atrophy; being applied to the hole
of the yard, they provoke Urine, because they stir up the expulsive faculty to
make water.

XIX. Ricinus, the Tyke,
IS a living creature, livid and foul, most offensive to Kyne, Swine, Goats,
Sheep and Dogs.

The virtues.
The blood of a Dogs tyke is a depilatory, and quenches St. Anthonies fire, as
witnesses Pliny. It is excellent also for Tetters, rebellious, and hard to be
cured (anointed.)

XX. Salamandra.
IS a Four-footed Animal of the kind of Lazards, black, with yellow spots, an
inhabitant of cold and moist places, very much in love with clear springs, and
therefore of some there is a division of the Salamandra into the earthy and
watery.

N. It is poysonful, communicating together with its biting a virulent milky
froth or foam.

The virtues.
The Salamandra gnawes, ulcerates, being burnt to ashes, it happily heals
ulcerated scrophul^s (the ashes sprinkled on the place.)

N. Take heed of the venomous fume.

XXI. Scarabaeus, the Beetle,
IS bred partly of dry logs, chiefly of Oak, partly of copulation. It is found
in woods in May and Summer.

In Physical use are, 1. The Beetles. 2. Their horns.


The virtues.
Beetles are commended against the pains and contractions of the nerves (from
their signature whereby being touched they become unmovable and contracted)
against the Quartane (applied in lieu of an Amulet.)

The horns hung about the necks of Infants are said to restrain Urine.

Preparat.
An Oil of the infusion of Beetles.

The virtues.
It discusseth the pain of the ears (dropped in.)

There is a Beetle called Scarabaeus Pilularis, having that name, because out
of the dung especially of Horses, it rols great bals with its feet, in which it
is said to hide small worms, the seeds of its issue.

The virtues.
It is commended chiefly in the falling out of the eye and fundament (the
powder sprinkled on) in mitigating the blind and painful Emrods (boiled in
Linseed Oil, to the consumption of the Beetle, and applied hot on the place
with lint.

N. The best manner of making the powder is;

Being killed let them be well dried in the Sun in a glass vessel, and then
be made into powder.

The unctuous Beetle (which being laid on the hands, it dies them with a fat
and yellow liquor) creeps in May and June by the way sides and every where in
woods.

The virtues.
It imitates the nature of the Cantharides, it moves Urine and blood, helps the
biting of a mad-dog, and the running Gowt, as Wierus has (the powder given.)

Outwardly the liquor thereof is desired by some to wounds. It is also added to
plasters, in the boil and Pestilentiall Carbuncle (taken from the signature)
It is mixed with Antidotes, and there is made thereof an Oil of the infusion of
the living Animals in common Oil, which many use in stead of the Oil of
Scorpions.

XXII. Scincus,
IS a water creature having yellow scales with a gray line running from the
head to the tail, living on sweet herbs.

In use are, 1. The whole ones dried. 2. The fat.


The virtues.
1. The Scincus is Alexipharmacall and provokes venery.

2. The fat is of the same nature.

The Dose one dram.

Mathiolus commends the snout, and feet, etc. gives them with wine to drink,
he commends also the flesh of the sides.

Preparat.
It is an ingredient in Antidotes, chiefly the treacle of Andromachus, and the
Antidote of Matthiolus.

XXIII. Scorpio, the Scorpion,
IS a creature imitating crabs in shape, but less then they are.

The virtues.
They provoke Urine, hindered by the stone of the reins or bladder (the living
ones burnt to ashes and used.)

They heal their own bitings (powdered and applied)

Preparat.
1. A simple Oil of Scorpions. of the infusion of Scorpions in Oil of bitter
Almonds.

N. Some give it to drink in the Colic and pain of the Stone.

2. A compound Oil of Scorpions of Mesue, which moreover receives Aristoloch,
Gentian, Cyperus and roots of Cappars.

The virtues.
It is most usual in the pains of the reins, and obstructed Urine (anointed
on the back or privity) it cures the bites of venomous creatures, it drives
away the fits of Fevers (anointed on the pulses or back) it asswages the pains
of the ears.

3. An Oil of Scorpions the great, of Matthiolus.

The virtues
It is of greater force then the former, and of excellent use in preserving
from and curing contagious diseases, in venomous bitings, and the like
(anointed on the heart and the arteries of the temples, hands, feet,) it
mitigates the pain of the Colic, and womb, etc.

4. A bloody Oil of Scorpions.

Take seeds of Hypericon 6 ounces, infuse them in Malmesey for 3 days, then
add Venice Turpentine 3 ounces, very old Oil 6 ounces, Saffron one dram,
flowers of Hypericon 4 handfuls. Let all be buried in sand in a vessel well
stopped for 3 days, and then let the liquor be pressed out very hard into
another vessel. Let it be decanted by inclination to the appearing of the Oil,
then lift up the vessel, and in it thou shall see an Oil as red as blood. In
this Oil for every pound let there be put 50 Scorpions in B. M. and continue so
long till a perfect fermentation be made, then let all be strained through a
cloth and the Oil be kept.

The virtues.
It mightily mitigates Nephritick pains outwardly applied.

N. This is that bloody Nephritick Oil of the great Duke, which Pona describes,
but adds not the Dose.

XXIV. Teredo, the Wood-worm.
IN use is the putrefaction or meal of Wood-worms.

The virtues.
It dryes, wherefore it is happily sprinkled on moist and flowing Ulcers, and
in this respect it is very ordinary with our Country women in drying the
excoriations or gallings of Infants.

THE END.
A PERORATION TO THE READERS.
FOr your ease and benefit, I have digested the two Alphabetical Tables
following; the former containing the several Animals mentioned in the Treatise;
the other, manifold Diseases whereunto Mankind is obnoxious, referred to their
Cures: whence we have sentiment of the goodness of our God, who for Man (whom
he loves) out of Man and other his Creatures (over whom he has given him
dominion) has provided store of Medicines, easy to be had, easy to be made,
easy to be applied. Now, to further your knowledge, I beseech you to study the
preparations of Minerals and Metals, and not neglect the virtues and signatures
of Herbs and Plants, that increasing in these accomplishments, the earth may be
full of knowledge, as the waters that cover the Sea; so shall all due honor be
given to the Physician, and in the sight of great men, he shall be had in
admiraton; for the Lord has not only created him for good uses, but also
Medicines out of the Earth to heal and take away pain, and he that is wise will
not abhor them, as many do, with whom I often converse, who are very sedulous
in procuring medicines for their Cattle, but remain averse from all in
themselves: Does God take care for Oxen? and not for men? O ye of little faith,
etc.

T. Bateson^.

The first Alphabetical Table containing the several ANIMALS.
A.
THE Ass, page 5.
B.
The Badger page 79. The Barbel, page 111. The Bear, page 84. The Be, page
155. The Beetle, page 155. The Bever, page 24. The Blatta, page 112. The Roe
Back, page 23. The Buffle, page 11. The Bull or Cow, page 6.
C.
The Calf, page 83. The Carpe, page 114. The Cat, page 26, 27. The Cheeslips,
page 141. The Cock, page 96. The Coney, page 35. The Cow, vide Bull. The Crab,
page 112. The Crane, page 99. The Cricket, page 149. The Crow, page 94. The
Cuckoo, page 95. The Cuttle, page 130.
D.
The Dentalium, page 122. The Dog, page 13. The Duck, page 89.
E.
Earthworms, page 152. Eele, page 111. Elephant, page 35. Elke, page 2.
F.
The Shell fish. page 116. The Kings Fisher, page 88. The Fly, page 153. The
Fox, page 85. The French Fly, page 144. The Frog, page 72. The water Frog, page
127.
G.
The Gloeworm, page 146. The Gnatsnapper, page 96. The Goat, page 16. 19. 20.
22. The Goose, page 89. The Grasshopper, page 145.
H.
The Hare, page 62. The Heart, page 28. The Hauk, page 87. The Hedgehog, page
38. The Heron, page 91. The Horse, page 36. The Horsleech, page 149. The House
Ichthiocolla, page 223
K.
The Kite, page 101.
L.
The Lamb, page 1. The Lamprey, page 126 The Lapwing, page 109. The Lark page
88. The Lizard, page 150 The Locust, page 151. The Louse, page 154 The Lucy,
page 124. The Lynx, page 66
M.
The Man, page 39. The Mole, page 78. The Moschius, page 66. The Mouse, page
68. The Mule, ibid.
O.
The Ostrich, page 100. The Oule, page 103. The Oyster, page 126.
P.
The Pagrus, page 132. The Palmer worm, page 247. The Partridge, page 106. The
Peacock, page 105. The Mother of Pearl, page 125. The Perch, page 127. The
Pigeon, page 93. The Pismire, page 146. The Punye, ibid. The Pie, page 107.
Q.
The Quail, page 95.
R.
The Raven, page 94. The Rh^noceros, page 73.
S.
The Salamander, page 155. The Scincus, page 157. The Scorpion, ibid. The
Serpent, page 73. The Sheep, page 70. The Silkworm, page 143. The Snail, page
33. The Sparrow, page 104. The Spider, page 141. The Stockdove, page 104. The
Storke, page 91. The Sturgeon, page 131. The Swallow, page 100. The Swan, page
103. The Swine, page 76.
T.
The Tench, page 132. The Titmouse, page 104. The Toad, page 12. The Tortoyse,
page 131. The Trout, page 133. The Turtle, page 108. The Tyke, page 154.
V.
The Viper, page 80. The Unicorn, page 83. The Vulture, page 109.
W.
The Wagtail, page 102. The Whale, page 115. The Wolf, page 64. The Woman,
vide Man. The Woodworm, page 159.
The End.
The Second Alphabetical Table containing the Diseases incident to the Body of
Man.
A.
AChes to ease, Page 44. 86. 89. 140. Alopecia: vide Falling away of the Hair.
Anthonies Fire, Page 113. 128. 154. Apoplexy, Page 24. 25. 49. 51. 93. 152.
Astma, Page 36. 42. 51. 54. 84. 113. 131. 142.
B.
Baldness, Page 78. Beauty, Page 34. 47. Biles, Page 12. 33. 96. Biting of
Dogs, Page 16. 40. 47. 95. 113. 156. Biting of venommus beasts to heal, Page
47. 68. 77. 89. 96. 101. 150. 157. 158. Birth dead to expel, Page 5. 36. 37.
41. Bleeding to stanch, Page 4. 6. 12. 18. 34. 37. 39. 48. 60. 64. 72. 77. 93.
96. 129. 130. 141. 144. To heal Burnings, Page 8. 48. 72. 113. 114. 128.
C.
Canker to cure, Page 47. 70. 100. 114. Carbuncles, Page 41. 51. Catarrhes,
vide Rhewms. Chapt hands to heal, Page 34. 40. 99. Chapt lips, Page 90. 98.
Cholick pains to assuage, Page 9. 14. 15. 18. 21. 25. 27. 31. 33. 37. 38. 40.
41. 32. 64. 65. 67. 71. 77. 88. 89. 93. 97. 98. 99. 101. 103. 104. 105. 106.
109. 111. 113. 114. 116. 126. 131. 142. 145. 152. 158. Consumption, Page 5. 19.
33. 34. 36. 48. 54. 65. 70. 113. 148. 154. Convulsion, Page 38. 66. 85. 86. 90.
143. 152. Corns to kill, Page 68. 72. 77. Corruption, Page 56. Cough to cure,
Page 33. 36. 37. 52. 65. 68. 90. 94. 97. 125. 136. 140. Cramp, Page 4. 11. 66.
D.
Deafness to help, Page 91. 99. 111. 148. Dolor to ease, Page 46. Dropsy to
help, Page 12. 13. 14. 18. 33. 38. 40. 42. 47. 65. 90. 123. 152. Dysentery,
Page 15. 19. 23. 31. 32. 36. 57. 63. 64. 68. 71. 93. 94. 108. 113.
E.
Ears pain, Page 7. 8. 25. 42. 64. 70. 71. 77. 90. 128. 133. 142. 156. 158.
Kings Evil, Page 4, 5, 22. 40. 78. 90. 106. 142. Excoriations, Page 159.
Diseases of the Eyes to remedy, Page 5. 26. 34. 40. 41. 42. 63. 65. 67. 75. 84.
85. 87. 91. 92. 95. 96. 98. 99. 100. 101. 102. 103. 105. 106. 107. 114. 124.
125. 126. 130. 132. 136. 137. 142. 149. 154. Epilepsie, Page 41. 4^. 46. 48.
49. 58. 59. 61. 63. 64. 84. 94. 95. 100. 102. 105. 107. 109. 110. 115. 128.
132.
F.
Face, Page 128. 129 151. Falling sickness, Page 1. 2. 3. 5. 7. 9. 15. 21. 25.
26. 37. 47. 65. 66. 84. 88. 94. 112. 114. 126. vid. Epilepsie. Fevers, and
their symptoms, Page 8. 9. 13. 19. 21. 30. 40. 42. 46. 74. 79. 82. 95. 98. 99.
106. 113. 116. 117. 123. 124. 125. 128. 133. 141. 158. The Hectic Fever, Page
17. 132. The Quartain, Page 39. 63. 82. 85. 100. 117. 128. 141. 147. 151. 155.
Quotidian Fever, Page 19. Fistula to cure, Page 34. 47. 48. 71. 78. 100. Flux
bloody, Page 71. 129. Flux of the belly to help, Page 29. 38. 51. 63. 97.
French disease, Page 74. 96. 121. Diseases of the Fundament, Page 69.
G.
Gangren, Page 45. 123. 129. To help the pains of the Gout, Page 5. 6. 8. 9.
15. 16. 17. 25. 26. 31. 32. 34. 41. 42. 47. 50. 58. 65. 72. 75. 78. 82. 84. 85.
91. 92. 93. 94. 102. 103. 105. 109. 119. 122. 130. 131. 138. 148. 152. 156.
Gums, Page 131.
H.
To cause Hair, Page 38. 39. 47. 62. 68. 69. 75. 90. 93. 111. 129. 135. 137.
150. 154. To repel Hair, Page 77. To make white Hair, Page 84. To make black
Hair, Page 94. Hard travail, to help, Page 32. 42. 57. 62. 64. 75. 87. 110.
125. Headache, Page 71. 77. 92. 93. 96. 109. 133. Heart, Page 31. 67. 118. 143.
Hemrods to cure, Page 17. 103. 111. 125, 128. 156.
I.
Jaundise to cure, Page 5. 8. 15. 18. 21. 23. 35. 39. 42. 44. 47. 71. 84. 98.
104. 106. 133. 152. 154. Impostumes to help, Page 41. 128. 130. Infection, Page
54. 73. Inflammation, Page 41. 45. 46. 114. 128. 130. 141. Diseases of the
Joints, Page 65. 69. 77. 89. 102. 128. 133. Itch, Page 77. vide Scabs.
K.
Kydneyes maladies, Page 9. 38. 79. 127. Kibed heels. Page 5. 32. 62. 63. 90.
L.
Leprosy to cure, Page 38. 74. 78. 79. 148. Lethargy, Page 25. 93. Lice to
kill, Page 37. Liver to help, Page 33. 34. 41. 65. Lungs, Page 33. 49. 79. 85.
97. 136. vide Astma.
M.
Effects of dislocated Members, Page 39. 66. 71. Contracted Members, Page 79.
85. Trembling Members, Page 63. 85. 91. Milk to increase, Page 106. 15^. Milt
to cure, Page 7. 10. 17. 18. 41. 42. 52. 68. 71. 85. 99. 108. 112. Miscarriage
to prevent, Page 32. To provoke the Months, Page 6. 10. 18. 25. 52. 69. 90.
101. 131. To stay the Months, Page 41. 57. 68. 90. 108. 128. Morphew to
cleanse, Page 14. 639. 4.
N.
Nerves, Page 24. 33. vide Sinews.
O.
Obstructions to open, Page 35. 44. 45. 82. 138. 152.
P.
To assuage Pain, Page 31. 32. 50. 93. Palsy, Page 6. 14. 24. 25. 49. 51. 66.
103. 148. Pestilence, Page 41. 42. 46. 54. 55. 56. 74. 79. 118. 156.
Pestilential Botches to heal, Page 126. 128. 156. Frenzy, Page 13. 18. 96. To
help involuntary Pissing, Page 13. 63. 68. 72. ^8. 98. 155. Plague, vide
Pestilence. Plurisie to cure, Page 4. 49. 105. 113. 124. To expel Poison, Page
1. 13. 15. 21. 25. 31. 35. 54. 73. 92. 118. 127.
Q.
Quartain, vide Fever.
R.
Reins, Page 131. 158. Ringwormes to kill, Page 47. 75. 81. 129. 154. Rhewms
to stay, Page 57. 125. Rupture, Page 33. 38. 84. 150.
S.
To heal Sca^s, Page 42. 48. 113. 115. 128. 130. Sc^tica, Page 123. Scurvie,
Page 9. 31. 44. 90. To expel the secundine, Page 36. 37. ^2. 90. 126. 146.
Shi^gles, Page 26. To cause sleep, Page 71. Small pox, Page 28. (...). Soars,
Page 47. 142. Spots of the face to take away, Page 41. 48. 63. 138. Spots of
the Skin, Page 98. 110. 130. 132. Squinsie, Page 1. 4. 15. 35. 46. 80. 100.
101. 103. 112. 123. 142. Stinging of Serpents Page 40. 75. Stomachs effects,
Page 26. 35. 95. 97. 103. 108. The Stone and its symptoms to cure, Page 34. 37.
41. 42. 44. 46. 47. 51. 62. 63. 64. 69. 82. 85. 88. 93. 98. 108. 95. 102. 104.
103. 114. 116. 123. 125. 127. 131. 138. 142. 145. 146. 158. To recover
strength, Page 40. 98. To help the Sinews, Page 35. 67. 69. 72. 86. 89. 90.
108. 110. 114. 152. 155. Suffocation of the womb, Page 25. 27. 37. 57. 67. 105.
106. 112. 147. 148. To move Sweat. Page 28. 29. 32. 46. 73. 8^. (...).
T.
To draw Teeth, Page 150. To make the Teeth white, Page 62. 113. 116. 127. 131.
Tenesmus, Page 7. 8. Terms, vide Months. Tetters vide Ringworms. To cure the
Toothach, Page 16. 23. 25. 64. 75. 84. 128. 152. To help childrens Toothing,
Page 16. 37. 63. 64. 70. 94. 97. Tumors, Page 72. 84. 93. 99.
U.
To help the Vertigo, Page 19. 21. 25. 93. 105. 143. To cure malignant Ulcers,
Page 10. 15. 18. 32. 33. 47. 56. 71. 84. 100. 123. 130. 140. 150. To cause
Vomiting, Page 40. 54. 111. 125. To stay Vomiting, Page 97. To help the
inflamed Uvula, Page 42. 100. To move Urine, Page 18. 38. 45. 46. 78. 90. 93.
104. 114. 123. 131. 136. 138. 142. 146. 149. 151. 154. 156. 157. 158.
W.
To take away Warts, Page 15. 34. 69. 72. 111. To stay the Whites, Page 35.
125. 133. To help the Womb, Page 29. 31. 52. 63. 83. 98. 103. 126. 130. 158.
Falling out of the womb to remedy Page 84. To kill worms, Page 29. 35. 152.
153. To heal Wounds, Page 92. 99. 111. 125. 127. 144. 152.
THE END.
Triuno Deo summo Archiatro Gloria.

