The chief Heads of Mr. John Sares Speech, and other passages at the time of
his Execution at West-Chester; he being the portliest man the three Kingdoms
afforded, whose Coffin was two yards and a half in length, yet too short to
contain his Corpse; he suffered the 20th. day of October, 1651.
GEntlemen and Friends, I am here come, and now ready to pay and suffer that
Death which my good God has appointed for me, to his glory, and my own good,
humbly confessing the same due to me for my sins; I look upon it as from him,
though instrumentally by man.

I here heartily acknowledge, that I have spent the prime of my age too much in
vain Company-keeping, and more then convenient drinking, which is incident to
too many men, and the Mother and Nurse of all mischief.

And likewise have broken, and, which troubles me most, despised that loyal
knot of Matrimony; but I bless my God, I have after very much grief of heart,
remorse, and true sorrow for the same, and wrestling with my gracious and good
God, through the merits of Christ and his intercession, obtained pardon, and
received comfort.

But beloved friends, I am not sentenced by man, nor yet his power has
adjudged me to this Death, but God designed me to it; for this, nay this use I
rather make of it, that the only motives and chief cause of sentencing me to
this end, is not the least grief or trouble to me, but rather occasions
Alacrity, cheerefulness and comfort, that I am accounted worthy, although by
the basest of deaths, to suffer for my King; notwithstanding others of honor,
have received noble deaths which could not be denied them; yet it matters not
the manner of the end, whilst I have an assurance, that I, and all that have
preceded me by what death soever, or shall hereafter suffer for the same cause,
shall arive at the Haven of Celestial joy, and ever sing Haleluiaes to him that
sits upon the Throne for evermore.

The word of God requires, Fear God, and honor the King; in the former I
have been too remiss and neglected too too often, the Lord forgive me; nay he
will, he has forgiven me: And for the latter, my obeisance to my Liege Lord,
and Sovereign King Charles the first, and after him, Charles the second; I was
never censured, or in the least tainted; but you see sentenced by the contrary
Party for the same: I was always for them in life, and am so still, I dye for
them; Nay I here profess, that if I had a head of Hair as big as Absolons,
and every hair as strong as Sampson; And if I were to live as many Methusalaes
lives as I have hairs on my head, I would spend them all for the good and
honor of my King.

Then he desired Mr. Pack to sing a Psalm, and after to pray with him, which
done, he turned toward the Ladder, and seeing it somewhat too short; he said
Jacob dreamed of a Ladder that reached up to Heaven; what this Ladder wants in
length, I hope by the support of Gods Spirit, and his holy Angels, I shall be
convayed and carried to Heaven, and be brought to my happy journeyes end. Then
he gave a Gratuity to the Executioner: and as he went up the Ladder, he
entreated his Friends not to weep for him, saying he was full of inward
comfort. But he desired all to pray for him, saying he forgave all the world,
and those that had a hand in bringing him thither; declaring himself in these
expressions, they intended evil to me, but they have done me much good in
taking me out of a sinful World, and out of a distressed Kingdom, and from a
distracted people, and sending me sooner to the Haven of happiness, the haven
of eternal and everlasting rest.

Now some may imagine, that death does work a terror and fear within me, and
that I am afraid to dye; I must confess the last night, the fear of death,
and the amazement it brought unto me, and loathness to leave this World,
troubled me very much; But I bless my God, I was comforted, encouraged, and
well resolved before the day appeared, that I durst look Death undauntedy in
the face; and as I trust God with my Soul, so I leave and commit my Children
to his Gracious and Fatherly protection: All that is mine I leave unto them,
hoping of Gods goodness and blessing upon them, desiring the same with my
soul.

I ever have lived, and dye a Protestant, and so far as I ever conceived and
verily believe, the late King, as also this, were ever Protestants, and stood
for the Protestant Religion: and therefore I was for him who is not; and for
him, for whose cause I now dye, praying to God to bless him wheresoever he is
or goes.

And now good Soldiers I thank you for your civilities toward me, and I
entreat you to see that my poor Son, and the rest of my Children may not
suffer after me, or on this manner, but let them have what is mine.

And looking toward his acquaintance, he said; I desire you to remember me to
my dear Mother, and all my Friends, I pray God bless and comfort her, and all
them.

Then he said to the Executioner, friend, when I hold up my hands, do thy
Office; and as he put the Rope over his head, he with expressions of joy said;
what a Gallant morning Ribbon is this which I wear for the sake of my King.

Then he made many short heavenly ejaculations, praying earnestly, and saying,
Lord I beseech thee wash my soul clean in the blood of thy dear Son my
blessed Savior from all my sins; I shall (said he) be by and by be with thee,
I shall enjoy the blessed presence of thee my gracious God, my dear Savior,
and all the holy Saints.

Then he entreated his Friends, not to suffer the Executioner to pull him by
the Legs, when the Ladder was turned, or to use any violent means, as is
usual to put him sooner out of his pain; for said he, I desire to suffer the
pains of this death whatsoever it be; nay if it were ten thousand times more
for my sins, and to wait upon my God, till he deliver my soul out of this
mortal body.

Then he prayed again, and said, into thy hands o Lord Jesus my blessed
Savior, I commend my Spirit; and so he held up his hands, and the Executioner
did his Office accordingly.

And that which was thought very strange, and never observed in any, none of
the beholders could perceive any motion, or stirring of either hand or Foot, or
the least appeareance of pain in undergoing the same.

FINIS.

