TERATOLOGIA: OR, A DISCOVERY OF GODS WONDERS, Manifested in former and modern
times by Bloody Rain, and Waters: With other prodigious Occurrences, being
intimations of the Divine Displeasure; but withal, most gracious Invitations
to REPENTANCE.

With certain Uses that a wise Christian will, and every Christian ought to
make thereof.

By J. S.

Fluunt multa ignaris mortalibus, occultis quibusdum rerum causis and mala,
bonaque agentibus astris nobis saepenumero patent, sed dum observare piget,
omnia casum facimus, neque prudentiae ministerio and industria consiliorum, vel
propensa numina invitamus vel minantis rabiem poti excludimus.

Marin. Bartetius, de vita and gest. Scanderbegi, l. 9. fol. 163. LONDON.
Printed for Nath: Brooks at the Angel in Cornhill, 1650.

To the READER.
IF my memory fail me not, I have read, but sure I am, I have credibly heard,
of a certain Creature that lives upon the water (so foolishly subtle) that upon
the apprehension of any approaching danger, for security hastens away, and
hides its head in an hole; thinking, belike, thereby, that all is safe, when
the head cannot be seen.

How near this comes in parallel to the nature of too many men will be
acknowledged, when we consider how indulgently favorable flesh and blood
looks upon it self in its own way of natural contentment and peace ( awake
not my Beloved, say they) how apt the most are to misconstrue judgments; and
for a continuation of a being that the flesh would have, and God will not; to
make a fair gloss upon a bad Text, and to interpret Gods meaning (deceiving
their own souls) as themselves would have it. The Jews had a Custom (which
yet is, I am sure lately was in use amongst them) to charm away noxious
spirits, Hags or Night walkers from their Childrens cradles. Their Charm was,
and is this, Adam, Eva, Hutz, Lilith: Elias Levit. in Thist. Munsteri Messiah
Christianorum.
Adam, Eve, away Hag, out of doors Hob-gobling. And the Ancient Romans had
their Lulla abi, Lulla abi, a song their Nurses used at the Cradle to the very
same purpose, as I have read. Now as such a custom was amongst them, so, is it
not true that the condition of most of the sons of Men is to sing a requiem, or
Lulla abi to their souls, to rock themselves asleep in the Cradle of security;
and what in them lies to drive away all objects, ocular and mental, (and to
charm them as the Jews did their Lilith, and the Romans their Lulla) and may
contribute any thing to an interruption of the free fruition and enjoyment of
fleshly pleasure and delight? whatsoever opposes, that is an enemy certainly;
away with it therefore, out of doors with it in any case. By this means we
plainly shun the ways of God, Jon. 1.
and Jonas-like, endeavor to fly (if such a thing could be possible) from his
presence: And if he cannot be found resident with us in our Earthly and Carnal
contentments, in our luxury, covetousness, pride, and excess, we care not
(could his presence be avoided) to see him at all. God will appear unto men as
it pleases himself, and according as they please, or displease him, (there is
no enchauntment has influence upon the Almighty, Numb. 23.23.
to turn him this way, or that way, the breadth of an hair) if they do well
they shall be accepted; if otherwise, Genesis 4.7.
sin, that is, punishment for sin, lies at the door. Sometimes we see him in
his mercies, lets labor ever to keep him there; sometimes we find him in
punishments, and sometimes in seeming, sometimes in apparent judgments. Let it
be our care upon all opportunities offered, to fall in, and close with God by
Humiliation, by Repentance, by Prayer, which will (being serious, fervent, and
unfeigned) even bind the hands of the Almighty. Exodus 32.10.
Let me alone (said God to Moses) as if God had been disabled from doing any
thing till Moses had left off praying. But alas! such is our great folly, that
which is, and should be to us an occasion of goodis, with a great many, even
summa industria, with the strongest and highest bent of reluctance declined, or
with much contempt ('it is a sad story to tell) pretermitted. What a strange
thing it is, that the very name, or word Hell, or a Book carrying that Title
should become so terrible, and should force such a melancholy impression upon
the soul, that it should make both seller and buyer afraid to deal upon such a
subject! But I demand, is this well? Is that Soul in a good condition and state
thus affected and disposed? I judge no man, it may be so, but it is two to one
against it. It is a saying that the wise Excclesiastes has. Eccles. 7.1, 2, 3,
4.
It is better (says he) to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of
feasting, etc. And again, sorrow is better then laughter, for by the sadness
of the countenance the heart is made better. The heart of the wise is in the
house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth. Will we
know the way to Heaven? it is through the Valley of Baca, weeping in a dry,
Psalm. 84.6.
barren, troublesome, and unpleasant passage, where there is no refreshing
spring to be found, but what by digging, and hard labor, we work out of the
fountains of Divine Consolation, the Scriptures, which open their breasts unto
us, from whence we may seek such nourishment as will feed our souls to
eternal life. Along this valley, the Valley of Affliction, you shall trace the
pious Votaries, and find the holiest of Gods Saints of Ancient times in their
pilgrimage toward Heaven. Heb. 11.25.
Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season. How heartily and cheerfully did that Holy
man, Ignatius, (condemned to be torn in pieces by the teeth of Beasts) break
forth, and say, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 36. ex Irenaei. l. 5. adversus
Haereses.
Frumentum ego sum Dei, etc. I am (says he) Gods Corn, and am ground and
kneaded with the teeth of beasts, that I may be made clean or white bread for
Christ. O blessed magnanimity, and highest example of Christian fortitude!
Ignes, cruces, bestiae dispersiones ossium, discerptionesque membrorum, ac
totius corporis poenae and omnia in me unum supplicia Diaboli art quaesita
cumulentur, dummodo Jesum Christum merear adipisci. Eusebius. ubi supra. Heb.
1.2.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 94.12.
This, this is the way to Heaven, which to all is not given to walk in, nor
has God required it, but only from such as he has enabled to undergo so
sharp a passage: no one of Gods Children is without his scourge, his
chastisement, of one sort or another, and blessed is he whom the Lord
chastneth, he receives none but such. But enough for a Preface, (a large gate,
or entrance, into a small Building) Cavenda superna vulnera, that follows,
Wounds on high, or from above (the subject of the consequent work) are to be
taken heed of. For, as sure as we live, if we smite God by our sins, we shall
be again smitten by his punishments, wound for wound, blow for blow, is Gods
impartial Talio. What ever we do, then lets be especially heedfull that we
fall not into the revenging hands of God; Heb. 10.31. Psalm. 2.12.
for if his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in him.

TERATOLOGIA. OR, A discovery of Gods Wonders manifested in former and modern
times by Bloody Rain and Waters, etc.
BLOOD, when ever it has been seen to fall from the Skies, or Clouds, in the
nature of Rain, or flowing out of the earth in the manner of a Fountain, has
always occasioned matter of great fear to the beholders; and has oftentimes
been the forerunners of destruction to Cities and Countries where it has
appeared, or God has otherwise disposed and appointed it. So merciful is the
God of mercy, that before he strike, he will give warning. When precept upon
precept, line upon line, instruction upon instruction, admonition upon
admonition, Isay 28.10.
will not prevail to call in obstinate persons to obedience: when there is no
remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
then God presents his Rod by visible and prodigious tokens of his ensuing
wrath; as Plague and Pestilence, Famine and War, (a Catalogue of them we find
in Leviticus) by signs in the Sun and Moon, Lev. 26.
by fearful sights, and lights not usual in the Skies: By Blazing Stars and
Comets, by Earthquakes, by flowing and raining of Blood, and falling down of
Iron, with what else he is pleased to make use of to give a demonstration of
his displeasure. Now that which I desire briefly to do upon this subject is
this, namely, to make a short relation of some prodigious apparitions, which in
former times have presented themselves to beholders, from, and out of the Air,
but more especially of that strange kind of flowing and raining of Blood, and
falling down of Iron. And to this end, first, to let such men know, that know
it not, that the same things, to wit, the raining of Blood, etc. have been in
former times as they have fallen out in the latter. A few instances of many more
I could produce out of Lycosthenes, Lychosthen. de prodigiis and oftent.
and others I have set down in the ensuing discourse. Secondly, upon the
consideration of such portentous apparitions to draw out instructions for
learning, and information of the unlearned, and simpler sort. To proceed then.

In the year of the world 3729. In Italy, in a Town there now called Marca
Ancona, Funccius ex Eutropio. Garcaeus in Meteorolog. 477.
the seat of the Ancient Picentes, inhabitants of Picenum, a River there flowed
with Blood. And at Toscana, formerly called Tuscia, the same year the Heavens
seemed to be on Fire, and three Moons were seen at Ariminum, now called
Rimine. In the year also 3783. in Rome, in a place there called Area Concordia,
it rained Blood for two days together as Livy has declared; Live. dec. 4. l.
9. p. 624.
and so in like manner it did in Area Vulcani a little before that time, as the
same Livy does report, Decad. 4. p. 610. which brought the people out of fear
of ensuing danger to supplicate their Gods by a solemn appointment or
proclamation, Ejus prodigii expiandi causa: and to pacify their indignation by
sacrifices, or such manner of heathenish service as then was used amongst them.
Plin. H. Not. l. 2. c. 56.
Pliny tells us, that in the year when Marcus Acitius, and Caius Portius were
Consuls, it rained Blood and Milk, about the year of the World 3852. and also
says, that a Light from Heaven was seen, C. Coecilius, and C. Papyrius bing
Consuls the next year after in the night time so bright, Vt diei species noctu
luceret, that it shined, or was light as the day. The same Pliny also writes,
that amongst the Lucani, a people of Italy, whose Country is now called
Basilicata, Plin.
Iron in the form of spunges fell down from above, the year before Marcus
Crassus was slain of the Parthians, Funccius.
being about the year of the world 3910. at which time a great abundance of
Soldiers that he brought along with him out of Leucaine were cut off, and
their lives lost in that fight with the Parthians.

But to pass by the Stories of more Ancient times, and to come somewhat lower
toward the present times. In the year of Christ, or near about 856. in the
time of Lewis the first, at Brixia, a City of Lumbardy, in rained Blood three
days and nights, as Naucler reports; and so it did, Naucler. Generat. 29. page
713.
but not for so long a time, amongst the Franks, in the year 879. as is read in
Speculum.

In, or about the year of Christ 935. at Genua, a City in Italy, a f^^^taine of
Blood was there seen to flow; and the City was that same year ransackt by the
Sarazens, Idem. Genesis 32. p. 728.
and all put to the Sword, besides women and Children, as Naucler tells us. And
the same Naucler does also report, that in Anno Christi 1104. Blood was seen to
flow from Bread at Spira: Bellum Civil significans, Idem. Genesis 37. p. 801.
signifying (says he) Civil War like to ensue.

In the days of Henry the Second, and about the year of Christ 1180. it rained
Blood in England, in what part certainly of the Land mine Author declares not:
which the people apprehending to be a prodigious thing, and being thereat
moved, began to suspect the Government of John, whereof they were afraid, as
Polydor Virgil notes. Hist. Angl. l. 13. p. 236.


In a Town or Village called Mirkalow, between the Rivers of Odera and Nissa in
Silesia, it rained Blood three days together about the year 1269. Crom. Hist.
Polon. l. 9. p. 162,
as Cromerus has observed.

In the year 1274. in the time of Edward the First, after an Earthquake that
spoiled and threw down many beautiful Buildings in Wales, Blood was there also
seen to fall like rain from the Heavens, Polydor. Virgil l. 17. H. Anglic
statim ab initio.
Quasi prodigium exitiale illi genti cujus sanguine brevi tempore postea ea
regio passim maduit: As a fatal prodegie (says Polydor Virgil) to that
Nation, with whose Blood a short time after that Country was all over moistened,
or made wet.

And the same Polydor also writes, that Will: Rufus taking a Journey into
Normandy to acquaint himself with the state of his Affairs there, a Fountain
near Abington was seen to flow with Blood three days together after his
departure hence, Idem l. 10. p. 176.
and the Heavens seemed to be on fire. And what followed? Polydor says, that
this King going over, made but short stay there; and returning into England,
was summoned back again by a report that Constantes, a famous old City in
Normandy, was besieged by the ^^^nch. To which place the King made his address
with all possible expedition; and taking with him but a few, came on with such
speed and resolution, that the besiegers affrighted, made all the haste they
could to be gone, but over taken by pursuit, there were slaughtered to a very
great number; This was about the year of Christ 1464.

To be brief, for there be already noted examples enough. In Kalenburg Castle,
Crantz. Saxon. l. 12. c. 5.
says Crantzius, and about the same year 1464. it rained Blood; for the drops
thereof were seen (says he) upon women's vails, and upon stra^^ that lay near
this Castle. And he says further, that a little after this rain, the sun was
there seen at noon, sine splendore, without splendour or brightness; And this
followed (says Crantzius) Wars were exasperated, Inter Duces, and Civitates
Saxionae, between the Dukes and Cities of Saxony.

Lastly, and of late times in Gloucestershire at a Village called Barnwood,
(upon the report of the neighborhood who beheld it, I have no other knowledge
of this particular) in the month of February, 1648. it rained Blood upon
certain Clothes washed, and hung upon an Hedge there to dry: Many eyes beheld
it, but what the consequence may be is secret hidden in the bosom of the
great, and Omniscient God, whose judgments are unsearchable, Romans 11.13.
and his ways past finding out. Let no man presume to draw near, or attempt to
open the Cabinet of these Divine Counsels, that are only reserved to himself.
And now to hasten forward. Pliny tells us in the place above mentioned, where
he speaks of Bloody rain, but especially of Iron that fell from the Heavens in
the form of spunges, that the Soothsayers being consulted, and enquired of,
what the same might portend, answered, Plin. vide supra.
Cavenda praemonuerunt superna vulnera: The same did forewarn (said they) that
supernall wounds were to be taken heed of. Lo, these are strange things, even
wonders in our eyes: Let Us therefore leave them to God, the Author of them, and
endeavor to make some good use of them, to the benefit and good of our souls.
And what shall that be?

Why, even this. Let it serve in the first place to exhort every wise
Christian, not to put far away the evil day, Amos 6.3.
building upon a vain confidence, and flattering themselves with fallacious
hopes, and groundless collections, promising peace to themselves when the
judgments of God are even at their doors. This was the fault of the Jews and
Israelites in the Prophet Amos his time, and the same was the fault of them
both in the Prophet Isaiahs time, Isay 22.12.
(who prophesied about fifty years before Amos) and whereof he complains,
saying, When the Lord God of Hosts in that time calls to weeping, to
mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth, behold joy and
gladness, etc. Much ado the Lord had with these untoward people. Hegesippus
writes, Hegesip. de excid. Urbis Hierosol. l. 5. c. 44.
that, though they had a great many of warnings by prodigious signs, and
fearful apparitions before Jerusalem was besieged, and the City destroyed; yet
the most of them had a way of expounding the meaning of those apparitions in a
better sense to themselves then God intended them; putting away the Evil day,
till the Vengeance of God fell upon the heads of them in a most severe manner,
as they that will take the pains to peruse Josephus and Hegesippus, Authors of
note and credit, (both which have written that Story) will easily see.

The next use will be a use of Admonition to all sorts of people to be very
heedfull of their ways. When God speaks let no man close his ears, but say as
Samuel once: Speak Lord, 1 Samuel 3.10.
for thy servant hears. How well is the Lord pleased with a ready return?
how soon does he receive those that come unto him, and tenderly embrace any
that tremble at his threats? Such a one let him assure himself shall find
mercy when contemners shall not escape misery and unhappiness. And to make us
assured how ready he is to come in to our assistance, when we come in to call
upon him for it, how willing to bear our infirmities, and to pardon our
failings; to cure our wounds that sin has made in our Souls, and to stir us
forward not to be wanting to our selves: John 4.24.
lo, he does discover and manifest himself (being a Spirit) under such
notions as are most attractive to any nature, by all the parts and passions of
man, by the nearest relations that intercede in our common societies, by all
tenderness of Paternall and maternall affections he declares himself. He has
(to suite with our weakness) a face, a mouth, he has nostrils, eyes, ears,
arms, hands, etc. he hears, he sees, he smells, etc. By all the external and
internal senses ((...)) affected in show after the manner of a man, he makes
himself known unto us, and does declare, and demonstrate with all tenderness
of affection, himself ready to assist at every need: Nay, how passionate he is
in our sufferings; he calls to be called upon. Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me (me that am a Quis ille nobis intelligendus est Pater? Deus scil.
tam Pater nemo, tam pius nemo. Tcrtul. de poenit. p. 45.
Father) in the time of trouble, and I will help thee, and thou shall glorify
me. Mat. 11.28.
Come onto me (me that am a Savior) all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will ease you. He sues to be sued, and sought unto, and takes it as a
courtesy done to him to ask a favor from him. He has an heart, he has
bowels, bowels of compassion feeling under humane infirmities. He is grieved at
our miscarriage, he is glad at our well doing; Ephesians. 4.30.
there is joy in Heaven over one sinner that repents, more then over ninety nine
righteous persons that need no repentance. Finally, what ever may conduce
toward the winning and drawing of a man to his own Salvation, the Lord God of
mercy imparts to him under such representatives as may cause him with
boldness, alacrity, and cheerfulness, to be still calling and craving for
necessary supplies for Heaven, whilst time and opportunity lasts, whereunto we
have great and manifold encouragements. Christ Jesus our elder brother, made in
the shape of man, Phil. 2.7.
is our Advocate, our Mediator, our Intercessor, our Judge, our Friend, our
All in All. Col. 3.11.
Lose not then to day what cannot (perhaps) be gained to morrow, we are not
sure of another Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum. Horat.
day. Yet an opportunity tenders it self, and a Kingdom may be purchased at a
low rate, and with a little labor. Let not this Kingdom now to be gotten with
so small ado be lost for not asking for, nor seeking after; we are commanded
and taught by our Savior, to seek it in the first place, Mat. 6.33.
before all other things. But see how little of Heaven the most of us have in
us, how little we value it, by this it is evident. Who, amongst us, all having
a promise made him to succeed as Heir to an Earthly Prince, in a poor Kingdom
upon condition, so and so to lead his life, and to demean himself to abstain
from this and that disorder, no way burdensome to nature; from fleshly
pleasures, that after acting are Proba istas quae voluptates vocantur ubi
transcenderint modum poenas esse. Senec. Ep. 83. p. 129.
grievous, from carnal delights easily forborne; to do his uttermost endeavor
to express readiness of service, with a willing mind to so free a Donor, so
bountiful a Benefactor: Who (I say) would not accept these conditions upon
such terms with all thankfulness? But this Kingdom, the Kingdom of Heaven,
being in all its privileges and prerogatives, so far beyond all the
dignities and prerogatives of an Earthly Kingdom, and so transcendently
surpassing all imaginable earthly felicities, is but slightly (I am afraid) and
carelessly thought upon, and but by a few thought on at all. God open our eyes,
and cause us at length to look about us. The time of our account is not far
off, when, certainly, no man knows. Let Us therefore redeem the time, Ephesians.
5.16.
because the days are evil.

A third use is to draw us to a serious consideration, and to a diligent
examination, what the cause is that so much blood is emptied, and drawn out of
the veins of this Land by a Civil War, that yet continues especially
amongst our neighbors with so much bitterness, and such height of stomach and
hostility. And what remedy must be sought after, and with endeavor may be
found to stop so bad an effect. For my part I shall declare the result of mine
examination of this particular, which is briefly this. Sin it is, that, and
nothing but that, has provoked Gods displeasure. We have smitten God by the
repetition of many horrid transgressions, and high contempts, served him with
no better sacrifice and devotion, than what has proceeded from hearts as hard
as Adamant, yea, iron hearts. By which means he is offended; and as we have
presented him, so has he let fall upon us Iron, with all materials of War,
and instruments of Vengeance to wound and plague us for our disobedience and
impenitency. We have walked contrary to God, Lev. 26.25.
and therefore has he brought the Sword upon us, which is drawn out, and
cannot again be sheathed, till he, he I say, that shuts up the Sea with doors
as Job speaks, and says, Hitherto shall thou come, Job 38.8.
and no farther, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed; and he that rebukes
the winds, and they are still, Mat. 8.26.
commands it to be re-insheathed, which (upon turning to him, and amendment,
being the only remedy in this case to be made use of, and which he has long
expected from us, but yet not found as it should be) he is quickly (see how
quickly he is) able to do it. O that my people had hearkened unto me, Psalm.
81.13, 14.
and Israel had walked in my ways, I should have soon (or how soon could I
have) subdued their enemies, and turned mine hand against their adversaries.
Certainly, what to man seems impossible, is to him, who is El Schaddai Genesis
17.1. Genesis 18.14.
All-sufficient, and Allmighty, to whom nothing is too hard, most easy. At the
only noise, or blast of Trumpets made of Rams Horns, enforced by the divine
breath which only is powerful, and wonderful, how soon did the wall of
Jericho fall to the ground? Josh. 6.20.
There Is no fortification can stand against the Almighty. God puts on Gideon to
fight against the Amalekites and Midianites, Judges 7.
with all their multitudes, all the children of the East. Gideon was but 300
strong, but the Enemy without number, as the sands by the Sea side for
multitude; ye he went on against this vast Army (so true it is, that elsewhere
is spoken, 1 Samuel 14.6. 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
that there is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or few) with his
handful, and by the power of God, The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon (so went
up the cry against the Enemy) and with their Trumpets, Pitchers, and Lamps
(poor weapons a man would think) they subdued them all, yea themselves (God
having so ordained) subdued and killed one another to a very great number. 1 Samuel 17.50.
David's conquest of Goliath is not to be forgotten, nor what NaZianZen and
Chrysostom have observed thereupon: His weapons were but mean (a sling, a
little stone) considering the strength of this Philistian Giant; yet so happily
was this stone guided, and set forward, that it had soon found its mark, and
done its work; for (says the Text) Immerso lapide in frontem ejus cecidit
pronus in terram, the stone was drowned, or sunk into his forehead. But this
stone went along with more then its own materials. (...). Naz. in Julian.
Orat. 2. p. 308. Chrysostom. (...).
For NaZianZen tells us it was a Mystical stone, and Chrysostom explaines the
Mystery, saying, That David overcame this Giant not with weapon, or Sword, but
Prayers. God is able to do infinitely more then we can think or ask, if we be
not wanting to our selves, he wants no power. The Ecclesiastical History tells
us that Eugenius an Usurper (upon the death of Valentinian the Emperor, who
was treacherously murdered, as it is thought, by one Argobastus a perfidious
Captain in his Army) led on a very great power of Soldiery, accompanied with
this Argobastus to the Alps, Ruffin. Eccl. hist. l. 11. c. 33.
with an intention to invade Italy; and after the example of Julian the
Apostat, to set up and establish Idolatry. Against this Tyrant Eugenius,
Theodosius the Emperor prepares, leads on an Army, which being much inferior
to the Enemies power, and he thereupon doubtful what to do; he falls to
Prayer, receives an answer and warrant by a Vision in the night to join
Battle: which accordingly he did, and gave the Pagans such a Charge, that
soon made them turn their backs; the Wind, upon the sudden, rising in so
violent a manner, that it forced back the Darts they cast into their own faces.
Hence it was that Claudian, a Christian Poet, has these Verses.

O nimium dilecte Deo, cui militat ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.
The Sky and Winds conjured for thee contend,
With Trumpets joined, Gods much endeared friend.
Was not that a strange defeat and overthrow that Uladislaus, King of Hungary,
received by Amurath the Turk? Amurath, and this Uladislaus, had Armies ready
for the Field and Battle: Conditions of peace were tendered, and on both sides
received; Articles drawn and Sworn unto, by them and the other party, the
Christian takes the Gospel, and the Turk the Alcoran. The Turk hereupon draws
off, being confident of Christian fidelity, and away he goes. Bonfin. de reb.
Ungar. l. 6. dec. 3. p. 462. etc.
Being gone some few days Journey, the Army, under the Command of Uladislaus,
by the persuasion of Julian the Popes Legate, break their Faith with the Turk,
taking certain Towns contrary to the Agreement solemnly made and sworn to.
Whereof the Turk (though far remote) being given to understand, with all
possible speed returns to Varna, in the confines of Mysia, near to which place
Uladislaus his Forces lay. Both Armies met again, and without any further
dispute fall on: A great slaughter was made on both sides, but especially in
the Turkish, till Amurath, at the length, fearing the loss of the day, drew
out of his Bosom, the Articles of true concluded upon between him and the
Christians, and lifting up his eyes toward Heaven, with the writing in his
hand, he thus brake forth: Haec sunt (inquit ingeminans) Jesu Christi foedera,
etc. These, these (says he) are the Convenants which thy Christians have made
with me; by thy Divine power they have solemnly Sworn, and violated their
Faith given under thy Name, they have treacherously denied their own God. Now O
Christ, if thou be a God (as they say, and that we are in an Error) revenge, I
beseech thee, here in this place, the wrongs done both to thee and me, and
manifest to those that as yet have not known thy holy name, the punishments due
for breach of Faith. These words were scarcely out of the Turks mouth, but
presently an alteration appeared in the Battle, down went the Christians
(formerly successful and victorious) apace, and the King slain, they fled
with a very great loss, even the loss of many thousands of their lives on the
sudden. O the incomparable wisdom, impartial justice, and irresistible power
of our God! See, his ears are open to an Infidel calling upon him for justice;
he respects no man's person, but where evil is committed, punishment shall be
repaid assuredly, and how soon he can do it, he has made sufficiently known.
Should I not be tedious to the Reader, I could tell him how God delivered from
Famishment, and the Sword, the poor Rocheleers in the year 1573, and how
quickly he did it, making them able (after that bloody Massacre) to hold out
against all the power of the French, that Besieged, and endeavored to stop all
provision from them. And how did he bring it to pass? why, even thus: De statu
religionis in regno Galliae. Comment. fol. 106.
He sent a certain kind of fish, never seen nor heard of before, (they called
them Surdones) that every day presented themselves during the Siege near the
shore to be made use of. By which means the people being nourished, until they
had made their conditions of peace with the Army; and they removing, the Fishes
also departed, that very same day, says mine Author. Eighty eight we must all
remember with thankful hearts, what haste God made to come in to the relief of
his people; and the sudden cessation of the great Plague must never be
forgotten, but must be acknowledged to be his alone work, so easy and ready is
his ear to hear a Prayer, though weak, and to take notice of but a very
little humiliation; and how quickly he is able to bring to pass his own work,
be it never so great we see. Let then this be our comfort, we have found God
willing, and able to help at any need, let us make much of such a friend whilst
he may be had, and by all means decline that thing whatsoever it be, pleasure,
or profit, and shun it with detestation that may hazard the loss of him. And
let us take notice by the way that there is no wound, no plague, has ever
fallen upon a people, from these supreme powers, but by occasion of wounds
first received. Which being so,

Let us then in the next and last place go on with a use of reproof, wherein I
shall, and do much blame such persons as let go the reins to all kinds of
licentiousness, and vicious living, taking no care to mortify sin in the
flesh, Romans 8.13.
but wholly to live after the flesh; and as much as in them lies, quenching
the spirit; also Crucifying (as I may say) the Son of God afresh, and wounding,
at almost every word, 1 These. 5.19. Heb. 6.6.
the Majesty of the High God of Heaven and Earth, by their cursed, and never
till of late heard of, hellish Oaths and Imprecations. Blood and Wounds are
become complements in ordinary language and communication, passing off without
passion, or any commotion or provocation inducing thereunto. And so common has
this wicked and most unchristian kind of speaking been amongst us, (thanks to
the Parliament for their pious Act against it) that almost no notice at all
has been taken of it. Upon this too too common miscarriage of men in these
unhappy times, I shall make bold to reassume, and repeat my precedent Theme,
namely, Cavenda superna vulnera: Heed, and great beed indeed (there being very
great cause) should be taken, that the powers above be not wounded, namely,
this way, by our careless, inconsiderate, and rebellious words and actions. If
he shall not be guiltless, (and God declares he shall not) that but only takes
his name in Vain, that is, without due reverence: Oh then what shall become of
him that studies to find out new Oaths to blaspheme and dishonor his Name? If
for every idle word that a man speaks, Mat. 12.36.
an account will be exacted at the last day, as our Savior has foretold us.
Oh then let the presumptuous and profane Swearer lay this to heart, and know,
that without timely repentance, sad and fearful will be the account that he
must give at that Great, and to the Wicked, that most terrible appearance: If,
lastly, one erring thought, be of that dangerous consequence that puts a man to
the hazard of his salvation, as S. Peter in that case of Simon Magus does seem
to imply, and which, Act. 8.22.
to subdue, and to bring into Captivity to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.
as S. Paul tells us, was a part of his spiritual task, or warfare; What then
may such a one expect, that all his life long does cherish evil thoughts
without control, giving way and consent to their operation, the product
whereof, is nothing but blasphemy and horrible transgression? It Is to me
indeed, a wonder to hear so many men that came to the Church, sort themselves
as good Christians amongst the Congregation, hear the Word of God preached, and
partake of the Ordinances, and the means appointed for every man's convoy and
direction to eternal happiness: Yet in their common converse and discourse,
do make no conscience at all of an Oath; nay, of many, and many oaths; and
those of an high nature too, as big as they can speak them, and take no long
time about it, but even as fast as the tongue will walk. Oaths fly out
intermixed in every passage and occasion without sense or feeling. What shall
we think of these men? For my part, I think, truly thus, That such men fear not
God, but plainly contemn him. Nature it is not that makes a man a Swearer, it
forces not, it inticeth not to such exorbitancy: But it is a vicious custom
assumed, received by the care, and entertained (in the absence of grace) by the
affections, and so continued, it hardens, and by degrees does cauterize the
Conscience in such manner, that at length it becomes devoid of sense; and such
a person, (as I have heard of many) reprehended for swearing, will swear that
he did not swear. Now this transgression fostered and entertained to such a
growth, has many times been seen to fly out upon provocations and
distemperatures (especially when drink has inflamed, or losses or crosses in
gaming, or otherwise have exasperated) so far as to bid defiance to the face
of God. There is one that writes to this purpose, Specul. magnu^ exemplorum,
Exemp. 103. did. 5. Hondorf. Theatr. Hist. p. 114.
(the Author unnamed, is said to live about 170 years since) That three men
were found in Lovaine, a City in Brabant, playing at Tables in a Cellar on Good
Friday at night; and withal, swearing and blaspheming terribly: A CitiZen
passing along the street where this Cellar was, and finding certain men of
that street lamenting over a stranger seeming to be miserably wounded and
besmeared with blood, the Citizen demanded of the standers there, who it was
that hurt the man; the answer was made, Those Table-players in the Cellar. The
Citizen thereupon hastens to those Gamesters, acquaints them what they were
charged withal, being very angry that they would so much forget themselves at
that time: they all deny with one accord the sight of any such man, and the
striking or hurting of any: and forthwith left off their swearing and gaming,
and away together they went with the Citizen to find out this supposed wounded
man; who being diligently sought after, and not found, they concluded (so
instructed) that they had wounded Christum dominum, contumeliis affectum,
Christ's Lord, by their reproachful contempts and obloquies. Of another the
same Author reports, That being at Tables, and having lost all his Money, in a
swearing rage (too too frequent with common Gamesters) finding a Bow and an
Arrow, he shot the same Arrow as far as he could (in revenge against the
Almighty) up into the Air, which returned unto him again all Blood. Now
whether these relations be stories, or fables, truths, or tales, I have not to
say, but sure I am, that a good use may be made of them by any one that is
willing to be reformed and instructed. Somewhat more I shall produce tending to
this purpose, that comes near (I suppose home) both to Story and Truth. In the
year 1553 in Helvetia, (now ZwitZerland) near the City Willisaw, Theatr. Hist.
page 115.
distant three miles from Lucerna it thus happened. Three Dicers having gotten
a pair of Tables into the field close by the City walls, they fell to play,
and in their gaming, one of the Gamesters, whose name was Ulrichus Schrolerus,
having lost much money, began exceedingly to curse and swear. The Dice, for the
present, turned their course with better success to the Swearer; he goes on,
plays, and swears as before, and at length breaks out (see how busy the Devil
is, how active upon all opportunities offered to do mischief, how despightfull
against the Majesty of God) in these terms with a Dagger in his hand. Si modo
fortuna me fefellerit, arreptum pugionem in ipsius Dei corpus quousque potero
interquebo: If now again fortune deceive me, I will sheath this Dagger,
(caught up) as far as I am able into the Body of God. But fortune never
constant, fell off again, whereat this Monster being again displeased,
forthwith drew this Dagger, and taking it by the point, up he throws it toward
Heaven as far as he could: The Dagger vanished in the Air, and five drops of
Blood fell upon the Table. Out of hand the Devil seizes, and away body and
soul he carries Ulrichus, with such violence and noise, that a fear and tumult
was stirred up throughout the whole City. The other two remaining in the place,
endeavored what they could to rub out the Blood, but all in vain, for the
more they labored, the more the nitor, or ruddy brightness of the blood
appeared. Whilst they thus labored, many persons came out of the City and
found them at it, whom presently they apprehended and took into the City with
them: And as they were leading through the gate of the City, the one of them
fell down, from, and out of whose body Worms, and Lice, in such abundance came
forth, that the very Carkase was left without skin, and so ended his unhappy
life in this most miserable and fearful manner: Which being seen, without
delay, the third Malefactor was presently dragged away to execution, and put to
death, as his crime so highly sinful and horrid well deserved. Now if any man
shall queslion the truth of this relation, the Author is Andreas Hendorffius,
Coelestis doctrinae praeco and propropugnator strenuus, so styled by the
Translator of that work of his entitled Theatrum Historicum, from whence I had
this Story written first in Dutch, and afterward translated into Latin by
Philippus Lonicerus, a very learned Protestant. Which Author (Hendorffius)
makes mention in his foresaid Book of the former of the two foregoing
relations. It is a grief to me to say, but it is true that I say, many and many
of these examples I could rehearse, but I pass them over: For as Dives
tormented in Hell, prayed Abraham that one might be sent to his Fathers house,
Luke 16.
to testify to his brethren, lest they also should come into that place of
torment. They have (says Abraham) Moses, and the Prophets, if they will not
hear them, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead: So
may I say, that if what has been said be not sufficient to affright and
terrify the soul of the Swearer, the addition of more will be needless: Yet
on a little further, with Gods blessing and assistance, I shall adventure to
go. God gives charge to forbear the profanation of his name, by vain and
unnecessary Oaths, which he has done in his Word with threats and meanaces of
punishment upon the profaners; Eccles. 8.11.
And because (as the Wise man says) sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil. 1 Timothy 5.24.
But as the Apostle says, That some men's sins are open beforehand, going
before to judgment, and some men's they follow after: So truly shall we find,
that God takes some few (one perhaps of ten thousands) (...), in the very act
(as I may say) of wickedness, and suppose this one thus punished, as an
example to those many as high malefactors, not that his punishment (suppose by
some dreadful death) shall any whit at all allay the rigor of his
indignation, or mitigate, blunt, or dull the sharpness of the Divine Wrath
toward others, but rather it becomes a cause of extension, and aggravation of
wrath, that will plague, Psalm. 50.2. Hos. 5.14.
will tear, will rage to all eternity, without hope of reconciliation, against
such a one as nothwithstanding such menaces, such monitions, such examples will
still presume to go on, Psalm. 68.21.
and do evil impenitently, he will wound (as the Psalmist says) the hairy
scalp of such a one as goes on still in his transgression. Oh what should I
say? To tell an inveterate Swearer, that because of swearing, the Land
mourns, Jer. 23.10. Zee. 5.3, 4.
he will not believe it, though the Prophet Jeremy affirm it, however he will not
leave it, though Zecharies flying roll be out against him, threatening the
destruction of him, and the consumption of his house. Surely he cares not for
flying rolls, nor what is within them, and without them; nor who, nor what
mournes, if he may swear, and be merry, he takes no further thought. Threaten
such a one with Gods Judgments, he is insensible, he knows not (having lived
so long untouched) hardly believes the undouted approaches of Divine Vengeance,
that will fall upon him sooner or later, he cannot escape: Job says he shall
not, the wicked shall not escape, says he, Job 11.20. Prove. 19.5.
nor he that tells lies, says Solomon. What then shall we do with such
persons? NebuchadneZZar made a decree, That whosoever spoke any thing amiss
against the God of Shadrach, Dan. 3.29. Levit. 24.11.
Meshach, and Abednego, should be cut in pieces. Blasphemy was punished with
death in the time of the law. But the course that Chrysostom prescribes to
the people of Antioch where he preached, against the swearers of that place was
this. (...), etc. Chrysostom. hom. ad populum Antioch.
If (says he) thou hear any one in the street, or in the midst of the market
blaspeming God: Go unto him, and rebuke him for it, and if strokes be
needful, refuse not to bestow them, rap him on the face, dash him on the
mouth, sanctify thy hand by thy stroke. And if any accuse thee, and draw thee
to the Court, or Tribunal of Justice, follow them, and if the Judge require an
account or reason of what thou did, tell him boldly, that he has blasphemed
the King of Angels, etc. This was Chrysostomes advice, which I propose not to
imitation, but much approve and commend his Christian zeal and pious animosity
to stand up in the defense of Gods honor, so much then, and I am afraid much
more now contemned and despised.

Lactantius tells us, that at Lindum, which is a town of Rhodes, there are
Sacrifices done to Hercules, Lanct. l. 1. c. 21. p. 86.
the manner and custom whereof is much different from others, for they are not
celebrated (...), as (says he) the Greeks call it, by good langage, or well
speaking, but by evil speaking and cursing. And they account such Sacrifices
to go for naught, if at any time there chances to fall from any man's mouth
there present a good word, though unawares.

Here Is mad Service, fit for none but the Devil. O let none of our Sacrifices
(none I say of ours that carry about us, or should so do, Temples for the holy
Ghost to reside and abide in) be ever stained with such pollutions. For as the
Rabbis say, The Prayer of a Drinker, (that is, a lavish drinker, or drunkard)
is an abomination: How much more abominable is the prayer of a lavish swears,
whose sins, (as I may truly say) without a cause; nature being far less prone,
if prone at all, to this then to the other, there being a natural desire, and
appetite after bodily sustentation, which sometimes falls out to be excessive;
but as touching Swearing, what cause for that? I have now done in a word. The
Prophet Hosea denounces Gods judgments against the Israelites. He tells them
that the Lord had a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because
there was no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land. By swearing,
Hos. 4.2, 3.
and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out,
and blood touches blood. Therefore, says the Prophet, shall the land mourn,
and every one that dwells therein shall languish with the beasts of the
field, and with the fouls of heaven, yea, the fishes of the Sea also shall be
taken away. God deliver England from this Judgment. To conclude, let us hearken
to the counsel of the son of Sirach: Ecclus. 23.7, 8, 9, etc.
Hear O ye children the discipline of the mouth: He that keeps it, shall
never be taken in his lips. The sinner shall be left in his foolishness, both
the evil speaker, and the proud, shall fall thereby. Accustom not thy mouth
to swearing, neither use thy self to the [ Claud. Bad^essus. Jansenius.
rash and irreverent] naming of the Holy one. For as a servant that is
continually beaten shall not be without a blew mark, so he that swears, and
names God continually, shall not be faultlesse. A man that uses much swearing
shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall never depart from his
house. If he shall offend, his sin shall be upon him; and if he acknowledge not
his sin, he makes a double offense; if he swear in vain, and he shall not
be innocent, but his house shall be full of calamities. There is a Melius est
simpliciter and simplicibus and nudis verbis rem dicere qua^ religiosa
affirmatione confirmare. Mihi haec translatio verbi (...) in textu, videtur
impium sceleratumque praetextum nominis Dei ad orationem fraudulentam and
mendacem accommodatum significare. Baduell. minot. in Locum.
Word that is clothed about with death, God grant that it be not found in the
heritage of Jacob, for all such things shall be found far from the godly, and
they shall not wallow in their sins. Use not thy mouth to intemperate swearing,
for therein is the word of sin.

God give a blessing to what is here endeavored: Let him only have the glory
to whom it is only due, and his poor servant acceptance before him, in, and
through Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed
all praise, all power, all dominion, with all hearty thanksgiving from every
Congregation, Church and Family, both now, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

