A PROCLAMATION, By FREDERICK Duke of SCHONBERG, General of all Their Majesty's
Forces in IRELAND.
For preventing Plunders and Robberies.
Licensed October 7. 1689.

J. F.



WHereas diverse Loose and Idle People, have of late committed several
Robberies, and daily continue them, under Pretense of following the Army.
Wherefore we have thought fit hereby to declare, That none do presume to follow
the Army, and under that pretense Rob and Plunder the Country through which we
pass: And all such who shall, notwithstanding this our Proclamation, follow the
Army (Sutlers and such as are hired excepted) shall be deemed and punished as
Robbers: And We shall further order, and direct the Provost-Marshall, and his
Men, to seize and Apprehend them as such, that they may be accordingly Punished.

SCHONBERG.
Given at Our Headquarters at Belfast the First Day of September, 1689.
A SECOND PROCLAMATION, By FREDERICK Duke of SCHONBERG, etc.
For Protecting and Inviting all Persons to bring Provisions to the Army.
WHereas we find that several Inhabitants, and Freeholders in the Country, near
and about this Place, have by groundless fears deserted their Habitations and
Houses, by which great stocks of Corn is lying in the Fields, in danger of
perishing for want of due care to save and gather the same into their Haggards
and Barnes; and since it is not their Majesty's intent to Ruin and Destroy,
but to Cherish and Protect their Subjects of what Religion soever. So we
Proclaim this our Protection to all those who shall peaceably and quietly
retire to their several Habitations, in order that they may enjoy their
Majesty's Clemency, and so gather their Stocks and Corn in due order for to
bring it to the Market for sale, which Freemarker, we have thought fit to
appoint at Dundalk, every Thursday and Friday, where all those that shall come
with Corn, and other Provisions, shall be Protected, and paid in ready Money for
what they shall sell or dispose of.

SCHONBERG.
Given at our Headquarters at Dundalk this 10th day of September, 1689.
London, Printed for Rich. Baldwin in the Old-Bayly, 1689.


