TWO SPEECHES IN PARLIAMENT OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, LORD Vicount SAY
and SEAL, Mr. of his Majesty's Court of Wards and Liveries, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, The first upon the Bill against
Bishops power in civil affairs and Courts of Judicature. The other a
Declaration of himself touching the Liturgy, and separation.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill. 1641.

A Speech of the Right Honorable WILLIAM, Lord Vicount Say and Seal, one of
his Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, spoken in Parliament, upon the
Bill against the Bishops.
MY LORDS,
I Shall not need to begin as high as Adam in answer to what has bin drawn
down from thence by a Bishop concerning this question, The Bishop of Lincoln.
for that which is pertinent to it will only be what concerns Bishops as they
are ministers of the Gospel, what was before (being of another nature) can
give no rule to this. The question that will lie before your Lordships in
passing of this bill is not whether Episcopacie (I mean this Hierarchicall
Episcopacy which the world now holds forth to us) shall be taken away Root and
branch, but whether those exuberant and superfluous branches, which draw away
the sap from the tree, and divert it from the right and proper use whereby it
becomes unfruitful, shall be cut off, as they use to pluck up suckers from
the Root. The question will be no more but this, whether Bishops shall be
reduced to what they were in their first advancement over the Presbyters (which
although it were but a humane device for the Remedy of Schism, yet were they
in those times least offensive) or continue still with the addition of such
things, as their own ambition, and the ignorance and superstition of
succeeding times did add thereunto, and which are now continued for several
politic ends, things heterogeneall and inconsistent with their calling and
function, as they are ministers of the Gospel, and thereupon such, as ever
have been, and ever will be, hurtful to themselves, and make them hurtful to
others, in the times and places where they are continued. And these things
alone this bill takes away, that is their offices and places in Courts of
Judicature, and their employments by Obligation of office in civil affairs: I
shall insist upon this, to show first how these things hurt themselves, and
secondly, how they have made, and ever will make them hurtful to others; They
themselves are hurt thereby in their consciences, and in their credits; In
their consciences, by seeking or admitting things which are inconsistent with
that function and office which God has set them apart unto. They are separated
unto a special work, and men must take heed how they mis-imploy things
dedicated and set apart to the service of God; They are called to preach the
Gospel, and set apart to the work of the ministry, and the Apostle says,
who is sufficient for these things, showing that this requires the whole man,
and all is too little, therefore for them to seek, or take other offices which
shall require and tie them to employ their time and studies in the affairs of
this world, will draw a guilt upon them, as being inconsistent with that which
God does call them and set them apart unto. In this respect our Savior has
expressly prohibited it, telling his Apostles that they should not Lord it over
their Brethren, nor exercise Jurisdiction over them, as was used in civil
governments among the Heathen: They were called gracious Lords, and exercised
Jurisdiction as Lords over others, and sure they might lawfully do so: but to
the Ministers of the Gospel our Savior gives this Rule, it shall not be so
done by you; If ye strive for greatness, he shall be the greatest, that is the
greatest servant to the rest; therefore in another place he says, He that
puts his hand to the Plow and looks back to the things of this world is
not fit for the kingdom of God, that is the preaching of the Gospel, as it is
usually called. To be thus withdrawn by intangling themselves with the
affairs of this life by the necessity and duty of an Office received from men,
from the discharge of that Office which God has called them unto, brings a woe
upon them; Woe unto me, says the Apostle, if I preach not the Gospel, what
does he mean? If I preach not once a quarter, or once a year in the Kings
Chapel? No, he himself interpreted it; Preach the Word, be instant, in season
and out of season, rebuke, exhort, or instruct, with all long suffering and
doctrine: he that has an office, must attend upon his office, especially this
of the ministry. The practice of the Apostles is answerable to the direction,
and doctrine of our Savior. There never was, nor will be, men of so great
abilities and gifts as they were endued withal, yet they thought it so
inconsistent with their Callings to take places of Judicature in civil
matters, and secular affairs and employments upon them, that they would not
admit of the care and distraction that a business far more agreeable to
their Callings, then these, would cast upon them, and they give the reason of
it, in the sixth of the Acts, It is not reason that we should leave the word of
God and serve Tables. And again, when they had appointed them to choose men fit
for that business, they institute an office rather for taking care of the
poor, then they by it would be distracted from the principal work of their
Calling, and then show how they ought to employ themselves; But we (said they)
will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the Word;
Did the Apostles, men of extraordinary gists, think it unreasonable for them
to be hindered from giving themselves continually to preaching the Word and
Prayer, by taking care for the tables of the poor Widows, and can the Bishops
now think it reasonable or lawful for them to contend for sitting at Council
Table to govern States, to turn Statesmen in stead of Churchmen, to sit in
the highest Courts of Judicature, and to be employed in making laws for civil
polities and government? If they shall be thought fit to sit in such places,
and will undertake such employments, they must not fit there as ignorant men,
but must be knowing men in businesses of State, and understand the Rules and
laws of government, and thereby both their time and studies must be necessarily
diverted from that which God has called them unto; And this sure is much more
unlawful for them to admit of, then that which the Apostles rejected as a
distraction unreasonable for them to be interrupted by. The doctrine of the
Apostles is agreeable to their practice herein, for Paul when he instructs
Timothy for the work of the ministry presses this argument from the example
of a good Soldier, no man that warreth intangleth himself with the affairs
of the world: So that I conclude, That which by the commandment of our
Savior, by the practice and doctrine of the Apostles, and I may add by the
Canons of ancient Councels, grounded thereupon, is prohibited to the Ministers
of the Gospel, and showed to be such a distraction unto them from their
Callings and function, as will bring a woe upon them, and is not reasonable for
them to admit of; If they shall notwithstanding entangle themselves withal,
and enter into, it will bring a guilt upon their souls, and hurt them in
respect of their consciences.

In the next place it does blemish them, and strike them in their credit, so
far from truth is that position which they desire to possess the world
withal, that unless they may have these outward trappings of worldly pomp
added to the Ministry, that Calling will grow into contempt, and be despised.
The truth is, these things cast contempt upon them in the eyes of men. They
gain them cap and courtesy, but they have cast them out of the consciences of
men; and the reason is this, every thing is esteemed as it is eminent in its
own proper excellency; the eye in seeing, not in hearing; the ear in
hearing, not in speaking; The one would be rather monstrous then comely, the
other is ever acceptable being proper; so is it with them, their proper
excellency is spiritual, the denial of the world with the pomp and
preferments, and employments thereof, this they should teach and practice, but
when they contrary hereunto seek after a worldly excellency like the great men
of the world, and to rule and dominere as they do contrary to our Saviors
precept, Vos autem non sic, but it shall not be so amongst you, in steid of
honor and esteem they have brought upon themselves in the hearts of the people
that contempt and odium which they now lie under, and that justly and
necessarily, because the world sees that they prefer a worldly excellency, and
run after it, and contend for it, before their own, which being spiritual is
far more excellent, and which being proper to the Ministry is that alone
which will put a value and esteem upon them that are of that Calling. As these
things hurt themselves in their consciences and credit, so have they, and, if
they be continued, still will make them hurtful to others; The reason is,
because they break out of their own orb, and move irregularly; there is a
curse upon their leaving of their own place. The heavenly bodies while they
keep within their own spheres give light and comfort to the world, But if they
should break out, and fall from their regular and proper motions, they would
set the world on fire: so have these done while they kept themselves to the
work of their ministry alone, and gave themselves to prayer, and the ministry
of the Word, according to the example of the Apostles, the world received the
greatest benefits by them, they were the light, and life thereof; But when
their ambition cast them down like stars from heaven to earth, and they did
grow once to be advanced above their brethren, I do appeal to all who have
been versed in the ancient Ecclesiastical stories, or modern Histories,
whether they have not been the common incendiaries of the Christian world,
never ceasing from contention one with another about the precedence of their
Sees, and Churches, Excommunicating one another, drawing Princes to be parties
with them, and thereby casting them into bloody wars. Their ambition, and
intermedling with secular affairs and State business, has bin the cause of
shedding more Christian blood then any thing else in the Christian world, and
this no man can deny that is versed in History; But we need not go out of our
own Kingdom for examples of their insolency and cruelty; when they had a
dependency upon the Pope, and any footing thereby out of the Land, there were
never any that carried themselves with so much scorn and insolency toward the
Princes of this Kingdom, as they have done. Lincoln.
Two of them the Bishop that last spoke has named, but instances of many more
may be given whereof there would be no end. Although the Pope be cast off, yet
now there is another inconvenience no less prejudicial to the Kingdom by
their sitting in this House, and that is, they have such an absolute dependency
upon the King, that they sit not here as freemen. That which is requisite to
freedom, is to be void of hopes and fears; He that can lay down these is a
freeman, and will be so in this house; But for the Bishops as the case stands
with them, it is not likely they will lay aside their hopes, greater
Bishoprics being still in expectancy: and for their fears they cannot lay them
down, since their places and seats in Parliament are not invested in them by
blood, and so hereditary, but by annexation of a Barony to their office, and
depending upon that office, so that they may be deprived of their office, and
thereby of their places, at the Kings pleasure, they do not so much as sit
here dum been se gesserint, as the Judges now by your Lordships petition to the
King have their places granted them, but at will and pleasure, and therefore as
they were all excluded by Edw. the first as long as he pleased, and Laws made
excluso Clero, so may they be by any King at his pleasure in like manner, they
must needs therefore be in an absolute dependencie upon the Crown, and
thereby at devotion for their votes, which how prejudicial it has been, and
will be, to this house, I need not say.

I have now showed your Lordships how hurtful to themselves and others these
things which the bill would take away have been, I will only answer some
Objections which I have met withal, and then crave your pardon for troubling
you so long.

Object. 1. It will be said that they have been very ancient.

2. That they are established by law.

3. That it may be an infringement to the privileges of the House of Peers,
for the house of Commons to send up a Bill to take away some of their members.

To these three objections the answer will be easy.

1. To the first, Antiquity is no good plea, for that which is by experience
found to be hurtful, the longer it has done hurt the more cause there is now
to remove it, that it may do no more, besides other irregularities are as
ancient which have bin thought fit to be redressed, and this is not so ancient,
but that it may truly be said, Non fuit sic ab initio.

2. For being established by Law, the lawmakers have the same power, and the
same charge, to alter old laws inconvenient, as to make new that are necessary.

3. For privilege of the House it can be no breach of it, for either estate
may propose to other by way of bill what they conceive to be for public good,
and they have power respectively of accepting or refusing.

There are two other Objections which may seem to have more force, but they
will receive satisfactory answers.

The one is, that if they may remove Bishops, they may as well next time remove
Barons and Earls: for answer.

The Reason is not the same, the one sitting by an Honor invested in their
blood, and hereditary, which though it be in the King to grant alone, yet being
once granted he cannot take away; the other sitting by a Barony depending upon
an Office which may be taken away, for if they be deprived of their office they
sit not.

2. Their sitting is not so essential, for Laws have bin, and may be made,
they being all excluded, but it can never be showed, that ever there were Laws
made by the King, and them, the Lords and Earls excluded.

The other objection is this, that this Bill alters the foundation of this
house, and innovations which shake foundations are dangerous.

I answer first, that if there should be an error in the foundation, when it
shall be found, and the master builders be met together, they may, nay, they
ought rather to amend it, then to suffer it to run on still, to the prejudice
and danger of the whole structure.

2. Secondly, I say this is not fundamental to this House, for it has stood
without them, and done all that appertains to the power thereof without them,
yea, they being wholly excluded, and that which has been done for a time at
the Kings pleasure, may be done with as little danger for a longer time, and
when it appears to be fit and for public good, not only may, but ought to be
done altogether by the supreme Power.

FINIS.
A Speech of the Right Honorable WILLIAM, Lord Vicount Say and Seal, one of
his Majesty's most Honorable privy Council, spoken in Parliament, touching
the Liturgy and Separation.
MY LORDS,
I Have waited to find you free from greater businesses, that I might crave
leave to speak of something that concerns my self; And this I have the more
desired since my Lord of Canterburies last speech, who expressing his troubles,
and bewailing the misery of his condition, and of the condition of the Church
of England, (for he would needs join them together, which I think he may as
the cause and effect, for the miseries of the Church have certainly risen from
him) he insisted much upon this, That these troubles had befallen him through
the malice of two parties, the Papists, and the Sectaries, and by those he
said the Church was greatly afflicted. How far this man will extend this word
Sectarie, and whom he will comprehend under it, I know not, but I have some
cause to fear that I may lie under some misapprehensions in respect of matters
of this nature, which how far it concerns him your Lordships will perceive
by what I shall say. My Lord of Canterbury a man of mean birth, bred up in a
College, (and that too frequently falls out to be in a faction,) whose narrow
comprehensions extended it self no farther then to carry on a side in the
College, or canvas for a Proctors place in the Universitie, being suddenly
advanced to highest places of government in Church and State, had not his heart
enlarged, by the enlargement of his fortune, but still the maintaining of his
party was that which filled all his thoughts, which he prosecuted with so much
violence and inconsiderateness, that he had not an eye to see the consequences
thereof to the Church and State, until he had brought both into those
distractions, danger and dishonor, which we now find our selves encompassed
withal; Yet to magnify his moderation, presently after the breaking of the
last Parliament he told a Lord who sits now in my sight, that if he had
been a violent man, he wanted no occasion to show it, for he observed that
my Lord Say never came to prayers, and added, that I was in his knowledge as
great a Separatist as any was in England. My Lords, how far he has spit
this venom of his against me, I am not certain; But I may well fear where it
might do me greatest prejudice; I shall therefore entreat your Lordships
favors and patience, that I may give you in these things which so nearly
concern me a true account of my self, which I shall do with ingenuity and
clearenesse, and so as that if I satisfy not all men, yet I hope I shall make
it appear I am not such a one as this waspish man was willing to make the
world believe.

For the first of these that he charge upon me, it may be he was willing to
have it thought that I would not join in prayer with your Lordships, but
refused such a communion, which is altogether false, for I should most
willingly join in prayer with you. And further I will add, that I do not
think but some set forms of prayer, by some men, in some cases, may be
lawfully used; But this is that which I am not satisfied in, that a certain
number of men should usurp an authority unto themselves to frame certain
prayers and forms of divine Service, and when that is done, under the name of
the Church to injoyne them upon all persons, in all times, and upon all
occasions to be used and none other: and upon this ground (which makes it the
worse) because these come from the public spirit of the Church (when the
Bishop or his Chaplain shall frame them) and others proceed from the private
spirit of this or that particular man.

This injunction is an usurpation of power over the Churches of Christ, and
over the gifts and graces which Christ has given unto men: which the Apostles
never exercised nor would assume, and yet they might much better have done it,
and the same reasons might then have been alleged for it, that are now; This
turns such forms, in stead of being directions, into superstition.

This sets aside the gifts and graces which Christ has given, and thrusts out
the exercise of them, to substitute in their places, and introduce a device of
man. This injunction of such forms upon all men, turns that, which in the
beginning necessity brought in for the help of insufficiency, to be now the
continuance and maintenance of insufficiency, and a bar to the exercise of
able and sufficient gifts and graces: As if because some men had need to make
use of Crutches, all men should be prohibited the use of their legs, and
enjoined to take up such crutches as have been prepared for those who had no
legs. This I confess I am not satisfied in, yet I will further say thus
much, here are with your Lordships some Bishops, men of great parts, able to
offer up this worship unto God, in the use of those gifts which God has
endowed them with: and certainly they ought to serve him with the best of their
abilities which they have received. Let them make use of their own gifts, nay
let them but profess that they account not themselves bound to use forms; nor
to this form they use, more then any other, but that it is free to them to
conceive prayer, or to help themselves by the use of any other form they
please as well as this prescribed; And let them practice the same indifferently,
that so it may be manifest the fault rests in the person and not in the
Service, in the negligence of him that may offer better if he will, not in the
Injunction of that which is offered; And I will not refuse to come to prayer:
for I take the sin then to be personal, and to reside in the person
officiating only. I know not whether I express my self clearly to be
understood in this or not, and it may seem to be a nice scrupulosity, give me
leave therefore to endeavor to clear it by an instance or two. In the time of
the Law, when God appointed himself to be worshipped by offerings, and
sacrifices, the shadows and types of those truths which were to come; If a
poor man that had not ability to bring a Bullock, or a Ram, or a Lamb, had
brought a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons, it would have been in
him an acceptable service: But if a man of ability who had herds and flocks,
should out of negligence or covetousness, have spared the cost of a Bullock
or a Ram, and brought young Pigeons, his service would have been rejected,
and himself punished: how much more would the service have been abomination,
if men should have taken authority to have enjoined all to bring no other but
Turtles or young Pigeons, because some were not able to do more? In one case
there might be a tolerable and lawful use of that, which otherwise used
(especially if generally enjoined) would have been most unlawful; God will be
worshipped with the fat and the best of the inwards, the best of men's gifts
and abilities, which he that worships, or officiates in worshipping, is to do
at his own peril; And if it be left free unto him, the worship may be lawful
to him that joyneth with him therein in it self, though performed in a
negligent, and so in a sinful manner by the Minister, but if that manner be
enjoined, the Service it self is to be refused.

Now in the time of the Gospel God has appointed the foolishness of
preaching (for so the world accounts it) to be the means whereby he will save
those that believe; I conceive where there are no gifts inabling men to preach,
there might be a lawful and profitable use of reading of printed Sermons and
Homilies, and in such case they might very lawfully be heard; But if some men
upon pretense to prevent extravagant preaching, should take upon them to set
forth a book of public or common Sermons fit for all times and occasions, and
should injoyne Ministers to conform to those, and use no other preaching at
all, but the reading of these common Sermons or Homilies so devised for public
worship, this would make it utterly unlawful, and to be professed against, as
that which were the bringing in of a humane device and injunction, in the
place, and in stead of Gods ordinance, to the exclusion thereof, as the
Pharisees, to establish traditions of their own, made void the commandments
of God; let it be considered what difference there can be found between
these, but only this, Use and Custom has enured us to that of Prayer, not so
in this of Preaching, and therefore the evil of it would easily appear unto
us if so enjoined.

My Lords, let me presume upon your patience so far further, as to give me
leave to speak to the other imputation laid upon me that I am a Separatist,
and the greatest in England; and first I shall say of this word Separatist, as
that learned man Mr. Hales of Eaton says in a little Manuscript of his which I
have seen.

That where it may be rightly fixed and deservedly charged, it is certainly a
great offense; But in common use now amongst us it is no other then a
Theological scar-crow, wherewith the potent and prevalent party uses to
fright and enforce those who are not of their opinions to subscribe to their
dictates, without daring to question them, or bring them to any rule or
examination either of Scripture or reason. And he observes that this was too
usual, even in ancient times as well as now.

Secondly, I say that there is a twofold separation, one from the Universal or
Catholic Church, which can no otherwise be made but by denying the faith, (for
Faith and Love are the Requisites unto that communion) the other is a
separation from this or that particular Church or congregation, and that not in
respect of difference with them in matter of faith or love, but in dislike
only of such corruptions in their external worships and Liturgies as they do
admit of, and would injoyne upon others. This is a separation not from their
persons as they are Christians, but from their corruptions in matter of worship
as they are therewith defiled; And this separation every man that sin keep
himself pure from other men's sins, and not sin against his own conscience,
must make. And I will ingenuously confess, that there are many things in many
Churches or Congregations in England practiced, and enjoined upon all to be
practiced and suffered, which I cannot practice, nor admit of; except I should
sin against the light of my conscience, until I may out of the word of God be
convinced of the lawfulness of them, which hitherto I could never see
sufficient ground for. But my Lords, this is so far from making me the
greatest Separatist in England, that it cannot argue me to be any at all; for
my Lords, the Bishops do know that those whom they usually apply this term
unto are the Brownists (as they call them by another name) and they know their
tenants. The truth is, they differ with us in no fundamental point of doctrine
or saving truth, as I know.

Their failing is in this, they hold that there is no true Church in England,
no true Ministry, no true worship, which depend the one upon the other, they
say all is Antichristian: here is their error, they distinguish not between
the been esse or purity of a true Church, and the esse or true being of it,
though with many defects and gross corruptions, But conclude that because such
things are wanting, which are indeed necessary to the well being of a true
Church, and to be desired, therefore there is none at all in being. I hold no
such opinion, but do believe to the contrary, That there are in England many
true Churches, and a true Ministry which I do hear, and with which Churches
I could join in communion were those yokes of bondage which are laid upon them
taken off, and those corruptions removed which they do (contrary as I think
to their duty) yield unto and admit of, and this I am sure no separatist in
England holds that deserves that name. Therefore I hope your Lordships will
in that respect let me stand right in your opinions. I shall now end with two
requests.

The one that your Lordships will please to pardon me for troubling you with so
long a discourse concerning my self, I have not used it heretofore, and I am
not like to offend again in the same kind, it is but once, and your Lordships
will consider the occasion.

The second is humbly to entreat of you, that where you know there is one and
the same God worshipped, one and the same faith embraced, one and the same
spirit working love, and causing an unblameable conversation without any
offense to the State, in your brethren, that in all these concur with you,
you will not suffer them (for Ceremonies, and things to you indifferent, but
not to them but burdens, which without offense to the State, or prejudice to
the Churches, you may take off if you will) to be thrust out of the Land, and
cut off from their native Country, for if you thus shall wound the consciences
of your brethren, you will certainly offend, and sin against Christ.

FINIS.

