REASONS SHOWING That there is no need of such a Reformation of the public

1. Doctrine.

2. Worship.

3. Rites and Ceremonies.

4. Church Government.

5. Discipline.

As is pretended by Reasons offered to the serious consideration of this
present PARLIAMENT, by diverse Ministers of sundry Counties in ENGLAND:

By H. S. D. D. Chaplain to his Majesty in Ordinary.

PHIL. 4. 5. Let your moderation be known unto all men. The LORD is at hand.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1660.

C. L.
ARca Palaestinis latuit velut exul in oris:
Davidis ad reditum, Quam rediisse juvat.
Hac been consulta; sub quovis, arma movere,
Relligio, obtentu Relligionis, erit.
Hinc etenim infandae caedes, and facta Tyranni
Effera, Praeconum scandala magna fluunt.
Undique Doctrinam hanc, tonuerunt Rostra, rebellem,
Clavum, Schismatici dum tenuere, Ratis.
Remigat hac Bradshaw, referens sua tincta, cruore,
Brachia, Divorum, vix Februanda: Proin
Alter ut infaelix; pariter censendus uterque,
Quod sua, maturo tempore, fata tulit.
Ergo paeniteat facti, Quicunque superstes
Jam sis, ac Hujus criminis actor eras:
Sic Parcas venerere tuas; monuere quod, etsi
Damnatum Gyaris, Te; monuere tamen.
IN THEIR EPISTLE TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
THEY say that its far from their thoughts to oppose or disparage Orthodox
Doctrine, a well composed Liturgy, Rites for Decency and Order, Ordination of
Ministers, Apostolical Episcopacy, or due rules of Discipline. All this I like
well: and that they are for all these, I like much better; especially being
accompanied with truth, without violation of liberty allowed by Christ. But
this mistaken Liberty has served as an Engine to pull down Doctrine, Liturgy
Rites, Orders. Episcopacy, Discipline and all: Nothing being set up in the room
thereof unless an Empusa, that must have but one leg to stand upon, to w^t,
men's own imaginations and single apprehensions of things.

The thing mainly touched in the said Epistle is Episcopacy, whereof they make
representation not of the pretended illegality only, but of the ill effects
too; as namely, how the Bishops in all ages since the Conquest have sharply
persecuted all that threw off Popery, where Kings have not curbed the violence
of them. An argument of that nature as strong for Episcopacy as could have been
produced, if we consider what good those men would have done in the Church, had
they lived under the Reformation, by reflection* had upon St. Paul himself, who
having been before his Conversion a grievous Persecutor, became after it a
zealous Promoter of the Gospel. And indeed it is to b^ confessed that the
confusions that have ensued upon that Episcopal rigor have rendered the
objects thereof, (but to the great scandal of themselves and the Gospel)
guilty of Rebellion against Kings, a thing often practiced, but never professed
by any but the Disciples of Junius Brutus. And of this spirit were the furious
Zealots in the time of Edw. 6. mentioned in the Epistle, which they pretend to
have been fomented and not moderated, but countenanced by that pious King: who
was so far from it, that he not only caused one book of Common Prayer to be
composed and enjoined instead of the several forms secundum usum Sarum, etc.
in practice before, whence men took occasion to use what forms they pleased;
but also prohibited by Proclamation all preaching whatsoever, till he and his
Parliament had taken order for the settlement of Religion; and setting of
bounds to all, but especially to the Anabaptistical Spirits, out of which
Divine Circle they were not to pass in their praedications. And what I have
spoken in defense of former Popish Bishops, the same may be said of those in
Queen Mary's days. Lastly, it is pretended that the noble King James was
persuaded by the Bishops, by whom he was continually plied, to leave the
Liturgy unreformed, to compel all to subscribe to the same, and to enforce the
observation of Canons that were illegal: whereby some were suspended, others
under Canonical admonition, the next door to deprivation; and all this clean
contrary to that influence which the Conference at Hampton Court would have had
upon him. But whosoever looks upon the Proclamation prefixed to the Book of
Common Prayer, shall find it de facto to be nothing so: and whosoever
considers the deep Learning and profound judgment of that Renowned Prince,
will never believe it to be so; He being able to cope with any Prince or
Prelate in the world in matters of that nature. And here one thing is not to be
omitted before I put a period to my observations upon the Epistle; That they
allege the Liturgy to have remained uureformed in greatest part, or most
material points; notwithstanding much complained of, in the Conference at
Hampton*Court. Whence I observe that somethings, even at their own instance,
were added or amended in the Liturgy, and with those additions or emendations
was it warranted by the Proclamation of King JAMES. If so, why do they, of all
men, except against it, as a thing not established by LAW? I intend not to
contend with the punctilles of LAW; wherein the more a man flutters, the worse
he may be entangled: Only thus much I say, that Conscience will not absolve
any man who has subscribed to the observation of the same, and of the other
things in Question, so long as they are either necessary or adiaphora, which we
are in our ensuing work to defend.

REASONS SHOWING That there is no necessity of such a Reformation of the
Public.
I.
DOCTRINE.
COncerning this; the main thing insisted upon, is the Articles, with the Kings
Declaration praefixed to them: wherein it is commanded not to affix any other
sense to the Articles besides the literal; and this, say they, ties us up from
all liberty of interpreting any Article, whereof they give us several
instances, and that all this was done by the procurement of the then Bishops.
But surely if this be any matter of Record, the K. had some body else to pen
it: and if it be reasonable, the Bishops need not be ashamed of being the
Authors of it. But so reasonable it is, that there is nothing in it that may
enforce those consequences that they would infer upon it: inasmuch as the
affixing of no other sense besides the literal, does not, I hope, take away
the liberty of explaining the Articles, or showing what is, and what is not
their literal sense.

The next exception is at the Homilies wherein it is falsely said, say they,
that plurality of Wives was permitted to the Fathers, because they every one
hoped and begged that Christ might come of their stock and kindred; as if, say
they, all did not know out of what Tribe Christ was to issue (the Homily is
mistaken, though the Page be right.) Whereunto I answer, that plurality of
Wives began before that prophecy, that Christ should come of the Tribe of
Judah: and therefore before this time all did not know so much; nor could every
man fish so much afterward out of so mysterious a prophecy.

The third is, That the Homilies call the Apocrypha the teaching of the Holy
Ghost.

Answ. 1. That the book of Homilies speaks according to the common Language of
those times; which so spoke of them, because they were reckoned in the Canon
(not of Faith) but of Manners. 2. They themselves confess the things there
quoted to be true in a charitable construction; and omnis veritas a spiritu
sancto est.

The 4th. Exception is, That the Articles contain no discovery of Popish
doctrines, being the first tenets of Arminius, etc.

Answ. That the Doctrine of Arminius is not the Doctrine of Popery: the
Articles condemn both; and therefore are no breasts, at which Popery and
Arminianisme may be sucked in, as is pretended.

The 5th. Exception is, That all things necessary to salvation are not
comprised in the Articles.

Whereunto I answer, that the same Exception may lie against the confessions of
any Reformed Church; but these that are, suffice to show their Harmony with
those of other Churches: and what is wanting in the Articles, is made out in
the rest of the Catechism.

Hereunto may be added their exception of not enumerating the Books of the New
Testament, as well as those of the old.

Answ. That the Canonical books of the Old Testament are enumerated to
distinguish them from the Apocryphal: but in the N. T. (there being no
Apocryphals) there needed no enumeration. And if Popery may be grounded upon
the Articles (as is pretended) they need not fear any tacit rejection of St.
James his Epistle, or calling of it stamineam Epistolam, as Luther does, nor
yet of the 2d* of Peter, in as much as the compilers of the Articles are
adversaries to those that are (...) 2 Ep. 2. 10. nor of the Revelation neither,
in as much as the seven Angels of the 7. Churches, are taken to be a clear
proof of Episcopacy.

The 6th. Exception is, That the Articles are not proved by places of Scripture.

Answ. They are known to be sufficiently proved by others, and therefore they
might have done so too: bnt had they done it; cavils would not have been
wanting against the proofs themselves, where none could be found against the
things.

II.
For WORSHIP.
THe maine exception is, That it does not appear by any enrollment or otherwise
that this is the book of Common Prayer.

Answ. That if this be not the book; I pray produce another. If you do, it will
be one, which in your own judgment, will be less Orthodox: But it seems, by
what follows, that you are displeased with any alterations though for the
better. Your design appears to be not a reducing, so much as a new moulding of
the whole; a thing which I must confess I like not of, lest we should seem
thereby rather to set up a new Religion, then reform the old: between
Reformation, and Innovation, there is a great deal of odds.

Of Alterations, etc. in the present Book of Common Prayer from that
established in 5. 6. Edw. 6. and 1 Eliz.
1. Exception is against Saints days put into the Calendar; which though in
Black letters there; yet in Dr. Cosens Calendar and the Scottish Liturgy, some
of them are in red.

Answ. For our Calendar or the Scottish, what ever characters the days are put
in, they are not enacted to be kept holy. And as for Dr. Cosens his Calendar;
that is intended for private offices, not for public devotion. What ever he
has done concerning the name of Jesus; I cannot think that so great an
assertor of the Protestant Religion (as he has proved himself to be) should
intend Popery, or Superstition. The thing it self infers it not; there being
no name JESUS in writing tendered to be adored; which was the only thing that
Calvin complains the Sorbonick Sophisters to have been guilty of.

2. Exception is, That upon certain Holidayes some Chapters of Apocryphal
Scripture are appointed to be read, the Canonical being left out there.

Answ. Whether it was done to please those that hold the days to be
Apocryphal, I cannot tell? If so, they need not be displeased at it. However,
those Canonical Lessons are not left out of the Rubric for daily reading.

3d Exception is, That the book established 5. 6. Ed. 6. names only the
Surplice to be worn: but the book of Canons enjoyneth other ornaments.

Answ. That nothing, but the Surplice, could be universally enjoined; inasmuch
as all Priests were capable of that: but want of degrees made many incapable of
others.

4th. Exception is against even useful prayers put into the Liturgy, which
happily might be done upon the Conference at Hampton Court, though the inquiry
to me is needless as long as I see the Kings Proclamation to it.

5th. Exception is, That in the prayer for the Queen, etc. the word Elect is
left out, perhaps because it distasted the favorers of the Popish Arminianisme.

Answ.That neither the Arminians nor Papists are against the word Elect, and
that in a more comprehensive sense then ours. It Is not they therefore, that
would exclude the Royal stem out of the number of Gods Elect, but such as
fought for the setting up of Christ's Kingdom, and of his Elect, against such
Reprobates as they esteemed the KING and all his family to be.

6. Exception is against the continuance of the Old Translation of the Psalms,
which is not so correct as the new.

Answ.That it proves the antiquity of the Translation, no wilful corruption of
the same; neither does it contain any thing contrary to the analogy of Faith.

7. Exception is, That notwithstanding the corruption of Translations, the
Preface of the book runs thus: That nothing is enjoined to be read: but that
which is the pure word of God, or that which is evidently grounded thereupon;
which is false, and a mere cheat put upon the people of God.

Answ.That the Preface of the Book runs, that nothing be enjoined to be read
but that which is the pure Word of God, or that which is evidently grounded
thereupon, in opposition to uncertain stories, legends, and such like vain and
superstitious things, neither in Canone fidei, nor morum; which have no ground
in the word of God; yet had been, before that time commonly read. And albeit
some things now to be read are not, evidently to all, grounded upon the word of
God; it follows not that the people of God are cheated thereby; for then St.
Paul had cheated the Thessalonians, Acts 17. 11. To whom, before search made,
his Doctrine did not appear to be the Word of God. Nay then most Sermons are
cheats; in as much as there be very few, wherein every thing delivered is
clearly made out to be grounded upon the Word of God. The same may be said of
prayers before and after them, wherein horrible absurdities and heterodoxies
have fallen from the mouths of Preachers. But one place is alleged out of the
Epistle for 16. Sundry after Trinity, which has no ground in the Word of God,
in as much as it implies, that the Father must be Father of himself.

Answ.That it does not necessarily follow: For in that he is said to be the
Father of all that is called Father in heaven and earth: among this, all; he is
to be excepted who is this Father. As when it is said, All things are put under
him, it is manifest that he is excepted that has put all things under him, 1
Cor. 15.

Further Observations.
1. In the Calendar.
THe first Exception, besides what has been answered before, is that 188.
Chapters of the Old Testament are left out: and of the Apocrypha which contains
173. there are read 121. Chapters by the Calendar of 5. 6. of Edward 6. as well
as by that of later date. The answer hereunto is set down in the Order how the
rest of the holy Scripture (besides the Psalter) is appointed to be read; which
begins thus: The Old Testament is appointed for the first Lesson at Morning and
Evening prayer, and shall be read through every year once, except certain Books
and Chapters, which be least edifying, and might be spared, and therefore are
left unread.

2. That of St. Hierome (Caveat omnia Apocrypha) relates to matters of Faith,
not of manners: besides that the ordering of the Apocryphal Chapters to be
read, is intended chiefly for the benefit of the Clergy (as appears by the
Preface) who having not always a competent number to join with them at Church,
are enjoined nevertheless to read them at home. Besides this general
Exception; there is one or two more against particular Apocryphal places: as

1. Against that, Tobit 3. of Asmodeus his killing of seven Husbands of Sarah
the daughter of Raguel before they had layen with her.

Answ.I have heard of as unlikely a matter as that: but however, it is not
impossible.

2. It Is excepted against, Tob. 3. 8. where it is said that Almsdeeds deliver
from death, and purge away all sin.

Answ.That they do so, and that one way is in that they declare, at the last
day, the Saints to be justified in the sight of God, Mat. 25. Nay they confess
themselves, Title 1. of Doctrine, that a charitable construction may be
Wyre-drawn out of the words. And is not there as much wyre-drawing to be used
in* making a good construction upon these words [Make ye friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations?] another way of expounding the words is in the Homily it self,
namely that God for the doing of Almsdeeds does repute us as clean and pure,
not that they have any such strength or merit in themselves.

To the other Exceptions against Raphael, verse. 15. and elsewhere, and also
against Judith. I answer, that though it were granted that the story were
untrue: yet the ill quality or carriage of the persons in it, are not fit
Mediums to discredit the truth of it: for then many books of the holy Scripture
must be false.

2. Of the Rubricks.
1. EXception is, that the Minister is called Priest. I answer, That the word
Priest is the best and properest word that can be used even in the sense of the
Authors of this Exception themselves, in as much as it is nothing else but an
abbreviation of the French word Prestre, which is Presbyter: in all words that
are French and that end in E feminine, as Prestre does, the English cannot
pronounce the E feminine but by a kind of stifling of it; which in time
degenerateth into an E quiescent, which at last gives occasion to the leaving
of it quite out of the Orthography of the word as unnecessary. As in Alarm,
Baptism, Catechism, and Prestre (with a number of other words) which are now
written Alarm, Baptism, Catechism, Pressed; and to lengthen the word to the
French manner of pronunciation, the letter I is put in, as a Metheg, to bridle
the overhasty prolation of the same. And as for the word, Minister, it is
taken either generally, and so it comprehends the Apostles and Bishops
themselves: (for they and we are all Ministers of the Gospel:) or else
specifically (which is the thing here intended) and so it is Diaconus, a Deacon,
and contradistinguished from a Presbyter. So that upon the whole, the Authors
would have us say Deacon instead of Priest. Now as for the Scottish Liturgy; if
it has hit upon a more unknown name then Priest is, we do well to retein this
which is better known.

2. Except. is a mere mistake: For the Rubric prefixed to the Epistles and
Gospels runs thus. The Collects, Epistles and Gospels, to be used at the
celebration of the Lords Supper and holy Communion throughout the year. Whence
they falsely infer, that they were never intended to be read but when there is
the celebration of the Lords Supper: Whereas the Rubric at the end of the
Communion says, that when there is no Communion shall be said all that is
appointed at the Communion until the end of the Homily, concluding with the
prayer for the whole estate of Christ's Church militant here on earth, with some
other Collect: But that the Communion is not celebrated throughout the whole
year, is occasioned for want of a competent number of Communicants.

3. Exception is, That the Rubric before the general Confession at the
Communion runs thus: Then shall this general Confession be made in the name of
all those that are to receive the holy Communion either by one of them, or else
by one of the Ministers. What is this, say they, but to admit a private person
to assist and bear a share in the administering of the Lords Supper against the
17. Article of Religion?

I answ. That the confession to be made by one of them, or by one of the
Ministers, presupposes the Priests speaking first: the which confession made
by one of them, is as much as if it were made by the Clerk who does not always
communicate, and consequently in that case is to absent himself. Or were it
made without the Priests leading them; yet it concludes not a liberty to
Laymen to administer the Sacrament; in as much as to confess, and to
consecrate are two distinct things.

4th. Exception is; That before the proper Prefaces at the Communion, it is
said that upon Christmas, and seven days after; upon Easter day and seven
days after, etc. the same shall be read. As if every one of the seven were the
same with the first, and what was done the first day were done every day
following.

I answer; That the first of those days is the Original, the rest are all
Copies thereof: the Feast continuing, the rest are the same in Ecclesiastical
account, though the first be the principal.

5th. Exception is, That every Parishioner shall communicate three times in a
year, of which Easter shall be one: yet the Minister is required every Assembly
day to invite them to come to the Lords Table: Therefore say they, the foresaid
Rubric seems to dispense with Gods invitation: How rightly, say they, let all
sober men consider.

I answer; That whether that be a Dispensation with Gods invitation, let all
sober men judge too? and of these three, Easter is to be one; because, though
every Lords day be celebrated in memory of our Lords Resurrection; yet Easter
day, (according to the judgment of the Church,) comes nearest the day of his
Resurrection.

But 6ly. where it is added in that Rubric. He shall receive the Sacraments
and other Rites, etc. This, say they, is no other but nonsense or worse: for
what other Sacraments are then to be received? or what other Rites?

I answ. 1. That by Sacraments are understood the two signs Bread and Wine,
which being parts integrales similares, receive the denomination of the whole:
as every part of water is water, because it is a similar part. So that were
there nothing more then this piece of Philosophy in it; it were not to be
accounted nonsense: But there is Divinity too, to make it good. For first, you
must grant the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the holy Communion to be in
substance the same: but now, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The bread that
we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? The cup of blessing
that we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? Wherein you see
that both the integrall parts of the Communion receive the denomination of the
whole.

2. For other Rites, the party to communicate may need and desire absolution in
case of scandalous and Conscience-wasting sins. He may receive confirmation, in
case he has never received that, or the Communion before: And are not these
rites? or can these be done without rites?

7. Exception is this: The last Rubric before the Catechism in order to
Confirmation concludes thus: It is certain that children baptized have all
things necessary to salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. Is this a truth, say
they?

Answ. That it is a great truth, inasmuch as no other ceremony is required on
our parts; and the promise of God makes it sure on his part: wherefore, if they
cast not themselves into doubtings, charity binds us not to doubt of their
salvation.

8. Exception is; That the Rubric after Matrimony says that the new married
persons the same day of their Marriage, must receive the Communion; and yet no
man is bound to receive it above three times a year.

Answ. 1. Why may not this day be one? 2. They are not ordinarily to receive
above three times a year, but in this extraordinary case they are: and many do
desire to do it; but there is not always a sufficient number to communicate; a
thing required by the Rubric.

9. Exception is, That in the last Rubric for the Communion of the sick in
the time of Plague or any other contagious disease, when none of the Parish can
be gotten to communicate with the sick for fear of infection, the Minister may
only communicate with him. By this, say they, the Minister is bound not only
to visit him, but to communicate with him, a thing no way agreeable,

1. To Christianity, in as much as the very nature of a Sacrament requires a
public administration; besides that other Rubricks require a greater number
of Communicants, even when the Sacrament is given to a sick person.

2. No way agreeable to common humanity; in as much as a Minister is bound to
hazard his health, and life, to gratify an infectious person.

I answ. 1. That this is not disagreeable to Christianity: because that God has
promised to be in the midst of two or three gathered together in Christ's name.

2ly. The Rubricks require greater numbers in other cases where they are more
likely to be procured, as in ordinary diseases they may; which cannot be done
in this: and that is the reason why the Rubric here requires it not.

2. It Is not dis-agreeable to humanity; in as much as it is said that the
Minister may communicate only with the infected person: it does not say that he
must do it; and therefore he is not bound hereby to do it, unless he finds
himself bound in conscience, or can secure himself from infection.

3. Of the body of the Book.
THe first Exception is; That the first words of it are these: At what time
soever a sinner does repent, etc. This, in the Rubric before it, is called a
sentence of Scripture: but* say they, it is not only no sentence of Scripture,
but it is also dissonant from another [To day if ye will hear his voice, etc.]
and besides it implies that a man may repent when he will.

I answer; That it is a sentence of Scripture rendered according to the sense of
the place: for the [If] is indefinitely taken, it is not if to day only, or if
to morrow only; if at this time only, or if at that timeonely: but if at all,
if at any time: that is to say, at what time soever. God often in mercy calls
us to repentance: if at any time, at what time soever we answer his call, he
will receive us graciously: yet this does not argue that it is in our power to
repent when we will, after our refusal of Gods several gracious invitations.
But this is not all; for after our regeneration and first conversion unto God,
we fall into sin, we go astray, and that every day, yea seven times a day,
which makes us every day confess and pray to God to forgive us our trespasses
according as we are taught by our Savior. And therefore the [If] signifies not
only At what particular time soever; but as often as a sinner shall repent,
etc. so often will God forgive. Now nothing that has been said is dissonant to
that place [To day if ye will hear his voice, etc.] For though it be the surest
way to hear Gods voice to day, that is at present, lest any should be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin: Yet God was grieved forty years with his
people in the wilderness, before he swear in his wrath that they should not
enter into his rest. The refusal of the present invitation, may prove a means
of hardening of us through the deceitfulness of sin; but it enforces no present
shutting of the door of mercy against us.

2. Exception is against that expression in the Confession [there is no health
in us] as if it were not to be understood by the common sort.

Answ. That no body can understand this of bodily health; but of the salvable
condition of the soul, which is taken away by sin.

3. Exception is against the reading of Te Deum and the Benedicite, as
interrupting the continued reading of the holy Scriptures, which the Preface of
that Book, say they, bears us in hand, is provided against.

Ans. That there it is provided against, breaking of one piece of a Chapter
from another; and after such interruption reading forward again, like the
interposition of a Selah, or (...), things whereof we have examples in the
Psalms, but no where else.

4th. Exception is against Te Deum and Benedicite, because they are both
Apocrypha and taken out of the Masse-book: from whence they would argue the
unfitness of Bishops to govern, who, not able to express their thanksgiving to
God for extraordinary mercies, do it in this superstitions formal dress
usually sung in Popish Churches.

I answ. That the best service that any man performs (besides the saying of the
Lords Prayer, and the reading of the holy Scripture) is Apocryphal: nor is
there a better piece of service in the Church of God (except before excepted)
then that piece of Apocrypha, viz. Te Deum, is. Then which, had the Masse-book
no worse, it would need no Reformation. And many of those that have gone about
to make expressions of thanksgiving for Gods extraordinary mercies in terms
and methods of their own, have performed it so ill, that they had better have
contented themselves with a bare Te Deum. If they say, It Is but a general and
ordinary form of praising, not applicable to the occasion;

I answer; That, at such times, we in like manner use to sing Psalms in meter;
which (quatenus such) are Apocryphal, and general forms; or, at most, not (in
all things) applicable to the present occasion. As for the Benedicite, they
except not so much against the matter of, as the title given to it in the
Bible, not here; as also against some alterations made in it, none whereof are
against the Analogy of Faith, I therefore pass it over: for it answers it self.

5th. Exception is, That the many Antiphonies and Responds (except the peoples
saying Amen) have no pattern nor warrant in the Word.

Answ. That they have a pattern, 1 Samuel 18. 7. where it is said that the women
answered, etc. that is, says Junius, Hunc amaebaeum versum alternis canebant:
they sang interchangeably, Saul has slain his thousand, and David hs ten
thonsand, as it is also Exodus 15. 2. Besides diverse patterns that there are in
the Psalms, of such interchangeable singing.

6th. Exception is that (from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome and all his
detestable enormities) is left out in the Letany, inasmuch as he had never more
instruments at work then now.

Answ. That the Act for Uniformity gives notice of an alteration in the Letany:
but whether herein or no, is uncertain. Mean time we may very well pray so;
since the Pope had never more instruments, who thinking to do their own work,
have done his.

8. Exception (for I omit the seventh here as answered before) is that it is
said in the Collect for Christmas, that Christ was this day, viz. December. 25.
borne, etc. which is evidently grounded on no place of Scripture.

Answ. On what place of Scripture is it evidently grounded, that this day, viz.
August 19. is the Lords day? have you any more then Ecclesiastical tradition
for it? as for saying the same seven days after: this has been spoken to
before.

9. Exception is against our saying at the Communion, Therefore with Angels,
and Archangels, etc. the Scripture never speaking of more Archangels then one,
which is mentioned, 1 These. 4. 16. This one was Michael, Jude 9. to wit Christ,
the Prince of his people, Dan. 10. 21. Which most (if not all) expound of
Christ.

For* answer whereunto I say; That, that place of 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. does neither
imply that there is but that one Archangel, nor yet, that, that one Archangel
is Christ: For

1. It is said that the Lord shall descend from heaven (...) in the voice of an
Archangel; not (...). In the voice of the Arch-angell; as if there were no
more but that.

2. If the Lord shall descend in the voice of an Archangel; and this
Archangel were Christ, then Christ (who is meant by Lord there) must descend
in his own voice, and he must be Gods Trumpeter, to give summons to his own
Tribunal, which cannnt be imagined. Indeed Jude 9. there is mention made of
Michael (...), the Archangel disputing with the Devil: but how by that Christ
should be understood, is not at all clear, as I suppose they themselves will
confess, if they consider the (...) in the Text [he durst not.] Sure if it had
been Christ, St. Jude would have said (he would not) not (he durst not) for
what durst not Christ say or do? Dares not he rebuke his creatures though
Devils, who has rebuked so many unclean spirits in his time, who trembled at
his presence in humane flesh? the meaning is then, that Michael that good
Archangel (and he of a great sphere too) would not rail at the Devil (though
he knew him to be a damned spirit) because he was in great dignity amongst
them: yet those men spoke evil of dignities they understood not. And for that
Dan. 10. they say most (if not all) expound it of Christ. That (if not all) was
well put in: for they know (I believe) that many learned men understand it not
of Christ. Now as for the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of Dyonisius the Areopagite:
though the book may be supposititious; yet the thing it self, Gregory the great
testifies to be received for Dyonisius his own. Hom. 34. in Evangelia.

10. Exception is that in the second prayer at public baptism we pray that
Iufants coming to baptism may receive remission of sins by spiritual
regeneration; how can this, say they, be; when remission of sins is received,
not by or from spiritual regeneration; but by and from the blood of Christ?

I answer. That the end of Baptism is, that thereby, as an outward means, we
may receive remission of sins: this baptism whereby we are baptized into the
remission of sins, is likewise rightly called an outward and Elementary
regeneration: Now therefore we pray to God that Infants coming to baptism may
receive remission of sins, (not in an Elementary way, and signo tenus only,
but also) truly and effectually by spiritual regeneration or spiritual
baptism; these being the Conduitpipes whereby, and through which Christ's blood
is conveyed unto Infants.

11. Exception is, That children being not able to perform the things promised
for them, are said to perform them by their sureties; and therefore they repent
and believe, say they, by their Sureties, which is a mere tale.

Answ. That here is no such thing employed, as repenting and believing one for
another; but a promise of a holding of the Infants baptized to that profession
by instruction of, and vigilance over them, and that they shall perform all
outward acts of Christianity when they come of age; and this was a very great
charge in the primitive times, when either for fear, or favor, or profit
Apostasy was so frequent.

12. Exception is against the Commination to be used diverse times in the year,
taken out of Deuteronomy. 27.

I answer; That that place is a type of the day of Judgment: that as all the
People were to say Amen (at their entrance into the earthly Canaan) to the
curses denounced against the wicked. So all the Saints at their entrance into
the heavenly Canaan, are to say Amen, that is, to aprove of the condemnation of
them; for the Saints shall thus judge the earth.

To avoid which condemnation hereafter, it imports us to condemn our selves
here. Now men are apt to justify, rather then to judge themselves, and so
escape the condemnation of the world: For such, therefore is this Commination
necessary; that, hereby, they may be brought to acknowledge their sins, to
repent of them, and require Absolution from them. That Discipline, in stead
whereof this Commination is used, is noted in the beginning hereof. If
therefore, they like not this, they may do well to endeavor the restoring of
that. But they except further against the denunciation made by Ministers, as
unlawful.

Whereunto I answer, That the Ministers of the Gospel may and must sometimes
press the curses of the Law, and the judgments of God denounced against
sinners; to the end, that, thereby they may be moved to fly to Christ as their
only Sanctuary, and so escape the judgment to come. And hereof we have an
Example given in that very place. For though they are pleased to say, that Levi
was none of them that were appointed to curse; yet verse. 14. we find the
Levites to be the only men that were appointed to curse. It Is true that (at
that particular time) Levi was one of those that were set upon Mount Gerezim to
bless: yet Levites (and none else) were charged with the ordinary denunciation
of curses for the future as a service specially incumbent on them; which is
point blanck against the Authors, and proves for us the quite contrary to what
they endeavor to infer.

Of Rites and Ceremonies.
THey begin here with Ceremonies taken away 5, 6 Edw. 6. complaining of the
restoring them again partly by the Canons of 1603. and partly by corrupt
practice. The thing they chiefly aim at (as they profess) is, to show the
necessity of reforming those Rites and Ceremonies contained in the book of
Common Prayer or enjoined by the Canons of 1603. the consideration of the
Canons for the present they defer. The Book of Common Prayer they deny to be
established by Law, because no Record can be produced by which that Book now in
use, or priuted 1 Eliz. is by Act of Parliament ratified and confirmed.

Answ. That all I can say to this is, that this is the book that has been so
long received and used, and this is the book that is warranted by the Kings
Proclamation printed before it: And I doubt not but the Testimony of the King
will in Law (being for the affirmative too) preponderate the testimonies of
many other: But since they undertake to show the necessity of reforming the
Book, they must show some reason in the things themselves therein contained
which require it. And this they endeavor to make good from the nature of them,
taking it for granted that they are (...), or things indifferent; saying, that
those ought not to be imposed on such as cannot be persuaded in their own
minds that they are lawful, because to them it will be sin, according to St.
Paul's own Doctrine, to his Corinthians, and Romans 14.

Answ. That if they be granted to be indifferent* then they are made necessary
by the intervention of humane authority. As for those that cannot be fully
persuaded in their own minds, the Proclamation has provided that they be born
with for a time: and no more is intended by St. Paul, who never dreamt that,
that superstitious conceit of the uncleanness of some meats should remain to
the end of the World. Since the Conference at Hampton Court, there has been
time enough to cosinder of the indifferency of Ceremonies, and the learned
Authors of this Offer have had time enough to instruct and convince the weak
amongst them in and of the indifferency which they grant to be in them. Should
Doctrine, Liturgy, Rites, Ordination, Episcopacy, Discipline be laid aside till
all men be agreed, we must never expect any whilst the world stands.

4. Of Church Government.
HEre they except against Episcopacy as not being Jure Divino, because erected
by the Kings of England.

Answ. That if Episcopacy be jure Divino in the Catholic Church, it must be
so in the Church of England, which is a part of it. The Kings of England are no
Fathers of the Church, so as to beget the Church; but they are, as well as
other Kings, the nursing Fathers to the Churches in their Dominions. They allow
them Nurseries to live in, appennage to live upon, and freedom of exercising
their Government: in which sense they are the Erectors of Episcopacy* in
England: And if this erection be legal, why need it a further confirmation by
Law? But they descend to the parts of Government, and therein

1. Of the Consecration of Bishops, and their power of Ordination thereupon.
1. THey except against those that say, that where there is no Dean and Chapter
to choose, and no Archbishop to Consecrate, there can be (legally) and
(regularly) no succession of Bishops.

Answ. The Archbishops, Deans and Chapters, etc. being of Ecclesiastical and
Civil constitution, it must follow of necessity that there can be no legal
(which respects the Civil power) nor regular or Canonical succession (which
regards the Ecclesiastical state and condition of them) without Deans and
Chapters, and Archbishop.

2. Exception is, That Episcopacy has been lately insisted upon not only to
be an office of Precedence and Presidency above other Presbyters and Ministers;
but also a distinct and specificall order (by Divine right) superior to all
other Presbyters, to exercise such things as none else may meddle with.

Ans. That this has been insisted upon, and has been made good by those that
have been put upon it by the Presbyterians their adversaries herein, decrying
them as Popish, and having no other bottom to stand upon besides Ecclesiastical
constitution and civil Connivance; till they enforced them to leave this hold
and fly to one more impregnable, that is to say, the Scripture. Impregnable I
say: for if our Savior did appoint any Regimen Ecclesiae at all, it may be
undenyably proved out of the Scripture, that it was to be seated in a single
person. The same Text or Texts that prove the one, will make good the other, a
thing which has been done within this nine or ten years at Oxford in the
Vespers, but was not then, nor ever since has been answered.

3. Oh but, say they, Linwood himself our great English Canonist says
expressly, that Episcopatus non est Ordo; and our book of Ordination tacitly
implies as much.

Answ. That this (Tacitly) is well put in: yea but it does more then
(tacitly) do so, say they. Ans. Then it does (expressly) say so, which will
never be proved. Now as for Linwood, we must know that when it is said by the
Canonists, or Schoolmen that Episcopacy is not an Order; by Order they
understand, according as they define it, to be a setting of one apart in Ordine
ad celebranda Sacramenta: for in this sense a Bishop is not a distinct Order
from a Priest or Presbyter: But as we here understand Order h. e. for a
superior to the rest of the Presbyters, etc. Episcopacy is an Order: and so
much Anselm himself, whom they produce, makes good: who makes not Bishops mere
Chair-men of Committees of Presbyters, but persons vested in a superior power,
durante vita; and such whereof there was an uninterrupted succession at
Alexandria from St. Mark the Evangelist to Heracla and Dionysius, who sat
there in the 3d. Century.

4th. Exception is, That Dr. Heylen one of the Episcopal party will allow none
to be rightly ordained, who have been ordained by Presbyters, even where no
Bishops are allowed to execute the office.

Answ. That many things may be allowed in a case of necessity, which
notwithstanding, are neither Canonical, nor otherwise rightly done.

5. They say that 1. There is no Script. that appropriateth this to a Bishop
alone. 2. That there are several warrants in the new Testament to justify the
laying on of hands without a Bishop in our sense, as Acts 13. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 14.
2 Timothy 1. 6. 3. The book of Ordination allows the Bishop to be (...), but not
to act alone.

I answer. That those very places which they produce against the appropriating
hereof to a Bishop, do prove it. For Acts 13. 3. Though Beza renders it out of
the Greek, Imposuerunt eis manus, in the plural: Yet the Syriack Interpreter
reads it Imposuerunt eis manum. It was then manum imposuerunt principally and
auctoritatively: but manus concurrently with it (though this separating of Paul
and Barnabas was an extraordinary thing, which the holy Spirit commanded
expressly to be done by mean persons, that the grace might the more evidently
appear says Chrysostom.) Wherefore 1 Timothy 4. 14. it is said, Neglect not that
gift which was given to thee by prophecy (...), not (...), etc. For this was
St. Paul's work and prerogative, 2 Timothy 1. 6. which interprets our book of
Ordination: wherein is required the concurrence, not the authority of other
Presbyters to the giving of holy Orders.

6. But they say that the statute of 13 Eliz. allows of any under the degree of
a Bishop that pretend to Priesthood, etc. by any other kind of Ordination, so
that he subscribes the Articles.

Answ. That by any other form of Ordination, for ought I know, may be
understood the forms of Ordination used in the Church of Rome, and that was
done by Bishops, which neither Prelaticks nor Presbyterians think necessary to
be iterated. Or be it an Ordination by Presbyterians, it was in the absence of
a Bishop, and an urgent necessity in the thing it self (which the Law presumes)
and then factum valet quod fieri non debuit: unless the party himself be not
satisfied with his Ordination.

7. And say they, This were to unchurch all Protestant Churches in Christendom
which have no Bishops.

Answ. That it may be they cannot have them; a thing I have heard that the
Low Country Divines complained of at the Council of Dort, as the cause of all
those heresies and differences in opinion that were amongst them, as it has
been with us during this many years suspension of them. Now this does not
unchurch them, inasmuch as it is done in a case of necessity, and they desire
that which they cannot enjoy; but it leaves them in a confusion, imperfection,
and unsetledness of Churchgovernment. God first created Light, and it served
the turn for a while before it was collected into one body: but he never
intended it should remain so for the constant government of the world.

8. They say that in the ordering of Deacons the Bishop alone is to lay on
hands; which is contrary to the practice of the Apostles, Acts 6. where it is
said, that They, (not one of them) laid their hands on them. Moreover in the
Prayer then used after the Letany, it is said, that God did inspire the Apostles
to choose to this order St. Stephen with other: Whereas the Text says, The
whole multitude chose them.

Answ. That although they all laid hands on them, yet one would have served: It
was therefore ex abundanti, not necessario as has been already showed in the
matter of ordaining of Presbyters: And these the whole multitude chose, but
they had their Conge des^ire from the Apostles first: Nay the Apostles bade
them choose, and Causa causae est causa causati.

9. In the Act of Ordination the Bishop takes upon him that which none but God
himself has power to bestow, in saying, Receive the holy Ghost.

Answ, That none but God himself has power to bestow the holy Ghost,
principally: but it is bestowed ministerially by men in this Ordinance of his.
By holy Ghost is understood here the grace of ministration; which is that holy
Depositum committed to Timothies charge by the imposition of St. Paul's hands, 1 Timothy 1. 6. and with men that have received this holy Depositum has Christ
promised his presence to the end of the world: Behold I am with (you) that is
men qualified as you are, (for a supply of your mortality) upon whom a double
portion of your spirit descends.

2. Of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
THe thing chiefly to be noted here is, that by the ordaining of Priests it
appears that the power of Jurisdiction belongs to other besides Bishops,
inasmuch as a Question propounded to the party to be ordained is: Will you
reverently obey your Ordinary and other chief Ministers unto whom the
Government and charge is committed over you: If it be said, say they, that this
may be meant of Arch*Deacons, Deans, etc. that have it under the Bishop, what
is this to the intituling of all Ministers thereunto.

I answ. That all Ministers are not entitled thereunto, but only all chief
Ministers; and such as have a power delegated unto them. Yea, but they say
further, that every Minister of a Parish has power given him by the Rubric to
keep notorious livers from the Sacrament: and what is this but as much and as
high a jurisdiction as any Bishop can use in that particular?

Answ. That this is but Excommunicatio minor, and confessed to be but a
particular case: Neither in this case is it so high as the jurisdiction of a
Bishop; inasmuch as herein lies an appeal from him to the Bishop.

2. Much time here is spent upon Restraints laid upon Bishops by KINGS: and
particularly when the Clergy petitioned the Parliament (51 Edw. 3. number. 83.)
that of every consultation conditional, the Ordinary may of himself take upon
him the true understanding thereof, and therein proceed accordingly: The Kings
answer was, That the King cannot depart with his Right, but to yield to his
Subjects according to Law.

Answ. All this might have been spared, and it shall be granted upon their bare
words without further enquiry, it being great reason that nothing be done to
the prejudice of the King or the Laws of the Land: for which reason the French
K. has always a Commissary in the Protestants Conventions, as may appear by
the Edicts themselves. Only thus much I must say by the way, that in my
cursory observation I find, that for one Act made against, there are 3. for the
immunities of Bishops in the time of that renowned King. That which is said
concerning the Bishops making his Will: though true, is little to the question.
But besides this*

3. Many things are alleged to weaken the authority of Bishops: but the last
and heaviest thing of all is, that by Act of Parl. all their power and
jurisdiction is taken away. 17 Car. 1.

Answ. That by that Act of 17 Car. is intended the taking away of the High
Commission only, as I humbly conceive: If, as I have heard Lawyers say,
preambles to Acts are the best interpreters of the Acts themselves: For the
preamble to that Act witnesses the abuses of the Authority given to the high
Commissiners by that Act of 1 Eliz. to be the grouud of the Act it self of 17
Car. 1. Again, if Episcopal Jurisdiction had been wholly taken away by the
repealing of that clanse of 1 Eliz. they would never have added another clause
(after that) to restrain the power of Bishops in case of penalties, for this
had been to fight with a shadow. But though it were granted that the power of
exercising Episcopal jurisdiction be taken away contrary to the intent of the
Legislative power: yet all the world cannot take away Episcopacy it self, it
being an Ordinance of God as is here confessed. The Reasons given by them why
they should not sit in Parliament, are but the killing of a dead man, and so I
let them pass.

III.
Of DISCIPLINE.
FIrst, they show how this Discipline is bounded. 2. They will have no Canon
Laws to be in force: And why? Because say they, the old Canons were enacted 25
H. 8. 19. to be in force, till such time as they be viewed, searched, or
otherwise ordered and determined by 32 persons or the more part of them. But
Dr. Heylin confesses that they were viewed, searched, and drawn into a body
(but never had the Kings Royal assent unto them) therefore the said old Canons,
etc. say they, are abrogated.

Answ. By what authentic Record does it, or can it appear, that those 32
persons did view, search, order, or determine any thing therein? Since (well
might they be written or printed in a book, but) the Kings Royal assent being
never had, they were never authentickly recorded: and consequently they have
neither force in themselves, nor do they abrogate or null any other Canons or
Constitutions not contrariant to the Laws of the Land. Inventa meliore Lege,
prior est abroganda, and not before.

2. Now passing by the Canons and Injunctions of Qu. Eliz. we come to those
made in Convocation 1603. published by authority of King James under the great
Seal, and these only can be pretended to be of any force, say they.

Answ. That this is more then I can see, if the other had the Queens Royal
assent, and were never expressly called in after, especially if ^hey be not
repugnant to after Canons, etc. But, say they. Even those Canons of 1603. are
not binding in as much as they were never confirmed by Act of Parl. although
the Kings Royal assent was to them. For, say they, it seems to be contrary to
the Petition of Right that they should.

Answ. That I cannot dive into the intrigues of Disputes touching these Canons,
the legality whereof has been the business of Learned men, who have so well
justified it in the opinion of all impartial auditors of the long Parliam.
where the argument was made, that they deserve an everlasting name for it.

3 In the close of all they say, that albeit it be pleaded by some that
Liturgies (and among them the substance of ours) are ancienter then the Popish
mass books by many hundred of years: And for that they produce Fathers, and the
Liturgies of St. James, Peter, and others, although by many learned men
censured as suppositious. Yet none of these Authors do mention any public
form (the same for substance with ours) although they speak of public prayers
made in the Congregation, which none ever denied. Public prayer is one thing;
a public form, another.

I answ. That it follows not that those forms are supposititious, because some
of the matters therein contained are so. A child is not therefore
supposititious, because it has the Rickets, and is either swelled in one part,
or pined away in others beyond its just and natural proportion. But what do
they think of the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom translated out of the Syriack by
Masius, and used generally throughout all the Greek Church, as my Lord Primate
of Armagh has noted? Is that no form, or is it only a supposititious form?
Or what do they think of other Liturgies as well as this, which have the Lords
Prayer and giving of thanks in them, together with snch improvements as are
Explications of the Lords Prayer and the parts thereof? are not these forms,
yea and the same in substance with ours? but that these were the first
Liturgies that ever were, is testified by Cassander (out of Dionysius) in
Liturgicis. Who says that Eucharistea sola Oratione Dominica cum gratiarum
action primis temporibus celebrabatur. But now they speak out: For whereas in
the begiuning they said that they were not against (nay they were for)
Liturgies, etc. Yet now they say, that though the Ancients speak of public
prayers (which none, say they, ever denied) yet they never spoke of public
forms: which is as much as to say, that we have no antiquity to justify
public forms; and therefore it were better be without them. But first, they
confess that these Ancients mention public prayers: and that these public
prayers were public forms, is already proved. Indeed there was a time when
some used public prayers in no public forms: but that they used such
alone, can never be proved: and what inconveniences ensued upon it, is too
evident, by the 12th. Canon of the Milevitan Council made against them, wherein
it is provided that no Prayers be used, but such as were approved by the wiser
sort in the Synod; least any thing should be vented against the Faith, either
through ignorance, or want of meditation.

FINIS.
The faults being few, may be amended in reading.


