THE SATYRICK ELEGY Upon the Execution of Master NATHANIEL TOMKINS July the 5.
1643.
To the Citizens of London.
IT IS Tomkins (glad spectators) whom you see
Hang as the Trophy of your tyranny;
Whose loyal harmless blood is spilt
By, and for you, yet no pale guilt
Dwells in your faces: with dry eyes
You murder, and called Sacrifice;
I will not say of fools: but sure no man
Can call such heathen Offerings Christian.
Such bloody, deep-dy'd Crimson facts
Must not be called Apostles acts,
(Though Case were godfather:) the Dove
Descended on the Son of Love,
And not the Kite or Eagle: no such foul
Must stand as Emblem of a Christian soul.
Though your new Buffe-Divines can draw
Blood from the Gospel, and make it Law;
(A killing Letter) and can bring
Christ into the field to kill the King;
When both the Cannon, and the Musket shot,
Proclaimed you guilty of a Pouder-plot:
Blacker than Fauxess, and more fell,
Than that you say was hatched in Hell.
When to defend them you let fly
At King, Prince, Duke, Nobility.
It Is true you bear a bloody Cross, but this
No badge of murder, but Religion is.
And Walworth's Dagger in your field,
Shows a Lord Major a Rebel killed:
But now he is one, and yet he
And Walworth wears one Liverie.
For my part, since Edgehill, I 'count that we
Live not by right, but only courtesy.
He that dares smite my King, is more,
Than I dare think, (grand Seigniour)
And I his vassaile, and my breath
Is his whose nod or frown is death.
(Britain) where is now thy liberty! thy walk
Is not thine own, thy gesture, nor thy talk.
Thou may smile Treason now: a look,
If cast a squint upon a book,
Signed with H. E. will strike th'as dead
As Basiliskes, or Gorgons head.
Isles were Informers punishment at Rome,
Where they lived Exiles) ours is now become
Their Paradise: He that can spy
Malignant in the face or eye,
Is a made man! need nothing fear,
Preferments grow at Westminster,
For knaves and Sycophants, and such as can
Ruin three Kingdoms to make up one man.
Thus fell brave Tomkins, rather thus
He hood! as did Calimachus,
And more, spoke dead, (for he did come
A dead man to receive his doom)
Which as he did foreknow, he scorned, nor could
Their number, or their malice chill his blood.
He stood undaunted! nor did fear
The Saw-pit Lord, or Manchester:
Nor yet Sir John's bloud-guilty front,
With Straffords head engraved upon it.
Nor the rest of City Judges that were there
For nothing but to murder and forswear.
Thus died the Roman Thrasea,
(Brave man) and thus fell Seneca.
Both wise, and rich, and fortunate,
Save in his tyrant pupills hate
Nero, who laugh't to see Rome fry, and sung
Unto his Harp the flames of Iium.
You do the same and worse, for now
A Kingdom's all on fire, whilst you
(Idle and glad spectators) lend
Fresh fuel, lest the fire should spend.
Look to it (thou bloody City) fast and pray.
London, that this prove not Acheldama:
From your black doom we will this conclusion draw,
You have no Gospel, Tomkins had no Law.
Printed at OXFORD, by Will. Web. 1643.


