The Scholars Petition for Playdayes, in stead of Holy Days: Exhibited To the
right Worshipful, the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the right Worshipful
Company of Merchant-Tailors, by the Scholars of their School, in the Parish of
Laurence Pountney LONDON, Martii 21. an. 1644. being the day of their public
Examination.
After diverse other Exercises in Latin, Greek, and lastly in English, the
Petitioner, in behalf of himself and his fellows, thus addressed himself to
the Company: -- yet one word more we crave, to show what griev's us,
Wherein we pray your Goodness to relieve us.


SInce mis-call'd Holy Days, profanely spent,
Are justly now cashiered by Parliament;
For that the Scarlet garment which they wore,
Was but a rubrick't-badge of the ROMAN WHORE;
Which therefore now must mourn in sable black,
Changing her color in the next ALMANAC;
Guilty before of scandalous abuses:
Which notwithstanding yet the harmless Muses
Used only for their sportfull intermission
Of toylesome Studies; not for Superstition.
"For he that made all things, did not make Man
"Of stone, or steel, or brass CORINTHIAN;
"But lodged our Souls in a frail earthen mass,
"Thinner then water, britler then the glass.
"Hoe know's our lives are by naught sooner spent,
"Then having still our Souls and Bodies bent.
"A Field, left fallow some few years, will yield
"The richer crop, when it again is tilled.
"A River, stopped by a sluice, a space,
"Run's after rougher, and a swifter pace.
"A Bow, a while unbent, will after cast
"His shafts the farther* and them fix more fast.
"A Soldier, that a season still has lain,
"Com's with more fury to the field again.
"Even so our Body, while, to gather breath,
"From pains sometimes at rest it sojourneth;
"It recollect's its powers, and with more cheer
"Falls fresh again unto its first cariere.
To you therefore we make our Common Prayer,
That, weighing the premises, you would repair
This doleful damage; and, in compensation
Of this sad loss, appoint, for recreation,
Some equipollent seasons, as will fit
Seem to your Wisdoms best for to permit.
Thus your poor Orators devoutly pray,
-- Graio Schola nomine dicta est,
Justa laboriferis tribuantur ut otia Musis.

That you sequester would some times for Play.
O let not then our Masters be our Jailors!
So shall we ever pray for MERCHANT-TAILORS.
This our Petition is, which you shall see
Subscribed with hands two hundred seventy three.
Auson.


