Evangelical and Catholic UNITY, Maintained in the Church of England: OR An
Apology for her Government, Liturgy, Subscriptions, etc. With Answers to the
Objections of Mr. B. Dr. O. and others, against Conformity.

ALSO A Vindication of the Lord Bishop of ELY, showing his way of True and
Christian Concord.

AND A Postscript in Answer to Mr. B's late Objections against my Self,
concerning General Councils,etc.

By WILLIAM SAYWELL, D. D. and Master of Jesus College in Cambridge.

Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Robert Scott at the Princes Arms in
Little-Britain, MDCLXXXII.

Synod. Land. Archi-Epis. and Episc. Anno 1571. Cap. Concionatores.
COncionatores modeste and sobrie in omni vitae part se gerent imprimis vero
videbunt, ne quid unquam doceant pro concione quod a populo Religiose teneri
and credi velint, nisi quod consentaneum sit Doctrinae Veteris aut Novi
Testamenti, quodque ex illa ipsa Doctrina Catholici Patres and veteres Episcopi
collegerint.

Synod. Land. Anno 1603. Can. 30.
TAntum aberat, ut Ecclesia Anglicana ab Italiae, Galliae, Hispaniae,
Germaniae, aliisque similibus Ecclesiis voluerit per omnia recedere, quicquid
eas sciret tenere aut observare, ut (quod Ecclesiae Anglicanae Apologia
profitetur) Ceremonias illas cum Reverentia susciperet, quas citra Ecclesiae
incommodum, ac hominum sobriorum offensionem, retineri posse senserat, and in
iis tantum Articulis a praedictis Ecclesiis dissentiret, in quibus eaedem ipsae
tum a pristina sua integritate prius disciverant, tum etiam ab Ecclesiis
Apostolicis, a quibus primum sunt proseminatae.

Hieron. adv. Lucifer. In illa Ecclesia permanendum quae ab Apostolis fundata
usque ad diem hanc durat. -- Nec sibi blandiantur si de Scripturarum Capitulis
videntur sibi affirmare quod dicunt, cum Diabolus de Scripturis aliqua sit
locubus; and Scripturae non in legendo consistant sed intelligendo.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IF thou will take the Pains to peruse this Discourse, thou shall find the
Controversies, which the Presbyterians and Independants have with the Church of
England, soberly debated, upon the Principles and Allegations of their greatest
Advocates, which now appear in their Defense.

These I take to be, first, the setters forth of the peaceable Design,
Peaceable design. p. 32. 44.
Published as the sense of the Presbyterians, and not disowned by them that
ever I heard. Now they do Plead for Libertinism and toleration of Popery, and
all kind of Heresy and Schism, and even Atheism too, for seven years, for no
body is to be questioned, during that time, that will but tell an officious
Lie, and profess he is of the reformed Religion, which certainly they will be
ashamed of, when they consider better of their Proposals. And yet they confess,
they can upon Occasion join with the Church of England, and believe it to be a
true Church, wherein Salvation may be had. p. 4.

The great Advocate for the Independents, is Dr. Owen, Dr. Owen's enquiry into
the Orig. of Evang. Churches. p. 14.
formerly Titular Dean of Christ-Church, and Vice Chancellor of the famous
University of Oxford; and he says, it is merely from a Spirit of Contention,
that some call on us or others, to produce express Testimony [of Scripture he
means] Or Institution for every Circumstance, in the practice of Religious
Duties. Again, Wherefore as was said before, it is utterly in vain and useless,
Page 32.
to demand express Institution of all the Circumstances belonging unto the
Government, Order, Rule and Worship of the Church; Or, for the due Improvement
of things, in themselves indifferent unto its Edification, as occasion shall
require. Nor are they capable to be otherwise stated, but as they lie in the
light of Nature and spiritual Prudence, directed by the general Rules of
Scripture. So that his great Controversy, is, because the Laws do not allow
him to set up his private Christian Prudence, in opposition, not only to the
Laws and Customs of this Church and Nation, but of the General Councils and
Tradition of the Church in all Ages.

Mr. Baxter is not only Advocate for the Dissenters, but for the Church also,
Mr Baxter's Apol. p. 8. p. 148.
and an Enemy together; for he tells us the main Body of the Nonconformist
Ministers, as far as ever he could learn, did judge it lawful to join with the
Church in her public Prayers and Sacraments, according to the Liturgy, and
that the Sectaries are never able to answer the Arguments of the Old
non-Conformists, against Separation from the Church of England.

But yet he formerly said, Mr. Baxter's holy Commonwealth. p. 485. 486.
He did blow the Coals, -- did Engage in the late War -- and Encouraged many
thousands to it -- nor dare I Repent of it, nor forbear the same, if it were to
do again in the same state of things. And though he does desire, that this Book
may be accounted, as Non scriptus, yet, I appeal to any impartial man, whether
his stickling, so as he has done against those Declarations, etc. That require
him to renounce those Principles that led into that wicked Rebellion, and may
lead him into another; nay, the bitter Declamations that he has written against
the Church and Churchmen, See his sacrilegious Desertion and prognostic, and
most of his other writings
in which he has stirred up men to uphold, and frequent Schismatical
Conventicles, be not certain Arguments that he does still blow the Coals of
Division, and continues of the same Mind. And he that will consider his late
Writings, will find he has done more to distract and amaze many sober
Christians, than most of the turbulent Writers of the Age, though he says, he
does all as a poor Assistant to the conformable Clergy.

Now let the World see, what Assistance he is like to give us, when the first
step he makes toward Concord, is by setting up Division, and Establishing
several Churches of different Persuasions and Communions amongst us, and then
setting down many dangerous Errors and Heresies; whose Professors he could have
tolerated: He sets down these with many others for ten Leaves or more, and in
his Book of The true and only way of Concord. p. 291. n. 1. That God has Parts
and is Divisible. 2. That God has the Parts or Shape of humane Bodies, Head,
Face, Eyes, Hands, Feet, etc. properly so called. p. 293. That there are three
Gods. n. 7. That the Doctrine of the Trinity, is contradictory, and impossible
to be true. 8. That it is not necessary to be Believed or Preached. p. 294.
That Christ is but a Creature, and not eternal. p. 299. n. 26. That Mahomet is
the Paraclet [ or Holy Ghost the Comforter] promised by Christ. p. 302. n. 7.
That Infants have no Original fin. And after he has set down these, and many
other wicked Heresies, he says, p. 327. This, or such a Catalogue of dangerous
Doctrine, is not to be renounced by Ministers, and then, not that every one
should be ejected or silenced, that holds or preaches any one such Error,
but only those who, Consideratis considerandis, are found to do more harm than
good.

Now our Savior Christ left no such Directions for Toleration, but tells us he
will gather all his Sheep into one Fold, and Commands nothing more, than Love
and mutual Communion one with another. The Apostle St. Paul, does plainly
Condemn it, 1 Cor. 1.12.
for men to say, I am of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas, or, I of Christ, in
Opposition to Paul, etc. Now to have Dr. Owen's tolerated Church, and Mr.
Baxter's Church, and Dr. Jacomb's Church, and twenty more in
Contra-distinction; or rather Opposition to the Church of England, is plainly
the same Case, and setting up a formal Schism; therefore the Church Universal
in all Ages, and the Protestant Churches in other Countries, and the Church of
England at this time, Consideratis considerandis, have judged those that
Preach, or hold those wicked Heresies not fit to be tolerated; and also, that
those, who in true settled Churches, do Preach and hold separate Meetings,
contrary to the Will of the respective Pastors, are guilty of Schism, and so do
more harm than good, and therefore Mr. Baxter, and all other Preachers in
Conventicles, ought to break up their separate Congregations, and return to the
Unity of the Church.

And as for the Instances of the Novatians and Donatists, which some plead to
justify a Toleration, it is evident they were tolerated only by the State, (as
the Arrians and Eutichians, etc. sometimes also were) to the great grief of all
good Christians, and were at the same time Condemned for Heretics and
Schismatics by the Church, and all Catholic Councils and Writers; and even by
St. Augustine, that glorious Light of the Latin Church, who does frequently
tell the Donatists, their Catholic profession of Faith, August. Epist. 48. and
lib. cont. Donatistas
their true Baptism, and valid Ordination, would not avail them to Salvation,
till they did renounce their Schism, and return to the Unity of the Church. You
are with us in Baptism, and in the Creed, and in the other Sacraments of the
Lord; but you are not with us in the Spirit of Unity, and Bond of Peace, and in
the Catholic Church it self, if you receive these, then what you have, will
not be given to you, but will become profitable to your Salvation. Which he
does often tell them, were not at all profitable to them, while they did
continue in their Schism, and Separation from the Church. And thus stands the
Case of the Presbyterians and Independents, that keep Conventicles in
opposition to the Laws of the Church of England, and separate from her
Communion, as it is stated by their ablest Patrons.

If any afterward appear to make a better Defense in their behalf, I doubt not
but some will have time and ability, to show the weakness of their Reasons. For
my part I take no delight in Contests, and am far from any Rigor or Severity,
but I know neither Church nor State can subsist, if Government be thus
despised, and men not only upon such frivolous, but unreasonable Pretenses, be
allowed to foment Schisms and Seditions. Out of more pity therefore to my
Native Country, which is like by these Disorders to be involved in Blood and
Confusion again; out of pity, to many poor deluded Souls, who are led blindfold
into the Paths of Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness; and out of care to my own
Charge, many of which will not hear any Instruction that I can give them, I
venture to send Papers abroad into the World, in hopes they may sometimes fall
into their hands, at least have that good Effect, to prevent others from being
seduced.

And whereas Mr. B. tells me, I speak like one of Rehoboam 's puny Counselors,
Apol. p. 196.
contrary to all Experience, I will tell him my Experience in a great Parish
where I am concerned, after the Bishop 's Preaching and Catechizing amongst
them several times, and my weak eadeavours, seldom fourscore came to the
public Worship upon the Lord 's day, as they ought to do, but upon a little
stirring and threatening them, with the Execution of the penal Laws only the 12
penny Act, without doing of it, the Church was presently thronged from one end
to the other, and we had eight hundred, or a thousand People at a time, and we
hope by the blessing of God, upon the Preaching of his Word, which is the
Administration of the Spirit, Augustine ep. 48. and 50.
many will thank us for this Compulsion, as they did St. Augustine in the like
Case, who will tell him more of his Experience also in the same kind, and I
have known the like good success in more than one Parish, and hope to find it
Confirmed more and more by daily experience; and this gives me good reason to
believe, the same moderate Course, would in a little time unite us in Peace and
Truth throughout the whole Nation, if Conventicles were but taken away, which
have been so prejudicial to Church and State, and drawn many thousands to
Anabaptism, Quakerism, Rebellion and Perdition.

These are the Principles therefore which I insist upon, against Papists,
Independents, Presbyterians, as well as Anabaptists, Quakers, and Socinians,
that the Church of England, as established by Law, is settled according to the
Institution of Christ, the Laws of general Councils, and the Tradition of the
Catholic Church in all Ages, and is neither guilty of Heresy nor Schism, and
that all those are Schismatics, that in England, separate from her Communion;
and this I have asserted as heartily as any body, against the Papists also,
though not so learnedly as others, and shall be still ready to maintain it, if
they please to reply to what I have said.

2. This is another Principle I lay down, which was ever received in the
Church, that where there is a true Church, settled according to the foregoing
Rule, there the State ought not to allow any public Christian Meetings, but
such as are approved of by the Bishops, according to the Laws of each
particular Church, if they will keep to the Christian Rule.

3. That all Persons that withdraw themselves, either from the sober
Instruction, See my proofs in my Serious Enquiry and Orig. of Plots.
or public Devotions of such a Church, ought by moderate Penalties, suitable
to every bodies Conditions, to be compelled to join with Her; and if
notwithstanding they will still separate themselves, they are not to be put to
death, nor cruelly tormented, or undone, but sober conference and reasons ought
to be used to convince them, and the Penalties still executed, to make them
hearken and attend to them, which generally Dissenters and lazy people will not
do; and if after all they still separate, they ought patiently to bear their
punishment, and content themselves with their private Devotion at home, and
leave their Case finally to be determined in the general judgment; but no
pretense of greater Edification or purer Worship, can allow them to keep
Conventicles, or excuse their Schism in separating from such a Church.

These are the Principles which I intend to go by, throughout all my Writings;
and if I have not been so cautious as to interpose these terms, always to avoid
repetition, I desire they may be always supposed and understood. So that if any
think fit to reply to what I have said, they must either resolve to set
themselves against the Catholic Church in all Ages, or else prove that the
Church of England has not kept to that Rule which she does profess to do, and I
think she has, and upon that supposition have undertaken Her defense, not
thinking my self obliged, nor no body else, to answer for the error, or hard
sayings of this or that particular Father, or particular Council; but the
public Acts of the Church, and the constant, general, and approved Tradition,
wherein as yet I see nothing, but truly tending to the Glory of God, and the
advancement of Piety; and I believe no body will be ever able to find any thing
else. I hope therefore the Gallantry of the English Nation, as it detests all
other Slavery, so it will assert the ancient Catholic and undoubted order of
the Christian Church, now established amongst us, not only against the
Novelties and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, but of all other Dissenters
whatsoever, that our Unity in true Religion may be as famous in the World, as
ever our Valor has been.

And as for the Presbyterians and Independents, who, I expect will be angry
with me, because I tell them the truth, yet if they rightly consider it, they
ought to thank me for the pains I have taken for their Satisfaction, for it is
not their Persons that I write against, but their Errors, which have been so
fatal to the Peace of the Nation, and do yet endanger our Religion and safety;
neither is it their Punishment that I desire, but amendment, and restoring of
Holiness and Unity to the Church.

And the better to induce you to observe this peaceable Method, I have
endeavored soberly to debate all Matters in Controversy, and answer all
Objections against Conformity, as well of Clergy as Lay-persons, and set down
the Words of Luther, Melancthon, Bucer and Calvin, concerning our present
Differences, whereby it does appear, that they do perfectly give their Verdict
against you, if you stand out in your separation.

And whereas some complain of their hard usage by the new Impositions, they are
no other than their own former Disorders did force the Church upon, to keep her
Officers in Peace and Moderation.

1. The Assent and Consent, is, To hinder men from being Hypocrites, and
offering up those Prayers to God, which they would Preach against when they had
done, as formerly has been known.

2. The renouncing the Covenant, is, To prevent men from being tempted to breed
Disturbance, and Murder their spiritual Fathers and Neighbors, as some of
their Brethren in Scotland, lately did Barbarously Murder the Archbishop of
St. Andrews, and actually appear in Rebellion, to establish that wicked
Confederacy.

3. The Declarations against taking Arms against the King, etc. are but an
Exposition of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, to provide against the
equivocating interpretations of the Jesuits and Commonwealths men, who are
upon all occasions stirring up the People to Murder and Rebellion, under the
color of maintaining their Liberty and Property, neither do they require any
more than the Law of Nature, and the Doctrine of the Gospel does oblige them to.

So that if men will silence themselves rather than make these Declarations,
they must not lay the blame upon the Church, but those who taught them such ill
Principles, for the Church does not silence them, but gives them the like
favor with any of her Children, that were faithful to her in the worst of
Times.

My first wish and endeavor therefore has been, that you may all Conform and
Unite to the Church of England, in your several capacities.

Secondly, If you are not satisfied so far as to Conform as Clergymen, yet to
persuade you to leave off your Conventicles, and join honestly and sincerely in
the public Worship, and live like Christians in Love and Holiness.

Thirdly, to Convince those that will not Conform at all, that a private
Worship at home in their own Families, is that which they ought to rest
satisfied withal in our present Case, or else to repair to some other Country,
where they can have a public Worship, according to their Mind. But the Law of
Nature and the Gospel too, forbid them to set up Churches against Churches, and
to disturb the true public Christian Worship, thus orderly settled in the
Nation.

Lastly, If any will not be persuaded to any of these things, I do utterly
disclaim all sanguinary Punishments, or cruel Torments, purely upon the Account
of Religion, and only move for moderate Discipline, to make them hear and
consider.

And as for the Wickedness and Profaneness you complain of, you cannot but be
sensible, they are in a great measure owing to your Divisions; but yet
notwithstanding, that does not hinder you, from being holy and exemplary in
your Lives, and doing your Duty; may you not offer up your Prayers with all
purity of heart? your praises with all cheerfulness and joy? and if you will
join with the Church, there is no Bishop and Pious Clergyman, but will heartily
concur with you in a Christian way, to reform the Errors and Vices of the Age,
as much as can be morally expected; for the true Churchmen desire and endeavor
nothing more, than to promote Piety and Concord in the Nation. But when we have
done all we can, there will be irregular and disorderly Persons; but the way to
reduce them to Obedience, is not by your continuing in your Separation, but by
uniting with the Church, and assisting her to uphold Discipline and Order.

I wish therefore your Charity be as great, and Intentions toward us, but as
kind as ours are toward you, and your zeal against Popery and Profaneness as
hearty and sincere, as you have ever found ours to be upon all occasions. And I
am sure you cannot but confess, that the pure word of God is faithfully
preached by the Conformists throughout the Nation; the Sacraments duly
Administered, and all Persons are generally taught, and if they do not wilfully
shut their eyes, may both know, and do their Duty; and that our Labors,
sometimes have no better effect, is, because you amuse and distract the People
by your Opposition and Divisions. For there is not any duty of Religion, that
is not taught and practiced in the Church of England, and which you may not
observe in her Communion; but only you will not heartily unite with us, if you
cannot perform it your own way, and prostitute the Government and public
Worship of the Church, to the private fancies, and arbitrary pleasure of every
single Congregational Pastor.

But if all that I have said, Defense of the principles of Love. page 88.
do not prevail with you to this purpose, yet meditate upon these words of Mr.
Baxter. The Covenant binds us to Reformation, according to God's Word, and
the Example of the best reformed Churches; but to prefer no public Worship, or
a worse before the Liturgy, is Deformation and Profaneness. And it is greater
Reformation to prefer the Liturgy before none, than to prefer extemporate
public Worship before the Liturgy. And all Reformed Churches in Christendom,
do commonly profess to hold Communion with the English Churches in the Liturgy,
if they come among us where it is used. Therefore it seems to me to be
Perjury and Covenant Breaking, either to prefer no public Worship before the
Liturgy, or to refuse occasional Communion with the Churches that use the
Liturgy, as merely upon that account unlawful. God in his mercy open your
hearts to consider these things, that you may not any longer hinder the
settlement of Peace and Holiness in the Nation, and have them represented to
your Confusion of Face at the day of Judgment, which is the earnest Prayer of,

Your hearty well wisher and humble Servant W. S.

THE PREFACE.
ENgland for the pleasantness and fruitfulness of its Soil, wisdom and valor
of its Inhabitants, excellency of its Church, and justness of its Government,
may truly be called the fortunate Island; and were it not for the Divisions and
Factions at home, might be justly accounted the Paradise of the World. Amongst
all the Designs therefore, to promote the Honor and Welfare of our Nation,
there are none ought to be so carefully pursued, as those that tend to a
closure of our Differences, and securing Peace and Unity in the enjoyment of
these ample Possessions. For else the richer and pleasanter our Country is, so
much the more will it be exposed to Rapine and Distraction. I shall endeavor
therefore, with all brevity, as much as can stand with clearing the Matters in
Controversy, to lay down a moderate Proposal, how to settle Peace and
Holiness, and so to prevent all Disturbances in the Government for the time to
come. And had I been to write on this subject forty years ago, then indeed
there could have been small hopes, that what was offered should at all be
regarded; men naturally, after long ease and quiet, growing weary of their own
happiness, and desirous to see Changes and new things, in hopes of greater
satisfaction. But now since they have sound the mischief of that vain
Curiosity, and the Wounds in many are still fresh, that they received in the
late Confusions, and there is scarce a noble or considerable Family in the
Kingdom, which has not the remaining Scars of that unhappy Experiment; methinks
there should not need many Arguments to persuade our Countrymen to return to
their former quiet, no more than to induce a weary Traveller to rest himself,
or a man in great pain to admit of an asswageing Plaster.

But still I know it will be demanded, What are these comfortable Remedies that
will bring us to rest and peace; for they are so desirable things, that no
sober man can refuse them? Now to be able to give a satisfactory Answer to this
Question, it will be necessary to enquire into the Controversies which are
alleged as the Grounds of our Divisions, and thence to proceed to seek out the
Means which have been used in former Times to prevent such Mischiefs. And that
I may shorten my present Work, I need not now enter into any debate concerning
the Principles of Anabaptists and Quakers; for I have formerly proved them to
be Heretics, and condemned for such by the Catholic Church, in the third
General Council held at Ephesus, and by the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas,
and by all settled Churches now extant in the World. Neither is it requisite I
should repeat what I have writ against the Papists here in England, to prove
them guilty of Schism, from the Laws of the General Councils, and the constant
Tradition of the Catholic Church in all Ages, which are Principles they do
own, and ought to be concluded by.

And by the same Authority I did as evidently prove the Presbyterians and
Independants also, that separate from the Church of England, and keep
Conventicles against her Command, to be guilty of Schism. But what has been
said against them, being replied upon in a new Method by two learned Advocates,
something may very seasonably be added in answer to their Pretenses; not that
the Cause it self does stand in need of any farther Confirmation, having been
lately managed with so much learning and acuteness by the Reverend Dean of St.
Paul's, Mr. Dodwell, and another Reverend Author in defense of the Dean, and
also by my Reverend Brother in his answer to the Melius Inquirendum. But the
substance of the Matter in Controversy, may be drawn into a narrower compass,
and more particularly applied to the present Objections made against our
Church, to excuse the separate Meetings from being Schismatical. Besides many
things are here spoken, which did fall under their Consideration, and all more
particularly handled to dispose the way to the Churches Peace.

THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND DEFENDED.
CHAP. I. The Occasion of this Apology.
MR. Baxter having lately published a Book, written for the most part above 10
years ago, is pleased in the Title Page to call it, An Answer to the
Accusations, urged as Reasons for the silencing of about 2000. by Bishop Morly,
Bishop Gunning 's Chaplain, Dr. Saywell, Mr. Durell, etc. But I do not find
that he refers to any words that I wrote, throughout his whole Discourse, nor
so much as names me till p. 196. and there he only says, I speak like one of
Rehoboam 's puny Counselors; and that is all the Answer he gives me, after
such a pompous boast in his Title Page. This when I cursorily observed, I
thought it needless to concern my self to make any answer, there being so many
learned and eminent men engaged in the main Controversy with him, who had
sufficiently refuted all his pretenses, with greater authority and acuteness
than I can do. But when I considered that my design was somewhat larger than
only the Justification of the Church of England against Dissenters, and this
Book of Mr. Baxter's, and many others; and the transactions in England and
Scotland since I published my Book, were carried on by the dissenting Party,
just according to these methods which I had showed to be the original of all
our Plots and distractions upon the account of Religion, I thought I had a good
opportunity offered to illustrate my first intentions, and to prove the
necessity of some such course as I had proposed, if ever Christians did really
endeavor after peace and settlement in Religion: And one thing more does make
this defense of my self almost necessary, to take off that slander and public
infamy which these few lines wherein Mr. Baxter mentions me, as they are joined
to that part of his discourse which represents the odiousness of Murder and
Cruelty upon the account of Religion, must unavoidably leave in the minds of
his Party (few whereof perhaps have ever read my Book) as if I had been an
Abettor of such bloody Prosecutions, as Gardener, Bonner, Calvin, Beza, and the
Murderers of Archbishop Laud, and the Archbishop of St. Andrews, when the
design of my whole Book was against it then: And yet his prefixing my name
before so many worthy men who far exceed me in learning and dignity in the
Church, and whose Writings were published long before I set Pen to Paper, will
make the world apt to think, that this Book was principally intended against
me, and I am most deeply concerned in those bloody and cruel insinuations. Now
whether this be fair, and ingenuous, and suitable to that peaceable and
Christian temper which he does pretend to, I leave any rational man to judge.

CHAP. II. The Author's design in his former Writings.
MR. Baxter in his Preface to the Nonconformists Plea for Peace tells us, My
honest Friend, whom I. persuaded from Anabaptistry, Writing against Separation,
says, that when he saw here a Leg, and there an Arm in the way, it was time
for him to stop. But in Church History I have had a sadder sight, even the
Carcasses of thousands, streams of Blood, and Tumults in the Chief Cities and
Churches in the World, the Crowns of Emperors and Kings, the loss of the
Eastern Empire, the Generation of the Papacy, the reproach of Christianity, and
that by Clergy Damnation and Contention, striving who should be greatest, and
seem wisest. This I had observed long before, and with a great deal of grief
and sadness, of heart lamented it in secret; and withal had considered from
what Original these evils did spring, and what were the likeliest means to put
an end to these Butcheries and Confusions amongst Christians. But alas! I was
not of that Eminence and Authority in the World, that what I could propose in
this nature, should be likely to be regarded, or take much effect toward the
healing of these Distempers, nevertheless at the discovery of the Popish Plot,
when all the Kingdom were in a great terror and consternation, and when every
body was groaning under these sad Calamities, and desirous to be freed from
these Fears and Jealousies of being burnt in their Beds, or having their
Throats cut, and their Wives and Children destroyed, or made a prey to such
merciless and bloody Murderers, I thought then a serious inquiry into the
causes and remedies of these distractions, would make some impression upon the
minds of men, and be readily embraced by all sober and well-meaning Christians,
and thereupon I named my Book, The Original of all Plots in Christendom,
together with the danger and remedy of Schism. Which I showed to be the root of
those bloody Murders, as well as of Spiritual evils and distractions.

Now that Schism in general was the ground of all these calamities, I find all
People are readily convinced, but who are the Schismatics still is all the
Controversy. The Papists on one hand, who confess they have put many men to
death upon the account of Religion, and by cruel torments terrified others from
departing from their Communion, brand them first with the name of Heretics and
Schismatics, whom they have thus inhumanely Butchered, and say it was but
execution of Justice, and inflicting of such punishments which the hainousness
of their crimes did rightly deserve. On the other hand, those that now call
themselves the Protestant Dissenters, have had their hands imbrued in blood,
sometimes in an outrageous and barbarous manner by Tumult and Violence, and
other times with a mock pretense of Justice, and a Holy Zeal for the Cause of
God, as is too too evident in the Histories of Modern times, and in the defense
that Calvin and Beza make for it, in the way of a legal Execution. So that
matter of fact being evident, that Papists and Presbyterians were actually
engaged in blood, sometimes in a Tumultuous manner, and sometimes under a
color of Justice: Orig. of Plots, Chap. 2.
I proceeded to examine into the Original of Government, and there showed that
all power and Authority of Civil Governors was from God, and that all the
right of Temporal Coertion was invested in the hands of the Supreme Magistrates
in their respective Countries, so that neither the Pope in prdine ad
Spiritualia, had any Authority to depose Princes, or stir up their Subjects to
Rebellion against them; nor the People, or ordines Regni, under their right,
could by force and violence depose a King, or extort the Administration of
Justice out of his hands, and consequently all Wars, and external coertion used
in a tumultuary way against the Magistrate, and without or against his
Commission, (except in private assaults of Thieves and the like, wherein every
man is a commissioned Officer for his natural defense) were to be accounted no
other than Rebellion, and so declared by the ancient Fathers for a thousand
years together, and ever maintained since by the greatest part of the most
eminent Divines, some Papists and Presbyterians excepted, and such other
disturbers of the Public Peace.

And having by this means cut off all pretenses of Rebellion and Tumult to
propagate Religion, if men would hearken to the Churches Doctrine in this
point, and prevented Subjects from making any disturbance, and staining their
hands with the blood of their Sovereign, or any of their Fellow Subjects in
order to a Reformation in Religion, that I might wholly take off all grounds of
future Murders on that account, Chap. 3.
I did farther enquire into the Authority thority of Princes in executing
capital Punishments for Heresy, and other Ecclesiastical offenses, which were
held privately, without any Sedition, or violation of the Civil Peace, and did
also prove that no men ought to be put to death purely upon the score of
Religion, if they did not by any attempts or Conspiracies endanger the Temporal
Government, or petulantly Blaspheme the Divine Majesty, or his sacred Religion,
and that this also was the Doctrine of the Christian Church. And that they were
only the Schismatics and Dissenters that did propagate Religion by Murder and
Cruelty, but such Practices were always condemned by the true Catholics.

And having thus showed that Christianity, and the Tradition of the Catholic
Church were wholly strangers to such proceedings, and did teach men love and
obedience, upon farther enquiry I found that Papists to maintain the unjust
Usurpations of the Pope over the Bishops and all Christian Churches; and
Presbyterians to encourage the People in disobedience and opposition to
Episcopal Superiority, Chapter 4. and 5.
did stir up their Disciples to Blood and Murder, and so filled Christendom
with Barbarous Cruelties and Massacres, this is notorious on both sides, and
several of the Presbyterians in Scotland have dyed lately glorying in this
opinion, though condemned as Traitors for it.

The cause being thus found out, the next enquiry was after the Remedies of
these mischiefs, which were laying aside all passion and prejudice, hearkening
to the sober advice of Learned and impartial men, especially submitting to the
Tradition and determination of the Christian Churches, Chap. 7.
that being the means our Savior himself left to quiet all our Dissentions, if
he neglect to hear the Church, Matt. 18.
let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a Publican. And the better to
enforce the observation of this method, I did endeavor to show the
reasonableness of it, and that it was the same that all Mankind by the light of
nature did use in most other disputes, and then in my considerations to those
of the Church of England, I did insist upon the usefulness of it, if not the
necessity, and that, as matters now stand, there is no other probable means to
undeceive those People who mean honestly on both sides, and are merely held in
blind obedience to their several Parties, The Considerations to men of the
Church of England.
and so carried on with an ignorant zeal, to execute all the bloody designs
their crafty Leaders will put them upon to uphold their Tyranny.

But lest any body should think that I had proposed some new and unheard of
method, Considerations.
or a way that was like to involve us in greater difficulties than we were in
already, or at least, considering the constitution of our Nation, altogether
unpracticable, and impossible to be observed, I did moreover lay down in my
Considerations to the Papists, how far this rule of Unity, and method of ending
Controversies, was assented to by the judicious Divines of all Parties, as is
to be seen Chap. 2. Page 188, 189, etc. wherein I set down the words of the
Greek, Roman, English, and German Confessions about it. And when I had showed
the agreement in general, I farther added, that the Concord was as manifest in
all the substantial and most material points of Religion that have been from
Age to Age maintained in the Christian Church, and delivered down all along by
a clear and uninterrupted Tradition, thence it was very natural to enquire into
the grounds of these Dissensions about which Christendom is now divided, seeing
they were in the general so fully agreed. Then as I hinted before, the great
quarrel arising from the affectation of unjust Dominion and Rule in the Church,
Considerations to Presbyterians.
or as Mr. Baxter Phraseth it from Clergy Domination, Chap. 2, 3.
I examined into the Divine right of Episcopacy, and showed that it was
Instituted by Christ, all along mainained in the Church, and that for Fifteen
hundred year, there was no other Government ever known or allowed, nor any
Ordination accounted valid, but what was made by a Bishop. And to remove all
possible scruples, did examine into the other pretenses against the Church of
England, which are used by Dissenters to blind the ignorant from discerning
their contentions for unjust Dominion, and Exemption from obedience to their
lawful Superiors. And as a farther strengthening of my cause, I did make it
appear that it was the desire of the first Reformers, that Episcopacy might be
continued, and learned men of those Churches that now want it, have expressed
their earnest desire to have it restored. So that the crime of Schism does
manifestly lie upon those who refuse obedience to their lawful Bishops, in all
just commands, and the guilt of blood will be heavy upon all those that have
been engaged to foment Seditions and Murder on this account.

Next I proceeded to Considerations to those of the Church of Rome, wherein I
showed that Authority which the Pope challenged over the Bishops and all
Christians, was merely a Usurpation contrary to the Laws of the general
Councils and Tradition of the Church, and contrary to the known profession of
the greatest part of Christendom, which did ever resist and condemn such a
groundless Dominion, and the better to convince the Papists of their Schism
here in England, did also show that those their points in Controversy which
the Church of England did condemn, were not always held in the Church of Rome,
nor had any Foundation in any general Law or Ancient Tradition of the Church,
and therefore that they, notwithstanding all their boasts of Antiquity,
Universality, and adhering to the Catholic Church, did follow a private and
novel faction in opposition to the known rules of Christianity, which do bind
them to live in the Communion of their own Bishops, and yield obedience to all
their just commands, as those of the Church of England were; and because there
were several Objections raised against our Reformation, I did briefly answer
them all, and in the Conclusion make it evident, that the Church of England had
kept her self within the rule of Catholic Tradition in all her Constitutions,
and the points in difference, between her and the Church of Rome, were merely
introduced for secular ends, to uphold the unjust Usurpation of the Pope, and
consequently the schism, and all other mischiefs of Blood and Murder that have
been committed in this Quarrel, are chargeable upon the Church of Rome and her
adherents therein, but cannot any ways be imputed to the Church of England, or
any of her obedient Members and Disciples, that keep within the bounds of her
moderation.

After I had advanced thus far, and shown the Universal agreement of all settled
Churches in the World, both in the general Principle of being guided by the
Laws and Tradition of the Catholic Church; and that they did agree in the most
material points thus delivered, and that those particular differences upon
which they grounded all their contentions, were private opinions, brought in
for Secular ends, contrary to ancient Doctrine and received Tradition of the
Primitive and Catholic Church: I might then with good reason in my
Considerations to Statesmen, etc. urge the maintaining of the Church of England
as now Established, and the suppression of Popery and Fanaticism, which were
both condemned by the Catholic Church, as the most necessary and rational
means to quiet all our Dissensions, and the safest Foundation for them to rely
upon for their own Salvation.

And however they were moved with what I had said, yet I might have hopes that
the truly pious and devout Sons of the Church of England would be confirmed in
their constant adhering to her Communion, and Religious frequenting of her
Public Service with all purity, which they saw built upon such a firm
Foundation, as the constant Tradition of the Catholich Church, and that they
were sure to dye in her Faith and Communion, if they did but faithfully observe
these sacred Rules and Constitutions. And to this duty I did most heartily
exhort them in my Considerations to all good Christians, as being the certain
and undoubted way to Peace and Comfort in this World, and Salvation in the
World to come.

And then, last of all, when the Church of England was thus happily settled, and
a sure and lasting method had been laid down to prevent blood and confusion,
the next care ought to be, how to uphold this excellent constitution, and to
prevent the spreading abroad of Sedition and Faction which may possess the
Peoples minds against this happy Government, and so secretly make way to
undermine this excellent order which is now established, and bring us back
again into the former misery and confusion. Therefore to provide against this
danger, I did in the end of all join a Discourse, showing the unreasonableness
and mischief of Toleration, which I did prove from Scripture, the constant
Tradition of the Christian Church, and the practice of the Roman Emperors, who
called the six General Councils, and had their advice in this matter, and
lastly from the constitutions of most Religious States and Societies in all
Ages.

Now if I have clearly made out these points, what more satisfactory work or
pleasing prospect could I offer to any Religious and peaceable mind amidst all
these miseries and distractions, when he could see Jerusalem a quiet
Habitation, the Church of God built upon a Rock, and stand unshaken amongst all
the boisterous storms and raging waves of Schisms and Heresies that threaten
her overthrow, and all these secure of their fafety, that keep within her
Obedience and Communion, and those only in danger, and deeply engaged in
Faction, Sedition and Bloodshed, that straggle out of her Paths and Tradition.

And as this blessed Contemplation must be pleasant to all true Catholics, so
the Motives of it cannot but be the most probable means to undeceive all
well-disposed Christians, that are engaged in the Society of these novel
Factions, that have upheld their unjust affectation of Dominion, by such bloody
and Schismatical courses. For if the Church of England be founded upon that
sense of Scripture, which has been received down all along by Tradition, and
ratified by the Laws of the whole Church, and Decrees of general Councils; and
those private opinions, which Papists and other Dissenters allege as grounds
of their Separation, be novel inventions, either wholly besides, or contrary to
the Churches public Constitutions, certainly all rational and peaceable minded
men must think it safer to live in obedience to their own Governors, which the
Law of nature does first of all direct, when they shall have the Authority of
the Primitive Fathers and Martyrs, and the consent of the Catholic Church on
their side; and let but Papists and other Dissenters heartily submit to those
Rules, and all our Schisms and Plots will be at an end.

Against this the Papists have made no reply, nor the Anabaptists nor Quakers,
only Mr. B. is pleased to make me feel the stroke of his Pen, and join me with
Gardener and Bonner, and such bloody Murderers, though he knows the main design
of my writing was to prevent such inhumane Butcheries. And being thus driven by
him to defend my self, my cause is so interwoven with that of the Church of
England, that I am forced to join both together in the same Apology.

CHAP. III. Of the Matters in difference between the Church of England, and the
Presbyterians and Independants.
SEtting aside the Controversies between us and the Quakers, Anabaptists and
Papists at this time, we will inquire into the Pleas of the Presbyterians and
Independants in Defense of their Separation. But as for the Presbyterian Form
of Government, I do not find that has scarce any Advocates to uphold it amongst
us, and the cause it self seems wholly deserted, but as it falls in with the
Independent way, which at present yields a better pretense to uphold
Schismatical Conventicles. But however I will endeavor so to handle the matter,
as not to neglect the Pleas that either can make for themselves. Now these are
either concerning the Form or Order of the Government, which they take to be
Lordly and Tyrannical, or else 2, about the Liturgy, and matter of the Service
they are to perform. 3. Concerning the manner and circumstances which attend
the public Liturgy. 4. About the Oaths, Subscriptions and Declarations that
are required of Ministers, to show their agreement to the Doctrine and Orders
of our Church.

CHAP. IV. Of Church Government.
THAT we may come to the true stating of this matter in difference, it will not
be amiss to set down what Dr. Owen and Mr. Baxter do yield in this
Controversy, which I shall do in their own words. Eng. Chapter p. 60. c. 5.
And first Dr. O. says, The visible Church State which Christ has instituted
under the New Testament, consists in an especial Society or Congregation of
professed Believers, joined together according unto his mind, with their
Officers, Guides or Rulers whom he has appointed, which do, or may meet
together for the celebration of all Ordinances of Divine Worship, the
professing and Authoritatively proposing the Doctrine of the Gospel, with
exercise of the Discipline prescribed by himself, unto their own mutual
Edification, with the glory of Christ in the preservation and propagation of
his Kingdom in this World. So that if the Doctor does not too strictly insist
upon the limitation of the especial Society or Congregation, his description
may well be allowed, and falls in with the general definition of the Church
owned by most Divines, and laid down in the Nineteenth Article of the Church of
England. The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in
which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments duly Administered
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that are of necessity
requisite to the same.

But the Doctor there goes on to describe things more particularly, the end of
it [the Church] is, 1. Preaching the word, unto the Edification of the Church
it self, and the Conversion of others. 2. The Administration of the Sacraments,
or all the Mystical appointments of Christ in the Christian Church. 3. The
Preservation and exercise of Evangelical Discipline. 4. Visibly to profess
their subjection unto Christ in the World, by the observation of his Commands.
5. The bounds and limits of this Church, are taken from the number of the
Members, which ought not to be so small, as that they cannot observe and do all
that Christ has commanded in due order; nor yet so great, as not to meet
together to answer the end of the Institution of Christ before mentioned.
Therefore if Parishes be so great, as that the Inhabitants have not convenient
room to hear God's Word and receive the Sacraments, they ought to be divided,
and some other place be allotted, where they may enjoy all God's Public
Ordinances. 6. This Church in its complete nature consists of a Pastor, or a
Pastor and Elders, who are its Guides and Rulers, and the Community of the
faithful under their Rule. 7. That unto such a Church belongs of Right all the
Privileges, Promises and Power, that Christ does give and grant unto the
Church in this World: That is, to any particular Church, else there are greater
Privileges of indefectibility granted to the Catholic Church. Now what is
there here in all this Description, but may be duly observed in a Diocesan
Church? For to every Member of the same the Word may be Preached in their
respective Parishes, the Sacraments Administered, Discipline exercised, and
visible profession of subjection to Christ made, and limited within such bounds
as these Institutions of Christ may be orderly observed. The Bishop, the Pastor
to oversee and govern all, and the several Parish-Ministers as Elders, under
him actually to Administer all Offices belonging to Personal Communion, yet
with respect still to the Bishops Government and Advice. And lastly to a Church
thus constituted, and every one of them, belongs of Right all the Privileges,
Promises and Power that Christ does give and grant unto the Church in this
World. Namely Regeneration, and Sanctification, the gifts and graces of God's
Spirit to conduct it here, and glorification in the World to come.

Dr. O. would indeed seem to insinuate that all these things can never be
performed, except in one individual Congregation, but the nature of the things
do not at all require that, and therefore he cannot by any means infer such a
consequence; all that will follow, is, that every Churchmember ought to have a
place to resort to, where there is a Person duly qualified to Administer the
Word and Sacraments in due order, and for a time till farther Examination, to
debar all ignorant and scandalous persons from the Communion, and this every
Parish-Minister can do without his Bishop. But what hinderance is it to all
these ends, for a man to have a Bishop besides to go to, if need be, to give
him farther advice, and to help and direct the Minister in promoting Piety and
good order in his Parish, by the greater Authority and influence he has over
them? To say that there are many defects in the management of affairs in this
order, and these ends are not always attained, will be no objection, for the
Congregational way is liable to Maladministration, as well as this, and
exposed to a great many more miscarriages and inconveniences, and supposing
men of equal care and Piety, the Diocesan is much more advantageous than the
other. But the abuse or neglect of ill men ought not to be objected against the
order it self.

So that the Controversy is not whether there ought to be Governors appointed
by Christ to Administer the Word and Sacraments, and to keep up a visible
profession of Order and Holiness in the World; that is confessed on all hands:
but whether Christ has appointed fullness of all Independent Power to each
Congregation in order thereunto. That a Bishop sometimes in the first planting
of the Gospel, might have no more under his charge, than he could personally
Administer all Offices to, no body does deny; but that Christ has by any Law or
Institution of his, confined all Church State to one individual Congregation,
it does not any way appear. Neither can that Negative possibly be proved, that
a Bishop must have no more under his charge, than can ordinarily meet together
in one place at one time, and this the Doctor is very sensible he can never
prove from any Text of Scripture, but would infer it from the nature of the
thing. Therefore to prevent his Adversary from desiring any such direct Proof,
he says, There are in Scripture general Rules, directing us in the Application
of natural light, unto such a determination of all circumstances in the Acts of
Worship, as are sufficient for their performance decently and in order.
Wherefore as was said before, it is utterly in vain and useless, to demand
express Institution of all the circumstances belonging unto the Government;
Order, Rule and Worship of the Church. Or for the improvement of things of
themselves indifferent, unto its Edification, as occasion shall require. Nor
are they capable to be otherwise stated, but as they lie in the light of
nature, and spiritual prudence directed by general Rules in Scripture. Now all
these general Rules in Scripture we do most heartily submit to, and all
particular Rules also, and yet we find no obligation in them, nor from any Law
of nature, to confine all Church State to the Congregational mode, nor exclude
a Diocesan Church, nor yet Provincial and National, neither can the Doctor name
any one Privilege or Spiritual advantage, belonging to a private Christian
which cannot be obtained in this way, not any duty which may not be observed.
Nay it is evident to experience and common sense, that it is so, as I have
showed in the Consideration of his description of the Church State, and the
duties that are to be observed in it. And I find it in my own Parish, and have
heard Ministers that did formerly practice the Congregational way say, the
present Diocesan Government, is more for the good order of the Church.

Come we now to consider what Mr. Baxter says about Church Government. And in
his Non-conformists Plea, Page 24. n. 17.
he says, Christ has instituted a Ministry to be for ever established in the
World, to Preach the Gospel, to Convert Volunteers unto Faith and Holiness, and
to gather by Baptism all Consenters into his Covenant and Church, and to teach
them all that he has commanded them. And this none have power to overthrow. He
has stated on the Pastors of such Churches, the power before described, of
teaching Assemblies and particular persons, of leading them in public Worship
and Sacraments, and of judging by the power of the Keys, whom to receive into
their Communion by Baptism, and profession of Faith, and whom to admonish, and
for obstinate Impenitence to reject, and this Institution none may alter.

Christ's Laws Empower and oblige the Bishops or Senior Pastors to Ordain
others for this Ministerial Service of the Church, P. 25.
and so to propagate their order to the end of the World: By which Ordination,
they are judges of the person's qualifications, whether he be such as Christ's
Laws admit into his Ministry, and they solemnly invest him in the Office.

Princes and Rulers may for orders sake, P. 31.
distribute their Christian Kingdoms into Parishes, which shall be the ordinary
bounds of particular Churches. And such distribution is very congruous to the
ends of the Ministry and Churches, and conduces to orderly Settlement and
Peace.

Princes by their Laws, or Pastors by consent, P. 34. n. 39.
where Princes leave it to them, may so associate many particular Churches for
orderly correspondence and concord, and appoint such times and places for
Synods, and such orders in them, as are agreeable to God's aforesaid general
Laws, of doing all in love to edification and order.

When Pastors by Concord, Page 49.
or Magistrates by Laws have settled lawful circumstances or accidents of
Church Order or Worship, or Discipline, though they be in particular but humane
Institutions, it is sinful disobedience to violate them without necessity. e.g.
Parochial Order, associations, times, places, Ministers,
Scripture-Translations, etc.

Pastors in a Synod are still Rectors of their Flocks, Page 266.
and their Canons to them may be more Authoritative than a single Pastor's
words. 2. God's Law binds us to keep Love and Concord, and the agreements of
Councils may determine of the matter in alterable points; and so even absent
and present Bishops may Concordiae Gratia, be obliged by God's Law to keep such
Canons as are made for Concord, and so they may be the matter of Duty.

And lastly, Apol. Page 250. N. 7.
more particularly speaking to our present case, he says, The true interest of
each particular Christian is, his pleasing and glorifying God in his holy Union
with Christ, and with the Church universal, and subordinately his holy Unity
and Concord with the Ecclesiastical and Civil Society where he lives, and yet
more plainly, the true interest of a mere Nonconformist requires him -- To
live in Loyalty, Page 251. N. 11.
Peace and Patience, and in Love and Communion with the Parochial Churches.

All these Premises being once admitted, not only all those that refuse
Communion with our Parish-Churches, are guilty of sinful disobedience, which
Mr. B. does grant, N. Conf. pl. 49.
but even Mr. Baxter himself, though he does join in Communion with our
Parish-Churches, yet if he does, when silenced by the Governors, Preach in a
private Conventicle, is guilty of the same. For the Pastors of our Church by
mutual consent, and the Magistrates likewise by their Authority have confirmed
such associations as Parochial and Diocesan Churches, and in their Synods made
Canons to require the observation of these orders, and that none should Preach
but such as are licensed by public Authority, and all this is Concordiae
gratia, and therefore to use Mr. Baxter's own words, If absent and present
Bishops may Concordiae gratia be obliged by God's Law, to keep such Canons as
are made for Concord, and so they may be the matter of Duty; surely by the same
reason they ought to bind him, and those of his persuasion. And what does the
Church of England require more, but the observation of such Canons and Orders,
as are made Concordiae gratia, by mutual consent of Pastors and civil
Governors also? And why then has Mr. Baxter any contention about the
Government of the Church of England? For all the Controversies about the Jus
Divinum and distinction between Bishop and Presbyter and suchlike, cannot come
into question here, since the Pastors in England have by mutual consent entered
into Parochial order and association, under certain Canon for the order of
Religious Duties, which he says, do oblige by God's Law, and become the matter
of duty. I do not see what need farther be added to make out the Government of
the Church of England to be such, as all good Christians in their respective
Parishes ought to submit to, for Dr. Owen does acknowledge there is no express
Law in Scripture to determine the modes and circumstances of these matters, but
what is fetched from general Rules, and the direction of the Law of nature, and
therefore to be determined by prudence, and mutual consent, and Mr. Baxter does
likewise say the same, and farther allow the Authority of Synods to prescribe
Canons, which men in duty are to observe, to me therefore, and I think to all
rational men, it seems a demonstration, since in their own confession, the
Christian Church all over the World, for above thirteen hundred years, have
settled Diocesan Churches, and made Laws and Canons which prevail in all
particular Societies that the general rules of Scripture, ^^d the Law of nature
do oblige them to ^^bmit to such Rules and Orders as are already prescribed. So
that there can re^^ain no possible reason for them to de^^ine subjection unto
the Church of England upon the account of Government.

Objections against Diocesan Churches considered.
All the pretense that can be made, is, that though there be such an
association and agreement in general settled for so many hundred years, yet it
is not suited (...) the ends of Church State, to exercise Church Discipline, to
prevent ignorance and profaneness, and work Reformation. ^^d this is the
substance what Dr. O. and Mr. B. do insist upon in opposing Diocesan
associations. And here I cannot but stand amazed and wonder what they mean, and
how they can with any color make such objections, for the contrary is so
evident, ^^at I may as well go about to prove the ^^n shines at Noon day, as to
prove this, ^^e Articles, Canons, Liturgy, and the ^ayly labors of the Bishops
and Clergy, ^eing so conspicuous to obviate the presences ofthis kind.

And first to prevent ignorance, is the not a Minister in every Parish,
constant (...) ready upon all Lords days and other occasions, etc. to Preach
the Word, Administer the Sacraments, Catechize the Your and perform all
Christian Offices belonging to private Christians? and they have opportunity
and convenience to hear and (...) advised by him, except in some few Parishes
in London, which of late have grove too big for one Church to contain the
Inhabitants, (wherein I confess some farther care ought to be taken) but in
other Parishes generally throughout the Kingdom it must be their own willful
neglect, (...) they want the knowledge of their due and all the Offices of
Church Communion and if the Minister be negligent, and (...) not perform his
office duly, there is a Remedy by complaining to the Bishop; a^^ in case of
other dislike, free liberty to (...) move to another Parish, where there (...)
a Person more agreeable to their min^ Nay, if there be any scruple of Conscient
any matter of more than ordinary difficulty, there is the Bishop to resort
unto, (...) any other conformable Divine in the Nation for their direction. And
can a^^ one possible then plead, that there is reprovision in the Diocesan
Church, to instruct persons in their duty. They may well say, they run away
from our Churches for fear of being drowned on dry ground, as for want of
instruction, and outward means of serving God in the public Congregations, and
as for those Parishes that are so big, those that have any care of their souls,
can easily find opportunity to serve God in other places.

Of want of Discipline.
Another great Objection with which Dr. O, and Mr. B. fill their Books, is, the
want of Discipline, and impossibility of keeping up order and Holiness in the
Church. And Dr. O. speaking of corrupt manners, etc. En. Chapter p. 209.
In this State the Church of England does not, and it is to be feared, will
not, nor can reform her self. And Mr. B. says, Abrid. of Councels, p. 13.
By this means true Discipline is become impossible and unpracticable.

That I may answer their Objections to this point of the want of Discipline,
they must say it is either for want of power, or for want of exercise. And
first there can be no pretense to say, this is for want of Power, for the
Bishops in their Diocesses, are both by the Laws of God, and by the Laws of the
Church universal and particular, sufficiently Authorized to Excommunicate all
erroneous and vicious persons, and do constantly hold their Visitations and
Courts, to enquire and punish those that give offense, and pollute the Holiness
of their profession by their disorderly lives, and do actually exhort, reprove,
excommunicate any that do obstinately persist in open and scandalous sins, till
they publicly profess their Repentance and Reformation of life. If they do
Hypocritically dissemble in their profession, and oath of obeying the Church;
who can help that? En. Chapter p. 208.
Dr. O. confesses, We own that wicked Hypocrites may be joined in true
Churches, and be made partakers of all the privileges of them. Neither is this
a cause of withdrawing Communion from any Church, much less of condemning it as
no true Church of Christ. So that in this Diocesan association, it is
acknowledged, Discipline ought to be exercised upon open and scandalous
offenders, the Bishops have Authority from the Law of God, and of the Church,
to put it in execution, and to hold their Visitations and Courts, to enquire
and exercise it, where then is the ground of complaint? or what pretense is
there on this account, for Separation? so that they must say this is not done,
and it is plain, Discipline is not exercised. Whose fault is that? since the Law
is clear, and the Bishops keep their Visitations and Courts to that end, the
blame at last must lie for want of legal complaints and just proof, and that
cannot be, but by the Oath of Witnesses that know that Persons are guilty of
such open and scandalous offenses, so that this defect of Discipline is not to
be imputed to the Government, but to the want of Informers, and consequently
the guilt is most in these that make the complaint, and not in the Bishops or
Constitution of the Church. For if they, instead of murmuring and complaining
amongst the People, would complain to the Bishop, or stir up the
Churchwardens, and other private Christians, to give in legal Information, all
this pretense would be wholly taken away, and as matters now stand, I do not
see but Dr. O. and Mr. B. are guilty of the neglect of Discipline, for they
know these offenses, or else why do they use them as an Argument, and do
nothing effectually to reform them? but the Bishops do call upon the
Churchwardens, and exhort all Christians to detect public Offenders, and
therefore do what in them lies to keep up good order in Religious Assemblies,
and so may in all equitable construction be presumed to admit no wicked men,
but secret Hypocrites into their Communion, or at least, such as must be
esteemed so in the eye of the World, till witnesses be brought off their open
transgressions, 1 Timothy 5.19. Against an Elder receive not an accusation, but
under two or three witnesses. And then what means this hideous exclamation
against the Bishops and the Government? And why must all the Load lie upon the
Church, who does all that she can to keep up Order and Holiness in all her
Members, and therefore herein give no cause of withdrawing from her Communion,
if that were enough; But it will be said, the reason why the Bishop has not the
knowledge of public crimes, is, because he lives at such a distance, but if
the full Ecclesiastical Authority were allowed to the Pastor of each particular
Congregation, as we think it was anciently, and now ought to be, then he might
be able to find out, and reform all public offenders.

This is the pleasing Dream with which Dr. O. and Mr. B. do fill their
imaginations, and it is but little more than a Dream when rightly looked into. I
confess the lesser the number is, the Bishop has to look after, the less care
and trouble it will be to manage his Charge, but it is not possible without
Information and witnesses, to counsel and punish very open and scandalous
offenders, if all must depend upon his personal knowledge, for how often may a
man have very wicked Children and Servants in his own Family, and yet for want
of Information not know it, or so know it, as be able to convince them of their
ill behavior? much more then in a great Parish, or a great City, such as
Jerusalem, which was the Church St. James had the charge of, or Rome whereof
St. Peter; or Alexandria where St. Mark was Bishop. Was it possible for St.
James, etc. who had 5000 men, and God knows how many more under his care,
scattered up and down in such a vast City, to know public Offenders without
Information and Witnesses? Common sense does tell every man he could not. And
if there be Witnesses that can and will Inform the Parish-Minister or President
of our Congregation, they can as well inform the Diocesan Bishop, and then upon
proof made, he can as effectually exercise Discipline as the Parish-Minister
himself, and with greater Authority and Terror to the Offender, and so is more
likely to bring him to Repentance. To wave many inconveniences that would
follow, if every Parish-Minister had full and independent Jurisdiction as these
men contend for, and so the great outcry they make, when thoroughly searched
into, comes to nothing, and the inconveniences they urge against a Diocesan
Church, are no more than are unavoidable if the Members be negligent, and
careless in their Congregational way.

Neither do they rightly represent the power which God and the Church have
given every Parish-Minister, which they do much vilify and deprive of his due
power in stating the case. For he can exhort, rebuke and suspend from the
Communion for a time, Rub. before the Communi. can. 26.27.
and bind In foro Conscientiae, till upon submission or farther examination,
the Person be loosed by a Superior Authority. And this is no contemptible part
of Discipline, and enough to keep up a visible profession of Holiness in all
persons that he admits to the Holy Communion, but the light of nature does
allow of appeals, neither did ever any Government make every single Officer
absolute, and endue him with the highest Authority in every kind.

Besides, if Dr. O. and Mr. B. would a little lay aside their enmity to the
Bishops, and calmly consider the case, they would find most of these open and
scandalous Offenders do Excommunicate themselves, and prevent the Churches
Discipline, and they cannot but know in a divided Church, as they have made
ours, and where many voluntarily Excommunicate themselves, it is not by St.
Augustine, and many other Divines, thought advisable to pursue them with the
Churches censures. And as for these that do generally approach to the Lord's
Supper amongst us, they do show as visible a compliance unto the Rule of
Christ, as even in those duties which they think they neglect, as any of their
select Disciples; but God help us, there is too great contempt of Christ's
commands in the Nation, and they had more need to join all their Forces to
uphold the Bishops Authority to further a Reformation, than by such frivolous
pretenses to alienate men's minds from all Reverence and attention to their
Pious admonitions.

CHAP. V. Of Diocesan and Provincial Churches, and the Peoples Power in
choosing their Ministers.
THere is agreat deal of stir made about the Peoples power in choosing their
Ministers, and Mr. B's. Parochial Episcopacy, and Dr. O's. Congregational
Church, is chiefly founded upon a supposition of the Peoples right herein, but
how they can prove it I do not see. The Scripture does not give them any such
Power as I can find, neither do I find Dr. O. and Mr. B. urge any Text for it,
neither do our Savior or his Apostles by their example give any ground for
such an Authority. It Is true, when the People were jealous that their Money was
misapplyed, the Apostles in Acts 6. did bid them choose out men that they had a
good opinion of for their Faithfulness, but still it was whom we may appoint
over this matter, and accordingly the Apostles only did give them Authority,
and these were only Deacons to look after their Money, etc. and if the Apostles
did find them fit for higher Offices, that still was in their own choice how
far to confer any other Dignity, but it does not appear that the People had any
thing to do in it, nor was this left as a rule, but only a present expedient to
satisfy them that their Money was honestly and carefully distributed in such a
time, when they had not leisure to examine into the accounts, nor other settled
maintenance to depend upon. When our Savior chose his Apostles, and sent them
abroad, and subjected all the World to them, he did not ask any bodies leave,
but they were bound under Peril of Damnation to obey them, Mark 16.16. He that
believes not shall be damned; when the Apostles did ordain Elders in every
City, they did not ask the Peoples consent beforehand, but appointed them
their charges, and commanded all People, To obey them that have the Rule over
them, Heb. 13.17. The like Commission the Apostles gave to Timothy and Titus,
and all other Bishops, and set down the conditions they were to observe in
choosing others; but asking the Peoples consent, or taking such as they should
choose, is none of them. Nay, Titus has full power himself, to set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5.

Now the Pastoral Office being to continue to the end of the World, and our
Savior's presence being promised to be always with them, Mat. 28. when the
Apostles and those Bishops were dead which they appointed, there must be some
orderly way of continuing a Succession of Faithful Pastors, for all things are
to be done decently and in order. Therefore as Timothy and Titus had Authority
to ordain Elders, so other Bishops must have the like Power committed to them,
now all Bishops being equal in order, and having fullness of all power, when
any Bishop did dye, who should choose and ordain a new Eishop in to the vacant
place, if every neighboring Bishop should ordain or send one, that would breed
confusion, therefore there can be no other way thought of to prevent disorder,
but for the Bishops to agree together whom to ordain and settle in the vacant
place. But it is not possible that all the Bishops in the World should meet, or
come to be consulted upon every Ordination, therefore some neighbor-Bishops
must have Authority herein, but still it will be a question who they shall be,
and how many shall be concerned, therefore as the Law of decency and order does
require the Bishops should come to agreement among themselves; so in all
probability the Apostles did give direction for the Erecting of Provincial and
Diocesan Churches, that if a Bishop at any time did dye, the rest of the
Bishops in such a District should some way or other, either by Assembling
together, or sending their consent, ordain and appoint another in his stead.
And every Bishop within his Charge, might choose and ordain such Presbyters and
Deacons as he thought sitting and necessary for his assistance, the fewer
Congregations he had to look after, the fewer Priests and Deacons were
necessary, and as his charge did increase, he had power to ordain more Priests
for his better supply.

And as in case of Death, so in case of Heresy, Schism, or any other heinous
crime, it is fit a Bishop should be deposed, and another ordained in his room,
so that upon this account also, they must meet together to hear the cause, and
examine Witnesses, Tim. 5.19. and in like manner if he does wrongfully
Excommunicate his Priests or Deacons, or any other of his Flock; and then in
all Assemblies there must be a Speaker or a President, to propose matters, to
moderate all debates, and to keep good order; and hence was derived the
Authority of a Metropolitan, so that Metropolitans and Provincial Churches,
seem to be necessary according to the Dictates of the Law of nature, and
likewise to proceed from Apostolical Institution. But as for Primates or
Patriarchs, or a Pope, they are neither Divine, Apostolical, or Ecclesiastical
Constitutions; but brought in by Princes, and founded upon no Law of the
Catholic Church, but their jurisdiction is wholly excluded, though a reference
in some personal Quarrels, with a Metropolitan, is allowed by the Council of
Chalcedon to a Primate, or the Patriarch of Constantinople, and all other
matters are finally to be determined by each Provincial Church, except in case
of a flagrant Schism or Heresy, wherein the Provincial Church is despised, and
then there is no Authority upon earth, but a general Council, to decide the
difference, unless it can be made up by an amicable agreement and reference to
neighbor-Churches. Now that this was always the constitution of the Church, is
evident from all ancient History.

1. For Diocesan Churches, (Antiquity tells us, that St. James was Bishop of
Jerusalem) St. Peter first at Antioch, and then at Rome, St. Mark at
Alexandria, St. Andrew at Byzantium now Constantinople, Timothy at Ephesus and
Titus in Crete, etc. And it does tell us also, the Names of the single persons
that were Bishops after them by Succession, and now in these Great and Populous
Cities wherein there was a mighty increase of Believers, it was not possible
that one Bishop could do all by his Personal labor only, or one Congregation
could be sufficient to hold all the Christians, and afford them convenience to
partake of all Ordinances, but that there must be several Assemblies, for
Preaching, Prayers and Sacraments; and several Priests to Minister in them; but
yet Ignatius tells us, (...), and St. Cyprian, ubi Episcopus ibi Ecclesia, and
therefore all those Priests, and their several respective Congregations, were
under the inspection and Government of St. James, St. Peter, St. Mark, St.
Timothy, etc. and after them, under ^ymeon at Jerusalem, Evodius at Antioch,
Linus at Rome, Anianus at Alexandria, is Eusebius, etc. do tell us, and so we
have plainly a Diocesan Church, a Bishop, and several Priests, and several
Assemblies, under his charge, call them Parishes, Congregations, occasional or
not occasional, or suppose it how you will, in such great Cities, there was one
chief Ecclesiastical Governor called Bishop, to which all both Priests and
People were subject, and 'twas Schism and no Communion, to do any thing without
his allowance and direction; and to think that all Christians in one of these
Great Cities, did Communicate only in one Room, and at one individual
Communion Table, certainly can never enter into the mind of any unprejudiced
man, neither is there the least color to suppose it, for seeing Priests were
allowed to Consecrate and give the Sacrament, to Preach and Baptize, etc. why
might they not for greater dispatch and convenience, have several distinct
Rooms in several parts of the City to do it in, and that must make distinct
Assemblies, and is plainly a Diocesan Church? If, notwithstanding, they did go
sometimes to the Head Assembly where the Bishop was present, so they may go now
also to the Cathedral Church So that there was such things as Diocesan Churches
in the Apostles time, is beyond all possible dispute.

And as for that Objection of (...) in Ignatius, and unum altar in St. Cyprian
etc. it is a Metaphorical expression, like to (...) in St. Paul, to denote that
the Sacrament and Communion is one and the same all over the World, by what so
ever lawful Priest, and in whatsoever Assembly it be Administered; and
Christians must all agree in the same commonn Order and Unity, for no body can
be ^^ bold to think, that when the Apostle said we are all made to drink of
one Cup, h^ means, one Chalice only. Neither is there any reason to restrain
Ignatius and St. Cyprian's one Altar, to one Communion Table only.

And as for Provincial Churches, St. Cyprian tells us, Ep. 68. translated by
Mr. Baxter, and Printed in the end of his Ple^^ Those things are displeasing
which come not of a legitimate and just Ordination. For which cause it is
diligently to be observed and held as of Divine Tradition, and Apostolical
Observation, which is held with ^^ and almost throughout all Provinces, that to
the right celebrating of Ordinations, a^ the neighboring Bishops of that
Provine came together, to those People over whom a Bishop ^ to be ordained,
that a Bishop may be ^hosen in the presence of the People, [Mark that he does
not say, by the People, but ^lebe praesente, lin the presence of the People,]
which does fully know every man's life, and has been privy to every man's
acting by is Conversation. Which we see was done among you in the Ordination
of Sabinus, ^at the Bishopric was conferred upon him, and hands were laid upon
him in the place of Basilides, by the suffrage of the whole Fraernity, [Who
gave Testimony that he was a man of good life and Conversation,] and by the
judgment of the Bishops that met together in your presence, and other Bishops,
who sent Letters to you concerning ^im. Here St. Cyprian does fully testify
that Bishops were to be ordained in every Province, by all the rest of the
Bishops of that Province met together, or else some of them met together, and
the rest sending their judgment and consent by Letters, and that this order did
descend down from Divine Tradition and Apostolical Observation, neither was
this observed only in case of Death, but of Deposition for any crime. And that
as this was by Divine Tradition, and Apostolical Observation, so it was the
constant order and Law of the Church, is evident from most Histories and
Councils, and in particular from the Apostolical Cannons the great Council of
Nice, the Council of Constantinople, and other General and particular Councils.

This being the order observed by Christ and his Apostles, and established by
Tradition and Canons in the Church, it is plai^ here is no right or power
invested in the People to choose and nominate their ow^ Bishops and Priests.
But Mr. B. often refers to a little Tractate of Blundel's Dejure plebis, etc.
concerning this matter where are several Testimonies to prove that the People
did nominate and choose their Pastors in the Primitive times, it is too long to
examine the particulars, but if such a thing was allowed them, that does not at
all prove that they had any right, or their consent was necessary, all that can
be gathered from it, is that the Bishops in those difficult times, the better
to induce People to continuested fast in the Faith, and contribute to the
necessities of the Church, did much attend to the Nomination and earnest
Petition of the People, when they did desire men well qualified for their
learning and sober Conversation for such a charge, and this may be very well
done without parting with their own right, or acknowledging any power in the
People to choose their Ministers, any farther, than to give Testimony of their
Pious lives, and unblemisht Reputation, and that was all the right indeed, the
people ever had in this matter, though much may be yielded to their desire, and
earnest recommendation in those early days, and is still upon all occasions,
but even then they found such Tumults and Disorders, oftentimes Bloodshed and
Murder, in but allowing popular Nominations, that the Church Universal was
forced to make a Law to prohibit them wholly, Con. Laod. Can. 13. and Secular
Magistrates in all Countries have made other provisions to preserve the Public
Peace, and prevent those intolerable outrages, which did happen upon that
account.

Neither if such a Nomination were now permitted, would it avail Dr. O. and Mr.
B. at all, for still the Bishops were to ordain them, and to judge of their
fitness also, and to depose them again in case of any unfitness, so that if the
People should choose Dr. O. and Mr. B. to be their Pastors, or any other, if
the Bishops did not Approve them, or if they did not observe the Canons of the
Church, the Peoples choice could not make them their Pastors, and this judgment
of the Pastors, Mr. B. does in many places allow.

It Is true, Mr. B. will say, if they find Him unmeet, but if the Persons chosen
by the People, be every way duly capacitated, then they are bound to admit
them; How far the Bishops may sometimes gratify a People, if the Person be
every way meet and capable is not the question but our Lord foresaw so many
inconveniences in this method, that he gave the People no such power, and when
the Church sometime did condescend to their importunity, they found such
intolerable evils by it, that they were necessitated to forbid it.

But Persons choose their Husbands and Wives, Physicians and Servants, and why
may they not choose their Bishops and Ministers also? There is not the same
reason, for these are private matters only which concern their own persons and
nobody else, but the public is concerned in the choice of Ministers, and
therefore those methods must be observed which the Governors shall appoint in
this matter, and which long experience has found to be the best to prevent
disorders, and then indeed every man has his liberty to choose his own Minister
and Confessor to advise him imprivate. Exhortation before the Communion, Let
him come to me, or some other discreet and learned Minister of God's Word and
open his grief, that by the Ministry of God's Holy Word, he may receive the
benefit of Absolution; together with Ghostly Counsel and advice, to the
quieting of his Conscince, and avoiding of all scruple and doubtulness. Where
it is plainly left to every man's choice in private, what Minister ^o apply
himself to, for advice and Absolution.

But this distinguishing Ministers in public, and having men's persons in
admiration, is the beginning of all Schism, for I ought not to refuse to join
in Prayers and Sacraments with any Minister of Jesus Christ, that is duly
settled in the Church, and lives orderly, upon any pretense of weakness, or
other dislike; this St. Paul did condemn in the Corinthians, when they said, I
am of Paul, I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas, or I am of Christ, in opposition
or to the slighting of any of Christ's Ministers, to be sure to the neglect and
forsaking of that Minister which is by public Order, made my Spiritual
Governor to Administer to the necessities of my Soul.

Besides this imaginary liberty which Mr. B. and Dr. O. promise us, comes to
nothing, for we must enter into associations, and it is Schism not to submit to
the choice of the Major. part, and so a man is never the nearer having a
Minister of his own choice, if he live a thousand year for he may be always
out-voted, by ^ prevailing faction, and it is a great liberty indeed we shall
gain by this proposal, instead of the pious and learned choice made by Bishops,
Cathedral Churches, and Colleges, to have a Minister imposed upon us, by
ignorant Plow-men, or the Factious Rabble, much good may do those men that can
please themselves with such a liberty. All wise men must think things are
better already, and would be better yet, if more effectual care were taken to
prevent the Symony of too many Lay-Patrons, which the Common Law at present
does not sufficiently provide against. For Parents and Friends drive bargains,
and freely bestow Livings upon the Clergy, so that they can honestly take the
Oath, but Patrons may truck and exchange the Market, without any fear or
danger, and so those excellent Scholars that have not Friends to buy Livings
for them, must go without, and the meanest Clerks that have wealthy Relations
do get many of the richest Preferments, which is an evil ought to be proceeded
against by public Authority.

CHAP. VI. Of the Liturgy and matter of the public Prayers, etc.
THough the Government of the Church of England may be never so excellent, yet
the Doctrine of the Church in her Articles, and the matter of her public
Prayers may be such, as may give just ground of offense, and drive men away
from her Communion. But here we have Mr. Baxter, and multitudes of other
Nonconforming Ministers, giving evidence to the soundness of the Liturgy, as
much as concerns every private Christian's public Communion in Prayer and
Sacraments. The main body of the Nonconforming Ministers, Apol. p. 148.
as far as ever we could learn, did judge as follows. 1. That those
Parish-Churches which had true Ministers (not utterly incapable Persons) were
true Churches of Christ. 2. That the ordinary Liturgy appointed for the public
Worship, was such as a good Christian may lawfully join in. Not speaking of
Baptizings, Burials, etc. in which some things they thought more dubious Nay,
Mr. Baxter is our Advocate against Dr. O. and other Sectarians (as he calls
them.) Apol. p. 62.
Nay, I will tell the World a certain truth of our success and usage. I Preach,
I Write, I frequently and openly talk against Separation, and for the
lawfulness of joining with the Church in the use of the Liturgy, and to rebuke
men's extremes and censures of the Episcopal Clergy, and for an impartial love
of all true Christians, I sharply reprove the weak reasonings of those that are
otherwise minded; and by this I occasion the true Sectarians every where to
speak against me. We take it for our duty to Preach against Schism, Page 18, 19.
Sedition and Rebellion, and all Principles which tend to breed or feed them;
and to use our opportunities and interest in the People to promote their
Loyalty and public peace. Also we judge it our duty to Preach those plain and
necessary things which the Salvation of men does most depend on, and the People
generally have most need to hear; that is, the opening to them their Baptismal
Covenant, the Articles of the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, the Decalogue, and the
Gospel-Precepts. [And yet, how do the People that are in love with the
Nonconformists, slight the Exposition of the Catechism in the Afternoon, where
all these things are laid open to them, and run away from our Churches, because
they have no sermon?] Or more briefly, the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance
toward God, and of the love of God and Man, to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this World -- And ^ot to fill the Peoples Heads with needless
Controversies, or vain jangling, or contending about words which edify not,
but subvert ^he Hearers; much less to perplex them with ^alking of the
unrevealed Counsels of God; nor yet to corrupt their minds by talking against
our Superiors, or against Dissenters behind their backs, or by aggravating the
faults of other men's manner of Worship, or talking against Bishops, or
Ceremonies, or Liturgy. Nor by representing any sort of Christians who differ
from us in points not fundamental, as odious to their Hearers.

And also he does fully show the unreasonableness of Separation from our
Communion, p. 8. I know how unable the old Separatists were to Answer the many
Arguments of the Famous Arthur Heldersham, John Paget, William Bradshaw,
Bright-man, John Rall, and other old Non-conformists, for the lawfulness of
Communicating in our Parish-Churches, in the Sacraments and the Liturgy. I was
exceedingly moved against Separation (truly so called) by considering how
contrary it is to the Principle of Christian-love. 2. How directly and
certainly pernicious to the interest, and cause of Christ, and of his Church,
and the souls of men; and how powerful a means it is, (...) kill that little
love that is left in the World. 3. How plainly it proceeds from the same
Spirit that Persecution does. For thought their expressions be various, their
minds and Principles are much the same; which is t^ vilify our Brethren, and
represent them (...) odious and intolerable, and overlook tha^ of Christ which
is amiable in them. In which, when they have agreed, as Children of the same
Father, they differ in their way of serving him. One says therefore, away with
him, silence him, imprison him, banish him, the other says, he is such and
such a one, therefore away with him, have no Communion with him -- Both agree
in murdering love, and accounting their Brother unlovely and intolerable. 4. I
was greatly moved in thinking of the State of most of the Churches in the
World; if I traveled into Abassia, Armenia, Russia, or among the Greek
Churches, I durst not deny to hold Communion with them. When I go to God in
Prayer, I dare not go in a separate capacity, but as a Member of the Universal
Church, nor would I part with my share in the Common Prayers of all the
Churches, for all the World; but am joined with them in Spirit, while I am
corporally absent, owning all their Holy Prayers, though none of their ^aults
or failings in them, (having many in all my own Prayers to God, which I must ^e
further from justifying than other men's.) And having perused all the Foreign
and Ancient Liturgies extant in Bibliotheca Patrum, I doubt not but our own is
incomparably better than any that is there.

So that as to the lawfulness of joining in our Liturgy, Mr. Baxter does not
only give us his own sense, but the concurrent judgment of the main body of the
Nonconforming Divines both Ancient and Modern, as far as ever he could learn,
and consequently the use thereof ought not to be accounted, as any cause or
just pretense for Dissenters to uphold their Divisions, but they are
Schismatics if they separate on that account. Let us now see what we can learn
from Dr. O. and he tells us, The Church State of the New Testament, En. p. 14.
does not less relate unto, and receive force from the light of nature, than
any other state of the Church whatever. Herein as unto its general nature its
Foundation is laid. What that directs unto, may receive new enforcements by
Revelation, but changed, altered, or abolished, it cannot be. Wherefore there
is no need of any new express Institution of what is required, by that light
and law in all Churches and Societies, for the Worship of God, but only an
Application of it unto the present occasions, and the present state of the
Church, which has been various. And i^ is merely from a Spirit of contention,
tha^ some call on us, or others, to produce express Testimony or Institution,
for every circumstance in the practice of Religious duties in the Church. I
know no body does require any such command or express Institution, or does
think it needful, that understands himself; the Dissenters use that Plea often,
when they have nothing else to say for their disobedience to the Church, but
none of the Church of England think it an Argument in it self, but only ad
hominem to Dissenters, who are willing to cheat the People with such a
pretense, and if they use it themselves, Page 236.
it is irrefragably retorted upon them, though it signify nothing to another
man, or the cause it self. The pretense I confess is vain, and therefore let us
hear of it no more. Yet we find the Doctor afterward girding at unscriptural
and uninstituted Rites. But the Doctor adds likewise, that, It proceeds from a
Spirit of Contention -- On a supposed failure herein [of an express Testimony
or Institution] to conclude, that they have power themselves to institute and
ordain such Ceremonies as they think meet, under a pretense of being
circumstances of Worship. But why so? May not Governors have a right to make
Application of the Law of nature, to determine these circumstances as well as
private men, and therefore without a Spirit of contention, we may conclude they
have a power to institute and ordain such Ceremonies as they shall see meet.
But this will be more proper under another Head. Let us then hear the Doctor's
reason, For as the Directive light of nature is sufficient to guide us in these
things, so the obligation of the Church unto it, makes all stated additions
useless, as on other accounts they are noxious. But though the light of nature
be sufficient to guide us in these things, may not men indulge their own
fancies, and not follow their guide? And then the obligation of the Church will
not be useless, much less noxious, when she does tie them to decent
circumstances. But the Doctor goes on, Such things as these are times and
seasons of Church Assemblies, the order and decency wherein all things are to
be transacted in them, the bounding of them, as unto the number of their
Members and places of habitation; so as to answer the ends of their
Institution; the multiplication of Churches, when the number of Believers
exceeds the proportion capable of Edification in such Societies; what especial
advantages are to be made use of in the order of Worship of the Church; such as
are methods in preaching, [and praying the Doctor should have added also.]
Translations and Tunes of Psalms in singing, continuance in public duties and
the like, the things themselves being divinely instituted, are capable of such
general directions, in, and by the light of nature, as may with ordinary
Christian prudence, be on all occasions applied unto the use and practice of
the Church. But have all the like prudence to apply them, or may they not be
often misapplyed? And are not the generality of men careless and negligent? And
therefore may not the Governors provide against such defects and indecencies?
Scripture has not determined the circumstances of these duties, he says, the
light of nature has not determined them, but the Scripture does require they
should be done, and the light of nature also does direct they ought to be
prudently done, but who is this prudent man that must determine them? He
answers, Ordinary Christian prudence may apply them. And why may not the
Governors then apply them? Have they not ordinary Christian prudence? So that
to speak to the present matter we are upon, we are to Pray to God, and Praise
him publicly in the Congregation; The words, the method and the length of the
Prayer we are to use, are not determined in Scripture, nor nature, here
Christian prudence must come in to order all these. And why may not the whole
Church of England direct the words as well as Dr. O? Is it not more reasonable
and fit the Gravest and Wisest men of the Nation should direct in this matter,
than ever young raw Divine be left to his Arbitrary pleasure? This I leave to
any rational unprejudiced man to decide, and I need say no more on this
subject, the whole Church of England can and will, in all humane presumption,
make better provision for the public Service, than every particular Minister
left to himself, will or ought to be supposed to do. Besides, it is the express
command of God's Word given to one man, but concerning all, to Timothy the
Bishop to see it done, 1 Timothy 2.1.
that Prayers and Supplications should be made for all men, for Kings and all
in Authority, and for all other necessities of the Church, and that these
things should be done decently and in order, and therefore Governors ought not
to leave these to every bodies pleasure, to do or not to do them, to perform
them decently or undecently, as the humor takes them, but in reason ought to
prescribe such Prayers and orders which they know to be full, pious, and
comprehensive, or else how do they discharge their duty, or can they be sure
that God is served in such a manner as he has required, and becomes us toward
his Divine Majesty? And if our Liturgy, as Mr. Baxter says, be incomparably
better than any of the Foreign or Ancient Liturgies that he has seen, surely
it is a much better Service than we were likely to have, if it were wholly left
to every Minister's private conceptions. So that the whole Controversy, as Dr.
O. has stated it, or any man else can do it, is, whether the public Prayers
that are left by God and nature, to be determined by Christian prudence, ought
not in reason rather to be determined by the prudence of the Governors, than
of Dr. O. I speak of public Prayers, which concern the honor of God, and the
Edification of the Church, (not Dr. O's or any man's private concerns at home,
wherein Dr. O. and others have a liberty and property of their own, though
subordinate to the public good:) in which Governors have a right to see that
all things be done decently and in order, and therefore may prescribe such
Prayers as are fit for the public Worship of God. And that ours are such, Mr.
B. and the main body of Nonconforming Ministers do allow. Neither do I find
Dr. O. does any where except against the matter of our in any particular, Page
229.
but complains of the constant and sole use of the Liturgy in all
Church-Administrations in the matter and manner prescribed. But since the
Doctor does confess these things are left to Christian prudence to determine,
if the present Liturgy be lawful, pious, and agreeable to the Word of God, as
the Nonconformist Divines generally acknowledge, I do appeal to the common
sense of all Mankind, whether Christian Governors may not require Christians
to join in that Service, and they can have no pretense to hold up Divisions,
and make a Separation on that account.

And here farther all men ought to take notice, that though the pretense with
which the poor people have been deluded hitherto has been a doubt, whether
those that prayed by form, prayed by the Spirit, and they have been nourished
up in an opinion, that Extempore Prayers, or the conceived Prayers which
Ministers made of their own, did proceed from the immediate influence of the
Spirit, whereas those that did Pray according to a set Form printed in a Book,
did offer up only humane inventions, and the Spirit did not ^o along with them.
But you find Mr. B. ^s quite of another mind, and allows of Liturgies, and
says, He would not part with his share in the Common Prayers of all the
Churches, for all the World. And Dr. O. does not say his conceived Prayers come
more from the Spirit than stated Forms, but says, ordinary Christian prudence
is sufficient to direct about them, and so the whole Controversy is, whose
prudence is to be preferred, that of the Church of God in all Ages, and the
learned Bishops and Divines of the Church of England for above a hundred years;
or the ordinary Christian prudence of Dr. O. and every young Divine of four and
twenty years old in the Kingdom.

CHAP. VII. Of the Circumstances of Worship.
THE Adversaries of our Church have in nothing found greater success in
alienating the minds of the Poor people from our Communion, than by casting
abroad prejudices amongst them about the circumstances of Worship.

Therefore that I may give the Reader satisfaction in these as well as in other
matters, I will set down what Dr. O. and Mr. B. say concerning them, and will
begin with Dr. O. It is merely from a Spirit of contention, P. 14.
that some call on us or others, to produce express Testimony [he means of
Scripture] or Institution for every circumstance in the practice of Religious
duties -- Such things as these are the times and seasons of Church Assemblies,
the order and decency wherein all things are to be transacted in them. -- What
special advantages are to be made use of in Preaching, [as Homilies, Pulpits,
etc.] Translations and Tunes of Psalms in singing, [as also Organs, etc. to
help the voices to sing melodiously,] continuance in public duties, [how long
or how short,] and the like, [what Habit and what Gesture,] the things
themselves being divinely instituted, are capable of such general directions
in, and by the light of nature, as may with ordinary Christian prudence be on
all occasions applied unto the use and practice of the Church. And to ^ew that
these words did not fall by chance from the Doctor, you find him re^eating the
like. P. 32.
There ought to be Societies wherein men voluntarily join together or the
solemn performance of Divine Worship, and therefore people must not for^^ke the
Assembling themselves together, and neglect the public Service on pretense of
serving God at home. And joint walking in obedience before God; these Societies
ought to use such means for their own peace and order, as the light of nature
directs unto, And where men have a Common interest, they ought to consult in
common for the due management of it. -- The Lord Christ in the Institution of
Gospel-Churches, their State, Order, Rule and Worship, does not require of his
Disciples, that in their observance of his appointments they should cease to be
men, or forego the use and exercise of their rational Abilities, according to
the Rule of that exercise, which is the light of nature. -- There are in the
Scripture, general Rules directing us in the Application of natural light, unto
such determination of all circumstances in the acts of Church-Rule and Worship,
as are sufficient for their performance decently and in order. Wherefore as was
said before, it is utterly in vain and useless, to demand express Institution
of all the circumstances belonging unto the Government, Order, Rule, and
Worship of the Church; or for the due improvement of things of themselves
indifferent unto its Edification, as occasion shall require. Nor a^^ they
capable to be otherwise stated, but (...) they lie in the light of nature and
Spiritu^^ prudence directed by the general rules (...) Scripture. So that these
things are to b^ applied and determined by some body, for order and decency can
never be kept up by chance, neither will the Vulgar sort be kept within any
rule, unless there be some Authority to determine every ones place and order,
and to reprove and punish those that break such commands, as is evident in all
great Concourse and Meetings of the Multitude. Who then ought to apply these
general rules to the particular circumstances but the Governors who have power
to rebuke and chastise the offender if he do not observe such decency and order
as shall be thought meet? And since we are to take the Laws of nature for our
guide, the common consent of mankind have generally agreed that it is the Law of
nature, that Governors in all Societies should determine the modes and
circumstances of all public affairs; and the same light of nature does teach,
that those circumstances are most proper to be observed, which custom and
general usage have lead men unto, therefore what is thought most honorable and
expressive of the greatest reverence amongst men, ought with the same parity of
reason to be understood to signify our Devotion to God. And the imitating such
customary ways of showing respect, is approved by God himself. Thus when God
appeared to Moses in the Bush, God requires him to come near with all
Reverence, and in token thereof, it being the way of approaching to great
Persons in that Country, to put off his Shoes, for the place where thou
stand is Holy ground, but that being not now a custom of honor in use
amongst us, but putting off the Hat, that we ought to do instead thereof, when
we speak to God, or appear in his House, where we ought to have all awful
thoughts, and by our outward behavior testify our honor of him, for whose
Service it is set apart.

Mr. Baxter does plainly ascribe the power of determining these circumstances
unto Governors, as fully as any body can desire. Plea for Peace. p. 30.
We suppose that there are some circumstances of the Ministers work which it
belongs to his own Office to determine of. -- [Such as are, when to Marry,
Christen or Bury, etc. within Canonical times, or when to appoint a Communion
on other days, besides those prescribed by Law, etc.] But there are others
which it is meet should be universally determined of, for the Concord of all
Churches in the Kingdom. These the Pastors and Churches by consent may agree in
without a Law, if Kings leave it to them. And Kings (by the advcie of such as
best understand Church-cases,) may well by their own Laws, make such
determinations. As for instance, in what Scripture-Translations, what Versions
and Meeters of Psalms, the Churches shall agree. Much more may they determine
of the public maintenance of Ministers, and the Temples and such other
extrinsick accidents. Again, Page 49.
It is Schism when men separate out of unruliness of Spirit, because they will
not be governed by their lawful Pastors in lawful things, as time, place,
order, etc. And yet more fully, Apol. 4.
We flatly affirm, as well as you, that the King's Laws do bind the mind or
soul, (or Conscience if you will call it so) to a conscionable performance of
all his lawful commands.

We are so tender of disobeying our Rulers, P. 111.
that we will do any thing to obey and please them, except disobeying God.

So that for the circumstances of time, place, order, etc. lawful Pastors may
prescribe them, and it is unruliness of Spirit and Schismatical, to make that a
pretense for Separation and not obeying them. And what a vast many
Controversies and Objections will this one Principle of his ^ut an end to,
between the Church of England and Dissenters. For hence it will evidently
follow all the Quarrels about Holidayes, Lent, and other Fasting-dayes, must be
laid aside, for there must be times of solemn Praising God, and humbling our
selves by Fasting and Prayer, and these the lawful Pastors may appoint. And
since they have appointed those which the Christian Church has generally
observed in all Ages, there can be no ground to except against their
observance; and under the title of place, order, etc. will come in all the
other usages which Dissenters take offense at. Such as the Habit the Minister
wears, whether Surplice or a Gown, or any other badge the Church shall appoint.
The part of the Church where he officiates, so as it be where the People can
Hear, as Baptism at the Font, reading Morning and Evening Prayer in the Desk,
and the Communion Service at the Table where that Holy Sacrament is usually
Administered. And lastly, by the same Principle we must allow of the duty of
Kneeling at Prayers, and at the receiving of the Sacrament, standing up at the
Creeds and Hymns, and such other accidents of Reverence and humble behavior
while we are in God's House. For these in themselves are lawful, being no where
prohibited by God, and therefore Rulers who are to be obeyed in all lawful
commands, must be obeyed in these also.

And here now let all understanding and well-meaning people that have been
misled into an Admiration of the Dissenters consider, how grossly they have been
abused and cheated by them, and how shamefully the Church of England, and even
the Christian Church in general, have been calumniated by their Teachers, as
bordering upon Superstition and Idolatry, bringing in humane inventions, by
laying Impositions that were not in Scripture, when they applied these
circumstances of Worship, to the particular occasions and conveniences of the
Church. When Dr. Owen himself says, Nor are they capable to be otherwise
stated, but as they lie in the light of nature, and Spiritual prudence directed
by the general rules of Scripture. And speaking of Church, State, and Religious
Worship, he does moreover acknowledge, Where men have a common interest, they
ought to consult in common for the due management of it. And is it not the
common interest of the Nation, to preserve Order, Peace and Holiness amongst
all the Members thereof, who must have mutual intercourse and Communion one
with another? and does it not much conduce to these ends, when they are put to
no doubts and scruples concerning their Religious duties, because they find the
same order, the same Rules of Worship, the same Prayers and Sacraments, in
whatsoever Church or Parish they remove unto? But what endless perplexities and
difficulties would people be put upon, if they were to enter into an
examination into the grounds and reasons of the Religion and Worship that was
professed in every place whither they Travel, or have occasion to six their
Habitations? nay if it were left to the pleasure of every Minister to vary and
change, and do what he list, every Lord's day, and time of public Assembly,
how could they ever be satisfied in this matter, so that since Dr. O. does say,
Where there is a common interest, they ought to consult in common for the due
management of it. It being the common interest of the Nation, that the grounds
and occasions of all offense and Controversy in the circumstances and order of
Religious Assemblies should be taken away. The Law of nature and common
prudence do direct, that the Governors and Representatives Ecclesiastical and
Civil should consult in common about them, and agree in such circumstances as
they shall think in their prudence are most meet. And if a minor part in Dr.
O's Assembly, ought to be concluded, and sit down satisfied with the
determination of the Major, why ought not the Major part, or the concurrent
determination of the Representatives of the whole Kingdom in their respective
capacities, conclude the rest also? And what are our Ecclesiastical Laws,
Rubricks and Conons, which they cry out upon, but the results of such common
Consultations about the due management of the common Interest, the peace and
order of all Religious Assemblies, that persons may have opportunity to serve
God decently and in order, unto whatsoever Parish or Country they have occasion
to go.

The Separatists would do well to consider also, what danger they fall into, by
following Weaver, Cobbler and Tinker-Preachers. Dr. O. and Mr. B. two learned
men, confess you are in an error, when you call for Scripture for every
circumstance and mode of Worship, men of learning and honesty scorn to abuse
you so, they were your Tinker, your Weaver-Preachers, or men of their level,
that filled you with such prejudices and Objections against the Church of
England. For Mr. B. does plainly tell you, It Is Schism when men separate out of
unruliness of Spirit, Plea for Peace, p. 49.
because they will not be governed by their lawful Pastors in lawful things, as
time, place, order, etc. or because a minor part in Elections, he might as well
have said also, In common consults about due management of affairs of common
interest, as Dr. O. has it, Is over-voted by the major part, and cannot have
their wills. And Dr. O. does confess, It Is merely from a Spirit of contention,
that some call on us and others to produce express Testimony or Institution [of
Scripture he means] for every circumstance in the practice of Religious duties,
which may, with ordinary Christian prudence, be on all occasions, applied unto
the use and practice of the Church. Therefore to put an end to this Chapter, I
appeal to the common reason of mankind whether it will not be merely from a
Spirit of Contention, as Dr. O. has it, or unruliness of Spirit, as Mr. B.
says it is, for Dr. O. and his Congregation, or any other Dissenters, to
oppose their ordinary Christian prudence, to the prudence and determination of
Church universal, and the Constitution of our Nation, about the circumstances
of Religious Worship, and to complain of Impositions, because their Governors
apply them on all occasions, to prevent their being misapplyed by private men.

CHAP. VIII. Of the one Ceremony of the Church of England.
THe other Rites which are usually called Ceremonies of the Church, properly
come under the notion of circumstances of Worship, which must be observed in
general of necessity, and it is impossible that any public Divine Service
should be without them, and therefore I have considered them all together by
themselves, for there must be time, place, mode, order, gesture and habit. But
though the sign of the Cross may be comprehended in the word circumstance also,
yet it is not of that nature, but that Religious Worship may be performed
without any thing of that kind, and often is, and therefore I speak of it by it
self, as being of another consideration.

But though the sign of the Cross does not come in under the necessary
circumstances of Worship, yet it is a thing that may be necessary to be
observed when it is commanded, and in its own nature highly profitable to
Christian Edification. For if it does give us to understand, and help to keep
in our minds those necessary duties, which we must never forget, certainly it
must be very useful to retain such an ancient custom.

Now that Signs are obvious to every man's apprehension, and apt to be
remembered, when words are forgotten; is so notorious, that many will make Signs
of their own, to put them in mind of things, which they fear they should
otherwise forget, as tyeing sometimes a string to their Fingers, knitting knots
in their Handkerchiefs, etc. which are not naturally significative of the
things they would remember. And why we might not use Signs to help our memories
about Spiritual things, I do not see, since they are more apt to slip out of
the minds of common people, than other matters, provided care be taken that
these signs be not many, troublesome, and impertinent, for words themselves are
but Signs, and if I can have an easier and more significative Sign, to help my
memory, and express my mind, than words are; I do not see the least reason why
I may not use it. Now, that the use of the Cross is a plain, easy, and
significative Sign of our profession, of our belief in a crucified Savior, and
of our own promise, willingly to take up and bear his Cross, and no short words
can be so expressive of them, or so firmly imprint it upon our Memories, must
be acknowledged by all mankind. For when a hundred Sermons about it would have
been forgotten, or little thought of, the seeing a Child signed with a Cross
when he is Baptized, will stir up in the dullest capacity, a remembrance of
their profession of Faith in Christ Jesus, who was crucified for them, though
no discourse be made about it, and so likewise in the midst of all their
Crosses and Afflictions it will put them in mind, that these things are no
other than they did voluntarily promise to undergo when they were made
Christians, and no other than their Lord himself did suffer, and tell them they
were to expect in his Service during their Pilgrimage in this World. Who has
also given us this assurance, if we patiently suffer with him, we shall also
reign with him in Glory, and these were the reasons that moved the Ancients to
use the Sign of the Cross so frequently, and are sufficient to warrant us to
imitate their example in observing this ancient custom; and the leaving it
wholly off, cannot be without some offense to many persons who read how much it
was used in the Primitive Church.

I will set down Mr. B's words concerning this matter. In his Book of
Church Government, p. 404. Man's mind is not known to others but by Signs, but
[God] has not tied us absolutely to any particular signs. If a Confession of
Faith be read, and we are called to signify our consent, etc. -- God has not
tied us in such cases, whether we shall signify this consent by speaking or
subscribing our names, or by lifting up the hands, or laying it on a Book (as
in Swearing) or by standing up, or such like. A sufficient signification or
professiom of our minds is necessary; but the special Sign is left to our own
or our Governments determination. -- To this end and on these terms was the
Sign of the Cross used heretofore by Christians, and to this end they used
standing in public Worship every Lord's day, -- and afterward standing up at
the Creed; as also adoring with their faces toward the East, etc. they used
these only as significations of their own minds, instead of words, as the
Prophets of old were wont by other Signs, as well as words, to Prophecy to the
People. And as Ensebius tells us, how Constantine measured the length and
breadth of a man on the Earth, with his Spear, to tell the covetous how little
must serve them (only a Grave place) after death. And I dare not condemn the
cautelous use of such professing Signs as these: though the tongue be the chief
instrument, yet not the only instrument to express the mind; and though words
be the ordinary Sign, yet not the only Sign: Dumb men must speak by other
Signs, and usually more silent Signs are fitter for Assemblies, to avoid
disturbances and sometimes more permanent Signs, (as subscription, or a Stone
or Pillar of Remembrance, as Josh. 24. etc.) are more desirable. And this is
left to humane prudence, 19. And therefore I durst not have reproved any of the
Ancient Christians that used the Sign of the Cross, merely as a professing
signal action, to show the Heathen and Jews about them, that they believed in a
crucified Christ, and were not ashamed of his Cross. And since we are obliged
to make the same profession now, why may we not as well use the same Sign to do
it by? And what then must we think of those men who have gone about to abuse
the People with strong Jealousies and surmises, by the hard words of Symbolical
Ceremonies, Humane Inventions, and new Sacraments. Because we use such a plain,
innocent Sign, to the same end which the Ancients did it so Piously, in the
first Ages of the Church. And also observe how unjust the complaints of
Dissenters are, when they cry out against the burden of Ceremonies, when we
have but one innocent Ceremony, and that applied to a man only in his Baptism,
which is but once in his whole life. And see what meek, charitable, good
natured Christians they are, that can make such an hideous outcry against
Ceremonies and Impositions on this account. Never any that bare the Christian
name, did make more unreasonable clamours than these men do against the Church
of England, when she does but endeavor to keep up a face of Primitive order,
and show her Conformity to the ancient and Catholic Church, in this and other
circumstances of Religious duties.

CHAP. IX. Of the Oaths, Subscriptions and Declarations, etc. required by the
Church of England of Clergymen.
HItherto I think I have sufficiently vindicated the Constitutions of the
Church of England, from those objections which are made against her conditions
of Lay-Communion, for private Christians, but because the conditions that are
required of Clergymen that will exercise their Function amongst us are
excepted against, and the Oaths, Subscriptions and Declarations, etc. are
alleged as another great Objection, and as a just ground of complaint of her
hard Impositions, therefore ^he consideration of them ought not by ^^y means to
be omitted in this Apology. And truly I should as much endeavor to ^ut off all
unlawful and superfluous commands in this kind as any man, and I think (...)
great imprudence for Christian Churches ^o clog their Communion with any
doubtful and unnecessary conditions, which may afford any just ground of
scruple, or fright my from joining in their public Worship, ^ut upon the best
enquiry that I can make, (...) do not see but that the terms of Commu^ion in
the Church of England are so easy, and free from any just scruples, that a man
must have separated from most Christian Churches that ever have been, for the
same ^eason that he can pretend to separate from ^^ers: For if the Liturgy be
excepted against, ^he like Objection lies against most other Churches, in all
Ages as far as any thing appears to the contrary; if Holidays and ^^asts, the
Christian Church ever had the ^^me we now observe; if Cross and Surplice, and
other Rites and Circumstances ^f Worship, I have showed the ancient Church; and
the Greek and Lutheran, etc. ^se them in like manner.

Come we to Oaths and Subscriptions in general, do not all Churches, and all
Societies of men require the like? Do not all Freemen of London Swear to
maintain the Laws, Customs and Privileges of the City and to be subject to the
Officers, and Government thereof? Do not the Universities, Colleges, and all
other Corporations, bind their Members upon Oath, to observe their Statutes and
Constitutions. And do not the reformed Churches require Subscriptions and
Assent to their Articles and Confessions, and why then may not the Church of
England use the like care for to secure her Peace and Concord, which all other
Societies do? So that unless something unlawful be shown in our Oaths and
Subscriptions, and Declarations, there can be no reason to except against them.

Of the new Impositions of Subscriptions and Declarations.
Mr. B. does in several places complain, that instead of any abatements and
approaches for accommodation, the Church has added to their Burdens, and
Conformity is made much more difficult than before. Now when matters come to be
seriously considered, I hope I shall make it appear, that Mr. B. has the least
reason to complain of the Church in this point of any man, and the whole World
must justly have accused her of folly, and palpable neglect of her own safety,
if she had not required these new Declarations and Subscriptions, considering
what confusions she had newly escaped when these things were first required.
For does not Mr. B. often tell the World they were the Conformists, and
Episcopal men that raised first, and carried on the War against the King and
Church in the late Rebellion, but what sort of Conformists were they? Such as
either submitted to the Government, only to overthrow it, or to get the
advantage it did then afford them, or else did only account it tolerable, but
necessary to be altered as soon as they had any power to do it; such
Hypocritical Conformists, that were secret Enemies, when they pretended to be
bosom Friends, I believe might make up a great part of those that were engaged
in the late Rebellion, and must such men always pass undiscovered amongst us,
till they have opportunity to play over the same Game again, and involve the
Nation in the other Twenty years Misery and Confusion? Must we together with
the Act of Oblivion, forget all sense of our past misfortunes, and not so much
as learn to be wise and prevent them for the time to come? So that the very
Objections they make against these Declarations and Subscriptions, are just
Reasons before all the World, why they ought to be imposed, for can any
Government be secure, or any Society of men live in Peace, whose Members think
it their duty to change it as soon as they are able, and use their utmost
endeavor to alter the present Constitution? and these are the very Objections
they make, that they cannot bind themselves from overturning the Government as
soon as they are able, and ought not the Church then to endeavor to Arm her
self against such new disturbances and confusions? or what reason is there that
she should admit any to be Teachers and Officers, which will not promise to
uphold and maintain her Peace and Government, which these men do openly
profess, they will change upon the first opportunity that is put into their
hands? and to what miserable State they will bring the Nation by that means,
the late unhappy experiment will sufficiently convince all sober men, setting
aside the wickedness of Rebellion, Schism, Murder, Sacrilege, Robbery, and
Perjury, that were antecedent to their pretended Reformation. And must the
Nation be wheedled again into the same snare, and use no remedies to secure
themselves?

And yet farther it must be said, that these new Impositions, Declarations and
Subscriptions, are made no way necessary to our Communion, neither is any man
required to take them, but those that will do it voluntarily themselves. But
here Mr. B. tells us, The Conformity of the Laity is made an hundred fold more
difficult by the Corporation Oath and Declaration, and by the Vestry Act, etc.
Yet have we lately read the Writings with pity and admiration, who blush not
to tell the World that the Laity or People, are not put upon the renouncing of
the Covenant. And is not this true? For where were any put to it as a condition
of our Communion, and where is it required of any one man but where he please
himself? Why, is not the Corporation Oath, etc. put upon men if they will be
Officers and Vestry men? but what need that? Who obliges them to it? Do not our
College Statutes oblige all Fellows to be single men? And must we therefore
conclude our Nation does require them not to Marry; that no one can say; if
they will continue in their Fellowship they must not Marry, but what necessity
is there for them to keep their Fellowships? or who obliges them to that? so we
may truly say, no man is required to be an Officer in a Corporation or Vestry
man, and therefore none of the Laity are put upon renouncing of the Covenant,
and these Impositions do not make their Conformity more difficult than before.
And if they are not pleased with these Conditions, it is but keeping out of
those places, no body will trouble them with any such things, neither is it fit
they should be admitted into such Societies, when they will make it their
business to embroil and disturb the Government all that they can.

CHAP. X. Of Reordination.
THough, as I have said, these points of Reordination, Declaration,
Subscription, be nothing at all to the present debate about Schism in holding
Conventicles. Yet to show the Churches equity and moderation in these, as well
as other matters, I will briefly vindicate her Constitutions about them from
their unjust complaints made in the peaceable design, which seems to be the
most general sense of the party.

First, then Reordination we do not require, but do as much disapprove of it,
as they themselves, all that is required, is, that we may be certain that all
Churches be duly supplied with Ministers rightly ordained, and therefore the
Church does think her self bound, when she may have choice, to admit none to
officiate in her Service, but those who are undoubtedly such, thereby to avoid
any scandal to others, and to prevent all doubts and scruples in many of her
own Children, who would be much troubled, to live all their lives under such a
Minister, from whom they were not certain to receive true Sacraments, and true
Ministerial Benediction. For we can plead no necessity here in our case, and
therefore that which may be tolerable in case of necessity, cannot excuse, or
be any warrant, when there is no such necessity for it, therefore she does
admit none but those that are Episcopally ordained. The case therefore is this,
in Scripture there are three names used to denote the Ministers under the
Gospel, (...), These words do plainly now in the usage of the Church, signify
other things than they did anciently in Heathen Authors, therefore I do not see
how we can know what Office does belong to each of them, and what a Bishop, an
Elder, and a Deacon are to do, but from the Scripture, as it has been generally
understood in this matter. And this we must lay down for certain, that God did
institute all things in his Church, as was most agreeable to good order, and
the peaceable Government thereof, and therefore we ought rationally to conclude
he did prescribe those methods now under the Gospel, which he thought best
under the Law, and which the sober part of mankind have thought most expedient
for the public Peace, if nothing appear to the contrary.

Now in all well constituted Governments, the power of making Laws, ending
Controversies, and giving judgment, is not in every particular man, but in some
select chosen Officers who are gradually one above another, and still the
Superior to redress any just complaint made against an Inferior. Thus in the
Jewish Polity, there were three distinct orders of men to Minister about Holy
things, the Levites, the Priests and the High Priest, whose Authority was Chief
and above all. Now, why should not the same reason hold in the Government of
the Christian Church? and does not the like equity appear that there should be
distinctions of orders and degrees amongst the Rulers thereof, the lower orders
keeping within their bounds, and leaving the weightier matters to those of the
highest rank? Since therefore this is after the example of the Civil Polity,
it is according to the order of the Jewish Church, if Scripture will allow of
it, and the Tradition of the Christian Church does tell us all along such a
distinction of orders was kept up. Methinks this should be enough to quiet all
contentions about it.

To avoid then all ambiguity of words, as much as is possible, it is plain that
there is one spoken of in Scripture in the Singular number, who has full Power
and Authority to do all Offices whatsoever, and he is called Bishop, and Elder
in several places. And some think, that as often as the word Elder, in
Scripture, does signify an Officer in the Church, it is meant only of a
Bishop. Beside the Bishop, there is the Minister of the word (...), which may
signify the Priest or Presbyter in the Modern sense. And then there is a third
degree mentioned, Acts 6. the Minister that was to serve Tables, which may
properly belong to those we call Deacons at this day. So that here is the
Bishop, the Minister of the Word, and the Minister to serve Tables, etc. just
three orders as were under the Old Testament, and why there should be such a
Subordination then and not now, no one can imagine. Besides St. Jerome does
expressly tell us in one place, Epist. ad Nepot.
What Aaron and the Priests were under the Law, that were Bishops and Priests
under the Gospel. Et Epist. ad Evagr.
And in another place, That we may know the Apostolical Traditions taken out of
the Old Testament, what Aaron and the Priests and Levites were under the Law,
that are Bishop, Priests and Deacons under the Gospel. Ignatius who lived in
the Apostles days, does plainly mention these three Orders of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons; and all Ages of the Church ever since, to this very day, have kept
up this distinction. So that there is sufficient Authority for it from
Scripture Tradition, and consequently from Reason. This distinction being
supposed, the end o^ distinction is, because there may be peculiar Offices
belonging to one more than to another, and still the Offices of greatest trust
and difficulty, are committed to the Highest Order. Now because the matter of
Ordination and appointing Ministers of determining Controversies about Heresy
and Schism, prescribing Rules of order and decency, are things that require the
greatest judgment and discretion, it is fit they should be peculiar to those of
the highest order, and every one that is qualified to Minister in an ordinary
way, and do all offices according to sound and wholesome Rules, is not fit to be
a Judge, a Lawmakers, and to prescribe Rules, and appoint other Ministers and
Officers in the Church. And if it be not reasonable to expect that every
Minister should be qualified for all these Offices, it is not reasonable to
suppose he has any such Authority given him by God. The power therefore of
Ordaining Ministers and ending of incident Controversies, ought to be supposed
to be committed to men that are particularly chosen for their wisdom and
gravity to judge of those things, and therefore it seems reasonable it should
be appropriated to the Bishop, who is a select person of more Authority than
other Officers in the Church. Now we never read in Scripture, that any
Ordination was ever made, but where one of the highest Order was present. And
in that place which they so much urge, With the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, there was St. Paul's hands amongst them, who could have done it
alone, and theirs being, or not being there, did not alter the case. Neither
can they ever prove, that by the Presbytery there, are meant such Priests as
ours now. The Ancient Fathers say they were Bishops only. Neither does it ever
appear, that any one but a Bishop, which was accounted an Order above a
Presbyter, as it is now understood, did ever Ordain with the approbation of the
Church for fifteen hundred years. And no one can show the least warrant or
intimation that Ordination could be given by any other than a Bishop, and this
is the opinion of the greatest part of the Christian World at this very day,
and St. Jerome their great Author, does still put in, Excepta Ordinatione,
plainly taking away that, from any part of their Presbyters Office.

So that for men, after fifteen hundred years, to begin an Office of their own
heads, that was never known or heard of before, and then to cry out they are
wronged, and have infinite hard measure, that all will not join with them in
such a novelty and groundless invention, is to me the strongest boldness, and
unreasonable demand that men can lightly be guilty of.

But what will become of all the reformed Churches, have not their Orders been
approved of by many learned men, and shall we now call them in question after
all?

What may be allowed in case of necessity, where ordinary means and Rules
cannot be had, cannot be allowed in other circumstances, where there is not the
like necessities, neither will they be excusable any longer than that necessity
does continue, but are bound upon the first fair occasion to return to ancient
order, but while the necessity does continue, God will accept what they have,
if they sincerely do their duty, and excuse their defects.

But we are ordained by the hands of the Presbytery.

That is denied, not only by us at present, but by all Churches for fifteen
hundred years together. So that so long as they can show no instance for
fifteen hundred years together, nor no Authority from Scripture, but merely
their own sense against all the whole Christian Church, it is ^ot reasonable to
allow that pretended imposition of hands for any lawful Ordination, therefore
they are not put to any Reordination, but only are denied Admission into any
Office in the Church of England, till they can show their Ordination according
to the true and undoubted method which was all along approved in the Church,
that all Congregations may ^e sure of a lawful Minister, which otherwise they
can never be certain of, there being no necessity to wave the ordinary way.

Besides, there is more to be said for the standing strictly upon this matter
now than ordinary, for the very ground of all their Schism, the Foundation of
the late Horrid Rebellion, and that lamentable confusion and Murder, which was
caused for near twenty years together, was all chiefy owing to this principle
of the validity ^^ Ordinations by Presbyters, though intro^ duced by the
casting off, Murdering, Imprisoning and Robbing the Bishops that were over
them. And will not the same Principle, cause the same Mischiefs again if men do
not renounce and forsake it So that it is only kept up for an occasion of a new
Rebellion, and justified to lay the ground of a perpetual Schism in th^^
Church. It being therefore new, ground less, contrary to the practice and the
sens^ of the whole Church, and the Mother o^ so much Rebellion and Confusion,
ou^ Church would have been extremely negligent of her duty to the Catholic
Church and of the well fare of her Children, and o^ her own Peace-aand Safety,
if she had no^ peremptorily required men to forsake such Schismatical
Innovations, before they were permitted to exercise any Ministerial Office in
her Communion.

But before I leave this point, I must take notice of some Arguments brought by
Mr. B. to prove the Ordinations made by Presbyters valid, and he has been
Meditating upon it above this Forty years, and has had likewise the help of
Voetius who had studied it threescore years, and of Blondel also, a man of
great learning and skill in Antiquity, and from all these arbours we may hope
to find the utmost ^^at the cause will afford them, and believe that Mr. B.
would choose out that which is most for his purpose.

And first he begins with St. Jerome, Tr. of Episcop. Page 223.
and ^^e better to impose upon his unlearned ^^eader, puts in the words made or
ordain^^, which are only to his purpose, but not ^^und in St. Jerome, Hieron.
Ep. ad Evag.
The Presbyters of Alexandria, from the days of Mark, till Heraclus ^^d
Dionysius made or ordained their own Bishops. And then he goes on to set down
^^. Jerome's own words in Latin, and before he begins, says [St. Jerom] Having
stewed that Bishops and Presbyters were of ^^r Office, adds, Quod autem, etc,
which shall Translate, though he does not. But ^at afterward one was chosen
who was set ^ver the rest, it was done [by the Apostles ^e means] for a remedy
against Schism, lest ^very one drawing to himself, should break ^e Church of
Christ; for the Presbyters of ^lexandria, from Mark the Evangelist, to ^eraclus
and Dionysius the Bishops, did allayes call one their Bishop, who was chosen ^t
of themselves, and placed in a higher de^^ee, as if an Army should make their
Em^^rour, or Deacons should choose one of themselves whom they knew to be
industrious, and all him Archdeacon.

Now what is there in all those word to prove that Presbyters did or can ordain
Mr. B's first reason is, St. Jerome mention eth no other making; but is that a
reason? Neither does he mention their o^ daining, neither does he say they
place him in a higher degree, but they did c^^ one placed in a higher degree,
Bishop; (...) does not say by whom he was placed, and therefore we ought to
suppose he was placed and ordained by other Bishops, as cording to the general
custom of all other Churches, though chosen from among themselves. For St.
Jerome does express say in the next words immediately following, What does a
Bishop do, except Ordination, which a Presbyter may not do? No^ would St. Jerome
except Ordination in the next words, if he had intended in the former words to
tell us, the Presbyters ^^ Alexandria did not only ordain Presbyter but their
Bishop, nay Archbishop also, ^^ the Bishop of Alexandria was? And 't^ most
plain, that equality that St. Jerome did suppose between Bishops and Presbyters
was, in his opinion, only in the Apostles time, and taken away by them, and
Episcopal Superiority erected, and all the care of the Church committed to the
Bishops, to prevent Schism; Inde Hier. in Tit.
for he says, this custom was from the time of St. Mar^^ the Evangelist, and
ever since that time the power of Ordination was peculiar to the Bishop, and
the Presbyter could not to it. And therefore he plainly excepts that from any
part of his Office, see more of this matter, Orig. of Plots, p. 136. etc. so
that St. Jerome is so far from helping Mr. B. that he does most evidently make
against him.

His second Testimony is from Eutychius matriarch of Alexandria.

But he is but a late Modern Author in comparison, and not able to give any
cer^^in evidence in this matter, and guilty of many notorious mistakes in
History, and wherefore not to be set up against the Tradition of the Church,
which is most clear in the other side. See more in Dr. Hammond against Blondel
concerning him.

His third Proof is, from the History of Scotland, out of Hector Boethius Hist.
Scot. ^b. 7. fol. 126. Ante palladium populi suf^agiis ex Monicis and culdeis
Pontifices ^ssumerentur. But he does not say they were ordained by them, but
chosen out of them, but they may be ordained by Bishops notwithstanding.

Johannes Major de gestis Scot. lib. 2. ^. 4. says, Prioribus illis temporibus
per ^^acerdotes and Monachos sine Episcopis Scoti in Fide eruditi sunt. Here is
nothing all this while of Ordination by Presbyter for though they did instruct
the Scots ^ first in the Faith, yet they might go to England or France for
Ordination, before Bishops were settled amongst them. And the like may be said
of the Gothish Church till the coming of Vlphilus. And to ^ little purpose are
his Proofs from the Mon^ of Hy, for it does not any way appeat that they did
pretend to ordain Presbyter much less Bishops, See Bishop Bramhall's
Vindication of the Church of England, p. 271. etc.
but having Temporal jurisdiction as Civil Magistrates, or Lord of the Manor,
they had Authority over Bishops, as Lay-persons have, and might send Bishop
Aidan into Enlgand, by virtue of their Temporal Authority, but they were
subject to the Bishop in Spiritual di^ rections, Heb. 13.17. and this is all
can b^^ made of that Story, which is not my business now particularly to search
into. Those that desire farther satisfaction in these matters, may consult
Archbishop Bramhall in his Vindication of the Church of England Mr. Thorndike
in his Latin Book, p. 331.375, 451. and Mr. Dodwell in his two Letters to Mr.
Baxter.

Neither will Mr. Baxter find any more advantage by his Quotation out of Lee
for the Pseudo-Episcopi mentioned by him, Ep. 92.
where such as he supposed, had valid Ordination from Bishops, but had turned
Heretics, or exercised their Office in Schism, and so nothing to his purpose,
concerning Ordination by mere Presbyters. So that Mr. B. after Forty years
studying the point, and taking in all the help that Blondel and Voetius could
give him, is not able to produce one instance of Ordination by Presbyters out
of all Antiquity, neither can he show where they were approved of in any Age of
the Church for fifteen hundred years together. And for his pretended Arguments
drawn from Reason or Scripture, they are all fully answered in this Discourse,
and consequently Reordination is not required by our Church, but sufficient
Testimony of such true and real Ordination as the Clergy of the Church of
England do produce.

CHAP. XI. Of the Declaration of Assent and Consent.
THE next thing excepted against is, The Declaration of Assent and Consent, to
all and every thing contained and prescribed in, and by the Book of
Common Prayer, etc. Against this they object, How can those now whose judgments
are, and have been still for Moderation between both Opinions, in times before
as now be able to come over to one side altogether, on such terms as these? How
can these we say make so short a turn as this, without the hazard of some
sprain to their Consciences if they do it?

So that to do any thing that tends to Peace and Settlement, must presently be
a sprain to your Consciences. One would have thought the renouncing of former
Oaths and Subscriptions of Canonical obebience, joining to overturn the
Government of Church and State, and now pleading for Indulgence and Toleration,
contrary to all your former Reasons and Declarations against it, should be a
greater sprain than to return to your duty, and make satisfaction for the
injury you had done; but to put your Consciences quite out of joint for Schism
and Faction, is not half so much as a little twitch to bring it them to their
right place, when they have started aside. But who desires you to sprain your
Consciences in this matter? I do not see any reason that men should be so fond
of your coming in, if you are not inwardly moved to take the Ministerial Office
upon you, with the like Conformity that others do profess, you have free
liberty to continue as you are, for God be thanked neither the necessities, nor
the honor of the Church does stand in need of such men's labors. But as for
your Reasons against this Declaration, they are so far from moving us, that
they were the very motives that made it necessary to require it. For we have
seen enough by experience, what mischiefs come from such lukewarm Teachers,
and how little hopes there was like to be of Settlement, unless the Clergy were
hearty and serious in the Service of God themselves, and so did effectually
stir up the People to Zeal and Concord in the same Worship. Now this can never
be expected when the Ministers themselves are not well satisfied with it, but
are always hankering after changes and alterations, and are so far from
exhorting the People to Devout Submission and Conformity, that they are always
insinuating the unlawfulness and the Imperfection of their present Religious
Offices, and thereupon would read the Common Prayer as they would read a Brief,
or a Proclamation, never regarding whether it were true or false, and show no
Devotion at all about it. The Church of England therefore, under the deep sense
she had of God's honor and Service, and to the end she might as much as in her
lay, promote Piety and Devotion in the performance of her public Worship, did
take care to admit none to officiate therein, but such as without Hypocrisy
and Guile, and with an unfeigned heart, would Assent to the truth and
usefulness of her public Service, that so they might encourage others piously
to frequent that, which they had declared to be good and acceptable in the
sight of God.

For can it ever be reasonable to admit men to officiate in that Service, and
have the instruction of the People in the right understanding and Praying
according to it, when they themselves do at the same time think it not pleasing
to God? So that if the Common Prayer Book be an Order of Worship which is
pleasing to God, as the Church of England does believe, she ought likewise to
take care that those that officiate in it do not mock God, and offer the
Sacrifice of Fools, as they must do, if they think they offend God in
officiating according to it. But if they think it all agreeable to the mind and
will of God, and such as he will accept at their hands, why may they not
declare their Assent and Consent unto the same? However, the Church could never
justify her self before God or men, if she should permit men to offer up a
Service to God Almighty, which they did think was contrary to his will.

But some will farther say, there are some Rubricks inserted into the
Common Prayer which are no part of the Service, and define controverted points,
in which many are not well satisfied, and yet are obliged to Assent to them.

The Catechism is also a part of the Book and with good reason, and if there be
other Doctrines as that about the efficacy of Baptism, and Antiquity of
Church Government by Bishops, Priests and Deacons, they are very useful truths
also, and fit to be taught in these distracting times, and therefore it is
reasonable that the Teachers should declare their Assent to the Catholic truth
about them. For a Church must not forgo all profitable truths, because some men
bred up under Factious and Schismatical Teachers, have had wrong notions about
them, but ought the rather to take care that men be better instructed about
them, and therefore that the Ministers at least make a profession thereof. But
if we must leave out every thing that some will call controverted, we shall
pare away all our Religion. And yet I dare say, these truths have been as
little controverted in the Christian Church as any, and are also of very great
advantage, and much tending to the Peace of the Church that they should be
assented to, as they are declared in the Book of Common Prayer.

As for the several Objections against the Rubricks and Calendars, and several
Versions of the Scriptures, etc.

I answer, there is no more designed nor intended in our Assent and Consent to
them, but that the orders and manner of Service prescribed by them, may be
piously and religiously observed, and to declare that the substantial parts of
God's Worship performed according to those directions and commands, will be
acceptable and well pleasing in his sight. So that we may Praise God according
to the English Psalter, observe Easter according to the Calendar, read all the
Lessons, observe the Festivals, and other Rites and Ceremonies prescribed in
and by the said Book, with a very good Conscience. Whether some Regulations
might not be made, is not defined nor declared either way, but our Assent and
Consent is to what now is prescribed, and does require no more than to
acknowledge that we lawfully and piously may follow these directions.

Thus because Astronomical Tables differ, and the motions of the Moon do vary,
so that it is hard for to find out the certain moment of the Moons changes,
therefore the Church has ordered, that she will observe Easter according to the
direction set down in her Calendar. Now whether that does always fall out
directly according to the Critical point in Astronomy is not material, neither
does the Church define so much, but has set down a Rule, how to find out the
first Full Moon after the one and twentieth of March, and because generally it
falls out so, the rule is well enough, and when it happens to fail from the
reality of the Moons motion, yet it may serve for the determination of the
Churches Easter, which is all that is intended by it.

The only Objection that I find material is, the Assent to the Athanasian
Creed, as it stands now with the Addition of Filioque which they say does seem
to condemn all the Greek Church, who oppose that Addition, etc.

To which I answer, if they rightly consider the words of the Creed, they will
see no necessity to infer any such Conclusion. For the words are, This is the
Catholic Faith, which except a man believe Faithfully, he cannot be saved. Now
to be faithful in any thing, does suppose it to be committed to his trust, and
to believe a thing faithfully, is to believe it in such manner as it is
committed to him. Now the Church of God in general, nor the Church of England
in particular, has no where declared that the Addition of the word Filioque, or
the express meaning thereof, is absolutely necessary to Salvation, neither do
we condemn the Greek Church, though they differ from us about it. So that this
point being not absolutely committed any where as indispensably necessary to
Salvation, these words Which except a man believe faithfully, are not to be
extended, to condemn all those that do not explicitly Assent to that Addition.
Neither do those words mean, that all that do not explicitly know and believe
that Creed, cannot be saved. But all those, that when they understand the
Churches Faith declared thereby, do reject and deny it. For to believe a thing
faithfully, does suppose that it is proposed to a man with all its Obligations
and Circumstances, and then whosoever does not believe the Catholic Faith,
faithfully, without doubt shall perish everlastingly. And that this has been
the constant meaning of the Church is evident, because it was never taught
young Children in their Catechism, nor the profession thereof exacted of Sick
and dying persons, which would have been done, if the explicit belief of every
passage had been thought necessary to Salvation. But yet because it is very
useful to be understood, therefore it is put into the Liturgy, that Pious men
may know and consider it, and because it ought not to be denied when it is
understood, therefore the Creed does very well say, this is the Catholic
Faith, which, Except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved. For it
declares no other Doctrine, but what is actually contained in the Apostles and
Nicene Creed.

CHAP. XII. Of the Subscription and Declaration against the Covenant, etc. and
Oxford Oath.
NOW I come to the Subscription; And first before I set down the words, let me
desire the Reader to remember that there had been a Rebellion carried on for
twenty years together, which began under pretense of Reformation, and was
upheld by virtue of the solemn League and Covenant, and by that means the
Government both in Church and State was quite overturned by violence; and
contrary to all Law and Justice, the King a long time persecuted, and at length
barbarously murdered by his own Subjects; many though sands of his Loyal people
inhumanely destroyed with all Malice and Cruelty, a^^ the Bishops and Orthodox
Clergy turned out of House and Home, and many of them murdered, starved and
imprisoned; and the Loyal Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty that escaped with
their Lives, plundered ruined and undone; yet notwithstanding all these
villainous Usages, it pleased the King and Parliament, after His Majesty happy
Restoration, to grant an Act of Indemnity for all former Offenses, but partly
out of Justice to declare the wickedness of these Principles that lead men to
such horrid Rebellion, and partly out of prudent caution, to prevent the like
mischief for the time to come, did only require this easy acknowledgment, and
them admit them to equal advantages with the most loyal Subjects, though they
had been guilty of Rebellion, Murder and Rapine, and had forfeited their Lives
and Estates a hundred times over.

I A. B. do declare, that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take up Arms against the King. And that I do abhor that traitorous Position of
taking Arms by his Authority, against His Person, or those commissionated by
Him: And that I will con^^rm to the Liturgy of the Church of England, ^^ it is
now by Law established. And I do ^^clare, that I do hold there lies no
Obligation upon me or any other person, from the Oath commonly called the
Solemn League and ^ovenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of Government
either in Church or tate. And that the same was in it felf an ^^lawful Oath,
and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and
Liberties of this Kingdom. The Oath ^^ the Oxford Act. I A. B. do swear, that
^^ is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, ^^ take up Arms against the
King. And that I do abhor that traitorous Position of ^^king Arms by His
Authority, against His ^^erson, or against those that are commissio^^ated by
him, in pursuance of such Commissions. And that I will not at any time
en^^eavour any alteration of Government, either in Church or State.

Now what more mild or easy words could be contrived? Or how could we over
hope to live in peace and safety after ^^ much sad experience of their Cruelty,
unless they did declare their repentance ^^y some such words as these, and let
us understand that whatever they were for^^nerly, they are now really of
another ^ind? And if they are so, then surely it is for their advantage that
they should ^^ clare so much, and they are not put to a^ shame in the matter
neither, for they ^^ no more than what every man else, though formerly
persecuted by them, is bound to^ in the like condition.

The first thing quarrelled at, is, that will not endeavor any alteration of
Government.

Against this it is urged, P. 18.
That every Subject has a Fundamental liberty to choose Knight and Burgesses,
and accordingly to inform th^^ of their Grievances, and Petition them ^^
Redress. What then? Were not the Pa^^ liament that made this Law, thus chose^
and entrusted with the power of redressing the Grievances of the Subject, and
have they not taken the best course to do it For when the greatest Grievance
the King dom lies under, is, that many are always busy to disturb and overturn
the Government, could they do a more grateful and beneficial thing to the
Nation, than to require all men that were to be admitted to have a share in the
Government, to declare that they would never endeavor to change or destroy it,
especially when we had so lately smarted by changes and alterations? Or is it
reasonable they should have any thing to do in the Government, that will not
endeavor to uphold and preserve it?

But how then can they make any new Laws? ^^^serve how greedy they are to find
fault ^^ere there is none. What a strange pre^^^ce is that, as if the
Parliament meant thereby to destroy all after-Parliaments, or ^^ke them
useless, which being none of ^^^ir design, therefore by alteration of
Government, is not meant not making any ^^^w Laws, but changing the frame and
^^^der of the Constitution it self, which in ^^he regard they confess is
unalterable. ^^^ere is the Constitution of the Government ^^^ the State, which
is a legal Monarchy; ^^^d this indeed we are so far bound from endeavoring to
alter, as we think it is not al^^^able by the King himself and Parliament,
^^^ause the Supreme Power for the Admini^^^ation, must be supposed in all
Communities ^^^he derived from, and held by the Consti^^^ion.

And since the Constitution has made ^^^al Monarchy not alterable by King and
^^^liament, why may not the same Consti^^^ion make Episcopal Government in the
^^^urch likewise unalterable by King and ^^^liament, to say nothing that it is
made ^^^ already by God himself.

What an anointed Plot have we had here ^^ the Nation, that an Allegiance in
effect ^^^ld be sworn to the Bishops, as well as to ^^ King. What other Plot is
it, but to teach people to be honest and good Christians, and to obey their
Spiritual Govern ours, as well as Temporal, for has not Go^ said, Heb. 13.17
Obey them that have the Rule over yo^ for they watch for your Souls, Romans 13.
as well as, ^every soul be subject to the higher Power And for the office of a
Bishop, does (...) St. Paul say it is a good work, and ^^^ Holy Ghost has made
Bishops in the Church Acts 20.

But what if times turn -- must these m^^ be bound up that they cannot
endeavor ^^ reduce back this Government that we have No not the King and
Bishops? See ho^^ captious these men are, as if that was n^^ included in their
Declaration, and ma^^ other ways. For he that binds himself endeavor no
alteration, does at the san^^ time engage to uphold and maintain the and
consequently to restore it by all law^^ ways, if it be violently taken away.

The matter of this Oath, being against (...) Fundamental Freedom of the
Subject a^^ Parliament, and the words you see so ensneing, and that against the
public good, ^^ offer it to you to consider, whether this ^^ part be according
to righteousness.

I have showed they are for the public good, and according to righteousness,
and ^^ for legal Monarchy, they confess that unalterable themselves. And the
Law say also, The Church of England is founded in prelacy, and how then it can
be against the fundamental Freedom of the Subject, Statute of Provison, 25. Ed.
3.
no ^^an can understand. For have we been all ^^aves this sixteen hundred
years? and as ^^r that Objection of not making new Laws ^^is frivolous and
groundless, and expounded otherwise by the Parliament themselves. and surely it
is much for the profit of the Subject, to live in peace and quietness, and not
to be always chopping and changing the Government. If the words be in^^aring,
they are a snare only to catch ^^ermin, and such as do not wish well to ^^e
Settlement of the Nation. For when ^^e Nation has flourished for sixteen
hungered years under the Government of Kings and Bishops, and we found by
experience that sad confusions we fell into when they here taken away, we may
well rather ^^nclude, it is the way to preserve our fundamental Freedom, to
swear never to al^^er that Form of Government, neither of Church or State,
under which we have hitherto been so happy.

Second Exception against the middle ^art of taking up Arms, By the King's
Authority against any commissionated by him, which must be sworn to, as
abhorred and trai^erous. See how necessary it was to require that Oath, that
they would not endeavor any alteration of the Government in Church and State,
seeing they are still for a reserve to themselves, that they may take up Arms
by the King's Authority against His Person? And we may farther observe how
unwilling they are to be satisfied, and ready to take all occasions to keep
open a door for a new Rebellion, by the frivolous cases they put, which never
did, or are like to happen, or such doubtful circumstances, where it does not
appear that men act by the King's Authority according to his Will, for no body
does ever doubt, but that men may defend themselves against Rogues, Bandites
and Rebels. The Position then that they are to hold traitorous is, taking up
Arms against the known undoubted Will of the King, and where we are sure the
Persons are commissionated by him. And this is Treason all over the World, and
must needs be so by the Law of nature, for else what a miserable case would
both the King and Subjects be in, if Rebellion were only against the Person of
the King, and not his Armies and Officers that must defend both him and them?
and who ever thought that War could be lawful on both sides, much less that
Subjects could Fight one against another, and both have the King's Commission
to do it?

But they object, The Courts of Law can avoid the King's Charters or
Commissions which are passed against Law. For the King is subject to Law, and
sworn to maintain it.

I acknowledge the King has several Counselors and Judges under him, and if
one gives him wrong advice, and decrees all judgment, he may appoint another to
examine the matter and amend the former mistake, and such is the Justice of our
Kings and Laws, that they allow a remedy against any error or surprise, and
therefore can grant a Supersedeas to proceedings till farther examination.

But whereas they say the King is subject to the Law, and sworn to maintain it,
if they mean no more by subject, than bound ^n conscience to observe it, and
see it observed by others, I grant it: but if they mean he is to be compelled
by, or subjected to his Subjects, and called to an account by them, it is false
and contrary to the very notion of a King and a Supreme Power. And farther,
though the King be sworn to maintain the Law, yet he is not bound to follow the
opinion of every Judge and Lawyer, for they all act by and under him; there is
no doubt therefore, but the King will consider what he does, before he grants
his Commission, and will hearken to such advice as he finds most agreeable to
the Law, and thereupon will suspend all other Executions and Commissions. But
put case the King and those in Commission by him, should act against Law, the
Sword is put into the King's hand, and not into the hand of his Subjects
without his Warrant, and then surely they will not set up Law against Gospel,
Mat. 26.52
which says, They that take the Sword, Romans 13.2.
shall perish with the Sword. And he that resists the power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist receive to themselves damnation. But
when the Gospel will not hold men, it is high time the Law should make them
swear they abhor such traitorous Positions, and so provide for its own
maintenance and security.

We are offended at the sense, and stand amazed at the horror of those sad
consequences into which the Imposition of such like Tests or injunctions as
these (if not timely retrenched) may lead posterity. Against the Test rightly
understood, no other consequences will follow, but Christians will be clearly
taught their duty, and will not be able to plead ignorance ever after, when the
Law has declared it so plainly, and therefore we hope all honest men will
rather joyfully suffer in a good cause, than wickedly Rebel against the express
Law of God and Man. And without any Tricks and Evasions, Comments and Glosses
of one or other, will remember they are Subjects and not Sovereigns, are to be
governed by the supreme Powers, and not govern them. Consequently may lawfully
according to truth, righteousness and judgment, swear they will not take Arms
by the King's Authority, against His Person, or against any commissionated by
him, since St. Paul tells us, They that resist, receive to themselves
Damnation, without exception of any, or any case, and if they suffer wrongfully
and as Christians, God will reward them as he did our Lord himself and his
Apostles and Disciples.

As for the form of the words, P. 21.
I abhor this traitorous Position, they are harsh. If the thing it self be
horrid, ought not the words that declare it so to be, harsh also? But why is it
harsh, to say I abhor that which is so odious and abominable in the sight of
God and men? 1 Samuel 15.23.
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft. And therefore if Grave Mr. Calamy was
offended at that expression, it is a sign he was not so judicious or so honest
a man as these men would have the World believe, for if Rebellion be evil as it
is, and to promise all hearty obedience, and lawful subjection to our
Governors be good, nay it is our duty, then we may surely without any offense,
abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. And it will be our
duty to profess so much when we are called thereunto, to give satisfaction to
our Governors, and security to the public Peace.

Another great stumbling block, as they pretend, is the Renouncing the
Covenant, now that is proposed in the most moderate terms that can consist with
the public Peace. For all by-matters about it are past over in silence, and
they are only required to declare, There lies no Obligation on me, or any other
person, from the Oath commonly called the solemn League and Covenant, to
endeavor any change of Government either in Church or State. Now when the
Kingdom had smarted so many years under this wicked Conspiracy, when a great
part of the Nation did still insist upon that pretense to move new changes and
disturbances amongst us, how could we ever expect Peace and Settlement, if such
men were admitted to be Preachers and Governors, that thought they lay under
an Obligation, to bring us back unto the like confusion again? Nay, this same
Principle moved the Scots to Rebel lately, and even now at this time many of
them stand in defiance of the Government; upon the same grounds of pursuing
their Covenant, so that when the thing it self is wicked, and it has been the
cause of so much mischief already, and is a constant pretense for new
Commotions; it is not only lawful, but necessary to require men to renounce such
dangerous Principles, for though some men may have erroneous opinions
concerning these matters, that may be born withal while they keep them to
themselves, yet when they are vented to cause Schisms and Factions, to disturb
the Peace and Unity of the Church, and stir up Rebellions in the State, and men
fall to murder and destroy those that withstand such Innovations, it is fitting
that not only those that are admitted to any Office, but even all private
Christians that had been engaged in such a dangerous Conspiracy, should declare
their repentance for, and abhorrence of all such Seditious Principles, and
indeed the Nation seems to have been rather wanting herein; in the ancient
Church, those that had been engaged in any Schism, were put to Penance and an
open acknowledgment of their sin.

Now let all sober and peaceable minded men, consider our case in short. This
Kingdom had been governed by Kings and Bishops for 1600 years, and was as happy
and pure a Church as any in the World, and upon certain wicked Principles
carried on out of Ambition, Covetousness, Envy, and Revenge, there was raised a
Rebellion and Schism with lamentable Murders and Desolations for near twenty
years, and our King himself driven away from his own just Rights by his wicked
Subjects, after it pleased God to restore him, and the Nation to their ancient
Liberties and Possessions, what could be more just and reasonable, than to
re-establish the Church and State in that Government, under which they had
continued 1600 years before, and to the end that they might not be again
disturbed, to require all Preachers and Governors to declare they would not
endeavor any alteration of the Government either in the Church or State, and
to promise that they will heartily and sincerely conform to the present
Constitution, and endeavor to support and maintain it: Does not every Society
and Corporation require the like?

And yet these are the main Objections brought against the Church of England,
and the ground upon which the Non-conformists pretend they are forced to hold
up these separate Congregations. And when they give the reasons of their
dislike, they all at length amount to no more than this, they have been bred up
in Rebellion and Schism, and harbored ill Principles of Government. And they
are not satisfied that they can with a safe conscience renounce them. But they
neither show Reason or Scripture, or Tradition of the Church, against the
present Constitutions, but hug their own erroneous opinions, contrary to them
all. And whereas they farther plead the Obligation they have to preach and
uphold separate Meetings, by reason of the great benefit the Nation receives
from their Instruction, and the advantage not to say the necessity of a
Toleration upon that account. I would wish them to consider, which all others
are fully satisfied of, that this is the ready way to destruction and to bring
in all confusion, else why should the Papists so much promote this way, as is
evident they do, by insinuating themselves into such separate Congregations?
Nay, has not a little Discourse called Foxes and Firebrarnds shown
demonstratively, that the Papists first set a foot these clamours against the
Church of England, under pretense of greater purity, and the necessity of
Condescension to tender Consciences? Did not they chiefly procure that
Declaration of Indulgence, which Dissenters so much commend? Had not Coleman
prepared a draught for another, and are we not at this day sensible, that they
understand too well what is for the carrying on of their own Faction, and our
Unsettlement? Did we not visibly see that all Heresies, Schisms, Tumults and
Disorders did more increase in one year under the Indulgence, than in many
before, though the Laws were still in force to restrain them? And have not the
Followers of these Conventicles rolled from Schism to Heresy, to Atheism, to
Popery, to any thing, and is there not Forty for one of these Sectaries, more
now than there were in 1630. before these greater Edifiers fell a building
their new way? Nay, are not these Godly people (as they call themselves) upon
any trouble or difficulty that lies upon the State, always adding fuel to the
flame, and by their insolent words, against the King and Government, rude
affronts to the Gentry and Clergy, and violent threats and holding up of Clubs
against their quiet neighbors, in all Elections and public Meetings, do they
not plainly show that their hearts and their hands are as ready for a new
Rebellion, as they were in 40 or 41. and what mischiefs must we expect, if
these proceedings should be encouraged by a Law for Toleration, and our Church
should be filled with such men, that think it their duty, upon the first
opportunity, to destroy it? Men that have souls to save, and lives of their
own, and have Wives and Children, and Estates to loose, would do well to look
back, and then think, if the same Principles, and the same tumultuous Methods,
will not bring the same destruction to the Nation, if publicly allowed.

CHAP. XIII. The fatal Consequences of Passing the Bill, drawn up by Dissenters
in their peaceable design into an Act, or any other of the like nature.
NOW I am as heartily for settling of Piety and Unity, and for keeping out
Popery, as they can be; and truly I have a tender compassion for some, that
through bad Education, have been misled, and brought into great Calamities by
that means, and I wish there could be a way found out, to give them some
relief, but the method that is now proposed, will be very destructive to Peace
and Holiness.

I do farther in general readily agree, that terms of Church Communion, ought
to be as easy as may well comport with decency and order, and reverence to the
Catholic and ancient Church, and therefore I hope all Governors will very
well consider what Alterations and Changes they make of ancient Orders and
Usages, and take heed of requiring Assent to any private Opinions, and late
Matters of Controversy, which may be wholly let alone, or indifferently held
without any hinde-rance of Piety and good Order, on either side. Therefore, if
there be any Rubricks and Circumstances in the Churches Service, that some
people may misunderstand, and interpret farther than they were ever intended by
the Church, or any oversight or mistake which with a little Explanation might
be amended, I think it very reasonable, that the persons who desire to be
satisfied, should apply themselves to the Convocation, and that they should
endeavor to remove such scruples.

But that some out of an overweening compassion, may not hastily be induced to
alter those things which are proposed in the Dissenters Bill, I shall show how
much they are requisite to good Order, and the taking them away, would tend to
the ruin of the Church of England, and all Religion amongst us.

Of Assent and Consent.
It Is known that these men that desire ^^e Passing of this Bill, though they
can join in the Common Prayer, and have no ^^st exception against the Matter of
it, yet ^^ey count it a poor, cold, and imperfect ^ervice, and think they
cannot perform it with that Zeal and Devotion, with which ^^ey do Prayers of
their own; and as Cal^^n called our Ceremonies Tolerabiles in^^tiae, so they
esteem the Common Prayer (...) a thing only tolerable, but not to be approved,
if left to their freedom; and how ^^on then (as many of them that did con^^rm,
have done already) will they bring people to an utter dislike and Aversation
^^om it. So that when it is the great part (...) Religion, and the chief care
of the Church of England, to keep up a solemn public Service of God in Prayers
and Sacraments, and to teach people Religiously ^^d Devoutly to perform the
same, these ^^en standing off from declaring their ^^ssent and Consent, and
keeping themselves ^^ee from any Approbation of the Common Prayer, are at
liberty secretly to insinuate the Tyranny of such an Imposition, ^^d the
necessity of a more Spiritual Worship, and will never seriously and heartily
exhort people to join with such Prayers so that our Church it self will be
turned into a Conventicle, and these men will be let in only to pull it down.

The next thing is, the Renouncing the Covenant.
Having then in their eyes, such a ready way to overturn the Liturgy and
Common Prayer, by a little seeming comply and upon their own terms for a while,
they have the like prospect, how they may put down the Church Government
likewise And in order to it, presently men that are not Episcopally ordained,
are by this Act to be put into equal Circumstances with any that are so, that
which the Church (...) God has ever maintained in all Ages and Times, is given
up at once, and we must have persons accounted validly ordained without Bishops
when there is no necessity when the general excuse that hitherto has been made
for such, was only in case of necessity. This does yield up the point, that
Bishops and Priests are one Order, and consequently all of equal power and
Authority. And when they have brought the people into dislike and Aversation
from the Common Prayer, etc. and gained that point, that a Bishop is no better
than a Presbyter, but what his Revenues and Temporal Authority makes him, how
^eady a way is there to insinuate amongst ^^me Envious and Covetous persons,
that ^^e order it self is but a useless burden to ^^e Nation, and the Revenues
would be letter employed another way, to save the ^oor people from Taxes, and
help the necessities of the Crown, and so here is not only a plain rode to
overturn the Church Government, but such an inducement which these men will
urge to be very plau^^le and honest, nay, if they will stand to their solemn
League and Covenant, as they ^^en may do, it will be their duty to set about it
with all their might.

Of the Declaration.
Last of all, lest the King should think (...) his Grandfathers Maxim, No
Bishop no ^^ing, and also remember how well it was ^^erified in the Murder of
his Father, after ^^ey had first thrown down the Bishops; ^^d thereupon should
resolutely maintain ^^e Order of Bishops, as a support to the Monarchy, they
are not willing to be tied (...) to that Government neither, though it (...) as
ancient as Adam, and we never had ^^y other, lawfully settled in this Nation,
therefore the other part of the Bill is to take away that Obligation of
declaring that they will not endeavor any alteration of Government either in
Church o^ State, and that it might not be accounte^ traitorous, to take up Arms
against the King, or by his Authority, against his Person, or against those
that are commissionated by him, in pursuance of such Commissions, and to reduce
these matters o^ Subscriptions to the State they were in the Thirteenth year of
Queen Elizabeth, so th^^ then many will think themselves at liberty to urge all
their Commonwealth-Principles, by which they carried on their Rebellion in 41.
and free to use all the Jesuitical distinctions, that they may not fight
against the King, but they may against Charles Stuart, they may not oppose hi^
in his Politic, but they may in his private Capacity, or wherever he does
an^ thing which they think against Law. Th^^ is, wherever he does any thing
that the^ do not like. And that it is a duty the^ owe the Nation, to remove
evil Counselor and by force to seize the King, and take him out of their
hands. And so from o^^ point to another, till they bring him (...) the Scaffold
as they did his Father, and the Church and Kingdom to the same and wo^^
condition than it was then.

All these matters they will then be able to carry on with more Triumph, and
with greater Odium and contempt upon the Church and Loyal Party. For if such an
Act pass, then they will say, all the Courtiers and high Churchmen, were for
tying up our hands, and making us mere Slaves to Monarchy, but the Nation could
never bear such an unreasonable Yoke, and therefore have shaked off those bonds
and Obligations, and now it is confessed people have a right to defend themselves,
if they think at any time they are tyrannized over and oppressed. So there is a
ready way for a Commonwealth, a Cromwell, or a Committee of Safety, or any
thing that the Fortune of War shall produce, and so Liberty of Conscience is
the bate to cheat men of their Liberty, Property, Lives and Conscience all
together. Let the World judge whether the Commonwealths-men and Papists, do not
work by this peaceable design.

CHAP. XIV. Dissenters Proposals to have Heresy, Schism, Popery and Atheism
tolerated in the Nation.
AND lest they should not be able to bring this confusion soon enough by their
own Party, they are willing to take in the help of all the Dissenting Parties
that profess themselves Christians amongst us, and to that end move for a
Toleration of every one of them in their own way, and taking off all Penal Laws
even from Papists also, which the Wisdom and Piety of the Nation have enjoined
for the better inducing all persons to the right performing their duty, p. 32.
What shall we say then to the Papists? -- As for the common Papist who lives
innocently in his way, he is to us in regard to what he does in private, in the
matter of his God, as others who refuse likewise to come to Common Prayers. --
He may hope for the enjoyment of his Conscience as we, without wrong or
oppression; and if it be only liberty of Conscience that he seeks, this will be
sufficient, that he is not troubled, nor we.

So that the upshot of this peaceable design is, to bring in all confusion and
Irreligion instead of a well constituted and truly Catholic Church. For
whereas now at present the public Authority of the Kingdom, has sufficiently
showed its care of the true Religion, and made strict Laws, and appointed
Governors to see them executed, that righteousness and holiness might flourish
in our Kingdom; these Presbyterians, that they might gain their own ends,
persuade the Governors to abandon all care of true Religion, and leave men to
serve God how they please, or else not at all; for let Atheists say they are
Dissenters, and they then are not to be troubled, so that from one of the best
and happiest Churches in the World, we are to have none at all by public
Authority. Because every one is to be lest to follow his own fancy, without any
Obligation to any Ecclesiastical Authority, and so it will be no thanks to the
Government, that there is any such thing as Religion amongst us. See therefore
the blindness of Faction, and whither Schism and Separation lead men. Is all
their Contentions about Ceremonies come to this, that every one must be
permitted to do as he list, rather than they should be denied their humor? Is
all their Opposition to Popery, Zeal for the glory of God, and Contention for
purity of Worship, turned to Libertinism and downright madness? Surely time
was, when Presbyterians had another Spirit, and did highly abominate such
dangerous profane notions, but when once men forsake God's ways, he gives them
up to strange delusions.

But some will say I run the matter too high against them, they are not for an
unlimited Toleration, but such as is consistent with the Articles of Faith, (i.
e. the Creed) a good life, and the Government of the Nation. These are very
good Limitations, if they were rightly and fully understood, but as these men
mean in the whole drift of their Book, are such large Conditions, as will take
in any Heretic and Schismatic almost in the World, that has but the common
prudence of a man to save his skin; to be sure all Pelagians, Socinians,
Anabaptists, Quakers, will come in for a Toleration, as well as Presbyterians,
Independants and Papists.

For they do all profess the Creed, that is, the Apostles Creed in their own
sense, and pretend to a good life, that is, soberly to follow that Doctrine
which they profess, and at present declare to be for the Secular Government of
the Nation. But to believe the Apostles Creed, as it is expounded in the Nicene
and Athanasian, and most Churches in the World, Protestants as well as others,
do profess it; to lead a good life, that is in Conformity to the Laws of God
and Man, and to submit to the Government of the Nation, that is, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, as it is now established; that neither Presbyterians
nor Independants, nor Papists, nor Pelagians, etc. do profess to do: so that
not only Papists, but all Heretics and Schismatics that now appear in the
World, are to be left to their own liberty, and pass unpunished, in order to
this peaceable design, and prevent the coming in of Popery. Now is this not the
very design that the Papists themselves carry on? Do not they desire, and
earnestly strive after this, as the first point to be gained, the better to
unhinge men from the Church of England, and take them off from all settled and
constant Principles? one would have thought therefore, this was rather a Popish
than a Presbyterian Design.

Let the World therefore understand, who it is that are for favoring Papists,
and encouraging them to continue in their Schism and Superstition, not the
Church of England, that does Enact Laws and Penalties against them, but the
Presbyterians, who would have these Laws taken away, and leave them to the
enjoyment of their Conscience without any trouble. And yet it must be
confessed, that here they show some Logic and Ingenuity, and plainly own the
consequence, that it is fit such measure should be allowed the Papists, as they
would have given themselves, and the same common rule of Christianity ought to
be used toward them, That we must do as we would be done by, to all men, p.
33. Since therefore it is their own Argument, that one ought to be dealt with
like the other. I may hence rather infer, that since Papists ought not to be
let go without punishment, but all reasonable care and means must be used to
bring them to the truth, and to hearken to sound Instruction; by the same Law,
Presbyterians ought to be dealt with in like manner, that they may be reduced
to the unity of the Church.

For though I am not neither for loving Capital punishments, or Cruel torments
inflicted upon Heretics and Schismatics, yet, seeing they err from the Truth,
Christian Magistrates ought to be a terror to such evil doers, and take care
that all their Christian Subjects yield obedience to the commands of the
Gospel. This is provided for, by several Constitutions in the body of the
Imperial Laws, and constantly practiced in all Christian Kingdoms and
Societies, and by these means the disturbers of the Churches Unity, have been
much suppressed. But these Presbyterians, though they profess the
Parish-Churches are true Churches, and there now lies an Obligation with a very
strict tie, to engage all men to Communicate with them, and serve God in a true
Church, yet that they may be gratified in their own imaginations, would have
all these motives taken away, and men left to be Pelagians, Anabaptists,
Quakers, Socinians or Atheists, and so Members of no Church at all.

But this is but only for Seven years, p. 44. Until by another Act of
Parliament or a Convocation, those that are fit to be tolerated, and the
intolerable be distinguished.

So that for Seven years they would have no public Religion vindicated and
maintained in the Nation, and by that time they may think, when Hell has been
let loose so long to rage amongst us, and men for Seven years have lived
without any Government and Control, they shall have conjured up the people
into the same humor that they were of in 41. and have made their Party so
strong, that they can give Law to the Nation, and then they begin to talk of a
Convocation. Hitherto it is only the Parliament must do all, till they can get
such a Head as to model a Parliament according to their own humor. But after
Seven years confusion to Arm themselves, then we hear of a Convocation again,
and Liberty of Conscience must be taken away, I suppose, when a Presbyterian
Convocation shall enjoin the Covenant again, and shall turn out of House and
Home all that will not take it, and so distinguish those that are fit to be
tolerated, and the Intolerable. Here then they follow the Maxim of the Papists,
as in many other things. When the Government is against them, then all Penal
Statutes must be taken away, and it is all the reason, that men should be
permitted to enjoy the Liberty of their Conscience, though all Heretics and
Atheists be allowed upon the same Principle; but when they are uppermost, and
have the Power in their hands, then all are Malignants and Intolerable, that do
not embrace their Errors and Novelties. So that Religion, and Peace, and Order,
may sink or swim, if they have their own Wills, it is all one to them, for they
cannot but know, when all Penal Laws are taken away, that compel men to live in
obedience to sound Religion, and Dissenters left to try their tricks amongst
them, the humor of the Common People will quickly lead them into the Bypath
of error, and not long after to mind no Religion at all, that so they may
follow their Lusts and Pleasures with lesser check and control. But these are
no inconveniences with them, but may be all swallowed, if Presbyterians be but
gratified by it.

CHAP. XV. Dissenters wild Notions of Schisms.
AND now I have showed how manifestly this peaceable Design does go about to
bring in all Confusion and Irreligion for the present, and tend to the utter
ruin and overthrow of the Church of England, let us see what a hopeful
Government we should have under such Projectors, and what Settlement they are
like to make, that have no better sense of the Government Christ left in his
Church, and vent such wild Notions about Schism, p. 32. If the supreme
Authority then loose our Obligation to the Parish-meeting, so that we are bound
no longer; the iniquity we say upon this account is not to be found, and the
Schism gone. Lo here, away opened for the Parliament (if they please) to rid
the trouble and scruple of Schism at once out of the Land. But what shall
become of the crime and guilt of Schism all this while? Can the Parliament rid
that out of the Land too? If they could do that too it were brave, and then the
motion ought to be considered. But if the sin of Schism will still remain, it is
fit the scruple should continue to keep many from running into it. And it is fit
the trouble also should remain, that those that are actually engaged in it, may
be induced to repent, which many Worldly-minded and ambitious men would never
think of, if they are permitted to indulge their own humors, without any
trouble and inconvenience. But in their affliction they will seek me early,
Hos. 5.15.

But can the Parliament take Schism out of the Land? How and which way? If they
would remove all such Schismatical Teachers as these, that blow the Trumpet to
Schism and Sedition, and carefully see their own Laws moderately executed, that
they have made to take away Separation, and bring men to Peace and Unity, that
is a likely way indeed; and we have observed, that when the State has appeared
to put these Laws in Execution, our Churches have been presently thronged, and
most men have thought of returning to their duty. This was visible a little
after His Majesty's Restoration, and a little before the late Indulgence in
71. but as soon as that came out, how were Sects increased, Schisms multiplied?
Men that had lived in all obedience and Conformity before, then thought it a
fine thing to Rove and Ramble up and down from Conventicle to Conventicle, from
Sect to Sect, and were pleased with the novelty and licentiousness that they
had got. So that this Proposal of Toleration, is not only a means to encourage
those that are already engaged in Schism, to continue so, but by experience is
found the most effectual way to multiply new swarms of Schismatics, and to
draw away all the ignorant and unstable (which are not a few) into God knows
what miseries and distractions. But that is no inconvenience to them, so long
as they can have their own ends, and ruin the Church of England, which this
bugbear word Schism does much hinder them to do. Heresy they can turn off with
a distinction, and Atheism may be concealed. But Schism and Disobedience,
contrary to an Act of Parliament, are such terrible Scarecrows, that English
men cannot swallow down without some trouble and scruple, and therefore they
would fain have the Obligation of the Act of Parliament taken away. And for the
Obligation of the Gospel, that they could manage well enough, and tell the
People twenty Stories and Devices to wipe off their troubles and scruples about
it.

Yet farther, are these men Divines and Scholars that talk after this manner?
Who ever did account it Schism in the Gospel sense, and as the word is now used
amongst Christians, to disobey the unjust commands of the Civil Magistrate?
Were Christ and his Apostles Schismatics? Were all the Primitive Christians
Schismatics till Constantine's time? Nay, were there not Schismatics all that
while the Church was a Society that had Laws and Government contrary to the
Laws of the Secular Princes? For does not St. Paul tell the Corinthians that
there were Schisms amongst them, and do we not find the Novatians accounted
Schismatics, and many others long before Constantine's time? Nay moreover,
were not the Arians Schismatics, under the Reign of Constantius and Valens,
though they had the Edicts of the Emperor to favor them, which were then of as
good Authority as our Acts of Parliament are now with us? Or if we should ever
have a Popish Parliament, that should command us to go to Mass, and abolish our
present Constitutions, should we be Schismatics for not obeying them? I hope
not, there is no such matter. These men much mistake the nature of a Church, and
the Constitution of our Kingdom. Christ has Pastors and Teachers in his Church,
and has promised to be with them to the end of the World, and commanded all
good Christians to obey them, and as they value the commands of Christ, and
their own Salvation, so they must live in the Obedience and Communion of these
Pastors; this these men know very well, and can plead and urge it when time is,
and therefore their Schism is not formally in disobeying the Act of Parliament,
but in separating from the Unity and Communion of the Church, which did subsist
before the Magistrates favored it, and may continue again, though Kings and
Parliaments should leave off to Protect it; and men would be Schismatics
notwithstanding that should in such a case separate from her Communion. Kings
may dye or be murdered, (From the hands of all Traitors and Murderers, God
preserve them) and Parliaments may turn Rebellious and Apostasise, at least may
vary from their former Piety, but Christ lives for evermore, Mat. 16.
he is the same yesterday and to day, and for ever, Isa. 30.
And he has founded his Church upon a Rock, and the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against it, and his Teachers shall be no more removed into corners, but
shall stand so long as the Sun and Moon endure, Jer. 33.

And as Christ has instituted Governors in his Church, and promised his
perpetual continuance with, and preservation of them, so the Constitution of
our Kingdom does reserve to the Church, all that right which Christ has given
her, and the great Charter of all our privileges begins thus, We have granted
unto God, and by this our present Charter have confirmed for us and for our
Heirs for ever, that the Church of England shall be Free, and enjoy all her
whole rights and liberties inviolable.

And even before the Magna Charta it self, in Henry the Third, the Bishops and
Pastors had the Government of this Church, which they derived from Christ, and
People were bound to obey them as his Ministers, and all that Kings and
Parliaments have done since, is by way of Cumulation, and adding the Authority
of the Civil commands to the Churches Constitutions, and obliging men under
Temporal Penalties to yield obedience to the Church, so that if these were
again taken away, the Church would still have that Authority which Christ had
given her, and men would be Schismatics that should withdraw themselves from
the Communion and Obedience of those Ministers which Christ has set over them.
And that the Laws of the Land do plainly own this Authority in the Church is
evident by the 39. Articles, Art. 37. Art. 23. Art. 33. Art. 20.
which do clearly take off all power of ordaining Ministers, preaching the
Word, Administering the Sacraments from Kings and Princes, and declare them to
be Offices wholly belonging to the Bishops and Clergy. And the same Articles do
plainly say, they ascribe to the Kings and Princes no other Authority in
Church Matters, than what did belong to the Pious Kings of Israel. Accordingly
the Power of Ordination, as it was given by Christ to his Apostles, to be
committed to faithful men, who by orderly Succession should continue the same
office of Governors in the Churches still, and ever was, reserved to the
Clergy. So that the Bishops choose whom they will please to ordain, they give
men the care of souls, they take in, and cast ^ut of the Church. This Authority
they ^ad from Christ, As my Father sent me, John 20.
so ^^nd I you, and in their Commission they have the whole World committed to
their charge, and this Commission is to last to ^he end of the World. Mat. 28.
Go make Disciples all Nations -- And to I am with you always into the end of
the World. So that for men to talk of the Peoples power of choosing their
Ministers, is a groundless whimsie, without any color or Foundation in the
word of God. The Apostles had Commission to make Disciples of the whole World,
and this Commission they were to transmit to others to the end of the World,
but no Law of Christ did ever oblige their to ask the Peoples leave, or desire
their approbation, or stay for their consent, any more than for a Testimony of
men's sober life, and orderly and unblemisht Reputation.

These men pretend to be great maintainers of Property, and the liberty of the
Subjects, and it is very well so to do in a Regular way, for we are, God be
thanked, Subjects not Slaves, and have Liberties and Properties of our own,
which the Laws are to maintain. And as particular men have their Liberties and
Properties, so the Church has her Rights and Priviledges^ both from Christ, and
from the favor o^ Christian and Pious Kings and Princes, and these, Magna
Charta, and the Laws of the Land, reserve unto her. Now as every Bishop has by
Authority from Christ, power to teach and instruct, and exercise his Pastoral
Authority over all that are committed to his charge, so the bounds of every
Bishops Diocesses are settled by common consent, and by the Laws of the Land,
as much as any man's private Estate is, or the jurisdiction and Revenues of a
particular College or Corporation, whereupon it is ^he method of our
Government, never to ^^ter Property, or take away Peoples Rights without their
own consent. Oftentimes ^^e Parliament do make Laws and Rules ^^y virtue of
their general Commission, as Representatives of the Kingdom, for the ^etter
maintaining and guarding of men's liberties and Properties, but they never
^retend to take away the Property it self ^^om any man, but by his particular
con^ent. Therefore if the Parliament should ^ake away those Penal Laws, and the
civil Obligation that they have enacted to com^el men to obedience to the
Church, that would not any way excuse Dissenters from ^chism, or free them from
the Obligation ^^ey had to obey those Spiritual Govern^urs which have the Rule
over them, whose ^^ght is from Christ, and therefore no man ^^n take it away
while they continue in their charge, and it is against the nature and
constitution of our Government, to dis^^ssess men of their Properties, much
more ^f that right which they have from Christ, ^^d the Property remaining, the
Power ^f governing remains, and the duty of obedience is a consequent upon it:
And so they must be Schismatics however, that do not observe it, Heb 13.17.

CHAP. XVI. Of Pluralities.
The Dissenters design to undo many conformable Clergymen, and discourage all
industry and improvement in learning in many others.
AFter they have laid the Foundation of Disorder and Confusion, so as to
destroy the Church it self, they proceed to make a Proposal to the Parliament,
to ruin and starve many of the Orthodox and conformable Clergy, and disable
others from being so useful and serviceable to the Church and Nation as now
they are, that the Non-conformists may have better means and advantages to
hasten the Churches destruction, that is, by taking away all Pluralities, and
settling the present Non-conformists upon their own terms, in vacant places, p.
43. Now alterations of this nature do not use to be made to dispossess men of
their present Possessions, which must needs prove very mischievous to many who
upon the considence of such a right they had, have entered into many Covenants
and Obligations, that it will prove to their great damager if not utter
undoing, to be deprived of it. But if it be thought convenient to change such a
thing, it is by making it unlawful for any to have the like Dispensation
hereafter, but at present to let persons quietly to enjoy what they possess.
But in this Proposal an honest, pious, learned and conformable Curate, that has
with great pains brought his Parish to be pious and peaceable Christians, must
be turned out to the wide World, and a Nonconformist, that has ^ived in
disobedience and Schism, perhaps was a great Incendiary in the late Rebellion,
had never any Regular Ordination, must be put in, and yet these poor People
must have no other to Administer the Sacraments to them, and have the direction
of their souls, when perhaps they are not satisfied that he is a Minister at
all. This is setting Wolves over the Lambs, and Leopards over Kids, and the
ready method to ^ut a Nonconformist into the Church, and the honest Conformist
into a Barn. Surely ^f Pluralities are to be taken away, it is fit the honest
and able Curate should be continued in the Charge, and not be exposed to
Starve; and that People should have a Minister of whose Ordination and sound
Doctrine they are satisfied of, and who has been approved and licensed by the
Bishop as the Laws of God and Man do require, but it seems to be very hard,
that an un-ordained Incendiary, should be put into a conformable and orderly
Parish, without the approbation and License of the Bishop, or that a Bishop
should be obliged to Institute a man that does not conform to the orders of the
Convocation.

But then as for Pluralities themselves, as they are now permitted, I do not
see that they are for the prejudice, but many ways for the great advantage of
the Church, and none that do not run into the wild Notions of Independency, I
think can have any reason to speak against them, as they are bounded by the
present Laws. For Christians being Baptized into the Faith of the Catholic
Church, they are to remember they must live and act as parts of that one Body,
and therefore profess the Faith and keep the Unity thereof, so that they must
not follow their particular Minister, but as he does direct them according to
the rule of the Church. Which is the order and method which Christ himself has
appointed. 1. That the Church Universal, or the body of Pastors in general
should take care to condemn all Heresies, and quiet all Schisms that might lead
people into danger, the national Church should accommodate these rules to the
condition of each Kingdom or Government, the Provincial Church does yet more
nearly provide for the orderly execution of these rules, and the Bishop with
his Priests and Deacons, do more particularly apply all these orders to the
several circumstances of each private Christian's duty and concerns, and after
this manner is our Church now constituted, and thereby the greatest and most
immediate care for the applying of all these rules, does lie upon the Bishop
and the Priests under him. The principal care indeed lies upon the Bishop, for
he is not only to look to the people that they do their duty, but to the good
qualifications of the Priests also; and therefore he ought in the first place,
if any, to complain, but he can have no reason to be aggrieved at it, for he by
the advantage of Pluralities, can commit the charge of the People to two able
and faithful men, instead of one only, and compel them both to do their duty.
And ought not the Bishop in reason to presume, that a grave learned man having
the inspection over a Parish, together with a younger hopeful person, is like
to see matters more effectually managed for the good of the people, than if it
were wholly left to the young man alone?

Neither can the people have any reason to complain, for by the mutual ease and
help they will give one another, they may both have the more leisure to follow
their Study, and improve in knowledge, and also be more at liberty to attend
the necessities of their Flocks. And certainly it is much more for the peoples
benefit and advantage, to have the care and instruction of a more grave and
experienced man, together with their young Curate, than altogether to take a
man as they find him, and be tied to him for forty years together, without any
variety or relief in case he should prove Weak, Negligent, or Factious.

So that all the reason of complaint, if there be any at all, must be in the
Curates themselves, and younger Clergy, who might some of them, hope to be
Rectors, if Pluralities were taken away, whereas now they are only Curates. But
the complaint is not laid here, nay, they are not thought worthy of any
consideration at all, but are to be turned out like Dogs to starve, after all
their honest pains and faithful Service, and Non-conformists are to dispossess
both the Rector and Curate. But perhaps some would think they are only out in
that Proposal, and if the honest Curate were invested with the Rectory, it
would be well enough. That case therefore is to be considered, whether it be
better generally speaking for the Clergy now, than it would be if Pluralities
were taken away. Now I think if matters be weighed impartially, we shall find
it every way better, both for them and for the Church also, that Pluralities
are allowed. For by this means, a young man that cannot live in the University
any longer, being bred up under the advice and direction of a learned Minister,
and taking his directions and method, is much advanced in his hopes of being an
eminent Scholar, and the expectation that he may thereupon be taken notice of
by the Bishop, or some neighboring Gentleman, and so preferred to considerable
places, will be strange motives to improve in his Studies, and to demean
himself so as to gain a good esteem for his Piety and Learning. Farther, it
will be a means to invite men of the finest Parts, and greatest Abilities into
the Service of the Church, when they see there is such encouragements to be had.

But some will answer, there are Bishoprics and other Dignities besides, to
invite eminent men, and to stir up others. There are so, I acknowledge, to the
great honor of our Nation, (and I wish an envious and a covetous Generation do
not rob us of them) and they have that good effect, as to encourage and bring
many learned men into the Church, but these Dignities are but a few in
comparison of the number of the Clergy, which ought to be encouraged, and do
very well deserve to be rewarded by the Church. And though perhaps all are not
provided for according to their merit, yet the encouragement that all may hope
for in their time, by means of the allowance of Pluralities, does raise the
expectations and stir up the industry of many that think themselves utterly
void of all likelihood of any other advancement.

So that when the necessities of the Church will be better provided for, people
having two able men to look after them, instead of one only; and when the
advancement of learning is like to be more promoted, the Wealthier part of the
Clergy being enabled to store themselves with Books, and the inferior
encouraged to hope they may one day by their Learning and Piety, arrive to the
like Dignity, it must needs be for the great benefit of the Church to continue
Pluralities.

Besides, by this means a learned City Minister that has but a small Revenue
there, may have the assistance of a better maintenance from a Country Living,
to which he may sometimes resort for his own and the Peoples benefit, and not
be tempted to bend to the Peoples humors to get a livelihood. Matters may be
so ordered, that a small Vicaridge of a Factious Market Town, may be supplied
with a learned and able Minister, by the assistance of a neighboring Benefice,
that has but a small Flock, and a large Revenue.

But some will say, men often put in pitiful, ignorant and weak Curates. And
would not he be as weak and ignorant altogether, if he were Rector or Vicar?
And are there not Rectors and Vicars sometimes that are weak and ignorant? Nay,
if that be all the complaint, the case is better for the Pluralist. For if
there be a weak Curate, that may be made up somewhat by an able Rector, or the
Curate may be removed, and a better easily put in his place, or else he will
have all the motives in the World to amend and improve himself, lest he be put
out. But if the Rector or Vicar be weak and ignorant, there is not so easy a
help for it if he be tolerably competent, and when he knows he is in for his
life, and can hope for no other preferment, he will never take care to improve
himself.

Our Author does farther move the Parliament to take Cognizance of Pluralists,
for the preventing an idle, scandalous, covetously-overgrown, unprofitable
Ministry, p. 33. But how does Pluralities make men so? in the nature of the
thing it is otherwise, the more work men have to do, and the greater
encouragement they find, the more diligent and industrious they will prove. But
I suppose he meant some Pluralists are so. But may not some also be thus to
blame that are not Pluralists? An idle and covetous man will be so, if he has
but one Living, and a diligent and conscientious man will faithfully discharge
his duty if he has two. But to argue, The more men have, the worse they will
be, is a good Argument for Levellers, and may be as well used to prove all the
Nobility and Gentry ought to part with most of their Estates, and become
Farmers. Riches and Honors are Blessings from God, and may be means of doing
good; if men abuse them to ill purposes, that is their fault, but ought not to
be used as Arguments, why other men should be deprived of their Possessions,
but in an orderly way. If therefore any Pluralists are thus to blame, let them
be suspended, and if they do not amend, let them be deprived of both their
Benefices, but let not sober and diligent men want due encouragement, because
some others are to blame, and make ill use of the Churches favors to them.

I plead not in behalf of any covetous or useless Drones, but for the
encouragement and better maintenance of many diligent and learned men, which
cannot be provided so honorably for, as the Churches Patrimony will allow, but
by the permission of Pluralities. And I suppose these Pluralists are or should
be employing their time in other places for the benefit and Service of the
Church. Neither would I have or think it reasonable, that any Pluralist should
leave his Cure without a sufficient and able Minister always residing upon, or
so near his Cure, as to be ready to attend all occasions of his Flock; nor is
it fitting that the Curate should be without a comfortable maintenance
according as the place will bear. And when the Churches Patrimony is wholly
bestowed upon men that labor in her Service, and every Parish is provided of a
Minister approved of by the Bishop, what ground can there be for any just
complaint, or accounting Pluralities to be such grievances? Is there any thing
in Scripture or right reason, that makes it necessary, that one that Preaches
to Thirty people in a Country Village, should have two or three hundred a year,
and another that Preaches to two or three thousand should have but 30 l. per
annum, because the Revenues of the Parishes happen to be so widely
unproportionable?

And there is as little reason that a leaned man should be tied up to this hard
choice, when he may have the oversight, and look after both, either to have a
great maintenance and a little Flock, or a great Flock and a little maintenance.

God Almighty therefore, as he has left the care and Government of his Church,
to the Bishops and Pastors thereof, so he has committed her Patrimony and
Revenues to their distribution, and I hope the secular Powers will leave those
matters in the hands of them with whom they are entrusted by God. If then they
take care that every place be provided of an able Minister, where the
maintenance will allow it, and every Minister have a comfortable allowance, God
and men will commend their wisdom, if they allot some qualified Persons to have
the charge of more Parishes than one, and also a more plentiful maintenance for
their encouragement, and the very hopes of this will stir up all the Clergy to
be diligent and faithful in their places, but where there is no farther hopes,
many good men are apt to be remiss in improving their Studies. So that it is an
easy matter for People that little mind how they slander their Brethren, to
throw abroad wild aspersions, and to heap up the words of idle, scandalous,
covetously-overgrown, and unprofitable, with many more such like expressions,
and then affix all upon Pluralists, and say Pluralities are the cause of all.
But I doubt, if they would rightly consider, they might find as great faults
amongst those that have but single Benefices, as amongst Pluralists. And time
was, when it has been truly replied to a Minister that preached against
Pluralities and Non-residence, that his neighbors Parish was better supplied
in the Rector's absence, than his was, while he was resident upon it. But all
the possible evils true or false, must be thrown upon Pluralists as such,
because they are the men that have leisure and abilities to counterwork and lay
open all their Factious and Schismatical designs, and have learnedly refuted
all their Murmurs and Cavils against the Government, and are able to bear up
their heads against all the contempt and scorn that some envious and turbulent
men would cast upon them. They are men that malign Religion it self, or else
the peace and prosperity of the Church of England, or here and there are
Politic, to curry favor with the people that thus decry Pluralities; for they
find by experience her cause is so good, that while the Clergy have Learning
and Wealth to maintain the justness thereof against all Faction and Opposition,
and in some measure keep up the Authority of the Church of England, and their
own Honor and Dignity, it is in vain for them to hope to overthrow it, but they
know, if they can make the Clergy poor and ignorant, then they will be able to
trample upon them as they please, make them bend and stoop to any base and mean
compliance, and so instead of Governing their Flocks, they will be made Slaves
to their humors, and wholly governed by them, so that it is not the care of the
Flock, but envy at the Authority and Learning of the Shepherds that makes men
write and declaim against Pluralities.

CHAP. XVII. The Charity shown by the Church of England toward Dissenters.
BUT all this while (some will say) here is no thought of Charity or Tenderness
to the two thousand silenced Nonconformists, yet there is more Charity showed
to them than they show to themselves, and as much Tenderness as to any man who
was formerly ruined and undone by them for his Loyalty, and keeping a good
Conscience. Where are any of them punished or called to an account for their
former actings and miscarriages? Have not both Church and State forgiven them,
and left them in the same condition with other Christians and Divines? Is there
any other measure used to them than to the conformable Clergy? and have not
many that were great drivers that way, enjoyed as much of the Churches favors
as the best in the Nation? Or was any turned out for any thing that he had done
formerly, and was now willing to amend? That they know, they must not, nor
cannot say. So that they can blame no body but themselves, or the ill advice of
their own Party, for they turned out themselves, silenced themselves, and then
complain of the Churches hard usage.

It Is true indeed, they must say, we might have kept in, if we would have
subscribed. But there is the hard dealing we complain of, that we were obliged
to such Subscriptions and Declarations. But do not all Christian Churches
observe the like method? And are there not harmonies of Confessions and Oaths
of Canonical Obedience, required generally in all places, to keep Clergy men to
one uniform Agreement and performance of their Duty? That they must acknowledge
also to be usual, and the constant practice of the whole Christian Church. But
the matter of these Subscriptions and Declarations is the thing the complain
of. But to that I have spoke already, and shall only add, there is and there
instance of the Charity of the Church of England toward them, which is greate^
than they have for themselves, for the Subscriptions required, are only to such
thing as it is sitting they should profess and observe; and the Declarations are
again those Opinions and Practices, which for merly led them and many others
into great Schism and Rebellion. Now, can there be any easier satisfaction
required of Offenders, than only to renounce their former errors, and promise
to amend, and this without any manner of reflection or difference between them
and any others? The Church is rather too mild and easy, than too rigorous in
this matter. The Discipline pline of the ancient Church in such cases, was to
make such men come and make a solemn and public Renunciation of their error,
and profess an open Repentance for what they had done. But all this is past
over in silence, and they are left to make their peace with God and their own
Consciences, and only to make such Declarations and Subscriptions as may assure
the Church they will avoid the like miscarriages for the time to come. But
rather than do that, they will silence themselves, and run into open Schism and
Separation, and while they keep such reserves to themselves, it is better to let
an Enemy appear so, than to let him in, secretly to work his ends under the
color of being an outward Friend, and a false-hearted Brother. So that we must
still say, they can blame no body but themselves that they are silenced, they
must answer it to God that they have thrown themselves out of the Service of
the Church, by their own humors or mistakes, for the Subscriptions and
Declarations cannot be showed to be against any Word of God or any Doctrine of
the Catholic Church in any Age, and are owned to be lawful by ten thousand
Clergymen in this Nation, against which they oppose the judgment of two
thousand that silenced themselves Eighteen years ago, never considering how
many of these have upon better thoughts approved of these conditions, and those
of the greatest eminence, as Dr. Conant formerly Divinity Professor in Oxford,
and Dr. Dillingham once Vice Chancellor of Cambridge; and how many others have
been since dead, so that perhaps, there are not scarce five hundred of those
still living, and must our Church be torn in pieces because five hundred will
not comply with it, when we have ten thousand that have declared these things
may lawfully and profitably be done?

CHAP. XVIII. Mr. B's Objections against Conformity, considered and answered.
THAT I might leave nothing unconsidered, which may be the ground of any
scruple, that the Church of England has dealt hardly in her Constitutions, or
required any unjust Conditions of Conformity, I will examine the other
Objections that are pretended against them. Which Mr. B. ushers in with this
Preface, Apol. P. 166. n. 5.
But the fullest decision of this case, [Of their Nonconformity, etc.] will be
from their cause it self. So that here we may expect their chiefest strength.
The Liturgy and Canon, 1. obliges us to refuse no Child that is offered us in
Baptism. If Mr. B. will allow that equity which is supposed to be meant, and
always intended by sober men in serious actions, here can be no ground of any
Objection. Take it therefore but thus, See Rubr. before Baptism, the Parent
shall give knowledge thereof.
as it ought to be understood. No Child offered by his Parent, or other Surety
that has power to educate it in the profession that is to be made at Baptism,
ought to be refused. For Christ's Commission is, Baptize all Nations, and
therefore all Children have a right to it, if there will any body seriously
offer them, who have power to educate them in that profession. And the Parent
is to offer it, that is, the Father, Mother, or other that is in loco Parentis.

2. The Rubric pronounces the baptized Infants, so dying certainly saved. The
Scripture says the same, Gal. 3.27. As many of you as have been baptized into
Christ, Titus 3.
have put on Christ. The Apostle does not say, have put on the profession of
Christ, the outward badge, but have put on Christ. And the Church of God has
taught the same in all Ages, and the contrary is Pelagian Heresy, publicly
condemned. But let us hear Mr. B's Exception, Not excepting any Child, of any
Infidel or Atheist, or open denier of a life to come. Parents with us, Can. 29.
do not stand Sureties for their own Children, but others, professed
Christians, the case therefore is, this baptized person, who has power to see a
Child educated in the Christian profession, offers it to Baptism, which is
administered to it. To say the unworthiness or the sin of the Godfather or
Father, can deprive the baptized Child of the benefit of God's Ordinance, is a
monstrous opinion, without any ground or color, and contrary to the word of
God, which tells us under the new Covenant, God will not take up that Proverb,
The Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, Jer. 31.29. Ezekiel. 18.2
and the Childrens teeth are set on edge, but every man shall dye for his own
iniquity. The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him. And the
wickedness of the wicked upon him. 2. It Is contrary to the nature of a
Sacrament, which is God's Ordinance, and confers Grace where the receiver puts
no bar, as Infants cannot, and not where bystanders, or others neglect their
duty. When was it ever asserted in any settled Church, that the actual
Sanctification of the Sponsor, was necessary to the Child's Regeneration?

3. When the baptized Children can say the words of the Creed, the Lord's
Prayer, etc. though they know not what they say, they are confirmed by the
Bishop.

4. Being confirmed they are to be admitted to the Lord's Supper, though they
know not what it means; yea, they are compelled for fear of Imprisonment and
ruin, to Communicate.

The Rubric is, Rubric after the Catechism Can. 51.61
When they come to competent Age, and the Canons do enjoin the Minister all
diligence in Instructing, Catechizing, and Examining the Youth and common
people, and then the Minister is to present them to the Bishop, and none are to
be offered, but such as Fidei suae rationem norint reddere, that know how to
give a reason of their Faith, etc. Is that though they know not what ti
means? And then the Minister has not only Power, but is commanded to suspend
from the Communion, those that give occasion of Scandal, till the Objection
against them be removed.

And as for the Compulsion that is complained of, Rub. before the Communi. can.
26.27.109.
people are to be first compelled to be instructed in their Catechism, and made
able to give a reason of their Faith, and live in all Conformity to the Rules
of the Church, and avoid all scandalous and other crimes, and then exhorted to
prepare themselves worthily to partake of the holy Communion. See the
Exhortation to the Holy Communion.
And because many, through idleness and sloth, will neglect their duty,
therefore they are punished, but not till sufficient admonitions, and after a
long time to consider and prepare themselves. And does not Mr. B. often say,
and approve the same? Treatise of Eniscop. Page 144.
I deny not but Magistrates may moderately drive men to hear God's Word, and to
do the immediate Duties of their Places. And is not that a Duty for Christians
to receive the holy Sacrament? Things are so prudently ordered in these
matters, and so much is left to the Ministers discretion, that there can be no
possible ground of complaint.

Object. 5. When they are Sick, if they will say they repent and desire it,
they must be absolved in absolute terms, though they give the Minister no
satisfaction that they are truly penitent, and have lived, etc. This is not
fairly construed, but stretching words beyond all reason. If the words had been
only, if he repent, or say he repent, it must be supposed seriously and
gravely, as to outward appearance. But the Churches condition of Absolution is,
if he humbly and heartily desire it. And then, Rubric before Absolution.
though Absolution be in absolute terms, yet it is always understood to avail
only, Clave non errante, and the Penitent is supposed to understand it will do
him no good, unless his Confession and Repentance be full and sincere. Let
persons observe therefore whether Mr. B. has dealt fairly in this Objection, to
leave out such full words, as humbly and heartily desire it, to make it seem
odious.

Object. 6. Being dead, we must pronounce our hope except, etc, that God in
mercy has taken to himself the soul of this our dear Brother out of the
miseries of this World, though they were Atheists, etc. and never so much as
said, I repent. Mr. B. does confess in other places, supposing the Orders of
the Church were observed, these words might well enough be used. If therefore
all the Dissenters would come in and help forward Discipline, this Aspersion
would be taken away. Therefore they will cause Divisions and spoil Discipline,
and breed Atheism, and then urge Objections which they have been the cause of.
But let us consider the words as they lie in the Churches Office, which Mr. B.
has ill jumbled together. As to the words Dear Brother, all Christians are our
Brethren, and their Souls ought to be Dear to us, though some more than others.
2. It Is in great mercy that God has taken to himself any wicked man, to judge
him equitably himself, and not leaving him to the Devils pleasure. And
Secondly, preventing him from increasing his torment by longer continuance in
sin. But then some will say the hardest words are yet to come. As our hope is,
this our Brother does. This may be considered in general as they are subscribed
to, and then supposing the order observed, which the Church has prescribed,
within our Subscription we always suppose, there can be no doubt, but in the
judgment of Charity we ought to say, As our hope is, this our Brother does. But
then as to matter of Fact, if a case does happen otherwise, may not the
Minister desire a neighbor that is a stranger to the case, to bury such a
person, without giving any reason, and he knowing nothing to the contrary, may
charitably pronounce, As our hope is this our Brother does, which is as faint
an expression as a man can use, or else in that case he may refuse to bury him,
and acquaint the Bishop with his reason, who no doubt will easily excuse him,
if the case be evident and notorious. For the reason of the Law is, to prevent
all peevish, humerous, and careless neglect.

Object. 7. And the Discipline of the Church being managed by one
Lay-Chancellor and his Court, with small assistance in a Diocese of many
hundred Parishes, is utterly incapable of calling one of an hundred to
Repentance, or keeping clean the Church. If all the whole burden lay upon some
few persons, there were a great deal of weight in this Objection, but there are
belonging generally to the Cognizance of such causes, Archdeacons,
Commissaries, Officials, several Surrogates, and the Ministers of every Parish,
whose Principal work is, to instruct, reprove and excite men to Repentance, and
if they neglect to hear them, they can suspend them from the Communion, which
is no small part of Discipline, and then complain of them to the Court, (or
mind the Churchwarden to do his duty,) where they may be publicly
excommunicated, and if there were as many more presented as there are, the
Court could easily hear and give right judgment concerning them. But if upon
public Examination, the crime be not legally proved against such a Person, or
he does hypocritically submit, without any real amendment, the Minister may
admit him to the Communion notwithstanding, as our Savior did Judas, without
any scandal or blame, for no external judicatures can provide against
Hypocrisy, neither must any body be condemned and shut out of the Church and
from the Privileges thereof, without proof of his crimes, so that if there be
Information and Witnesses, the Judges of the Bishops Courts can easily decide
all Controversies of this kind, as well as the Twelve Judges do all the Civil
and Criminal Misdemeanors of the Kingdom, that come to any open contest before
them. And how Mr. B. should make an Objection here I cannot understand, since
here is much better care taken than in his Model, for a Minister may do as much
by our present Constitution, as he supposes his Parochial Bishop to do, unless
he will take off the liberty of an appeal, which the Law of nature, and the
Constitution of all Churches allow. And is not the Minister like to deal better
with a stubborn Offender when he has the Authority of the Bishop, the Court,
the whole ^iocess, and the Law of the Land against him to bring him to shame,
than by his ^wn private Conviction with a few of his neighbors? and may not
the Minister and Congregation too be very faulty? And then in his Parochial
Episcopacy, I do not see any remedy; but in our way both Minister, People and
Bishop also have Superiors to look after them, and see to the keeping up of
good order, and exercising Discipline in the Church. And then as if Mr. B. had
given such invincible reasons, the says, These are much of that which
Non-conformists refuse to subscribe their full Assent and Consent to, and to
Covenant never to endeavor to reform, for which they suffer the loss of all.
But how falsely the Churches Rules are misrepresented, her equitable meanings
perverted, and upon the whole matter, how frivolous the Objections are, I leave
all unprejudiced persons to judge. As for what is added concerning Perjury, God
forbid that any should mean that, much less desire any one to do it, but if
they think that is the case in Conformity, we pity their weakness, and commend
their honesty in avoiding it, and if a bare pretense, and saying so were
enough, a Quaker, an Anabaptist, a Socinian and a Papist, may equally complain
of the Mischief, Impositions and unjust Conditions of Conformity that are
required of them, as I have heard a Socinian say, that it would never be well
till our Doctrine was reformed. And Sandius has written to the same purpose.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Ecclesiastical Courts.
OF all the clamours against the Church, none is greater or louder than that
against the Ecclesiastical Courts, and whether there be any reason for it,
besides humor and frowardness, I will now enquire. But beforehand, I must
desire the Reader to set aside the thoughts of all personal defects and
miscarriages that be in this or that particular man, or here and there an
under-Officer, which no body does or ought to defend, and which no Government,
nor Society of men, can ever prevent. Supposing then a learned and pious
Bishop, diligent and skillful Officers, and the Authority of the Church
restored to what it was in 41. before the Dissenters had taught the people to
cast off all reverence and just sear of their Governors and their
Ecclesiastical censures.

Matters being in this posture, by the inspection and care of the Bishop, every
Pa^ish will have a Minister settled amongst them, or so near, as to attend all
duties belonging to his Office, and there will be Prayers and Sacraments duly
administered, ^he people instructed, the Children catechized, and all Christian
duties carefully performed; this was done actually, and hight be done still,
did not Dissenters raise Disputes about Liturgies, Surplices, and other decent
circumstances of Worship, to amuse the People, who would quickly be quiet if
they would let them alone, and ^ve in public Communion with the Church,
Reverence toward their Bishop and Minister, and neighbourly Friendship ^ne
toward the other. And what could any Country desire more, and would not his be
an invincible Bullwark against Popery, Rebellion, and all other distractions?

But we will go on, and suppose a Minister does not do his duty as he should
do: The Ministers defects considered.
^ow easily can the Bishop reprove him, and ^ case of perseverance in his
neglect or miscarriage carriage suspend him, and place another in his room? or
if he be none of the ablest Clerks, send now and then a neighbour-Minister to
assist him, or go himself sometimes, and have a more particular eye over such a
Parish? and this is frequently done.

But we cannot always suppose that people will be so orderly, The Peoples
defects, and Ministers power over them.
and live as they ought to do, let us consider therefore, how such cases are
provided for. And first what power the Minister of each Parish has over them?
Now, supposing they are licensed Preachers, they are by their Office to Preach
the Word, Administer the Sacraments, visit the Sick, and reconcile private
Penitents, and therefore they can reprove and exhort all negligent and careless
People, confer with, and labor to satisfy and convince all erroneous and
doubting or despairing Christians, suspend men from the Communion, and bind
then in foro Conscientiae, under peril of damnation, till they give him
reasonable satisfaction of their orderly and Christian Conversation. And what
can Dr. O's Congregational Pastor, or Mr. B's Parochial Bishop in reason do, or
desire more, unless they will make him a Muggleton to Damn and Save whom he
please, without giving an account or allowing any redress in case of error or
too hasty and peevish rejection? What means then all this outcry that Mr. B.
does so frequently make? What must a City or a Diocese have but one
Schoolmaster? Shall a University have no Governor but the Vice Chancellor?
Shall all the Patients of a Diocese have but one Physician? But is that our
case Mr. B? is the power of Preaching the Word, Administering the Sacraments,
reconciling private Penitents, reproving, exhorting, and convincing
gainsayers, suspending from the Communion till submission and satisfaction
given to the Minister himself or a Superior, binding in foro Conscientiae in
private offenses, nothing at all, unless he be altogether absolute and
independent? and are Ministers degraded and deposed from their Offices, because
they are liable to error? and in case of grievance and complaint, it is fit
some higher Authority should ^ear the matter, and if occasion require give
relief. So that this is our case, every Parish has his Teacher and Governor,
as well as every College its Master, every School its Schoolmaster, and every
Sick man a Physician, to heal all the Distempers of his Soul in his own Parish,
if he will be orderly and take his wholesome Medicines, and if they do their
duty as they may and ought to do, there is no need of coming near the Bishop,
but once for Confirmation, in their whole lives, all other Offices may be
fully, and sufficiently performed by their Parish-Minister, how contemptibly
soever Mr. B. and the Dissenters do represent their Authority.

But suppose all the Ministers Endeavors, Reproofs, and Censures, prove in
vain, and people grow unmasterly and stubborn, too obstinate and unruly for him
alone to govern, and so their offenses become open and scandalous, is it not
for the Ministers advantage, that there is a higher a greater power than his to
deal with them; and either he himself can complain of them and present them to
the Bishop, or else h^ may charge the Churchwardens, who ar^ upon their Oath
obliged to do it, to eas^ him of that burden, and if they neglect their Office,
he can suspend them from the Communion till they obey his command^ Can. 26. so
that if the Minister can preva^^ upon his Parishoners by the Obligation (...)
Conscience and his own Authority all (...) well, and he may and has power to
kee^ his Communion pure, and exercise as much Discipline as Dr. O. or Mr. B. in
their Assemblies, but if they will not be governed by him, he can suspend the
Church-Warde^ from the Communion till they complain^^ the Bishop, and so call
in the help of the Church to his assistance: And let us follow the matter
thither; Now a careful Minister will never put the Churchwarden upon such a
presentment, or his neighbors to such trouble, till the crime be notorious and
proof manifest, (for if it be otherwise, he must be tolerated as well as secret
Hypocrites) then the Bishop may easily Couvict him, and confirm the private
censure of the Parish-Minister, and publicly Excommunicate him, and denounce
him in the Cathedral or Mother Church, and his Parish Church, and others round
about also, and so give notice and charge to all the whole Country to shun him
as a Heathen and a Publican, and all Christian-Churches in the World, are bound
to esteem him so in like manner, and shut him out from their Communion; and is
not this a better and more effectual way of Discipline, to preserve the Church
pure from Heresy, Schism and Profaneness, and make the Offenders ashamed, then
the private censures of Dr. O. and Mr. B's Congregational Bishop in a corner?

But if the Offender, when he comes before the Bishop, does promise to submit
and take an Oath to obey the commands of the Church, then Penance is enjoined,
and he is Admonished to certify his orderly behavior to the Bishop, and what
farther can be expected, or who can require any more? Neither is this only in
speculation, but actually practiced almost every day, and multitudes are by
this means kept from many scandalous offenses, and others are brought to
Repentance and a Holy Conversation, and were it not that Dissenters provide
shelters for them, and so upon the least threatening or distaste, they did flock
to them, and laugh at all public censures, visible purity might be generally
kept up, and the World would see by experience, that the Episcopal Government,
is not only the most ancient, but the most effectual to preserve Unity and
Holiness in the Church.

But it will be objected, the Bishop does not know the temper of the man, the
Quality of the Witnesses; because he lives at such a distance, and has so many
under his Charge; and therefore how can he judge what is fit to be done? the
personal care is committed to the Ministers of each Parish, in all ordinary
cases, and they are here and there some difficult cases only, and notorious
open offenses which come to the Bishop, which need no other knowledge of the
person, than the clear proof of credible Witnesses, that he is guilty of them,
and thereupon the Bishop is to proceed to enjoin him Repentance, which if he
refuse to Excommunicate him as I said before. Many thousands of these cases may
be easily heard and decided if the persons appear, in a very short time by the
Bishop and his assistants that act in his name; and therefore the ordinary
number of people in a Diocese, may be sufficiently governed and inspected by
the Bishop, so as to keep a visible profession of purity in Religion, for there
needs no long conference, the question is only, Guilty, or not Guilty? Do you
Repent or do you not Repent? Which are quickly decided.

But is that enough only to say it, I repent? He is not only to say I repent,
but to make solemn profession thereof, either in the Church, or before some
public persons, and this is all that any external judicature can require. And
unless there be extraordinary signs of thorough-Contrition, time is, and ought
to be set for them to show some fruits of Repentance, before they be admitted
to the Communion; which the Minister and Churchwardens of each Parish are to
certify to the Bishop. So that if the Bishop alone were personally concerned
to inspect the whole Diocese, then it was impossible ever it could be done; but
since there are so many Clergymen under him to attend his charge in every
Parish, and only the weightier matters, or points of Controversy, that cannot
be ended in each Parish, that are brought to him or his assistants, he may very
well keep all in good order, supposing the Ministers do their duty, as well as
the twelve Judges by the help of the Justices of Peace, do determine all the
Temporal causes of the Kingdom without any failure of Justice on their part,
except in time of public Sedition and Rebellion.

And if Discipline in the Church be now not executed as it ought to be, it is
because Dissenters have made a Schism, which is an Ecclesiastical Rebellion in
the Church, and people Mutiny and refuse to be governed by their Bishops. In
such cases no general rules can be fixed, but the Bishop and his Clergy must
take the best course he can on all emergencies, and this is our case at this
time by the disturbance the Dissenters give the Government both in Church and
State; and when multitudes do thus Excommunicate themselves, till matters are
brought to a Settlement, or there be some prospect of it, and open divisions,
and setting up of Churches against Churches be taken away, it is not to be hoped
that Discipline will have that effect it ought to have.

CHAP. XX. Of Lay-Chancellors.
THE Church indeed does speak much of the Bishop who is a learned and pious
Divine, but we see little of him, but are turned over, God help us, to a
Lay-Chancellor, sir Timothy I do not know who, and he must Lord it over us, and
Excommunicate us as he pleases; this I confess does need some Explanation. And
first it is to be noted, that the Lay-Chancellor is no part of the Hierarchy,
or constituted by any Law of the Church, neither is there any Law to require
that there should be a Lay-Chancellor at all, only an Act of Parliament in
Henry the Eighth's days does empower Doctors of Civil Law, though not in Holy
Orders, to sit Judges in Ecclesiastical Courts, if they be lawfully
commissioned so to do, and therefore they are no part of the Government, which
our Declaration does forbid men to endeavor an alteration of, and to be no
exception against it. Let us then enquire into the reason of their admission;
and first, the chiefest is for the upholding the study and profession of the
Civil and Canon Laws, which is very needful for the Government, and there is
little encouragement and practice of it any other way.

But must the Church be harassed and undone, to breed up men to serve the
State? Cannot the Civil Government provide for it self, without laying such an
unsupportable load upon the Ecclesiastical, etc?

If the Government were settled, and things brought into order again, I do not
see, as the Laws stand, that there could be any ground of complaint in this
matter, for there are many intricacies in the forms of Law, by the granting the
Cognizance of Testaments and Administrations, Matrimonial causes, and Suites
about Alimony and Divorce, petty Tithes, Dilapidations, Defamations, etc. that
require a man expert in the Forms and Rules of Canon and Civil Law, and they
are of too mean a nature, many times for the Bishop to employ his time about
them; therefore as Moses did appoint Judges and Officers to examine all lesser
causes, and the weightier were brought to him; and St. Paul when he had the
care of all the Churches lying upon him, is not to be supposed personally to
inspect every little matter, but only to have a general eye to public Peace
and Order, and decide the greater matters which could not be ended without the
interposing of his own Authority: So the Bishop in reason, and by the constant
allowance of the Church, is permitted to have his Officers under him, to take
off a part of his burden in ordinary matters, and to dispatch business when he
is Sick or otherwise employed, and then the cases of Legacies, Alimony,
Dilapidations, etc. being matters of Meum and Tuum, why may he not appoint an
expert Doctor of Civil Law to examine them without any hurt to the Church?

But how can he Excommunicate? He does not, nor cannot excommunicate, See Can.
1571. C. Cancel Commiss. etc.
for that is only an Ecclesiastical censure. But the Church in that case has
Decreed, that in matters of instance and Meum and Tuum, the Sentence of the
Lay-Chancellor should be Obligatory unless suspended or retracted by an appeal,
and thereupon does pronounce all persons contumacious and Excommunicate that do
not submit to it, and require the Minister upon a Certificate thereof, to
denounce him as such, declared and pronounced so by the Laws of the Church. And
herein the Church did follow our Savior's direction, who does expressly say, If
a man will Sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak
also, much more then does require us to submit to the Sentence of paying a
Groat, etc. neither can he be a good Christian, that will neither appeal to
prove the Sentence unjust, nor satisfy the legal dues, which the judge has
Decreed he ought to pay, and therefore in all cases of instance the Church may
very well declare those Excommunicate that do not appeal, nor obey the Sentence
of a Lay-Chancellor, without other hearing the matter over again, if the person
be able to pay. So that no man is excommunicated only for a Groat, but for
contumacy and injustice, which are damning sins, when obstinately persisted in
against public Admonition and command to make satisfaction, and he is able to
do it.

But the Lay-Chancellor does also judge in Criminal causes, and matters purely
Spiritual also, as Heresy, Schism, etc.

He is allowed in such cases, to examine into the forms of the Law, and see
that the Proofs and all matters relating to the Sentence be duly observed, but
he is not empowered to excommunicate or pronounce the Sentence, that the Bishop
or Ecclesiastical judge himself must only do, or some other Grave Divine
appointed by them, and so lawfully Authorized by Christ and his Church to
excommunicate all obstinate and impenitent sinners. Constit. 5. 1597. c. de
excess. cir. excom.
It is provided as often as the censure of Excommunication is to be inflicted
for the immediate punishment of any notorious Heresy, Schism, Simony, Perjury,
Usury, Incest, Adultery, or any other grievous crime, the Sentence shall be
pronounced, either by the Archbishop, Bishop, Dean, Archdeacon, or Prebendary
(so that he be in Holy Orders, and endued with Ecclesiastical jurisdiction) in
his own person, together with such Company and assistance as may conduce to
give the greater Authority to the thing. And lastly, that every Vicargeneral,
Official or Commissary, that has not taken Holy Orders, shall call and
associate to himself some learned Priest, empowered with sufficient Authority,
either by the Bishop himself in his jurisdiction, or the Archdeacon (being a
Priest) in his jurisdiction, and he shall pronounce the Sentence of
Excommunication for Contumacy, according to the direction of the Judge then
present. So that in all cases of instance, the Law does suppose a man that does
not prosecute an appeal is justly condemned, and thereupon order the Minister
upon Certificate of his refusing to obey the Sentence of the Judge, though a
Layman, and to denounce him as excommunicate, though in those cases also,
usually there is a Clergyman to pronounce the Sentence. But in all Criminal
matters, the case is to be particularly considered by the Bishop or
Ecclesiastical Judge himself, or a Priest, appointed and delegated to that
purpose by the Bishop, and so by the Act of the Church; and consequently he
refuses to hear the Church, and is excommunicated by her, that will not obey
the Bishop, or a Priest appointed by him to hear and determine such matters.
And does not this look much more like the Act of the Church, when it is done
according to public Laws and Canons of the Church, in a formal way of
Judicature, in a known certain place, whither all may resort, and by a man
expert and long employed in such affairs, than to leave it to the Arbitrary
discretion of every Parish Priest, whom Mr. B. and Dr. O. have exalted to the
order of an independent Bishop? So that our Savior's words, Tell it to the
Church, may very well, notwithstanding their Jeers and Reflections, be
interpreted to belong to the Bishop and his Court, and such other Judicatories
which the Church in all Ages has appointed, to examine and determine all
matters of Controversy and public scandal, that did any ways disturb or
pollute her Communion; neither can there any just exception be made against our
present Constitutions in this kind. Whether some Regulations might not be
thought of, to prevent the abuses that may happen from some ill men, I leave it
to the prudence of our Governors to consider.

CHAP. XXI. The State of the Controversy between Mr. B. and me enquired into.
HAving as near as I can, considered and answered all the Objections made
against the Church of England, and so justly called this Discourse an Apology
for it, I will now descend more particularly to my own justification against
Mr. B's Exceptions to me, and I find it a much harder task to know what they
are, than to answer them; for he refers to no words that I wrote, and does not
particularly point out any Doctrine or Position that I laid down, but I suppose
would have me included in the merits of the cause in general, and thinks that
the Objections and Answers dispersed up and down in his Apology, do
sufficiently invalidate all that I had wrote against the Protestant Dissenters.
And if that be his meaning, it will be still very hard upon his own Principles,
to know what it is he can object against me, he does so fully grant almost every
thing that I contend for, in order to the Unity of the Church, and putting an
end to all Murders, Rebellions, Tumults and Schisms, to propagate Religion,
which were the chief designs of my Writing. As first, When Pastors by Concord,
or Magistrates by Laws, Plea for Peace, p. 49.
have settled lawful circumstances or accidents of Church Order, Worship or
Discipline, though they be in particular but humane Institutions, it is sinful
disobedience to violate them without necessary reason, e. g. Parochial Order,
Associations, Times, Places, Ministers, Maintenance, Scripture-Translations,
etc. ibid. It Is Schism when men separate out of an unruliness of Spirit,
because they will not be governed by lawful Pastors in lawful things, as Time,
Place. Order, etc. Again, Apol. p. 148. The main body of the Nonconforming
Ministers, as far as I could ever learn did judge that the ordinary Liturgy
appointed for the public Worship was such, as a good Christian may lawfully
join in. Apol. p. 9.
Nay he says himself, Having perused all the Foreign and Ancient Liturgies
extant in Bibliotheca Patrum, I doubt not but our own is incomparably better
than any that is there. And yet farther, P. 8.
I know how unable the old Separatists were to answer the many Arguments of the
famous Arthur Hildersham, John Paget, William Bradshaw, Brightman, John Hall,
and other old Non-conformists, for the lawfulness of communicating with our
Parish-Churches in the Sacraments and Liturgy. So that the Pastors and
Magistrates both together, having agreed in certain Order, Worship, Discipline
and Association and such a public Liturgy, which the main body of
Non-conformist-Ministers confess it is lawful to join in, and those Separatists
are never able to answer the reasons of the Non-conformists for the lawfulness
of communicating in it, and thereupon it is sinful disobedience and unruliness
of Spirit to separate from our lawful Pastors in these lawful things; and
consequently it must be their duty, constantly to join with our Church in her
public Prayers and Sacraments, or else they are guilty of Schism; and this was
that which I did contend for, and Mr. B. does, as well as I, condemn all the
Independents, and Presbyterians, that withdraw from the Communion of our Church
for Schismatics on that account.

But what must be done to these Schismatics? Must they be suffered to go on in
their own sinful disobedience, and seduce others to their Party, and so
overturn the Peace of the Church?

Mr. B. says, Treatise of Episc. P. 44.
I deny not but the Magistrate may moderately drive men to hear God's Word, and
do the immediate duties of their Places -- I acknowledge, P. 193.
1. That Magistrates, Parents and Masters may force their Subjects to use those
means which tend to make them Christians. 2. Accordingly may use the like force
with their Subjects who are Christians, to cause them to use the foresaid means
of hearing and reading and Conference, for the curing of their dangerous errors
or sinful lives -- 4. We doubt not but Magistrates may restrain false Teachers
from seducing others, and drawing them from God to sin. And this is the
substance of what I pleaded for in my Chapter of the unreasonableness and
mischief of Toleration. Neither did I design any more in my whole Book, but to
show that all persons ought to communicate with the Church of England under the
Guilt of Schism, and that Christian-Magistrates ought to use their Authority to
induce men to do their Duty, and by moderate Penalties, not putting them to
death or cruel torments, to hinder them from Separation, and gathering into
Conventicles; that being united in the Principles of our Orthodox Religion,
they might live in Peace and Godliness, and not engage in Plots and
Conspiracies to destroy one another. And hitherto I do not see but Mr. B. and I
are fully agreed, and earnestly contend to the same purpose; and why does Mr.
B. call me one of Rehoboam's Puny Counselors, for this which he himself does
advise?

But where then do we differ, and why does Mr. B. pretend his Apology to be
answer to me? I will set down his own words, which I think do fully express his
meaning in short. We profess therefore, Apol. p. 19
that though we take not our selves bound to prefer our preaching before other
men's, nor to tie our selves just to numbers and circumstances of Time and
Place, nor to draw a Party from the lawful public Ministers to our selves, nor
to Preach at all where there is not real and notorious need; yet do we take our
selves bound on pain of God's displeasure, and of Damnation, to exercise our
Ministerial Office as we are able, in a pious, peaceable and loyal manner, as
poor assistants to those faithful Ministers that have public allowance and
encouragement, notwithstanding any Prohibitions or unwillingness of those that
are against it. And if this profession shall teach any to conclude, that
therefore Bonds and Imprisonment, or Banishment must restrain us, the will of
the Lord be done -- But we must suffer without resisting or reviling. If this
had been always the temper of the Non-conformists, and were the real case of
them all now, all good men must needs pity their condition, and some means or
other would be quickly found out to quiet all our Dissentions; but the whole
transactions of the late Rebellion, the innumerable Sermons and Writings that
plainly show another Spirit, and the daily experience of that insolence, scorn
and petulancy they show against the whole order of our Church, does plainly
convince us, nay, the Seminaries to breed up a Succession of unlicensed
Preachers, is a demonstrative Argument that they have another design to carry
on, and are far from the Moderation Mr. B. here pretends to; and therefore
whatsoever good meaning he may have, yet this modest pretense of his, will
uphold them in all their Extravagancies, and fill the Church with endless
Schisms and Confusions.

CHAP. XXII. The true point in difference between Mr. B. and my self considered.
FROM the words but now set down, it does appear, that Mr. B's great
Controversy with me, is for justifying their silencing, and maintaining that
they ought not thereupon to preach in this Nation without public License, or
keep any separate Meetings, which Mr. B. does think himself bound to do, under
pain of God's displeasure and of Damnation, notwithstanding any Prohibitions of
his Superiors against it; and he does endeavor to prove it by several
Arguments, but they do not at all come home to his purpose, for they only prove
that Ministers ought not to desert their calling in general, or neglect the
exercise of their Office when they are lawfully authorized and required to do
their duty, which I do as much own and contend for as Mr. B. himself; but none
of his Arguments do in the least prove, that he ought to exercise his Office in
England in this or that Parish, or where he pleases himself. Where is there any
Law of God to require him to exercise his Function here against the Laws and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical and Civil of the Nation, where there are other
lawful Ministers duly settled in all places already, to exercise this Office?
And what Order, Discipline or Concord could ever be kept up in the Church, if
every body might take that liberty to call a Congregation together, where, and
when, and as often as he pleases, and be tied to no Rules, but those of his own
making? For Mr. B. says, He is bound notwithstanding any Prohibition, and so a
Socinian will say, and a Papist, a Quaker, an Anabaptist, a Mohammedan, a Jew;
and can it be supposed that God has left the Government of his Church to such
uncertainties? It Is plain he has not, for the Scripture says, 1 Cor. 14.32, 33.
The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, much more then,
inferior Ministers in the Church are subject to others. And then the Apostle
gives a reason, For God is not the Author of Confusion but of Peace, as in all
Churches of the Saints, plainly intimating, for Order and Peace sake, in all
the Churches, the Spirits of the Prophets must be subject to the other
Prophets, and the Spirits of the Pastors to the rest of the Pastors, and
consequently there needs no External force to stop their mouths, and moral
silencing is sufficient, and is all the Authority Christ gave the Officers of
his Church, and that he has backed with power enough to make any man submit,
Mat. 18.
For if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man
and a Publican.

And as the Scripture is plain against Mr. B. so the Laws and customs of all
Churches do condemn it for Schismatical, for a man to come into another
Minister's charge, and there exercise his Office without his leave and consent,
and against the public Constitutions of each particular Church, wherein he
thrusts himself. If Mr. B. could say, we were no true Church, and Salvation
could not be had in our Communion, then I confess notwithstanding any
Prohibition, he might be bound to preach the Gospel amongst us, and any man
that is really persuaded so of us, may think the like, but this Mr. B, and Dr.
O. does not nor cannot pretend, and therefore it is against all reason and the
rule of all Churches and Societies whatsoever, for them and other men to thrust
themselves into another man's charge, not only without lawful allowance, but
contrary to the express Laws of that place where they come.

And the reason of this is plain in nature, because it is impossible to keep men
in any obedience to their Governors, and Peace and Concord amongst themselves
where this liberty is admitted, for Jealousies and Emulations will always
arise, and people are naturally apt to be mutinous and unquiet upon the least
suggestion, and will grow into comparisons between licensed and Non-licensed
Preachers, and when an unlicensed man does find pity and favor amongst the
ignorant multitude, flesh and blood will tempt good men to insinuate the ill
management of affairs, and lessen the reverence and esteem they should have for
their lawful Superiors, and by degrees work them to be clamorous and greedy of
changes, and what Piety and Love will be promoted by persons, whose fancies are
heated with new Models and Projects, and disaffected against their lawful
Governors? That time which should be spent in subduing their Lusts, Reading
and Meditating God's Word, encouraging one another in Holiness and the
continual Service of God, will be employed in murmurs and making Parties,
Plotting and contriving how to destroy this, and set up another Government. And
this was evidently the business of the late swarms of Lecturers before the
Wars, who did by that means prepare the peoples minds for those changes, and
afterward by their Curse ye Meroz, stir them up to effect such designs.

But Mr. B. is sensible it is against all reason, that every pretender should be
allowed to Preach. Therefore, he says, Plea for Peace. P. 99.
4. If a Heretic or intolerable person must set up a Preacher, or if any turn
Heretic, the Orthodox Churches are (after due admonition) to renounce him as
unacceptible of their Communion, that he may be shamed and avoided. 5. If yet
he continue obstinate, and do more harm than good, the Magistrate is Ruler, and
must restrain him, and deny him leave so to Preach in his Dominions.

But what is this to Mr. B's Preaching, who does a great deal of good by it? To
which I answer, that which I said before will unavoidably follow, it will be a
means to breed Jealousies, Murmurings, secret undervaluing of their proper
Governors, and consequently Schism, Faction and Sedition, and therefore all
preaching against the allowance of Authority in true Churches where all things
necessary to Salvation are to be had, was ever condemned and accounted
Schismatical by all Churches and most sober Divines, as Mr. B. cannot but well
know.

But Mr. B. says, Apol. p. 19
He does preach but as a poor assistant to those faithful Ministers that have
public allowance. What Mr. B. intends has not that good effect, for it is not
an assistance but an hinderance, for the people are by that means kept from
fixing themselves steadfastly to the Church of England, reverencing those
faithful Ministers which are allowed, as is notorious in all experience. And
though Mr. B. owns himself as a poor assistant, others who preach by the
encouragement of his example, do formally boast themselves for better and
properer Pastors, and plainly oppose and revile the Church, and draw Parties
after them from her Communion. If it be left to every Preacher's discretion
that will set up himself, under pretense of doing more good than harm, and
being a poor assistant to carry on the main work of the Gospel, as they all say
they do, it will be impossible ever to prevent such Divisions and Confusions.

Object. But if they preach any Faction or Sedition, or any thing in derogation
of the Government, or allowed Ministers, then silence and punish them, but if
they think it convenientest so to do, they will cry out against Persecution, as
much as if they were not allowed at all. But farther, who shall inform the
Governors of their miscarriages? Their own Party will not, and every ordinary
man is not capable to discern their mischievous Insinuations. The Governors
may appoint some. So that there must be a new charge brought upon the Nation,
to maintain so many Ministers as Spies over the unlicensed Preachers, and the
Government will be perpetually disturbed with hearing and punishing such
offenses, and the peoples minds always distracted with Contentions and
Oppositions. Therefore right reason as well as the constant order of all
Churches do direct, that where there is a public Service, which it is lawful
for Christians to join in, as not only Mr. B. but the main body of
Nonconforming Ministers do confess, ours is, and where Salvation may be had in
the Communion which is allowed, no men ought to set up separate Congregations,
nor upon any pretense, preach without License so to do, under the Guilt of
Schism, and disturbing the Peace of the Church.

Mr. B. being well aware of this, says, they are not to preach, but when they
shall do more good than harm. But who shall judge of that? For suppose we allow
Mr. B. to judge for himself in things that concern his Personal duty and
behavior, yet in things that belong to the public, and have influence upon
the Peace of the Church and State, as all public Preaching, and calling a
Congregation together has, that in a true and settled Church, must not be done
by private men alone, against the will of the Governors, for it is not their
place to judge of public matters, besides, no man ought solely to be judge in
his own case, whether he does more good than harm, for men are apt to be too
partial and favorable to themselves, neither is a private man in a capacity to
judge truly when his labors do more good than harm; for though the work he
does, in it self be good, and the intention truly Pious, yet the example may be
very dangerous, and the consequence fatal to the public Peace, and that a
private man may see at least and repent of, when the mischiefs cannot be
prevented. Therefore let every man keep within his own bounds, private men to
private duties, and leave the public to those who are publicly authorized,
and that is keeping in God's way, and is a far more likely means to do good,
than for private men to set up themselves against public order and command.

But Mr. B. has one farther answer still, that he does only preach where there
is real and notorious need. Apol. p. 19.
Now that he supposes does happen in two cases. Where the Minister is so
scandalously weak, that he is not able to instruct the people in things
necessary to Salvation, or else the Parish so vastly big, that the people
cannot join with their Minister. These do at first seem colorable pretenses,
but will appear little to his purpose, and altogether groundless to authorize
his Preaching.

1. That is not the case of the hundredth part of the dissenting Preachers, so
that they are all condemned for Schismatics, according to this last refuge in
their defense. Come we to consider the other men's cases. And first, where the
Minister is scandalously weak, but who has judged him so, have they modestly
represented the case to the Bishop, and have they his judgment that he is
scandalously weak? If so, the Bishop may, and will remove him for
Insufficiency, or send him a Co-adjutor, this is frequent and common. No, that
they must confess they have not, nor ever went about it, but they judge so.
What a hard case then the poor Clergy of the Church of England are in, if they
had not more merciful Judges. To be judged, condemned and executed, for that is
all one to be deposed from the hearts and reverence of their Flocks, wherein is
their greatest comfort, because a private Whisperer shall inveigle and tell the
poor people he is insufficient, and he will teach them and instruct them
better, and be never so much as heard, or have his case considered but by his
accusers.

But suppose the Minister of the Parish to be really none of the greatest
Clerks, does he not officiate in his place duly and gravely, and Administer
the Sacraments according to public order? So that here the public Service of
God is sufficiently provided for by the Church, and that they cannot fail in,
and perhaps he may perform it more gracefully than a much abler man. And then
in the very Churches Administrations, there is the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and
the Ten Commandments, and the Catechism, wherein are contained the substance of
every man's duty, besides Homilies appointed by the Church, and if any one
desires farther Information, there are multitudes of excellent Sermons which he
may read at home, and many other good Books, or he may remove to another
Parish, or in case of any difficulty or scruple, he may go to the Bishop or
some other conformable Divine for his instruction, how then can there possibly
be such real and notorious need for the Non-conformists to Preach. And the like
answer may very well be given concerning the great Parishes where the Churches
will not contain the Inhabitants, they may in that case go to other Churches or
Chapels, till care be taken to erect more Churches, which ought to be done.

I would put it to Mr. B's own Conscience, whether he thinks there is a man in
the Kingdom, that, generally speaking, might not find room in one Parish Church
or Chapel or another, almost every Lord's day, if he did but use the ordinary
diligence which he does about his other affairs, at least so as to join in the
public Prayers and Sacraments, which are the principal duties of solemn
Assemblies, to which indeed Preaching the Word and Catechizing are very well
joined, and it were desirable that all Parishes were so ordered, that all the
Inhabitants could conveniently hear in their own Church; but though that be not
done as yet, they may go to others where they have better convenience, and
advise with able Ministers in difficult matters in the mean time, and use their
utmost endeavors to have more Churches erected. I am confident there is not a
man in the Nation that can say, but that he might have had opportunity of
joining in public Prayers and Sacraments, and be fully instructed in all parts
of his duty, (if he did desire it) by the Conformists of the Church of England,
and it must be every man's own willful neglect, if he want convenient means of
leading a Christian life, and in the Communion of the Church of England, and
then where is this real and notorious need for Non-conformists Preaching? Mr.
B. if he would seriously consider it, cannot but know that the cause of the
great ignorance and Debaucheries that he complains of, proceeds from the
contempt of Ecclesiastical Authority, which his Writings have as much
contributed to as most men's, for by this means the lazy and careless will not
come to learn and be instructed, and the profane will not be brought to
practice what they know, and while there is this crowd of Sects, and such hot
disputes against Episcopacy, and the force of the Churches Excommunication,
it is impossible that Discipline should have any effect toward outward
Reformation, for multitudes can never blush or be ashamed, neither will
Excommunication be dreaded while men can run over to another Society, and be
embraced by them, and have persons about in every corner, to tell them the
Churches Excommunication signifies nothing.

Did the Dissenters make it their business to assert the Churches Authority,
and tell all their Followers that a man excommunicated by his own Bishop, for
not coming to the public Service, and joining in Prayers and Sacraments, or
for any evident breach of the known Gospel-duties, was cut off from the body of
Christ, and the Communion of the faithful all over the World, and that it was
Schism for any Church to receive him into any other Communion for Christian
Worship, till he did declare his repentance and submission to his own Bishop,
as the Canons of the Council of Nice did declare, and the universal Church ever
taught, and thereupon avoid them as Heathens and Publicans, then there were
some hopes of Reformation, and that Discipline would take effect, for it is not
for want of knowledge that Drunkards, Adulterers, and most profane persons
perish, but out of unruliness of Spirit, because they will not practice what
they know concerning these matters, and so the ignorant and lazy do know they
are in a wrong way, but since they find no Temporal inconvenience by it, they
are contented to please their present humor, and never think what will follow
upon it, therefore if Dissenters were really in earnest for Peace and Holiness,
instead of declaring against Diocesans, crying out upon Persecution, they would
join to encourage Discipline, and assist the Bishops and Governors of this
Church in restoring that reverence and Authority which is due to their lawful
censures. But instead of that, hideous outcries are made, the Kingdoms undone,
Souls perish, and multitudes are damned, because 1800 silenced themselves
eighteen years ago, and would not submit to those rules which were necessary to
the public safety, and promise to uphold that Government under which they
lived, though there have thrice eighteen hundred grown up since, as able, and
it may be much abler men than they, and yet still the clamor is fresh of
eighteen hundred Nonconformist Preachers, without which Religion must sink,
and the Church be destroyed, and without any consideration how many of these
have conformed since, and these of great eminence, Dr. Conant Titular Regius
Professor of Oxford, Dr. Dillingham Master of Emanuel College, and
Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, Dr. Fog, etc. and how many more of them are dead,
yet eighteen hundred must keep up the noise, and to make up a round sum,
sometimes it must be enhanced to two thousand. If Mr. B. had seen thereupon our
Pulpits empty, our Church doors shut up for want of Ministers, the people
groaning for want of opportunity to serve God and receive the Sacraments, then
there had been some ground of complaint, but neither can we see nor hear any
want of these in any public Congregation.

But we must suppose there was some invisible excellency in these eighteen
hundred, that was the life and soul of Religion in this Nation, though no body
knows why, or upon what account. And the eight thousand others that continued
still in the Church, must go for nothing, nor the conformable Clergy that
returned to their Charges from whence they had been driven by the Rebels, but
all is undone, unless the Hedges be broken down, and Non-conformists brought
into the Church with Triumph, to let in the Confusions of Forty one, and fall
heartily to work to destroy the Church of England, for else they are no
otherwise silenced than other men are, and they would be silenced in France and
Holland or any other Christian Church, if they would not promise to live
peaceably and not go about to overturn the Government, and this is all that is
required of them, and they rather choose to silence themselves, than to tie up
their hands from endeavoring Changes and Alterations in that Government, that
Order, and those Circumstances and Rites the Christian Church ever had, and
most settled Churches practice or approve of, and how just and equitable they
are in themselves, the foregoing discourse I hope will satisfy all reasonable
and unprejudiced men, and consequently Mr. B. and his Brethren must bear the
blame for silencing themselves, but upon the whole matter, have no reason to
complain of the Church of England, who has been too favorable in admitting
them without public Penance, rather than any way rigorous in laying hard
Impositions.

CHAP. XXIII. What is to be done to prevent the Effusion of Blood, and settle
Peace and Holiness in the Nation.
THough Mr. B. is pleased so notoriously to usher in his Declamation against
shedding of Blood upon the account of Religion, with Reflections upon me, and
then to go on to insinuate that I was an abetter of the Cruelties of Gardener,
Bonner, Calvin, Beza, yet how much injury he has done me by it, every one that
looks into my Book cannot but see. For they will find it was my chief design to
prevent these mischiess, and to persuade all sober persons to renounce these
Sanguinary Principles of Paplsts and Dissenters, and seriously to endeavor
after the public Peace and Settlement by uniting to the Church of England,
which was established according to the Word of God, the Laws and Canons of the
general Councils, and constant Tradition of the Catholic Church. This Mr. B.
does not nor cannot refute in one particular, but in every point says the same
thing all along that I do, as I have showed in this discourse, but only when my
Arguments, and his own downright Positions, came to be applied to his own case,
then he starts at the Conclusion, and says, the case is altered, as the great
Lawyer did, and Mr. B. must be a lawless man, tied to no Rules, bound to no
Orders, but rove and range, censure and condemn, and if any one talks of
restraining him, he must be one of Rehoboam's Puny Counselors.

But pray Mr. B. be not so Partial, let Conclusions hold that have good
Premises, and let Particulars be included in Universals, and allow but the
Church of God to have as much prudence as you and Dr. O. and then we shall hear
no more the noise of Canoneers, nor complaints of Impositions about a few
innocent circumstances of Government and Worship, and England will become
settled in Peace and true Religion.

And the like I may say of Dr. O. for it is above my reach to imagine what
should make him separate from the Church of England, upon the account of some
circumstances of Government and Worship, that are required in her Communion,
when he says they are left to be determined by ordinary Christian prudence,
Page 33.
and they are not capable to be any otherwise stated. And yet he says, The
ground and reason of our refraining Communion from Parochial Assemblies, is, P.
345.
the Practice and Imposition of things not lawful for us to observe in them.
And then afterward he tells us in a manner what would take off his scruples.
Page 360.
If before the end of the second Century, any proof or undoubted Testimony can
be produced, of the Imposition of the necessary use of Liturgies, or of stated
Ceremonies of practice of Church Discipline, consistent with that now in the
Church of England, it will go a great way in the determination of the whole
Controversy between us. Now all these being circumstances of Worship no way
determined in Scripture, but left to Christian prudence directed by the light
of nature, and the general rules of Scripture, as Dr. O. says, I can see no
reason that Dr. O. can possibly give, that they should become unlawful by being
imposed by the Church, or why he should require a proof of their Imposition
before the end of the second Century, as a condition of his agreement with us
about them.

If they were matters, of Doctrine, or Sacramental Rites with power to confer
grace, he would do well to require some probable Argument of their observance
in the second Century, nay farther, some Institution or Foundation in
Scripture, but for circumstances of Worship, which ordinary Christian prudence
may apply, surely the undoubted usage of thirteen hundred years, or the
Institution of a particular Church are warrant enough. And yet I doubt not if
Dr. O. would consider these matters with a little candor, he would see very
probable if not demonstrative Arguments, that these Circumstances he complains
of, were in use before the end of the second Century. For the sign of the
Cross, do not Tertullian and St. Cyprian plainly tell us, it was generally used
in their time, and give not the least suspicion that it was then first imposed,
but plainly imply, it descended down from ancient Tradition. Does not St.
Chrysostom and St. Jerome the like for the Surplice, and then about Kneeling at
our receiving the Sacrament, Mr. B. says, Mr. Paybody has fully satisfied him,
and it being a gesture in Prayer used by our Savior and his Apostles, I need
allege no other proof for the lawfulness of it, besides it being a gesture
naturally significative of the greatest reverence, I cannot see but that if
ever it be to be used, it ought to be at Prayers and receiving the Sacrament,
where we ought to appear with the highest Devotion, and therefore very probably
suppose it was observed by those holy Christians before the end of the second
Century.

Then for the use of Liturgies, Dr. O. cannot but know that from the times of
St. Chrysostom and St. Basil, they have been constantly in use, and that there
are Liturgies that go under the names of St. James and St. Mark, which learned
men do generally suppose have lost their first Reputation, by the intermixing
of latter Additions, but think it very probable that there may be some ancient
remains of their composure still left, though now not certainly to be
distinguished. And if there be not a plain positive Testimony for the necessary
use of Liturgies, yet Dr. O. being able to produce none to the contrary, the
constant usage of them in all the following Ages, wherein there is a clear
account of the Churches customs, ought to be a strong presumption that they
followed the ancient practice, in this as well as other matters, and that the
same reasons which did induce St. Chrysostom and St. Basil to compose their
Liturgies, did move the Primitive Fathers in or before the second Century to do
the like.

The same may be said for Diocesan and Provincial Churches, for St. Cyprian was
undoubtedly an Archbishop and Metropolitan, which does plainly infer a
Provincial and Diocesan Church, the Canons Apostolical proved by learned men,
to be composed in the second Century, out of seattered Rules left by the
Apostles, do evidently suppose the like; and the great Council of Nice speaking
of Provincial Churches, does say, the order of them should be observed, (...),
according to the customary usage which did then obtain, and also adds, (...),
let the ancient customs be still observed, and that they should apply this rule
to a novel alteration that had been introduced two hundred years after Christ,
contrary to the Evangelical Institution, as Dr. O. does contend, cannot enter
into the mind of any rational and unprejudiced man. So that these things
considered, there is no equitable Judge in the World, but would give Sentence
against Dr. O. in these matters, and determine that it is highly probable if not
certain, that they were used in like manner before the end of the second
Century, but to be sure, it is impossible for him to show any evidence from the
second Century, or any time before, that the Prayers, Ceremonies, and practice
of Discipline then in use, are not consistent with that now in the Church of
England, and therefore all his Controversy with her ought to be at an end, by
his own confession. For though some Bishops had no larger Diocesses at first,
than could meet in one Congregation ordinarily, and receive all Christian
Offices from their Personal Administration, yet that Negative that they ought
to have no more, or not to have the inspection of many particular
Congregations, who have Presbyters to Administer the Word and Sacraments to
them, under their direction and Government, can no way be proved from
Scripture, or the two first Centuries, nor is such a Constitution any way
repugnant to the Primitive Institution of Evangelical Churches, but the
contrary may be proved, as I have fully shown in this Discourse.

But though Dr. O's and Mr. B's own Principles do necessarily oblige them to
join with the Church of England, at least not to hold separate Meetings
contrary to her express command, yet upon a Supposition that they do more good
than harm, and are Instruments to advance greater Edification and purity in
Religion, they do and will uphold their separate Congregations, and while that
is allowed, the Churches Communion will be little regarded, and all Heretics,
Schismatics and Commonwealths-men will pretend the like, and our land will be
crumbled into Sects and Factions, and thereupon the force of Church Discipline,
and the Sentence of Excommunication will be little regarded, and so the
generality of the people will be bred up in Atheism, Ignorance and Profaneness,
or else in such pernicious Principles as are not only destructive of true
Religion, but of all Government and common honesty, between man and man, and
this is already so much our case, that it is a very difficult matter to find out
a Jury and Witnesses, especially amongst the Dissenters, upon whose credit we
may rely. And while men are in this temper, how easily are they stirred up by
Fears and Jealousies to any Rebellious attempts which will be suggested as
necessary for their own defense, or the maintaining that Liberty and Property
which they will imagine is invaded; and when once the Sword is drawn, and a
rude Atheistical, and inflamed multitude is gathered together, whose life is
secure? and to what hazzards will not only our Religion, but even our Lives,
Liberty and Property also be exposed? Nay, may not a Papist get at the head of
an Army of such an Atheistical and Seditious Rabble, and by Arts and Promises,
make them the Instruments to settle Popery in the Nation? as there is too great
reason to suspect Cromwell did intend to do, when matters had been ripe to go
through with it; and that being once restored, will quickly set about
destroying the remainder of those that escaped the fury of a Tumultuous
Insurrection, if they will not submit to their obedience. So that Dr. O. and
Mr. B. may pretend what they will, that they Preach for Edification, and to
rescue Souls from dropping into Hell, but it is notorious, they have kept up and
promoted these Divisions, which do not only destroy Millions of Souls, but also
endanger our Lives, the safety of the Nation, and the very reformed Religion it
self. And if private men do thus presume to set up themselves in opposition to
the public Authority of the Church, it is impossible that these mischiefs
should ever be prevented. Therefore not only Murderers, Adulterers, Drunkards,
etc. but such Schismatics as disturb the Peace, and weaken the Authority of
the Churches Discipline, are to be excommunicated and reckoned amongst Heathens
and Publicans, and Enemies to the Gospel of Christ; which does call Schisms and
Divisions works of the Flesh, and require nothing more strictly than Peace,
Order and Obedience to the Church. The first thing therefore to be done, to
prevent the coming in of Popery, and all other occasions of Murder, and
effusion of Blood upon the account of Religion, with the unavoidable confusions
and distractions which will always attend such licentious practices, is
effectually to suppress all Conventicles, and to require all people under
moderate Penalties to attend the public Service of God, and to allow no
public Assemblies, but those that are authorized by lawful Authority,
according to the constant rules of the Catholic Church, and this is equitable
before all the World, that public Authority should interpose to keep up
public Worship, and to prevent Assemblies of private men, contrary to the
express Prohibitions of the Government, both in Church and State, and
especially in such a Church where Salvation may be had, and abundantly had, and
where there is a public Worship wherein Mr. B. and the main body of
Nonconforming Ministers ever did, and do now think they may lawfully join both
as to Prayers and Sacraments.

After all Conventicles and illegal Assemblies, under color of Religious
Worship are effectually taken away, and people by moderate Penalties obliged to
frequent the public Service of God. Then it would be convenient for the
Convocation to hear the Dissenters Objections closely drawn up against the
present Constitution of our Church, that if any thing has been admitted
contrary to the Word of God, as it has been generally understood by the
Catholic Church, or any thing contrary to the Laws and Tradition of the
universal Church, which we do not yet believe, or any words and expressions
which may be better explained, or with some verbal Alterations, the same thing
in substance may be retained, without the like offense, I think it very
reasonable these matters should be soberly considered for public satisfaction,
and the grounds of all scruples be taken away. But if nothing will content men
without new modelling the Government, casting away the ancient Rites and Usages
of the Church, and leaving the circumstances of public order and decency to
the pleasure of every private Humorist, this is not a way to Peace, and prevent
Confusion, but plainly pulling down the Walls and Bullwarks sooner to let it in.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Office of the Civil Magistrate concerning Matters of
Religion, and the Execution of Penal Laws, not Capital, upon Frequenters of
Conventicles, and those that neglect the public Worship of God.
THIS is the point, if any that has stirred up Mr. B's anger against me, and
makes him break out into those passionate words, to say, I spoke like one of
Rehoboam's Puny Counselors, and then run into a bitter Declamation against the
bloody Persecutions of Gardener, Bonner, etc. as if I had pleaded for the like
Cruelties and Barbarities, when Mr. B. cannot but know that I say no more in
this matter, than he himself does allow, but only he would have himself
excepted, which his reasons and mine will not permit. But because this is a
matter which generally is wont to seem most odious, I will set down Dr. O. and
Mr. B's own words, concerning the Magistrates power in executing Punishments on
this account, En. Chapter p. 145.
and first Dr. O. says, It is granted that the Magistrate may dispose of many
outward concerns of Churches, may impart of his favor to them, or any of them,
as he sees cause, may take care that nothing falls out amongst them, that may
occasion any public disturbance -- may coerce, restrain and punish, as there
is occasion, persons who under pretense of Religion, do advance any Foreign
interest, opposite or destructive to his Government, the welfare of the Nation,
and the truth of Religion, with sundry other things of the like nature. And
herein lies an ample Field wherein the Magistrate may exercise his power, and
discharge his duty.

Mr. B. says, Plea for Peace, p. 30.
Princes and Rulers may forbid Atheists, Infidels, Heretics and malignant
opposers of necessary truth and Godliness, and all that preach Rebellion and
Sedition, that propagate such wicked Doctrine, and may punish them if they do
it, and may hinder the incorrigible, and all that provedly and notoriously are
such, whose preaching will do more hurt to men than good, from exercising their
Ministry, or preaching in their Jurisdiction or Dominions.

If a Heretic or other intolerable person must set up a Preacher, P. 99.
or if any turn Heretic, the Orthodox Churches are (after due Admonition) to
renounce him as unacceptable of their Communion, that he may be shamed and
avoided. 5. If yet he continue obstinate, and do more harm than good, the
Magistrate is Ruler, and must restrain him and deny him leave so to preach in
his Dominions. So he do it not by Penalties unsuitable to the offense.

I deny not but the Magistrate may moderately drive men to hear God's Word,
Treatise of Episc. p. 144.
and to do the immediate duties of their places. I acknowledge, that
Magistrates, P. 192, 193
Parents and Masters may force their Subjects to use those means which tend to
make them Christians, as to hear preaching, Conference or Disputations, or to
read Convincing Books -- 2. Accordingly Magistrates, Parents and Masters, may
use the like force with their Subjects who are Christians, to cause them to use
the foresaid means (of Hearing, Reading and Conference) for the curing of their
dangerous errors or sinful lives. 3. I doubt not but Magistrates may punish men
Corporally for their Crimes, according to the nature of them, and even for the
same that the Church has excommunicated them. If one be excommunicated for
Treason, Murder, Theft, Swearing, Profaning the Lord's day, and Holy things,
etc. It follows not, that the Magistrate may not also meddle with him. 4. And
we doubt not but Magistrates may restrain false Teachers from seducing others,
and drawing them from God to sin. 5. And the Magistrate may and ought to
encourag Ministers in the use of the Church-Keyes, and to preserve them from
the violence of wicked men.

Now what have I said any where, or what need I say in this matter, which Dr.
O. and Mr. B. do not also maintain, and why do I then speak more like one of
Rehoboam's Puny Counselors than they? only I do not except them because the
Law of the Christian Church, nor the necessary consequence of their own
premises do not except them, and are they only to be lawless and subject to no
rules, when all the World beside, are under the power of the Magistrate, to
coerce, restrain and punish them, if they do any thing that may occasion any
public disturbance, or advance any interest, [for though the Dr. O. does put
in Foreign interest, yet his words, with sundry other things of the like
nature, do also include any Domestic interest,] that is opposite to the
welfare of the Nation, the truth of Religion, with sundry other things of the
like nature? And then the Doctor does not only say, Herein lies an ample Field
wherein the Magistrate may exercise his power, but also adds, and discharge his
duty. And Mr. B. says, If persons continue obstinate, and do more harm than
good, the Magistrate is Ruler, and must restrain them, and deny them leave, so
to preach in his Dominions. So that Magistrates according to Dr. O. and Mr. B.
have not only power to coerce, restrain and punish Schismatics and disturbers
of the Peace of the Church, but it is their duty so to do: And if it be their
duty so to do, then the mischief and all the dangerous consequences that follow
upon their neglect, will lie upon them, and what a heavy account will the
Magistrates have to give, who suffer Heretics, Schismatics and Disturbers of
the public Peace, to distract and amuse the people, and lead many thousands
into Destruction? Therefore it concerns them highly to look about them, and
take care on both sides, that they do not hinder God's Faithful and lawful
Pastors from doing their duty, nor yet suffer Heretics and Schismatics to
seduce and distract their Subjects. Now to grant a Toleration, and to permit
Dr. O. and Mr. B. Mr. P. and Mr. K. and a hundred Sects more, to set up
themselves, is to cast off all care of Religion, and plainly to neglect their
duty. That Dr. O. and Mr. B. do not allow, and will acknowledge Socinians,
Quakers, etc. ought to be punished and restrained, so that the Magistrates must
consider and take advice, who are to be allowed, and who are to be restrained
and punished. Now what wiser method can Magistrates take than ours have done,
without any partiality and favor one way or another, to leave it to the mature
and sober debates of the highest Councils of the Kingdom, the Bishops and
Clergy in their Convocations and Synods, and the Temporal powers in the high
Court of Parliament, and then in their Resolutions not to follow new devices,
or be singular in their Constitutions, and different from most other Churches
and Kingdoms, but to observe the orders and customs which the Laws of the
general Councils, the constant practice of the Catholic Church, and which ten
thousand Clergymen in our Nation approve of, and judge agreeable to the Word
of God? And if Dr. O. and Mr. B. shall contrary to this public Settlement both
of Church and State, warranted by the constant order of the Catholic Church,
the practice of all reformed Churches, and justified by the Non-conformists
themselves till 1660. set up themselves to preach, I leave it to the common
sense of all men that are not blinded with self-interest, whether they do not
occasion disturbance, and advance an interest opposite and destructive to the
Government, the welfare of the Nation, and the Peace of the Church, and
therefore the Magistrates may, and if they will discharge their duty, ought, to
coerce, restrain and punish them, as Dr. O. says, and must restrain and deny
them leave to preach in their Dominions, as Mr. B. does affirm. And therefore I
have been so far from speaking like one of Rehoboam's Puny Counselors, that
any one that shall advise otherwise must be acknowledged one of Jeroboam's
Schismatical Counselors.

Now to satisfy the World how much I have been wronged by Mr. B. in this
Suggestion, and with what tenderness and Moderation I did propose the Execution
of Penal Laws against Dissenters, I will set down my words which principally
relate to this matter.

Orig. of Plots p. 389. I confess Papists and Presbyterians have under pretense
of propagating their Religion, brought great confusion upon the Christian
World, and have endeavored to get Power and Wealth into their hands by such
Unchristian methods; therefore their Principles and Practices ought to be
suppressed by all ways that are possible, if ever men hope for Peace amongst
Christians. But their Schismatical and Rebellious proceedings are no way to be
imputed to the Church, neither will their Cruelties and Excess be any Argument
to take away that rational Discipline which Christianity does command to be
exercised upon Heretics and Schismatics, as well as profane persons. The
Christian Church did never teach or require that any should be put to death,
merely as Heretics, or that they should be cruelly tormented. But only that
they should be hindered from propagating their errors: And by suitable
Penalties compelled to hear instruction, and consider impartially what is
offered for their Conviction; neither can Dissenters complain of any cruel
usage under the Churches Discipline.

Again page 391. God did endue the Apostles with a more easy way of convincing
men than we have now; for we must use long Arguments, and make large Discourses
to prove what we say, which will need a great deal of time and consideration
for men rightly to understand; and therefore many out of mere sloth, and to
avoid trouble, will run away from the Church; whereas Christ and his Apostles
having the power of working Miracles, they could propose what they had to
deliver in short, and then work a Miracle to convince their Auditors. Besides
the matter that was then in Controversy was more plain and obvious, the
opposition being chiefly between Jews and Pagans, against whom the Arguments
are most clear and evident; but many of our Controversies, as to the matter of
them, are not easy to be apprehended by all capacities; and therefore there is
required great seriousness and attention to the right discerning of the truth,
especially now, when men have lost all reverence for the Church, and will take
nothing upon the Authority of their Superiors; therefore when the generality of
mankind are careless and negligent, and do not take such pains, and use such
consideration as is needful, rightly to inform themselves, one great end of
Government, is to compel men to hear, and attend to such instruction as is
necessary to bring them to the saving knowledge of their duty -- Page 393. It
is also farther to be considered, that amongst the Dissenters, in whose behalf
a Toleration is desired, there is scarce one of an hundred, that does
understand how the points in difference are stated, either by the Church or by
those of their own Party; but run on blindly by an implicit belief of their own
Teachers, and are more led by Humor than Judgment. Can it be reasonable then,
that men should be permitted thus strangely to delude themselves, and to
forsake their proper Pastors, without so much as hearing or understanding what
is required of them? This therefore seems to be a method more rational than any
other: That men should in the first place be obliged to give all diligent
attention, to understand what is required of them by their lawful Governors,
and not without very evident reason, follow any private Teachers that give them
contrary instruction.

2. That all Christian Magistrates ought to see, that none be permitted to
preach publicly, or hold any Congregations, but such as profess that Faith and
Worship which is agreeable to the Catholic Church; for they ought to remove
all stumbling blocks and occasions of error out of the way.

3. In case many are dissatisfied with the public established Religion, after
they understand what it is; nevertheless, they ought to be punished with
reasonable Penalties to make them better consider, and that they may not
propose to themselves any Temporal advantage by their Separation. For it is
found by experience, that many Papists did go to Church in the times of
Cromwell, which afterward returned to the Church of Rome, when they were not
punished for it; and many Fanatics went to Conventicles while the Indulgence
continued, that before lived in all Obedience and Conformity to the Church. But
if after all, they still persist in their error, they are not to be put to
death, or cruelly tormented. And all such Dissenters ought to rest satisfied
with their private Devotions: And by this means all persons may perform their
duty in their places, and public Tumults and Disorders will be prevented, and
a remedy provided in a good measure against ignorance and profaneness. Now by
these words it is evident to all unprejudiced men, that I say no other than
what St. Augustine did in his 48. and 50. Epistles, and which all good
Christians ought to say in the like case.

CHAP. XXV. The Judgment of the most eminent Instruments of the first
Reformation concerning the present Controversies.
HAving debated the matters in difference between the Presbyterians and
Independants, and the Church of England, upon the Principles of Scripture,
Reason, and their own Concessions, I will show how much they act against the
Principles of the chiefest Divines also, that first stood up in Opposition to
the Popish Corruptions, and were the great Instruments of settling that
Reformation which has been called by the name of the Protestant Religion,
though now shamefully pretended as a Cloak to cover over the Rebellions,
Heresies, Schisms, and all other extravagancies which the Fanaticisms of our
late times have produced. Now though in the heat of Contention with the
Papists, while they oppose their Superstitious, Usages, and abuse of ancient
Rites, they do not always express themselves with such caution as they might
have done, neither were so careful many times to distinguish the Pious use
which might be made of them, from the intolerable abuse to which they were
perverted, yet they have sufficiently declared themselves, that the Government,
Constitutions, and Ceremonies of the Church of England, are not only lawful,
but pious and profitable for the Christian Church, and peaceably to be
submitted to by all Religious Persons in their several Capacities.

And because Mr. B. does so passionately desire us to consider the Writings of
the learned Bucer, writ in England and for England, I will begin with him.
Buceri Script. Angl. p. 565.
These Orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons were perpetual in the Church, and
instituted in the beginning by the Holy Ghost -- The Churches ordained their
Metropolitans in every Province, every one of which was to take care of the
Bishops of the Churches of his own Province -- But there was no more Authority
granted them, over other Bishops or other Churches, than that they should be
concerned and preside in all Elections and Ordinations of Bishops, but together
with the rest of the Bishops of that Province, with all of them if it were
possible, or at least with the nearest, or as many as could be present. -- The
Judgments both concerning Doctrine and Manners, over all Clergymen and
Laypersons were in every Church in the power of the Bishop and Presbyter of
each Church, [The Presbyter in his Parish, and the Bishop in his Diocese.] The
Judgments concerning the Bishops, were in the power of the Provincial Council,
all the punishments were suspension toward those that submit to Penance, p.
566.
and Excommunication toward those that did reject their Penance.

And again to the same purpose. p. 581.
Since it is our Lord's pleasure, that all his Disciples should mutually
embrace and have a care one of another, the Fathers did every where as far as
they could, (for all Christians are but one body) appoint, that the Bishops of
every Province, should meet together with the Presbyters and Deacons as often
as the occasions of the Church did require. [Which is now done at Visitations
and Episcopal Synods.] And should inquire into the Doctrine and Discipline of
Christ, that they might be administered, and flourish in all Churches; and that
they might amend any thing that they found amiss, and might confirm and promote
what they knew to be well.

But that these Synods might be rightly and orderly managed, they would have
the Metropolitans, the Bishops of every Metropolis, have the Presidency in
calling and moderating them, and therefore they did lay upon these
Metropolitans, the charge and care of all the Churches throughout their
Province. That if they understood there was any thing that was not well
instituted, or done by the Ministers of the Churches, or the people, they
should admonish them of it in due time, and if they did not amend by their
admonition, that they should call a Synod of Bishops to correct it. For nothing
of judgment was committed to them, which they could exercise by their own
Authority over the Churches, which had proper Bishops of their own; for all the
judgment over the People and the Clergy, was in the power of the Bishop and the
Presbytery, [that is respectively] but the Synod did judge the Bishops.

When Bishops were to be ordained in Churches, it was appointed that the
Metropolitan and all the Bishops of the Province should meet together at that
Church (if it could conveniently be done) and if with some only, not with less
than two or three, who were to govern the Election of the Bishop, if it were to
be then made, etc. and then at length, to ordain him to the Episcopal Function.
All which things were instituted, and did prevail, that there might be a
knowledge and mutual care between the Churches and their Ministers, as much as
was possible, and to drive away and remove all offenses concerning Doctrine and
Manners, and to uphold, promote, and render the Edification of Faith, and of a
Life worthy the Lord Christ more effectual. So that if any did recede from
their office, the rest of the Bishops might provide relief even to the
suspension of those that were obstinate, and also to the casting them out of
their Episcopal charge.

-- And then concluding the order of Government, Page 583.
he says, But because it is altogether necessary, that all Clergymen should
have their Keepers and Curators, as the Authority and Power of Bishops, and
also of Archdeacons and all others, by what names soever they are called, to
whom any Portion of Ruling and Governing the Clergy is committed, is to be
restored, so also the vigilance and animadversion, that no one in this order be
altogether without a guard over him.

But who shall judge among so many Churches, P. 232.
of which some follow the Pope of Rome, etc. others do not? I answer, says he,
National and General Councils.

But what if some, by a Schismatical Spirit, do oppose those things which are
rightly and piously decreed by a Council? R. These are to be condemned by the
Council as Guilty of Heresy. [Or Schism by the same purity of reason, etc.]
That they may be avoided by the Saints, and then presently after speaking of
the Magistrate, he asks this question; Does the care of Religion pertain unto
him? R. First of all, for all Power is of God, which they that have received it
from the Lord, ought so to Administer it, as to be a furtherance to those that
are good, and a terror to those that are evil.

And then showing the great mischiefs that arise from the contempt of
Ecclesiastical Authority, he says, P. 852.
There are many that are simple and understand little, who cannot direct and
govern themselves by their own discretion, and we all love our selves too much;
so that we cannot rightly know and judge of our own actions, wherefore unless
we think well and highly of them whom the Lord has set over us, who should
instruct, exhort, admonish and chide us in his name, unless we receive their
Word and Doctrine, with all fear and trembling, as the Word and Doctrine of the
Lord, the obedience of Piety will never have any place in us, neither will it
be able to grow up, as we see with our eyes, and daily find by experience. For
where this Authority and observance of the Ministers is not, there we see there
will be no true Church, nor appearance of Piety. And so it ought to be, for God
will rule altogether by his Ministers as we have demonstrated in the third
Chapter. If these be heard, then he is heard, if they be despised, then Christ
and his Father are despised.

And having thus written of the Government of the Church, upon his Deathbed he
did after this manner express himself. Says Mr. Car that wrote of his Death.
How often have I heard him deploring the Desolation of Germany, P. 874, 875.
and that with the most passionate expressions, and looking up to Heaven as he
prayed to Almighty God, that he would have pity on his own Nation, so that he
would not suffer England to fall into the same Vices which brought that
destruction upon Germany long before. And that he was afraid, that in the great
heat of desire that was in many of knowing God, and reforming the Church, while
Discipline was wanting, whereby wicked men were chastised, and order in the
Ministry was kept up, their good endeavors could not long make any progress.
This he did often say, but then most vehemently, when he did, as it were, like
a Pious Father, embrace this Church of England as a Daughter, in his Arms, and
with his last breath commend her to the King's Majesty and all good men, and
did wish in our hearing, that what things he had written to the King's Majesty
concerning the Discipline of the Church, might find a place and settlement in
this flourishing Kingdom, which was without controversy a House of God. And
that he did hope, if that were done, that no calamity, no deformity could
happen to this Commonwealth; but if it were not done, God would not be so much
appeased with the desire of a few to reform the Church, as he would be provoked
by the wickedness and Luxury of many others.

And herein this Pious man was not mistaken, but proved a fatal Prophet of our
late sad Disasters, for by the giddy zeal of some busy Reformers in Forty one
and onward, wherein Discipline was taken away, not only the King and Kingdom
were destroyed, but the Church has been almost overwhelmed with numberless
Schisms and Heresies, and we can never hope, as that Holy man did foresee, to
avoid the like confusion while the Authority of the Church, and all Discipline
is so shamefully trodden under foot, and despised as it is by our Dissenters.

Of the Ceremonies or Circumstances of Worship.
Now let us see how the Discipline o^ Ceremonies is to be restored into
Churches. P. 45.
But these are necessary Ceremonies and common to Christians: The
Sanctification or setting a part of places in which the Religion of Christ is
to be publicly administered: The Sanctification or setting apart of times in
which people may meet together in the Lord, and attend upon the duties of
Religion: A certain Administration of the Word, Sacraments modification of
Discipline, etc. first o^ all, Christians ought to have certain place^
appointed for holy Assemblies, and for the Religious duties delivered by Christ
the Lord, which ought not to be applied to any other use, unless some great
necessity does force it. Which our Lord did effectually teach us, when he cast
ou^ of the Temple, those that held a Market, though it were only for
Sacrifices, which were to be offered in it; and overthrew the Tables of the
Money Changers, by which strangers were helped to make their Sacrifices, and to
offer the gifts which were partly commanded, and partly commended in the Law of
God, etc.

It is agreeable to our Piety, Page 48.
to sanctify certain days with the Memorial of the Principal Works of the
Lord, by which he did perfect our Redemption, as the day of his Incarnation,
Nativity, Epiphany, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and Pentecost. Page 182.
We teach men so to celebrate the Memorials of the Saints which live with our
Lord Christ, and concerning whom we have the Histories of the Scriptures, or
other Books of good credit, that it might be propounded to the Church of God,
what Gifts their and our God and Father has bestowed upon them through our
common Savior. And that we may give thanks to God for them, and that we may
rejoice with them, as being our Members, and by this means we might the more
stir up our selves to trust in the grace of God, and to imitate their Faith.

The third common Ceremony of Christians, Page 50.
is the manner and ordering of the Holy Actions in the sacred Assemblies of
Christ, as the Administration of the Word, Sacraments and Discipline of Christ,
Prayers and Psalms and such like, that they may be exhibited and administered to
all People religiously, decently and in order, and to the true Edification of
Faith -- But such Churches as are in the same Nation or Kingdom, since the
dispositions of men there do not greatly vary, it is not only comely, but very
profitable to increase the esteem of Christ's Holy Offices, that as much as
they can, they should observe Conformity in these matters; which can never be
done but by prescribing Forms and Rules how all things shall be performed, as
he knew it was done then in our Church, and desired the continuance and
settlement of it at his Death.

Of the Sign of the Cross.
I esteem this Sign of the Cross decent and profitable to be used, Page 479.
not so much because it was of ancient use in the Church, as because it is very
simple, and of present admonition of the Cross of Christ.

Of the Surplice.
Whether we will or no, we must confess, Page 709.
that difference of Habits in those that bear civil Offices amongst men that
are rightly educated, do become a means of special reverence toward
Magistrates, and what does now hinder, but the same may come to pass in
Religious Ministration -- Let us consider what the Holy Ghost does teach us
concerning the signification of the Woman's Vail, and the Man's Head, being
uncovered, 1 Cor. 10. why does he make mention of the shining Garments of
Angels by name? For he does nothing without cause, but I have written more
largely of this matter to John a Lasco.

It is manifest our Lord Christ has prescribed the substance only, Page 708.
of the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments in his own Words, and left it to
the Church to ordain all other matters which pertain to the decent and
profitable Administration of the Holy Mysteries. From whence it comes to pass,
that we do not celebrate the Holy Supper, neither in the Evening, nor in a
private House, neither lying along and with men only: For these things,
concerning Time, and Place and Habit of the body in celebrating or receiving
the Lord's Supper, and of admitting Women to the Holy Communion, of the manner
of our Prayers and Hymns to God, and also concerning Garments and other things
which pertain to external decency, I do not doubt but he has given free Liberty
to his Church, to determine and make such Orders concerning these things, which
every Church shall judge most conducing amongst their People, to keep up and
increase their reverence toward all sacred things which belong unto our Lord.
If therefore any Churches from this Liberty of Christ, and to this end, for the
Edification of the Christian People, would have their Ministers use any
peculiar Garments in their sacred Administrations, all Superstition being
removed, and all Levity, and all Dissension amongst Brethren, that is abuse: I
do not see certainly how such Churches can be condemned as Guilty of any sin,
much less of having any Communion with Antichrist. Who would now condemn the
Church of Impiety, if by any pure and holy consent, they had that custom that
every one when he did partake of the Lord's Supper, should wear a White
Garment, as those that were newly baptized formerly did.

For if any should contend, that such a Liberty is not permitted to any Church
of Christ, he must of necessity confess one of these things, either that
nothing is allowed to be appointed in the Churches, of which they have not the
express command of Christ; by which means they will condemn all Churches of
wicked boldness. For all do observe Time and Place, and Habit of their Bodies
in the Celebration of the holy Supper; and do admit Women into their Communion,
of all which things they have not only no command of the Lord, but contrary
example --

Or it is impossible that there should be Churches which our Lord does so far
free from all suspicion and abuse of his good Creatures, that to those that are
pure by Faith in his name, all the Creatures of God are good, and of pure
signification in their use. Which whosever shall say, he by that means will
deny that Christ our Lord is such a one to all, which he promised himself to
be, to deliver them from all uncleanness.

Or that wicked men by their abuse, may so spoil God's Creatures which are good
of themselves, that they can be serviceable to no pious man to any holy use,
which is manifestly against the Testimony of the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 1 Cor.
8.9. 1 Timothy 4. or that at least it is not lawful for Christians to dispose any
things to put them in mind of their and our Creator, and of his benefits
toward us, and our duties toward him, which is opposite to that which the
Spirit does every where teach concerning our acknowledging and worshipping God
in all his Works, and doing all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
the Glory of the Father.

All these Absurdities are to be avoided by Pious men. Neither ought we to fear
that evil which is wont to be objected If there be such a Liberty granted to
the Church, that they may institute any things for Pious Significations and
Admonitions, it might come to pass that they may bring in all the Aronical
Rites or of the Roman Antichrist, or of the Gentiles into our Religious
Solemnities For the Churches which I have described and to which I think that
Liberty of which I am treating cannot be denied will so take and order all
Rites and Garments to their use, that they may serve to illustrate and not
obscure the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, as it is amongst true Christians
in the use of all external Rites not appointed by our Lord in any express
command.

But to answer more fully to Mr B's charge against me, of speaking like one of
Rehoboam's Puny Counselors. Contrary to all experience, let him consult his
commended Bucer, and he shall find him of my mind, or rather me of his in this
matter.

Since the Magistrates have Supreme Authority over all, Page 297.298, 299.
therefore above all they ought to take care that all men live orderly and
well, and each man discharge his duty: They are bound before all things to look
after this, that no man live under them, which is not continually sought after,
and helped forward to Christ. -- This Magistrates will rightly take care of,
when after the example of ancient Pious Princes and Magistrates, which ruled
amongst the Primitive Christians, they shall so appoint the Ministry and Cures
of Souls, that the Churches remain unhurt by Wolves, neither are oppressed by
Hirelings, and have their faithful and industrious Ministers which Administer
their Pastoral care of Souls faithfully and in all due manner -- Concerning
which matter we have the Constitutions of the ancient Christian Cesars, in
which they permit none to introduce any false Doctrine or Schism from the
Communion of Christ; neither publicly in the place of the public Ministry of
the Church, nor privately in corners to each several person. Moreover, they
permit no man, who is baptized, into the name of Christ, to withdraw himself
from the Communion of the Church, and use of the Sacraments, for they who do
not abide in the Communion of Christ, [that is, by abideing in the Communion of
his Church] they condemn them as Apostates, neither do they admit them to any
Honors or public Offices. But they who join themselves to any Sects, they
drive them away from this their Perdition, by pecuniary Mulcts and other
grievous punishments. Which Laws and Constitutions we have in Cod. de summa
Trin. and Fid. Cath. l. nulllus. and in the whole Title de Hereticis, and also
in novellis Constable. 109. and these Imperial Laws St. Augustine does praise and
defend that they are Christian and wholesome. -- And as the merciful God and
faithful Father, who does for our good try both troublesome things and pleasant
-- So that holy Bishop and faithful Curate of Souls St. Augustine, has found by
experience in some thousands who were brought by the punishments of the
Emperors, from the Sect of the Donatists, to the true Communion of Christ,
that God by punishments and severe Compulsion, did make false Doctrines and
Heresies, and all contempt of Religion irksome to men, and did first by that
means, bring them to hear sound Doctrine, and that they did not seduce or
offend any body, and then by Doctrine did bestow upon them his Spirit, which
does free them wholly from their errors, and indue them with a love and zeal
for the truth.

Thus the learned Bucer who was so hated by the Papists, that they dig'd up his
bones and burnt them publicly at Cambridge, after he had been buried above
four years; but the Protestants did so honor him, that they did solemnly
abrogate that order for his burning, and publicly do write again to his memory
in a general Senate, and the University Orator made a Speech, and then the
Regius Professor Preached upon that occasion.

CHAP. XXVI. Luther's Agreement with our Church, and the Churches that are
called after him.
Of Episcopal Government.
NEXT to Bucer's, I will set down Luther's Judgment concerning the present
matters, and because it can appear no where better, than in the public
Confession offered to the Emperor, which was set forth as their most
deliberate resolution, Confess. August.
and ever since the form of the profession that is still kept amongst them, I
will begin with that. And first in the Preface to the Reader, they say. We hope
all good men will understand, that we profess no Doctrine contrary to the holy
Scripture and the Catholic Church -- We reprehend these vices, not that we
might dissolve the Ecclesiastical Polity, but that we might illustrate the
Glory of Christ, and restore the Gospel to its native purity.

And then in the Confession it self.
This is the sum of the Doctrine which is delivered in our Churches, Cap. 21.
and we judge to be agreeable to the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and
the Catholic Church; and lastly to the Roman Church as she is known out of
approved Writers, and we hope all good and learned men will judge the same. For
we do not despise the consent of the Catholic Church, neither is it our
intention to bring into the Church any new opinion and unknown to the holy
Church. Neither will we Patronize any wicked or Seditious Opinions, which the
Catholic Church has condemned. For we were not led to embrace this Doctrine by
any evil concupiscence, but compelled to it by the Authority of the Word of
God, and of the ancient Church.

What shall we think of the Lord's day, Cap. de potest. Eccles.
and such like Rites belonging to the Church. To these things they answer, that
it is lawful for the Bishops or Pastors to prescribe rules that these things
may be done orderly in the Church. -- Such are the Observation of the
Lord's Day, Easter, Witsontide, and the like Holidays and Rites. -- The
Bishops might easily retain men in due obedience, if they would not urge them
to observe Traditions, which cannot be observed with a good Conscience. -- The
Churches do not desire that the Bishops should make up a concord with the loss
of their honor. -- Only they desire that those unjust burdens may be remitted,
which are new, and received beside the Tradition of the Catholic Church -- We
do not go about, that the Ruling Authority of Bishops should be taken away from
them, but this one thing is desired, that they would permit the Gospel to be
purely preached, and would remit some few Observations, which cannot be
observed without sin.

Of the public set Form of Prayers and Ceremonies.
Our Churches are falsely accused that they abolish the Missa or public
Liturgy, Cap. de Missa.
for the Missa or public Prayers and Administration of the Lord's Supper are
still retained and celebrated amongst us, with the highest Reverence, and
almost all the usual Ceremonies are still observed.

Most of the usual Traditions which conduce to this, De Discr. clb.
that things should be done orderly in the Church, are observed by us, such as
the order of the Lessons and the Principal Holidayes.

Hitherto we have had the words of the Confession; let us see what Luther
himself says. And though no man did more abhor the Popish Doctrine concerning
the Mass, yet he is not afraid to use the word Missa in a better sense as it
was anciently done, Tom. 2. Fol. 556.
hence he describes the order of the public Worship at Wittemberg, and begins
thus. A Form of the Missa and Communion for the Church of Wittemberg. Fol. 560.
And then sets down the several parts of it according to the usual order with
the Creed, Psalms, Lessons, Hours and Holidayes.

And says, It Is comely and necessary that Children should be accustomed to the
reading and hearing Psalms and Lessons of the holy Scriptures, but if any thing
here ought to be altered, it may be changed by the discretion of the Bishop,
[as he does permit in many other Circumstances, and as our Church does in many
cases leave it to the Ordinary.]

The Church does pray in her Prayers, Tom. 1. Fol. 308.
that we being stirred up by the examples of the Saints, may imitate the virtue
of their Passion, and does sing what great torments the Saints did suffer, that
they might securely come to the Crown of Martyrdom, from which Words and Songs
of the Church, we understand the Festivals of the Saints, their Memorials,
Temples, Altars, Names, Images are therefore celebrated and multiplied, that we
may be animated by their example, to endure the same evils which they suffered.

Again, Tom. 2. Fol. 558.
If it be thought good that the Communion Service should be Sung, let it be
Sung.

And then afterward, I omitted to speak any thing concerning Garments, but we
think concerning them as we do of other Rites. We allow Churches liberty freely
to use them, so as Vanity and Excess be avoided. But what order they observe,
we shall by and by learn from Melanchthon.

We are not bound to the Mosaical Ceremonies, Tom. 4. Fol. 120.
much less these of the Pope, but because our bodily life cannot want
Ceremonies and Rites, for there must be some Pedagogy, the Gospel does permit
that Constitutions should be made concerning Holidayes, about Times, Places,
that People may know on what day, at what hour, and in what place they ought to
meet to hear the Word of God.

This rule is every where to be observed concerning Ceremonies, Tom. 4. Fol.
601.
that the unskilful rude, negligent, might be stirred up by them, to learn the
will of God in his Word, to offer up their Prayers, and call upon the name of
the Lord, if this be done, which way soever it be, it is well done. -- It is
permitted to the Pastors in all Churches to institute such Ceremonies as are
serviceable to the Word, that is, to the knowledge of God, and the Salvation of
Man. For this care is committed to them, that many may be invited to the Word,
and accustomed to Piety.

-- Here we may deservedly lament the ruin of true Discipline; for because we
were compelled to cast away the Popish Ceremonies, many are of that opinion,
that there should be no place left for any Ceremonies in the Church, therefore
if any out of a Pious intention, should command a Fast of certain days, or
should exhort men to amendment of life and serious Prayer, what reproaches
would he hear amongst us, as now men's humors are? They would cry out presently
Popery is coming about again, our Christian Liberty is in danger; but do you
consider this O people, hear the Prophet to whom it does not seem enough to
propound the pure Doctrine of true repentance, but he would have a solemn
Assembly appointed, and certain times set apart for Fasting -- For these are
means by which the Holy Ghost does stir up ou^ minds.

Luther upon the Epistle to the Galatians written in the year 1538. Tom. 4. p.
6, 7, 8.
twenty years after his first appearing against the errors of the Church of
Rome, and when he had by experience found the mischief of the Fanatic Spirit
that set up it self contrary to the public order and Government o^ the Church,
commenting on these words Paul an Apostle not of men, neither by man, [sayes by
of men.]

I understand such who call and thrust in themselves, when neither God nor man
sent them, but such as run and speak o^ themselves. As the Fanatic Spirits now
adays, who creep into corners, and seek out places where they may spread their
Poison, and do not enter into the public Churches, or come hither where the
Gospel is already planted, these I call of men. [By men,] are such as have a
Divine call, but yet by men, for the Divine call is twofold, one mediate, the
other immediate. God does call us all now to the Ministry of the word
mediately. But the Apostles were called by Christ himself, the Apostles
afterward called their Disciples as Paul called Timothy and Titus, etc. who
afterward called the Bishops, as Tit. 1. the Bishops called their Successors,
and that Call continued to our times, and shall continue to the end of the
World, and it is a mediate Call because it is by men, yet it is Divine -- And
this is the general Call all over the World after the Apostles, neither is it
to be changed, but highly esteemed, by reason of some Fanatical men which
despise it, and boast of another better Call, whereby they say they are moved
by the Spirit to teach. But such Impostors lie, they are moved by a Spirit
indeed, but not a good but a wicked Spirit. It is not lawful for me to go out
of my own Charge into another City, where I am not called to be a Minister --
Wherefore we must not run into another man's Charge, as the Devil does stir up
his Ministers to run where they are not called, and pretend a fervent zeal, and
that they are grieved that men are so miserably seduced, that they will teach
them the truth, and pluck those that are misled out of the snares of the Devil.
And indeed if any out of a Pious zeal and good intention, would by sound
Doctrine, free those from error which are seduced, yet it would give evil
example by which occasion is offered to wicked Teachers to thrust in
themselves, by whom Satan does afterward rule and do much hurt -- This is the
first assault St. Paul makes against false Apostles which run when no body
sends them, therefore a Call is not to be despised, Neither is it enough to
have the Word of God and pure Doctrine, but our call must be certain, without
which he that enters, comes to kill and to destroy. For God does never
prosper the labor of those that are not called, and though they bring some
wholesome Doctrines, yet they do not edify.

Again speaking of Persons seduced by Sectaries, Fol. 111.
says, they say the Lutherans are not the only men that are wise, it is not
they only that preach Christ, it is not they alone that have the Spirit, the
gifts o^ Prophecy, and the right Interpretation of Scripture. Our Teachers are
no way inferior to them, and exceed them too by many degrees, for they are led
by the Spirit and teach us Spiritual things, but the Lutherans have never yet
attained to the true Divinity, but rest in the dead letter, and therefore teach
nothing else but the Catechism, Faith, Charity, etc.

Of Excommunication.
This is a place concerning Excommunication, Tom. 4. Fol. 682.
and that as the Church is twofold; for one is Political or outward and
visible, which the Church uses against those that are notorious offenders,
according to the command of Christ, Mat. 18. that rule is altogether to be
observed in the Church, neither is Excommunication a light matter which does
utterly exclude men from the Kingdom of Christ, and does retain sins without
forgiveness, unless they do repent -- Take heed how you despise this
Excommunication lawfully inflicted by the Church, for it brings the certain
sentence of the wrath of God, and eternal Damnation, as Christ says, Verily I
say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven.

CHAP. XXVII. Melancthon 's Judgment.
NEXT to Luther's, I will set down the Judgment of Melancthon his pious and
learned Disciple, who was chosen out to write the Apology in defense of the
Ausperg or Augustane Confession, in the name of the several Princes of Germany
and others that assented to it, and extant amongst Luther's Works, written in
the year 1538. twenty years after the first Protestation against the errors of
the Roman Church.

Of the Authority of Bishops, and Observation of the ancient Canons.
Our Adversaries receive the fourteenth Article, Tom. 4. Fol. 205.
in which we say, that none ought to be permitted to Administer the Word and
Sacraments, but those that are orderly called, if we would but use the
Canonical Ordination. Concerning this matter we have often testified in this
Assembly, that we do most earnestly desire to preserve the Ecclesiastical
Polity, and those degrees that are in the Church, though made at first by
humane Authority. For we know that Ecclesiastical Discipline was appointed by
the Fathers in this manner as the ancient Canons do describe it, upon very good
and profitable Considerations --

Moreover here we do testify again, That we would willingly preserve the
Ecclesiastical and Canonical Polity, if the Bishops would leave off to exercise
their Cruelty against our Churches; and this our Will shall excuse us before
God, and before all the World to all Posterity, that it cannot be imputed to
us, that the Authority of Bishops is diminished or taken away.

Of Hypocrites being in the visible Church, and receiving the Sacrament from
wicked Ministers.
We acknowledge many Hypocrites and evil men are mingled with the good in this
Life, Tom. 4. Fol. 192.
and have the Fellowship of outward Signs, and are Members of the Church, as to
the Participation of outward Signs, and therefore do bear Offices in the
Church. Neither does it take away from the efficacy of the Sacraments, that
they are administered by the ungodly, because by reason of the appointment of
the Church, they represent the person of Christ, and do not represent their own
persons, as Christ himself does testify, he that hears you hears me; when
they administer the Word and Sacraments, they do administer it in the stead and
place of Christ. But we have spoken clearly enough to this point in our
Confession, where we reject the Donatists and Wickefists, who do think they do
sin, who receive the Sacraments in the Church from Ministers that are unworthy.

Of Rites and Ceremonies, and the Churches power to institute them.
We think that the difference of Rites instituted by men, Fol. 193.
do not hurt the Unity of the Church, though it is very pleasing to us, that
universal Rites should be observed for Peace-sake. As we do willingly observe
in our Churches the order of the public Liturgy, the Lord's Day and other
special Holidayes, and do with a most ready mind receive the profitable and
ancient Constitutions, especially because they contain a Pedagogy which leads
to Instruction; wherefore it is profitable to teach and accustom the people and
those that are unskilful to their use.

Although the Holy Fathers themselves had Ceremonies and Traditions, Fol. 206.
yet they did not think these things profitable or necessary to Justification;
they did not obscure the Glory and Office of Christ, but did teach that we are
justified by Faith for Christ's sake, and not for our humane forms of Worship.
But they did observe them for bodily convenience, that the people might know
what time to meet together, that all things might be done orderly and gravely
in the Temples for examples sake; and lastly, that the common people might have
a kind of Pedagogy to instruct them. For distinctions of times and variety of
Ceremonies are of use to admonish the common people.

-- For these causes we also judge Traditions may be rightly observed -- We
willingly retain the ancient Traditions which were delivered in the Church for
convenience and Peace, Fol. 207.
and we interpret them most favorably, shutting out that opinion of their
justification. And our Adversaries do falsely accuse us, that we abolish the
good Ordinances and Discipline of the Church. For we can truly say, that the
public order of the Churches is much more honored by us than by our
Adversaries; and if any will rightly weigh it, we do more truly observe the
Canons than our Adversaries -- For amongst us many receive the Lord's Supper
every Lord's Day, but they are first instructed, examined and absolved.
Children sing the Psalms that they may learn them; and the people sing them,
that they may either learn or pray.

-- In this Assembly we have sufficiently showed, Fol. 208.
that out of Charity we would willingly observe any indifferent things with
others, though they had some inconvenience; but we did judge that public
Concord, which could be made without any offense to our Consciences [that is,
without the breach of any Law of God, for there can be no other just offense to
Conscience] was to be preferred before all other Conveniences.

Of the Liturgy, Holidayes, Surplice, etc.
We must make this Declaration again in the beginning, Fol. 216.
that we do not abolish the public Liturgy, but do Religiously retain and
defend it. For the public Service of the Church is celebrated amongst us upon
all Lords-dayes and other Holidayes, in which the Lord's Supper is administered
to them that will receive it, and they are tried and absolved before. And the
usual public Ceremonies, the order of the Lessons, Prayers, Garments, and such
like, are still retained and observed by us.

CHAP. XXVIII. Calvin 's Judgment.
AFter I have shown how far the Lutherans agree with us in these controverted
points between us and the Dissenters, I will set down Mr. Calvin's consent
likewise against their proceedings.

Of Government.
I confess honor ought to be given to the Priests, Call. de necessit. Refor.
Eccles.
and there is great danger in despising the ordinary power; [he means which is
settled in any true Church] if therefore they will say, we must not lightly
resist the ordinary power [of Ecclesiastical Governours] we will easily
subscribe to it. For we are not so rude, but we perceive what confusion there
will be, unless deference be shown to the authority of our spiritual
Governors. Let therefore Pastors have all their due honor -- Let them give us
such an Hierarchy, in which Bishops have such a pre-eminence, that they do not
refuse to be subject to Christ, wherein they depend upon him as their only
head, and are referred to him; in which let them maintain Brotherly Charity one
with another, and be united together with no other bond than of his truth: then
I will confess there is no Anathema that they are not guilty of, if there be
any such that do not observe it reverently, and with the highest obedience.

And then in opposition to the new Independent way, or Parochial Episcopacy.
This is not the least part of Ecclesiastical Government, Ib. p. 70.
that those who are to be Rulers in the Church, should be rightly and orderly
chosen and set apart to that office. We have the Rule of the Word of God,
according to which all Elections ought to be managed; there are extant many
Decrees of ancient Synods, in which all things are prudently and diligently set
down which pertain to the right form of electing -- We see what order the
Apostles observed in ordaining Ministers, and what the ancient Church followed;
and lastly what the ancient Canons command should be observed; if I complain
that this is now despised and rejected, will not this be a just complaint?

In a Church rightly established, De vera Refor. ration.
none ought to be admitted to the office of teaching, but those who are called
to it by the ordinary Pastors.

We learn from this place, Call. in Tit. c. 1. v. 5.
that there was not that equality then amongst the Ministers of the Church, but
one had the pre-eminence over the rest, both of Authority and Counsel.

Of Common Prayer or set Forms, and stated Ceremonies.
I do highly approve that there should be a certain Form of Prayer and
Ecclesiastical Rites. Lib. Epist. p. 65.


From which it should not be lawful for Pastors themselves to discede or vary.

1. That provision may be made for some peoples ignorance and unskilfulness.

2. That the consent of all Churches amongst themselves may the more plainly
appear.

3. That order may be taken against the desultory Lightness of such who delight
in Innovations.

Thus there ought to be an established Catechism, an established Administration
of Sacraments, as also a public Form of Prayer.

Neither does he thus plead there ought to be such public Forms, but has
actually composed one which is now extant in his Writings.

Of Significative and Symbolical Ceremonies.
That no man may raise a Calumny against us, De vera Eccl. refor. ratio.
that we are too morose and froward concerning external Things, and do so
precisely take away all Liberty; I do here testify to all my pious Readers,
that I do not contend about Ceremonies, which serve for order and decency, or
else are Symbols and Incitements of that Reverence which we pay to God. Under
this notion, kneeling and the Sign of the Cross, may be very well used as
significations of our Reverence, and our profession of Faith in a crucified
Savior, and also to put us in mind of our duty, patiently to bear the Cross.
The like may be inferred concerning Festivals, Surplices, etc.

Of the Churches power in ordaining Rites and Ceremonies, and obedience to
Bishops.
I will here set down the words of a Confession of the French Churches, Call.
Epist. p. 406, 407
sent to the German Princes at the Diet of Francfort, Anno Dom. 1562. and
extant amongst Calvin's Epistles.

We would not have the Authority of the Pastors and Superintendents taken away,
to whom the charge of governing the Church is committed. We confess, Bishops
ought to be reverently hearkened unto -- We confess also, that all and every
Church has this right to make Laws and Statutes, and to appoint a common Polity
amongst their Members; seeing all things in the House of God are to be done
decently and in order. -- Wherefore we account those Schismatics, who cause
Tumults and Confusions to divide the Church, which cannot otherwise stand than
while it is governed by its Pastors, since this is the will of the Lord. And he
has given command to every one, as well the highest as the lowest, that they
should submit to that order which he has appointed. So that they who of their
own accord separate and cut themselves off from the Assembly of the faithful,
[that is of their lawful Bishops and Ministers, for those they had been
speaking of] they cast themselves out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Of Schism, in separating from a true Church.
I have set down the preaching of the Word and Administration of the
Sacraments, Call. institut. lib. 4. c. 1. n. 10.
for the signs whereby to know the Church -- For where the preaching of Gospel
is reverently heard, and the Sacraments are not neglected, there for that time
is a certain face of a true Church, and it is lawful for no man, without
punishment, to despise her Authority, reject her Admonitions, be refractory
against her Counsels, or mock at her corrections, much less may he separate
from her and break her unity. For our Lord does so highly esteem the Communion
of his Church, that he does reckon him for a Renegado and desertor of Religion,
that does obstinately separate from any Christian Society, that does hold the
true Ministry of the Word and Sacraments; from whence it does follow, that to
depart from the Church, is to deny God and Christ: by how much the more ought
we to take heed of such a wicked Schism; for while we go about as much as in us
lies to destroy the truth of God, we deserve that God should thunder against us
with the greatest force of his wrath, to break us in pieces.

Of choosing Ministers.
It was ordained with a great deal of reason by the Council of Laodicea, c. 13.
Institut. lib. 4. c. 4. n. 12.
that the choice of Ministers should not be left to the people; for it scarce
ever falls out, that so many men should agree to manage such a thing well; for
that is for the most part true, that the uncertain multitude are divided into
contrary Parties.

He does indeed afterward prove, that the peoples Testimony for the Ministers
carriage and behavior was asked; and so it is now, and they have the same
liberty still, to object and declare, where they know any exception.

Of appointing and ordaining Bishops.
It is the Decree of the Council of Nice, Ibid. n. 14.
that the Archbishop and the Bishops of the Province should meet together, to
ordain him that was chosen Bishop. [The Canon it self does give them the
Authority to constitute the Bishop, which implies the power of choosing as well
as ordaining, but does not the least intimate any other choice, or require them
to stay for any other Nomination or consent. But Mr. Calvin goes on.] If by
reason of the length of the Journey, or Sickness, or any urgent nenessity, part
were hindered from coming, that three at least should meet together, and those
that were absent should testify their consent by Letters. -- And it does
appear by St. Cyprian, that they were not called after the Election, but were
wont to be concerned in the Election. And then sets down St. Cyprian's words
quoted by me. Chap. 5.
For which cause this is diligently to be observed and held as of Divine and
Apostolical Tradition (which is for the most part observed by us throughout all
Provinces) that to the right celebrating of Ordinations, all the neighboring.
Bishops of that Province should come together to that people, over whom a
Bishop is to be ordained, that the Bishop may be chosen in the presence of the
people. Observe, St. Cyprian does not say, by the people, but Plebe present,
in the presence of the people.

This was every where observed without out exception, N. 15.
anciently (he says.)

Of the choosing and Ordination of Priests.
The Bishops had a peculiar habit in the solemn Assembly, whereby they were
distinguished from the rest of the Presbyters; and they did ordain Presbyters
and Deacons with imposition of Hands. And every Bishop did ordain his own
Presbyters, with the College of his Presbyters. The usage of Presbyters laying
on of Hands in Ordination of Presbyters, does not seem to have any other
Original than from the Council of Carthage, and was no other than is now
observed in our Church. And by all that I have quoted out of Mr. Calvin it is
evident, he does assent that the Superiority of Bishops was in the Apostles
time; that the manner of their appointment was by the Archbishop, and the
Bishops of the Province; and that the Power of ordaining Presbyters and
Deacons, was principally belonging to the Office of the Bishop, and never done
without him; and that it was well done of the Council of Loadicea, to forbid
popular Elections. And though he does indeed express it to be his opinion, that
Presbyters are of the same Order with Bishops, yet he does confess, their
Superiority was always acknowledged in the Church from the Apostles days, and
that they deserve the highest Anathema, that will not reverently and obediently
submit themselves to Orthodox Bishops.

So that it is a demonstrative Truth, that Government by Bishops according to
the ancient Canons, set Forms of Prayer, and a public stated Liturgy,
Holidayes, stated Fasts, the use of the Cross and Surplice, and the Doctrine
that Ecclesiastical Governors have power to institute Rites and Ceremonies for
decency and order, etc. were none of the things condemned in the Church of
Rome, nor in any other Church; but the first Reformers thought they are of
themselves, pious, profitable, and fit to be retained.

Their chief care was to oppose the Popes Supremacy, Transubstantiation,
Communion in one kind, the Worship of Imager Invocation of Saints, etc. and to
root out the Superstitious opinion of Merit in the Observation of Ceremonies,
and placing a great deal of Religion in their external performance, without any
inward Piety and love of God. Now these and such like superstitious Corruptions
are taken away in our Church, and yet our Anti-Episcopa^^ Countrymen never
cease to embroil i^ upon the account of Government and Ceremonies; though not
only the reveale^ Law of God, but the Law of Nations and common humanity, do
oblige all person not to disturb the Civil Government, legally settled in any
Country, or to contend with any about indifferent Modes and Circumstances. Yet
it is our unhappine^ not to find the same Civility or Justice from those who owe
obedience and subjection, and are tied by the strictest bonds of Religion and
Charity, to live in all Peace and Love with the purest Church in the World, and
that has the Authority of the Catholic Church in all Ages, and most sober
Divines amongst the reformed Churches, to justify the lawfulness and Piety of
her Constitutions.

CHAP. XXIX. The Spiritual and Temporal Interest of the Nobility and Gentry,
and all the Trading and wealthy part of the Nation.
MR. B. is pleased to conclude his Book, which he calls an Answer to me, with a
Scheme of Interests: I shall also end my Defense, with showing what is the real
Interest of all good Christians, and the highest Temporal Interest of all the
Nobility and Gentry, and all the Trading and wealthy part of the Nation. As to
the spiritual Interest, I cannot better set it down than in Mr. B's own words.

The Interest of particular Churches is, Apol. p. 250. Number. 3.
their pleasing and glorifying God, by their Union to Christ and the Church
Universal, by Faith, Love and Obedience; and their Holy Union between Pastors
and People, and of the People among themselves.

Now how can they show their Union to the universal Church, by Faith, Love and
Obedience, but by professing her Creeds, observing her Laws and Canons,
reverencing her ancient Customs and pious Traditions, and keeping up those
Rules and Orders of Unity which she has prescribed: Therefore the Governors
must set forth these things, and require all within their several Charges to
conform to them. And what are these Impositions which the Dissenters complain
of, but the pious commands of our particular Church, to submit and yield
obedience to the Laws and Orders of the ancient Church, that they may testify
their Union with her; so that Mr. B. in his calmest thoughts, does acknowledge
the true Interest of this Church of England, is to keep to that ancient and
Primitive Order, which is already established in our Nation, particularly by
obedience also to the Church universal.

The Interest of each particular Christian is, his pleasing and glorifying God,
Number. 7.
in his holy Union with Christ, and with his Church universal; and
subordinately his holy Unity and Concord with the Ecclesiastical and Civil
Society where he lives.

Here he does farther acknowledge that it is his Interest, and the Interest of
all the Non-conformists, in Subordination to the Church universal, and to
testify their Union with her, to live in holy Unity and Concord with the
Bishop of that Diocese, and Minister of each respective Parish where he lives,
for that is the Ecclesiastical and Civil Society settled by Law in this Nation.
So that they must hereupon leave off al^ separate Meetings, and heartily join
it Prayers and Sacraments, and all Christian Offices with the Parochial
Churches respectively; and let them but faithfully keep to this Interest, and
our Land will quickly be turned to a Paradise for Peace and Unity. But Mr. B. I
fear, will not long hol^ to this Interest; or if he will, I doubt most of the
other Dissenters will not be of h^^ mind. But whether he will stick to it o^
no, you see he does plainly confess, it is you^ highest Spiritual Interest to
glorify Go^ in your Union with Christ, and with the Church universal; and
subordinately i^ your holy Unity and Concord with the Church of England, as by
Law established and consequently it will be your Temporal Interest, to do your
utmost endeavor t^^ promote the settlement of all other Christians in this
Nation, in the same holy Unit^^ and Concord; for then you are secure against
all disturbances and scruples that can possibly arise upon the account of
Religion and will quietly enjoy your Honors and Estates, and all other
comforts this Nation does afford, and have freedom and opportunity to advance
your selves to greater Wealth and Dignity, by honest industry and lawful
endeavors, and securely to convey down to your posterity what you have or
shall lawfully possess.

But as yet we are far from that happy state, and in danger of having, not only
our Religion, but our Lives, our Estates, and all destroyed by Papists or other
Dissenters, or both, unless timely care and hearty endeavors are used to
suppress Conventicles, and disabuse the people, and so bring our Nation to holy
Unity and Concord, in the Ecclesiastical and Civil Society already established
amongst us. You may fancy other Interests, or may be wholly taken up with
pursuing your particular advantages and designs; but while the Land is thus
torn and divided, you can never be secure of enjoying any of these Blessings;
for by reason of Indulgences and Relaxation of Penal Laws ever since Forty One,
multitudes of people have grown up, that are ignorant and Atheistical, and mind
and know little of any Religion at all; and many others that are altogether
ignorant of the Principles of true Religion, and withal peevishly Factious and
Schismatical, and highly prejudiced against the Government both in Church and
State; so that scarce the Twentieth part in many Parishes, and most
Corporations, do Religiously frequent the public Prayers and Sacraments, and
live as Christians ought to do, and in many places never so much as hear any
instruction, or regard what their Ministers say unto them. And yet these men
must be Jurymen and Witnesses in all matters that concern our Lives and
Estates; these men must choose Parliament men, without whom no Money can be
raised, nor Laws made for the necessary defense and support of the Kingdom; and
these are men that have Heads and Arms that may be conjured up by Seditious
Pamphlets, Factious Sermons, and Lying Reports, to Dethrone and Murder their
King, take away your Lives and Estates, and bring in Anarchy and Confusion into
the Nation, as they have formerly done within your Memory. Can you therefore,
if you rationally consider your danger, hope long to enjoy what you have, and
sleep secure in your Beds, while Seditious Pamphlets thus fly abroad into every
corner, and Seditious Preachers hold vast Meetings, to propagate Schismatical
Principles against the settled Government and Religion, and make that the
greatest exception against Conformity, that they are obliged to renounce that
wicked Covenant, and these Rebellious and Commonwealth Principles, by which
they destroyed His late Majesty of Blessed Memory, and brought the Kingdom to
Desolation for near twenty years? Nay, were not their Insolences and
Rebellious Methods for these two last years, and our imminent dangers in all
appearance, the same and greater than those in Forty one? And though as yet,
Providence has but showed us the gulf in which we are like to be swallowed up,
and given some respite to prevent these dangers, and the Loyal Churchmen have
appeared to show their resolution to stand by the Government, and demonstrated
a possibility of suppressing these Factions and Tumults, yet I do not see any
of those men are converted, or Seditious Conventicles taken away, or our
Churches better filled; nor can we hope the common people will ever entertain
founder Principles, while these things are permitted: And it is in vain to
imagine, that those men that caused the late disturbance are sunk into the
ground; yet it must be confessed they are at present so discouraged, and the
Government has such assurance from the Loyal Party, that it is not only
possible, but very easy to prevent all these dangers, if effectual care be
taken to maintain the ancient Religion, and those just Laws, which are so
equitable, so wise, and so necessary for the public Safety, and they he
executed with Impartial Justice, against Papists and all other Dissenters, not
to the utmost rigor, but with such gentleness and moderation, that
Conventicles be taken away, but no body ruined and undone, though they feel it
uneasy for them not to conform to public Religion, and be utterly excluded
from all hope of future Favors and Indulgences. This method in a short time
will undeceive the poor deluded people, and by means of the sober instruction
they will hear in the Church, and the Blessing o^ God upon such a Pious care of
his Worship would secure us from all future Tumults and Rebellions, and settle
the Nation in Peace and Unity, which is the highest Interest of all the Noble
and Wealthy part o^ the Nation.

But suppose we are secure against any Protestant Rebellion, and there is no
danger they will be able to breed any disturbance, (though I do not see but
what ha^ been done may be done again,) yet ou^ fears of Popery will be allowed
to be just and reasonable, and every body is sensible our danger will be great
under the Roman Tyranny; now which way do Papists endeavor to bring about
their designs? Ha^ not a little Discourse called Foxes and Firebrands, and the
first Discoverer of the Plo^ in his Narrative, with numerable other Evidences,
made it plain to the World; it is by sowing Principles of Schism and Faction
amongst the people, by Preaching in Conventicles under all shapes and
disguises, and alienating men's minds from the public order of the Church, and
any solid Foundation of true Religion? and did not Mr. Coleman and the Lord
Stafford acknowledge before their Death, that they did endeavor to get a
Toleration, that by means of our Divisions they might ruin the Church of
England, to make way for settling their own? And though a Toleration should not
presently bring in Popery, and there be no danger during the Reign of our most
Gracious Sovereign, who has given such repeated promises and assurances of his
constant defense of the established Religion, yet we do not know what may
happen in future times, the Royal Branches being planted abroad in Foreign
Countries; neither is the Queen of Spain without a remote possibility of
inheriting the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And suppose a Monarch of the
Spanish Temper and Severity should sway the British Scepter, and should find
our Nation thus torn and divided, and perhaps the greater part ignorant and
Atheistical, and regardless of any Religion; others peevish, humorous and ill
natured, but spiteful, Schismatical and disaffected to the public Worship
established amongst us, and very ignorant and ungrounded in any sober
Principles, how soon would these men and their Puny Levites, most of whose
Learning is a Bible and Concordance gathered into incoherent Phrases, become a
prey to the Jesuits and Friars, who would in whole swarms fly about their Ears,
and beset them in every corner, and yield a new Triumph to the Roman
Conquerors? It is impossible that such a broken, ignorant and distracted
people, as ours are at this time, should long hold out the contest against the
Learning, settled Order, outward uppearance of Religious Zeal, which they will
then press upon their Consideration, together with the Temporal advantages they
will have if they submit, and the many threats and dangers they will incur, if
they obstinately persist in that they call Heresy and Disobedience.

Neither will the Bishops and the learned Clergy, and their truly ancient
Catholic and pious Establishment, be able then to secure these men or the
Nation; for the Dissenters will not desire their help, but are taught to
account them Papists also; and then the Papists having a much easier Game to
pursue, will slight and avoid all Contests with them, and prey upon the weak
and unsettled people, and by that means will gain strength enough by Force and
Violence, without any farther dispute, to trample them under their Feet; and so
our Land will be again enslaved to Rome, and all her Corruptions; and the
Presbyterians and Independents do open the door, and dispose our people by
these Divisions, to let them in.

But if those be thought only remote possibilities, and not much to be feared,
yet the growing Arms of France at present are very powerful, and threaten
Slavery to this part of the World, and the motions of the Empire and of Spain
are very slow to prevent it. Flanders is most already in their Power, and the
rest lies at their Mercy. Holland was overrun lately in a Month; and I have
been credibly informed, that the City of Amsterdam had made a Golden Basin to
present their Keys in to their Royal Conqueror; and how easily then may they
be again reduced to the same necessity, when their Adversaries are far stronger
now, than when they made their first Invasion. These things must needs concern
us and our Trade; and yet by means of the Divisions that are tolerated amongst
us, Malcontents are encouraged, and perhaps French and Popish Money does hire
Preachers and Pensioners to spend their time in Quarrels about Religion, which
should be employed in Consults to establish Truth and Unity, and provide for
the public Safety and Defense.

The only means therefore that is left to preserve our Nation from Destruction,
and to secure us from the danger of Popery, is to suppress all Conventicles
whatsoever, and by some moderate Penalties, suited to every ones condition, so
as not to ruin any body, but to oblige all to hear the sober instruction of
the Ministers of the Church of England; and then in a short time the Body of
the Nation, which are now sloathful and lazy, and mind no Religion, or else
strangely perverted and misinformed, would come to understand the Grounds and
Principles of the true ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Religion, which by an
uninterrupted Tradition, has been publicly taught in all Ages, confirmed by
the general Councils, and now owned and approved of by all settled Societies of
Christians; and in all Disputes will hearken to the learned Arguments of the
Pious and Orthodox Bishops and Doctors of our Church, against which all the
reasoning of the Church of Rome will never be able to appear with any color,
and so they will be in no danger of being seduced to the Roman Church by the
busy Priests and Jesuits, if afterward tolerated to preach amongst them.

Being by this Method provided against having our people seduced by the
Papists, which as yet they are in great danger of, upon the least opportunity
or encouragement; the next thing to be thought of, is to consider how to
prevent Violence, that those be not murdered and undone, that cannot be
persuaded to submit. Now to secure this His Majesty's gracious Promises, to
confirm any Bills that were thought necessary to preserve the established
Religion, that did not entrench upon the Succession of the Crown, do make the
way very easy, if our People were united amongst themselves, and in the
Religion of the Church of England. For Matters may be so ordered, that all
Officers, Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military, and all that are employed in
Power or Authority of any kind, be Persons both of known Loyalty to the Crown,
and yet faithful Sons of the Church, and firm to the established Religion, and
the Laws that they act by, may be so explained, in the Favor of those that
conform to the public Worship and the discouragement of all Dissenters, that
we must reasonably be secure from any Violence that the Papists can offer to
force our Submission. For when all our Bishops and Clergy are under strict
Obligations and Oaths, and the People are guided by them; and all Officers,
Civil and Military, are firm to the same Interest, and under severe Penalties,
if they act any thing to the contrary. Then what probable danger can there be
of any Violence or Disturbance to force us out of our Religion, when all things
are thus secured, and the Power of external Execution is generally in the Hands
of men of our own Persuasion: Nay, moreover the Prince himself will by his
Coronation Oath be obliged to maintain the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom
thus established. Neither is this an imaginary Fancy of mine, or wild Proposal,
but actually seen in other Countries; the Elector of Brandenburg himself a
strict Calvinist, and most of his Subjects Lutherans, and a late Duke of Zell a
Papist, and his Subjects of the Reformed Religion, and yet have lived in all
Love and Concord, the Laws of their Country having secured them from any
Disturbance.

The Papists therefore being very well aware of this, take all the ways they
can to distract and unsettle the People, and especially to alienate their minds
from the Church of England, and make them indifferent to any Religion, that so
they may be in a possibility of fixing them in theirs, or at least by degrees
to get a Parliament, If ever they have a Prince to their own mind, that may
abolish our present Laws, and settle the Popish Religion; and had they but once
that hold again, they would leave no Queen Elizabeth behind to restore us to
that happy Reformation which now we enjoy.

So that every Conventicle is a Factory here for the Church of Rome, whether
they intend it or no; and all those that alienate men's minds from the Church of
England, or promote the Relaxation of Laws, to allow men to indulge their own
humor, whether it be to be lazy and careless of any Religion, or else
Schismatical, are (whether they design it or no) Agents for the Papists, and do
that work which they have been laboring about this Forty years, and plainly
dispose People to be in a readiness to embrace Popery, and encourage their
busy Priests and Bigots to contrive Plots to settle their Religion, when they
see the Dissenters have set open so fair a door to let it in. Men may overlook
and despise these matters how they please, and Dissenters may endeavor all
ways to excuse themselves; but it is demonstratively evident to all
understanding Persons, we shall never be free from Murders, Conspiracies,
danger of Popery, and perpetual Fears and Distractions while Conventicles
continue, and men are suffered to withdraw themselves from the public Religion
without any check or control. And all at last must end in Popery, the
Consequence whereof I cannot think upon, but with the greatest Horror and
Amazement. God Almighty, for the Honor of the Reformed Religion, and in Mercy
to this poor Nation, open the Eyes of all that are concerned, thoroughly to be
sensible, and timely to provide against it, before it be too late, which as yet
by the Blessing of God may be easily done, and that without Cruelty, Bloodshed,
or any just Complaint.

FINIS.
A VINDICATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God PETER Lord Bishop of ELY.

Extorted by the numberless Provocations and Reflections of Mr. Baxter upon his
Lordship.

Wherein is showed his Lordships charitable Method of True and Christian
Concord, and that Mr. B. and his Anti-Episcopal Party, (next to the Jesuited
Papists) are the great Incendiaries of Christendom.

Mr. Baxter's Holy Commonwealth, Page 485, 486. I spoke much to blow the Coals
-- I did -- engage in that War -- I encouraged many Thousands to it -- Nor dare
I repent of it, nor forbear the same, if it were to do again in the same state
of Things.

See also the Second Part of the History of Separation.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. London, Printed in the Year, 1682.

THE Bishop of ELY's Constancy TO THE Church of ENGLAND, AND Diligence in
performing his Office.
NEXT to the Vindication of our holy Mother the Church of England, it is most
honorable to appear in the Vindication of the Governors also, who have spent
their days, and grown old in her Defense, and suffered the loss of all for the
Maintenance of her righteous Cause, and a good Conscience, in the worst of
Times. And amongst these, none have been more eminent than that most learned,
holy Prelate, the Right Reverend Father in God Peter Lord Bishop of Ely, who
was an early Confessor for the Truth at Cambridge, and has above Forty years
hazarded his Life and Health in disputing, preaching and writing for the same,
against all Opposers both of Church and State, as often as any occasion was
offered either in Public or Private. I will not recount with what Pains and
Courage he asserted the Cause of the Church of Eugland in London in the height
of the Rebellion, keeping up a visible orderly and Catholic Communion in the
face of the Sun, and thereby took away that Reproach the Papists cast upon us
at that time that our Church was lost, and confirmed many thousands in her
Communion, secured others from being seduced, and was one principal Instrument
under God, to make way for the happy Restoration of the King and Church.
Neither will I at large tell the Reader how publicly he confounded the
Anabaptists, and so baffled the Socinians, that they quite dissolved their
Assembly upon it. Neither were his Labors less indefatigable in reducing
Quakers, Presbyterians, Jews, Turks, and all other Dissenters; but his Contests
were most signal with the Papists, who were so learnedly refuted by him, that
as soon as they understood his Ability, the Priests were forbid to engage in
any Dispute with him, and many did thereupon wholly decline it, and others were
sufficiently rebuked for their rash Adventures. However this the Church of
England gained by his Labors; many that were wavering were confirmed in the
Truth, and multitudes were brought back to the Church that were seduced by the
Papists. Nor lastly, will I relate how he was delivered from the Mouth of the
Lion, and Paw of the Bear, all those perilous Times, and covered by the Hand
of the Almighty from all Harm and Violence. These and many other Matters will
better become an abler Pen, when he has finished his Course, and consummated
the rest of his Labors for the Glory of God.

But after all his unwearied Diligence in Preaching, etc. undoubted Constancy
to the Religion of the Church of England, and unblemisht Conversation in all
Places and Societies where he has been concerned, he has not been able to
silence Malice and Detraction, therefore though a Panegyric of his Virtues
will be more seasonable after his Death; yet a just Vindication of his Honor
will be necessary while he is alive.

Now one would think that a Man that had lived in all Integrity, and shown
himself so faithful in the Defense of the Church, for above Forty years, should
need no Justification; and indeed he does not with any that are not malicious
against the Church also, and therefore malign him for his Constancy and
unwearied Diligence in her Defense? and perhaps Mr. Baxter has as much
contributed to stir up popular Hatred as any, if not been the only man that has
all along secretly insinuated ill Surmises amongst the Dissenting Party against
his Lordship, and at length publicly and broadly spoke it out, in his Epistle
Dedicatory to the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Winchester,
and his Lordship, where he seems to lay the greatest load of all their
Complaints upon them, and says, You (above all men that I know) have
effectually helped to bring us under [those hard Terms of Concord] and a little
before, Is there no better way to the Churches Concord, than that which must
cast out such men as you or I? And then adds, I am fully persuaded, that in
this Book, I have told you a righter way of Christian Church Concord, more
divine, harmless and comprehensive, fitted by Christ himself to the Interest of
all good men, yea of the Church and all the World. I offer it first to you,
that you and Posterity may see what it was that I desired; and that if I err,
you will faithfully detect my Error, that I may repent before I dye, and may
leave behind me the Recantation of this, and all my other Mistakes and
Miscarriages, as I intend to do upon just Conviction; but do it quickly, or
else I am not like to see it: And I purpose not to provoke you by any
Confutation, but to improve your Evidence for my self.

And to answer the earnest Demand of our Reasons, by you my Lord Bishop of Ely,
I have also published and Historical Narrative of our Case and Judgment, in
another Book called, The Non-conformists Plea for Peace. The chief whereof, are
repeated again in his Apology, and the peaceable Design, and particularly
considered and answered in this Discourse if not all of them; I am sure, so
many as concern the Churches Peace, and her Vindication thereunto. And thereby
is shown a way of Concord, wherein more Christians will agree, though not so
comprehensive, I confess, as Mr Baxter's is; for, I believe, few men in the
World, besides himself, will approve of his only way to Concord, of which he is
so fully persuaded; I am sure the Church of God, in all Ages, have accounted it
Schismatical.

The Lord Bishop of Ely's Discourse with Baxter.
Now, though the Bishop of Ely did not publicly write against Mr. Baxter, yet
out of his abundant Charity and Goodness toward all that express any desire to
receive Satisfaction, he sent for him, and did seriously expostulate with him
concerning these Matters, why he should so particularly lay all the load, of
their silencing, upon him, and where, and when, and how, either by Preaching,
Disputing, or Writing, he had given him any Reason to complain, more than any
body else; for that he had no Authority in the Church, but of a private
Minister, till nine years after, and since he had any Jurisdiction, silenced
none, but some for Debauchery and ill Manners.

To which Mr. Baxter answered, Mr. Baxters Answer.
That he could not charge his Lordship with any thing in particular, in the
ordinary discharge of his Office, nor had heard any Complaint; but his Lordship
being appointed one of those that managed the Conference at the Savoy, great
Deference was given to his Authority, and by that means, all ways of
Accommodation were laid aside.

To which his Lordship replied, The Lord Bishop of Ely's Reply
Mr. Baxter, you speak very much in Commendation of the Moderation of Bishop
Usher, Bishop Hall, Bishop Davenant, and Bishop Brownrig, etc. but why do you
use such Partiality? For what did I do at the Savoy, but they were bound to do,
if they had been called to give their Judgment in the like Case as I was? For
had not they subscribed to, and approved of the Common Prayer, and
Constitutions of the Church; and what did I more, than maintain that they did
well in it? Would not they have vindicated what they had done likewise, if it
had been put to them as it was to me? Why therefore, do you single out me, and
oppose me to them, when I defended no more than they did own and subscribe to,
and were bound to defend it was lawful, which was all that I did?

Moreover his Lordship added, Mr. Baxter, you also say, you desired nothing of
us, but that we would lay aside the LayChancellors, and take Advice with our
Presbyters; and yet you single out me, upon whom you heap the load of your
Complaints, who have done both these things. For I have been concerned but in
two Diocesses, and I have put in Clergymen and Doctors of Civil-Law to be
Chancellors in both of them: And for advising with my Clergy in all
Ordinations, I do desire the Dean and Prebendaries to examine the Persons, and
to be present at my Examination also, or some other Grave Divines, who are to
join in laying on their Hands. And then for the Laws of the Church in general,
they are not made, but by the Consent of both Houses of Convocation; so that
the Bishops have advised with the Presbyters in all Matters as you desired. And
what are you angry with me, because I have done both these things that you
desired? Though I do not blame my Brethren that have taken another Method.

The Lord Bishop of Ely's way of Concord, and Endeavor after it.
But his Lordship is highly to blame, because he will not come up to Mr.
Baxter's Terms of the True and only way to Concord. If his Lordship did not
endeavor after Concord, amongst all good Christians, and promote the Peace and
Unity of the Church, I should confess he did justly deserve Mr. Baxter's
Censure; but I am not only fully persuaded, but can certainly prove it, that no
man in the World has shown greater Moderation, or laid a surer Foundation for
universal Concord amongst all good Christians, than his Lordship has done; and
God be thanked of late years, most of the Churchmen are convinced by direful
Experience, that his Lordships Catholic Principles, and primitive Moderation,
are the soundest in themselves, and necessary for the Churches Peace; and
therefore Mr. Baxter cannot but be sensible, that men whom he thought great
Favorers of his Party, have showed themselves to be of another mind, and
poured out upon him, the Authority of whole Armies of Saints and Martyrs, and
invincible Reasons, to batter down his Babel Structure, to confound the Church,
which he has set forth under the specious name, of the True and only way to
Concord.

Let us then consider the Bishop of Ely's way of Concord, which is, by uniting
in that ancient Catholic and Apostolic Faith, Doctrine, Government,
Administration of Sacraments, and Order of Worship, which was instituted by
Christ and his Apostles, confirmed by the general Councils, received down by
the known Custom and Practice of the Churches of God throughout all Ages, and
approved by the primitive Fathers and Martyrs, and established in this Nation
for substance, ever since Christianity was first planted, (which was within
four years after our Savior's Ascension;) and under those Circumstances and
Forms, which have been established by Law ever since the first Reformation; and
who can desire a better, or propose a more reasonable way to Concord than this?
For all wise men are willing to take Advice, and to hearken to the sober
Resolutions and Counsels of grave and learned Divines, famous for their
Integrity and Wisdom. Where then can we hope to find this better, than in the
constant Tradition of the Church, and the most deliberate Resolution of the
primitive Fathers and Martyrs, and the ablest men in all Ages? Besides, in the
unanimous Profession of that Society which God has chosen peculiarly out of the
World, and promised to bless with his perpetual presence, and thereupon has
called it the Pillar and Ground of Truth; and assured us, 1 Timothy 3.15. Mat.
16.18
that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it. And as it is against
the Catholic Faith, to deny that that Promise is not made hitherto good, so it
will puzzle Mr. Baxter's skill in Church-Histories, or any other man's, to show
that this had not been made good in the visible, public, undoubted Acts and
Traditions of the whole Church in all Ages, from the Apostles time to this very
moment. It Is needless to reckon up the Particulars wherein all agree, for his
Lordships Profession is the same which is all over the Christian World.

Come we then to consider the Concord the Bishop maintains with all other
Christian Churches. Now there is not one settled Church, established by public
Authority, that he is not at Concord withal, and holds Christian Communion,
and would actually embrace, and receive to his Prayers and Sacraments, and
count as Members of the same Mystical Body, whereof Christ is the Head, though
he does not agree with them in their Errors and Singularities, and only differs
from them, where they depart from the Scripture and the Catholic Church. Why
does Mr. Baxter then weary himself out with inventing new Models and
Contrivances, and feigning an endless multitude of Scruples about Church
Communion, when all the sober part of the Christian World are generally united
already? And they are the great Zealots for the Pope, and such furious
Anti-Episcopal Dissenters as Mr. Baxter, that hinder all Christian Concord, and
set the World ^^ a Combustion with their groundless and unnecessary Disputes.
Mr. Baxter, I suppose, in his younger days, before he had well considered the
Terms of Church Concord, and thoroughly understood the State of the Christian
Church, saw the Anti-Episcopal Party a prevailing Interest, and so put on a
Buff Coat to become like them, when he was engaged amongst the Rebels, against
the King, and his Spiritual Fathers in Christ. And now to justify the Errors
of his Youth, would persuade all the World to be of his mind, and make men
believe the Breaches are irreconcilable, unless they will palliate his
Miscarriages, by making them the Standard of Church Communion; whereas if he
would be quiet, and keep within his Station, the Methods of Concord are better
already than any he can offer, and People would be satisfied, and mind their
business that concerns them, if he would let them alone. But then Mr. Baxter
will be inconsiderable, his Name and Books will make no noise; and that Cause
that he has wrote and drawn his Sword for, will appear, indeed as it is, no
better than Schism and Rebellion, against the Father of his Country, and the
Spiritual Fathers of the Church.

The Lord Bishop of Ely's Concord with the Reformed Churches, etc.
Now that the terms of Concord proposed by the Church of England, and which the
Lord Bishop of Ely has preached up and defended this Forty years, are truly
Catholic, and such as all Christian Churches agree to, I shall prove by the
particular Churches which do approve of our Communion, and are upon occasion
admitted to it.

Our Communion with the Dutch Church.
First, Does not His Highness the Prince of Orange, and his noble and
honorable Retinue, join in Communion with us, as often as they have occasion
to come over hither; and are not any of the Ministers and others of the Dutch
Churches, publicly permitted to come to our Communion? And do we not thereby
own them for Christians, and Fellow Members of the same Catholic Church? And
do they not thereby own us for the like?

Our Communion with the Reformed Church of France.
If at any time any of the French Protestants come over to our Country, do we
not likewise admit them to our public Prayers and Sacraments, and so profess
our Concord with them in the substantial Principles of the Christian Religion?

Our Communion with the Bohemian, Lutheran Churches.
Come we likewise to consider the Remains of the ancient Bohemians; do we not
hold all friendly Communion with them? Nay, the Bishop of Ely does subscribe
yearly to the Maintenance of Scholars in the Universities, to be sent over to
be Ministers amongst them; and when their Bishop was lately here to solicit
our Churches Charity toward their Relief, none was more forward to promote it
than his Lordship, as that Reverend and learned Bishop and his Brother did with
ample Thanks and hearty Prayers to God for his Lordship, acknowledge to me, and
are ready to testify to the whole World; and I have heard from a Friend now at
the M. of Brandenburgs Court, that the Fame of this Charity, has raised an
honorable esteem of our Church in those Parts.

The same Charity and Concord is always shown to the Lutheran, Churches, some
of whom have often communicated with the Lord Bishop of Ely; and one in
particular interposed between him a naked Sword, Mr. Brochmand Son to
Atch-Bishop Brochmand known by his Writings in Denmark.
run full at his Lordship as he was performing his public Office in his
Surplice, and offered to dye immediately to save his Life. The like Concord I
can show with the Helvetian, Hungarian, and Transilvanian Churches, and all
that profess the Catholic Faith.

Our Communion with the Greek, Abyssin, Persian, Russian Churches.
Neither is the Charity of the Church of England confined to neighbor
Churches, but diffused throughout all the Christian World, even those Eastern
Churches, formerly the Glory of Christendom, and not many hundred years since,
the renowned Seat of Learning, and all ingenuous, as well as Christian
Education, are acknowledged as a true Part of Christ's Heritage. And the Lord
Bishop of Ely has often received both Bishops and Priests of that Communion,
with all Honor and Respect, and permitted them to join with him in our Prayers
and Sacraments, and does upon all Occasions show a Christian Respect and
Affection toward them; and his Goodness and Charity is extended also to all
sober Converts from the Errors of the Church of Rome; and his Liberality and
Compassion was abundantly shown to a poor distressed Nun, of extraordinary
Piety and Understanding, that out of pure Conscience left her Monastery, and
came hither for Refuge, and refused to return to that Communion, though courted
to it with all the Pleasures of the World.

Of Communion with the Roman Church.
As for the Schism that is between those of the Roman Communion and the Church
of England, which are the only Churches which are not in Concord with us, yet
the Lord Bishop of Ely believes not only the Cause, but the Formality of it is
plainly on their Part, and the Church of England is altogether blameless.
Neither can those of that Persuasion here in England, any way excuse their
Separation, or lay any fault upon her; and this is evident by History, and
plain to common sense; for during the first Ten or Eleven years of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, they did make no scruple of communicating with their
respective Bishops and Parish-Ministers; neither had the Pope any Exception to
make against the soundness of our public Prayers and Forms of administering the
Sacraments, but would have allowed them still, if the Queen and Bishops would
but have acknowledged his Supremacy; but they refusing to own such a usurpt and
unjust Authority, he thereupon excommunicates the Queen, charges all Christians
to own her no longer as their Sovereign, nor to join in Communion with the
Bishops and English Clergy but to account them as Heretics, and cut off from
the Catholic Church; whereupon several withdrew from our Communion, and so
made first a Separation, and held up a Schism upon that pretense eversince.

Now against this usurpt Authority o^ the Pope, and Schismatical Separation o^
his Adherents, and many other Error and Innovations of that corrupt Church
none has appeared more constantly and zealously in all Times, than the Bishop
o^ Ely, nor prevented more from being seduced or given better Satisfaction to
many that were wavering, or at least not so fully convinced in their Minds. But
though the Church of England and the Bishop of Ely, do condemn many other
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome; yet it is plain, the Popes
usurped Authority, and his Prohibition of joining with our English Bishops,
made the first Schism, and is the hinderance to keep them from now joining in
Communion with us. For common Lay-persons are not required to declare
themselves in any of the controverted Points, but only obliged to profess, and
^o live up to those common Rules of Chritianity, which are equally agreed upon
^y them and us, and most other public societies that profess the Christian
Religion. And how groundless the pretense of the Popes Authority is, I have
sufficiently ^ewed upon other Occasions, and it is not material to handle it at
this time, it being confessed by those to whom I am now writing, and also
condemned and rejected ^y the general Councils, and by the greatst part of the
Christian Church in all Ages, and even at this very day: So that if Papists
amongst us, would but observe their down Rule laid down in the Council of
^rent, and keep to the Tradition and Laws ^f the Catholic Church, they not
only may, but will find themselves bound by their Baptismal Vow, to join in
Communion with the Church of England, and renounce their Subjection to the Pope.

Mr. Baxter and his Anti-Episcopal Brethren can, and therefore ought to hold
Communion, and live in quiet Concord with the Church of England, and Bishop of
Ely, but will not.
And as the Church of England, and the Bishop of Ely are at Unity with all
Churches abroad; so Mr. Baxter and his Anti-Episcopal Brethren confess, they
can be at Unity with them at home if they please; and that the Terms of her
Communion are such a are lawful, and they can and do upon occasion join in,
when it is to hold a good gainful Office, or put them in a Capacity to be in a
Place to promote the Interest ^^ their Faction; nay, at other times, whe^^
there is no Interest in the Case, if they please and Mr. Baxter tells us, this
is the general Opinion of the Nonconforming Minsters.

The main Body of the Nonconforming Ministers, Apol. Page 148.
(says Mr. Baxter) as far ^^ ever I could learn, did judge as followetr 1.
That those Parish-Churches which h^^ true Ministers (not utterly incapable
Persons) were true Churches of Christ. 2. That the ordinary Liturgy appointed
for the public Worship, was such as a good Christian may lawfully join in, not
speaking of Baptizings and Burials, etc. in which some things they thought more
dubious. But those things are not so much excepted against, when their own
Children or Friends come to be baptized or buried, or other Persons whom they
have a good Opinion of; and at other times they may refrain coming to those
Offices, for no body requires their presence, if they will but orderly and
reverently attend the public Prayers and Sacraments, which they own they can
do.

3. That though combined Churches, whether you call them Diocesan or National,
are not any otherwise a divine Institution, than as Concord is commanded us in
general. [And are there not many strict Commands of God to that purpose, to
bear all things, and if it be possible, to live peaceably with all men?] -- Yet
a good Christian may and must live peaceably and submissively where some such
combined Churches are guilty of Usurpation and sinful Abuse.

The Peaceable Design acknowledges the same. Peaceable Design renewed. p. 4
Two things therefore we will acknowledge, That our Parish-Churches are true
Churches, and that it is our Duty, consequently to desire and endeavor their
Union and Prosperity. And what would any Conformise have of us more, unless it
be also to join with them there in participation of Ordinances which some of us
refuse not neither upon convenient Occasion? Well then, they do their Duty that
hold up separate Meetings which must needs hinder the Union and Prosperity of
the Church! So that as the Church of England, and the Bishop of Ely, are at
peace with all Christian Churches abroad; so if the Nonconformist Ministers,
would but do what they can lawfully do for peace-sake, that is, constantly join
with the Church of England, and peaceably submit to the Government, as Mr. B.
says, it was their Opinion they must do, and publish a short Discourse with
their Hands and Names to it, telling all their Disciples and Friends that they
may and must do the like, we should be presently united at home, and all the
Christian World; besides Papists, would be at Concord one with another, which
would quickly open the Eyes of many well-meaning Papists also, and make way for
a universal. Agreement amongst all Christian Churches in the World, which the
Pope, and Mr. Baxter with his Anti-Episcopal Brethren do only obstruct. But the
Bishop of Ely in vindicating the Church of England as he has done, has been a
public Blessing to the World, and laid a Foundation for everlasting Peace and
Holiness in the Church of God.

Of the Bishop of Ely's Moderation and Christian Charity toward those Churches
and Persons, that differ from him in Matters not necessary to Salvation.
Though the Bishop of Ely, by his admirable Parts and Judgment, indefatigable
Industry, and Watching, sincere Study and Prayers to Almighty God, for the
Illumination of his Understanding, and Guidance unto Truth, has arrived to
greater knowledge of the divine Mysteries, and a larger Comprehension of
Theological Science, in the Scriptures and Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
than most other men, yet he does not thereupon despise other Persons that are
far from his Seize, or breed any Disturbance in other Christian Societies
that have not such an happy Settlement, and that true ancient and Catholic
Order which we have. He does see and secretly mourn for the Divisions of
Christendom, and does thoroughly understand from whence they proceed, and what
are the means to make them up, and does with all Learning and Candor, as
occasion is offered, endeavor to convince and persuade Persons that differ
from the Catholic Order, to promote the Restoration and Settlement of it, in
order to the Churches Peace. Thus he has labored with Scholars of the Greek,
Russian, Roman, French, Dutch, Lutheran, and Hungarian-Churches; and they all
go away very well satisfied with his Charity, and commend his Learning,
Goodness, and pious Zeal for universal Concord. And were there more that did
use the like Religious Care to promote Catholic Order, as well as Catholic
Charity, Differences would be quickly made up. But ever now and then there
rises up a Great man or more, that out of profound Prudence as they think, or
Popularity rather, are not contented to show Charity to their Persons, but
procure Favors and Indulgences for their Errors and Humors; when with
greater Charity to them and the Church in general, they might both encourage
them, and discourage their singular Ways and Defects. This has been too too
apparent all along, and has held up the Hearts of Dissenters in their
Separation, and from uniting with the Church of England, which otherwise they
would have done long ago. But finding such secret Abetters of their Cause in
general, they hope one day, to be Masters of the Field again, and so they
prepare and strengthen their Party for such an occasion.

But though the Bishop of Ely does see and lament these unhappy means of
perpetuating Divisions, and his Counsels and Labors have not their good
effect, he does not thereupon reject Communion with those that differ from him,
use any violent or unlawful ways to force them to be of his mind, send
Emissaries abroad to embroil and disturb their Peace and Quiet, or preach or
write bitter Invectives against them, and endeavor to expose them to popular
Hatred, Holy Commonwealth, Page 486.
or stir up foreign Princes, by Sword and War to root them out; as Mr. B. did
stir up thousands to engage in that War, where they were bound by a solemn
League and Covenant, and sworn to extirpate the Government of Episcopacy, and
is so far from repenting, that he says, if the like Case should happen, he
should do the same again. Nor dare I repent of it, nor forbear the same, if it
were to do again in the same state of Things.

Now, how can any man in the World proceed with more Candor and Wisdom than
his Lordship has done? he is bound in all Conscience and Duty to God, to use
all honest and lawful Endeavors to promote the Settlement of ancient,
Apostolical and Catholic Order, and never to consent to any thing, whereby it
may be hindered or abolished; but if Reasons, Arguments, and Persuasions will
not prevail with men, to agree with the Catholic Church in all things, he
does, notwithstanding, bless God for their Agreement in the substantial Truths,
and own them for Christians, and for the rest, leaves them to their own
Liberty, and prays God to unite them and his whole Church in all Truth. And if
all other Churches and Divines walk by this Rule, and show the same Moderation,
as all ought to do, all Christian Churches would be at peace one with another
all over the World, and we should hear of no more Wars and Commotions to
propagate Religion, nor any Animosities or Plots to breed disturbance amongst
Churches that differ from one another. But this is the irreconcilable Temper
of the Papists and the Anti-Episcopal Party with their Adherents, that they
will not be satisfied with our Charity to their Persons, unless we will make
them our Masters also, and swallow down all their Novelties and Defects. Which
is just as if a man that had a lame Leg or a Wen, should refuse friendly
Conversation with others, because they will not break their Legs, and mangle
their Bodies, that they may halt and become deformed like him.

The Bishop of Ely's Moderation toward Schismatics, here at home.
And now we are come to the Point, whereupon Mr. B. and his Anti-Episcopal
Party raise their great Outcries against the Bishop of Ely, as being rigorous
and severe toward Dissenters from the Church of England. But which way, or
wherein can they ground any Complaint against his Lordship, more than against
any other man? First, if they blame the severity of Laws, and terms of
Communion, that cannot at all concern his Lordship; for he was not present at
the making of them, nor had any Authority in the Church to hinder them when
they were made, but was a Subject, and bound to submit to them as well as other
men. Neither can they accuse his Lordship of any Rigor in executing them above
others; no man has been ruined or undone, no man has suffered any cruel or hard
Usage by his Lordships means. Though he has been severe to himself, taken many
Journeys, impaired his health and his strength in Preaching, and laboring to
inform and convince Dissenters and others; yet he has not given them any
occasion to complain of hard Usage or Severity toward them. And though he is
Justice of Peace by Act of Parliament, yet he never did act any thing in that
Office against Dissenters or others, since he came to his Diocese. So that
there is nothing in any kind, that Dissenters can lay to his Charge, but they
must confess they are treated by him, and discoursed withal with the greatest
Tenderness, Charity and Moderation. Any thing of Modesty and Goodness that
appears in them, is cherished and commended; any thing of Weakness or
Indiscretion, is easily pardoned and overlookt; no advantage is taken of a
hasty Word, or misbecoming Behavior; any thing but intolerable Error and
Obstinacy is presently forgiven. This all that know his Lordship do well
understand and are convinced of; and for others that do not know him, if they
think ill of him, there is no excuse for them; since not only the duty of
Christian Charity, but common Humanity does oblige all persons, not to harbor
any ill opinion of any man, till they have sure Evidence he does deserve it.

It Is not therefore any thing that his Lordship has said or done, but only his
being a Bishop of profound Learning and Acuteness, exemplary Piety in his whole
Life and Conversation, and indefatigable Industry in Preaching, and stopping
the mouths of all Gainsayers by his unblemisht Reputation, that has made Mr.
Baxter and the Dissenters express their Displeasure against his Lordship; as
some said at a Committee at Tunbridge in Kent, before whom his Lordship was
brought before his Exile from Cambridge: That he was indeed a man of a very
good Life and Conversation, the more was the pity, for such men did all the
Harm.

What Heretics and Schismatics, etc. the Bishop of Ely will not communicate
withal.
Though the Bishop of Ely's Charity be so diffusive, and his Christian
Moderation does extend to hold Communion with all Christian Churches in the
World, yet his Love of Truth and Zeal for Catholic Unity, does teach him, not
to communicate with them that deny the Catholic Faith, or break Catholic
Unity. Such are Infidels, Heretics, Schismatics, and openly wicked Livers,
that pollute the soundness of their Profession by an ungodly Conversation.
These the Church of England, and the Bishop of Ely taught by her, do manifestly
reject from their Communion. And whereas this is made a large Pretense by many,
to reject whom they please from their Communion, and to censure and condemn all
that will not come up to their Fancies and Humors, the Church of England, and
the Lord Bishop of Ely, do not hereupon take an occasion to vent their Passion
against any body, and presently brand them with the Name of Heretic and
Schismatic, etc. but for their Rule herein, embrace all those that profess the
common received Faith and Order of the Catholic Church, and reject those that
are condemned for Heretics and Schismatics by the four first general
Councils, or any other lawful and truly general Council, or else by plain
evidence of Scripture, though the Church has not yet had opportunity
particularly to condemn it. According to this Rule, Eliz. 1. c. 1.
not only Socinians are to be shut out from all Christian Communion by the
Church of England, and the Lord Bishop of Ely, but even obstinate Anabaptists
and Quakers, as holding manifest and gross Heresies, contrary to the Doctrine
of Christ delivered in Scripture, and declared so by the general Councils, and
the Church of God. And by the same Rule, all those that set up Altar against
Altar, and hold separate Congregations contrary to the Law of this Church, are
to be held as Schismatics, and were condemned for such by the ancient general
and particular Councils, See St. Cyp. Epist. and St. Aug.
and all the Catholic Fathers and Martyrs, and thought not fit to be received
into Christian Communion, or accounted lively Members of the Catholic Church.
Such therefore the Church of England and the Lord Bishop of Ely do reject from
their Communion. And the Scripture does in many places pronounce Condemnation
against such Persons. These be they who separate themselves, Jude 19.
sensual, having not the Spirit. And the same St. Jude tells us, that men, v.
11.
even in the times of the Gospel, Numb. 16.
do perish in the gainsaying of Core, which Corah and his Company were
miraculously destroyed by God, for setting themselves up without any lawful
Call, against the ordinary lawful Officers that were appointed to minister
about holy Things. So that the Bishop of Ely does reject those that are
rejected by the Church of England, and the Church of England does reject only
those that are rejected by the Catholic Church, and the Catholic Church does
reject only those that are rejected by the Word of God.

Mr. Baxter's way of Concord seems to be, to communicate almost with all
Heretics, and few if any of the principal Governors of the Church.
That the Bishop of Ely's way of Concord, is holy, pious, and good, and
comprehensive of all orthodox Christians, I have sufficiently and
demonstratively proved. Let us see whether Mr. B. that sets himself as Pope
over the World, and usurps an Authority of Magisterially censuring, condemning,
and reprobating all that he pleases, can so well vindicate his true and only
way of Concord. Now any one that will look into his Writings, shall perceive
all things quite contrary, that he does censure and condemn most of the
Orthodox, and comprehend and tolerate almost all the Heretics that ever were
condemned by the general Councils, and will scar^^ afford the Councils
themselves a good Word.

For after he has reckoned up a larger Catalogue of horrid and wicked Heresies;
than ever Epiphanius or St. Augustine thought of, and most of them likewise;
and amongst others, See Mr. Baxter 's True and only way to Concord.
That there are three Gods, p. 293. That the Doctrine of the Trinity is
contradictory, or impossible to be true, Ibid. That (...)

A POSTSCRIPT In Answer to Mr. Baxter's Objections against Me, CONCERNING
General Councils, etc.

In a Book called, An Answer to Mr. Dodwell, AND Dr. Sherlock.

Augustine. de Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 1. c. 7. Quaestionis hujus obscuritas
prioribus Ecclesiae temporibus ante Schisma Donati magnos viros and magna
charitate Praeditos, Patres, Episcopos, ita inter se compulit salva pace
disceptare atque fluctuare, ut diu Conciliorum in suis quibusque regionibus
diversa Statuta nutaverint, donec plenario totius orbis Concilio quod
saluberrime sentiebatur etiam remotis dubitationibus firmaretur.

Idem lib. 2. c. 3. Quis nesciat -- Ipsa Concilia quae per singulas Regiones
vel Provincias fiunt, plenariorum Conciliorum Autoritati, quae fiunt ex
universo Orb Christiano, sine ullis ambagibus, cedere.

London, Printed in the Year 1682.

Of General Councils.
AFTER most of these foregoing Papers were printed, there came another Book of
Mr. B's to my Hands, called, An Answer to Mr. Dodwell and Dr. Sherlock, in
which he does reflect upon me in several Places, but quotes no words of mine
which he does refute, nor takes notice at all how I state the Matters which he
excepts against, but altogether proceeds upon his own Notions of them, and then
writes, what he thinks will make the Cause seem odious; so that the Cause it
self truly stated, is not so much as spoken to, or considered by him. But upon
the whole Matter, as far as I can perceive, the great Quarrel he has against
me, is because I maintain the Authority of the Church Universal in all Ages, in
Opposition to his single Popeship, and persuade all Christian People in their
several Capacities, to hearken to her Direction and Command, rather than Mr.
B's private Dictates, which are quite contrary to them.

It was not my Design, when I wrote first, to contend with Mr. B. or any body
else, or to raise any new Disputes or Controversies, but to promote Love and
Holiness amongst all Christians, and to put an end to that unnatural Cruelty
and Bitterness, with which they persecute and destroy one another; and
thereupon I did demonstratively prove, that the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the
Profession of the Christian Church, were always contrary to these violent
Methods, and that they were the zealous Defenders of the Pope's usurpt
Jurisdiction over all Christians, and the turbulent Fanatics or Anti-Episcopal
Party, that have thus filled Christendom with Blood and Confusion. And this I
made so plain to common Sense, that Mr. B. nor no body else is able to gainsay
it.

And as he cannot deny that the Papists, and Anti-Episcopal Party, have gone
about by Blood and Violence, to destroy the Church of England, contrary to all
Law and Justice, so neither does he go about to disprove me, when I maintain,
that it is the Law of the Gospel, and the constant Profession of the Christian
Church, that all Persons, as well Clergy as Laymen, must live in Obedience and
Communion with their own Bishops, as long as they profess the Catholic Faith,
and uphold such a public Worship wherein it is lawful to join, and in the
right performance whereof, we may obtain Salvation. And that our public
Service of God is such, I have evidently showed in this Book, and even from Mr.
B's own Confession. So that it is demonstratively certain, that this Separation
from the Church of England, and holding Conventicles contrary to Laws both of
Church and State in this Nation, is Schismatical, according to the Doctrine of
the ancient Fathers, and all approved Councils General and Particular, and the
constant Profession of the Christian Church in all Ages.

This is a Point, upon which Mr. B. is not willing to join Issue; and he must
needs be sensible, that modest and sober men of his Party would very much
startle, if they were once convinced of this Truth; and therefore he does all
he can to obscure the Matter, and would fain lead the Dispute away from the
present Question, into the Debate of the Nature, Authority, Number of General
Councils, etc. which is nothing at all to our present Differences, neither
shall I require Mr. B. to be of my mind about them, if he will but observe
those Rules of Unity which the Gospel has laid down. For, if there never had
been any General Councils, yet Christians must have lived in Obedience to their
lawful Pastors; and there would have been some orderly Methods of
Church Communion; and I make use of the Authority of Councils, as an external
Means to know what were the Rules of Communion the Christians held, to preserve
Unity and Order, and to prove that Mr. B. in maintaining Conventicles, acts
contrary to them, and plainly sets up a Schism in the Church.

Nay, there is not one Point, that I maintain, about the Terms of
Church Communion, wherein Mr. B. does not agree with me in general, as his
words quoted above do show; but only he is angry, I do not still make an
Exception for him and his Party.

These things being premised, I proceed to the particular Exceptions he makes
against me: And first,

Of the Authority of the Church Universal, and General Councils.
Mr. B. says, p. 197. I have earnestly desired and searched to know the Proof
of such a legislative universal Power, and I cannot find it. But if Mr. B.
would seriously consider these Texts, he might find that Obedience is due to
the Church, Mat. 18. If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as
an Heathen man, and a Publican. Now as one private man may neglect to hear the
Episcopal Church to which he belongs, so the Episcopal, Provincial, and
National Church may also prove Heretical, and neglect to hear the Catholic
Church; but the universal Church can never fail, for the Gates of Hell shall
never prevail against it. And if more Persons, Mat. 16.
or particular Churches give offense by Heresy, Schism, etc. the Church
Universal, or the rest of the Bishops, may reprove them for it, and then there
is no Reason, why one man should be censured, and many should go free; and
consequently our Savior has established the Authority of his Church over all
Christians, as well particular Churches as private men; and if they neglect to
hear the Church, let them be unto thee as an Heathen man and a Publican; and as
this is a rational and necessary Inference from our Saviors words, so the
Scripture elsewhere does plainly tell us, that Churches of Kingdoms and
Nations, have a Sovereignty over them, to which they must yield Obedience. Is.
60.12. where the Prophet speaking of the Christian Church, says, The Nation
and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish, yea, those Nations shall be
utterly wasted. If Nations and Kingdoms must serve the Church, than she has
Authority to command their Obedience in things that belong to her Peace and
Holiness.

And as the Church, in her diffusive Governors, has Authority to teach her
Children the heavenly Truth, so in her collective Representatives in a General
Council, she has power to decide Controversies, and provide for good Order and
Unity. And this is evident from Acts the 15th. where we read, Paul and
Barnabas, two inspired Apostles, went up to Jerusalem to consult the Apostles
and Elders, about a Question that arose in their Time, and there was a Council
held, and the Controversy was decided by it, and the Decrees were sent about,
not as the Decrees of the Apostles only, who were divinely inspired, but as the
Act of the whole Church. Ver. 22. Then it pleased the Apostles and Elders with
the whole Church, to send, etc. For because the indefectible Authority of
deciding Controversies, was not to reside in every single Bishop, the Apostles
to give example how Controversies should be ended in future Ages, did not
decide it by their infallible Spirit only, but proceed in an ordinary Method,
plainly countenancing the Authority of Councils, and intimating to us, that all
Christian Poople ought to submit to their Decrees. Accordingly the Christian
Church has challenged such an Authority, and has held such Assemblies as
occasion did require; and six such have been approved, and received generally
in the Church, and no more. For the Western Councils, such as those of Lateran,
Lions, Constance, Basil and Trent, have been ever rejected by the Eastern
Churches, and so there can be no pretense to account them General Councils. And
as for Mr. B's Exception, why we do not own the second of Ephesus, and the
second Nice, for General Councils also? I answer, because they were at the time
they were first held, and many years after, accounted no General Councils, and
not received for such by the Church. And the second of Ephesus is plainly
rejected at this very day, and has been from its first Dissolution. And so was
the second of Nice, for a long time, by the Eastern and Western Churches, and
the Church has never yet met since, to confirm its Authority. See my Orig. of
Plots, p. 243. etc.

But Mr. B. objects farther, The Nestorians, Jacobites, Abassines, etc.
renounce some of the six Councels.

They had indeed a profound Veneration for the Persons of Nestorius and
Dioscorus, and thereupon did believe them, when they said, that the Councils
were mistaken in Matter of Fact, and condemned them for Opinions which they did
not own, and thereupon did reject those Councils; but they did not then, nor do
not at this day, reject the Catholic Faith, See Breer-woods Enquiries, p. 183.
And many others that write of those Churches.
and the Rules of Christian Unity, which are contained in the six General
Councils; so that in effect they do own them; for the principal Thing that is
required, is to profess the true Faith, and hold the Unity of the Spirit, in
the Bond of Peace and Righteousness of Life, which those Churches do, in as
much as they profess to own the Nicene and Constantinopolitane Councils, and do
not deny the Doctrines defined in the other Four.

But Mr. B. demands, But how shall any man's Conscience be satisfied, that just
these six had a Supreme, etc?

By the public Acts of the Church, as we are satisfied of our Acts of
Parliament, for there are no more generally received, and there are.

Ibid. Ob. Did the Catholic Church dye or cease, after the sixth General
Council?

The Essence of the Catholic Church, does not consist in the being of a
Council; she would have existed, if there never had been any General Council,
and does exist now there is none. The Meeting of the Pastors in Council, is but
an external Means for better declaring the Catholic Faith, and holding of
mutual Correspondence and Understanding, between the several Churches. And the
several Churches, God be thanked, have by this means been kept united in the
Faith, amidst all other Confusions and Divisions ever since, and agree to it at
this very day. Nay, all those Schisms and Massacres that have happened in the
Church, have been carried on, and are still upheld by trampling down, and
opposing the Authority of the Catholic Church and General Councils. First, by
the Papists, in setting the Pope above a General Council, and then burning and
destroying all those that will not submit to his Determinations. Secondly, by
the Anti-Episcopal Party, who saw no other way to compass their Designs, but by
despising the Authority of the Church Universal and General Councils, which
they saw were plainly against them, and did condemn their Proceedings; and so
setting themselves up above them, do make a Pope in every Parish or Independent
Congregation. Mr. B. goes on.

It Is a doleful thing to think on what accounts all these expect, that all
Christians Consciences should be satisfied, etc.

It is a doleful thing indeed, to think how they should be satisfied that set
up a Pope in every Congregation, and follow him in Opposition to the Catholic
Church and General Councils. And it is a much more doleful thing, to consider
how Mr. B. who knows he does this, and deludes the poor People into such an
unreasonable Disobedience, should satisfy his own Conscience, it is past my
skill to understand how he can; or how he can hope to quiet Heresies and
Schisms in the Church, when the Authority of six General Councils, and the
constant Practice and Doctrine of the Church in all Ages is set at naught
by-him, in comparison of his private Spirit.

But besides these Scriptures already alleged, I desire Mr. B. to consider the
Text of St. Paul, and the Reason of the thing in the light of nature. 1 Cor.
14.32, 33. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. For God is
not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the
Saints. Now if Prophets divinely inspired, to prevent Confusion, are subject to
other Prophets, and God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, in all
the Churches of the Saints, the force of this Text, and the Dictates of right
Reason do teach us, that if Heresies and Schisms do arise to disturb the
Churches Peace, the Spirits of private men and private Pastors, must be subject
to the Decisions of the rest of the Pastors, and the Major part of the Church;
or else there can be no Peace but adless Confusions; and what is this but ^e
Authority of the universal Church, or General Council, which Mr. B. does so
utterly write against and despise. And ^et in another Mood he will be better
natured, and yield all in this Point that one would have him. Treatise of
Episcop. Page 163.
If the Diocesan silenced ^y Teacher, and ten neighbor Bishops wiser ^^an he,
did tell me, that it was for Truth and Duty, and that the Heresy was the
Bishops, I would hear my Teacher, and believe ^he other Bishops before him. And
will you ^ot then believe a General Council, or the Major part of the Bishops
of the whole World, before some of your Separatists? And ought not your
Congregations to do ^he like, and consequently reject those Pastors which they
reject, and cleave to them which they approve, or are settled in that Order, and
by such Rules as they have made? And let but this be observed, and all our
Schisms and Controversies will be at an end.

Again Mr. B. says, Pastors in a Synod, Plea for Peace, P. 266.
are still Rectors of their Flocks, and their Canons to them, [and by the same
Reason, any other Instructions about Heresy, Schism, etc.] may be more
Authoritative than a single Pastor's words. 2. God's Law binds us to keep
Love and Concord, and the Agreement of Councils may determine of the Matter in
alterable Points, [and expound the Scriptures too, sure as well as in their
private Preachings.] And so even absent and present Bishops may Concordiae
gratia, be obliged by God's Law to keep such Canons as are made for Concord,
and so they may be the Matter of Duty. And wherein then does Mr. B. differ from
me in this Point? I say to quiet Schisms, silence Heretics, the Judgment and
Directions of the Pastors of the universal Church, whether in Council, or out
of Council, when known, as they are God be thanked, in most, if not all our
present Differences, ought to be hearkened unto and reverently observed And Mr.
B. says, Absent and Present Bishops may Concordiae gratia, be obliged by God's
Law, to keep such Canons [of Councils] as are made for Concord, and so they may
be the Matter of Duty. And why does he then blame me for pressing him and the
Non-conformists, to submit to those Cauons of the universal Church and General
Councils, which have been already made, and generally received Concordia
gratia, and endeavor to undermine that Authority which has made such useful
Rule for Concord in the Church?

The Authority of General Councils thu^ stated by me, and including the Consent
of the greatest part of the Pastors present or absent, accepting such Decision,
and the Church diffusive that live in subjection to them, is owned by all
Churches, and all sober Divines; and the Exceptions that are usually made
against the Authority of General Councils, are against such packt Assemblies as
Trent, Lateran, etc. which were wholly governed by the Pope, and never received
by the Church. And such Councils indeed ought not to be accounted General, nor
their Authority regarded by us. But for the Authority of free General Councils
universally received, I could give him numberless Quotations out of Protestant
Writers, Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin, Bishop Andrews, King James, Spalatensis,
Causabon, Bishop White, Bishop Mountague, Archbishop Usher, Dr. Hammond,
Dallee, etc. And whereas Mr. B. does usher in this Discourse, with an
Insinuation that this was only a Doctrine of the Gallican Church, he cannot but
know that this was the Sense of the Church of England, in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, though many would persuade the World we were departed
from the Church in Her time; for our twentieth Article says, The Church has
Power to Decree Rites or Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith.
And the next Article does plainly suppose this Authority likewise in a General
Council, while it keeps to the Rule of God's Word, and no King, Father, or
Governor whatsoever can oblige men by any Decrees, against the Word of God;
and yet no body does doubt of their Authority; but the Act of Parliament, the
First of Elizabeth, c. 1. does clearly make the Interpretation of General
Councils, the Measure whereby to judge Heresy, in Matters of Controversy;
where, describing the Method that the Commissioners were to follow in
correcting Heresies and Schisms, 1 Eliz. c. 1.
it is said, They shall not adjudge any Matter or Cause to be Heresies, but only
such as heretofore have been adjudged to be Heresy by the Authority of the
Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four General Councils, or any of them, or
by any other General Council, etc.

And the Canon of the Church of England also, Syn. Land. An. 1571.
Concionatores.
does plainly imply so much. First of all let the Preachers take heed that they
do not teach any thing in their Sermons, which they would have Religiously held
and believed by the People, but what is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Old
and New Testament, and what the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have
gathered from that Doctrine. Now, where have the Catholic Fathers and ancient
Bishops more fully declared their Sense in these Matters, than in the
deliberate. Resolutions and Decrees of General Councils? Those therefore the
Church of England does principally command us to follow in our Sermons and
Instructions to the People.

So that the Apostles they held a General Council, and thereby did own their
Authority, and the Wisdom of holding such Assemblies; the primitive Church did
hold General Councils; Luther did appeal to a free General Council; and Bucer
does plainly ascribe to them the Power of ending Controversies; the Act of
Parliament does likewise make them the Measure to judge Heresy by; and the
Church of England does command her Preachers to follow their Interpretations,
and our Divines have ever since vindicated their Authority; therefore I am not
singular in this Matter; and it is not only the Doctrine of the Gallicane, but
Apostolical, Ancient and English Church.

Of my stirring up Magistrates to punish those that absent themselves from
God's public Worship.
Mr. B. goes on in his Complaints against me, It Is doleful to think -- on what
account they write and talk so frequently for the Mag strate to punish us, as
Dr. Saywell, and his Lord, and Mr. Dodwell himself, with all his Humility does,
-- That they dare trust to the Sword, and call for yet more punishment of us,
when they give us no better means of Conviction, but condemn us as
Schismatics, for not being Schismatics that cut off most of the Catholic
Church, for not obeying they know not whom or what. Nor can any of them tell us
how to know what or whom.

Would not any one stand amazed at these words of Mr. B's, when there is no
more required of him, than what he does know and profess to be lawful a
thousand times over in all his Writings? For what do we require of him or any
body as a Condition of our Communion, but to live in Obedience to those
Governors, and join in that Worship which the prudence of God in a peaceable
manner, according to the Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil of the Nation, has
settled amongst us, and which Mr. B. does often join in, and says, it was the
Judgment of the main body of the Non-conformists, as far as ever he could
learn, Apol. p. 8.
that it was lawful so to do? is this to condemn them as Schismatics, for not
obeying they know not whom or what? And though we do ex abundanti urge the
Dissenters with the Authority of General Councils, and the consent of the
Christian Church in all Ages, to show the Piety of our Constitutions; yet we
require not him, or others, to assent to any number of General Councils, or any
thing about their Authority, as a Condition of our Communion, but only to live
peaceably in that Communion which he says is lawful, and which the Word of
God, as well as the Rulers of the Church, oblige him to

Neither is there any Church in the World that we condemn or separate from;
their Errors and Corruptions we do condemn, and I hope there is no harm in
that; nay, we are so far from cutting off most of the Catholic Church for
Schismatics, that we condemn none for Schismatics, but those that are
condemned for Schismatics by all Churches in the World. For not only the
Greek, Abyssine, Rushian Churches, but the Protestant Churches do all with one
consent, condemn them for Schismatics which separate from the lawful Pastors
of any True Church (where the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments
rightly administered to them,) and set up Churches against Churches, and
Communion against Communion, not only without the Leave, but contrary to
express Laws both of Church and State. This being Schism in the Opinion of all
Churches, it is the Duty of all Christian Magistrates, who are Nursing Fathers
of the Church, to see that their Children be not led into Schism, and have no
Temptations to draw them into Sedition, Strife and Disobedience, which they
will have, if schismatical Preachers be suffered to set up themselves contrary
to all Authority, and insinuate what they please amongst the People to disturb
the Government both of Church and State. We do well therefore to put the
Magistrates in mind, that it is their duty, as nursing Fathers, to hinder such
Seducers from corrupting their Children, and to preserve that Order which all
other Churches require as well as ours. Again, there are abundance of lazy,
ignorant, erroneous, and profane Persons in the Kingdom, that are baptized and
under the Magistrates Care; to these he ought to be also a nursing Father, and
provide Food for their Souls, and therefore compel them to hear sober and
wholesome Instruction, which out of laziness and humor they will not do, but
rather live in Ignorance and Error; and does it not well become Mr. Dodwell's
Humility, and every Pious man, to call upon Magistrates to act the part of a
nursing Father, in taking care of such careless Children? And does not Mr. B.
say, that Magistrates ought to use this care? See above Chap. 24. and why does
he then say, it is such a doleful thing for me and others to say so, as well as
he? All the mischief of it still is, Mr. B. will offend, but he is angry that
we do not except him and his Party from punishment.

Of holding Communion with the Grecian, Russian, Abyssine, and Reformed
Churches.
Mr B. says, p. 198. It Is evident that you take none to be of your Communion,
who take not a thing called the universal Church, to have a legislative Power,
and judicial Supremacy over all Christians. 2. Who prosess not Subjection -- at
least to the six General Councils. Thence goes on to say, You renounce
Communion with the Greeks, Armenians, Georgians, those called Nestorians,
Jacobites. And p. 199. You deny Communion with -- the Reformed Churches. We do
indeed deny Communion with those that do not profess to believe the Holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints; And will receive none into our
Communion, that do deny the Faith, and break that Unity which is required by
the six General Councils, after due Information and Admonition; but we do not
require as a Condition of our Communion, that a Person should profess there
were six General Councils, no nor one General Council. So that these Churches
may agree with us in the Essentials of Christianity, and be received to our
Communion, though they differ from us about the Number and Nature of General
Councils. And as I said above, the four latter Councils, do not require the
Profession of any other Faith, or other terms of Unity than the two first; so
that Communion may be held with them, notwithstanding that difference about the
Authority of this or that Council.

And that Mr. B. should charge me with denying Communion with these Churches,
and cutting off as Schismatics, most of the Catholic Church, is very strange,
seeing he takes notice of these Words of mine, p. 198. But he seems to be of a
larger Communion, when p. 344, 345. he says. We are in Charity and hold
Communion with all good Christians (excepting as above excepted, the
fundamental Corruptions of the Jesuited part of the Roman and other Churches)
throughout the World.

These words fully vindicate me; but Mr. B. says, The doubt is, whom you will
take for good Christians in your degree of Charity? But this can be no doubt to
any that considers these words, much less to one that has read my Book, as Mr.
B. seems to have done. For when I only excepted the Jesuited part of the Roman
and other Churches, I did plainly enough comprehend some of all other Churches
within my Charity; but I put in the words, good Christians, to exclude evil
Livers, and those that do not walk according to their Profession, with whom
Governors ought not to communicate, till they profess their Repentance. But I
need not go about to infer this by consequence, for in that very Page quoted by
Mr. B. in the words immediately foregoing, I had sufficiently prevented his
doubt. Those of the Greek and Reformed Churches, are never refused our
Communion, so long as they profess the Catholic Faith and Worship. Neither do
we so much as enquire what their Opinions are in other Matters, but only for
our private satisfaction. And this is enough to show we are in Charity, and
hold Communion with all good Christians (excepting, etc.) throughout the World.
And in the same Page, before we may communicate with those of the Reformed,
Greek, and Roman Churches, if they profess the Faith, and sincerely join in the
Service of God, contained in our Common Prayer, though they have some private
Errors which are contrary to some of our Articles, etc. See more there, and p.
192.

So that my Charity is evident toward all Churches. But Mr. B. would do well
to show us a little more of his Charity, and not go about to make Differences
where there are none, because I oppose his Anti-Episcopal Designs, to disturb
the Peace of the Church.

Of my Communion with those of the Church of England that differ from me.
The strangest Supposition yet, which I find in Mr. B. is p. 199.6. Yea, I
would understand whether you renounce not Communion with the Church of England,
and most of the present Conformists, as Schismatics, as well as
Non-conformists? Again p. 201. That which I now note is, that you judge the
True former Church of England Schismatics, and separate from them as none of
your Communion.

But what color Mr. B. has to judge so, I do not know; no words of mine, nor
Practice, do show any such thing, nay both are quite contrary. And whereas he
quotes several of the Articles, thinking from thence to prove something against
me; I will assure him there is nothing in them, which I do not heartily assent
unto; neither do they contain any thing contrary to what I have written in this
or any other Point, and I wish Mr. B. and the Non-conformists did as heartily
join with the Church of England, according to her public Laws and
Constitutions as, I do; and then all our Disputes about Schism would be at an
end. Besides, Mr. B. cannot but know, if he would consider, that this is
altogether a groundless surmise; for if a man lives soberly, and comes to our
public Worship, no body does trouble him to know what his Opinions are, about
General Councils, or such like Matters. Did Mr. B. ever hear that Bishop
Sparrow, or Mr. Thorndick, or I, did ask any Communicant before we gave him the
Sacrament, whether he did believe there were six General Councils, etc. and why
then should he fancy such a thing? Yet all Churches would reject an Arrian, a
Macedonian, a Nestorian, an Eutychian, and a Monothelite from their Communion,
if he did obstinately persist in his Heresy after due Admonition. So that it is
quite a different thing to deny the Faith of any of the General Councils, from
dis-believing or doubting about the Authority or number of General Councils.
And if I had lived in the days of Archbishop Abbot, Grindall, etc. I should
have communicated with them, and they with me, and do daily communicate with
those that know nothing at all about the Number or Nature of General Councils.
But it must be a great Satisfaction to all sober Christians, as well a it is to
me, that the Doctrine, Government and Worship of the Church of England are
according to the Rules and Decrees o^ the General Councils, when they come to
know it. And it will be an Aggravation of the Crime, of those that separate
from the Church of England, that they do there in act contrary to the Order of
the Catho^ lick Church in all Ages, and the Rules o^ Unity prescribed by the
General, as well as particular Councils.

And whereas Mr. B. does think it s^ strange, that I should own six Genera^
Councils, he will find the same number approved by Chamier, Alsted, Dallee,
Bishop Andrews, Dr. Field, Craconthorp, and many other learned Protestants.

The King's Supremacy no way diminished by owning the Authority of the
Catholic^ Church, and General Councils.
Mr. B. farther objects against me, p. 201 You set up a foreign Power, as
supreme above the King. I wonder Mr. B. did not consider that this Objection is
urged by Mr. Hobs, and the Atheists against all that profess the Scripture and
Christianity it self, but with no more Reason at all. For as a man may obey the
Gospel, and so render to God the things that are God's, and yet render to
Caesar the things that are Caesar 's; so we may worship God according to the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and yet acknowledge the Scripture as the only
Rule, and the King as the only supreme Governor in his Dominions, and yield
all that lawful Obedience which is due from Subjects to their Sovereign. Nay,
none did ever more heartily maintain the King's Supremacy, than the primitive
Bishops in General Councils; and when Princes did allow them in the free
Exercise of their Religion, they did bless God for his Mercy toward them; but
when they did command them to deny the Faith of the General Councils, they did
so far still acknowledge their Supremacy, as never to rebel, but patiently
suffer for the Truth; and that good Christians will do again, whenever they
are put to the Trial, rather than deny the Catholic Faith, or deny the
Supremacy of their lawful Prince, which the General Councils do not derogate
from, but did ever acknowledge.

The maintaining the necessity of an uninterrupted Succession of Episcopal
Ordination, not derogatory to the Power of the King, or right of the Patron.
Mr. B. does often object against the maintaining of an uninterrupted
Succession of Episcopal Ordination, and now particularly does urge it against
me. I will set down his words, p. 201. You utterly disable King or Bishop, or
Convocation, from choosing a Bishop or Priest that shall have any Power: For by
you, neither King, nor Patron, nor Clergy, nor People, can call any man with
power to the Ministerial Work, that has not had an uninterrupted Succession of
Diocesan Ordination, which no People can know, but in most places know to the
contrary. But why does Mr. B. quarrel at an uninterrupted Succession, as if he
does not, or at least ought not, to maintain it as well as I, when it may be
had? And then, why does he say that I disable a King, a Bishop, or Convocation,
from choosing a Bishop or Priest, that shall have any Power, any more than he,
or any other man? For has not God promised there shall be Pastors always to
the end of the World? And then is not Mr. B. bound to maintain, that God has
and will make good this promise somewhere? And therefore he, as well as I, will
be obliged to seek after an uninterrupted Succession, and make use of it where
it may and is probably to be had, nay assuredly had, as much as we can, be
sure, in things of that Nature, if we will take care to satisfy our selves;
and as much as any man can be sure of his Genealogy, or a Jew could be sure
that our Savior was born of the Tribe of Judah. I suppose then, Mr. B. will
not turn Erastian, and say, that though there be Bishops and Priests, that have
had Ordination by Succession, yet the King, or a Patron, may appoint a Layman
to be a Priest, or a Bishop, without any Ordination, so much as by a Priest;
but where there are Presbyters, he will say, and a Patron may have a Person
ordained by them, he ought to derive his Priestly Office by Authority from such
Presbyters at least; and so an Erastian will say, Mr. B. does utterly disable a
King, or Patron from choosing any Priest that has not an uninterrupted
Succession, as well as I. But this is the difference, he will require a
Succession that began an hundred and fifty years ago, or perhaps not fifty; and
I require a Succession that began from Christ and his Apostles, Matt. 28.
and was ever owned and maintained till this very day, and which God has
promised shall continue to the end of the World. And Mr. B. will find it a very
hard Matter to prove that this Succession of Bishops was interrupted in any
Age, or that there were many counterfeit Bishops; for a Bishop's Ordination is
generally so open and notorious, that few Cheats have happened or could happen
in that kind. And since there are so many Bishops that have a visible
Succession, it is an easy matter for any man that has a mind, to be assured of
the Episcopal Ordination of the Person he makes choice of; or if he doubts or
knows to the contrary, to have that scruple taken away. So that here is no
difficulty put upon any body in this Case. For if a man can have a Bishop or a
Priest, that has Episcopal and undoubted Ordination, what wise man would not
rather choose it, than any other uncertain way, or that which is most probable
to be so? If he cannot have such a one, or is imposed upon by a Counterfeit,
without his knowledge, God will accept what he has, till he knows the Cheat,
and gives him an Opportunity of a better Supply; and then he ought to follow
the Regular way, and there can be no excuse for his neglect. And this is the
Case of all those that would exercise the Priestly Office amongst us; where
there is an uninterrupted and an undoubted Succession, and Bishops and Priests
thus duly settled throughout the Kingdom. And as for other Churches that want a
regular Succession, either they can have it, or they cannot. If they cannot,
though they desire it, God, as I said, will accept what they can have, and
excuse the rest. But if they might, but will not amend this defect, it is a
great Error in those that neglect and hinder the Restoration of the ancient
Order, and I shall leave them to the Judgment of their Lord and Master; but I
shall think charitably of the Generality of the People in those Churches, and
receive them to my Communion, who profess and live up to the Catholic Faith,
which is declared in their Confessions, and either do not know, or cannot help
their Defects at home. So that all that I contend for in this Matter is, that
the Order of Bishops, and Episcopal Ordination by an uninterrupted Succession,
ought to be maintained where it is to be had. And Mr. B. is for casting of it
away where it may be had, or at least setting up another Order never approved
for fifteen hundred years, to be equal to it. That is a thing I still do and
must insist upon; and no Criticisms and private Interpretations can give color
to the erecting of a new Power of Ordaining, that was never allowed, nor
thought valid for fifteen hundred years, when the ancient Order may be observed.

How unjustly Mr. B. does raise Suspicions of my being a Papist, and how his
heart did misguide him at the same time, and force him to satisfy the World to
the contrary.
Page 202. N. 7. I hope you are willing that we should understand, that by
Communion you mean subjection to the supreme Church Power, and that the Church
of Rome are all subjected to the Pope; and if you have Communion with all of
them, save the Jesuited Party, and none with us, or any other Reformed
Protestant Churches, who renounce that sort of Communion, I beseech you
satisfy the World, why you are any less Papists than the Church of Rome is? I
suppose you know that Jesuits have never been Popes, and that very few of them,
if any, are Cardinals. (But I must note, that it is but their Corruptions that
you renounce.)

Here Mr. B. does insinuate many doubts, which I had sufficiently prevented in
that place which he himself quotes, and in the Words quoted by him. As to
Communion with the Catholic Church, besides what I said in my Book at first,
which was full and clear, I have particularly applied my Answer to Mr. B's
Objections now again. And so likewise about Communion with the Reformed
Protestant Churches. And for satisfying the World I am no Papist, Mr. B. does
it for me at the same time when he raises the Suspicion. But I must note, that
it is but their Corruptions that you renounce. What need I renounce more? I hope
Mr. B. would not have me renounce their sound Doctrines; and what is it else
that denominates any to be Protestants, but protesting against, and renouncing
the Corruptions of the Church of Rome? And as for Mr. B's Objection, that
Jesuits have never been Popes, that is nothing to me, my words were not
excepting Jesuits, but the Jesuited Party; now many Jesuits may not be of the
Jesuited Party, learned men have had a better Opinion of Ribera, Sirmondus,
etc. and many may be of the Jesuited Party, that are not Jesuits; nay, my words
do plainly suppose so, for I excepted the Jesuited part of the Roman and other
Churches; so that this Jesuited Party does take in our Rebels in England, and
the late Rebels in Scotland, as well as Jesuited Papists, and all the
King-killing, Rebellious, Schismatical Plotters, to overturn or disturb the
Government and Peace of Church and State, whether Protestants or Papists. And
though I did think more favorably of some Persons that did comply with the
Errors of the Roman and other Churches, yet I did in that Page quoted by Mr.
B. sufficiently show my dissent from the Popish Errors also, P. 345. N. 7.

Though we do thus think charitably of many in other Churches, and do gladly
receive them to our Communion, which is pure and Catholic, yet we must not
join with them in, or approve of their Errors and Defects. Therefore if they
would permit us to communicate with them in the Roman Church, without
renouncing our own Communion, (which I know their Schismatical Pride will never
allow them to do) yet whilst their Errors and Superstitions are mingled with
their Service, we cannot join with them in the good Things which they still
retain, but we must join with them in their Corruptions also, which is unlawful
to do.

And then besides what I have said already of my Communion with the Reformed
Churches; yet farther to confirm how groundlesly Mr. B. does charge me with
rejecting them, I desire the Reader to consider what I wrote, p. 337. Since all
Reformed Churches, that stand established by any settled Authority, do own the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and for the sense of them do generally
lay down the Interpretation of the Catholic Church, to be the Measure they
will be ruled by; and not only so, but even do actually embrace all the
essential Faith contained in the Creeds, and all other Points absolutely
necessary to Salvation; therefore I do see no Reason, but we ought to grant a
possibility of Salvation to some in all these Communions, though they are
guilty of many lesser Errors and Defects. And thus much is said by the most
Reverend Archbishop Usher, as well as many others, in his Sermon before the
King, 1624. Whose words I there quote. So that all the Quarrel that Mr. B. or
any body can have against me, is, because I will not own all their Errors and
Defects, and approve their Singularities, rather than the Catholic Churches
ancient Order and universal Practice.

Thus I have answered all the Objections of Mr. B. against me, Chap. 5.
beginning at p. 193. and therein I think I have answered the Matter of his
whole Book, but the other several parts thereof, I doubt not, will be
sufficiently answered by his two learned Adversaries, against whom they are
written. But there being two or three passages in other parts of this Book;
wherein he speaks of me, I will consider them, and so finish my Answer.

Page 176. As to the casting on us the Odium of the late Wars; and as Bishop
Gunning 's Chaplain, calling us over and over Cruel and Bloody Sectaries, as if
their own reviling would warrant men to destroy us, etc. I did not stir up any,
or go about to destroy you, but warned the Nation to take care that you do not
destroy others. Neither did I cast any Odium upon any Person, for I named no
body; Nay, I did distinguish too between the Deceivers and Deceived, and did
move for pity to the Deceived, and that they might be rescued out of the Hands
of such cruel Deceivers. I did indeed show the danger of such wicked Principles
and Practices, and how much Christendom had suffered by them; and if you will
own them, you cast the Odium upon your selves; if you do not own them, what I
said, casts no Odium upon you. But since Mr. B. does force me upon it, I must
tell him, I cannot but wonder, that he should put in the word Us, and think it
wrong done to him, to cast the Odium of the late War upon Him, who casts it
upon himself; Holy Commonwealth p. 485, 486
when he acknowledges, He did blow the Coals -- And encouraged many thousands
to it -- And then says, I dare not repent of it, nor forbear the same, if it
were to do in the same state of Things. And that we may have the same state of
Things, he writes so bitterly for the taking off the Obligation of the
renouncing the Covenant, the Corporation and Oxford Oath. Did I then wrong
those men, when I called them over and over cruel and bloody Sectaries; when
they did exercise so much Cruelty, and shed so much Blood, and now quarrel at
Conformity, because they are tied thereby to renounce those Principles, which
will lead them into the same cruel and bloody Designs? These things are a
strong Presumption, if not more, that they are still of the same mind; let them
but renounce their cruel, bloody, King-killing, Rebellious, schismatical
Principles and Practices, and what I said over and over, will not concern them;
but if they will act them over and over, as the late Conventiclers in Scotland
that rebelled against their King, and barbarously murdered their Archbishop,
did, I hope it is no wrong to them to call such Persons cruel and bloody, and
over, and over, and over again. But when People shall say, they dare not repent
of it, nor forbear the same, if it were to do again in the same state of
Things, it is time for us to warn this Generation over and over again, to beware
of such cruel and bloody men, and to prevent their falling into the same state
of Things.

Of silencing those that never meddled in the Wars.
Mr. B. p. 182. refers his Reader to consider, Whether Dr. Sherlock, Dr.
Saywell, do wisely, justly, and truly use the mention of the late Wars, etc.
and proving it well done, to silence and imprison such as never meddled in the
late Wars.

Mr. B. quite mistakes the Point; for no body is questioned for being in the
late Wars, much less silenced on that account; but the miseries of the late
Wars did waken the Nation, to call upon Ministers to renounce those Principles
and bands of Sedition, which would lead them into another War; and if they
scruple at that, they tell the World what they would be at, and do silence
themselves. And so we do truly, and wisely, and justly, use the Topic of the
late Wars, to warn the Nation to prevent the Danger again, and to take heed of
such a Cockatrice Brood, that boggle at renouncing such dangerous Principles.

Of making indifferent things Articles of Faith, and necessary to Salvation, to
be believed.
But one of the strangest Insinuations is, Page 11. where Mr B. says, Dr.
Saywell and this man make such refusal [of obeying Governors in lawful
indifferent things he is speaking of] Schism and damnable. Now mark how they
make all indifferent imposed things, consequently necessary to Salvation, and
make all such indifferences, Articles of Faith, or necessary to Salvation, to
be believed.

Now Mr. B. does not quote, nor refer to any words of mine, where I say any
such thing; neither does the Duty of Obedience in such Cases, alter the Nature
of things themselves. For they are indifferent in themselves, as they were
before; yet they are become necessary to be observed, by virtue of God's
Commands also, which require me and all others to obey their Governors in
lawful Commands, and Disobedience to Parents and Governors is reckoned amongst
the damning Sins, Romans 1. and elsewhere. Nor did I any where say, any more than
Mr. B. does himself, about this Matter. It is Schism, Plea for Peace, p. 49.
when men separate out of unruliness of Spirit, because they will not be
governed by their lawful Pastors in lawful Things, as time, place, order, etc.
Again, Apol. p. 41.
We statly affirm, as well as you, that the King's Laws do bind the Mind or
Soul, (or Conscience, if you will so call it) to a conscionable performance of
all his lawful Commands. I hope then Mr. B. will think as well as I, it is a
dangerous thing for a man wilfully and obstinately to sin against his
Conscience, and so Mr. B. does make indifferent things necessary to be obeyed
as well as I; but there is no color for him to say, I make them Articles of
Faith, or necessary to Salvation, to be believed; for the Obligation of their
Observation may be taken off when the Governors see good, (but so cannot
Articles of Faith,) and ever was owned so by our Church; and therefore while
they are commanded, they remain indifferent in their own Nature as they were
before.

So that upon the whole Matter, Mr. B. makes no Objection against me, but is
fully prevented in the Place from whence he draws the Matter of it. And he
seldom disagrees from me in any Point, but where he disagrees from himself
also; as will fully appear to those that will read this Book.

What is the Catholic Churches sense, concerning holding Communion, and being
a Member of the Catholic Church.
Mr. B. says, P. 182. It greatly concerns all Christians to know what the
Catholic, that is, what the Christian universal Church is, because it is that
which every Christian must be, and is a Member of, and it is an Article of our
Creed. Had Mr. Thorndike, Mr. Dodwell, Bishop Gunning 's Chaplain truly defined
it, they had not been to blame for laying so great stress on that Article, and
calling us all to unite in the Catholic Church. Now if Mr. B. did really mind
the Peace of the Church, and not the upholding of a Party, he cannot but be
sensible that I did speak fully to this Matter; for though I did not, like a
Catechist, explain the Notion of the Catholic Church, yet I did sufficiently
satisfy the Reader in all Points about it, that concern our present Peace and
Unity, which was the Design of my Writing. For our Churches Peace has been
disturbed by two Parties. First by the Papists, who refuse to join with us,
because we deny subjection to the Pope and his Councils. Secondly, by the
Anti-Episcopal Party that deny Obedience to our Bishops and Provincial National
Synods. Three things therefore I had to make good, to bring these Dissenters to
the Communion of the Church of England.

First, That it was most reasonable, that in all Controversies wherein the
Peace of the Church was disturbed, they should hearken to the Order and Custom
of the universal Church, or the main Body of Christians, rather than the
private Determinations of their own Parties. And I showed that all Churches did
agree to this Rule, and that the Church of England was established according to
it.

Then I had but two things more to do to procure this Union, both which I did
effectually make good. First, that there was no Law or Tradition of the
Universal Church, to require us to observe any of those corruptions or defects
of the Roman or other Churches, rejected by the Church of England in her
Articles and Constitutions.

Secondly, That it was the constant Doctrine of the universal Church, that all
private Christians and Ministers must live in obedience to their Bishops and
Provincial Synods, while they did keep to the general Rules of the universal
Church, as the Church of England had done.

Now Mr. B. yields the two former Points, and so much of the Third, that the
Church of England is a True Church, and that it is lawful to communicate with
her in her public Service, See Apol. p. 8.
and that it is unlawful to separate from her; but quarrels with me for not
making a Scholastical Definition of the Catholic Church, for him to run
Division upon, and confound his Reader. But I did over and over show, that it
was the constant Doctrine of the Catholic Church; that for Priests and others
to be in Communion with, and Members of the Catholic Church, it was necessary
that they should yield Obedience to that Bishop and Provincial Church under
which they live, if they did keep to the Rule of the Catholic Church, and had
a public Service wherein they might lawfully join, as Mr. B. and the
Nonconformist Ministers own ours is. So that for the Papists, upon pretense of
obeying the Pope and his Canons, and the Anti-Episcopal Party, under pretense
of purer Worship and greater Edification, to set up another Communion without,
and contrary to the Command of the Bishops and Provincial Synods of this Nation
respectively, is Schismatical, according to the received Doctrine of the
universal Church; and therefore in order to their being in Communion with, and
sound Members of the Catholic Church, they must leave off their private
Conventicles, whether Popish or Presbyterian, and heartily join and submit
themselves to their respective Bishops and Parish-Ministers, as long as they
maintain that Catholic Faith and Worship now established amongst us.

This being assented to, will quiet all our Dissentions at home, and by the
same Reason will oblige all other parts of the Christian Church, to cease
troubling us, and so will set us at Peace with all other Churches abroad also.
For as our own People must yield all Love and Obedience, so all others, as well
Clergy as Lay-persons, must show all Love and brotherly Friendship to us, and
we the like to all others that keep to the same general Rule, as far as they
are able, and their Circumstances will admit; and this being the main Point in
Difference between Mr. B. and me, I shall endeavor farther to show this is the
Scripture Rule, and the Doctrine of the Catholic Church. And the Proof hereof
will suffice, instead of all other Disputes about the legislative Power, the
Nature, Number, etc. of General Councils.

And first the Scripture Rule is, To obey them that have Rule over us, Heb.
13.17. as the Bishops of that place where we live have. And then because
Differences and Disputes may arise, we are told, that The Spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets, for God is not the Author of Confusion
but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.32, 33.

Ignatius the holy Bishop of Antioch, Ignat. Ep. ad Smyr. Edit. Voss.
and renowned Martyr, who lived in the Apostles days, says; All of you follow
the Bishop, as Jesus Christ did his Father; and the Presbytery, as the
Apostles; and reverence the Deacons, as being the Command of God. Let no man do
any thing that pertains to the Church without the Bishop, let that Eucharist or
Communion be accounted firm and holy, which is under the Bishop; or where he
does allow. Where the Bishop does appear [that is either in Person, or by his
Authority allowing and appointing Presbyters] There let the multitude of
Christians be, as where Christ is, there is the Catholic Church. It is not
lawful, without the Bishop, to baptize, or to hold any Agape or public
Ecclesiastical Assembly. But what he shall approve that is well pleasing to
God, that every thing might be safe and firm that is done. It Is right that God
and the Bishop should be known. He that honors the Bishop is honored of God.
He that does any thing without consulting, or the Approbation of the Bishop,
serves the Devil.

Give heed to your Bishop, Epist. ad Polycarp.
that God may give heed to you. My Soul for theirs that obey the Bishop, the
Priests, and the Deacons. And I wish I may have my part in God with them that
do so.

It is meet, Epist. ad Magnes.
not only to be called Christians, but to be so. As some do call such a one
their Bishop, but do all things without him; these seem to me, not to have a
good Conscience, [And yet our Dissenters pretend Conscience to excuse their
Obedience, so much do they differ from the primitive Purity.] because they are
not firmly gathered together according to the Command. Epist. ad Trall.
It is necessary that you should do nothing without the Bishop, but to be
subject to him, and to the Presbytery, as to the Apostles of Christ.

Tertullian de Baptismi c. 17. It remains to the concluding of this Matter,
that I should admonish you concerning the Order that is to be observed in
giving and receiving Baptism. The Right of giving it is in the Power of the
chief Priest which is the Bishop. Then in the Power of the Presbyter, and the
Deacon, but not without the Authority of the Bishop, for the Honor of the
Church, which being preserved, Peace is secure.

St. Cyprian Ep. 69. Although the Rebellious and proud Multitude depart, and
will not obey, yet the Church does not depart from Christ. And they are the
Church, the People that are united to their Bishop, and the Flock that does
adhere to their Pastor. From whence you ought to know, that the Bishop is in
the Church, and the Church in the Bishop; and if there be any one not with the
Bishop, he is not in the Church. And they do flatter themselves in vain, who
being not at Peace with the Bishop, do creep up and down, and think they have a
private Communion with some of their own Party. When the Church which is
Catholic, is not rent nor divided, but is joined and coupled together by the
Union of the Bishops, mutually cleaving to one another. And elsewhere writing
to some Confessors that did join with another Person that held a Conventicle
and separate Party in Rome, in Opposition to the one Bishop, and contrary to
his command and the Rule of the Church, as Mr. B. and his Party do now in
London, He says, Ep. 44. It grieves me, it makes me sad, and the intolerable
grief of my astonished and almost broken Heart does confound me, when I find
that you there had consented to make another Bishop against the Ecclesiastical
Constitution, against the Law of the Gospel, against the Unity of Catholic
Institution; that is, which is not lawful, and ought not to be done, to
institute another Church, to tear the Members of Christ, to rend the one Soul
and Body of the Lord's Flock with a divided Emulation. Now I beseech you that
you would not at least continue in this Separation from our Brotherhood, but
remembering your Confession, and the divine Tradition, return to your Mother
from whom you have departed, in whose Communion you arrived to the Glory of
being Confessors, to the great rejoicing of that your Mother. Neither do you
think that you so stand up for the Gospel of Christ, while you separate your
selves from the Flock of Christ, and the Peace and Concord thereof, seeing it
is more agreeable to glorious and good Soldiers to abide within their own
Tents, and while they are there, to do and provide those things which are to be
ordered in Common. For since our Unanimity and Concord ought not at all to be
divided, because we cannot leave the Church and go out, and come to you, we
desire and entreat you, with all the Exhortations we can, that you would rather
return to the Church your Mother, and our Brotherhood.

This Passage alone of that holy Father and glorious Martyr St. Cyprian, is
enough to satisfy any considering man, and convince Mr. B. and his Party of
their great Error, in setting themselves up to be Bishops, in Opposition to the
settled Ministers in the Nation.

Athanasius the Great, Epist. ad Pallad. Presbyt. I have understood by our
beloved Dianius, that the Monks of Caesarea do grieve and oppose our beloved
Basil their Bishop; I have writ to them what was fitting in that Matter, that
they should be obedient to him, as Children to their Father. -- And let them
glorify the Lord, that has given to Cappadocia such a Bishop, which every
Province would desire to have.

St. Hierom, advers. Lucifer. c. 4. The safety of the Church does depend upon
the Dignity of the Bishop, to whom if there be not given a more excellent and
eminent Power by men, there will be caused so many Schisms in the Churches as
there are Priests; whence it comes to pass, that without the command of the
Bishop, neither the Presbyter nor the Deacon has any right to baptize: Except
in Cases of extraordinary necessity, which he does there show, are otherwise
provided for. Again, Chap. 8. Hilarious seeing he was but a Deacon when he
departed from the Church -- cannot consecrate the Eucharist, not having Bishops
and Priests. -- And because a Deacon cannot ordain a Clergyman after him, when
he died, all his Sect died with him. And that is no Church which has no
Priests. -- The Church consists of several Degrees, and last of all is made
complete by Deacons, Priests, and Bishops.

Hieron. Epist. 4. ad Rustic. All Bishops, all Arch-Presbyters, all
Archdeacons, and all the Ecclesiastical Order have a dependence upon their
Governors.

Chrysostom. in Phillip. 1. 1. with the Bishops and Deacons] Why does he say
this? Were there many Bishops in one City? No, by no means.

Idem in Heb. 13.17. Anarchy is ill every where, and the Foundation of a great
many Calamities, and the beginning of Disorder and Confusion; but it is much
more dangerous in the Church, in as much as the Government is greater and
higher. If you take away the Shepherd from the Sheep, you overturn and destroy
all. Anarchy therefore is evil, and the Foundation of Destruction. And
disobedience of Inferiors is no less, for the same is done again; for a People
that do not obey their Governor, are like to them that have none, and perhaps
worse, for there they have some excuse. -- [Obey them that have the Rule over
you, and submit your selves] But why does he say then when he is wicked, we
should not obey him? But how do you mean wicked? if it be upon the account of
Faith, fly from him, and reject him, not only if he were a man, but though he
were an Angel come down from Heaven; but if it be in Matter of his Life, do not
trouble your self. And this I do not say of my self, but from the Holy
Scripture; for hear Christ saying, the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses
Seat, etc. Matt. 23. Do not regard their Life but their Words, for no body can
be hurt by their ill Manners. Why so? because they are manifest to all, neither
will he, though he do wickedly ten thousand times, teach wicked things. But
upon the account of Faith, because that is not so manifest to all, and a wicked
man will not cease to teach his wicked Doctrine.

And that the Canons of the Church Ancient and Modern, See them quoted in my
serious Enquiry into the Means of a happy Union.
both of general and particular Councils require the same, is so evident, that
Mr. B. had no way to avoid the force of their Authority, but by writing a
Church History, on purpose to disgrace both the ancient Bishops and their
Councils. And how he has handled the Matter, I refer the Reader to his
Answerer that has wrote in their Vindication; and will only quote one Canon at
present of the universal Church: Can. Eccles. universal. 84. Council. Antioch.
Can. 5.
If any Presbyter or Deacon, despising his own Bishop, shall separate himself
from the Church, and shall hold a private Conventicle, and set up an Altar, and
disobey his Bishop when he calls for him, and will not hearken to him when he
calls once and twice, such a one ought wholly to be deposed, and never after be
admitted to any Ministration in his Office, or receive his former Honor: but
if afterward he does continue to trouble and divide the Church, he ought to be
chastised by the Civil Power, as a mover of Sedition. So that the Church
Universal, I suppose, will undergo the like Censure with me from Mr. B. as
speaking like Rehoboam 's Puny-Councellors But it is undoubted, that it has
been the constant Doctrine of the Greek, Eastern, Northern, and Southern
Churches, as well as Roman in all Ages, that Christians ought to be in
Subjection to their respective Bishops; and he was held cut off from the
Catholic Church, that did separate from his lawful Bishop, or was justly
excommunicated by him; and no other Church could receive him, till Repentance
and Reconciliation to his own Bishop, and it is the same at this very day. And
that it is the Sense of the Lutheran Churches also, may be seen in their
Confession and Apology above quoted, where I show likewise, it was the Opinion
of Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, and Calvin, in the Circumstances that I now speak
about, and that it is the constant Doctrine of the Reformed Church in France
and Holland, that every private Person ought to be subject to his particular
Pastor; and no Pastors ought to preach without public Allowance, is also
beyond all Dispute, as is evident from their Confessions and Canons. So that it
being the Sense of all Churches, that for a private Person to be in Communion
with the Catholic Church, it was necessary he should live in the Communion of
that Pastor and particular Church, under whose Government he did reside, while
he did keep to the Catholic Rule; Mr. B. and all others must yield Obedience
to his Diocesan Bishop, and the Laws of that Provincial Church where he fixes
his Habitation here in England, if he will approve himself a Member of the
Catholic Church; and this I did over and over insist upon, though I did not
make a formal Definition of the Church. And this was abundantly sufficient for
our Peace, seeing our present Differences are not so much about Doctrine, as
Government, and Circumstances of Worship. And that our Doctrine and Liturgy
give no just Grounds of Separation, no man has more fully satisfied the World
than Mr. B. Is not the Non-conformists Doctrine the same with that of the
Church of England, Defense of the Principles of Love, p. 64.
when they subscribe to it, or offer so to do? Ibid. p. 59. Most of the Liturgy
is the reading of the Scripture it self, and the rest is sound Matter. And then
to satisfy the World how universally our Church and Liturgy are approved of
amongst the Reformed Churches, he says, Ibid. p. 88. All the Reformed Churches
in Christendom, do commonly profess to hold Communion with the English Churches
in the Liturgy, if they come among us where it is used. Therefore it seems to
me to be Perjury and Covenant Breaking, either to preser no public Worship
before the Liturgy, or to refuse occasional Communion with the Churches that
use the Liturgy, as a thing merely on that account unlawful. So that when I had
showed that all Christian Churches were agreed in the Matter of our Doctrine
and Liturgy, and that for the Government, it was that which was ever observed
in the Church for fifteen hundred years, and that those Churches who had not
such an orderly Succession as we have, yet did approve of our Government;
without any farther Definition, I said abundantly enough to satisfy Mr. B. and
all others, that in order to their avoiding Schism, and being sound Members of
the Catholic Church, they ought to live in all peaceable Subjection and
Conformity to the Church of England, and refrain all preaching and joining in
any Conventicles; and this is the sense of the Catholic Church, so long as our
Doctrine and Liturgy are sound, as Mr. B. himself does confess they are, and
the Reformed Churches likewise, do acknowledge by their joining in our
Communion. Nay, what I said, was more full and satisfactory in our present
Circumstances, than any Definition could be; for it is more to bring down
Matters to the Circumstances of every man's particular Duty, as I did, than it
is to make a general Definition, and leave People to make their Inferences,
which few have learning and understanding enough to do for themselves, in
Matters of Controversy.

All that Mr. B. generally has to say to this, is, that we differ about the
kind of Episcopacy, and so all these things do not concern him; to which I
answer two things; that we may altogether wave the Consideration of the
distinction between Bishops and Presbyters in this Matter; for the Law of the
Church does require even Bishops themselves, to submit to the common Rules of
Order and Unity, which are appointed in each City and Province; and therefore
all these Testimonies do however concern Mr. B. who does act against the
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, duly and lawfully established in this Nation, by
the several Governors in their respective Capacities; so that though his
raising Disputes about the distinction of Orders amongst Bishops and Presbyters
might serve his purpose amongst the Pagans, where he was to begin and found a
Church, yet they can do him no Service here, nor warrant him to exercise his
Office in a settled Church, without the allowance of the Governors.

Secondly, His distinguishing Episcopacy into several Species, is but a mere
Invention of his own, for the Order of Bishops is one and the same all over the
World, and ever was in all Ages and Times; it is not Riches, or the largeness of
his Charge does make Bishops of another kind from another; This St. Cyprian
says many times, and St. Jerome, and the whole Church. And then as to Diocesan
Bishops, I have spoken already, Chapter 5. besides so much has been said in their
Defense by the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's, Mr. Dodwell, and the Author of the
Vindication of the primitive Church against Mr. B. that nothing need be added
about them. And in truth Mr. B's own Concessions seem Demonstration enough to
any Rational man; for he cannot deny that St. James was Bishop of Jerusalem,
St. Mark at Alexandria, long within the Apostles times, etc. So other single
Persons in other great Cities, and that must be a more tremendous Charge, than
a Diocese of a hundred or two hundred Parishes in a Country. And a Bishop of
such great Cities, with their adjacent Villages and Suburbs, must have several
Priests under him, and they must hold several Congregations, and have several
Altars, to be able to administer all Offices duly to each particular Person,
which is plainly a Diocesan Church, and so all Mr. B's pretenses come to
nothing. And it is notorious in all the Histories and Canons of the Church, that
never any more than one Bishop at a time was allowed in any of these great
Cities, (neither will Dr. Hammond's notion alter the case, if it be supposed
true, for that was but a temporary Permission, as the Observation of the Jewish
Rites was, and no constant Rule.) And if a Schismatic did sometimes creep in,
as the Novatians and Donatists did in troublesome Times, they were always
condemned by the Church, which did constantly maintain there ought to be but
one Bishop in a City or Diocese, and all Priests and Lay-persons ought to be
governed by him.

The Lord Chief Justice Hale's Opinion of our present Constitutions.
That I might omit nothing that may tend to the Satisfaction of peaceable men,
and promote Unity in this Nation, I will set down the Opinion of the Lord Chief
Justice Hale, who was not thought by some over favorable to the present Church
in his Life; and although I cannot set down his Judgment with that clearness as
I might have done, had he thought fit to express it in his own Words; but
however, as his Opinions are represented by Mr. B. the Reader may receive full
Satisfaction, how unreasonably and injustly the Dissenters did raise Clamours,
and at length destroyed the Church of England in the times of the late
Rebellion, and how causelessly they do now disturb our Peace, since Providence
by a Miracle has restored it to its ancient Order.

Of the Ministerial Office.
Page 41. M. Baxter's Additional Notes on the Life and Death of Sir Matthew.
Hale.
Indeed the Lord Chief Justice thought that the Power of the Word and
Sacraments in the Ministerial Office, was of God's Institution; and that they
were the proper Judges appointed by Christ, to whom they themselves should
apply Sacraments, or to whom they should deny them. So that according to this
Reverend Judge, the Power of determining all Matters of Religion, that concern
the public Communion of the Church, is by divine Right invested in the
Governors of the Church; therefore any that by vexatious Prohibitions,
Calumnies, and Molestations, do go about to weaken their Authority, or hinder
them in the faithful discharge of their Office, do oppose the Institution of
God. And so do all those that draw away People from the Obedience of their
proper Governors, and take upon themselves an Authority to hold Conventicles,
and set up a Communion contrary to the command of the lawful Ministers
instituted by God, as the proper Judges to instruct and govern the People in
their several Charges. For as it is a high Crime to affront a Judge duly
commissionated, so it is no less than Rebellion for an able Lawyer without a
Commission, to assume to himself the Office and Authority of a Judge. And why
it should be in temporal Judges, and not in Spiritual appointed by God, as the
Bishops are in the Opinion of this Lord Chief Justice, I cannot see; I am sure
'twas ever thought so by all sober Christians, till our unhappy Rebellion
nursed People up in Schism and Disobedience.

Of the Government of Church of England.
But it is possible sometimes Judges may go beyond their Commission, or their
Authority may not be rightly settled. But the Lord Chief Justice clears the
Church of England from any of these things, p. 42. He thought well of the Form
of the Government of the Church of England.

Of the Dignity and Revenues of the Clergy.
Page 18. I must say that he was of Opinion that the Wealth and Honor of the
Bishops was convenient to enable them better to relieve the Poor, and rescue
the Inferior Clergy from Oppression, and to keep up the Honor of Religion in
the World.

Of Conformity.
Page 22. His behavior in the Church was conformable. -- He constantly heard a
Curate, too low for such an Auditor.

Of the Peace of the Church.
Page 38. His main desire was, that as men should not be peevishly quarrelsome
against any lawful Circumstances, Forms or Orders in Religion, much less think
themselves godly men, because they can fly from other men's Circumstances or
settled lawful Forms as sin; so especially -- that Christian Verity and Piety,
the Love of God and Man, and a good Life, and our common Peace in these, might
be first resolved on and secured, and all our Additions might be used, but in
due Subordination to these, and not to any injury of any of them, nor Sects,
Parties, or narrow Interests be set up against the common Duty, and the public
Interest and Peace.

Now that the Church of England has endeavored after Peace and Godliness in
this Christian Method, will be evident to any one that shall impartially read
this Book, and that the Dissenters set up Sects and Parties, and narrow
Interests against the common Duty, and the public Interest and Peace. For who
are more like to follow narrow Interests than People that have narrow Souls, as
Judge Hale did say, Judge Halt's Life. p. 68.
Dissenters have? For he that writes his Life fully clears the Matter. He
declares himself always of the side of the Church of England, and said, those
of the Separation -- had narrow Souls, who would break the Peace of the Church
about such inconsiderable Matters, as the Points in Difference were.

Of his high Esteem of the Communion of the Church.
Not long before his Death, P. 110.
the Minister told him, there was to be a Sacrament next Sunday at Church; but
he believed he could not come and partake with the rest, therefore he would
give it him in his own House. But he answered, no; his heavenly Father had
prepared a Feast for him, and he would go to his Father's House to partake of
it; so he made himself be carried thither in his Chair, where he received the
Sacrament on his Knees with great Devotion.

I hope therefore all Persons that have an honorable Esteem for the Judgment
and Piety of the Lord Chief Justice Hale, will be fully satisfied, not only
that Dissenters do unreasonably separate from, and oppose the Church, but the
Erastians and Commonwealths-men do unjustly malign the Authority and Honors of
the Clergy. For this learned Judge, who by his Profession and long Study in
things that concern good Polity, arrived to a mature understanding of such
Affairs, said, The Form of the Government of the Church of England was well;
the Honor and Wealth of the Bishops was convenient to keep up the honor of
Religion in the World. And the Clergy were the proper Judges appointed by
Christ, to whom they themselves should apply Sacraments, or to whom they should
deny them. Which do take in all Concerns of Religion: consequently they oppose
Christ who oppose and disturb his Judges in the discharge of their Office, and
rob them of their Honor and Maintenance. God grant that all admirers of this
Great man may agree with him in these Principles, and then the Churches Peace
and Discipline will be no more disturbed in this Nation, and we may hope to see
Love and Holiness restored amongst us.

The unjust Clamours of the Non-conformists.
Now whereas Mr. B. does lay his great Complaint against the Church of England,
that so many Godly men are denied liberty to preach upon their own Terms and
Conditions, without giving any Assurance that they will uphold the Churches
Peace, and that thereupon the Preaching of God's Word is hindered in the Nation
where it is wanting; Mr. B. cannot but know this is a thin pretense easily seen
through, and in it self ridiculous, when at the same time that they complain for
want of Preaching, they run away from many thousand serious, godly and learned
Sermons, which they may hear in most places throughout the Kingdom, and are not
contented to slight and undervalue the sound Preaching they may have, and leave
empty Seats and naked Walls where they should attend God's Service, but
persecute, revile and scorn that Minister whom they should honor and obey as
their lawful Governor, to follow an Interloper that thrusts in himself, not
only without any mission to that place, but any pretended Orders at all, so
much as Presbyterian, as it is in my own Parish. And then Mr. B. to palliate
all, tells the World, we hinder Preaching, we deny People Food for their Souls,
because the Non-conformists are not suffered to preach in our Churches. These
things sober men cannot reflect upon, but with grief and sadness; and the
bitter Complaints which God's faithful Servants have justly sent up to their
heavenly Father, for the Neglect and Contempt that has been shown to their
Persons and Labors, by these Dissenters which complain for want of Preaching,
who are upheld in their Obstinacy and Disobedience by Mr. B's passionate
Writings, will one day be represented little to their Comfort.

And in the mean time it is a hard Case, after they have robbed us of our Flocks
that are committed to our Charge, and bred them up in Ignorance, Pride, and
Disobedience; robbed us of the Love and Friendship of our Neighbors; robbed us
of the great Comfort of our Lives, not only seeing the Fruit of our Labors,
but made our selves and Labors slighted and despised; yet if at any time we
write to vindicate the Church and our selves, and to have these Evils
redressed, then we have Cart-loads of Declamations thrown upon us, for stirring
up Persecution against the Godly, speaking like Rehoboam's Puny-Counsellors,
being Enemies to Preaching, silencing Godly Ministers, hinderers of God's Word;
when any indifferent man that looks into our Writings, will see our great
Endeavors, are to withdraw People from their Ignorance, Error and
Profaneness, and bring them to hear sound and saving Preaching, and be guided
by it.

But Mr. B. thinks he has now sufficiently prejudiced his Party against the
Church of England and her Ministers; and therefore says, p. 230. in the end of
this Book, I intend, -- hereafter, to let the Matters of mere Conformity
comparatively alone, and will write about the universal Church Supremacy. So
that as far as I can see, he will go about to prejudice his Disciples against
hearkening to the Authority of the universal Church and General Councils also,
and so make himself the universal Dictator and Controuler to the Church. But I
desire this Justice from Mr. B. that if he thinks fit to meddle any farther
with me in this Controversy, that he would first thoroughly consider how I have
stated the Matter, and then give his Reader my words impartially, or at least
their Sense fully represented, with my Concessions and Limitations; and then if
God give me Opportunity, I will return him a fair and candid Reply. But before
he publishes his Thoughts, I would wish him and all sober men seriously to
consider; whether to set aside the Authority and Custom of the universal
Church, and free general Councils; and instead of them, to set up a man of four
and twenty, etc. chosen by the ignorant Rabble, and make him an independent
Arbitrary Bishop, be a way to bring the unlearned and unstable to sound
Knowledge, and to settle Peace and Holiness in the Church. For the Controversy
between Mr. Baxter and me, is not whether the Scriptures contain all things
necessary to Salvation, Orig. of Plots, p. 99. etc.
or whether the Authority thereof ought not to be preferred before all humane
Writings, for I defend this as well as he; but when there arise Controversies
about the true Sense of these sacred Writings, in things that concern the
Essence of Christianity, and the Peace of the Church, whether I may not more
safely rely upon the Wisdom and Honesty of the Church of God in all Ages, and
the deliberate Expositions of free General Councils, than the private
Interpretation of Mr. Baxter, and some few of his Nonconforming Brethren? For
God has told me the Church is Holy, and therefore cannot and will not deceive
me in things that she will propound as necessary to Salvation; but I have no
such assurance of the Holiness and Wisdom of the Non-conformists, or every
private man. Therefore when Mr. B. has wearied himself with needless Disputes,
and done what he can to defame the ancient Bishops, (for which he has much to
answer) and disparage the Authority of General Councils; yet still as often as
we can say, (as we can in our present Differences) If any man seem to be
contentious, we have no such custom, 1 Cor. 11.16.
neither the Churches of God, sober and understanding men will be moved by it.

THE CONTENTS.
Chapter I. THE Occasion of this Apology. Page 1. Chap. II. The Author's design
in his former Writings. p. 4. Chap. III. Of the Matters in Difference between
the Church of England, and the Presbyterians and Independents; or the general
Heads of this Apology. p. 17 Chap. IV. Of Church Government. p. 18 Objections
against Diocesan Churches considered. p. 29 Of want of Discipline. p. 31
Chap. V. Of Diocesan and Provincial Churches, and the Peoples Power in
choosing their Ministers. p. 37. Chap. VI. Of the Liturgy and Matters of the
public Prayers. p. 51 Chap. VII. Of the Circumstances of Worship. p. 62 Chap.
VIII. Of the one Ceremeny of the Church of England. p. 73 Chap. IX. Of the
Oaths, Subscriptions and Declarations, etc. required by the Church of England
of Clergymen. p. 78 Of the new Impositions. p. 80
Chap. X. Of Reordination. p. 84 Chap. XI. Of the Declaration of Assent and
Consent. p. 97 Chap. XII. Of the Subscription and Declaration against the
Covevenant, etc. and Oxford Oath. p. 105 Chap. XIII. Of the fatal Consequences
of passing the Bill, drawn up by Dissenters in their peaceable Design into an
Act, or any other of the like Nature. p. 121 Chap. XIV. Dissenters Proposals to
have Heresy, Schism, Popery and Atheism tolerated in the Nation. p. 128 Chap.
XV. Dissenters wild Notion of Schism. p. 135 Chap. XVI. Of Pluralities. The
Dissenters Design to undo many conformable Clergymen, and discourage all
Industry, and improvement in Learning in many others. p. 144
Chap. XVII. The Charity shown by the Church of England to Dissenters. p. 157
Chap. XVIII. Mr. Baxter's Objections against Conformity, considered and
answered. p. 161 Chap. XIX. Of the Ecclesiastical Courts. p. 170 Chap. XX. Of
Lay-Chancellors. p. 179 Chap. XXI. The State of the Controversy between Mr. B.
and me enquired into. p. 185 Chap. XXII. The true Point in Difference between
Mr. B. and my self considered. p. 191 Chap. XXIII. What is to be done to
prevent the Effusion of Blood, and settle Peace and Holiness in the Nation. p.
206 Chap. XXIV. Of the Office of the Civil Magistrate concerning Matters of
Religion, and the Execution of Penal Laws, etc. p. 217 Chap. XXV. The Judgment
of the most eminent Instruments of the first Reformation, eoncerning the
present Controversies, and first Bucer's Judgment. p. 228 Chap. XXVI. Luther's
Agreement with our Church, and the Churches that are called Lutherans. p. 246
Chap. XXVII. Melancthon's Judgment. p. 256 Chap. XXVIII. Calvin's Judgment,
etc. p. 261 Chap. XXIX. The Spiritual and Temporal Interest of the Nobility and
Gentry, and all the Trading and Wealthy part of the Nation. p. 272
FINIS.

