PLENARY POSSESSION MAKES A LAWFVLL POWER: OR SUBJECTION To Powers that are in
being Proved to be lawful and necessary, In a Sermon Preached before the
Judges in Exeter March 23. 1650.

By RICHARD SAVNDERS, Preacher of the Gospel at Kentisbeer in Devon.

Concordiae patrono convenit defendere statum Reipublicae qui quoque tempore
sit.

Cic. This ISOCRATES terms, (...).

Optimum, quemque praesenti statu gaudere.

Live. Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers.
etc.

LONDON: Printed for William Adderton, and are to be sold at his shop at the
three Golden Falcons in Duck-lane. 1651.

To the READER.
Christian READER,
I Have here presented thee with a short discourse on a Question, not very fit
I confess by modest Christians in a private capacity to be moved, but being
moved very necessary to be answered, viz. Whether we may acknowledge, and
submit unto the Parliament as the Supreme Power of this Commonwealth in
being. I delivered the greatest part of what thou find here, in a Sermon,
and upon the desire of those Honorable Personages (the Judges) before whom
among others I spoke, I have adventured to expose the same to public view.

In preaching of it, my drift was to satisfy conscience, in a thing of general
concernment to all persons belonging to this Commonwealth; and this is mine
end in printing of it. I confess I was silent for a while (not wholly
suspending my duty of endeavoring occasionally to acquaint men with their duty
in this change of things) but waving so public and professed an engagement in
this great controversy, waiting for some more choice parts to undertake the
same: But finding too great a silence in this thing, and many consciences by
this means ensnared, I could not hold my peace.

If thou ask me why I handled this in the City, rather than in the Country
where I live; I answer,

1. I have not been wanting unto mine own people, in satisfying them, so far
as was needful, according to my talent; so that I dare say, there are hardly
any among them (especially of those that carry any face of religion) that did
as much as question the thing that is here disputed, at the time when I did
preach this.

2. I conceived that there was greatest need of such a discourse, where I found
most dissenters: and besides I could not have had a better advantage of
satisfying all sorts, than at such a public meeting.

I have taken liberty, in printing, to ad some things to what I delivered by
mouth, because the small time I had to deliver my thoughts, upon so large a
subject, made me out many things too short. Something that I spoke I have
forborne to print, viz. A short exhortation to the Judges in the cloze of my
Sermon; The substance of which, with some enlargement, I had inserted in an
Epistle Dedicatory to them, but that I thought good to decline the writing of
any Dedicatory Epistle, among other reasons, for that I would avoid the
suspicion of intending, or aiming at the favor of great men.

I have labored a little the more in collecting the testimonies of the
learned, that witness to what I speak all along, not that the truth asserted
needs humane testimony to support it; but that those that are dissenting, may
see how passion, or affection, or prejudice, (or what I know not) has carried
them in this cause quite out of the way of those, whose authority in other
matters they make much of. I wonder what should make those that condemn
singularity, and new notions and conceits in others, (as I my self also do,
so far as they agree not with sound doctrine) to go such a new and singular
way themselves, contrary to the sense of the learned in the things discoursed
of in this tract. The Kings of the earth, in particular the Kings of this
Nation, would have given a man but little thank for teaching or suggesting (as
now some do) that usurped powers may not lawfully be submitted to, or
acknowledged; such a doctrine without doubt would have shaken their Crowns.
That such are to be submitted to, in this Sermon, I have (I hope) made plain:
the which I have done, not that we need fly to such an argument to justify
subjection to the present Power, The Parliament; as thou will or may see by
that time thou have read through this book; but that I, supposing the worst,
may let men see how slender the grounds of non-subjection are.

Seek God, lay aside prejudice and jelousies, examine impartially what thou
find. Opinions that relate either to the settling or unsetling of Nations are
weighty. Be serious, and the God of truth direct thee. If thou find any
satisfaction by the Authors weak attempts and endeavors, this is all he
beggs of thee, to remember him at the throne of grace, that he may become more
strong to do thee, or any of the elect of God service; which is all that is
the desire of him, who is

Thine, in the advancement of truth and peace. RICHARD SAUNDERS.
From my study in Kentisbeer May 19. 1651.
SVBJECTION TO POWERS IN BEING ASSERTED AND PROVED, IN A Sermon Preached
before the Judges at the last Assize held in Exeter being on March 23o. Anno
Dom. 1650.
On ROMANS 13.1. (...).

Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God: The powers that be are ordained of God.


THE main body of this Epistle consists of certain Theological Conclusions,
tending to the clearing up of the Doctrines of Justification by Faith,
Sanctification, and particular Election. This we find to be the principal
matter of the eleven first chapters.

The latter part contains many particular, moral Exhortations, reaching home
to the last Chapter, which is spent in brotherly salutations.

Among those particular Exhortations which the Apostle gives unto the Saints at
Rome (the persons he directs his Epistle to) we find this 13 chapter laying
down one, holding forth a rule for them to walk by, in their carriage toward
the Powers and Rulers of the Earth, under which the Lord had fixed them: That
so they might be directed to walk inoffensively both before God and men.

The Gospel meddles little with State-matters; we find the Apostles very
sparing in them: And what Paul speaks here, he speaks as a Divine, not
disputing of the Powers that were in Being, whether they were lawful, or
usurped (though there was room enough for such a dispute, if it had been proper
for him) but only exhorting the Saints, according to the law and rule of
Civil and Political Order, (which God himself has for common good ratified
and fixed in the world) to submit unto them. Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, etc.

They that are well acquainted with my Ministry, and way of Preaching, know, I
seldom engage in State-Divinity, the work of a Gospel-Minister being to win
souls to Christ, and to reveal a spiritual Kingdom which is not of this
world: but where Scripture speaks, though but sparingly, there may we speak
too, so that we remember still what our main work is; especially when some
emergent reasons provoke unto the same.

Upon this account have I endeavored to speak something unto this Scripture,
in opening of which, we shall, I hope, find somewhat fatisfying some scruples
to this day on foot amongst us.

The former part of my Text is an Exhortation, grounded on a Doctrinall
Conclusion laid down and illustrated in the latter part.

The Exhortation in these words, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers.

The Doctrine, There is no power but of God. The which is amplyfied, or
illustrated in the next, or last words, The Powers that be, are ordained of God.

The Text being such an express Doctrine and Use, I shall not affect to draw
forth any other Conclusions out of it, but labor to give you the true sense of
the terms and expressions as they lie, and apply the whole to our present
occasion.

As for the first words, (...), Every soul, which comprehends the persons whom
this exhortation concerns; there is no difficulty in them, nor controversy
about them, that I know, save between us and the Papists, who following the
interpretation of Origin, understand by [(...)] Every soul [(...)] every
natural man, so excluding their Clergy from any subjection to Civil Powers,
because they are not [(...)] natural, but [(...)] spiritual men. But this is
so frivolous, that I need not to take any pains to furnish any with an argument
to refute it. Clergymen, as well as others, Every soul, that is, every man and
woman, is most certainly, and indisputably here intended.

And Christ himself gave an example of this, in that he himself paid Tribute
by way of acknowledgement of the Civil Order established. Mat. 17.27. Not that
he himself was to be accounted subject to any earthly power; for, being made
heir of all things, he had a pre-eminence above all Kings and Princes of the
earth: But this he did to give us an example of subjection unto those that are
over us.

But that which is most considerable in this Scripture, and to be looked into,
is, that there is mention made in it of Powers, and higher Powers. And
concerning these Powers, we find expressions, 1. Of Subjection to them. 2. Of,
and concerning their Being. 3. Of their Ordination and Institution by God. All
which particulars, or most of them, have difficulty and dubiousnesse in them.
Therefore my work shall be to open them to you, and that by giving an answer to
these four Questions.

1. What is meant by Powers, and higher Powers? 2. What it is to be Subject to
them? Or, What is the Subjection that is required? 3. When Powers may be said
to be? Or, What Powers may be said to be? 4. How they are said to be ordained
of God?
A word or two to the first of these, which will be necessary by way of
introduction to give light to what follows.

By Powers we are to understand Civil Magistrates. All, think agree in this,
and if any should doubt of it, we have one Scripture where we find this word
Powers joined with Magistrates as Synonimous. It is Luke 12.11. where Christ
says, When they shall bring you unto the Synagogues, and unto Magistrates, and
Powers, take no thought, etc. Here Magistrates and Powers are set down as
expressing one and the same thing.

Paul in the fourth verse of this 13 Chap. to the Romans, calls a Magistrate,
One that bears the sword, i. e. the sword of power and justice. viz. Such a
one as is in rule and power, Par. in loc.
over others. So Pareus. Qui potentia and potestate sunt armati in alios; Such
as are invested with power and authority over others. And the reason why he
says Powers, rather than Kings, Princes, Nam omnes complectitur Paulus, cum
ait, non esse potestatem nisi a Deo. Call. Inst. l. 4. cap. 20.
Emperors, Senates, Parlaments, or the like, is twofold, either, First,
Because this is a more comprehensive word taking in Rulers and Governors of
what kind soever, and does denote any in power under what form of Government
soever, whether Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or Democraticall. Secondly
(which is the reason Pareus gives) That he may be understood to speak, not of
the persons so much, as de ordine ipso, of the Order it self fixed and set up
by God. Pareus in Loc.
For if we should look upon the persons of men in authority and eminency, we
may epsy many times failings, and corruptions, and causes of non-Submission:
whereas if we have respect unto that Civil Order that is set up and fixed by
God, for Common good and safety, we may see greater reason for submitting.

Whereas the Apostle here says higher Powers, It Is not as I conceive comparing
Powers one with the other, as if the meaning of Higher Powers were, such Powers
as are uppermost of all: I say that is not the meaning of the word. But Higher
in relation to the people they are over. Rather to be rendered high Powers then
higher Powers.
The words are [(...)] Powers that are set above others. Such as have the
people under them. Quae praesunt nobis, Such as be over us.

There has been some controversy touching this word (...) made use of in the
text: Some being of the mind that it signifies in Scripture only a lawful
Power and Authority, in opposition to a power usurped: which: though it be a
new notion and conceit formed on purpose to take off the edge of this
Scripture, yet finds it entertainment with some. I suppose I do not misname it
in calling of it a new conceit; for sure, the limiting and confining the word
unto that strict sense is both new, and having little ground, either in
Scripture, or the proper genuine We read in Dio. Hist. Romans (...), which could
not be if (...) by it self, with that Greek Author, did signify a lawful
Power. Plutarchus and Herodianus (...) and (...) copularunt. Scap. Lex. Gr.
(...). AEmil. Port. Annot. in Thucyd. de Bello Pelop.
signification of the word it self.

It Is true that learned men the better to express their conceptions, do take
liberty sometimes to put some senses upon certain words more than they had
originally in them; not with an intent to co^fine the words to the new created
or imposed significations, but only the better to make out to the
apprehensions of others a distinction between things that differ. So some have
made use of (...) and (...) to distinguish between lawful and unlawful or
usurped Powers, as they do the latin of Potestas and Potentia, which yet I
think every man will confess, import one and the same Potestas posse Potentia
Cum significatio vocabulorum quaeritur, fit plerumque vt aliud in sermon
vulgate, aliud apud eos qui disciplinas tradunt significare inveniuntur. Estius
in sent.
thing.

Is it not most absurd to argue thus? Because some have used the word in this
strict sense, that therefore we must expound it so in Scripture. Some of the
Fathers and Ancients have made use of this word (...). i. e. a Mystery, to
signify a Sacrament; now because St. Paul Ephesians. 5.32. says marriage is (...)
a great mystery, do the Papists soundly conclude, or may they infer that
marriage is a Sacrament? I hope not.

But I having heard some (of such as else would hug such a nicity and
Criticisme as this in this cause) ingenuously to confess, that the contrary
has been sufficiently cleared by some others that have written of it, I shall
pass it by. Though I could tell you that the Devils are called (...) Powers
too, as Ephesians. 6.12. And yet I hope their rule, and dominion, and power, Non
est ille (viz. Satan) princeps mundi legitimus, sed per rapinam, etc. Wolf.
Musc. in Ioh. 12.31. See Annot. on the bible on Ephesians. 6.12.
is usurped and intruded into, and not of right belonging to them And you shall
find that in Heb. 2.14. that power which the Devils have is expressed by another
word which signifyes mere (...). Sign. Robur. vis, potentia
might, force, or strength: So that lay those two Scriptures together, and you
may infer from them, that these words (...) and (...) or (...) are used
indifferently to express one and the same thing.

But that I may decline Logomachie or strife of words, I grant the meaning of
the Apostle here to be a lawful Power, that is such a Power or Magistrate as
may lawfully be obeyed, yea such a Power as has right to be obeyed and
submitted to: Though I do withal deny, that he intends such Powers only as
came lawfully and inoffensively unto that height, eminency, and authority in
which they stand: And that upon these grounds.

1. Because (to omit this that the signification of the word imports no such
thing) if this should be the Apostles meaning, Let every soul be subject to the
Powers that are over him, that is, if they came lawfully and regularly by the
power they have, and were not usurpers and intruders: He had said as much as
nothing at all to the Saints he writes to, Caesares qui tunc rerum potiebantur
Monarchiam vi Tyrannica ad se rapuerant. Call. in 1. Pet. 2.13. See more in my
answer to the third objection.
for they lived under the Roman Emperors, whose power was a power forcibly
wrested out of the hands of the Senate and people, as will appear more clearly
anon. They must needs have conceived, sure Paul does not mean the Emperor,
for if he be a lawful power, then none is unlawful.

2. Or else, secondly if it were otherwise, that is, if Nero's power were not
an unlawful power, yet how imperfect and unsatisfactory is the Apostles advice
notwithstanding if we be to interpret him in that limited sense before
mentioned? It Is true understand him so, and he gives satisfaction in one thing
which has but little difficulty in it, viz. That lawful Powers, such as are
rightly and regularly introduced, are to be submitted to; but he leaves us to
seek about that which is far more difficult, yea even impossible in some cases
for us to find out, and that is, what Powers are lawful, what not? How can
Christians give judgment of those supreme Powers that they live under? What a
work should a Christian have to do, if he were to seek out the original
Right of Supreme Governors by which they hold their power? Where should they
have recourse for satisfaction? what rule should they proceed by? Truly a man
may see with half an eye that this cannot be Paul's meaning: It Was never his
intent to put Christians upon such a task. His meaning is then nakedly what
the words express, Let every soul be subject to the Powers that are, of what
kind soever, and by what means soever fixed over us: we ought not to perplex
our selves with needless, endless questions concerning their Right, but fit
down satisfied in this that they are such as are in power, and have the rule
and Government of us.

This may suffice to be spoken to the first Question. What is meant by Powers
and higher Powers here. The second Question follows.

What it is to be Subject? or what is the Subjection that is here required?



They will be subject to the Powers that are over them, that is, they will not
oppose, they will not draw the sword against them, and this is all (say they)
the Apostle here calls for.

I confess this is more than all will acknowledge themselves bound to, in
relation to the Powers we have now over us. But surely the bounds of this
command reach further than this; pray weigh it well. The Lord pronounces a
curse Deuteronomy. 27.17. against such as remove their neighbors landmarke, or (...)
terminus a limit or boundary from (...) Terminavit which the Sept. render (...).
boundary as the word signifies: and is it not worse to remove the bounds that
God has set to his commands? Well let us consider what is the true latitude of
Paul's expression here.

The Greek word is [(...)] which some render, and that very aptly as I conceive
[Su^ ordinetur] let every soul be set in order under the higher Powers. For the
word has respect unto Civil order, opposed to Ataxie, or Confusion, and is
very significant. It Is as much as Let every soul be posited or placed The word
is compounded of (...) which sign. Sub, and (...) ordine distribui, word for
word in English, To be placed in order under.
orderly, or according to the rules of Civil and Political Order, under the
Powers that are over. So that it is more than Honor, Obey, or Oppose not; for
it comprises all these in it, and what ever else is requisite unto an Eutaxie,
or good Order in a body Politic.

And if so, it is not then barely to be patient under them, as one would be under
a judgment, plague or affliction, (Though I confess they that are in
authority, by the abuse and maladministration of their Power, are no less
than plagues unto those that are godly sometimes) as was the Power under which
the Apostle lived, and I may say that Power under which we formerly lived. I
say it is not barely to be patient under, or not to speak against, or act
against them forcibly; though this be included: but this same Emphaticall
expression implies, what ever is requisite unto Civil Order, or human society,
what ever is requisite and suitable unto, and becoming that proportion that is,
or ought to be between head and members, the Rulers and Ruled; in short, what
ever is necessary to prevent the dissolving of the frame of Government or
Civil Order established, and what may preserve and perfect and secure the
same, all this is intended by subjection here: And to give any streighter
bounds to its meaning and signification is to do injury to the word made use of
in the text, than which, the Apostle could not have pitched upon one more
significant.

In particular I conceive these three things are employed in the subjection here
enjoined.

1. Honor.
1. To have a reverent esteem of those that are in power, if not for any
personal perfections which we can see in them, yet at least in respect of
their eminency in power, in respect of which they represent Gods Soveraingty to
us, and are his vicegerents. This Paul makes mention of a little after my text
in ver. 7. Bidding us to give honor to whom honor is due, meaning Honor to
all those that are in power; the which implies a sincere and Candid estimation
of them, as men bearing the image of Gods Sovereignty. Surely Contempt of men
in power, and true Christian-like subjection, can never consist and stand
together.

2. Obedientia
2. To obey them, that is, in all things that are not unlawful and against the
divine will; for otherwise, in case men in power command things unlawful, we
must take up Peter's speech, Acts 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God
to hearken unto men rather than unto God, judge ye. But in things that are
lawful before God, yea in all such things as are (...), of an indifferent or
middle nature, we are bound to Obey: As in paying Tribute or Custom, etc.
Which Paul makes mention of in particular, ver. 7. And if it be so, then much
more ought we to obey them in things unquestionably good and laudable. Surely
such as refuse (as some do) to perform lawful Duties upon this account, that
they are enjoined by a Power that they presume to conceive unlawful, discover
much Zeal and Affection, but little judgment, or Christian discretion, as far
as I can judge. I know not what is the mystery of it, but surely if this should
go for a Rule, that a Christian might not do lawful things commanded by an
unlawful Power, we might soon be commanded out of all our Religion.

3. Fidelitas.
But Thirdly, this implies to be true and faithful unto them, viz. In laboring
to defend them that defend and protect us from confusion, and that in
discovering any designs on foot against them, and the like. This must needs be
implied in the subordination spoken of in the Text; for it is that which knits
the very joints of a Commonwealth. There can never be any Civil order
preserved in a Nation, without mutual resolutions and endeavors in Rulers and
ruled of protecting one the other. And if Christians ought to be true and
faithful, without doubt they may promise to be so.

You see what Subjection means: no less than all this is due from you unto
what ever Power you are to be subject to. The distinction of Active and Passive
subjection has no place here, for [(...)] Paul's expression in the Text,
signifies both, in the latitude before expressed.

The Third Question inquirable into is,

When Powers are said to Be? Or, What Powers may be said to Be?

be are ordained of GOD. The Apostle disputes up Subjection to the Civil Powers
from the bare existence and being of them. And therefore it is of the greater
concernment to know when they may be said to Be?

To satisfy you as to this Question, I answer, that there is not much
difficulty or dubiousnesse in this matter; for the Being of Powers, ruling
Powers, is no such insensible thing; our very senses will teach us who are in
power over us, we see and feel the influences of their power good or evil,
sweet or bitter. But in a word to this also.

When the Apostle says, The Powers that be.

pretend Right to Government and Power, Quando non praesunt, when they are not
actually in power over us. Christians are not required to inquire after the
pretended Rights of any, they are to look to those that [are] in Power. being:
And therefore he says expressly the Powers that be.
But if any will be further curious to ask of me, when Powers are said to be, I
answer,

they in eminency over them. This the Learned consent to. Calvin says, Satis
nobi^ sse debet quod praesunt; It Is sufficient that they be above us. And Bucer
on Romans thus, Potestates hae sunt, quibus est merum imperium, and potestas
vitae and necis; They are Powers, in whose hands is mere Mastery or Dominion,
and the power of life and death. And again, he describes them to be such as
bear the sword, and so are Supreme: and such as are invested with mere Mastery
or Dominion; see his own words in the Margent Cumque unius corporis non possit
nisi unum caput esse: Vnius Reipub. nisi una potestas. In quaque Republica,
potestati quae gladium gestat atque ideo suprema est, meroque imperio pollet,
subjici debet Omnis anima. Bucer. in Romans 13.1.
Many more such like expressions of the Learned might I insert, but that I
would not be tedious. You will find more anon in the clearing of what is yet
behind.

Being of a Governing Power: When we see this, we may say a Government is, or a
Power is, as safe as we may say, there is life where we see breathing. The
administration of Law is the very soul and breath of a body Politic, and it
can no more be without it, than a natural body can live without breath, and
without a soul. And are not such then to be accounted Powers in Being unto a
people, as do give (under God) life and breathing to them in a political sense?



When the people, or the greatest part of the people, have consented: For what
is an act of the major part of the people, is taken for the whole.

When they have by any means consented upon this account: Because though their
consent or choice be not voluntary elicitive but subjective only (as the
Schoolmen distinguish) it is enough. That is, though it be not drawn forth by
the will as the first and sole productive principle of it: Yet il it be with
the will, moved; and acted by some necessity apprehended, or the like; this is
sufficient to make it voluntary, and so valid; yea and fully as voluntary as
any people have been in choosing, or consenting to their Kings or Princes.

I cannot conceive any thing more that can be added, as necessary to the being
of an authority.

To say (as I have heard some do) that time, or duration gives, or may give a
being to the lawfulness of a supreme Power, seems to me very irrational; for
as says Grotius, Tempus suapte natura vim nullam effectricem habet: Nilenim
fit a tempore, quanquam nihil non fit in tempore; Time makes nothing to be,
though every thing be made in time. The duration or continuance of things
cannot make them to be what they are not in themselves. Quod ab initio vitiosum
est, etc. says Quod ab initio vitiosum est, non potest tractu temporis
convalescere. Ulp. L. 29.
Vlpian; That which is vicious in its rise, cannot become valid by its
continuance.

It Is true, Prescription and Custom make things to be deemed right, which
might not be so in themselves originally: And yet, I hope, it is not Time or
Duration that is the ground of this right, but a presumption of right still to
have been, because the same never known to be questioned. For lapse of time
undoubtedly cannot change the morality of a thing, so as that that which is
unjust, should become just by continuance. Time may alter the quality of
actions, or things, a minore ad majus, that is, so as to make that which is
evil, to become more evil; or that which is good, to become better: This
tract of time may do; but that a thing that is unlawful (as a Civil Power)
should become lawful by continuance, seems to me a Paradox.

Surely this seems to me to be the judgment of such, as are not willing to join
hands with any Supreme Power that comes in upon the change of Government, till
time has worn out all danger of adhering to the same, and till the Power has
outlived (in likelihood) the hazard of shaking. Surely it is not becoming
Christians to suspend their obedience unto a Divine Rule, upon such a carnal
ground. But I pass to the last Question, and that is this.

How the Powers that be, are said to be Ordained of God?

viz. Either by manifest will and command, or by secret providence.

The one I call a Preceptive ordination, the other Providentiall.

1. Such are ordained by God to rule by manifest will, or preceptive
ordination, as are by God himself nominated, and commanded to be set up over
the people, by express word; as were the Kings of Israel: When Israel would
have a King, according to the mode of the Nations round about them, the Lord
points out by express word who it should be, and then who should be his
successor, etc. But any such way of ordaining Rulers in a State, I hope, we
may not expect or look for now; because such appearances of God, as then were,
are ceased: We have no Prophets, to whom God now speaks (as of old) Go Anoint
such a person King; Go tell the people, such a Person, or such a Family, will I
have to reign over them: he does not ordain any then, now, after this first
way, by manifest will, or express word.

2. Now in the second place, as for Gods Providentiall ordaining of Rulers or
Powers, such are Powers ordained of God, into whose hands Providence has cast
Authority and Dominion: Such as Providence has placed in eminency. This is the
way after which all Rulers and Powers in the earth are now established, and
fixed by God: And it is that which Paul means in the Text, and makes the reason
of Christian subjection. Does not Scripture speak of that Sovereignty that the
Lord makes use of in disposing of the Empires of this world? See Dan. 2.21. And
he changes the times and the seasons, he removes Kings, and sets up Kings.
And, Chap. 4.17. The most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to
whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the lowest or humblest of men, as
the word (...) Humilis, submissus.
signifies. And again, Jer. 27.5. I have made the earth, the man, and the beast
that are upon the ground, by my great power, and by mine outstretched arm;
and have given it to whom it seemed meet unto me. And the Psalmist speaks to
the same purpose. Psalm. 75.6, 7. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor
from the West, nor from the South. But God is the judge; he puts down one,
and sets up another. The Lord ownes these changes to be from himself, not
by permission only, as you see, but by divine disposition, and ordination,
viz. Providentiall. So that it is enough to satisfy us touching a Power that it is
ordained of God, when Providence has set it up.

Neither am I alone in this: It Is that which the learned and judicious agree to.
As Calvine speaking on these words, There is no power but is of God, says
Ratio cur debeamus esse subjecti Magistratibus est, quod Dei ordinatione sunt
constituti. Quod si ita placet Domino mundum gubernare, Dei ordinem invertere
nititur adeoque Deo ipsi resistit quisquis potestatem aspernatur, quando ejus,
qui juris politici author est, providentiam contemnere, bellum cum eo suscipere
est. Calv. in Rom 13.
that to slight providence, is to wage war with God himself; intimating (as
you may find by reading him at large) that the ordaining of Powers in the Text
is by providence, which ought to be binding to Christians. And Bucer affirms
that Summum jus omnium potestatum, Regum etc. in eo situm est, quod a Deo
Ordinatae sunt and hisjus ordinationis unum and indubitatum (...) est esse
Potestates: Nam nulla potestas nisi certa dei dispensatione esse potest. Buc.
in Romans 13.
the chief right of all Powers consists in this, that they are ordained of
God: And of this ordination there is this one most sure (...) or evidence, viz.
That they are Powers, i. e. that providence has set them up: for no power can
Be but by Gods ordering of it to be.

Omne sub regno graviore regnum est.

Sen. And indeed there is nothing by which we may judge of a Power whether it
be of God or no, but only this, that it actually [is.] If you say, yes, the
consent and choice of the people; I say, that demonstrates what is the peoples
will, not what is Gods will: We are commanded (...) be subject to Powers, in
the text, not because the people choose them, but because God ordaines them.
Now by what (...) we know that a Power is ordained of God, unless we ^ake
providence putting men in possession of power, to (...) Gods way of ordaining
Powers? I say by what shall we judge whether a Power be ordained of God or no?
God does (...) now reveal himself by express word concerning the thing, how
shall we know his will then? why, Promotion comes neither from the East, nor
West, etc. God gives the Empires of the world to whom he will. Thou can not
know who is ordained of God, but only by considering whom providence has
exalted as supreme; For as says Calvin, Atque simulac in regium fastigium
quempiam evehit dominus testatum nobis facit suamvoluntatem quod regnare illum
velit Call. Inst. l. 4. Chap. 28.
As soon as ever the Lord has lifted up any unto the Height of a supreme
power, he does witness to us, that it is his will that he should reign.

So then, the particulars being thus cleared, consider what the whole text
speaks out. Let every soul be subject, i. e. [orderly or according to the Law
and Rules of Civil Order placed under] the Powers that are [above or in
Eminency] for there is no power on earth [be it what it will be] that has an
actual being, but is [Providentially] ordained by God, and has validity and
Authority from him. So that (as it is in the verse following) he that resists
the Power [ Gr. (...)] he that does any thing against the Order, resi sts the
Ordinance of God.

I have met with one objection that seems to carry some weight in it, which I
shall here insert; and give an answer to it.

The objection is made against what has been given out as the sense and scope
of my text, viz. That those that are actually Supreme, and in Plenary
possession of Power, are to be submitted to as Powers, or as a Power Ordained
of God.

Kings 11. thus: If possession makes a lawful Power, then Athalia was a
lawful Power, and they did ill who did rise against her, and crown Joash
King. It had questionless been rebellion in them to thrust out her, that had
been in full possession for six years together; but we find not that they did
amiss in putting her off, though she had been actually supreme for so long
time, that the right heir might be anointed King, therefore her being in
actual possession did not make her a lawful power, or a power to which the
people were bound to be subject: and so by consequence, the like does not now
constitute a power to which the people owe subjection.

Jehojada who contrived the deposing of Athaliah after six years reign, was no
private man, but the chief Priest, to whom it did belong (as says Peter
Martyr speaking very well to this very Question) non modo judicare res
Ecclesiasticas, verum etiam Civiles, to judge not only Church matters, but
State affairs too; he was custos Legum, and had power to look to the laws, to
keep them from violation and infringment; if he, and they that acted in this
business, had been private men, it had been rebellion in them, according to
Peter Martyr, who says, (upon this very case) that it is not lawful for
private men to cast down him, qui rerum potitur, that is in plenary possession.

2. God then ordained rulers by manifest word, and command, and therefore such
were only to be acknowledged for lawful Powers then, as were thus appointed
by God; in respect of which, Athaliah was not, but Ioash was, the rightful
Prince. But now to us there is no such express way afforded to determine who
should govern, but there is an express way teaching us whom we should
acknowledge, and Submit to, even the powers that are: therefore we are not
bound to, neither may we, look any further back than the Powers in being,
though the Israelites might, and perhaps ought, according to a rule which they
had more than we have.

Hosea 8.4 by the Lord: They have set up Kings, but not by me, they have made
Princes, and I knew it not, speaking of the peoples following and setting up of
Jeroboam as their King. Therefore all Powers that get up into actual
Domination, are not ordained of God.

Ten tribes took in setting up Jeroboam to be King over them: not as if he were
not a lawful Power after he was in the throne, or as if God had no hand in
setting of him up: God himself says he made him King, as you shall see in the
answer to the next objection. But however the people were disorderly, and
rebellious in what they did, which is that which this Scripture has respect
to: and to this agree Peter Martyr, Pareus, and diverse others. See the margent.
Quod autem non promoti fuerint ( speaking of the Kings mentioned Hos. 8.4.) ad
regnum deo volente, cum tota ferme Scriptura pugnat. Pet. Marrv. Loc. Com. A
Deo fuit illa regni, a Roboamo ad Ieroboamum, translatio, etc. Quod vero hic
dicit Deus, Jeroboamum Regem non fuisse ex se, de modo, and circu^stantiis
facti quas Deus minime probavit, est intelligendum. Par. in Romans and plura in
Ose. 8.4.




Jeroboam to be King, yet this was more than they knew: In this respect the
Lord says, he knew it not, that is, approved it not.





Do not all call Jeroboam an Usurper, in taking off the Ten Tribes from
Rehoboam? And yet the Lord says, this was of him, and that he would cut off
the Kingdom from the hand of Solomon, and give the ten Tribes to Jeroboam. See
1 Kings 12.15. 1 Kings 11.31, 35, 37. We know what Nebuchadnezzar was, strenuus
aliorum invasor and populator, a mighty invadour and waster of others, (as
Calvin styles him) and yet God says, he set him over Egypt, though for his
part he tyrannically usurped power over them to their undoing. See Ezekiel. 29.19.
And as for that Power under which the Apostle was when he writ this Text, the
Emperor Nero, we may easily understand by History what he was, and how he, and
his predecessors got their power.

Ten Persecutions began in his time. Christians were not then clamorous, or
refusing to submit unto him, because he would not establish their
Ecclesiastical Government, and Church order by a Law; they would have been
glad if they could but have had their lives preserved, so as that they might
have professed Christ without danger of dying for it, and could not enjoy this.

therein they are by themselves, I think, however they condemn singularity in
others. Peter Martyr says, Romanam Tyrannidem vel Imperium ei (viz. Caesari)
non contulerunt, sed vi atque potentia usurparat; The people gave not the Roman
Power to Caesar, but he usurped it by force and might. And Calvin says, Calv.
in 1 Pet. 2.13.
Caesares qui tunc rerum potiebantur, Monarchiam vi tyrannica ad se rapuerant;
The Caesar's that then were in possession of power, did by a tyrannical force
take the Monarchy to themselves. Many more testimonies I could add; I have
fixed some in the margent. Legiones veteranae fortes sed feroces, and ad suam
vim omnia nostra consilia revocantes. Sleid. de. 4 Sum. Imper. Sermo. Cic.
Caesare, rerum potiente contra leges and consuetudinem patriae. Dio. Hist. Romans
Quamvis multi existimant Julium Caesarem occupato imperio, hoc sibi jus (i. e.
regnandi) potius rapuisse quam ex S. C. accepisse. Balth. Meisn. S. S. Th. D.
de Leg. Nam ipsorum (Caesarum) dignitas omnisatque salus erat non in Senatus
aut populi, sed in. Legionum atque militum potestate. Sleid. de. 4 Sum. Imp.
lib. 2 page 304. and page 305. Sic. Caesarem metuebat Senatus, ipse vero Caesar
ab impuri militis voluntate propemodum, atque nutu, pendebat. A brave
Government. Afterward he cites Erasmus speaking of the unhappiness of the
Roman Empire thus. O miserum illorum temporum statum. Oppressa Senatus
authoritate, oppressis legibus, oppressa populi Romani liberate: Sic ereato
principi serviebat orbis, princeps ipse serviebat eis, qualem, nemo vir bonus
domi vellet habere servum, etc. Ibid.


In short it is thus: Heylyn's Georg. p. 147.
Julius Caesar (the first of the Caesar's) after many successes abroad, which he
got being a servant of Rome, of her servant made himself her master. His
Successor Augustus set up the Praetorian Guard of 10000. men, pretending for
the safety of his person, but, as History says, to awe the Senate and people.
Then after the death of Caligula, the Senate had hopes of recovering their
Liberty, and when they were contriving the restoring of the same, these same
Praetorian Soldiers (...) etc. (...) (viz. Claud.) (...) Dio. Hist. Romans
saluted Claudius Emperor, and forced the Senate to consent to them. The next
to him was this Nero, who came by the Scepter after the same fashion Inter
horam sextam septam jue processit (viz. Nero) ad excubitores, cum ob totius
diei diritatem non aliud auspicandi tempus accommodatius videretur: proque
Palatii gradibus Imperator salutatus, lectica in castra, and inde raptim
appellatis militibus in curiam delatus. Suet. de 12. Caesaribus.
. And yet this Power also among others, is said to be of God.

And yet in the second place, this is not to make God the Author of Tyrants
usurpations and violence; for, their Aliud est potestas quae a Deo est, aliud
acquisitto and usus potestatis. Par. Romans
Power is one thing, the acquisition or administration of that power is another
thing: Their Power is of God, and by his disposal; but the male administration
or acquisition of the Power, is not of God, save only by permission; as in
Jeroboams case, his advancement unto the Throne was of God, he made him King
(as before) but the indirect course of the people was not of him.

Neither is this my judgment alone, but the general vote of the Learned, as
you may perceive by their testimonies before produced, and by those that I
shall now annex. Calvin upon my Text affi ms, that it is Etsane hoc verbo mihi
videtur Apostolus voluisse tollere frivolam hominum curiositatem, qui saepe
solent inquirere quo jure adepti fuerint potestatem qui rerum potiuntur: satis
autem nobis esse debet quod praesunt: non enim conscenderunt sua ipsi virtute
in hoc fastigium, sed manu Domini sunt impositi. Calv in Romans 13.
frivolous curiosity to examine by what right, those that are in possession, did
get their power; for it ought to be enough to us that they are over us: for
they could not come to eminency by their own strength, but by God, placing them
in it with his own hand. And again, speaking of Gods enjoining subjection to
the King of Babel, he says, Videmus quanta obedientia Dominus tetrum illum
ferocemque Tyrannum coli voluerit, non alia ratione nisi quia regnum obtinebat.
Call. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 20.
the Lord commands men to be subject to that cruel Tyrant, for no other reason
but because he had got the Kingdom; though we know without any right: The same
say Peter Martyr, Bucer, and others. See the Margent. Cum enim quaeritur cui
parendum, non est spectandum qualis sit qui potestatem exercet, nec quo jure
vel injuria quis potestatem invaserit, quave ratione eam administret, sed
tantum si potestatem habeat. Bucer in Romans 13. Cum tamen principatum
obtinuerint, (viz. Tyranni and qui usurpant) atque imperant, privatorum esse
non videtur illos moliri. Pet. Mart. Loc. Com.


But may not Christians resist an Usurper?

Deus, ut Daniel testatur, imperia and regna transfert, and quamvis fas est
tyrannis invadentibus principatum resistere; cum tamen obtinuerint, atque
imperant, privatorum esse non videtur illos moliri. Pet. Mart. Loc. Com.
Peter Martyr, and others.



ad mode randum Regum libidinem, as Calvine speaks, Call. Instit. lib. 4. chap.
28.
to curb and check the exorbitancy of supreme Powers, here the case is altered.
They may do that which private men may not. They may Eis profecto licet, si
princeps pactis and promissis non steterit, cum in ordinem cogere, ac vi
redigere, etc. idque vel armis, etc. Among others he instances in the English
as having such a power in their Parlaments. Pet. Mart. Loc. Com.
regulate, restrain, reform, and, if need be, remove too, Powers that are
abusive in the administration of their Authority: Paul in my Text, and so I in
this discourse speak of private Christians. I hope I have sufficiently removed
these blocks.

I shall say but little as to the application of this truth: Use.
only I shall address my self in a word or two unto those gracious souls,
who, having tasted of Divine love, have given themselves up unto the will of
Jesus Christ, to be wholly acted by it: for others whose wills must be their
Laws, I have nothing to say to them here. Let as many as follow the Lamb, and
know his voice, consider what Christ wills, what the spirit of truth directs
to, concerning their duty to those Powers that Providence has set over them.
The rule is plain: Be subject, or subordinate to the Powers that are: Be not a
cause ( negatively by not doing what thou should, or positively, by doing
what thou should not) of interrupting the Civil Order established: unite
with them that are in Power, as members with the head. Surely if Chrstians in a
private capacity may suspend, or deny subjection to Powers actually supreme,
and dispute their right and fittednesse to rule, then race out this scripture,
this Text, out of the Bible: yea and all that you find in 1. Pet. 2.13. Tit.
3.1. parallel places: Surely these must stand for naught, or else such a course
is unlawful.

Does not my Text say, Let every soul be subject to the Powers that are, for
they are of God? To come home then to our case. Is not the Parliament the
supreme power of this Nation? Are not they that now sit in Parliament, the
Powers that are? Pray examine this well.

1. Are not they over us? have not they undertaken to Govern and protect us?
Are we not involved in their power?

2. Do they not give laws to the people, and the people receive, and seek law
from them? Else what mean our Judges riding in circuit? and such a great
confluence and concourse of people in all counties seeking for justice from
them? Let your own eyes be witnesses this There being then present the Judges
with great numbers of the Country whose coming from their home was for Law.
day.





This were (me thinks) convincing and satisfying enough, if the Parlaments
power were merely usurped in respect of its original, and corrupt and wicked
in its administration, and yet its plain enough that neither of these is so. for

1. Is it not more than evident the Power of this Commonwealth was fairly cast
into their hands, after a full debate of the matter before the tribunal of
heaven (The only tribunal at which controversies between supreme Powers are
to be decided) in a lawful war? And do not the learned agree, and is it not
suitable to reason, that when there is a breach between supreme powers, or
such as share in Government, one laboring to invade the rights of the other,
and it come to war, wherein God is immediately appealed to, there being no
Judicature on earth to judge between them; if one overcomes the other, he that
overcomes has right to dispose of the whole power? Was not the case even thus
between the late King and the Parliament? And did not the House of Lords, who
are also laid by as useless, resuse the protection of the people (in the time
of the Hamiltonian invasion) and so nulled their own power, before any body
else made it void? Me thinks this should sway with unbiassed judgments.

2. As for the administration of their Power, since God has (after a fair
trial) cast it upon them (to speak the least, and to avoid all suspicion of
flattery which I abhor) has it not been hitherto with much lenity toward
those that have suspended obedience to them; and with no slender testimony of
their hatred of injustice, and Profaneness? What power in England (if I go no
further) ever witnessed so fully against vice and ungodliness as they have? I
bless God I am not so void of modesty, civility, and ingenuity, as to be so
uncharitable (as some are) as to censure their end in it, whose lesson is it (I
pray) to judge amiss of men's intentions, when their actions speak well? I am
sure it is none of Christ's.

There are none have much reason to object the great burdens yet lying on the
nation, let them bare the blame of it, that occasion the keeping up of Armies,
by their not acknowledging of, and submitting to the Authority that God has
set up: I see no reason any have to put this upon the Parliaments score.

Besides, I might show you the singular benefits of this form of Government
above either of the other two: but that would make this discourse to swell up
to a great bigness. It Is easy, I confess, to show some inconveniences that
may spring up in it, but what form of Government is without some danger of
corruption? And yet (if it were needful in this controversy) I should easily
make it appear, that there is no form of Government more likely to continue
free from corruption than this which is established, by a succession of
Parliaments to be chosen by the people themselves.

Wherefore let this make honest hearts the more ready to submission, I am sure
it should.



England, that binds them from ever submitting to any other form of Government
than was formerly in being, but only such as bound them unto fidelity unto
such Powers as were in being. I wish you would impartially look them all over
again, and see whether it be otherwise than I say. You might be obliged to
preferving, but there is not a word that mentions the restoring of the Powers
that were, if they should be taken away. And if any of the Covenants should
contain that which should bind Christians, in a private capacity, to endeavor
such a thing, they were clearly unlawful: for private Christians may not
attempt the setting up of what is put down by public power.

Secondly I confess an Oath ought to be very sacred unto Christians, who are
acquainted with the glorious name of God: But observe, it is only Durante ejus
Obligatione, as long as its Obligation remains, and no longer. We know that
though God, before whom we convenant and swear, be eternal, and unchangable,
yet the matter of our Covenants is not so, and therefore the obligation of them
may cease and expire. Now the obligation of an oath or Covenant expires
several ways, as

1. If we swear to one, as under such a capacity, when that capacity ceases,
the Oath it self, and the Obligation of it ceases. So says Grotius expressly.
Non tenebitur si cesset qualitas sub qua alicui juravit; A man is not bound
when that quality, Grotius de jure Belli and Pacis lib. 2. Cap. 13.
under which he swore to, or with, once ceases As if a Magistraet ceases to be
a Magistrate, as says he. As, if we bind our selves to a King, and he ceases
to be a King: or if to his successors, and they do not succeed in the throne,
but are ejected from so much as the privilege of Subjects; here the obligation
must needs be at at an end If I promise to restore a sword lent me, at such a
time, to a person that in the interim grows mad, the obligaion of this promise
must needs be void. He is not the man he was when I made the engagement to him.
If a Tenant, farming a Tenement, promises to pay such a rent, to such a Lord,
during such a term, and before half the term be up, the power and right of
this Tenement be transferred to another, suppose by means of the Lords
forfeiting his right and interest from him and his heirs for ever by treason;
does not this promise and the obligation of it immediately expire? is he bound
think you to what he did promise to the Lord? or has the heir of the said
Lord any right to call for his rent? or if he should, is the tenant bound by
his promise to give it him? I hope not.

And is not this our case? are the persons sworn to and covenanted with in
that capacity or quality under which we engaged to them? Is not the power of
government put by God into other hands? by God, I say, according to the rule in
the Text, There is no power but is of God. Is not the late King, with his
heirs, and successors dispossessed by God, who gives, and takes away rights of
government according as seems good to him, by putting down one and setting up
another?

The Parliament have declared the supreme power to be in themselves, exclusively
without a King or house of Lords, and they are the Powers that now are, as has
been cleared: therefore Kingly Government, both in the late King, and in his
heir must needs be extinct, as to England, for.

Non capit regnum Duos. Sen.

One people cannot have two supreme Powers at once.

Satis est quando juramus nos habere hanc voluntatem illa ex equendi quae
pollicemur: quod si Deus secus ostenderit faciendum, nobisque declararatum
fuerit, id quod promisimus Divinae voluntati adversari: Jam neque ille cui
juramus ea a nobis debet exigere, quod si forte faciat, jus ejus nullum esse
censetur. Pet. Mart. Loc. Com.
As, if a man should promise to marry a certain woman, before such a time, and
she in the interim be married to another, he is not any longer bound by his
promise. And is not this our case? has not this State another head? is there
not another Power over us? and is there not a Gospelcommand enjoining
subjection to the Powers that are? either the obligation of former engagements
must be at an end, or we must be bound to the violation of a Divine law; which
can not be.

there is a ceasing of some express, or tacit condition of the same. In all
promisory Oaths and Covenants there must be some A subdiditis obedientiae and
obsequiorum promissio fit sub condition vel tacitavel expressa. Iun. Brut. de
vi^d. Tyr. Dicimus si promissio fundata sit in praesumptione quadam rei quae
non ita se habeat, naturaliter nullam ejus esse vim, quia omnino promissor non
consentit in promissium, nisi sub quadam condition quae reipsa non exstitit.
Grot. de Iure Belli and pacis.
conditions expressed, or employed, or both; for else they could not be lawful,
being de futuro, of the future, which is not in our Power.

Now 1. Judicious men say, that engagements made to Political and public
persons, are to be understood in this Political sense, even with the tacit
condition of holdiug their possessions, and no further; if that fail, or when
it does, then the obligation ceases: and therefore upon this account the
dipossessing of the Powers formerly engaged to, does free us from the tie that
was upon us.

And secondly I am sure this must needs be a condition employed in all
covenants. Non valent promissa facti illiciti quia ad illa nemo jus habet nec
potest habere. Grot. de Iure Belli and pacis.
as before; you can not stick to your former Covenants (at least in the sense
that some conceive) without sin, for to hold to what is conceived to be
contained in former Engagements, carries in it non-subjection to this Power
that is now in being; which (if we will believe Paul) is unlawful and sinful.

4. The obligation of an Oath or Engagement ceases, when there is such a change
in the state of things, between the making, and fulfilling of the Oath, that if
at the time of making, the state and change of things, that afterward followed,
had been known, the oath had not, or could not have been taken. Si candide
agit, tum non astringitur ad servandum nisi ea quae cogitavit, in foro
Conscientiae. Pet Martyr. Loc. Com.
So Sanderson as I take it, in a tract of his. In such a case, if a man be
candid, and sincere in taking the Oath, he is bound to no more than what he
apprehended in taking the same. And if certain notable and unexpected changes,
quite alter the case, a man is free from his promise. As, in case I promise to
do this or that in order to common peace and welfare, and then find, that (by
reason of some change in affairs) I shall ruin the public by doing that
which I promi^ed to do in order to public good: surely this promise must
needs be void, or if it bind to any thing, it is to a desisting from what was
promised to be done, because destructive to the chief end and intent of my
promise. This is our very case; were not all former Oaths and Govenants taken
in order to public Peace, welfare, and good, as the chief end? And will not
the keeping of them (as the Adversaries of the present Power would have it, in
maintaining the pretended Right of the late Kings Son) be the only way to war,
disorder, confusion, blood?

Wherefore Christians, I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, learn your duty
in reference to the Powers that are over you. Sedition was an old blemish cast
upon the professors of truth, but without cause: Oh let it not now be justly
cast upon you. Let it not be said, truly professors of religion are now the
greatest State-incendiaries. Ah! do not your hearts tremble to think of blood
again? can you hope for it, or look for it? sure I can hardly think it. But Ah!
Whether will not passion, and blind affection transport and carry men? We
find such folly prevailing as (...) Dio. Hist. Romans
Dion the Historian says, that men are greedy after small matters that they
count good, though they usher in necessarily much more evil with them; like
Nero's mother, who, when the Astrologers told her that her son should reign,
and with all that he should put her to death, said, (...), Let him kill me;
only let him reign. O furor! O madness! Let him reign (say some) though the
Nation die for it Let christians be more meek, more sober. Do not prosecute a
particular private right (as you may suppose) against public welfare; I am
sure that is not the course of a (...) Dio. Hist. Romans
modest, discret, and wise Christian. I intend this discourse only, or
chiefly, for honest hearts that yet are dissenting and unsatisfied. God I hope
has more mercy in store for you, than to give you your desires and
expectations, in this thing. Learn your duty; shake off the yoke of earthly
Powers, and you shake off Gods yoke too, and so run your selves into the flames
of divine displeasure, as well as humane, and invite the justice both of God
and men to take hold of you: for they that resist receive to themselves
Damnation.

FINIS.

