THE SPEECH Of Colonel JOHN SARES,

Delivered at the place of Execution on the tenth of this instant Month at
Chester: With his Protestation, That if he had a head of Hair as big as
Absolon, and every hair as strong as Sampson, he would spend them all for the
good and honor of His KING.

Likewise, the Charge of High Treason read against him at the Bar, for adhering
to Charles the II; And his Declaration upon the Ladder: Together with his
tryumphant Speech when the Rope was put over his Neck, saying; What a gallant
mourning Ribbon is this, which I wear for the true Loyalty I bear to my KING.

London, Printed for G. HORTON. 1652. 1651

A Speech made by Colonel John SARES at the place of Execution, in the
Marketplace at Westchester; who after a Trial before a Council of War,
received Sentence to be hanged upon a Gallows, for levying Forces against the
Common Wealth of England, and assisting the King of Scots against the
Parliament.
Gentlemen and friends,
I Am here come, and now ready to pay and suffer that Death which my good God
has appointed for me, to his glory, and my own good, humbly confessing the
same due to me for my sins; I look upon it from him, though instrumentally by
man. I here heartily acknowledge, that I have spent the prime of my age too much
in vain company-keeping, and more then convenient drinking, which is incident
to too many men, and the Mother and Nurse of all mischief. And likewise have
broken, and, which troubles me most, despised that loyal knot of Matrimony;
but I bless my God, I have (after very much grief of heart) remorse, and true
sorrow for the same, and wrestling with my gracious and good God, through the
merits of Christ and his intercession, obtained pardon, and received comfort.

But beloved friends, I am not sentenced by man, nor yet his power has
adjudged me to this Death, but God designed me to it; for this, nay this use I
rather make of it, that the only motives and chief cause of sentencing me to
this end, is not the loast grief or trouble to me, but rather occasions triumph
and joy, that I am accounted worthy, although by the basest of deaths, to
suffer for my King; notwithstanding others of honor have received noble deaths
which could not be denied them; yet it matters not the manner of the end,
whilst I have an assurance, that I, and all that have preceded me by what
death soever, or shall hereafter suffer for the same Cause shall arrive at the
Haven of Celestial Joy, and ever sing Hallelujaes to him that sits upon the
Throne for evermore.

The Word of God requires, Fear God, and honor the King: In the former I have
been too remiss, and neglected too too often, the Lord forgive me; nay he will,
he has forgiven me: And for the latter, my obeisance to my liege Lord, and
Sovereign King Charles the first, and after him Charles the second: I was never
censured, or in the least tainted; but you see sentenced by the contrary party
for the same: I was always for them in life, and am so still, I dye for them;
Nay I here profess, that if I had a head of hair as big as Absolons, and every
hair as strong as Sampson; And if I were to live as many Methusalaes lives as I
have hairs on my head, I would spend them all for the good and honor of my
King.

Then he desired M. Pack (the Minister) to sing a Psalm, and after wards to
pray with him; which done, he turned toward the Ladder, and seeing it somewhat
too short, he said Jacob dreamed of a Laddrr which reached up to Heaven; what
this Ladder wants in length, I hope by the support of Gods Spirit, and his holy
Angels, I shall be conveyed to Heaven, and be brought to my happy journeys end.
Then he gave the Executioner 3 li. and as he went up the Ladder entreated his
friends not to weep for him, saying, That he was full of inward comfort, and
freely forgave his Enemies,; And (says he) although they in^ended evil to me,
yet they have done me much good, in taking me out of a sinful world, and out of
a distressed Kingdom, and s^o^n distracted people, and send^n, me sooner to the
Haven of happiness, the Haven of eternal and everlasting rest. Now some may
imagine, that Death does work a terror and fear within me, and that I am afraid
to dye; I must confess the last night, the fear of death, and the amazement it
brought unto me, and loathness to leave this World, troubled me very much: But
I bless my God, I was comforted, encouraged, and well resolved before the day
appeared, that I durst look Death undantedly in the face; and as I trust God
with my soul, so I leave and commit my children to his gracious and fatherly
protection: All that is mine I leave unto them, hoping of Gods goodness and
blessing upon them. I have ever lived, and dye a Protestant, and so far as I
ever conceived and verily believe, the late King, as also this, were ever
Protestants, and stood for the Pro^estant Re^igion: and therefore I was for
him, who is not; and for him, for whose cause I now dye, praying to God to
bless him wheresoever He is, or goes.

Then he said to the Executioner, Friend, when I hold up my hands, do thy
office; and as he put the Rope over his head, he with expressions of joy said;
What a gallant mourning Ribbon is this which I wear for the sake of my King.

Then he made many short heavenly ejaculations, praying earnestly, and saying,
Lord I beseech thee wash my soul clean in the blood of thy dear Son my blessed
Savior from all my sins; I shall (said he) be by and by with thee, I shall
enjoy the blessed presence of thee my gracious God, my dear Savior, and all
the holy Saints.

Then he entreated his friends not to suffer the Executioner to pull him by the
legs, when the Ladder was turned, or to use any violent means, as is usual to
put him sooner out of his pain; For, said he, I desire to suffer the pains of
this death whatsoever it be; nay if it were ten thousand times more for my
sins, and to wait upon my God, till he deliver my soul out of this mortal body.

Then he prayed again, and said, into thy hands O Lord Jesus my blessed
Savior, I commend my spirit; and so he held up his hands, and the Executioner
did his Office accordingly.

But that which was thought very strange, and never observed in any, none of
the spectators could perceive any motion, or stirring of either hand or foot,
or the least appearance of pain in undergoing the same.

This Mr. Sares was taken in Cheshire, since the late fight at Worcester, and
immediately committed to safe custody; but upon the 7. instant he was brought to
a Trial before a Court Marshal, where the Judge Advocate (in the name of the
whole Court) read the Charge of High Treason exhibited against him; declaring,
That he stood impeached of Treason against the Commonwealth of England, for
abetting, and adhering to Charles Stuart, and holding correspondency with the
Enemies of this Nation.

After reading of the Charge, the Court proceeded to sentence, viz. That he
must return to the prison from whence he came, and from thence to the place of
execution, there to suffer the pangs of Death, by being hanged upon the Gallows.

At the pronouncing of this sentence, he seemed to smile, saying,

Gentlemen,
ALthough I am sentenced by man, yet God has adjudged and designed me to this
Death; and this use I rather make of it, That the only motives and chief cause
of sentencing me to this end, is not the least grief or trouble, but rather
occasions alacrity, cheerfulness, and comfort, that I am accounted worthy,
although by the basest of deaths, to suffer for my Dread Sovereign Lord and
King.

He was executed on the 10 instant, being the flower (for stature) of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; for he was two yards and a quarter complete in height.

FINIS.

