THE Husbandman, FARMER, and GRASIER'S Complete Instructor.

CONTAINING, Choice and Approved Rules, and Directions for Breeding, Feeding,
Choosing, Buying, Selling, well Ordering and Fatning Bulls, Cows, Calves, Rams,
Ews, Lambs, Swine, Goats, Asses, Mules, etc.

How to know the several Diseases Incident to them, by their Signs and
Symptoms, with proper Remedies to Cure them; as likewise all Griefs, and
Sorrances whatever.

ALSO, A Treatise of Dogs, and Conies, in their Breeding, Ordering, and Curing
the Distempers they are subject to.

How to Breed, Feed and Fatten Poultry; and Cure their several Diseases.

To which is Added, The Experienced Vermine-killer, in particular Directions,
for taking and destroying all sorts of Vermin in Houses, Outhouses, Fields,
Gardens, Graneries, and other places.

By A. S. GENT.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Nelme, at the Leg and Star, overagainst the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1697.

The ^us^and man Farmer and G(...)s Complete Instructor.
Jon B(...)ed for Henry Nelme at the leg and star in Cornhill

woodcut depicting livestock

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving seriously considered, that a Book of this Nature was wanting to be
brought to Perfection, there b^ing nothing already extant Valuable, or a^
least, in a Method Plain and Intelligible; I have, for the Love I bear to my
Country, Studied the Advantage of it, Consulted others, and joined what is
approved in them, with my own Experience; and digested it into such a compact
Body, that although this Book, to Appearance, seems little, it contains much
more than at first Sight can be reasonably imagined, far exceeding what the
Title Page sets forth; and indeed, much more Adapted to the Purpose, than all
the Books of its kind; which in searching, I am constrained to confess, I found
very Scanty and Imperfect; and as to some Cattle, very useful to the Nation,
and herein mentioned, there was nothing, at all to any Purpose; so that I
wondered at former Ages, and even at the present that a Work so necessary,
should be no better Improved, which was one main Incitement that induced me to
this Undertaking; and to add many things I conceived highly necessary, and not
touched o^ before; and to the Breeding, Choice, Feeding, and Curing all
Diseases in Cattle of every kind, useful in the Nation: I have added the same
for a^ D^mestick Poultry, with Directions how to fatten them with much Ease,
and little Cost; as also for Coneys, Tame, or Wild; and to preserve these, and
even the Fish in the Water: You are furnished herein with an Experienced
Vermine-killer, laying down plain and easy Rules, and Methods, to take, or
destroy all offensive Vermin, hurtful either to Man, Beast, Fowl, Fish, or the
Fruits of the Earth. Therefore, as the Work is f^ll of Variety, so I doubt not
but it will as fully satisfy those that Read it, and put my Directions in
Practice, as they can expect; which is the wish of your Friend to serve you,

A. S.

THE Husbandman, Farmer and Grasier's COMPLETE INSTRUCTOR, IN Breeding,
Feeding, Buying and Selling Cattle, etc.
Proper Seasons for a Heifer or Cow, to take the Bull; and what is to be
considered therein, as to a good breed.
SInce England abounds in Cattle, and by the well Ordering and Breeding them,
Riches, and Plenty of Provisions, accrue, not only to the industrious
Husbandman and Dealer in them, but to all sorts of People; it is highly
necessary that such Rules and Directions should be laid down for their
Increase, Improvement and Preservation, as so useful and profitable a Subject
requires; and first, of Kine:

The most proper time for the Heifer to have the company of the Bull, is at
Three Years old, in order to a good Breed; for, if younger, it hinders her
growth much, infeebles her, and makes her produce Weaklings, or unhealthy
Calves: Nor for these Reasons, on the other hand, is it convenient she should
be covered after Twelve Years, especially if the Calf be intended for a Cow or
Ox: The best time to let her be with the Bull, is from the Tenth of May, to the
Tenth of June; for then by feeding she is lively of body, and will produce her
Calf in a warm season.

When you find her inclinable to be covered, (which you may know by the
swelling of her Claws, her continual Lowings and running to the Hedges or Banks
when she hears her self answered, or sees any Cattle pass by; by her looking up
and scewling the Air, as if she smelt the Bull) then put her into good and
easy Pasture, turn the Bull to her, and it will not be long e're she kindly
receives him. If you design for breed, look well to the Limbs and proportion of
your Bull, and choose, above others, one that is mostly of a red Color,
Sprightly, and not exceeding Five Years; his Body long, and not over thick, his
Neck and Horns thick and short, a broad curling Front, his Eyes lively, and of
a black shining, his Tail long and bushy, and therest of his parts
proportionable to his Body; free from Diseases or Imperfections. Let him be in
good case, and not suddenly taken from other Cows: If he refuse to cover her,
smoke his Nostrils with the dried Herb called ^arts-Tail, sprinkled in a
Chassing-Dish of Coals, which will incline him to lustful desires; as also the
Juice of Sea-Onions, given him with new Ale, or sweet Wine.

The Heifer or Cow having kindly received the Bull Twice or Thrice, put her
into an enclosed Pasture, where she cannot leap to injure her self, or lose
what she retains, or oceasion the casting of her Calf, when come to any
perfection; see it be free from Briars, Thorns, or the like, watered with a
clear Spring, or running Brook, etc. and give her now and then Water wherein
Bran or Wheat (...) been boiled.

How the Cow ought to be ordered in Calving, and after; a^ also the Calf; and
proper times for weaning etc.
When your Cow has Calved, hearten her with half a pint of Malmsy, the yolk of
Three Eggs, and a pint of sweet Wort; if there be any difficulty in her
Calving, help her with your hand; and let her lying be as easy as may be,
bolstered up with Sraw, and take the Calf from her till she gather strength,
putting it to a new Milch'd Cow, or feed it by hand, with Milk and Oatmeal; but
if you put your Calf to a strange Cow, let it not be with her a whole Night,
lest by the scent she discern it not to be her own; and then, being Careless of
it, she may happen to overlay it.

Two Months or Ten Weeks expired, wean it and teach it to feed by hand, and do
this by putting your Finger in its Mouth, whilst your hand is in the Pail, by
which means he will the better take the Milk, supposing it to be his Dams Teat;
mix in it some fine sifted Wheat-bran, and being used to this, offer a handful
of sweet Hay, or sweet new c^t Grass, and so by degrees you will prepare him
for Pasture, which he will be strong enough for in a Weeks time, if the Weather
be not Wet, Windy or Cold; but if either of these, keep him in the House to a
more seasonable warmth, and then for a time he must have his fill Morning and
Evening of Milk or Whey; and in a little time but once a day, and so by degrees
you may take him quite off from it: When you perceive he is addicted to
feeding, at Three Months, he may subsist altogether at Grass or Hay, and now
and then Bran and Skim-Milk, when i^ the Evening you house him.

If he in sucking time mumble or draw the Teat painfully, look in his Mouth,
and under his Tongue you will find white Blisters growing, that restrain the
use of the Tongue; cut these away, and anoint the sore well with Honey and
Allom dissoved in Vinegar, do so tili the part is healed, lest the Calf pine
away; or, sometimes by, the Gangr^ening, it dye. That the growth may not ^e
hindered, see it be not afflicted with Lice; if so, rub him over with Butter and
Salt melted, and when it is well soaked, with a hard Wisp of Hay or Straw, and
the next day with Urine, wherein Wood-Ashes have been steeped.

Convenient times to Geld or Spay Calves, with proper Directions to do it
without endangering Life, etc.
As you intend to bring up, or dispose of your youn^ Calves, so you must take
the order and observations in Gelding or Spaying them; most hold Three Months a
proper time for this; but if you intend to breed them to be Oxen or Heifers, a
great deal longer time may be taken. vix. Six or Twelve Months; and any time
before Three Years is not too late, though more dangerous for a Bull Calf; or,
for a Cow Calf, the time may be less; and the weather in doing this ought to be
moderately warm, neither too hot, nor too cold; and the Spring and Fall in the
warm of the Moon is most proper.

In Gelding, having slit the Cod, draw out the Stones with their Sinnews, as
far as you can, without over-straining; clap the Sinnews into a cleft Stick,
and so seer them off with a hot Iron, anoint them round with fresh Butter, and
sow it up with very fine Silk, taking up no ^ore th^^ the outward Rim or Edge.

In Spaying a Cow Calf, when you have taken away the Matrix, anoint the
Incission with Oil of Almonds, o^ sweet Olive Oil; see that no part of the Guts
are disordered, or out of place, and in sowing up, ^e careful not to tack any
of them with your Stiches to the Skin, lest it make them pine away and dye;
anoint the place for several days, with either of the said Oils; and, to keep
of Wasps and Flies, brush it over with a little Tar-water.

As for Bull Calves, after Gelding, put them in such Pastures or Places that
they cannot leap nor strain themselves; lest, bleeding a fresh, they endanger
their lives; and particularly, if they be of any bigness, keep them from Cow
Calves, for being apt to leap, by that means they will much in^ure themselves;
and rub the Wound over till cured, with the Ashes of the Vine and Lytharge;
giving them ^ut little water after Three days cutting, and in it Fennel-seed
boiled; feed them as their Stomachs will bear, (which by this means is much
enfeebled) with sweet Grass, Hay or green Boughs. If the Wound swell, anoint it
with the Oil of Rosemary and Hogs-Lard tempered together, and warm, but beware
the Calf catch not cold.

How to m^nage or order your breed of Cattle in their Stalls, Food, Taming or
Breaking.
Having a Breed etc. in this forwardness; the next thing to be considered, is
to bring them to gentleness and a good management, for many Reasons or
Conveniences: The Bull Calf, when Gelded, is c^lled a Steer; and the Cow Calf,
a Heifer; and, to break them, observe your Cowhouse, S^all, or other Housing
convenience, be adjoining to some enclosed warm Pasture; make your self
^amilier with them, (when you house and feed them) with sweet Provinder out of
your hand; for encouragement, let the housing be kept clean, to prevent
Diseases; and, let their goings out and in, be a^ set times; make their Stalls
yoakwise, about Seven Foot from the ground; and, if they become wanton,
headstrong, or push with their Horns, to mischief one another; you must, to
break them of so ill a habit, tie them in their Stables, Twenty Four Hours,
wit^out giving them provender, which Three or Four times used, will make them
very tame, for by this means they will be brought to receive their Fodder more
gently, and with much Familiarity; then stroke and scratch them gently, spirt
some sweet Wine or Wort into their Mouths, which will induce them not only to
endure your waiglet leaning hard on their Necks and Backs, but in a little tim^
to follow you gently; then rub their Mouth with Salt and Water, make up Balls
of sweet Butter, and C^mminseed and oblige them to swallow One or Two as big as
an Egg, in a Morning before they go out to Pasture; let the places where they
stand be very Airy in warm Weather, and close in cold, and so they will in a
short time be tamed, and thrive the better; some, when they are Restiff or Head
strong, yoke them with a tamed O^ or Steer, and make them draw a light Plough,
or son a Weights; but I think I have given the best Directions.

If the Pasture fail, by reason of dry or excessive wet weather, house them, or
feed them abroad with sweet and short Hay, fine Pease-Straw, Barly-straw,
Chaff-Tear^, and Clover-Grass, after Grass, or the like; for this manner of
feeding in Winter greatly improves them. Lupius and Chaff mingled together is
Physical and Nourishing; in the Spring, to purify the Blood, give them green
Sprigs of the Fig Tree, Ash, Holm, Elm or Oak.

Rules to be observed for preserving your Cattle, and in g(...) plight, with
Signs of Sickness etc.
When you have made this kind of Cattle tractable, the next main thing to be
observed, is how to keep the^ healthy; to do this, see their Meat be given them
in due season, that no Infectious thing fall into it; keep from their Stalls
Hogs, Ducks, Poultry, Pigions, the scent of whose Dung is very offensive to
them; and, if scattered in their Provinder, makes them sick, and breeds
unwholesome Airs, which cause the Murrain and Scab among them. Comb them down,
and rub them well with hard Wisps, as often as your leisure will admit; at
least, once in Two Days wash their Claws, and keep them from Gravel and
swelling, or from other Defects that may occasion them to break out; Let them
Blood, though no urgent Cause require, it Twice a Year, viz. Springs and Fall
of the Moon, being in any of the lower Signs; let them, after it, drink the
Pickle of Olives, with a Head of Garlic bruised, and purge once a quarter if
you see occasion; at least, Twice in the Year, without it, Three days together;
the First may be done by giving them Lupius, and Pese mixed together; the next
with the Grains of Cyprus, beaten and steeped a Night in a quart of Water. The
Third, by bruising Nutgalls, and boiling them in a quart of Vinegar, Six is a
sufficient number.

If you suspect the health of the Beast, go to him early in the Morning before
he eats or drinks, observe well the top of his Nose, and if there be Pearls
like the drops of Dew upon it, he is in health; but, if it be hot, dry, or
Scursey, some Distemper is beginning to grow upon him.

How to fat your Ox, Steer, Heifer, Cow, etc. the cheapest and and easiest way.
The shortest and cheapest way to fat an Ox, Heiser, etc. Is, Morning and
Evening, to give them a sufficient quantity of Meal, Chaff, and Rapes, or
Grains, well mingled; and, in their eating, sprinkle them with warm Water,
wherein Nettle-Seeds have been boiled: If you perceive they fail in their
Stomachs, boil green Colwort-Leaves in Vinegar, put it down hot with a
Drenching Horn, and it will whet and restore their Appetite; give them
Wheat-Bran at times, well sifted; and, in Winter, feed at break of day, but in
Summer, Sun rising is time enough: Water, in Summer, at Nin^ in the Morning,
and Three in the Afternoon; but in Winter, Once a day, with warm Water and
Wheat-Bran; and at some convenient distances, give them sweet Hay, and new cut
Grass; and, if you turn them out, now and then, into pasture or Airing, let it
be sweet, and by no means rank; and so, in a little time, you will perceive
their Flesh will increase abundantly, and be well stored with Tallow, to the
advantage of the Buyer.

Instructions for buying of Lean Oxen.
Observe, in this case, the Age of the Beast as near as you ca^; for, the
younger they prove, the better they will seed, and the sooner grow fat. The
next, observe that their Hair be not stairing, but very smooth; and, that they
lic^ themselves; that their Eyes be black, full and shining; that they want
none of their Teeth, but are whole mouthed* see their Ribs be broad, Hide
thick, and Skin not loose, nor slicking to the Ribs or Sides, for then they
will not thrive so well; that there is a good Pizzle and Tail, and the hair of
neither broken; for, if so, the Beast is a waster, and will never feed well;
learn if you can, what Ground they fed in, and put them in better if may be;
lest, not liking their feeding, they lose their Flesh, rather then improve it:
Consider likewise if there be any Sickness among Cattle in the Quarter where
you buy them; for, if there be Infectious Diseases, as the Murrain, Longsough,
or such like, one Beast will be apt to take the Disease of another; though it
may (at the time of your buying) to appearance, be in health: And if any one be
sick, separate him from the rest; that, as little as may be, they may not be
endangered.

To find whether a Beast be Sound, Healthy, or the contrary.
To be satisfied in this, gripe or pinch him with your hand on the Back or
Weathers, behind the fore Shoulder and if sound and healthy, he will stand to
it and n(...) shrink, but if the contrary, he will not only shrink, (...) he
ready to fall; you may guess at their healt^ likew(...) by the sprightliness of
their Eyes, and the motion of the(...) Ears, for if these be heavy and dull,
the Beast is (...) and out of order; also feel of the Claws if they be (...)
seem crusty and burning hot, then is he inclinable to Fevers, and Pestilential
Diseases: If a Cow, you may know by the Milk changing color, if a little
Vinegar be sprinkled

How to choose a Beast proper for several occasions, as for the Team, Plough,
Butcher etc.
If you choose an Ox for the Plough or Team, observe he be young and not broken
hair'd either at the Tail or Pizle; and, if he be not sociable to Labor, put
him between two managed Oxen, and he will soon be tractable.

If an Ox be required for the Butchers use, they then ^andle him, to feel if
the Crop behind the Shoulders, upon the hinmost Rib, and the Hackle-bone be
soft; and a big Nath round and knotty; and, if the God be big and full, these
ar^ sufficient Signs the Beast is well fed, and contains much Tallow in him;
and to know his Age observe these Directions viz.

Look in his Mouth, for in the Tenth Month of his First Year, he casts his two
Fore Teeth, the Two next in Six Weeks following, and at the expiration of Three
Years, he will have cast them all; and when grown all up full again, they then
will be equally white and long; when he waxes old, they will be very unequal,
black and crooked.

General Rules to know a good Beast.
Observe if he be well quartered with large and big Members, his Horns strong,
big, and somewhat black; his Brows wrinkled, a broad Forehead, the Hair within
his Ears rough and soft; his Eyes lively and large; bla^k Muzled, Crook
Nostrils, wide and open; his Neck(...)ine thick, long and fleshy, large
Dewlaps, almost to his (...)ies; his Breast big and round, large and deep
Shoul(...) (...) Bellied, falling deep in compass; Ribs wid^ (...) or (...),
his Reins and Back strait, and large bending tow^^ds the Rump; Thighs round,
Legs strait and well se^, full Knees, his Claws large and broad, his Tail well
(...)ed and long, his Color mostly black, or red, easy to be handled, and a
good feeder.

G^neral Rules for-chusing, buying, feeding, and speedy satning of Cattle, etc.
For b^ying Draught Oxen, or choosing them from among any Herd, the best time is
held to be in Mar^h, when, being b^re, they cannot easily hide their Faults, by
the fraud of the S^ller; nor, by reason of their weakness, be to stubborn to be
handled: It is most convenient to buy them as near a^ may be to the place you
in^end to Pasture them in, or b^ing them up, that finding little or no
difference, they may equally th^ive; and if you find not a convenience for
this, consider the Country where you buy them, to be (...) near as may be, of
an equal like temper to that whether you are to carry them; which will not only
be a means for their thriving, but very much to preven^ Sickness.

Consider again, that they are not dreading of Water, or ^ridges they pass
over; that they take their feed freely, and are not over nice or dainty in it,
and not such as you design for the Plough or Team, be tractable to the Goad,
that by their insensible dullness, they become not tiresome and vexatious to
the Driver. The best breaking time is, from Three till Five; for before, they
are too young; and after, to Restiff and headstrong; so that without great
trouble, if at all, they will not become tractable: To hearten them the better,
you may give them, when such things are in season, Lupius steeped in Water,
Radishes, Wheat, Rapes, etc. by which means they will grow, in a manner,
insensibly fat and lusty, even where Grass is not over plenty. N^w Grains is a
great feeder; and some Cummin-Seed scattered amongst it, prevents any Cold,
Watery Diseases in Winter; and when you change their green Pasture into dry
Fodder, as the necessity of the Season requires, sharpen their Appetites, by
choping Colwort-leaves small, steeping them in Vinegar Four or Five hours, and
putting them into a Mash of Wheat-bran, which will make them feed the better;
and having once well taken to their dry food, grow fat upon it.

Browsings of Oak Shrubs or Sprays, are very wholesome to cleanse their Blood,
and make them hold out the better in sharp Weather, and in very cold Weather
let their Morning Water be warmed; and this, particularly for Cows, helps their
fruitfulness; and, if they are in Hilly or Woody ground, where they may bruize
on, and feed among pleasant Shrubs, they will be sooner fatter then Oxen or
Bullocks, but not so in low grounds, or Meddow Pastures; and though these
Cattle seem to covet drinking where the Water is muddyed or discolored by
Land-Floods ar^ sudden Rains, yet it is not near so proper for their health as
clear Springs; it likewise makes them give more and better Milk, sweater and
pleasanter to the Taste.

To make an old Cow, or Oxes Flesh, tender, and pass for young, a rare
Experiment.
To do this, after having well fed on Provinder that is dry, turn the Beast
Three or Four days into fresh Pasture, then bleed pretty well, and let him or
her be kept Forty Eight hours or thereabouts without any Meat; then boil a Mash
of Wheat, Cummin and Coriander-seeds, and give it as w^rm as the Beast will
take it; this do three days successively, Morning and Night; then give Chaff
and Grains, a good quantity, after that, Hay of the latter cutting, sweet and
short, then boil a Mash of Pease, and that being eaten, turn the Beast into
fresh Pasture; and the new blood that p^oceeds from this manner of feeding a
Week or Ten days, will so soften and shorten the Fresh, that the Cow cannot
easily be distinguished from a young Heifer; nor the Oxen from a Steer, if
presently after killed and dressed, without long lying in Salt; for over
Salting will hearden i^ again.

For a Cow that is averse to the Bull, and will not, without much attendance
and difficulty, be brought to the Bull.
Take a quart of new Milk, though not of her own, put into it a Dram of
Saffron, a quarter of an Ounce of Cardamum-Seeds, and half an Ounce of
Hemp Seed, strain it and give it her with a qurter of a pint of the Juice of
Mint; drive her after it about the Yeard or Ground till she ^e heated, and it
will soon after prompt her to do what is desired.

To prevent Cows casting their Calves untimely.
When you perceive the Calf is come to any perfection, that is, your Cow has
well conceived, drive her often gently among Rushes, if such an opportunity can
be had, and keep her there till she is disposed to lie down, which you may
oblige her to by tickling and scratching; let her rest there till she is
willing of her self to rise again* then take the Roots of those Rushes where
she has lain, wash them clean, and boil them in Vinegar, with the tops of
Nettles, and give it her warm to drink, sweetened with Sugar Candy; and, after
this, half an ounce Oil of Lavender, in half a pint of warm White Wind; and be
assured, after this, unless occasioned by some violent straining in leaping, or
great hurt, she will not cast her Calf before the proper time.

To make a Beast's Horns grow fair and large, and not shed.
To effect this, shave off the Hair round about the root of the Horns; wash it
with the Juice of Comfry and Maidenhair, a Herb a so called, then boil
Plantain in his Water, and let him take it warm Three or Four days before
turning out to Grass: This likewise prevents the violent pain under the Horns,
that makes Cattle often run mad, and so do themselves or their Fellows much
injury.

To make Cattle large in growth.
When the Calves are weaned, rub them well with hard Wisps of Hay or Straw;
supple their Joints with Neatsfoot Oil, give them Fennel-seeds in their
Provinder, at least twice a week for a Month together; then the weather being
warm, put them into fresh Pasture, wherein is a pleasant Stream, and wash them
as the use is by Sheep at their sh^ering, or as well as the convenience will
allow; after that give them Agarick, as much as a Hazle-nut, made to the
bigness of a Walnut, with Butter, and they will, though the breed was small,
grow very large.

Barrenness in Kine, a Remedy often Experienced, and much approved.
Take the Roots of Eringos, by some called Sea-Holly, Southistles, and
Pollipodium of the Oak, of each a good handful; boil them in Water, wherein
Osial and Pa^s^ips have been sodden, and give it the Beast to drink; then make
a Decoction of Nettle-tops, and Ash-keys, and wash her Flanks, and other hinder
parts with it very hot; stamp Garlic with Butter, and make into Balls, and
give her one about the bigness of a large Wall-nut, fasting ^ach Morning; Three
days after, then turn her to the Bull, in a close warm Pasture, and you will
have what you desire answered, unless extreme Age hinder it.

To increase Milk of good-taste and color.
Boy^ Lettice-leaves in new Wort, and give a Pint warm in the Morning, give her
green Colwort and Radishleaves, and then sweet Hay after it, make a wash of
Lupins and Wheat-bran well boiled in fair Water, and let her have it over night
about resting time, and although she gave l^ttle or bad Milk before, you will
find it much increased and mended.

To prevent the stairing or unseasonable sheding of the Hair.
Take ground Ivy, two or three handfuls, the Roots of Fern a like quantity,
Juniper Berries a good handful, bruise these well and boil them in Water, bathe
the Beast with it hot, and sleek him down with a hard rubbing Cloth; and when
such of the stairing dry hair as is proper to fall off, sheads, it will be
succeeded by that which will stand right, rendering the Beast thriving and
graceful; and thus having laid down for the honest Husbandman that breeds
Cattle, and for those that buy them, all necessary thing, in that nature, to be
usefully observed: I proceed to what remains of other matters.

Rules for ordering the Neabeards Stalls, etc. For the increase, growth and
health of Cattle etc.
^n the cold and damp Winter weather, be careful in foeding your Cattle, lest
by neglect they fall away, and lose more th^n by great labor and expense can
be easily regained in a long time; use to drive them in this season too and fro
p^etty hard, that the natural heat may stir the H^mours, and render them
lively; shift often their Litter, and let their Provinder be fresh and sweet,
rub them over often, and raise the Skin that it may hang the looser on the
Flesh; if they be draught Oxen, when you return from labor, carefully rub them
down with hard Wisps, then smooth the Hair and cleanse their Feet, wash their
Claws with warm water, wherein a little Allom has been dissolved, to strengthen
and harden them if they have been softened in the wet; do not over-labour or
heat them in the hot weather; for, if they stand and cool to suddenly upon it,
it subjects them to the Flux Fever, and many other inconveniences; the Dung
heaps of Swine must not be near their Stalls, for that subjects them to the
Pestilence or Murrain; and, they being of a delicate scent, must not be
offended with foul Sinks, or Carrion near them; and, if any infection appear,
speedily separate them, and carry the sick Beast into change of Air; give him
water wherein Rue and Cardus has been boiled, and the Juice of Garlic and
Vinegar.

Their Stalls, especially in Winter, must be very close and warm, paved with
hard Stone or Gravel, well rammed down, and laid asloap; with a convenience to
carry the Urine into the Drain. Boarded Floors I reject; because, let them be
never so close, the Urine and other Excrements, get between them; and,
corrupting in the hollow Caveties, cause noisome smells, by sending up
putrified vapors to sicken and disease the Cattle: As for the Windows, let
them open to the North-East, to let in cool Air in hot and stifling Weather;
for, in cold Weather, especially in Winter, there is no occasion of opening
them; and, in Summer, in much rainy weather, though it be hot, keep them shut
that the Damps and Vapors exhaled by the Sun, may be kept out, as much as is
convenient; lest, they being too much drawn in, create cold Diseases in the
Beast.

Of the Sundry DISEASES and SORRANCES IN Bulls, Oxen, Cows, Calves, etc.
SHOWING From what Cause it Proceeds; the Symtoms to know them by; and approved
Receipts for the Safe, Easy, Speedy, and Cheap Cure of them.
A Remedy for the Fever.
THESE sort of Cattle are very subject to this Distemper, frequently arising
from the corruption of the Blood, by Surfeiting in gross Feeding, ill Airs, no
some Scents, or the like; and is known by the Beasts trembling, groaning,
foaming at Mouth, h(...)viness or dullness of the Eyes; then immediately let him
Blood to re^^dy it.

Take a handful of Plantain-roots well scraped, bruise them and boil them in a
quart of stale Ale, with Two Ounces of London-Treacle, give it hot with a
Drenching Horn, and sprinkle his Hay or other Provinder with Water wherein
Mallows has been boiled.

Murrains of sundry kinds, their Symtoms and proper Remedies
To know if your Cattle be tainted with this dangerous Distomper, which often
sweeps away whole Herds, if not timely prevented: Take the following
observation, viz.

In some Murrains the Cattle drivel and run both at Nose and Mouth; in others
it afflicts them with extreme Thirst, and pining away; and in many Cases it
appears in the Joints, which is known by their much halting, before it can
otherwise be much perceived; sometimes it is known by an afflicting weakness in
the Back and hinder parts, causing great Pains and Aches in the Loins: There is
another kind rises with Pimples all over the Body, as also the swelling out of
the Humor in diverse parts, and then the Disease begins to settle between the
Skin and the Hide, and sometimes appears like a Leaprosie in Pimples and Knobs
all over the Body; their Eyes grow dull, and their Appetite fails them; and
when any of these symtoms appear, immediately separate those on whom they are
visible.

To Remedy these Distempers, take Fennal-seed, Sea-Thistle, Angelica-roots,
stamp and in^use them in Whitewine, take a handful of each, to two quarts of
Wine; and so, proportionable to the number of your Cattle; boil them with two
ounces of Wheat Flour, then strain out the liquid part, and give a pint at a
time, very hot Morning and Evening; bathe their Body with the decoction of
Hellebore or Baresfoot, a Herb so called, which holds all the Winter; and let
them have fresh Air, clean Litter, and with the Root of the forementioned Herb
cut triangular, the better to keep it in, peg their Dewlaps, by making first a
hole through the Skin with a pegging Awl or Bodkin, and by being renewed, it
will attract to it the poisonous corruption in a great measure, and eva^nate it
at the hole.

Instructions to know whether the Murrain has seized an Ox or Cow, etc, beyond
recovery, or to render it exceeding diff^cult.

To be satisfied in this, let the Beast blood in the Neck-Vein, taking away
somewhat more than three pints, if the Beasts strength will allow it; if not,
somewhat less, according to it; let it stand an Hour or Two, and if the Blood
change, there is a fair prospect of Recove^^; but if it do not, the Case is
very desperate and little hopes remains.

However, in this Case, open the Ox or Cows Mouth, thrus^ your Fingers to the
Root of it, make way for a Ball of rusty Fat Bacon, about the bigness of an
Egg, tempered with bruised Ragwort, bleed him or her at the Nose.

This done, take Rue, Longwort, Transie, Time and Hysop, of each half a
handful; add long Pepper, Orpiment, Juniper berries and Tangerick, of each a
penny worth, boil them in White Wind and give it the Beast hot. viz. The liquid
part to the quantity of a quart, having well tempered it with two Ounces of
Methridate.

For Murrain of diverse kinds, a Remedy.
Take Sulpher and unslac'd Lime, the Seeds of Coriander dried, Marjorum and
Garlic, beat these into a Powder, and having sprinkled it on the Coals,
burning in a Chafing Dish or Pan, order it so that the Beast may be sumed with
it, going up his Nostrils, and in all parts, which will bring away at his
Vents, and by sweat, abundance of the Infectious humor; then give a quarter of
an Ounce of Ru^arb, and an Ounce of Gardus boiled in a pint of White Wind, this
must be done three or four times, as soon as the Symptoms of the Disease
appear, though it is tried with great success after it has seized him.

Of the Murrain, beginning in the Throat, and the Remedy for it.
The Symtoms of this kind of Murrain, is the swelling in the Throat, the
dullness and weeping of the E^es, heaviness and weeping of the Head, bloated and
swolled.

To remedy this, take a quart of new Milk, three Cloves of Garlic, three Drams
of Cinnamon, a quarter of a point of Olive Oil, an Ounce of Turmerick well
beaten, a handful of the tops of Rue, boil and give him the liquid part, and
about a quarter of an hour after bore a pretty large hole in the Skin of his
Nose, run some soft Thread smeared with Tar through it, knot it like a Rowel,
and it will be a means to draw out of the O^isice much poisonous Water and
Matter, which afflicted the Throat and Brain, etc.

To cure the swelling in a Beast, occasioned by too much Blood.
Drive him a pretty pace till he grows warm, then blood him in the middle great
Vein under his Tongue; and when he has bled pretty well, rub his Mouth with
Salt and Vinegar, and give him a ball as big as an Egg, made up of bruised
Garlic and Butter.

For a Cough, and shortness of Breath.
Take a Spoonful of Tar-water, bruise with it a head of Garlic, and an ounce
of Liquorish; boil these in a quart of new Milk, and give it hot fasting, for
two or three Mornings.

For the Head Garget.
The Symptoms of this Distemper are, the swelling of the Eyelids and Lips,
blisters on the Tongue, a lumpishness and flaging of the Ears.

In this case draw forth the Tongue, and if there be blisters, take them off
with a sharp Knife, and slit the Tongue underneath an Inch long, though not
very deep, and an infectious water will distill out; then wash it with Vine^ar,
about an hour after take powder of Fenegreek, long Pepper, Turmerick,
Liquorish, and Aniseeds, of each an Ounce; boil them in a quart of Ale, and
give it blood warm.

An approved Remedy for the Flux.
For this Distemper, Take Sloes dried in an Oven, but not too much; beat them
into powder, and give the Beast warm in Wine-Vinegar, two Ounces of it in a
Pint, and keep him fasting a considerable time after; then give him a quarter
of a pound of Rasins, and sower Grapes, in a quar^ of the sharpest White Wind,
and bruise them so that you may easily swallow them; and let the Beast browze
on green Boughs, such as are sweet and wholesome; and if it stay not in, a
little time after this is received, burn him in the sore-head; a little beneath
the Horns, and slit his Ear and Lip, anointing them with Oil and Tar, to keep
the Wounds from putrefying, and after wash it with Urine.

For Madness in a Bull, Ox, or Cow.
This proceeds from a defect in the Blood: Therefore to cure it, cord the Neck
well, and let blood in the Temples, under the Eyes, and in the Ears; then take
Fenegreek, long Pepper, Turmerick, and green Aniseeds, of each an ounce, mix
them with two ounces of the Juice of Ru^, warm it in a quart of strong Ale or
Beer, strain it and thin it well, ther^ spurt it up his Nostrils; or, tying up
the Beasts head to a Rack, draw it as high as you can, and pour it into his
Nostrils and Mouth, and let him continue in that posture half a quarter of an
hour e're you let him down. This Distemper is known by their reeling, or fixing
their Heads against a Wall or Tree.

For the Maw Garget.
This is known by drooping and heaviness of the Beast; the much panting of the
Heart, and hanging down the Head and Ears; by costiveness in the Body, and
forsaking their Food.

To Remedy this, let him blood well in the Neck-Vein; then take Plantain, Rue,
Southernwood, Shepheards-purse, Smallage, Colewort, of each a small handful,
bruis^ them, then take about a handful of Hens-dung, lay it eight hours in a
pint of old wash to steep, then strain out the Liquid part, and put the Herbs
to it; add a quant of strong Ale, and set them on a gentle fire till one half
of the Liquor be consumed; then put in an ounce of Tre^cle, and a spoonful of
the Juice of Garlic, half an ounce of Aniseeds, and the like quantity of
Liquorish-p^wder, strain them, and give the Liquid lukewarm. This is approved
in the Murrain, and has done Cures beyond Expect^tion.

For the Yellows, a Remedy.
This Disease being created of a complication of bad Humors, has man^ others
its attendants, and indeed is the sorerunner of most: It appears by a
yell^wn^s^ in the E^^s, Eyes, and Tail end; and sometimes turning up the H^ir,
you may find it all over the Body.

The speed^ Remedy for this, is to blood ^he Beast, and in the bleeding rub him
well with your Hand^, to make him do it the freer; after this give two handfuls
of Bay Salt in a pint of warm Vinegar, let him fast upon this; and in the
Morning, (for the other is best done over Night) Take Turmerick, Fenegreek,
Aniseeds, and long P^pper, of each a quarter of an ounce, and two drams of
Liquorishpowder, give it powdered and well mixed in a quart of Ale, as
conveniently hot as can be taken: This also much helps in the overflowing of
the Gall.

Pissing Blood.
To Remedy this, Take Nettle-tops or Seeds, the Herb Shepheards-purse, of each
a handful; boil them in a quart of red Wine till a third part be consumed, then
strain it, and add a d^am of Cinnamon in powder, and the Liquid strained out,
let him drink it hot, fasting, and not eat or drink after it for four Hours.

Loss of Cud to restore.
Take a handful of Cud-wort, a Herb so called, bruise it, and make it up into
Balls with Bacon Fat, give it him, and after it half a pint of White Wind
Vinegar; and a little while after bleed him in the large Veins under the
Tongue, and let the Provender you give him, be very sweet and pleasi^g.

The Galls overflowing.
Take two ounces of Sea-Cole Soot, that which is hard knotted together, an
ounce of fine beaten and sifted Pepper, and a^ much Honey, make these up into
Balls with the Yolk of a^ Egg, and fill an Egg-shell with it, and so ram it
down the Ox or Cows Throat; this must be done twice or thrio^.

For any Infection by swallowing poisonous things.
Take two ounces of Mithridate, a quarter of a pint of Olive Oil, put these
into a pint of very sharp White Wind Vinegar, warm them over a Fire, and well
incorporate the^; then give it as hot as he can drink it, and drive him a pace
afterward, which will cause the poisonous Matter to e^acuate.

A Remedy for the Milting of a Beast.
This is when they have had an unluckey stro^k with a Go^d or Pole; or bruised
by rushing against some piece of Timber; and this is known by their uneasiness
in lying down, and suddenly rising up again as if they were restless

To Remedy this, take Stone-Pitch, bruise it into powder to the quantity of two
ounces; add Saffron a dram, of Pepper, a quarter of an ounce in a quart of Ale,
give it the Beast warm, and drive him after it till he become hot; co^l him
again by leasurely driving, and let his lying down be easy, and the Cure will
soon be effected.

The swollen Neck and Chest.
In this case, Take of Honey, Hogs-lard, Beeswax, and fresh Butter, of each an
ounce; make it into an Ointment over a gentle Fire, and anoint the afflicted
place with it; but if the Neck be swollen and raw, take Honey and Mastick, of
each three ounces, fresh Butter a quarter of a pound, and Hogs-Lard the like
quantity; make them into an Ointment over a gentle Fire, and bathe the place
with it as hot as may be well endured.

If the Neck be much swelled and puffed up, boil the Roots of Elecampane till
they become soft; then stamp them in a Mortar, mix them with Hogs-Lard or
Mutton-Suet, three or four ounces of either; add to these Honey and Beeswax,
of each an ounce, Frankincense half an ounce.

For Putrefying or Rottenness.
This will appear by the poverty of the Beast, his Skin sticking close to his
Flesh, continual scowering, and that in smell very offensive, of a whitish
brown color.

To cure this, or in some measure very much remedy it, Take Elder-leaves,
Bay Berries, Myrrh, Rue, and Fetherfew; dry the Herbs so that they may be
powdered; then take a piece of blue Clary, burn it till it becomes red, then
powder it; mix of each of these an ounce, in a quart of Man's Urine, wholesome
and sound; set it over a Fire till it well boyls up, then give him half a pint
at a time, and it will in three times stay the scowering, and much restore his
body.

For inward Sicknesses in general.
Some may not be presently able to find out the Cause of the Distemper, yet
perceive the Cattle sick; in such a case, till it can be better known, this has
proved successful, viz.

Take a quart of Ale, a handful of Wormwood-tops, and as many of Rosem^ry,
bruise them in a Mortar, boil the Herbs well, and then strain out the liquid
part with hard pressing; bruise Garlic and squeeze out two s^oonfuls of the
Juice of it, as much of Housleek and London Treacle, give the Beast this warm,
two or three times, half a pint at a time, and it will mightily revive him, and
stop the progress of the Disease.

For a Fever in Winter.
This comes by cold Damps, lowness of Feeding in mo^^ wet places of unwholesome
Grass; and its Symptoms are, the Beasts shaking and trembling, heavy-Ey'dness,
groaning, foaming at Mouth, etc.

These, or any of them being observed, let the Beast blood with all speed. Take
two ounces of the Juice of Plantain, of Dioscordium an ounce and a half; of
Lapins, a handful, dried and ground into Powder; give him these hot in a quart
of new Ale, being all well mixed, and about two Drams of small Pepper dusted in.

For a dry huskey or hoarse Cough.
Take a quarter of a pint of Hysop-water, and as much of Mint-water, and for
want of them, boil the Herbs in fair Water till it comes to a good strength;
then add the Juice of Leeks and Garlic, of each two spoonfulls; and to these
put half a pint of Oil Olive; gvie these well mixed together warm, twice or
thrice; and if the Cold be not extraordinary, for want of these you may give
Tar and Hone^-water.

For the Lasks or Ray in Calves, or Cough in young Bullocks.
This appears in their want of Appetite, and bad thriving

To remedy it, take a quart of New Milk, Curdle it, though not very thick, with
a little Runnet, and heat this over the Fire for a Cal^, and in twice or thrice
giving of it 'twill ease him of his troublesome Distemper; but, for the Cold
taken by a Bullock, if it be newly done, boil a pint of Barley, a handful of
Rasins in a pint of C^n^ry; or, for want of it sweet Ale; then having very well
strained it out, beat up two Yolks of Eggs in it, and give it him hot; after
this make him a Mash of Wheat Flour, Beans and Lintil Meal. For the Cough in
young Calves, give them Centory bruised to powder, in White Wind.

To Cure the Manginess or Scab.
Boil Garlic in Urine, mix Tar-water with it, and rub over the afflicted part;
and if it be far gone, add Brimstone and a little slaked Lime to Dust it over
afterward, and give him two or three Dosses of White Wind Vinegar, and powder
of bitter Almonds pretty hot; this is also good against the biting of a mad Dog.

To know when Cattle are Hidebound, and the Remedy.
The first observation is, their want of thriving, though there are many
others; if you go about to take up their Skin, it will seem to stick to the
Ribs, also a lameness and defect in their going, and it proceeds from being in
too much rain, sweating and taking cold after labor; to Cure or Remedy this,
boil Featherfew and Bay Leaves in fair water, rub him all over with the
decoction, and after that, with the Lees of White Wind and Neats-foot Oil,
boiled and well mingled, smooth him.

For the Staggers in a Bull, Ox, or Cow. The Dasie, etc.
The Beast that is afflicted with the Staggers, will look very red about the
Eyes, and be often turning his Head backwards.

To Remedy this dangerous Distemper, take half a pint of the best White Wind
Vinegar, tie his head up to the Stall, and pour it warm down his Nostrils, and
let blood at the Nose.

If he turn round he has the Dasie, blood him in the Forehead, bind a Cloth
over his head, and keep it warm, purge it well with the Decoction of Rue and
Hysop.

Pissing blood, Pantasie and Taint.
Let him not drink in twenty four hours; then give him a dish full of Runnet
Curds in a quart of Milk. If he have the P^nt^sie, he will pant much, and shake
at the Flanks. For this, give him a handful of Soot, a quarter of a pint of
Runn^t, and a pint of Chamberlye, well mixed and warmed. If he swell of the
Taint or Sting-worm, give him Urine and Treacie, two ounces of the latter in a
pint of the former.

For the Worm in the Tail.
This is perceived by the Hair breaking off in the Tail where the Worm lies;
and commonly, some of the Joints will appear as eaten asunder, which you may
feel knock one besides the other; and if the Tail be soft toward the end, it
is a true sign of the Worm.

To remedy this, slit the Skin of the under side, above the decayed Joint,
against the Vein, and bleed him in the Veir very well; then take Garlic, Salt,
and Butter, stamp their well together, and bind them on Poultis-wise.

For swelling behind, and rising of the body.
^or this, look in the Mouth for Blisters, break them, and bleed the Beast
under the Tail; then rake in their bodies to break the Blisters there.

Take (for perfecting the Cure) a quart of Buttermilk, a handful of Sea-cole
Soot, an ounce of bole Armoniack powdered, the Juice of a red Onyon, and the
powder of an Egg-shell, and give it the Beast warm, and he will soon be cured.

For the Towering, long sought, that is, Wind-bound, etc.
Much Poverty occasions this Distemper, and is known by their Hides sticking
fast to their Backs; their Eyes sincking in their Heads, wheting of their
Teeth, loss of Cud, and choosing to be alone.

To remedy this, let blood in the Neck; then take of Rue, Fetherfew,
Southernwood, and Rosemary, o^ each a handful; bruise them small, and put them
into a quart of strong Ale or Beer; and after they have stood a considerable
while, press them hard; then, to the liquid part* put long Pepper, Liquorish,
Tumerick, and Anniseeds in powder, of each an ounce; half a quartern of Olive
Oil, make them Milk warm, and give the Beast the whole dose at a time; then
bore the Dew-laps, and peg them with Bares-foot, or Spearg-grass, anointing the
place with Salt and Butter.

For the scowering, long sought.
This distemper is known by the rank smell of the scowering, and is caused by
superfluity to corruption of blood; over-heating, unwholesome Fodder, etc.

For this let blood in the Neck-Vein, take Turmerick, Fennegreek, Grain and
Pepper, Anniseeds and Liquorish in powder, of each an ounce; half a pound of
Allom, two ounces of Charcole in powder, wild Mint, Sage, Rue; Southerwood,
Wormwood, Rosemary, Hysop, of each a handful; bruise them small, and put a
quarter of a pint of Whitewine Vinegar to them; put them to a quart of Ale,
boil them well, and give the liquid part, well strained, to the Beast hot.

To help in making Urine.
The defect in making Urine, many times proceeds from over much heat, sometimes
by driving, Sandy water hindering the passage to the Bladder; and often by
bruised blood in the Kidneys.

To Remedy this, take Cummin-seed, Anniseed, Parsley-seed, and Mustard Seed,
bruise them, and let them sleep in Vinegar ten Hours; then strain them, and
give them the Beast blood warm; about an ounce of each of these is sufficient;
for want of these, take Nettle-Tops, Bay Berries, Penneroyal and White Wind
Vinegar, boiled to the Consumption of half.

For the swelling Foul.
This is known many times by a swelling in all four Legs, sometimes in one,
two, or three; occasioned by Co^rupt Blood, and Rhumish Water.

To Remedy it, draw the Beasts Feet together, and slit with a short Knife, the
Skin under the Fetlock Joint, an ^^ch above the Heel, straight up and down, to
preve^t cutting the Sinnews: Take then Nettle-Tops, and Ga^lick, bruise them
with Bay Salt, and bind them to the wound a Day and a Night,

For the Foul between the Legs and Claws
This is often occasioned by Stubs, Sand or Miery Traveling. To Remedy it, pare
off all that is dead, and rub the Quick till it bleed, then rub off the the
Blood, and lay on dried Verdigreese; then make a Plaster of Hogs-Lard, lay it
on with a Cloth, and let it continue twenty four hours: And if Warts between
the Claws, pa^e it, then Seer it with a hot Iron, and anoint it with Tar,
Beeswax, melted and well tempered together; then bind it with Flax.

For the Evil.
This is known by the weakening and often taking away the Limbs of the Beast,
though many times it takes them in the Neck, as well as Legs, and sometimes in
both, and proves very dangerous to remedy it.

Take Hysop, Sage, Rosemary, of each a good handful, and two handfuls of
Burdock-leaves, boil them in a Gallon of Spring water till half be consumed,
then strain on^ the liquid part, pressing it hard, put into it half a pound o^
Roach-Allom, finely bruised, and pore two or three spoonfuls into the Beasts
Nostrils warm, three times a day, and then let blood in the Tail.

To Remedy the Speed in the hinder parts.
This comes of rankness of Blood, and is catching by young Cattle, from one to
three years, and not beyond, coming through want of Blood.

To cure it, bleed in the Neck-Vein, and give the Beast a handful of Salt, in a
pint of White Wind; then in the hollow of the Gambrils, make a slit two Inches
long, but take care you cut not the Veins or Sinnews; then put in some
Sparagrass, Salt, and Butter, beaten, and well tempered to gether; boil Ruo,
Sage, Featherfew, and Spurge-grass, bruised in a quart of Ale, give it warm,
and drive the Beast well for an hour or two after.

For the biting of the Shrew-Mouse.
This is known by an extraordinary swelling, through the Creatures Venom.

To remedy it, make holes with an Awl in the Hide, as far as it is swelled,
then take red-Earth pretty dry, and mingle it with White Wind, lay it to the
place, binding it on with a Cloth, and it will draw out the Venom; but the
Earth of Swallows Nests, with old Urine, if it can be got, is better.

For the stinging of any Venomous Beast.
Take Plantain bruised, a handful, Oil of Scorpions, two ounces, mix them with
Vinegar, and lay them on like a Poultiss, and that being taken off, in two
hours lay on another Poultis of Dragons-Blood, Barley Meal, and the White of an
Egg, renew it at twelve hours end: This is approved also against the stinging
of Hornets.

For the swelling of the God.
Anoint it with sweet Cream, three times a day; then take the Lome of an old
Wall, steep it in Vinegar, as also Ox Dung; then after Twelve hours, strain out
the Vinegar and bathe it with it very warm.

Over-growing of the Lungs.
This is known by the Beasts breathing heavily, Feeble Coughing, Straining, and
hanging out of the Tongue; Panting, and blowing, or little motion.

To remedy it, take the Ooze of a Tan-Fan, a handful; of brown Sugar Candy, an
ounce; of Olive Oil three ounces; of Tar two ounces; mix these in a pint of
New-milk, and give it the Beast at twice warm. Or, make up two Balls of Tar,
Garlic, Butter and Sugar Candy, each of an equal ^uantity, about the bigness
of an Egg, and force one at a time down his throat.

The Blain in Ox or Cow.
This is known by a swelling about the Face and Eyes; and of the Body, or if
you find Blisters under the Root of the Tongue, cut them away, and rake the
Fundament, and break those Bladders contracted there.

Take then Chamomile, Marshmallows, Groundsil and Bay Leaves, boil them in
Spring or running, water, mix Salt with the liquid part, and give it the Beast
warm to drink.

Chollick or violent pains in the Belly.
This is known by the drawing up of the Belly, the uneasiness in standing;
heavy lowing, and the Beasts Eyes running with water.

To remedy it, take the inward Rhine of Elder, Longwort, and May-weed, of each
a handful; Long-Pepper and Liquorish, each an Ounce, Cummin and Anniseeds, each
half an Ounce, Madder and Turmerick, each two Ounces, boil th^se in a Gallon of
Ale, and give a quart at a time very hot, and take care the Beast take not cold
upon it.

For the Quinsey.
Take a handful of Bay Salt, six roots of Garlic, four new laid Eggs with
their Shells, and an ounce of Orpiment; boil and strain these in a quart of
White Wind, then add an ounce of Venice-Treacle, and give the Beast a pint at a
time very hot.

For Worms in the Maw or Bowels.
This is known by heaviness, shrinking up of the sides and Belly, loss of Cudd,
etc. To remedy it, take the ^ops of Baum, Wormwood, Savin and Southernwood;
bruise them with an ounce of Dill-seed, and as much Ginger, boil them well,
bruised in a quart or three pints of Stillers. Grounds; and add, when strained,
half a pint of Aqua-vitae; give a pint at a time very hot, clean Litter the
Beast, and leave him to rest.

For Putrefaction in the Lungs.
Take Brasile Wood, rasped to Powder, an ounce; of Oil of Turpentine, an ounce
of Juice of Liquorish, or for want of it the Powder; two ounces of Oil of
Bay Berries an ounce, mix these in a quart of Malliga; boil them over a gentle
Fire, to the consumption of a third part; and strain out the liquid, give it
the Beast, half at Morning and half at Evening hot, and repeat it three or four
days, and by proportionable quantities, you may make it all at once.

For a Cows Withering.
Take Mallows, Maidenhair, Magwort, and Colwortleaves, of each a handful;
Aristolochea, Bittany and Mirrh, of each an ounce; bruise these, add a little
fine beaten Pepper, and give it the Beast at thrice, in three pints of warm
Milk, having been first sweetened over the Fire, and very well strained.

Loss of stomach, to Recover.
If this happen through over driving, poorness, weariness, or disagreable Food,
if not soon remedyed, it will bring on Diseases: To do it then, take a hanful
of Salt, dissolve it in White Wind Vinegar; rub the Mouth well wit^ it, and
pour the rest down his Throat, make a little Sawsage of Lean Bacon, well
minced, and thrust after it.

For any hard swelling in a Bulls or Oxes Pizle.
Take Holly-Hauke Roots, Plantain and House-leek, bruise them with fresh
Butter, and then fry them a little in a Pan, and strain out the Juice, and
Butter; and that done, make it into an Ovntment, and anoint the swelled part;
having first washed it with Urine and White Wind V^negar, and if the Yard be
Ulcerated, wash it with V^negar only, wherein Allom has been dissolved.

For swollen Feet, or Surbaiting.
This often comes by over traveling, in Stoney, or stiff Clayey ways, which
fret and strain the Feet. To remedy it, take of Honey and Hogs-lard, of each
two ounces, boil them in a pint of White Wind, till they become so thick that
when cold, they will rope like an Ointment; spread it then on a Cloth, and lay
it on the Foot, a good thickness.

The turning Evil or Sturdy.
This is a Distemper incident to the Head, though it sometimes happens in the
Brains, and at other times, under the Horns, sometimes again in the Neck Joint;
the signs are these, holding up the head in the Air, looking wildly, or turning
round: To remedy these, though very dangerous; take a sharp Knife, and open the
Skin, just up to the Brain; then with a sine Chisel and Mallet, cut out so much
of the Scaup, as you may come at a Bladder that lies on the Brain, which is
full of a Salt humor, take that away without breaking it, close in the Scaup
even as possible; then draw the Skin over it, and sow it with fine Silk, even
and close; anoint it with Oil of Chamomile, make a Plaster of Turpentine, Wax
and Rozen; lay it close on, and so bind it about that no cold may come in, with
a Woollen Cloth; and to do this, you must cast the Beast, and bind him very
strongly, or he will not endure the Operation.

Some hold the other two places incurable; but my Opinion is to let blood in
those pa^ts; bathe with Oil of Turpentine, and make a Drench with
London-Treacle, Oil of Myrrh, and a pint of Canary, taken very hot; and let him
take up his Nostrils, the smoke of Juniper Berries and Storax.

For a swelling Gall or bruise.
Beat in a Mo^ter, the Leaves of round Aristolochia, with Tallow of a Mutton
Kidney, and bind them to the place; having first bathed it well, with Ointment
of Tobacco, and Marshmallows.

For the Clowse or Chush.
Burn old Shoes, take the Ashes, mix them with Tallow, hand Oil of Turpentine,
till they may be a kind of an Ointment; and if not thin enough, add some Oil of
mile, and bathe the Neck of the Beast with it.

For Goaring.
Take a handful of Wood-ashes, finely sifted, a quart of the Grounds of Ale or
Beer, two ounces of Oil of Turpentine; boil them till they may be spread, and
laid to the Wound.

To stanch blood in any Beast.
If a Vein break, or any hurt come to the Beast, that it bleed much, or in
blooding you cannot many times stop it at pleasure.

Take Hares or Rabits Wool, dip it in the Oil of Spike, and apply it to the
Hurt, Wound, or Incission; having first scattered over it a little powder of
Franckincense, bind it on, and the bleeding wi^^ immediately stay: For want of
these, take the Ashes of Vine-twigs, and the juice of Nettles, well tempered
together, and apply it to the afflicted part.

Lay over it a Plaster of Beeswax, Honey, Turpentine, Hogs-Lard and
Wheat Flour; made and incorporated over a gentle Fire.

For Itching or Mainginess.
Take an ounce of Verdigrease, a pint of Linseed Oil, a quarter of a pint of
Aqua-vitae; Tar-water, half a quarter of a pint, wash the Beast over with
strong Vinegar and Urine, where the affliction is, then anoint him with this
incorporated over a gentle Fire.

An Excellent Purge to preserve health.
Take the Dross of Olive Oil, two ounces; a pennyworth of Honey, two
pennyworth of Bay-berry Oil, twelve Laurel leaves dried and beaten into
Powder, mix these together in a quart of strong Ale, and give it M^lk-warm,
fasting; then take a pretty large Candle, and put into his Fundament, as far as
you can reach, and leave it there; this will effectually cleanse the Body, and
bring away much foulness, and gross Humors.

Another excellent Purge to prevent Sickness.
Take Cinnamon, and shaved Hartshorn, of each an ounce; B^y-Salt, two ounces;
Senna, a handful; Hellebore, two o^ three Leaves; boil these in running water,
add two ounces of brown Sugar Candy, and give him a pint hot fasting: This is
an excellent preserver of health, after Winter, before Cattle are turned to
Grass.

To Remedy Ha^ling.
This is caused sundry ways, but chiefly by the Blood falling down into the
Heels, and the inordinate heat of the Hoof; rub it extreme hard, then scarrifie
or pounce the Skin; but if in the Foot, with your Knives point, open it between
the Claws, cleanse it well with Linnen-F^ags, diped in water and Salt; anoint
it with Olive Oil, Hogs-Lard, Goats or Mutton Suet, and bind it up, not
suffering the Beast till well, to go in the wet, especially dirty ways.

Cramp and Kibes.
For the first of these, rub his Thighs, Legs and Knees, with Salt, dissolved
in oil of Spike, and make the Beast move up and down a pretty pace afterward.

For the latter, pare the Kibes, and let them bleed well, then take
Verdigrease, and the Yolk of a new laid Egg; bruise or beat them well together;
make of them a Plaster, and apply it to the Wound.

For defects in the Eyes, as Webb, Pin or Haw, etc.
Bleed the Beast in the Temple Vein, on that side the Defect is; if it be a Haw
on the Eye, take it off with the finest Lance of your Fleams; then open an Egg
in the Crown, and let out the White, that done, fill it with fine beaten Salt,
and roast it in hot Embers; then powder the Salt and Eggshell, and disolve in a
Spoonful of Eyebright-water, a little of it; add some small quantity of the
juice of Housleek, and with a Feather, sprinkle it into the Eye, twice or
thrice a Day, and keep close the Lidd with your hand for a time.

For any Green Wound.
Take Turpentine, Hogs-Lard, Tar and Beeswax, of each an ounce, and in melting
over a gentle Fire, half an ounce of Verdigrease, and two Spoonfuls of Oil of
Water Lillies; make them into a Salve or Ointment, spread them on Leather, wash
the Wound with warm Urine, and then apply the Plaster to it.

A good Medicine for any surprising sickness, when it is not well known what to
be.
Take the Roots of Poplar, and Sea Onions, and common Salt, of each a handful,
stamp and infuse them in Water three days; then heat the water gently over a
Fire, and press it, sweeten it with a little Sugar Candy, and give it the Beast
to drink.

Lice or Ticks afflicting the Beast.
Take Helebore, or Barefoot and Staves-Acre, a Herb so called; stamp and
infuse them in Vinegar, boil them with Oil of Olives, to the thickness of an
Ointment, then anoint the part afflicted, and it will not only kill those as
are there, but keep any from coming after them, so long as the scent remains.

For the Lasks in large Cattle.
Take half a Gallon of Spring Water, the ba^k of Ivy, a handful; of dried
Sloes, two handfuls; of Verjuice a quart, boil these in the liquid, to the
consumption of half, and give the Beast a pint at a time hot to drink, when he
is fasting.

To help a Beast that is Dewboulen.
Bleed him in the Tail, grate a Nutmeg, and take off the top of the Shell of an
Egg, take out the White, fill it with White Wind and the Nutmeg, and then put
the whole Shell, and all that is in it, down the Beasts throat, and walk him up
and down till he grow hot. This sweling is caused by the Beasts eating of very
wett Grass, and he sucks up with it much Air; wherefore a moderate purge in
this case, will do very well.

A special way to breed Milk in Kine.
To do this, give the Cow Water wherein Spurg and Laurel has been boiled, which
will gently purge the Blood; then make her good Mashes of Malt and warm Milk;
each Evening let her have a quart of Ale, and a quart of Milk mixed together;
but then, the Curd taken off, put into it Coriander-seeds, Lettice-seeds,
Cummin-seeds and Ann^-seeds beaten to powder, and when they are well mixed, and
infused, for three or four hours, give it the Beast, and in repeating it a few
times, she will give store of thick and sweet Milk; if it be in the Winter, to
refine her Milk, when b^d, you may let her feed on Turnips, which much cleanse
in their green Tops, and purge the Blood.

For the Beasts making Blend-water.
Some name this Distemper, the Morelough; sometimes it proceeds from corrupt
Blood, or other times, from the Yellows, the Seed of most Diseases; and many
times from sudden change of Pasture, or Air.

To remedy this, take the powder of Charcole, finely beaten, as much as will
sill an Egg-shell, and ^ole-Armoniack powdered, half as much; about a handful
of the inward dried Bark of an Oak, bruised into powder; put them into a quart
of Milk, and give it the Beast fasting in the Morning and at Night.

To take off the Wart, or An-berry.
This is a spungy Excressence, proceeding from corrupt Blood, and grows on the
Beast most commonly from One to Four Years.

To Remedy it, take Nine or T^n Horse-hairs, and tie about the Wart, as hard as
you can, and anoint it with Oil of Spike, and in Eight or Ten Days it will fall
off, and then it is to be healed with Unslack'd Lime; but if it happen to be
flat, that it cannot be conveniently taken up, then you must take off by
Cauterizing with a hot Iron, and anoint it with a mixture of Honey, and Oil of
Chamomile.

If it be among the Sinnews or Veins, or both, use Resogar, or Mercury, to take
it off; then, for two days, st^p the Hole with Flax, and the white of an Egg,
and so heal it with Lime and Honey.

For the Eating Sore in the Neck.
To Remedy this affliction, take Three Roots of Garlic, an Ounce of the Flower
of Brimstone, Six Nut-galls, and a handful of Soot, boil these in a quart of
sharp Vinegar, and add a quarter of a pound of Hogs-Lard; let them boil till
they become the thickness of an Oyn^ment; and anoint the Sore with it, after
washed with Chamber-lye, once or twice a day, according as the Sore, or
dangerousness of it requires.

For the Aposthume.
Take two Ounces of Linseed, a handful of Mash-mallows, an^ an Ounce of
Nut-galls, bruise them well together; add the Juice of White Clud over, and two
Ounces of Woodsoo^; boil them in three pints of White Wind, till they come to
the thickness of a Poultess; lay it to the swelling, and it will in a little
time break it; then lay on a Plaster of Beeswax, anointing it with Oil of
Mash-mallows, and re^ew it once a day, and by this means the Corruption will be
brought away, and the wound made by it, healed.

The mattering Ulcers, Boyles, etc.
Take an Ounce of Leaven, two Roots of White Lillys, and an Ounce of Onions;
bruise them, and boil them well, in a pint of Vinegar, and having bled well in
the Neck-Vein, apply this as a Poultess, to the place grieved, and it will
remove the Cause in a short time, being renewed once a day; and heal up the
Wound, if anointed with L^nseed-Oyl, that no relaps need be feared.

For the inveterate Headache.
Take a Root of Garlic, bruise it and boil it in a pint of White Wind, strain
out the Liquid part, and with a Syringe, spirt it into the Nostrils and Ears of
the Feast; then fume him with Storax, dried Rue, and Savin, giving him after to
cherrish him, a quart of Ale, wherein Rosemary and Mint has been boiled, and it
will take away by Rhume, and other means, the cause of the Grief; or if not,
speedily give him a Root of Garlic, or Three or Four Lawrel-leaves, and a
handful of Bay Salt, the liquid part of a quart of White Wind, they have been
boiled in.

Swollen Eyes.
To Remedy this, take two Ounces of Honey, a quarter of a pound of
Wheat Flour, an Ounce of the Juice of Celendine, make them into a Plaster,
with Vinegar, and the White of an Egg, and lay it on the Eye that is swollen,
and let blood in the Temple Vein.

For weeping, or Rheumatick Eyes.
Take an Ounce of Bole-Armoniack, two Ounces of wild Parsnip-Root, half a
quartern of Eye-bright-water, a little handful of Meal, an Ounce of Honey, mix
these well, by bruising such as are to be so done; and mix them with so much
White Wind, as they may spread Playsterwise; and they will dry up, and drive
back the Rhume, and much clear and enliven the Sight.

For Mattering of the Eyes.
This is caused by the congealing of Humors, before they can descend; to
remedy it; take Saffron two Drams; Franckincense an ounce, and the like
quantity of Mirrh; boil them in a pint of White Wind, and strain thinly out the
liquid part; of which, you must give the Beast three or four spoonfuls in his
Nostrils, holding up his head that it may be contained, and not presently
snorted out; with the remaining part, wash his Eyes and Mouth.

To recover a clear Sight, in dark, cloudy, or imperfect Eyes.
To do this, bruise fine white Suger-Candy, burnt Roach-Allom, and ^ Bone burnt
till it can be powdered; being finely sifted, blow a little of it through a
Quill, into the Eye, and often doing this, by his hard winking, will work off
the Film or Skin that hinders the clearness of the Sight.

For Shails or Nails in the Eye.
To Remedy this, take an ounce of live Honey, as much Bo^e-Armoniack, an ounce
of Stone-Salt, well burnt, half a quartern of the Juice of Baum, or Mint;
bruise and mix them well together, and then infuse them in a pint of Eyebright
water, two or three days, take of the clear part, and keep it to wash the
Beasts Eyes, Morning and Evening, and the defects by it, will be taken away.

For Spots, Pins, or Webbs in the Eyes.
Burn Allablaster, and beat it into fine powder, blow it in^o the Eyes of the
Beast, and then prepare a water for washing them afterward in the same
following manner.

Take the Leaves and Roots of Strawberries, Parsley, H^usleek and Sage, boil
them well in White Wind, and st^ain out the liquid part, and being cool, wash
the Eyes with them, as often as you blow in the Powder.

Directions to preserve the Lungs.
The afflictions of the Lungs, most usually proceeds from the unwholesome lying
of the Beast, which generating store of raw Humors, and Crudities, they
descend upon the Lungs, and afflict them with diverse Maladies.

Wherefore be careful that as soon as you perceive any defect, by Caugling,
Straightning, Rattling, Wheesing, etc. Make the following Medicine viz.

Take two ounces of Liquorish powder, and as much of ^nny-seeds;
Fennegreck-seeds, and Honey, boil these in a quart of Maltaga; over a gentle
Fire, strain it, and give the liquid part as hot as he can well endure it.

If the Cough has violently seized the Beast, take a handful of Wheat Flour,
half an ounce of Poppy-seed, two rue laid Eggs, a handful of Bean-flower, and
half a ^andful of Mugwort, boil these in a Gallon of Ale, and give a quart of
the liquid part at a time, Morning and Evening; if the Cough be old, add Hysop,
a handful, and half a^ ounce of A^loes.

For the Ague, an approved Remedy.
This Distemper is known by the beating of the Beasts Veins, his Melancholy,
and the dullness of his Eyes, Driveling, Shivering, and the like.

To Remedy this, take a good handful of Rue, two or three Burdock-Roots, half a
pint of Linseed-Oyl, a pickle Herring, mix and bruise these together, boil them
in two quarts of Vinegar, and press out the liquid part very hard; and having
first bled the Beast at the Tail and Neck, give him a pint of it hot; and an
hour after, another Pint, and the remainder the next Morning; and so do twice
or thrice; if the Ague leave him not the first time, adding a quarter of a Pint
of Mustard Seed, and it will effectually answer your expectation.

For a Beast that is swelled, by swallowing a Horse-Leach or poisonous Grubb,
etc.
Take the Oil of Olives, a pint of White Wind; Vinegar, half a pint; dried
Figgs two Ounces, the tops of Rue a handful; new Milk a pint, boil them
together, and strain out the liquid part, give it hot to the Beast, and keep
him moving, and by purging, and sweat, the Venomous quality will be evaporated.

For swelling by over-feeding on Corn and Clover.
You may in this, use the aforesaid Medicine for swelling, adding a little
brown Sugar, and at the same time, giving him a Clyster made of Liverwort,
Turmerick, Ground sil and Mallows boiled in fair water; adding to the liquid
part, a quarter of a pound of the coarsest brown Sugar; rake the Beast as well
as you can before you give it, dipping your Hand and Arm in Oil, or anointing
with Hogs-Lard.

For the Violent Chollick, pains in the Stomach, or Belly.
To Remedy these dangerous and painful Distempers, take an ounce of
London-Trea^le, a quarter of an ounce of Rhubarb, two Drams of the Oil of Mace,
a little handful of the tops of May-weed, grossly bruised; boil them in a qua^t
of Ale, and give the Beast the liquid part, very hot, and ^ase presently will
be given, and in twice giving, the Distemper removed.

For the Brawns.
If the Beast be afflicted with pains of the Reins, Brawns or M^scles, which
disables and enfeebles him; blood him in the Tail, or Flank: Take two Roots of
Garlic, a handful of Rue, two ounces of Sugar Candy, an ounce of Cinnamo^, and
the juice of three or four ^emons; put these into a quart of Ale, and boil them
well; then to the pained p^rt lay a Plaster of Beeswax, Turpentine, and
Storax.

To stanch bleeding in a^y Wound, etc.
This many times occasions the loss of a good Beast, when it may be easily
remedied, taken in time: And i^ done only by burning the Twig of the Vine, and
making Ashes, mix them with Litharge, and apply it to the wound or bleeding at
the Nose, or over-straining after Gelding, which many times causes dangerous
bleeding, and it will in a little time stay it.

For the Liver-Sickness.
This is most occasioned by bad digestion, and ill blood, which much afflicts
the Liver, by carrying noctious Vapors along with it, from the digestion of
the Stomach, and often proves fatal, if not regarded in time.

To remedy this, take a hanful of Hysop, two ounces of Figs, an ounce of
Bole-Armoniack, and a few tops of Juniper, or for want of that,
Juniper Berries; boil these in a quart of White Wind, and give it the Beast at
twice, very hot; then when it has by its operation, stired his blood, bleed him
well between the two times giving, and keep him warm two or three days.

For a Pestilential Blain.
Take for this (which comes by some poisonous Infection, breaking out, as
expelled and forced by Nature) a^ Ounce of Turpentine, as much Rye-meal,
Beeswax half ^n Ounce, make of these, with an Ounce and a half of Li^^seed, a
Plaster; apply it to the Sore, and it will draw it to a Head; then if it break
not of it self, Lance it, and lay on a fresh Plaster, having first anointed it
with Ointment of Tobacco, and the poisonous Corruption in twice or thrice
doing, will be drawn away, and render the Beast sound and healthy.

For Blood-pissing, an excellent Receipt.
This is occasioned by bad Digestion, so that the Liver by defect of the
Stomach, and its own want of Heat, not being able well to digest the Blood,
sends it undigested to be conveyed away by the Uriturs; but many times it
happens by Blows, or violent over-strainings, whereby the Kidneys, or Reigns of
the Back are bruised, or hurt, of some Vein broken. To Remedy this, take two
Ounces of the Juice of Garlic, half a Pint of Aqua-vitae an Ounce of
Bole-Armoniack in fine Powder, and give it hot to the Beast fasting; and if it
stays not his Pissing blood the first time, you must use it oftener, and it will
effect the cure.

For Aches and Pains.
This comes frequently by taking Cold, over-labouring, straining, some bruise,
or hurt, or old sore not well cured. To Remedy this, let Blood in the ^lanks,
and under the Tail, then take Horstail, a Herb so called, Baum and Winte^
Savory, boil these, of each a good handful in a Gallon of fair Water, and with
a Rag dipped in the liquid part when it is as hot as may be, bathe the Limbs,
or grieved part; after this, bathe in Oil of Spike and Turpentine well mixed
together and heated.

An approved Remedy for the Mainge.
This comes often by uncleanly Feeding and Lying, ^ankness of Blood, or
Humors: To Remedy it, rub the Beast with a Hair-cloath to take off the Scurff,
and so, that the Maingy parts may bleed a little, that the salt wa^ery Humor
may come forth; then bleed in the Neek, and ^noint the maingy place with an
Ointment made of Butter and Verdigrease; hoil in a Quart of Ale, Rue and
Cardus, and give him the liquid part warm.

For Mattering Sores or Ulcers.
Wash these with warm Vinegar, wherein has been dissolved a little Allom, dry
them after this gently with a clean Cloth, then take Stone-pitch an Ounce, Tar
as much, Beeswax and Sheeps-suet, of each two Ounces; make them unto an
Ointment, or thin Plaster with Linseed Oil, and ^pply it as a Plaster on
Linen or Leather to the Sore, and ^enew it in five or six days; but if there
be any mortified, proud, or dead Flesh, you must eat it away with burnt Allom
or burnt Salt.

For Hurts in the Heels.
Wash the Feet of the Beast clean from Gravel, Sand, or Dirt with warm Water,
then clip away the Hair, if the Ho^ be above the Hoof, and wash it well with
Urine; after that, let him stand a while, and then anoint it with ^ar,
Mutton-suet, and Oil of Camomile made into an Ointment over a gentle Fire, and
bind it up with Flax, Tow, or a Linen Rag, so that no Wet come at it. Do this
twice or thrice, and it will be well.

For fastening the loose Hoo^.
When the Hoof grows loose, or hollow, or seperates from the firmness that
should hold it fast, which, if not apparent by moving, you may know by knocking
it, f^^ then it will sound hollow.

To fix the Hoof, and restore the wasting and defe^ take an Ounce of the Oil of
Bays, two Ounces of N^ Oil, and three of Turpentine, warm them, and mix the
well over a gentle Fire, dip a double Rag in it, and b^ it about the Hoof as
hot as may be, after you have pa^ it, as you see convenient; and keep the Beast
dry, that ^ from going in the Wet, and in twice or thrice renew^ this, the
Business will be effected.

Bruises under the Hoof.
To Remedy this, which proves very painful, especi^ to laboring Beasts, and
sometimes corrupts and makes t^ Hoof shed, which utterly disables them, ^ry two
hand^ of Cow Dung, stamped first with one handful of Pa^ and Butter, and bind
it on Poultiswise very hot; but ^ fore you do it, pare the Hoof, and bleed in
the Foot-V^ and it will Remedy the Grief.

A General Remedy.
Seeing particular Remedies cannot he always had wh^ particular Immergencies
require them, I have tho (...) to prescribe one that may be of special use to
(...) ^den Danger, or Death, if not cure most (...) to this kind of Creature,
viz.

Take a handful of Longwort, a (...) much of the inward Rhine of Elder, a
ha(...) of (...) these be well bruised, and put them into (...) of ^^ there let
them infuse a pretty while then sees them o^ a gentle Fire, add then an Ounce
of long Pepper, as (...) Liquorish, Anniseeds, and Cummin-seeds, having first
w^ beaten them with half an Ounce of Turmerick; to these add a quarter of a
Pound of Mather, and whilst the are seething, put into a ^owl, or other
convenient Vess^ a handful of Bay Salt, half a handful of Garlic, four ^^ laid
Eggs with their Shells, two Balls of Orpiment, b^^ these well together, and
when the boiled Liquor is ha^ ^old, put it into the Bowl, and brew it together,
and then ^rain and press out hard the liquid part, and give half a ^int a^ a
time warm.

You may make a greater quantity of this at a time, and ^eep in a readiness for
a Reserve on all necessary Occasi^ns, when a Beast falls Sick, or Sickness by
visible Symp^oms i^ threatened,

A precious Medicine to prevent inward Sickness.
Take Grains, Cummin-seeds, Anniseed, and Bay-ber^ies, of each an Ounce,
Fenegreek-seeds, and Turmerick, ^ach half an Ounce, Orpiment a little Ball,
Methridate ^wo spoonfuls, Madder a little handful, bruise and mix ^hese well
together, and put them into three quarts of Ale, boil them well, and strain out
the liquid part, give it as the former.

For trembling of the Heart, or inward Pains.
Take Flintfoot that is hard, and dried on a Post or Roof, beat it into Powder
with Bay Salt, then sees it in ^running Water, also a handful of green Ivy,
and a little ^handf^l of Soot, and when the Ivy is soft with boiling, press out
the liquid part very hard, and give it half a pint ^t a time, as you see
occasion, Blood-warm; and this is likewise excellent to give them in the Spring
before you t^rn them to Grass.

The Gargyse, an approved way to cure.
The Gargyse is a swelling upon the Eye, beside the Bone, like a Botch, or
Boil, and if the Beast have it cut off, a circle of Skin round it, and a little
one round that; or you may do it by seering the Skin till you see it yellow,
and this will keep it from coming to the Lips, which if it attain to, most hold
it incurable; then sees Bay Salt in Cha^^berly, and wash the sore place
Morning and Evening, scraping off the Filth, and so ordering it till the
swelling sink, and it leave Wa^^^ing and Mattering; then take two Ounces of
Honey, and a quarter of a pint of Nerve-Oyl^ mix them over a Fire, and anoint
the place with it, and it will grow well.

For Springes, a speedy Cure.
This Distemper is known by the Beasts unusual throwing his Head backward
toward his Belly, and stamp w^ his Legs.

When you perceive this, thrust your hand up into ^ Fundament as far as you
can, pull out the Dung, and the^ you will perceive streaks of Blood upon it;
when yo^ have done this as clean as may be, take a handful of B^^ salt, and at
twice put it in as far as you may, and it wi^ remedy the Distemper.

For Lameness or Halting.
When you perceive the Beast Halts, and is uneasy in ^ going, apply your self
to his Feet, and where you find t^ Hoof very hot, there is the Ailment, then
feel above ^ and if the Blood be above the Hoof in the Leg, dissolv^ or
disperse it with rubing and cha^ing, and if it cannot ^ so dissipated, scarisie
or pounce the Skin with a Knife, ^ Bodkin; or if it be in the Foot, open it a
little with Knife between the two Claws, and lay a Clout to the Sor^ dipped in
boiled Vinegar and Salt as hot as may be, naking the Beast a Shoe of Broom,
and let him not go into the Wet.

This Blood, if it be not let out in time, will corrupt and turn to Matter, and
endanger the falling of the Hoo^ at least admit but of a very difficult Cure;
if the Blood be in the lowermost part of the Hoof, the outermost Claw must be
pared to the quick, and then having let out the Blood, dip the Clout in Water,
Salt, and Olive-Oyl, and lay it on them, taking this off, anoint it with old
Swine^ Grease, and Goats Suet boiled together, and it will quickly be well:
This by some is called the Fowl or Wisp.

For the swelling of the Knees and other Joints.
If you find the Joints swelled, bathe them with warm Vine ^ar, chasing it in
strongly with your Hands, then bruis^ Linseed and Melliiot, a Herb so called,
and lay it on Poul^is-wise, fried in Hogs-lard; let this be done very hot.

If under the Swelling there be any Humor contracted, lay o^ Leaven and Barley
Meal sod in Water and Honey, and when it is Ripe, it must be Lanced, and anoint
it with Ointment of Tobacco, covering the Wound with a Plaster of Diaculum,
and renew this in two or three days, and the Beast will be easy, and sit to
Travel, or go to Plough, etc.

For Hurts in the Heel or Hoof, etc.
For this, take Stone-pitch, Brimstone, and greasy Wool, and burn them upon
the afflicted place with a hot Iron; this ^s likewise proper when the Beast is
pricked with a slub Thorn, or Nail, either of them being first pulled out; but
if it be ^leep, it must be gently opened with the sharp point of a Knife, and
Grease melted into the Wound.

For Kibes in the Heels.
You must in this case, cast the Beast, if he be not very tractable, otherways
he will not easily endure the pain of the Operation, and having bound his Legs,
take a sharp pointed Knife, and turn out the Kibe as nigh as you can, and let
him bloed well: Then

Take a Pennyworth of Verdigrease, and the Yolk of an Egg, temper them well
together, and spread them Plaister-wise on Leather, then bind them to the Sore,
and in once or twice renewing it, 'twill be well.

For the Swelling of the Udders.
If the Udders of your Cows be swelled, take a handful of I^y-leaves, boil them
well in a quart of stale Beer, bathe the Udders with the liquid part warm, and
then smoa^ them with Honey-combs and Camomile.

For Feet that are worn or surbated.
This happens most to the laboring sort of these Cattle and when it so falls
out, wash their Feet with Man's U(...) very warm, and kindling a Fire with
Twigs and Spra^ when the Flame is done, make him stand on the glowr^ Embers,
and anoint his Horns with Tar and Oil, or Hoggrease, then rub them over with
Oil of Bays and Cam^mile very hot, pi^k out the Gravel, and stop the Cl(...)
with Tow dipped in Tar, and Hogs-lard.

Scabs and unseemly breakings out.
This is caused by bad Humors, occasioned by ove^rank Feeding: To remove it,
the best way is;

Let the Beast Blood in the Nose, Ears, and Tail, bo^ three or four handfuls of
bruised Garlic in a Gallon o^ Water, and being strained out, wash the place
grieved w(...) it, and they will dye away, and peel off in three or for
washings.

For any Venomous Wound.
Take a handful of Pennyroyal, stamp it with an Oun^ of the Flower of
Brimstone, boil them in a pint of Vi^^gar, and as much Water, then add an Ounce
of Allo^ with as many beaten Almonds, or Figs, as will make i^ thicken, when
three parts boiled away; and spreading ^^ Poultis, or Plaisterwise, apply it to
the Sore, and it wi^^ in twice doing, draw out the Venom; then anoint it wit^
an Ointment made of Butter and Beeswax, and it wi^ heal.

To make Beasts seed well, and prevent pincing and falling aw^^
Sometimes there are hidden Diseases, not without great difficulty to be
discerned, that makes Beasts pine and languish, forsake their Meat, and lose
their Flesh. To Remedy this; Take the Root of a Sea Oynion, and the Root of a
Poplar-tree, each four Ounces, scrape or slice them thin, add a handful of
Salt, and infuse them in the Water your Beast drinks some hours before he does
drink, and if there be more than one afflicted, use a greater quantity, and it
will soon restore their Appetite, make them feed lustily, and create good
Blood, which will plump up their Flesh, and render them plump and lusty.

For Swellings about the Jaws and E^rs, etc.
This is frequently occasioned by Pestilential Humors and is a forerunner of
the Mur^ain; therefore, as soon as ever you perceive it,

Take a handful of Ragwort, stamp it with about three Ounces of rusty Bacon,
open the Beast's Mouth, and put it under his Tongue as far as may be, then let
him Blood at the Nose, and under the Tongue; when this is done,

Take a handful of Tansie, as much Rue, Longwort, Hysop, and Time, stamp them,
and take a quart of the best Ale Grounds, and boil them in it, but not
overmuch, put the Liquor into a close Vessel, and add of Pepper-Grains,
Orpiment, and Fenn^greek-seed, each an Ounce give a pint at a time very warm.

For swelling or hardness in the Dewlaps.
This frequently proceeds from Sickness, and Diseases in the ^ungs; therefore
if you perceive them very far up, and har^, feel the Hide on the Back, and if
it crackle or snap much,

Take Turm^rick, long Pepper-grains, Fennegreek, Madder, and Anniseeds, of each
an Ounce, Methridate half an Ounce, boil these in a quart of White Wind, strain
out the liqu^d part, and give it the Beast hot, then peg his Dewlaps and put in
a Pest or Sprig of Helebore, or Bearsfoot, a Herb so called, and put the Beast
into a warm House; give him some after a warm Mash of Bran, and boiled Barley.

For inward wasting.
This is known by a short husking Cough, and thrustin^ out of the Tongue, and
if he be much perished in the Lungs, the cure will be very difficult, therefore
it oug^ to be taken in time; whether the Beast be so perished o^ not, you may
know by the Hide, which then will usually stick much faster on the left side,
than on any other part.

To Remedy this, take Mace, Cloves, and Pepper, eac^ half an Ounce, Anniseeds,
and the bitter R^ind of Wallnuts, each an Ounce, Garlic, a good Head, bruise
the^^ well together in a Mortar, or some such like Utensil, and boil them in a
quart of old Mallaga, and give half a p(...) at a time, and it will wonderfully
restore the Lungs.

The manner of Settering Cattle.
To do this, take Setter-wort, otherways called H^lebore, or Bears-foot, and
peeled Garlic, of each a ve^^ small handful, stamp them, and wrap them up in
Butter like Pills, then make a little slit in the Dewlap of the Beast two
Inches behind the Sticking-place to the Breastward, then open it with your
Finger, so that you c^^ make way for one of the Pellets, or more, to lodge in
the Vacancy, then run a Rowel, or String through both Li^^ of the Slit, dipped
in Tar, or Grease, so that it may keep it together; yet, by drawing, turned
round at pleasure: And three days after this is put in, open the Slit, and let
o^^ the Corruption, if it be come down, if not, take out the old, and put in
new Garlic, and Setter-wort in the former manner, close it with the Rowel
again new anointed, and often turn it round, that the Corruption may slow
thence; and if, for all this, you find it much swollen, and hard, so that it
will not come away, take a hot Iron, and take up part of the Sore, the Skin and
the Flesh in such ^ place as is most convenient, but not to come to the Bo^e,
and thrust this Iron through both sides, or right under, i^ the swelling be
just unde^nea^h, then anoint it with Ta^, and Hogs-Lard; after you have run a
little Stick with a fin^ R^g dipped in Oil, through the Hole, and having
sea^ched it well, apply Oil of Mallows to heal it up, etc.

General Rules for Feeding, Ordering, and Fattening Oxen, and Cows, etc.
Though particular Rules in many Cases of this Nature may be wanting, since all
Counties have not the convenience of Feeding alike, it will be therefore
necessary, before I enter on other Matters, to speak something in General, and
leave it to the Discretion of the Industrious Husba^dman, Farmer, or Grasier,
viz.

If there be store of good Pasture in the Country where you live, that is the
best; but where it is wanting, especially in the Winter, it will be proper to
keep them in the St^lls, or in any good warm Housing-yard, or Pingle, if the
Snow lie not thick on the Ground, where you may Fother them with what your
Store affords; where there are plenty of Tares to be had, it is a very good
Feed for them, as also short sweet Hay, for the long they cannot so well
manage, unless it be cut, or chopped; nor is it so sweet and nourishing for
this kind of Cattle, if it grow on proportionable ground.

They likewise will feed well on Chaff, and cut Hay almost to the smalness: The
Leaves and tender Stalks o^ Coleworts they much delight in, as also Turnips,
and new Grains; these latter much increase Milk in the Udders of the Cows; and
to keep up their Stomachs, give them Lupi^s and Chick-pease sodden in Water,
but not very soft, f^r then they will be apt to refuse them, as grown clammy,
and sticking about their Teeth and Lips; and when you g^ve them these, mingle
them among Chaff, and a few Ears o^ Wheat, and if you can get any wholesome
green Branches o^ Trees in the Wintertime, let them brouse on them, and they
will cleanse their Blood, and much invigorate them; and these are also proper
in Summer, especially the Elm, the Ash, Poplar, Holm, Oak, and Fig Tree: Then,
to hasten their Fatning, give them Wheat-Ears, ^apes bruised, Apples,
Radish-Leaves and Roots, Meal mixed with Wheat-Chaff, and new Grains, and wash
them with warm Water, often rubing and loosening the Skin; some allow making a
little sli^ in their Skins, and blowing in Wind between the outward Skin and
the Rhine of their Bellies, will loosen their Skins, and make them thrive a^ace.

If their Appetites fail, give them Coleworts stamped and steeped in Vinegar;
if they take them not in kindly, mingle a little Wheat-bran, and Chaff with
them: In Winter they should be Foddered very early, then a^ Noon, and at
Sunsetting; and in so ordering, they will yield abundance of Tallow, and their
Flesh grow extraordinary good and Juycy, to the advantage of the Seller and
Buyer.

Other Methods for watering Cattle, and Distempers got by unwholesome drinking,
c^red.
In Winter, give your Cows and Heifers, often, warm Water, with Bran boiled in
it, which is held exceeding good to render them Fruitful, and to make the Cows
produce Milk in a great measure; and in wa^ering those Lakes, or other
convenient places filled with R^^in-water, are better than any other; for,
indeed, they desire not very fair Water to drink; however if their Water be
over foul, it will fill their Stomachs with Filth it leaves behind, and hinder
Digestion; and if they have unknown to you, drank any muddy Water, that makes
them full off from their Feeding, by loss of Appetite, take timely ca^e to
restore them to that, and a good Cudd.

Take a handful of Peletory of Spain, as much Rue, Fetherfew, Sage, and
Horehound; a good handful of Bay Salt, and three pints of new Ale* sees them
in the liquor pretty well, and strain out the liquid part, and give it the
afflicted Beast blood-warm in the Morning, as near Fasting as may be, and
suffer no drinking till the Afternoon.

This is to be perceived by often belching, and a rumbling in the Belly,
dullness of the Eyes, and their frequent ^icking themselves, grieving and
bemoaning, as it were their Condition. There is yet another way to Remedy this;
when the things beforementioned; cannot be had without much tro^ble, viz. bind
the Tail close by the Rump as h^r^ as may be, give half a pint of Olive Oil in
a pint of Whi^ewine, and drive the Beast apace for the space of a Mile, then
anoint your Hands with Hogs grease, thrust them up the Fundament, and rake well
out as much Dung as (...) can then drive him again, then let Blood under the
Tail n(...) the Rump, and unbind him.

To cause increase of Milk and keep them from Vermin, etc.
To increase Milk, and make it good when it is naught let your Cattle seed a
while on short Clover, then in their dr^ Provinder, give them Cumminseed, and
black (...) well scattered in it, that they may take it freely; rub the Udders
over with Runnet, and afterward with ^^ats-foot-O^l, and let them drink Water,
Strawberry leaves having been bruised and steeped therein. And if a Cow or
Heifer b^ barren; and you would remedy it, put her into Fields, o^ other
Grounds where Broom grow much about the blooming time of it, and by cropping
and feeding, her B^ood will be invigorated: Then give her the juice of Garlic
and Housleek in a Pint of stale Beer hot, chafe her well with running, and so
put her to the Bull.

There are some Cattle of this kind that breed Lice, which stants them, and
spoils their growing; these must be rubbed over duly, especially every other
day whilst the Humor lasts that creates it, and washed with warm Water wherein
Savin has been boiled, also purged with the Decoction of Spurge-Lawrel, a Herb
so called, and Tobaccostalks; and so, the Humor wasted, and the Beast by tha^
g^owing strong, the Effects will cease, etc.

If the Hair fall off, and render these kind of Cattle unsightly, as many times
by inward Defects it will be occasioned, boil Briony-roots in the Urine of an
Ox, and rub the Beast over with the liquid part when it is hot, and give him
the juice of Hysop and Spear-Mint in a little Beer to d^ink. Do this often,
that is, three or four times, and your Ends will be accomplished.

To order Unruly and Rustic Cattle, etc.
If Cattle are apt to creep Hedges into other Pastures, put Yokes with a cross
Beam about their Necks, or a cross Beam on their Horns, boring a little holo
into the tip of the Horn, and peg it on: This likewise hinders the Unruly from
butting and hurting the Weak and Gentle; and when they are much used to this,
some blindfold them, by clapping a piece of a broken Pail or Board before their
Eyes, and hang it on their Horns, as also fasten it to their Neck with a
String* And this is an excellent way, if you have brought them from a distant
Farm, that they may not see to leap their Bounds, or gadd and stray back again.

Some Oxen not well tamed, and especially young Steer^, grow restless, and
refuse to labor at the Plough, or otherways, and will be apt to lie down; and
when they bind their Legs where they lie, so that they cannot get loose, thrash
them well, and leave them in the Furrow all night without Meat, and coming the
next morning, unloose him, and yoke him again, and he will go to your mind, and
never attempt to lie down, unless excessively over-labour'd, for fear of the
like Punishment to be inflicted on him for his stubbornness and failure, etc.

A TREATISE OF RAMS, EWS, LAMBS, etc. SHOWING How they ought to be Chosen,
Bred, Fed, Ordered, and Cured of their sundry Distempers, Griefs, and Sorrances.
What is to be observed in the Choice of Sheep, with their Goodness or Defect
in growth, etc. in relation to respective Counties.
OF Sheep there are sundry Breeds, according to the Countries they are bred in,
and the Pastures they feed on: The rich Champion Country produces a arge Breed;
and the barren and cliffy, those of reasonable stature: The wild and
mountainous Ground a small and wearish Sheep; and the best way to have Success
and Profit in dealing in them, is to procure a good, sound, healthy Breed: And
to do this, know well from what Parts you have them; be diligent to enquire,
whether there be any Infection in those Quarters, and of the ground they feed
in, with the manner of their feeding and ordering, that nothing may differ in
it; or if any thing be altered, it may be for the better.

As for the observation of the Ground where they feed, the red Soil is held the
best, next to that the duskish, inclining to red, and that which is dirty and
whitish is little to be regarded, as not fit for the Improvement of Sheep.

The Counties for the several Breeds that are of considerable note, are these,
viz.

In Hereford-shire, especially about Lemster; and on those famous Hills called
Cotswol^-hills, Sheep are fed that produces a singular good Wool, which, for
fineness, comes very near to that of^ Spain, for from it a Thread may be drawn
as fine as Silk. And they are much the same in Worcestershire, though they are
black Faced, small Bon'd, and bear but a little burden.

Buckingham-shire, Warwickshire, Northamptonshire, and Leichestershire,
produce Sheep of a large Bone and good Shape, likewise the deepest Staple.

Lincolnshire, especially in the Salt Marshes and Fenny Grounds, produces the
largest Sheep, but not the best Wool, for their Legs and Bellies, though long,
are for the most part bare or naked.

York, and Northward to the Borders of Scotland, produces lusty Sheep, of big
Bone; but then their Wool is not so advantageous, as being rough and hairy.

In Wales, for the most part, the Sheep are small, and their Wool little, but
are the sweetest Mutton.

There are an excellent Breed of Sheep produced on Bans^ead-Downs in Surrey.

Kent, especially in Rumny-Marsh, produces abundance of Sheep, but the
beginners of them were brought out of other Counties to raise the Stock;
however, the Feed much increases them in Flesh and Wool: And indeed, England,
for the goodness of its Sheep, is able to vye with any Nation under Heaven.

To make choice of your Rams and Ews for good Breeders, and rear a healthful
Stock, etc.
To make a good choice of Sheep, take the following Directions, as the best
approved by all that deal in them.

As for the Ram, see his Eyes are brown, his Ears great his Breast, Shoulders,
and ^uttocks broad, his Stones large his Tail broad and well covered with
Wool; that he ^ l^rge and long of Body, his Forehead broad, round, and well
rising, his Nostrils straight and short, with a very smal^ Muzzle, his Horns
not extraordinary large nor scaly-r^ug^ though some approve of those without
Horns, or very little o^es, especially in the Southern parts, accounting the
Dodd^r Sheep the best breeders, because in this case is not so d^ngerous; the
Neck must be large and right, bending like a Horse; the Legs small, short, and
nimble; the Belly deep and well Woolled; see that his Tongue be not black nor
speckled, for then, according to the Verses of an excellent Observer of these
matters, he will get black and speckled ^ambs, which are not accounted good for
rearing or ^reed, viz.

And though the Ram in sight be white as Snow,
If black within his Jaws, his Tongue be wrought,
Refuse him quite, lest if he ^eap the Ewe,
He does infest thy Fou^^ with Color na^ght.
To choose your Ews, take these Directions, viz. The best time to buy or choose
them from the Fould is at Two years old, and not exceeding Three: And as for
knowing the Age, take notice, that the first Year he will have two broad Teeth
before; at two, four broad Te^^h; at three, six; at four, eight; and then the
Mouth begins to break, and the Teeth to grow short and stand out of order:
Observe that she has a deep Belly, white and shining, Wool soft and pliable, a
long Neck, large Dugs, smooth Horns, large, b^^ck, and gold colored shining
Eyes, long and lean Legs, a Tail long, and well covered with Wool.

To know if Sheep are sound and healthy, or the contrary.
Having thus observed and made your Choice, other material things are to be
considered: And first, to know whether they are healthy or sound; and in this
case observe, that the Wool stands firm in all places, and not straggling here
and there a patch of it off; in the next place open the Mouth, and observe the
Gums, whether they are ruddy; also the Teeth white, and of a complete evenness;
the Sk^ of the briskest red, and of a lively color; the corner of the Eyes
ruddy, the Fells loose, the Wool very fast in all its parts, the Feet of a
moderate temper, not given to glowing or much heat.

The Signs of Unsoundness and Rot are these, viz. T^^ Eyes are dark and pale,
the Wool easse to be plucked ^^, the Gums white, the Teeth foul, and yellow;
and, being dead, the Bellies will be found with much Water in th^^ the Flesh
moist and waterish, the Fat yellow, and the Liver putrefied.

Diverse ways of ordering Sheep, with the easiest and proper^^ Method for
pasturing and feeding them fat, etc.
For the ordering of Sheep there are many things to be considered; it must be
done with gentleness and moderation, Care taken in their housing and driving
abroad, in respect to the several Seasons, for this is a tender Creature, and
subject to Diseases and Infirmities on the least Suffering or Abuse.

As for proper Food, which is one main thing to be considered, the Grass is
best and most wholesome among which grows Melilot, Clover, Cinkfoil, Self-heal,
Bettony, Pimpernel, Broom, white Henbane, etc. Those that are most noisome and
infectious to them, are, Penny-wort, Spere-wort, Knotgrass, mildew'd Grass,
Hemlock, or any offensive stinking Weeds growing from overflowings of Water, or
too much rankness of the Ground. High Grounds are the best Pastures, or the
brousing among Woods, on the sides of Hills, to keep them from the Rot, which
is chiefly caused by wet: to feed on Follows, or the Grass that springs after
the Land has been plough'd for some time, is very sweet and pleasant to them;
but drive them not into wet damp Grounds (if Necessity require feeding them
there) till such time as the Sun is well risen, and has taken off part of the
moist Vapors; drive them not in hot weather against the Sun, nor in cold to
the North Winds, for their Head is a very tender part: In the excessive heat of
the day shelter them under the shades of spreading Trees, Rocks or Hills.

If ^hey be brought early in the Morning, before the Dew in Summer, or the
Hoar-Frost in Winter, be off the Grass, chase them up and down the Field for a
time, by which means, that they may in a great measure beat away the Mildews,
Dews, Ke^ts, Webs, Rimes, or the like, to make themselves free places to feed
in, and so not take in with their Food what may occasion dangerous Diseases;
beside it stirs up the natural heat, wastes the moisture, and prevents the Rot
in a great measure, makes them feed better, more deliberately, and without
greediness; and so pi^k out such Grass that best pleases, and is properest for
their Heal^h and Nourishment: Once a month, or oftener, give them Water wherein
Bay Salt has been dissolved, and it will thin and purify the Blood, and
prevent those Distempers the thickening of it would occasion.

Of Housing and Sheep-Cotts; and how they ought to be managed and ordered as to
Feeding, etc.
Convenient Sheep Cotts are very necessary for the preserving of Sheep, for
this Creature affects cleanliness, and mus^ be kept nice and in good Air; and
these must be so placed, that they are not subject to ^old Winds in Winter, nor
to great heat in Summer; yet more convenient to stand toward the East than the
South: They are best built low, long, and broad, that they may be warm in the
Winter, and that the streightness of the Room may not hurt the young. Observe
that where they stand the Grou(...) be firm and even, something sloaping, that
their (...) may run away into the Gutter designed to carry ^t off, and so be
kept clean, without offending: It must be dry too, for the wetness much hurts
their Feet, makes them catch Colds and Agues; it likewise injures their Wool
in their lying down, making them look rough and uncomely. And, to prevent
Infection, litter them well with fre^^ Straw, that the Ews with young may lie
soft and wholesome, which will make them feed more kindly, and take delight in
the place, and so grow fat, and become profitable sundry ways.

There must be several Partitions of Hurdles, or suchlike, to keep the weaker
from the stronger and unruly, lest they be hurt by them. If they be cotted in
the Field, for the advantage of dunging Land, as is used in many Cou^ties of
England, take care the Ews great with Lamb be put by themselves; and these
Cotts must be placed on dry Ground, not in low wet Furrows, lest the Sheep get
the Rot: And here, for their better improvement, and to make them dung the
better, if that be your purpose, ye^ may feed them with short Hay and Offal
Turnips, the latter will scowre, purge and fatten them, and they will eat them
very kindly, scouping out that which is within the Rhind or Paring, and brouse
heartily on the tender Top^: Besides, this is very profitable for Land, because
those the Sheep have meddled with will never grow again, but lie ^^ the Ground,
and become good Dung: In Wintertime sweet Grains is pleasing to them, but not
too many, le^t it make them over-moist, and contract the Rot.

They feed well on Hay, Tares, Chaff, and Pease, especially in the Straw: They
delight much to brouse on El^ and Ash-leaves, which at the first shooting out
are very healthful, proving Physical in thinning and purifying their Blood. You
may also in their Troughs give them Barley, Beans, and Acorns ground together;
as also Wheat-Bran boiled; and these things managed with care, will not only
keep them in Health, but make them grow, thrive, and fatten them.

When the Ewe ought to be covered, and the Care to be taken therein, and in
their yeaning or bringing forth, etc.
As for the time of the Ewe's being to bring strong and healthful Lambs for a
good Breed, choose them at two years old, and let them receive the Ram in a warm
close Pasture; for, if they be covered much before, the Lambs they Produce,
will prove weak and unfit for good Breeders, by reason the Ews are not at their
strength, or at least-ways not contracted a sufficient heat to produce Lambs
strong and lusty enough to continue their Health. A Ewe will bear pretty well
from two years to seven, though it is not so proper; and for Breeders, keep
only the first two or three years Product.

Those Rams designed to serve your Ews for such Lambs as are intended for
Breeders, before the Blossom comes on the Trees; must be well fed in the Cotts,
or kept in good Pa^ture about a month e're they are turned to them, that so
they may be full of Spirit, lusty and vigorous, and the better able to perform
what they are designed for; and if yo^ perceive, as commonly he will do, that
the Ram rather covets the old than the young Ews, because they are easier
wooed; scatter Blades of Onions and Garlic in the way of the Ram and younger
Ews, that eating them they may stir up Desire, and render them both ^he
willinger to a compliance.

There are various Opinions of having Ewe or Ra^-Lambs at pleasure; some say,
That if the Ram cover the Ewe, their Faces being toward the North when the
Wind blows, it will not sail to be a Male, and the like toward the South a
Female. Others, That to knight the Ram's right Stone some time before he leaps
procured a Male, and doing so by the left, a Female. That the juice of male or
female Mandrakes will work the like Effects. But these I conclude to be
Conceits, when the thing naturally happens so, and therefore I shall lay little
stress on them.

The Ews in their yeaning must be carefully regarded and helped by the Hand, if
Nature be not of sufficient strength to bring forth, and after be comforted
with warm Milk and Bran: The Lamb must be set on his Legs as soon as may be,
and showed to the Dams Teat, lest by long delaying she refuse to cherish him,
as otherwise she would do; and if the weather be not very seasonable, they must
be warmly housed.

The best time for bringing forth is about the latter end of April, if
Pasture-Sheep; if Field-Sheep, it may be well enough from the beginning of
January to the end of March.

How to order your Lambs after they are cast: Proper Times and Seasons for
Gelding, etc.
Having set the Lamb on his Legs, and directed him to the Udder, make him take
it in the Teat, and spirt some of the Milk in his Mouth, that finding the
sweetness of the Milk, he may become the more familiar, and find an easy way
to it of himself: But before you do this, milk out the first Milk, which is
called Colostra, or crude Milk, and very hurtful, if taken by the Lamb, to put
it into a Fever or some such like Distemper, especially in a hot Season.

If when it is proper time he trifle with the Teat, and refuse to take it,
anoint his Lips with Cream or sweet Butter, and by licking them his Appetite
will be stirred up to fasten on the Teat, and once pleased with the sweetness
of the Milk, will suck very kindly.

If before the Lamb is fitting to be weaned, the Dam grow sick or dye, if you
have not a spare milch Ewe to put him to, suckle him through a Horn, which you
must be provided with, suitable on that occasion.

When the Lambs grow over-sportful, and wax wanton, cherish them in it a
little; but if housed, separate them with Hurdles, and tie them after ten days
to little Stakes with ^o^t Strings, so that they may not gaul their Necks, lest
they not only hurt one another, especially the stronger the weaker, but lose of
their Flesh, and neglecting feeding, hinder their growth.

Be careful also to separate the weaker from the stronger, especially when
their Horns begin to put out, when they are in their Cotts; and be diligent in
suckling them Morning and Evening, and see that the Ews Milk fall not away or
be corrupted by any inbred Distemper, which you may not presently perceive: And
so use them till they wax strong; then give them a little sweet Clover or short
Hay or Bran mixed with Flower in Water; and the Season being dry, and not too
hot, turn them out to Pasture with the Ews.

Wean them, if possible, in warm weather, which may be conveniently done to
such as are healthy or strong at seven weeks or two months, and then keep them
high in feed, lest they pine and fall away, in bemoaning the loss of their
Dams, or their Stomachs falling off, for want of due Nourishment, renders them
sickly and weak.

As for the best time of Gelding, it is in this as in all other Cattle, when
the Moon is in the Wain, and the Sign favorable in some of the fore-parts, for
it being accounted the Sign of Life, participating immediately with the vita^
parts, to cut them when it is in Scorpio, which governs the Genitals, lets out
much pure Blood and Spirits, endangering festering and death. This must be done
in a warm Season, and some are of Opinion, that the best time is at five months
old; but Experience teaches, it may at six weeks, two months, or nine weeks;
yet indeed if they continue ungelded three months, they will be of a larger
growth, though then there is somewhat more of danger, and when killed, their
Flesh will not be so sweet after gel^ing; which you may do in the manner
directed for Calves; anoint the Wound with fresh Butte^, keep them up in soft
Litter till the Wound cements, and when the foreness is over, or past danger,
turn them out into short warm Pasture, and they will feed the better.

those that you keep for Rams ungelded, observe to take of that Ewe that brings
frequently Ram-Lambs, or that has two Ram-Lambs at a time, which signifies
lustiness and heat, and that the Breed will be strong, and able of performance.

Sheering of Sheep, and other matters necessary to be known, lating to Growth
and Preservation.
The time of Sheering is not preseribed to a particular time, but varies
according to the hotness or coldness of the Country; and, but not to do it
before Midsummer, is held most agreeable, for the more the Sheep sweats in the
Wool, the better and more kindly it will prove for use though some do it much
sooner.

Observe, before you Sheer, when you wash, that it be in a pleasant Stream,
into which falls not the Washing of Lime-fatts, or any such offensive thing;
let it be rather, if it may be, in a cloudy day than a Sunshiny, because w(...)
wet, the Sun heating the Water when they are washed, scalds their Backs with it
unless presently driven into a shady place: Keep their Heads up, that they
snuff not any, or at least, not much of the Water up, l^st they are after
afflicted with the Headache or Rheums.

Beware in Sheering not to out their Skin, or if you do, rub it over with Tar
and Butter, lest in this hot Season it putrify, and Maggots breed in it.

When you have sheered, give them Water to drink wherein Lavender has been
steeped, and a little boiled Corn.

Diseases and Sorrances incident to Rams, Weathers, Ews, and Lambs, with the
most approved Receipts and Remedies for them, and Directions to keep them from
Sickness, etc.
The Headache, its Cause and Cure.
THESE Cattle are subject to sundry Diseases; occasioned by Infection,
Evil-digestion, wet and unwholesome feeding, eating unsavory and noisome Herbs
that breed bad Blood and Humors, drinking dirty Water, and the often dropping
of Trees upon them, being abroad, no ^mino lerate Showers, Damps, Mists and
Fogs arising from Moorish and Meadow-grounds.

For the Headache, caused by damp and unwholesome ^eeding, burn Storax under the
Nose of the Ram or Ewe, etc. give the Decoction of (...) and Housleek in a pint
^f Whitewine blood-warm, and Water to drink wherein Cummin seeds and Fennel
have been boiled.

For Giddiness or Dasie.
This happens mostly in the hot Season, through exces^ve heat; to remedy it,
let him blood as soon as you per^ive him to stagger and round, by slitting the
Nose-vein cross, then take a handful of Baum, Rue and Mint, boil ^m in two
quarts of Small Beer, and give him a pint at time Morning and Evening
successively.

For loss of Cudd.
Take a handful of Wheat Flour, a spoonful of Bay^lt, make it into little
balls with sharp Vinegar some^hat bigger than Hazle-nuts, thrust two or three
down ^s Throat fasting, as near as may be; do it two or three ^ornings, and
give Water after it wherein Sorre has been ^iled, or for want of that, mix it
with a little Ve^juice.

For the Ague in Sheep.
For this let blood, by making a little slit between the ^^ws behind and
before, not suffering him for 24 hours ^^ drink any cold Water; then boil two
Roots of Gar^^k, an ounce of Pepper, Wood Sorrel, Bettony and ^^e, each a
handful in a quart of Small-beer; strain it ^^ll, and give it three days
successively half a pint, or ^^thing more, at a time; but if it b^^ a Lamb,
give a ^^t of the Ewes Milk wherein Polipodium of the Oak and ^^ebs have been
boiled, at twice, viz. Morning and Even

For the Rheum and Catarrh.
These troublesome Distempers proceed from abundan^ of phlegmatic Humors to
remedy it, burn under ^ Nose Assafoetida, the Bark of Elder and Ta(...)risk,
give ^ Ale wherein a small quantity of Liquori^h and Annise^^ have been boiled,
and let him not for two or three day be in any wet place.

For Pains in the Teeth.
For remedying this, bleed him in the Gums or upp^ Lip, ^ub the place with Salt
and the Juice of Sage, ^ Garlic or Onions, two or three days, if the Pain ^
not sooner.

For the Aposthume and Ulcer.
Draw the Swelling to a head with a Plaster made ^ Rye-Meal, Ground Ivy, and
the Yolks of Eggs, and ^ ripe lance it, and put into the hole powdered burnt ^
lum and Salt, covering it with a Plaster of Burgu^ Pitch.

St. Anthony's Fire.
This same is called the Wildfire, and very dange^ to Sheep: To cure it, take
Bole-Armoniack, Deers S^ Turpentine, Soot, and the Juice of Housleek, of ^ an
Ounce, wash the Afflicted place with Goats-Milk; for want of it, Ew^-Milk, make
the before-menti^ Indredients into a Plaster, over a gentle Fire; clip ^ Wool
close, and give him Salt with his Water.

For the Ro^, or Plague.
Take a handful of the Herb Melilot, the like of Com^ Polipodium of the Oak,
Rue, and Walnut-tree-leaves, the green Husks of Walnuts, if to be had, are
better; b^ them in a quart of Water, and a pint of Aqua-vitae, s^ out the
liquid part, and stir in it an Ounce of Methri^ ^ill di Tolved, and give half a
pint at a time warm, and ^et the Sheep be in dry Pasture, or any airy House.

For the Scab, or Itch.
Take Soot, the Stalks of Tobacco, and flower of Brim^oue, boil them in fresh
Chamberlye, and wash the grie^ed part.

For any Defect in the Lungs.
Take a handful of red Sage, the like quantity of Purslain, ^arsle^,
Coltsfoot, a Herb so called, and a Root of Gar^ck, boil them, when well
bruised in a quart of White^ine, then add to the strained Liquor an Ounce of
Honey, ^^ half an Ounce of Methridate, and give it the afflict^d Beast Morning
and Evening warm.

For the shortness of Breath, and Cough.
Take Fennegreek-seeds, Cummin-seeds, the powder of ^quo^ish, of each two
Ounces, Coltsfoot a handful, three ^unces of the Oil of Sweet Almonds, boil
them in three ^nts of stale Beer, strain out the liquid part, and give it ^e
Sheep fasting; half a pint in the Morning blood-warm.

For taking in any venomus thing in feading.
Many times, especially in bad Pasture, the Sheep will ^k in Spiders, poisonous
Worms, or some other Infecti^ that will make them sick, and very much swell:
This ^ing perceived; for a speedy Remedy, take half a pint ^ Vi^egar, and a
quarter of a pint of Olive-Oyl, give ^ the Beast warm, and keeping him moving
up and down ^r ha^f an hour.

For the swelling of the Belly.
Th^s is occasioned by eating unwholesome Food: To ^medy it, let blood under the
Tail, and give them Water ^ drink, wherein Rue, Camomile, and Bay leaves have
^en boiled.

For Lame or hurt Claws.
For Claws that are lame, bruised, overgrown, broken, pare them as much as is
convenient, then make Plaster of Beeswax, Rosin^ ^urpentine, unslacked Li^
and Hog's Grease, anoint the Claw with Oil of Camo(...) and lay the Plais^er on
it, binding it up hard, and (...) him not to go into wet places till he is well.

To kill Lice and Maggots.
Take a handful of Burdock-roots, as much of B^^^ boil them in Camberlye, and
wash the Sheep over v^ it; or at least, the place afflicted with these Insects,
^ when that is dried, anoint it with T^r-water, and it ^ not only kill those
that are there at present, but pre^ the putrefaction that breeds them.

For broken Bones, or bruised Joints, etc.
Take Camo(...), Marsh Mallows, ^ettony, Bug(...) and Honey suck ^o leaves, of
each half a handful, (...) them with Hogs-lard, and fry them in a Frying (...)
spread them upon Leather, as a Poultis, and bind up ^ afflicted part with them
very warm.

For the Fever in Sheep.
If you find your Sheep Feverish, suddenly ch(...) their P^sture, separate
those that are infected, from the that are well; and consider in the next
place, from whence ^ cause of the Distemper proceeds, whether from Cold, Heat;
if from the former, drive them to shelter; if fr^ the latter, feed them among
Trees, or in any conveni(...) shady Enclosures.

Then take Pulcol-Royal, stamp it, and squeeze out ^ Juice, and mix it with
half a pint of Water and Vineg^ viz. an Ounce and a half of it, give it as warm
as he w^ receive it, and gently drive for half an hour.

For the Worm in the Claw.
To find this, look between the Claws, and you may ^ercei^e Hair, or Wool like
a head; and indeed, this cal^d the Worm, is all a woolly substance, which, if
great, ^uses Lameness; to take it out, slit the Foot, pull it out without
breaking, and anoint the place with Tallow, and (...) and it will do well.

For the red Water.
For this Affliction, bleed in the Spining-vein in the Foot, ^en stamp Rue,
Wormwood, Bay Salt, and Butter, a^^ ^y, it on as a Poultis.

For the Choler.
When this abounds, it causes a yellowness of the Skin, burning feverish heat,
and much pain. To remedy ^ take a good handful of young Elder-leaves, strain
the ^yce out, when well stamped, into a pint of A^e, and ^ve it him warm.

For the Jaundice.
Take a pint of stale Urine, half an Ounce of Allom, a ^ram of Saffron, boil
them to the consumption of a ^ird part, and give it warm.

For the Phlegm.
This much troubles Sheep, because they are naturally ^lined to a waterish
Flegmetick Constitution: To re^edy he Oppression by it^ super-abounding, take
Polipo(...) of the Oak; the Roots of Fern, Bettony-leaves, of ^ch half a
handful, boil them in a quart of Ale, and give the Beast to drink, when
strained, pretty warm, and it ^ll cause him to avoid much slime, and watery
offensive ^atter.

For the Water in the Belly of a Sheep.
This many times, by over-moist Feeding, hangs bag^ between the outward Skin,
and Rim of the Belly; and not timely removed, causes the Rot; it may be done ^
gathering to one part, as may be by grasping and drivi^ it with your Hands;
then slit a little Hole, and put i^ Quill, and so squeeze it out, then anoint
the place w^ Tar, and Butter, and it will heal; but if it be within ^ Rim of
the Belly, it must be purged out, for if that ^ cut, it cannot be closed again;
it may be done with h^ an Ounce of Alloes, and an Ounce of Turmerick in w^
Milk, given for a Fortnight fasting.

For the Cramp.
Take fine leaved Grass, or Cinquesoil a handful, (...) it, and boil it in a
pint of White Wind, give him (...) pint warm in the Morning, and the next in
the like (...)ner the next Morning, and bathe his Legs with W(...) wherein
Rosemary has been boiled.

For the Pox.
This is known by coming out in small Pimples, over like the Purples, and when
it first appears, sep(...) those that are afflicted with it, from the rest of
the Fl^^ to prevent Infection; change the Pasture, and the W(...) being clipped
away, anoint them with the Juice of (...)li^k, well incorporated with
Tar-water, or the thi^^ of Tar.

For the turning Evil and Morfound.
Blo^d pretty well in the Temple-Veins, of through Nostrils, and rub the place
with the Juice of young Net and half a pint of White Wind, give an Ounce of
M(...)date as hot as can conveniently be taken.

For the Bent.
To cure this, cut away the Tags, lay the Sore open, cast curious sine Mould on
it, and lay on a Plaster of Tar, Oil of Tar, Oil of Turpentine, and
Goose-grease well mixed, and incorporated together.

To fasten loose Teeth.
Sometimes, by reason of ^old moist Distempers, the Sheeps Teeth grow so loose,
that they cannot feed, and therefore must consequently pine.

To fasten them, then bleed the Gums, rub them with Salt, and burnt Allom,
bleed again under the Tail, and boil Sage and Lavender in fair Water, and give
it to drink.

For Worms in the Belly of a Sheep.
These are known by the Sheeps beating his Belly with his Feet, stamping and
turning his Head back to look on his Sides. To remedy this, stamp the Leaves of
Coriander, mix the Juice of it with Honey, give him it warm fasting, and
afterward warm Water, wherein Wormwood has been steeped, to drink.

An excellent Remedy for the Staggers.
This is a dangerous Distemper, and if not readily minded, takes away the Sheep
in a short time.

To remedy it, take long Pepper, Hemp Seed, Liquorish Anniseeds, and Honey, of
each an Ounce, add as much Pennyroyal dried, and powdered, put these into two
quarts of new Milk, and give him half a pint at a time warm, successively one
hour after another; or if in haste, and these cannot be readily got, take the
dried Flowers of Wormwood, a handful and half, a handful of Bay Salt, boil them
in Ale, give it in the foregoing manner.

For the Murrain.
Peg the Ear with the Root of Setterwort, give the^ brine and Tar about two
Ounces in half a pint of White wine; wash, or rather sprinkle the Sheep with
Water wherein Fennel-seeds has been boiled: This is also goo^ for that called
the Murrain of the Longs, occasioned ^^ extreme Drought, for want of Water in
hot Weather.

For Defects in the Eyes.
If Films, Pins, Webs, Haws, or Rheums afflict ^^ Eyes, burn Roach-Allom, and
Hartshorn, blow the finely powdered, with a Quill into the Eyes; and ab^^ half
an hour after, bathe them with Eyebright Wat^^, wherein Bole-Armoniack has
been steeped.

For Rheums in the Eyes.
Boil a handful of Honey-suckle-leaves, the like qu^^tity of Selendine, and
Eyebright in a pint of White-wi^ spirt this up the Sheeps Nostrils, and wash
his Eyes wi^^ it.

For the Scabs on the Mouths of Lambs.
This is occasioned by feeding too early, when they must feed on Dewey, or
otherwise over-moist Grass, before the Sun has dried it.

To remedy it, take a handful of Hysop, and as (...) Bay Salt, boil them in a
pint of Vinegar, and wa^ their Mo^th^ and Pallates with it warm, anoint the
place with an Ointment made of ^ees-wax, Butter, and T^r, and in a short time
it will heal.

For the falling off of the Wool.
It is many times o^servable, that Sheep, especially such as have the
opportu^ity of coming among Bushes, Briars, Brakes, Fu^z^s, and the like, loose
a great part of the^ Wool, easily coming off. This is occasioned by the
dryness of the Skin, through the wasting of the Sheep for wan^ Moisture: To
remedy it, boil, or bruise Ash-leaves in their Watering Troughs, and give them
Fennel-seeds mixed with chope^, or short Hay, three or four times; you may also
wash them with Water, wherein Wood-Ashes have been soaked.

For the Posie, or running at the Nose.
This is ocacsioned by too damp Aires when they are abroad late, or Fogs in low
or Marshey Grounds, whereby the Brain is overcharged with Moisture.

To dry this up, which else may probably turn to Colds, Coughs, or sometimes a
Rot, smoke them with the Flow^r of Brimstone sprinkled on a Chasing-dish of
Coals, or burn ^^ags dipped in Brimstone; you may in a close House, smoke
twenty or thirty together with little trouble, for ^he Air being scented, and
they snuffing it up, it will dry ^p the moist Vapors; then give them Vinegar,
in which Bay Leaves have been boiled, to drink, and it will purge their Heads,
and the foulness of the Stomach, that send^ ^p the Vapor, and administers to
the Moisture.

To prevent Sickness in Sheep,
Bleed them in the Tail and Nose, Spring and Fall, ^urge them with Hysop and
Lavender boiled in Whey, which will cause gentle breathing Sweats, to carry off
^he gross and afflicting Humor, and rarefie the Blood, so that they will feed
well, and wholesome, be lively, and ^atten apace.

To prevent unseasonable Tireing.
If with moderate driving they lie often down, loll out their Tongues, pant,
and are tired, take Plantain, bruise ^t, and rub their Mouths and Noses with
it, then take ^isemart, which grows almost in every Ditch, do the ^ke, and rub
their Fundaments, and they, after having ^rank a little Water, will go with a
Courage.

For the Biting of any Veno^ Creatures
Take of Rue and Smallage, of each a handful, Aqu^vitae half a pint, bruise the
Herbs, and strain the Juy^ out, stamp it over a gentle Fire in the Aqua-vitae,
and wa^ the afflicted place often with it hot, then take Vervei^ Lavender, and
Oil of Spike, stamp the Herbs, and man a Poultis, and bind it to the afflicted
part.

For Poison, by licking up any infectious thing.
When any such Infection happens, you may know it b^ the Sheeps staggering and
reeling; then open the Mou^^ and under the Tongue, you will find Blisters, cut
the^ off with a sharp Knife, and rub the Mouth well wi^^ Bole-Armoniack and
Sage, boiled in Chamberlye; the give him a quarter of a pint of Olive-Oyl in
half a pint ^ new Milk.

For Pains in the Bowels.
This is occasioned by over-rank feeding, or eating u^vory things; and is known
by the drawing up the Be^ spurning at it with their Feet, often lying down, ^^
quickly rising, as uneasy. To remedy it:

Take a handful of Rue, and Fetherfew, boil it in (...) quarts of Water, with
an Ounce of Coriander-seeds, (...) give it the afflicted Sheep to drink.

For the running Scab.
This is occasioned by Surfeits, or too much gross(...) of Humor, bad Blood,
or the like.

To remedy this, bleed them under the Tongue ^ Tail, boil a good handful of
Baum, and an Ounce and half of Turmerick finely powdered, in three pints of
(...) Milk, and give a pint at a time warm, then wash the with Water, wherein
Elder and Burdock-roots have be^ boiled, not giving them any Meat for twelve
hours.

For the Dropsy, or puffing up of the Skin.
This is caused by feeding in wet places, or too early, when the Dew is much
upon the Grass, so that in the Biting, they suck up too much Moisture, which
they cannot digest, nor evacua^e, by sweating it out; and so being capable of
passing the Skin, it remains, and corrupts between it and the inward Rhine, and
often occasions a Universal Rot.

To remedy this, clip off the Wool close behind each Shoulder, slit the Skin
there, and put in a Tent dipped in Oil of Spike, and it will draw the Water to
it, and so evacuate by twice or thrice renewing it then steep half an Ounce of
Regulus of Antemony, in a pint of Ale, with a little of the Spice, called,
Grains, and a little Sugar; warm it, and give to the Sheep about half a quarter
of a pint at a time, two or three times, with a day or two's intermission
between each time.

A further discourse on the Rot in Sheep very necessary.
As for the Rot, though I have spoken as to its Remedy, seeing it is the most
dangerous of all to Sheep, destroying them in clusters, I shall speak some more
fully of it, with the sign of its approach and causes.

In moist years, sheep are subject to the Rot, where, in dry years, they are
exempted from it, and that not only from the moisture, for then would Sheep Rot
in all moist Grounds; but there is a certain putrefaction in the Air, Grass, or
Herb, or all of them that cause it, which usually attend them in such moist
years; which, together with their Food, corrupt their Livers; and that through
foulness, wateryness, and defect of Blood, for want of its performing its due
Office, creates this Disease.

When the beginning of this is perceived by their huskey Cough, or some of them
dropping away, with all speed with them to the salt Marshes, and by their
feeding there, if there be no over-flowings of Water, or extreme wet, the
Liver, if not too much putrefied, will take heat, and recover it^ Strength, and
then the Blood, by the Acremony of the Grass, being purified and purged, the
Sheep will do well.

Observations and other Directions
If May and June prove wet Months, the Proit causes ^ frothey Grass, together
with the bad Air that must necessarily follow, causes the Rot in Sheep;
therefore, in such Summers, keep your Sheep on the dry and barren Lands; Fodder
them in Winter with hardest Hay, and most astringent Fodder.

Some Grounds yield soft Grass above others, and this is subject to breed the
Rot in your Sheep; therefore feed other Cattle there, and your Sheep in the
dryest, healthiest, and hardest Pastures.

If they be already infected with the Rot, which you may discern by the color
of their Eyes, pen them up in a Barn, or large Sheep Coat set about, it may be
with wooden Troughs, and feed them a day or two with Oats, then put amongst
them Bay Salt well stamped, and after that a greater quantity, till such time
as they begin to distaste it, then give them clean Oats another day or two, and
then as before, serve them with Salt well stamped, and so increase as directed;
follow this course till their Eyes have recovered their natural color, and
then you may assure your self the danger is over, and the Sheep will be well.

If you are not furnished with a convenient House, it may be done in a close
warm Yard, or Pingle, if the Weather be favorably seasonable.

Folding of Sheep in May, or June, if they prove wet, make them Rot the sooner,
because they are more greedy devourers in the hurtful Grass in the Morning,
than those not folded; therefore, at that time, liberty from the Food is well
prevented.

Of red Water, and its Remedy.
This red Water is an infectious Disease in Sheep, offending the Heart, and is
also as pestilent among other Cattle; therefore, when you perceive any of your
Sheep afflicted with it; let them Blood between the Claws, and under the Ta^l,
then lay to the sore place, Wormwood, or Rue, fin^^ly beaten with Bay Salt.

To kill all sorts of Infects in the Sheep.
Take Goose-grease, Brimstone, and Tar, mix them together over a gentle Fire,
and if there be any Maggots, Worms, or sore places infected with Flies, anoint
it with thi^, and it will destroy, and prevent the Mischief.

For Worms in the Body, take a quarter of a pint of the Juice of Wormwood, and
Sage, give it the Sheep in a pint of warm Milk, and put Bay Salt, and a little
Allom, in the watering Trough, and by this means the Worms will be killed, and
brought away, either bred in the Stoma^k, or Bowels.

For Lambs that are yean'd Sick.
^f the Lamb be sick and weak when it is yeaned, then w^^p, or fold it up in a
warm Cloth, and opening the Mouth a little, blow into it; then draw the Dam's
Dugs, an^ squirt Milk into the Mouth of it, then boil a little Saf^ron and
Cinnamon in the Milk, and give it warm about a quarter of a pint, and House it;
by this means many Lambs are saved, that would be otherways lost.

For the Leaf-sickness in the Sheep, or Lamb.
This is often occasioned by their overmuch brousing on Hawthorn, and
Oak-leaves, or such like, which the Lambs especially, are very apt to do, and
it is known by their sta^gering, or turning round, for that manner of feeding
ingenders cold corrupted Blood, or Phlegm gathered together about the Brain; and
indeed, this Disease is very dangerous, and makes them suddenly fall down
before thos^ that are ignorant in it, scarce know they a^l any thing.

To remedy this, dissolve Assafaetida in warm Wa^er, and put the quantity of
half a spoonful into each Ear of the Lamb, and a spoonful into that of a Sheep,
then stop the (...) close, and it will work the Distemper from the Brain, and
entirely cure them, if timely taken.

For the great, or general Scab, or I^c^.
This is a grievous offensive Disorder, or Sorrance, not uncommon amongst
Sheep, especially those that are much exposed in the Fields, or other places,
to rainey weather, or great Mists, or Fogs; over-driven much in wet dirty ways,
or the like: These things, I say, will afflict them with this n^useous
Sorrance, making them break forth into Sca^s, which, upon view, you may know if
it ^e general, or only in particular places, by a filthy white Scurff sticking
on their ^kins; when you perceive this, take off the Wool as close as can ^e,
mix Tar, Goosegrease, and the Juice of Rue, make them into an Ointment over a
gentle Fire, and anoint them with it warm, then clap some light fleeces of
Wool, or a few shreads of stocks over it, and the Scab will dry up, and peel
off; you may, if it be very great, let Blood in the Tail and Ears, and give
them the Juice of Cardus in a Glass of Whitewine to drink, and then a while
after smoke them with Brimstone, which will put them into a kind of a Flu^,
that will carry off the Humor; and then, the cause removed, the Effects will
cease.

A Remedy good for the Sickness of Sheep in general.
It is convenient for all keepers of Sheep, to have the following Medicine by
them, as well in the Field, as at home in the Coats, or Houses, to remedy any
sudden Sickness, and stay the Sheep alive till other Medicines can be got;
especially in the Fever, Pox, Rots, Lungs defective, etc. it is excellent.
Take Pennyroyal half a handful, Scabeous, and Shepherd's Purse a like
quantity, boil these, when you have bruised them well in three pints of small
Ale, and strain out the liquid part by hard squeezing, and pressing the Herbs,
then put to it two Ounces of London-Treacle, put it up in a Bottle, and stop it
close, and give a quarter of a pint of this when you see the Sheep in any
disorder, and it will be of wonderful use for their preservation, and restoring
them to health.

Against violent Heats in Sheep.
Many times by bad feeding, or over-driving, defect in the Blood, or the like,
the Body of the Sheep will be fieryred and hot all over, to the endangering him
into a Fever or Plague: To remedy it, wash him with warm Water, wherein
Pimpernel and Sage have been boiled, and give him Whey to drink, wherein Hysop
and Polipo(...) have been steeped, after they have been well bruised, an^ hard
pressed into the liquid.

A gentle purge f^^ Sheep.
If you would have them feed well, when you put them to Grass, especially in
the Spring, it will be highly convenient that they be moderately purged, which
will purifi^ their Blood, by carrying off the gross Humors contr^cted in
Winter, and make them grow lusty and Fat. To do this,

Take three or four Sprigs of Spurg-Lawre^, a quarter of an Ounce of Antimony,
a handful of dried Roseleaves, if fresh ones are not to be had; bruise and boil
these in new Whey, and give to every one a quarter of a pint, keep them fasting
after it 4 or 5 hours; then, if the Weather be warm and open, turn them to
grazing in the Field, where there is no Water, for all that day, etc.

A particular Receipt for making a Ewe yean easily, and with out danger to her,
or the Lamb.
If you perceive the Ewe defective in Nature, to bring forth her young, lay her
soft, and to the best advantage for yeaning, then take a handful of the tops of
Basa-mint, or Horse-Mint, stamp it, and put the Juice; or for w^^^ of that, if
none but dried Mint can be had, put the powder into a half pint of strong Ale,
and give it the Ewe to drink, and she will presently yean.

A speedy way to increase their Milk.
Change their Pasture, if you find their Udders are drying up, or that they
give but little; but let it be short and sweet, nothing inferior, but rather
exceeding that they are removed from; for, indeed, nothing increases Milk in
Ews more than change of Pasture, and fresh feeding; and if the Ground give
opportunity, drive them one while to the Hills; and then again to the Valleys,
and where it is sweetest, and short, they will eat with the best Appetite;
there see they continue longest; and to bring their Milk down apace, give them
mingled with short Grass, or short Hay, Fitches, Dill, Anniseeds, and the like,
and their Milk will spring apace.

How to make a Ewe love her own Lamb, or that of any other Ewe, and foster it.
If the Ewe grow unnatural, and decline her Lamb, and will neither suckle that,
or one of another Ews; to make her more kind after she has yeaned, take a
little of the clean of the Ewe, which is the Bed, Nature provided for the Lamb
to lie in, whilst he grew in the Ews Belly, dry it, and beat it to powder, and
give it her in a Glass of White Wind, and afterward she will fall naturally in
love with the Lamb, and be very fond of it; but if an Ewe has cast her Lamb,
and you would have her take to that of another; then take the dead Lamb, and
with it rub and dawb the live Lamb all over, and when she has ^cente^ it, she
will love and cherish it as her own.

For Canker or Ringworm.
If this happen either in the Mouth, or on the Skin, by the Eyes, Ears, or Pole
of the Neck; to remedy it, as an eating and troublesome sore, make a mixture
with Oil, Salt, and Allom, and dissolved, or well incorporated over a gentle
Fire, and anoint the place with it, then cover it with a Plaster of Tar, and
the Flower of Brimstone, and in so ordering three or four times; the Cure w^ll
be wrought.

Profit^ble Advice to Shepherds, or those that have the Government, and
ordering of Sheep.
As for those that undertake the Care of Sheep there is a great charge and care
lies on them, if they intend they shall turn to any good Account; and therefore
I shall conclude this particular Treatise, with some Directions not, or very
slenderly touched on.

First, It behooves the Shepherd to know what Food is good and nourishing for
Sheep, and what hurtful, so that by choosing the one, and eschewing the other,
he may keep his Cattle in good health: The Grass most wholesome for Sheep, is
that which has store of Mellilot, Clover, Cinquefoil, Pempernel, Broom, and
white Henbane growing among it. That which is unwolsome for Sheep, is that
which has growing among it Spare-wort, Penny-wort, Penny-Grass, or any Weeds,
or Flowers that grow from the overflowing of Water, or Inundations; as
Brooklime, Mareblabs, Lady Smocks, Smallage, etc. also that which has ^notted
Grass growing among it is not good, nor where the Mildew falls, or such as is
spotted with it.

Of all Rots, the Hunger Rot is the worst, for it putrefies the Skin, and
Flesh. The next is the Pelt Rot, which comes by great store of Rain, or going
in much wet immediately after being Shorn; for the Wet Mildewing, the Sk^n
corrupts the Body; and this is most (...) Fie^^-sheep wanting shelter.

(...) are (...) while Snales which the Sheep will li(...) (...) will soon rot
them; and if you perce^(...) (...) a^ the Ews Teats, that stop the Milk,
wh(...) the (...) them away.

(...) the Sheep will have a bladder of Water ^ (...) which must ^e Lanced, and
let out in (...) will not pr(...).

In a (...) of G^ievances and Sickness, the party (...) to tend, or look after
Flocks of Sheep, (...) by their Feeding and Ordering, from what ca(...) (...)
Sickness or Griefs may chance to arise, or happ(...) (...) Cold, his ^^st way
is, as soon as he sees them ^ (...), to drive them to shelter; if from Heat, to
d(...) (...) to feed in shady cool places.

It is best buying them in March, when they have (...) out the Winter. As for
the Terms given them in m(...) Co^^tries, for the better understanding them,
take the Rule: The Lamb for its first year, is called a Weath(...) ^og: The
second year the Male is called a Weather, ^ gelded; the Female a Theaf, and
then she is fit for the Ra^ If she passes another year, she is then accounted a
dou(...) Theaf, and the best Breeder: As for Lambs, those the Suckle, are for
the sweetness of their Flesh, preferred before Grass-Lambs; he must always have
Necessaries re(...) to assist the Cattle, if taken ill, or hurt, and good
Do(...) to guard them, especially on the Purlews where they (...) out late in
the Evening, or all Night; for though we (...) not infested with Wolves in this
Country, yet we ha^^ mischievous Creatures to injure them in their Lambin^
time, by killing and sucking the Blood of their young, ^ not carrying themaway;
your larger sorts of Pol-Ceats w(...) do this; but the Fox in Lambing-time,
makes their Blood h^ beloved Food. There are likewise Dogs very cunning ^ this
Trade, for they will go several Miles in a Night t^ ^ind out Sheep and Lambs,
and having worried them, and ^^ti^ted themselves with their Blood, return, as
if the^ had been no ways concerned; washing and licking themselves so clean, as
if they had not stirred from their K^^nels, being sure to be at home e're any
of the Family is stirring; and if they find themselves watched toward their
Homes, so cunning they are, that they will make more dablings than the Hare, to
avoid the pursuit or discover ^ where their Habitations are.

I have heard of a Mastiff that was kept up in a Collar and Chain, but having
got before a haunt of this Trade which perhaps caused his restraint, he seemed
uneasy o^ his Confinement at first, but within a little while, appeared no
ways disordered, or disturbed at it; there was th^^ a great Rumor of many
Sheep being worried in the Fiel^s, and this Dog having been before suspected,
they charged his Master with it, but he declared it could n^ be, for his Dog
had not been out of his Collar for many Weeks before this happened; but one
affirming, he saw a Do^ that had worried Sheep, come running into his Yard, of
the same bigness and color, it came in the Man's Head to cause him the next
Night to be watched, but so, that the Dog could not see the party did it; when,
about Midnight, the Moon shining, he came out of his Kennel, and sitting on his
Tail, with his two fore-feet, with the help of his hinder ones, he thrust off
his Collar, and hasted to his Prey, and about three hours after came home, and
put his Nose into his Collar, run it to the length of the Chain, and by
straining with main sorce, thrust his Head in, licked his Feet, rubed his Nose
clean in the Straw, lay down to sleep, as he had never removed from that place.
This being told, created much Wonder and Adm^ration, at the cunning and
sensibleness of the Dog; so, that for his Policy, many interceeded to save his
Life, but the Owners of the Sheep being clamorous, and threatening the utmost
prosecution of the Law in that case, he was doomed to the Halter, and after all
his cunning, had a Dogs Fate.

Concluding Instructions relating to the well ordering Sheep.
In Winter, get such Greens as your Sheep will eat, an^ are by the highness of
their growth out of their rea^ which will keep their Bodies soluble, and their
Blood ^ a good temper, much preventing the Rot: In Snowy We^ther it lies
lightly on the Ground, sweep it off, and yo^ will find sweet Grass, as it were,
springing under it, ^ reason the Snow keeps it warm, as in a Bed, and secure it
from the niping Frost, and sharp Winds, which are the greatest hindrance to it;
but this cannot easily be practicable, but for a very few; however, their
nibling of it ^ that season, much revives them, if it be short, and f^e^ from
old dead Stalks. To feed them on ploughed Land, where some Corn springs up
again, that was shed out of the Ear before Seed-time, or in Copises, where
tender Sprays give them a pleasant brousing, is very wholesome for them, and
hinders the Winter Disease very much; and indeed, care ought to be taken of
them, for they are o^^ main support of the Country; if you consider the great
Commodity and Profit they bring in, their Wool to Cloth us, their Pelts for
sundry necessary Uses, their Fruitfulness and Increase, the delicacy of their
Flesh for Nourishment, and the goodness of their Tallow and Suet on many
occasions; for the use of Man in Food, Ointments, Salves, and Medicines.
Therefore I shall conclude with the Verses of the ancient Poet:

Poor Beast, that for defense of Man created wast,
And in thy swelling Udder bear the Juice of dainty taste,
That with thy Fleece keep'st off the cold that would our Limbs assall,
And rather with thy Life, than with thy Death thou do avail.
A TREATISE OF SWINE, As to their Choice Breeding, Feeding, Fatning; and the
Cure of their sundry Diseases, Sorrances, and other Griefs, and Ailes.
Swine very profitable, with their proper Food, to render them in feeding,
large, and well shaped.
THAT the keeping and nourishing of Swine properly belongs to Husbandry,
evidently appear by the Profit that arises from them, in most Farmers Houses,
as well as the sale in the Shambles, for it is a chief Subsistence of their
Winter Store, and produces many good Dishes for the support of their Families;
nay, more than any other Creature whatsoever; beside, their Flesh is very sweet
and nourishing, and always ready at hand, easily to be prepared for the Table.
This made the Ancients, all but the Jews, highly esteem it above any other. The
Greek^ kept Swine as their surest stock of choicest Viands, and are so
commended by many of their approved Authors; and the Romans in the height of
their Lxuxury esteemed no Feast to be complete; where whole Swine were not
served up at the Table; and when their tame Stock failed, with much hazard and
labor they searched the Woods, Forests, and Mountains, for the wild ones: But
to pass these things over, seeing my present Business is not to give Encomiums
of them, but to lay down such Rules for their Breeding Feeding, and curing the
Diseases incident to them, as man redound to the profit and advantage of my
Countrymen.

Though England in general breeds better Swine than any other Neighboring
Countries, yet we find a difference ^ to their growth, and the goodness of
their Flesh in several Counties; and those of Leicestershire, and the bordering
parts of Northamptonshire, claim a Preference, which mo^ conclude proceeds from
the great store of Food growing there, that most naturally ag^ees with them,
viz. (...) and the Clay Countries bordering on these Counties, take the next
place, by reason of the abundance of Pulse; for although Swine will feed
eagerly on Mast; yet those that make it mostly their Food, neither grow, nor
breed so well, or kindly, though their Flesh is ^irmer, and very sweet; but
above all Acorns hardens it most, and keeps it firm and close in salting, and
afterward; but when there are no Woods, Barns, Marshes, Corn, Pease, and
Bean-fields must supply the Defect; Pulse is very much coveted by them; also
Chestnuts (they find under the Trees, when they open their Husks) and full
Hazle-nuts, if they find any quantity, will fat them very soon. The best to
fat, are of two or three years old; for if younger, the growth will much hinder
it; and if older, they will take up much more Food and time.

A ^rue description of the Boar; and Sow, for the procuring a healthy and large
Breed.
^f you design to have a good Breed, you must be curiou^ i^ your choice, which
is the man foundation of it; and particularly have a regard to the Boars, and
Sows; the choice Marks of which, are these:

Let your Boar be well set, and short, his Mouth drawing upwards but not over
long, his Shoulders and Breast broad, his Thigs large and full, but short; his
Stones even large, and hard, hanging down pretty low; his Br^stles thick, and
strong; and for the most part, (as much as may be) bristling up, or standing
upright; his color white, or inclining to sandy.

As for the Sow, see that she be long and large of Body; he Sides deep, her
belly large, with many Teats; her Buttocks broad, her Ribs long, and large; her
Eyes small, he^ Head little, her Legs short; for though the long-leged S^ine
appears well, it deceives the Eye, and is not so much for Profit, as the short,
as to Substance, and Fleshy: Now for the Color, there are good of all but
black, though white is accounted the best; yet those that are only spotted with
black, are not to be rejected.

Having thus made your choice; the next thing to be considered is, when it is
most convenient to le^ your Sow b^ covered, which take in the following Section.

The most convenient time for the Sow to take the Boar; how to be ordered in
her going with Pig, and Farrowing, etc.
A Sow goes four Months with Pig, and will conveniently bring two Farrows in a
year, but then it is to be considered what times are most convenient that the
Litter may turn to the best advantage.

The best time for the Sow to be covered by the Boar, is when she is fourteen
Months old, but the Boar must b^ of a longer standing, not less than three
years old; and when he exceeds five, he is naught for Breeders, and the Sow
ought not to breed after four, unless the ^igs be to be disposed of young, for
they will not be si^ proper to raise a Stock. About Candlemas, in the increase
of the Moon, is a proper time to let her take the Boar, then see that he serve
her well three or four times; for these Creatures do not presently conceive,
but often miss the first or second time of Serving, and so being with Pig,
suffer not the Boar to come at her, lest by his boisterous rudeness he hurt
her, and by this means you will have a Farrow; in the warm Weather when there
is good Provision for them, she most commonly brings as many as she has Teats,
and every Pig naturally takes his own Teat, and will not suck another; and if
her Milk be slack, or not sufficient, feed them at times with Oat meal and
Milk, or Bran finely sifted into the Milk; if the Weather be warm, you may wean
them at a Month, and let them go abroad, give them green Leaves, Wheat-Ears,
and Pease to feed on, then is the Sow fit to take the Boar again for another
Farrow, that she may bring forth in the end of Aut(...), so that she will have
four Months to bear each Farrow, one to feed them, and one to recruit and
gather Strength and Flesh. In your Sows Farrowing, you must lay her soft, and
help her, if Nature prove defective, with your Hand, giving to comfort her,
warm Ale to drink, with Bran scattered in it, or a little sweet Wine, and
observe as much as may be, when she is with Pig, and not far gone, to keep her
from Acorns, for much feeding on them will make her apt to cast her Farrow
untimely.

Proper Seasons for Gelding and Splaying; how ordered after, also in Stying,
and in Relation to their Food.
Having weaned your Pigs, and they are grown strong and lusty, at two Months
old you may geld and splay them; though, if it be done at six Months, or a
year, ^f it be done with dexterity, that no danger ensue, and then they will be
the larger, and fatten the sooner; let this be done in the waine of the Moon,
in the manner as directed for Calves, and keep them warm a week after, and in
places where they cannot injure themselves, by over-straining, or leaping; it
is not convenient to do it in hard frosty Weather, or when it is excessive hot,
but in mild open Weather, for then they will sooner heal, and thrive the
better, and be excellent Bacon, or Pork, either, as you desig^ for your use.
The Females in this case, are called Splay-guelts, and indeed, are esteemed,
and prove better for spending than the Males, though young Shoats, or Males of
three quarters old are accounted the dantiest Porks*

Observe, not as by other Cattle, that you put your Hogs together, many in one
place, and in fattening time, ^ne by one in Partitions, which will prevent many
ill-con^eniencies; and once a Fortnight, dust some red Oaker, or ^ed Lead in
their Swill, and it will greatly contribute toward their Health, especially
prevent the Measles, and other such like Infections.

Observe in this case too, that they eat not the Dung of Men, Pigeons,
Poultry, nor lie on Horse-dung, for ^hese will certainly breed the Measles, and
other infectious Diseases; any Carrion, or dead Flesh, is likewise hurtful ^o
them though they will often devour it greedily, if they ^ant their fill of
other Victuals, and this will inure to ^eed on the Living, make Sows eat their
own Pigs, and ^oung Children in Cradles, etc. if they can conveniently ^ome ^^
them, as many Histories furnish us with Examples, ^specially they will eat
Poultry; and indeed, in that way, ^rove a very dangerous Creature to others it
can master, ^r surprise; give them no Fish-water, nor the washings of ^f
Mustard Plates, or Trenchers, in their Wash, for that ^ill make them sicken;
Soap-water is likewise very bad, and will cause Diseases in their Eyes, and
Head; and nail ^ome thin plates of Lead at the bottom of their Troughs, which
cooling their Noses, will please them the better in their Feeding, and has a
certain Virtue to cure the Insla^ation of the Lungs, for this is the hottest of
all Do^estic^ Creatures, which makes him cove^ cool places to ^emper and allay
the Fervor that incommodes him.

Rules for fatening Swine in Champion Countries.
Where Woods, many Tuffs of Trees, or Copises are ^anting, they must, when at
large, be fed from the Ground; ^re a ^arshey, or Morish Ground is to be
preferred before dry Ground, that they may mouzle and dig up Woe(...) or Snales;
as also cool themselves with more conveni(...) in the hot Weather, and get
Roots, which much con(...)butes to their Growth, and Health; especially
Fern-Ro(...) Bulrush-roots, the Roots of Sedges; as also feeding u(...) diverse
kinds of fattening and physical Grass; and He(...) also Orchard, where waste
Fruits fall; at Barn-doors, (...) find good feeding of all sorts of Corn
amongst the (...) or Straw; and this with Beans, Tears, and some so(...)
Barley, will keep them in good Flesh.

Now, if you design to fat them for immediate (...) Sty them up, and let them
not out till they are as f^^ ^ you desire; in this Order keep them the two
first (...) fasting, and early the third Morning give them a (...) quantity of
dried Pease and Beans; repeat this at N(...) four hours after, and when it is
your time to go to (...) but not any Water that day; but the next give th^^
same quantity of Meat; and let them drink their ^^ll; ^ if you can conveniently
get it, twice or thrice (...) give them a lusty draught of sweet Whey, or swee^
Milk, and thus, in a Month they will be sufficiently for Pork, and in five
Weeks for Bacon.

How to order, and fat them in woody Countries.
The Swine delights most in woody Countries that ^ full of Quagmires, or where
there is a sufficiency of (...)^er; and if there be any agreeable Food, they
will th(...) there very much, as Beech, Mastholm, Services, Med(...) Crabs,
Hazle-nuts, Acorns; and here likewise in (...) Rooting, they will find Snales,
Insects, and Roots to ^ on.

Turn them into the beforementioned Woods, or (...) as are very near, and most
convenient to you, for Weeks, or two Months; and when they are well fle(...)
drive them to the Sty, and shut them up for a Fortni(...) or three Weeks,
feeding them as before, with old d(...) Pease, and some spilt Beans; give them
likewise s(...) Fetches, or Tears, and they will grow hard of Fat, ^ their
Flesh be white, and eat very sweet and short, ^ Salt well, and keep long.

(...)tract(...) to fatten Swine in Towns, and particularly for Bra^n, ^^r
Larding.
For keeping, and fattening Hogs in Towns, where they ^ve no: the advantage of
leting them run abroad so much, ^e (...)-Chandlers Grieves, or the hard
pressings of the ^llow may be dissolved, by cutting the Cakes in small ^eces,
and boiling them in Wash, or Whey, or the ^ashings of Ale barrels, or the like;
also O^fal; boiled ^urnips, Parsnips, or Carrots sliceda, Cart-load of which,
the ^eason of clearing the Grounds, may be bought for little matter; and when
their Flesh is raised with these, to ^arden it, give (in two days) each Swine,
a Bushel of dry ^^se, and a little Barley, then two or three days after he ^ill
b^ fit for the Knife.

If you feed a Boar for Brawn, or a Hog for Lard, the (...) Week you put either
into the Sty, give him a suffici^t quantity, three times a day, of Barley
sodden, till it be^ins (...) burst; the next Week give him undried, and it will
^o what you desire, if you give store of Swill in Was^. Whey, etc. after it:
And these Rules are approved by ^he must Thrifty and Experienced in this mat^er.

How to order your Pork, and Bacon, for the well keeping of it, and its eating
sweet, and savory.
After all I have said on this Subject, there remains one thing very necessary
to be discoursed of, which is the ordering the Hog, etc. when killed.

When your Hog is singed, or scalded, hang him on some Hool^ by the Heels, and
take out the Intrails, then cut off the Head, and after the Flitch is separated
from the Chine, if for Bacan, or for Pork, cut into the several Joints, pres^
out the Blood as much as may be with clean Linnen-Clo^ths, and let the Meat
cool on the Table all Night, and ^he next Morning salt it, taking notice of all
the bo^y places, to stuff it well; then if Pork, put it into your
Powdering-Tub, that has rather had Oil than Vinegar, or any other sharp thing
in it, to prevent the Musting; when this is done, boil some Water and Salt,
till it will ^^ an Egg, pour it on gently just warm, and laying ^^ of Salt,
cover it up close, and set it in ^ dry ^ place.

As for your Bacon-Flitches; lay them on Plan^s ^ salt them well for a
Fortnight, or three Weeks, when ^ have taken Salt, hang them up in the Wind to
dry ^ windy place, then let the Smoke come to them by de^^ for if it comes too
much at first, it hazards th^^ ^^ Rusty.

Diseases in Swine, their Causes, S^^toms, anb proper Remedies for the Cure,
also other Griefs, Ails, H(...) etc.
For the Headache.
WHEN this is perceived by their unrest, and ^^ times drowsiness, dullness of
the Eyes, (...) their Heads against any thing that stands in their way, ^^
lancholy, Grunting, and Groaning.

Then let the Swine blood under the Tongue, rub ^ Mouth with Bay Salt and
Vinegar, and if it be ^ give him Lettice-leaves, if not, Colewort, or Beet-le^^
to eat; boil in Whey, Fetches, Rosemary, L^v^^d^ and Vervein, and give it to
drink; do this success^^ two or three Mornings fasting.

For the Meas^es.
This Distemper is occasioned by excessive, or un(...) some Feeding: To remedy
it, take a hard Brush, and ^ it in cold Water, rub the Swine all over with it
hard ^ against the Hair, then take Parsly-Roots, Rue, and B^^ ^^ch a handful,
boil them in a Gallon of fair Water, ^ a handful of Bay Salt, and two Ounces of
Allom, and ^ng kept the Swine a long time from drinking, give him ^iquid part
warm, a little Wheat-bran, to make him the ^er taken, being scattered amongst
it.

For the Swine-Pox.
^ake an Ounce of Me^hridate, as much of long Pepper, ^w tops of Savin, boil
these in a quart of Sider, strain ^ the liquid, mix with it a quarter of a pint
of Olive^, and an Ounce of Honey, give this warm two or ^^ Mornings.

For the Ague or Fever.
^o not give him much Meat, boil Pars^ips, Parsly^^s, Sage, and Pepper, in fair
Water, give him the ^er, and what is boiled in it, thrice a day, having first
^^ blo^ded him in the Tail, and then keep him warm in ^ Sty, but so that he be
not oppressed for want of (...)

For Swelling in the Neck, Throat, or any part.
As soon as this is perceived in any part, let the Swine ^od in the Tail, and
under the Tongue, and to the grie(...) pa^^ apply a Plaster made of the yolk
of an Egg, (...)-wa^, Wheat Flour, and Burgundy-pitch, slice Horse^ish, and
scatter Coriander-seed in the Trough, when ^ giv^ him Bran and Wash very warm.

Stra^ns, Bruises, broken Claws, Bones out of Joint, or ^^ken, etc. an
Excellent Plaster.
^ake Oil of Earth two Ounces, Stone pitch, and the ^e called Mellilot, of each
an Ounce, Turpentine and ^s-wa^, of each an Ounce, the Juice of Mugwort, ^ Oil
of Bay Berries, of each an Ounce, make these in(...) Sal^e pretty thin, over a
gentle Fire, wash the afflict(...) ^plao: with ^rine, and having spread a
convenient ^ster, bind it on hard, and bind it on with Flax.

For the Husking Cough, or C^ld.
Take the Juice of Long-wort, and powder of (...)rish, of each two Ounces, a
quarter of a pint of O^ Oil, the Juice of Coltsfoot, a Herb so called, ^
Ounce, give it fasting in a pint of warm Ale.

For the Pain in the Belly.
Take two Ounces of Fennel-seed, one of long P^^ an Ounce of Fennegreek, a
handful, of May-weed, ^ two Ounces of Treacle, boil these in a quart of ^ Beer,
give it him fasting, and let him fast about six ^ after.

For the Flux.
This Distemper is occasioned by an extraordinary ^ ativeness: To remedy it,
bruise five or six Nut-gi^ little handful of Bettony, dried Slows, and white
S^^ of each an Ounce; Oil of Turpentine, a quarter of ^ Ounce; boil them in a
quart of Milk, and a pint o^ ^negar, strain out the liquid part, and give it at
twice, ^ Morning and Evening, very hot.

For the Plague, or any Disease in the Mil^.
Take Methridate an Ounce, Ginger, Pepper, and ^ ^iander-seeds, of each half an
Ounce, Camomile-(...) a little handful, boil them in a quart of Milk, st(...)
and give it hot.

For Diseases in the Eyes.
Wash them with the Juice of Selendine, Houslee^ Bettony, blow through a Quill
the powder of b(...)lom, or Sepia, and bind a rotten Apple, beaten sm^^ a
Plaster over them.

How to know when a Swine is sick.
There are few Beasts more distempered or subjected ^o Diseases then Swine,
though their Distempers are by ^any the fewer.

If you would know when the Swine is sick, without any v^olent Symptoms; then
it is, when he hangs ^own ^is Ears, and has a dull Countenance, is ques^e in
^is Appetite, and d^clines his fe^ding: But to come to a ^ore certain Rule,
though the former are sufficient tokens; ^raw half a dozen Brissels from the
back, and if the roots ^r ends appear white, the Swine is in good health; but,
^f black, ^loody or spotted, then is he afflicted with some ^nte^nal Sickness,
or has received some violent bruise or ^urt, not outwardly discernable.

When you perceive any of these symptoms, boil Co^iander-seeds, and sweet
Fennel in his Wash; then give him a^ Ounce of Methridate, and a quart of
Olive-Oyl, ^in a quart of new Milk, very warm.

For eating infectious Herbs that makes them sick
There are diverse Herbs dangerous to Swine, and from which they ought with all
diligence to be kept, viz. Mad-Chary, Milfoil, and Henbane, etc. If they sicken
by eating any of these, to make them well again; boil wild Cucumbers, and
Anni-seeds in water; season it with Bay Salt, and give it him to drink, which
will make him ev^c^ate from his Stomach, the Infectious Humor generated there
by these Herbs.

For Rheums.
D^ a Rag in Brimstone, and at the end of a Stick, when lighted, hold it under
his Nose, for a little time; after that, smoke him with Stora^, scattered on a
Pan of Coa^s: Then bruise Garlic, and make it into a Pill with Salt-Butter,
about the bigness of a Wall-Nut, oblige him ^o swallow it.

For Blood-shot, or bloody specks in the Eyes.
Wash the Eyes with the juice of Bettony and Turni^^ mixed with the juice of a
rotten Apple, and give ^^ sliced Parsnips among his other Food to eat.

Imposthumes or Swellings about the Head or Throat.
For this, take Camomoile, Allows, and May-w^^ each a good handful, boil them
when bruised, in a q^^ of White-wine-Vinegar; strain out the liquid part, ^^
sweeten it, if you please with brown Sugar: Then (...) Tar, Bay Salt, and
Rye-flower; thicken it into a Plais^^ spread it, and lay it on the swelling,
and it will draw ^^ to a head, so that if it break not of it self it may be
la^^ed, and the Corruption brought away.

For Vomiting or casting up Food.
This often happens by the Swines eating of Hemlo^^, Hens-Dung, or something
very nauceous, and afflicts to the Stomach, and will make them fall into some
d^^gerous Distemper, if not speedily remedyed: Therefo^^ to do it, let him fast
twelve hours, then give him B^^ in water, wherein Dill or sweet-Fennel has been
boyld; dissolve in a little Allom and Salt, and keep him w^^ for twelve hours.

Diseases in the Gall.
If the Swine be afflicted with the overflowing of the Gall, which occasions
sundry Diseases, which in a little time may be known by the Skin, inclining
somewhat to ^ yellow, but particularly the Roof of the Mouth: Ta^^ an Ounce of
Turmerick, and as much Bole-A^^oniack beat them into powder, add an Ounce of
Honey, and a Dram of Saffron, give these in a pint of sweet Wo^^ pretty hot,
without straining.

For Lice, or Ticks.
Anoint the Swine for this, with Oil of Turpentine, and ^ower of Brimstone; if
any Maggots, or Putrefaction ^ppear, anoint the place with black Soap, and Tar,
and ^hey will cease to generate.

For ^hirst.
Excessive Thirst, through the heat of the Swines Body, and des^re of cold
things to allay it, agitates, and fer^ents ^he Blood, many times drawing on
Fevers, and o^^er hot Diseases; then to allay it, and prevent the ill
con^quen^es, give him Sorr^l boiled in Water, fasting, and ^hen driven out of
the St^, let him be in a place where ^e may at liberty ^^ bathe himself in cool
Streams, or ^onds; and after this, he will not care to drink to ex^ess.

^n excellent Ointment for Fractures, Bruises, or broken Bones.
Take Sheeps suet three Ounces, Venice Turpentine, and ^ees-w^x, of each half
an Ounce, Galbanum and S^orax, ^^ each a Dram, Oil of Olives, half a pint, melt
them ^ver a gentle Fire, and if too thick, add two Ounces of ^e Oil of
Camomile, and anoint the grieved part with it ^ann, when you bind it up.

For Leanness, falling away, and Scurf.
These proceed from corrupted Blood, proceeding from ^ing on Dunghills, in
muddy places, or in the Stys, on ^^ten and corrupted Litter, and many times
want of ^od in the proper Se^sons.

To remedy this, bl^^d the Swine under the Tail, rub ^^ over hard with a
Wy^e-card, such as Wool is car^e^ ^it^al, to take off the Filth and S(...)
then mix a pound ^ Hog^-^a^d, or the rusty Fat o^ Bacon, with a quarter a
po(...) of Tar, and two Ounces of the flower of Brimstone, rub him over with
it, boil Fennel in his Water, and give him clean Litter.

For the sleepy Evil.
This mostly happens in the hot Weather in Summer: To remedy it, keep him
fasting twenty-four hours, boil in his Water Stone-crop, or the Roots of wild
Cucumbers, which, by cleansing his Stomach, will hinder the Vapors that arise
from foul Digestion.

For the biting of a mad Dog.
Take new Chamberlye a quart, put into it two Ounces of Bay Salt, and as much
Soot also beat in it an adled Egg or two, boil them till a third part be
consumed, wash the Wound, and lay on a Plaster of Turpentine, and Beeswax;
and in twice or thrice doing, it will be cured.

For a Hog that has been lugged by a Dog.
Take three Ounces of Tar, as much Soap, and Muttonsuet, mix them well over a
gentle ^ire, then incorporate them with half a pint of White-wine-Vinegar, and
a quarter of a pint of Olive-Oyl, and anoint the wounded place with it as hot
as may be.

For the Milt-pain.
This is known by the reeling, and going on one side; and is cured by Honey and
Wormwood boiled in Water.

The Murrain, ^^s cure.
This is known by the Swine'^ abstaining from Meat, grunting heavily, dullness
of the Eyes, throtling, and hanging of the Ears, and is very dangerous;
therefore, when you perceive any of the^e Signs, boil two handfuls of the Her^
Liverwort, a handful of the whitest Hen-dung, and two Ounces of r^d-Oaker, in
^^ Gallon of Wash, give it warm; and if he refuse to take it, pour it down his
Throa^ with a Drenching-Horn, and wash him with warm Water, wherein Rosemary
and Bays have been boiled.

The Quinsey in Swine.
To this Disease a Swine is very much subject; and when you perceive it has
taken them, let blood under the Tail, and in the Vein behind the Shoulder; and
if the Kernels swell much under the Throat, or on the side of the Neck, ^et
them blood under the Tongue, rub their Mouths with Salt and Wheat Flour; then
take a handful of Dassidilly-Roots, a^ much Salt, and an Ounce of shaved
Hartshorn, stamp the Roots, and boil all these in Vinegar, give the Swine half
a pint of it hot at a time, and anoint the swelling with Oil of Spike.

For the Spleen, an excellent Remedy.
Th^s comes principally by foul varacious feeding, to which, above all others,
this Creature is very subject.

To remedy this Disease, give him the Juice of Tamerine in Water, wherein the
Coals of Heath has been often quenched, and let him drink pretty often of it.

For pining and wasting.
Th^s is perceived by his want of Appetite, in forsaking ^his Meat; and
sometimes, when you bring him to his Meat, and he endeavors to feed, he
instantly starts back, and falls down as dead: This many foolish People
conclude to proceed from Witchcraft, when, indeed, it is ^ natural Distemper.

To remedy this, shut up your Swine a whole day without Meat, or Water; the
next day give them Water to drink, wherein the Roots of wild Cucumbers have
been stamp^d, and strained, and let him fast an hour after; then give ^^an
boiled thick in Water, and so do two or three days, and the Cure will be
wrought; for the Cucumbers will make him Vomit, and cleanse his Stomach,
sitting him for a good Appetite; and thereupon his Flesh will be recovered, if
you give him hard Beans that have been steeped in Bri^e.

To prevent Pestilential Diseas^s.
Take a handful of the Roots of Polipodium, or Oak-Fern, stamp them well, and
boil them in a pint of Whitewine give the Swine half a pint when he is fasting,
very hot, and it will purge him of C(...)er, to which the Creature is
exceedingly subject, and is the Root, or Original of most Diseases that afflict
him.

Of immoderate Thrist.
This in hot Weather greatly afflicts the Swine, and makes him cove^ cool
places, M^^es, and Water, and is very prejudicial to Health; for excess of
drinking brings Distempers, that often prove fatal, and dangerous.

To remedy this, give them Water, wherein Housleek and Wood Sorrel has been
boiled, Peg his Ear, and thrust a Peg made of the Root of Setwort into the
H^lo, so that it may stick fast there: This also is an approved remedy, for the
inflaming of the Liver, or Lungs, by too much hea^, and want of moisture.

For Boiles, or Blains.
Take an Ounce of Burgundy-pitch, as much Beeswax and Turpenti^e, makes these
into a Plaster, by well incorporating them over a gentle Fire, cilp the Hair
as close as you can ^ound about; anoint the place well with Ointment of
Tobacco, with a little thin Tar mixed in it, lay on the Plaster, then take it
off at two days end, and La^ce the Sore, then take powder of burnt-Allom,
scatter in it, and anoint and plaster it as before.

For a Thorn or Stub in the Foot.
Open the place hurt, with the point of a Knife, and if you can, draw it out,
and anoint it with Oil of Spike; if not, lay a Plaster of Stone-pitch and
Turpentine to it, and it will draw it out with ease.

To help the Scowring.
This frequently happens through the sudden change of their Meat, especially in
fatning-time, and much hinders their getting fat; as also puts the Owner to
greater charge than need be, if not speedily remedyed, which is done with
little cost; for to do it, is required no more than a p^nt of Verjuyce in two
quarts of Milk, for the elder S^ine; and for young Porklings, or Shoats, you
may give it above a quarter of a pint, and it will in twice or thrice doing,
stay the Scowring.

For the violent Pain in the T^eth.
This is usually occasioned by contracting Wind in the ^^llowness of their
Teeth, and by the violence of the P^in, many times makes them run mad for a
time.

To remedy this, Lance the Gums close to the Roots of the Teeth, ^ub them with
Salt and burnt-Allom, then w^sh^ the Swines Mouth with Vinegar, wherein
^e^^else^d^ has been boiled, and blood him in the Ear, of the side where you
perceive the Pain mostly to be, by ope^ing a Vein just behind it.

The Frenzy in Swine.
This is held many times to proceed from a Worm g^^wing of putrefaction in the
Head, near the Brain, by which me^ns the Brain is hindered in its Office, and
much afflicted, which causes Frenzy and Madness: The surest Remedy for this,
is to kill your Hog, if he be in good plight; for in the Sty he will be apt to
beat himself to death; or if abroad, break his Neck down any ste^^ place; or
trying the water beyond his strength, be the drowned; or what is as bad, by
long swimming, tear ^^ Throat out with his own Claws. However, if the H^^ when
so taken (for his Head cannot be open so f^r as ^^ take out the Worm, and he
live) be not in plight;

Take the Juice of Briony-root, an ounce, put it i^ a quarter of a pint of
single Poppey-water, ^our it wa^ into the Hogs Nostrils, and keep it in by
holding up ^ Head; then give with his Meat, Colwort leaves boiled i^ Vinegar.

To remedy want of feeding, and defects in the Liver, etc.
Give him half a dram of crude Antimony, in a (...) of warm Bran, and it will
not only restore his App(...) when lost, but also remedy the foulness of the
Liver (...)rid him of the Measles, if once they have entered the (...)

For Le^^ness, Mislike, Scurf, and Mainginess, a most appr^ved Remedy.
These Diseases proceed from corrupt blood, occasi(...) by wet and foul lying,
especially on rotten: wet Bo(...) or rotten Litter in the Stys, and sometimes
from a s^^ city of Meat and Water, and now and then Wash ^ Whey, etc.

To cure it, let the Swine blood under the Tail; the with a Wool-card rub him
from the back to the Tail, ^ all the filth and scurf come off, nay, till the
skin is (...) by it, and the blood come; then take Brimstone, Goo^ grease, and
Tar, make these up into an Ointment ov^^ ^ gentle fire, then with a fine brush
diped in it, rub t^^ Swine over with it, give him short clean litter, and keep
him in the Stye for two or three days with good wa^^ food, and by this means
the disorder will be remedyed.

Of the Cattar in Swino.
This happens by too much eating rotten Fruits, corrupting the blood; or
Carrion, or other unwholesome things, especially wherein there is too much
moisture and corruption. Hemlock or ^enbane, if eaten, is a great producer of
it; and to know when this afflicts your Swine, observe their Eyes; and if you
see them heavy, du^l, moist, or watering, it is a sign. Their averseness also
to their Meat is another.

To remedy this, give your Swine a drench of warm w^ter with Hens-dung in it;
and in his wash, boil Live wort, a Herb so called, and red Oaker, some dried
Sloes, and ^olipodium-roots, and give him lukewarm.

For Casting, Nauceating, or Vomiting.
This is a defect occasioned by the weakness of the Stomach, or its great
foulness by eating unwholesome Food; a^^ is known by his straining and striving
to cast; his offer gaping and shaking his head; when you perceive any of these
signs, as also leanness and falling away, if it have contin^ed long.

To remedy it, give him splent Beans and Fennel seed mi^ed well together, and
they will by their astringency, str^ngthen his Stomach, and restore Appetite.

For dangerous Impostumes in any part, an approved Remedy.
These troublesome Sorrances or Tumors being gathered by evil Humors, are very
dangerous, if not timely remedy^d. They happen in many parts of their Bodies,
as un^er their Throats, Ears, Bellies, and often on their Sides. To remedy these:

If they be soft, and come to a head naturally, you may lance them; if not, you
must use means to bring the Corruption into a body that they may come to a head
proper to be ^^uced or break of themselves; and to this purpose, use a Plaster
made of Tar, Turpentine, and Oil of Spike, or the Juice of Lilly-roots; and
when the Tumor is ^ to be lanced, press it between your Finger and Thu^ and
having given a small slit with a sine Instrument, (...) out the Corruption, and
put in a Tent of Linnen-rag^ Flax dipped in Oil of Peter, and anoint the Wound
vs^ Salt-Butter; blood him likewise under the Tongue, ^ his Mouth well with
Meal^ and Salt well mixed togeth^^ and cover over the Orifice of the wound with
a Plaist^ of Diaculum, and in a few dressings it will be well; ^ if there be
any proud or putrefied flesh in it, put in so^ burnt roach Allom in fine
powder, and i^ will corr^ away.

For the Murrain, another excellent Remedy.
This Disease is much incident to some in the Spring especially where they eat
Grass among which young He^ lock springs up. It is known by the dull and
redness ^ the Eyes; the little List the Swine has to stir; his hea^ grunting,
and much hanging down his Head.

To remedy this; take the roots of Water or Ga(...) Lillies, bruise them, and
squeeze out the Juice, mi^^ quarter of a pint of it with half a pint of Salad
Oil, a^^ half an Ounce of Turmerick finely beaten into powder, give it the
Swine in a Horn, that it may the better go down his Throat; and when you
perceive him grow hoe, or sweat, blood him under the Ears, Tongue, and Tail,
and give him cooling Washes to drink, with a little Bay Salt sprinkled in it.

For Laxativeness.
This many times wastes them, if it continues long, and not only hinders their
growth, but their fatning; though it is easily remedyed, by giving them Milk
and Verjuyce to drink; and Beans, Pease, Barley, and such like dried Meats for
their Food: For want of Verjuyce, Vinegar, or the juice of sower Grapes will do
the like.

A peculiar way to prevent a Sow from the un-naturalness of eating or
destroying her own Pigs.
Some Sows being used much to Carrion, and now and then to the snaping up of
live Poultry will, if they be not well fed and looked to, un-naturally eat
their own Pigs; and this it seems is not new to these voraciousCreatures for we
find the ancient Saxons looked on it so barbarous and un-natural, they made a
Law, That any Sow which eat her own Pigs, should he burnt alive.

This destroying or eating their Pigs as soon as farrowel, springs from an
un-natural greediness in them; which to remedy, you must watch her when she
sarroweth; and if she be accustomed to such Tricks, take away the Pigs is they
fall; then take the Rickling or u^derling Pig, and wash it all over with the
Juice of Stone, a He^^ so called and put it again; to the Sow, and if she
devour it, it will make her cast and vomit extremely, and be so sick, that the
pain and disorder she finds in it, will deter her from doing the like again:
But of all the cures for such in un-natural Beast, is to fat and kill her, for
there are bat few Sows that are guilty of this trick.

A present way to increase Milk.
Some Sows when they have farrowed, are deficient in Milk to bring up their
Farrow; in this case, to make her speedily give Milk, which is (especially at
first) the most wholesome and nourishing to them; give her Sow-This^le to eat;
if she refuse it raw, scald it, when choped small among Bran: And to relish her
Stomach to an Appetite, whereby Milk may have wherewithal to increase by
feeding, give her Colwort-leaves boiled in Vinegar; and for her food, Pease,
scalded Bran, and splert Beans, and she will give much Milk, and become lusty.

A Cordial for a Sow, sick in, or after her Farrowing.
Take a handful of dried Rose-leaves, a few Leaves ^ Baum, and Flowers of
Layender, boil these in a quart o^ Ale, sweeten the Liquid part when strained
out, with a little brown Sugar, give her half a pint at a time wan^ with a
drenching Hom; and this will help her also in he^ farrowing, and make the Pigs
come kindly away, unle^ by violent straining, or other accident.

For a Sow that is apt to cast her Pigs untimely.
This is a fault they are seldom guilty of, as being of a very hot nature, and
not subject to phlegmatic Humors, that mostly occasions Abortion; but
sometimes it happens, especially where any violence has been offered by
strokes, luging with Dogs, or wrenching themselves through narrow Gaps or
Pales; sometimes by the unruly lunching of other Swine; and it is known before
hand, if notice be taken of it, by their often lying down, mou^^full grunting,
foaming much at Mouth, and redness ^^ their Eyes when you perceive these things,

Take a handful of Fumitory; if that he not to be got, Featherfew; as much
Hysop and Lavender; boil them in the Wash, and having strained the Herbs, give
it warm; if any bruise has been taken, let blood under the Ears.

To know when a Sow is near her farrowing time.
When this time approaches, her Eyes will look dull and heavy; she will, if at
large, be searching up and down in corners for a secret convenient place; and
when she has found own to her mind, she will take Straw in her, Mouth, and
carry it thither; if she be confined, she will be making her Nest by lightning
up the Litter; and lying round more in one place than another, hold up her
Nose, to seent if any one be coming near her; beat other Hogs from her, often
turn round, yet seem fearful of lying down, for fear of tumbling her new made
Bed before the ^me she is to use it. When you see these things, give her ^oyled
Whey and Bran to hearten and strengthen her in what she is to undergo, for it
will not be long e^^e she will fall down.

For blindness in Pigs newly farrowed.
Sometimes it happens, especially in cold frosty Weather; that Pigs, by defect
in the Sows Womb, or excessive sharpness of the Air, become blind: To remedy
this, that it may not continue on them, give them in their Milk, Juice of
Selendine, and wash their Eyes with the same Juice with a Feather dipped into
it warm, and they will be r^^ored.

Thus I such for Swine, being all that is necessary to be cons^^ered of them in
every point.

A TREATISE OF GOATS, THEIR Nature and Kind, and the Advantage accruing by
feeding them.
Goats, their Profitableness: How to make choice of good Breeders, with the
marks to know them, etc.
THOUGH some parts of England are not much acquainted with this sort of Cattle,
yet the greater part is; as also the Principality of Wales: And indeed their
Flesh, when young, is very dainty in the Opinion of many; equaling, if not
exceeding Venison; and their Milk exceeding nourishing: Be^^des, their Skins
and Hair are fit for various uses, and bring not a little Profit to those that
trade in them. The Patriarchs of old held Goats in much esteem, and bred up
multitudes of them, making very savory Meat of their Kids; and so indeed should
we at this day, were we wanting o^ those numerous flock of Sheep, etc. which
daily supply the Table. However, it is a Domestic Creature, and so lows in
course to be taken notice of in this Book.

The Goats have many things common with the Sheep, for they usually go to Buck
about the same time. There an^ in some places two sorts of these, the hairy
sort, and that smooth; and those that have Wens and Warts under their Chins,
are taken to be the Trustfulest; their Udders we (...) great, the Milk duck,
and the quant^ty much. There is in these, as in other Cattle, something to be
considered in their choice, especially for breeding; and for this matter, to
keep my preceding Method, I shall lay down some Rules.

And first, of the He, or Buck Goat; Observe in your the sing him, that he b^
well horried and bearded; his Main thick, his Head long, and his Neck short;
his Legs fles^ey, his Eyes sprightly, I and somewhat large; his Ears lar^e, and
somewhat declyning.

Secondly, as for the She Goat, in your choice, observe that her Udders be
large; her Belly deep, and body long; her Leg short, well But cooked, and a
complete Head.

The best time for the Female to suffer the Male, and he cov^red for breed, is
about the beginning or middle or February; if the Weather be not too extreme,
by reason of hard Frosts that many times continue the greater part of that
Month, if not beyond.

How to order them in their Covering; the proper Season; and how, after they
have brought forth, to bring up the young; with the manner of feeding them.
There is one thing remarkable in these Creatures; the Male, by a kind of
instinct in Nature, know his Prerogative, and always goes before the Female: As
for buying them you cannot expect they should be entirely healthy, because the
heat, and a rank hu^^our ^in their Bodies, make them almost always fauv^^ish of
against.

The best kind for Breeders, are those that (...) (...)ntly bring forth twice a
year. The Goa^ is (...) to ^^gender at seven Months old, being according to the
Proverb, even, As Letchorous as a Goat: For the Male, whilst be has not been
weaned, will be leaping his Dam, if h(...)ds no other for his purpose; which,
too early beginning, makes him wax feeble; and before he be six years old,
unable to get any Kids, especially such as worth Rearing; and therefore, after
he has passed his fifth year, he is no longer fit for your turn: As for a
Breed; you may put them to be covered again at the latter end of the (...), or
beginning of Autumn; and though your Kids be brought forth by young Goats of a
year, o^ under two, yet the best way for their thriving is to put them to
suckle to a Milch Goat of two or three years old, so let the young one breed,
and the elder bring them up, and there will be no time, lost in procuring a
good Block; suckle them, and other ways order them in all cases as the Lambs
when they are weaned; yet with this caution, that living more un(...)ly and
wanton than the (...), care must be taken, that they hurt not themselves or
others.

To Brouse on, give green Boughs, especially Sprays of the Vine, which they
exceedingly covet; and where they come among Vineyards, do damage; which
occasion^^ the Ancients to (...) them to (...) their fabled God of Wine, that
he might be satisfied by the Deaths of some, for the Mischief the rest had
done: After three, they are not very good to breed, but for procuring such Kids
as you design to dispose of very young; and past four, their Breed is good for
little. The first leaping is accounted uncertain; the second frequently
speedeth, but the third carries a certainty with it.

The Age of Goats, and many other things observable in the^ as to their
Knowledge, Housing, etc.
The Age of these Creatures are to be taken notice of by the Circles of their
Horns, from their first growing till eight years, and then they are altogether
past their best, and not worth buying, unless for their Skins, and Hair. The
Females of those that are wanting of Horns, and called Pollards, give the best
and sweetest Milk, of which some make good Butter and Cheese, especially if
mingled with Ews and Cows Milk; it gives it ^ pleasure ^ast^, and occasions it
to keep longer than any other; and many are of Opinion, they see as well by
Night as Day: They always in their Lyings down, lay their Faces one from the
other, and in that manner feed; to be more watchful against Danger, which way
soever it may be likely to assail them by the means of Wolves, Dogs, or other
Ravenous Creatures; and if abroad, they sense the young ones in the midst of
them, that they may be able to defind them, unless they be unruly and break
out, for which they are often chastised by their Dams.

^his is a very sensible Creature, and cautions of Danger; for Nutianus
reports, he once saw a couple of them accidentally meet on a Bridge very
narrow, and long, over a rapid Stream, which, by reason of the straightness
would not suffer them to return; then to go backward, as it were, blindfold,
seemed more hazardous; where upon, one of them lay leisurely down, and suffered
the other to go over him; yet in Rockey and Mountainous pla^es they will climb
and run up Cliffs pr^digiously, esp^cially in the Mountainous parts of Wal^s,
where many of them are wild, and hunted by the ^entry there, as their chief
Recreation; and in common Inns you may see them run on the Ridges of Houses,
like a Cat, ye the^^ d^ead to take the Water, and will not, unless very much
forced to it by Frights.

Extreme Heat more than extreme Cold aff^icts them, because they are hot by
Nature, especially those with young; and therefore in such times in Sum^rer,
Heat drives them to Shades. Let them brouse in Copses, ^or under Hedges, and
they will by that means grow sat; and in the Cold, House them, at least those
that are with ^oung, and most tender; feed them with Oats, Pease, and
Wheat-Ea^s. It is better, if you have a Convenience, to keep then in sundry
little Flocks, than altogether, for Healths sake.

How their Housing ought to be, and care as much as possible, to keep them from
Diseases.
Keep Goats as well as Deer, from Vines, and choice Fruit Trees, for there they
will make a miserable spoil, by plucking off the tender Branches, and their
biting and bruising, hinder them from kindly growing ever after.

As for their Standings, when Housed in Summer, let them be Airy, and Winter
close and warm, having for that purpose two Windows, one to the North, and the
other to the South, so that you may let in the Sun, or cool Air at pleasur^, as
the Season requires it.

Let it be hard under their Feet, descending, that the Urine may pass into the
Sink, and not offend them; the Flooring must be hard, and the best is accounted
of Stone, either flat, or pibble; as for their Littering, if it be sweet and
clean, little will serve them, and in the Spring, Summer and Autumn, small
green Boughs, Sedge and Rushes are most pleasing and delightful to them; and
the best way to keep them from Diseases, is to keep their Housing clean, for
ill Scents mainly offend and afflict them, insomuch, that they presently fall
sick, and when they do, especially of some Diseases; it is very dangerous; for
they drop not as other Cattle, by degrees, but fall down dead as fast as may
be, so that twenty out of a hundred that seemed to be well over Night, have
been found dead in the Morning,

And having thus far treated of this kind of Cattle in General, and
Particulars: It now remains, I follow my former Method, to treat accurately of
the Causes, Symptoms, and Cures of their Diseases.

Diseases most incident to Goats, their Causes, Symptoms, Prevention, and
choice Receipts for their Cure, etc.
For the Fever, or Ague.
THESE Distempers, and especially the first, are inh^rents to Goats, and very
rarely, especially of any yea^s standing, they are altogether without it; it is
occ^sioned, by too much heat in the Blood, by reason of their L^stfulness or
indeed, that which prompts them to it, and is known by an interchange of Heat
and Cold. To remedy this:

Let them blood under the Tongue, then take a great Thistle, Roots of Fern, and
Reeds, of each a moderate ha^lful bruise them well; Co^iander-seeds two Ounces,
the Juice of Sorrel as much, Peels, or seeds o^ Citron, or ^emon, an Ounce and
a half, boil them in three pints of ^unning Water, and give the Beast the
liquid part to drink.

Another for the same.
^ake a handful of Bean-flower, an Ounce of Allom bea^en in powder; a few Roots
of Pollipodium of the Oa^, boil them in two quarts of Skim-Milk, or Whey, and
gi^e it at four times, the liquid part strained out pretty warm.

For the Dropsy.
This is a Disease Goats are many times troubled with, pr^ceeding from wet
feeding, and too much lying abroad in ^oggy Weather, or in Monish dump Grounds,
and is kn^wn by the tumourousness, or pussing up of their Skin, which if you
press, with your Finger, will indent, and no: presently rise again.

To remedy this, Lance the Skin a little under the S(...)der, and put a Rag
dipped in the Oil of Bays betwe^^ and the Flesh, and so often renew it, and by
thus k(...) it tented, the Water will slow to that part and ev^^ give him, if
you have a convenience, at the same (...) Hop tops the tenderest, and the
tender sprays of (...) or Beech, to brouse o^; however, give him a (...) of
Milk at twice; wherein a handful of Dwarf ^ has been boiled.

For the Murrain or Pestilence.
These are Diseases fatal to this kind of Cattle, and though many times they
seem lusty and well, yet by (...)denly taking them, they will drop down very
fast, t^ immediately dye; therefore always have the follow things to remedy so
great a loss, which so little time w^ procure in a readiness, to preserve them
safe. Take (...) tops of Rue, Baum and Vervine, of each a handful, (...) them
in two quarts of Sider, till a^ third part be co(...)med, strain it out, and
infuse in it a quar^^e^ of an Ounce ^ Saffron, and two Ounces of Methridate, or
London-Tr^^d and give half a pint at a time wa^in and according t^ the number
of your Goats, make a greater quantity, ^ have it in a readiness; and as soon
as you see this Diste^per appear amongst them, separate as many as you peceive
infected, and put them into warm, but Airy place

For Pains in the Head.
This sometimes afflicts them even to Madness, occasi^^ed by violent Heats
first contracted by being in cold w^ places, or unwholesome feeding; it is known
by their reeling and staggering, running their Heads against (...) thing that
stands in their way. For this:

Blood them in the Neck, and under the Tongue take Mather, a little handful;
Turmerick, half an Ounce; a few tops of Hysop, Sage, and Rosemary; boil them in
fair Water, strain out the liquid part, and give it warm.

For Faintness, or Dizziness.
This proceeds from Heat, or want of seasonable Food, and is easily known by
the languishing of their Eyes and Feebleness.

To remedy it, wash them with Water, wherein Hysop has been boiled, infuse a
Dram of Saffron, and two Ounces of Dioscordium in a pint of new Milk, and give
it w^rm, after it some Holm, Oak, or Vine Sprays to brouse on, and scatter
Fennegreek-seed among their Provender.

For Scabs, or Scurf.
T^ese are occasioned by gross Humors, proceeding from too much rank feeding,
and which they are not often troubled withal. To remedy it,

Bleed well, then give them Bole-Armoniack, Bay Salt, and the juice of stamped
Honey-suckle-leaves boiled in fair Water, and wash them with Chamberlye.

For Leanness, or Consuming.
Boil two or three handfuls of Lupius in a quart of Wa^er, and as much Vinegar,
strain it out, and give half a pint at a time, and it will bring them to feed
and g^ow ver^ Fleshy.

For the Surfeit.
This comes by over driving, and heat, when they stand still, and too suddenly
cool; or by greedily brousing on unwholesome Boughs, or Herbs; and sometimes is
known by breaking out, but oftener by their lolling out their Tongues, and
panting for Breath; dullness of their Eyes, he^t of their Horns and Feet.

To remedy this, take a good handful of Ground Ivy, stamp ^t, and boil it in a
quart of fair Water, strain out the liquid part, and put in an Ounce of
Venice-Treacle, or Methridate, give half a pint at a time wa^m, and keep the
afflicted Goats in dry places.

For a Stub, thorn, or other hurt in the Feet, etc.
These H^^ts often come by clambering cragg^ ^^ places, and frequently, the
sharp Stones getting b(...) their Claws, much hurt their Feet; to cure then
(...)fects that may happen of these kinds:

Take an Ounce of yellow Beeswax, half an O^^ Turpentine, a quarter of a pint
of Linseed-Oyl, ^ quarter of an Ounce of Verdigrease in powder, ^ these in a
very soft Salve, or Ointment, which, by ^ stirring, you may soon do; then wash
the grieved ^ with Urine, spread some of the Salve, or Ointment, ^ and bind it
on with Flax and Leather.

This Ointment is good to heal up old Sores, B^^ Botches, Blains, green Wounds;
to assuage Sw(...) and reduce Bruises to a sound state; also in Fractu^^ Bones,
over-straining of the Sinnews, and the like.

For Diseases, or Defects in the Eyes of Goats.
These Distempers are sundry, coming by Blows, or ^^ different effects of Heat,
and Cold, which makes t^^ Eyes sore, dazy, subject to Watering, or Rheums (...)
over them, Spects, Spots, or Scales.

When any of these happen, take Pimpernel, and ^^ bright, of each a handful,
boil them in a quart of ^^ Water, till the third part be consumed, then strain
out ^^ liquid part and wash the Eyes with i^; but for Sp(...) you must blow
into their Eyes, some time before you ^^ them, burnt Allom, or burnt Salt
sinely powdered.

For Defects in the Lungs.
Take the Leaves of Bramble, or Dewberry-leaves, o^ either a handful, the Roots
of Scabe^s, and Comfry, of each an Ounce, bruise and boil these in small Beer,
an^ give it warm half a pint at a time twice or thrice.

To preve^t breaking out, and she^ding their Hair.
^is many times happens by their foul lying, feeding, ^ or the like, and
renders the Goats not only uncomly, ^ the forerunner of dangerous Diseases, if
not s^d^^ prevented: To do which, Take*

^llebo^e, or Bares-foot, a good handful, Suthernwooo^ ^e quantity, stamp them,
and boil them in a quart of ^ give half a pint at a time, and it will purge ^h^
^^, ce^se the effects of the bad Humors, and pre^any f^rther Mischief, or
Danger from the increase of

A general Purge for the Goats, etc.
^^ke t^o Ounces of Antimony, a handful of Spurg^el, a good handful of wild
Cucumbers, bruise these to^r, boil them in a gallon of running Water, and give
^ a pint in a Morning before they come to any full seed(...) and ^t purges
Blood and Choler in a good measure, ^^s the violence of the Fever, and makes
them after(...) th^^ve very well.

To stench bleeding at the Nose.
This many times happens through excess of Heat, and ^oulness of the Blood that
gathers in the Head. To ^^dy it:

^ake a handful of Ash-leaves, as much of young Ne^tle (...) or the tops of
Yar^ow, or rest Harrow, bruise them, ^^ out the Juice, and mixing it with
Vinegar, give it ^east, and spirt a little up the Nostrils, and the bleed(...)
w^^l ^mmediately stay.

^^medy the Convulsions, or Cramps that occasion their Halt^g or Lameness.
^his comes by taking sudden Colds after Heats, which ^^s it the Nerves and
Sinnews: To remove it, chafe ^ the grieved part with Oil of Turpentine, or
Spike, and give a quarter of a pint of Sallad-Oyl to drink, a scatter
Carraway-seeds, and Coriander-seeds into his P^vinder.

For Pains in the Belly.
This happens by Wind in the Bowels, or raw Digest^^ in the Stomach: To remedy
it,

Take a handful of Camomile, as much of Bay-lea^^ boil them in a quart of small
Beer, and give the liq^^ part hot at twice.

A TREATISE OF ASSES, As to their nature, Breeding, Feeding, Ordering, and
Curing the sundry Diseases incident to them.
^^^ations on the Ass, his Hardiness, and man^e^ of (...)
THE Ass is the hardiest of all Domestic Creatures, seeming by Nature, to be
framed for labor; its Feed is indifferent to it, and any thing that is proper
to be eaten by (...) it make a good Meal of. The simplicity of this ^^ea^^ is
^^d in History, to make Heraclitus (who always, ^p^ this t^me, wept for the
Pride, Covetousness, and ^^ry of Mankind) to l^ugh; for, passing along (...)
solitary, having a little before seen Luxurious Tab^^ spread with all manner of
Dainties Sea and Land could afford, he espied a poor Ass contenting himself
with Thistles, mumbling them with as much pleasure, as if h^ had the best
Provinder imaginable; which made him prefer his Indifferency before the
pretended Wisdom of d^contented, covetous Persons, who having never so much,
are grasping at more, and never truly enjoy what they really in one kind
properly poffess: But to return.

The Ass likewise brouses on Briar-staks, will eat Ch^^ pleasantly; and indeed,
by reason of his hardiness, ^^ the few Diseases incident to him, requires
little looki^^ to, although his Labor is considerable; for though here (by
reason of the abundance of good Horses) riding ^ him is accounted scandalous,
and not used but by t^^ meaner sort; yet in other Countries, they are used by
great Ladies, as Palfreys, with ^^broidered Carpets, and gilded Trapings
thrown over them. However, if we abate this in England, and should lay them
aside as useless for riding, there is notwithstanding, much business they are
capable of: For, as to carrying Burdens, the la^^ sort are comparable to
Horses; they will hold out a (...) way without fainting or^tireing. Then, for
draw^ Burdens in a Cart, they are very serviceable; as also ^ the Plough, in
light ground, or where there is no ^^ of Trees, stiff Clay, or large Stones;
for indeed, ^^ Creature put beyond its strength, is foiled and disorder^ and
makes it unpleasant to him for the future.

Of Covering, and the proper time; their order in bringing forth, etc.
The breeding of these Creatures are in all particular, the same with the
Mares, both in time and manner; And for a good breed, the Male and Female must
be both of a reasonable Age, large bodied, sound, and of a good kind. The Male
must be at least three years old; for ^^om th^^^ to ten, they ^ro very (...)
bredding, though they bring forth their Col^s sometimes at two year, and a
half; but it appears by the bad thriving, not to be so well, nor good for
Service or Pontinuanc^. To make the She-Ass retain the Seed, you must, after
she has been well leaped, drive her up and down for an hour, or more, a
handsome pace. She seldom brings forth two at once, and appears to have a
kind of shame in her delivery; for when she finds her burden ready to come
forth, she will, if possible, retire into some dark ^hady place to avoid being
seen. They bring forth their Foal in a twelve Month; and for a good breed it is
conveni^nt to let them be covered but once in two years, that they may bear
kindly every other year. Aristotle accounts their Life's to be thirty years, and
indeed they are very healthy, being afflicted with but a few Diseases.

The best covering time is from the twentieth of May, to the tenth of June; and
whilst they are with Foal, they must not be greatly labored, nor hard driven;
but labor does the Male good, for by reason of his extreme letcherousness, he
grows naught if he stands idle.

The ordering and weaning the As^-Colt; when to break him; Considerations of
its Nature, and the housing required.
A. for the ordering the Ass-Colt when cast, suffer it the first year to run
with the Dam; and the next, tie him up gently with her, only in the night time:
The third is a si^ ^eason to break him, and render him tractable for labor,
which will not be very difficult to do, by reason of his ^^ate dullness and
easiness to be handled. There is in this Creature a great love toward her
young; for if it be in danger, and cry out for help, she will not stick, if
possible, to run through a circling fire to it. But above all things, they
dread the Water, not willingly ^a^eing to dip the tips of their Hooss in it;
and indeed the much wetting their Hooss in travel, or wet grounds, is the cause
of most of their Distempers; neither, unless exceeding dry, will the Ass, of
her own accord, willingly drink in any strange Water; and when they drink, they
do it so mannerly, as if they were afraid to touch it with their Lips. Some,
who have been curious to search into the (...) of ^t, affirm, that seeing the
shadow of the^^ goodly large ^ars in the Water, in which they take great
Pride, they are offended, and suddenly draw back, as ^earing they ^ wetted.

They delight to lodge in wide Rooms, and by reas^^ of the melancholy guality
that abounds in them, they among all Creatures, if any thing at all, are the
least delighted in Music; and for the same reason ^^oubled ^^ fearful dreams,
which make them not only groan ^ make piteous noise in their sleep, but also,
if they ^ near any hard thing, to beat their Feet and Heads, w^^ by they much
hurt and bruise themselves; but much m^ those of their kind, that lie near them.

How to order the Ass in snowey, or hard frosty Weather, (...) there is little
to be got abroad.
In the Winter Season, if the Snow be on the gr(...) especially, you must feed
him in the House, with Ch(...) sweet Pease-Straw, and Hay chopped short; hard
Bid^ or chipings of coarse Bread beaten small; and to con^^ and keep them in
heart, fit for service, give them ^ and then Bran in sweet Whey, skim Milk, or
Wort; ^ it must be very thick, or, for the reason before menti(...) he will
hardly fish for it, though never so hungry. T^ care to let them stand dry, and
if their Hoofs grow ^ shape, pare, them, and bring thim into a fashionable for
that they may grow in thickness; in many places wh^ they labor much, or go on
stony ground, they ^ shooed; but this must be done lightly, and within co^pass,
that they interfeer not, to lame them in their tr^ing.

Diseases particularly incident to them; and their Cures.
Pains in the Head.
THis comes from wet and cold in travel or lying; and sometimes of extreme hent
in the hot Summer Season.

To remedy this, take Polipodium of the Oak, a handful; Wood Sorrel, or
Field-Sorrel, a like quantity; boil them in stale Beer, and give it him hot;
soon after let him bl^od behind the Ears.

For defects in the Lungs.
This is known by his heavy and painful breathing, his lamentable braying, not
clear, but inwardly as it were.

To remedy this defect, boil Liquorish well bruised two Ounces; Centory a
little handful, in three pints of ^^ning Water, till a third part be consumed;
then give it him at two equal potions well strained, Morning and Envening
fasting.

For the Hide bound.
This is occasioned by being too much in the wet and cold; To remedy it:

Let him blood under the Tail; rub him well over with hard wisps; boil the
roots of Fennel in new Wort, a handful to a quart; add an ounce of Lupins, and
half as many Camomile-Flowers; give it as a drench, a pint at a time, Morning
and Evening.

To purge Melancolly.
Take three or four Laurel-leaves, a sprig or two of Savin, a quarter of an
Ounce of Stibium, boil them, well bruised, in a quart of Whay, and give him the
liquid part well strained, to drink, and let him fast six hours after.

For Madness or Giddiness.
This is occasioned by the contending of heat and cold in the Brain; from
Vapor arising by bad digestion. To remedy it:

Take a handful of the tops of Rue, and Cardus, boil them in a pint of
White Wind; and just before you give i^ him, bleed in the Temple-Veins. Tie him
up close in a^ airey place, for six hours; then give him Water wherei^ wild
Cucumer-roots have been boiled, and good Litter.

To prevent Diseases.
Pick his feet clean from gravel and dirt; wash the^ with warm Chamberlye, and
stopped them with Goats o^ Beef Suet; over that Flax, dipped in Tar: Give him in
^ pint of Ale, an ounce of Methridate, and a quarten of Olive Oil.

For Swellings, Sores, Bruises, broken Bones, Sprains, and the like, do as in
case of Bullocks, Sheep, etc.

A TREATISE OF Mules, or Moiles. THEIR Generation, Breeding, Feeding, Diseases,
etc. And the Cure.
Condsierations on the Generating Mules: Directions to choose your Stallion and
Mare for a large and good breed.
THE Moile or Mule, among other Domestic Cattle, I conceive necessary to treat
of, as being a Beast commendable for i^s enduring much Labor and Travel; kept
with little, and not su^ject to many Diseases.

It is generally held, that if the She Ass and the Horse engender, they beget
the She Mule or Moile; and that the contrary is done by a Stone-Ass upon a
Mare: This la^ter however, must be the far better way, because the Mare is
larger, and affords greater Nourishment to it is the Womb, and can more
conveniently suckle it; so that consequently it will grow larger, stronger, and
be of a more lively temper; and in this case the Ass is never fitter to cover
the Mare, than when he has been hard drive^, riden, or labored, for then the
Blood, and Humors being stirred, and moved in the parts, render him the mos^
active and vigorous for Performance.

This Ass-Stallion, (if you intend a good large Stoc^ that covers your Mare,
must be well chosen; that is, we^ trussed of Body, full and Brawny Thighed, his
Head lea^ and small, his Breast full and large, his Ears large, and standing
well upright, his Body of a very darkish Color, or spotted brown.

The Mare properly to be chosen for this Business, oug^^ not to be under four
years old, nor to exceed ten; let h^^ Shape be as lovely as may be, in case you
choose her for Breed of good Horses, but it matters not whether her St^ture be
extraordinary large; she goes in this case full Eleven Months, and sometimes
more, and must have good usage and seeding.

How to order the Mare and Foal, and oblige the Mare that is backward, to
consent to be covered, etc.
When your Mare is near Foaling, put her into a warm closeplace, and take care
that she comes to no Damage, by overreaching, or straining; when she has
Foaled, take it from her, and the most expedient way will be, to put it to a
Mare that has a Colt sucking, till the Dam has gathered Strength: This must be
put to the second Mare in a dark place, lest she refuse it, till she become
better acquainted.

Now there may in this Undertaking arise some difficulty, to oblige the Ass to
cover the Mare, or she to receive him, being something of a different kind, but
may be facilitated by early familiarity, as thus:

The Ass-Colt that you intend for your Stallion, may be taken young from his
Dam, and put to a young milch Mare, so that being brought up among that kind,
he will be no stranger to them, nor they to him. But where this cannot be
ordinarily done, high feeding will make him met^lesom, and lustful; you must
also put first an indifferent Ass-Colt to her, that if she beat him it may not
matter ^s to the discouragement of the Stallion you intend; and when he has
wooed her that she seems something pliable, then put the right Stallion to her,
who will soon cover her, for these Creatures are naturally lustful; but yo^
must take care you put him to a Mare that has never bee^ covered by a Horse,
lest her coyness, or immeasurable beating him, not only cools his Courage, but
dull^, and puts him altogether out of his Amorous sit, so that ten to five, if
he be ever brought to be free in this kind of business afterward; and by this
means you may procure your desire.

When you have brought up the Colts to a weaning time, which may be at three or
four Months; turn him into some close Pasture, make him gentle and tractable by
feeding him, letting him eat out of your hand, either sweet Grass, short sweet
Hay, choped Straw or Chaff; for this kind of Creature, as I have said, will be
kept with little, and fare hardly; but that which he has must b^ sweet and good.

Proper Housing for a Mule, and how to order him in riding or laboring.
As for his stabling, it must be dry, pretty airy, not too hot in Summer; nor
cold in Winter; though in seasonable Weather, they cove^ better Lodging then
the Litter of t^eir Feeding in dry Pasture. One of these thus brought ^p, may
be backed or put to work about three years old; they will hold labor
extremely, run very swiftly, and of in e^sie pace; so that in diverse Countries
beyond the Seas, they are chiefly used by the great Ladies as Palfreys, or to
the same use and purpose of our Pad Nags; great esteem being set upon them, and
their value prized higher than considerable good Horses. These Creatures Pliny
allows by a natural Course to live sifty years; they ^re serviceable in the
Plough, where the Husbandman is not unreasonable to put them beyond their
Streng^ viz. in such stiff or rooty ground as requires a strees draught of
Hors^s or Oxen, etc.

Diseases, etc. Most incident to Mule^ their Cause, Symptoms, and proper Remedy
for their Cure.
For the Fever, etc.
THE Distempers this Creature is afflicted with, (...) indifferent both to the
Horse, and the Ass; but ^ they be well used, they are very few, and the
principel's the Fever, by reason of their dryness, choleric Humor, and heat
of their Blood; it is known by the burning (...) of their Hoofs. Ears, and
redness of their Eyes.

To remedy this, bruise two handfuls of Pursley, stra^ out the Juice into half
a pint of White Wind, and give it him in a Drenching-horn; then Blood him, and
give h^^ four hours after a Mash, made of Malt, or Wheat-bran.

For Pains in the Head.
This sometimes afflicts them, that they fall down, a with the Staggers,
Turning, or Giddyness, especially when they are too much Labored, or overmuch
Traveled in hot Weather.

To remedy this, Bleed them in the Temple veins, and the Roof of the Mouth; rub
his Mouth with Salt and Vinegar, and give a Head or two of Garlic bruised, and
boiled in a pint of Vinegar, and give him the one half of the liquid part to
drink, and pour the other warm into his Nostrils, holding up his Head, by
drawing it to the Rack with a Halter, about half a quarter of an Hour, and give
him a Mash of Lupius and Barley.

For broken Wind.
This but seldom happens to them, by reason of the lig^tness of their Body, and
not over Pursiveness; and when it does, is not easily cured; however, to use
the bes^ means, viz.

Take an Ounce of Anniseeds, a handful of Rasins, and hal^ an Ounce of the
powder of Liquorish, as much Allom burnt, and bruised, then put them into two
quarts of Water, wherein two handfuls of Smallage has been boiled, and give
him, (when they have been infused a considerable time, in it, over a gentle
Fire) half a pint at a time of the liquid as hot as may be; Ride him gently,
and then bring him home to a warm House. Litter him; and do thus five or six
times, intermitting a day between.

To harden tho Hoofs.
The Hoofs of this Creature, if going in the Wet, will be apt to be very soft,
so that the Shoes, if she have any on, will draw, and the Hoof apt to be much
injured by splitting, or fretting.

To remedy this, rub them well over with Oil of Turpe^tine, then bind on them a
Plaster made of the same O^l, and slacked Lime, and let him stand in a dry
House for twelve hours.

For the brittle, or rugged Hoof.
Scrape off the Scurf, or shelly Substance, with a sharp paring Knife, pick and
cleanse the Feet from Gravel and D^rt, wash them with warm Water, and after he
has stood a while in the Trough of warm Water, make an Ointment of Tallow,
Beeswax, and Neatsfoot-Oyl, anoint his Hoofs with them as hot as may be, and
bind them up with Clothes, and in twice or thrice so ordering, they will be
soft and pliable.

For Diseases in the Eyes, Rheums, etc.
If Specks, or any other the like Disaster happen in ^^ Eye, to obstruct the
Sight, take burnt Allom, and Bo^^ Armoniack finely powdered, and sifted, blow
it into t^^ Eyes through a Quill, and when a pretty while he ^^ winked hard,
spurt in some White Wind Vinegar.

For Rheums, purge his Head, by giving him Rue, a^^ Hysop, boiled in fair Water.

For any Strain or Sprain, new or old.
If it be in the Leg, clip away the Hair, and bleed ^^ Shackle-vein, then take
two Ounces of the Oil of T^pentine, heat it hot in a quarter of a pint of
strong Beer and when the bleeding is over, chaff it in strong^ with your hand,
then swathe it a day, then lay on it ^ Charger of Soap and Brandy, well mixed,
as hot as (...) be; renew it twice or thrice, and then ride him gently ^^ even
Ground, and in a little time he will be recovered This may be done in any other
part with exact management, and be also exceeding helpful in Bruises, or ^^
like.

A TREATISE Of the various sorts of HOUNDS, And their proper use, viz: Spannels
for Land and Water, the House-Dog, and the Shepherd's Mastiff,
SINCE Dogs are very serviceable Domestic Creatures, it will not be amiss to
plac^ them toward the completing of this Book; for among Irrational
Creatures, they may justly claim a place both for the Love, and the advantage
they bring to Man, being very sensible Creatures, and largely capable of
Instructions; and according to their kinds, are appropriated and designed for
sundry Uses, being distinguished by Names and Distinctions suitable to their
Natures, viz.

The Greyhound.
This is a Dog of a curious sine Make; and to distingrish those that will prove
well, even when Whelps, that are fittest to be chosen, are loose, raw-boned,
sickled, ^ crooked Hought, and generally unknit in every Mem^ but those that
appear the contrary, never prove we at a years end, he will be at full growth,
and then ^ true one will have a fine lean long Head, with a she Nose, rush
grown, from the Eyes downward; a chea^ Eye, his Eyelids long, and a sharp Ear,
short and c^ falling; a long N^ck a little bending, with a loose hang Wesand;
straight Forelegs, a broad Breast, hollow Side straight Ribs, a square and
flat Back, strong and short ^ lets, a broad space between the Hips, a strong
Ste^^, ^ Tail, a round Foot, and considerable large Clefts: A^ briefly, to sum
up his Character, he must have a Head ^ a Snake, a Neck like a Drake, a Back
like a Bea^^, ^ Sides like a Bream or Tail like a Ra^^ and Foot like Cat.

The Blood-Hound.
This Dog is of singular good Scent, and for that p^pose, is very useful to
Forresters, and those that keep ^ ney-Warrens, to find out those that have
Robed th^^ they will also pursue Thieves so nearly, that they ^ find them out
even in a Crowd. The Ears of this Ho^^ are thin, long, and hanging; his Head
big, his Cry great, ^ he well proportioned in every part, though they open, ^
Bark but seldom, except in the Chase; the best Color hold to be Brown, or Red,
and they are very obedient ^ their Owners; and if the Quarry be trussed up, and
^^ veyed away never so cleanly, if they once get the S^^^ they will pursue it
till found, and even take the Water ^ pursuit of it, if it have passed that way.

The Rach.
This is another sort of Hourd common to England, ^^ Scotland, and no other
Nation; the Female is with ^^ called a Breach, and this will Scent the Feet, of
either Birds or Beasts, and unweariedly pursue the Game, til run down.

The Sluth-(...)
This is a Dog most proper to Scotland, and from them so named, it is somewhat
biger than the foregoing; and the best sort inclining to Brown, or somewhat
Sandy, they will scent Men's Feet, as the Blood-Houn^ till they come where they
are, violently purshing any that have Robed, or Murdered; so that the
Borderers of England an^ Scotland, where Roberies are frequent, have them in
great ^steem and use; and if they stop at any Door, and will pass no further,
they conclude the Thief and Goods stolen, are there concealed, and so
accordingly make sea^ch.

The Gaze-Hound.
This Dog is of an extraordinary quick and piercing Sight, and dexterous at
singling out the fatest Deer in the He^^, and such a one as is young, and best
ple^se his Master, to induce him to make ^nsuch of him; ^e is much use ^ and
esteemed in Yorkshire, and those Northern parts, and will discern any thing at
a much further distance tha^ any other Dog whatsoever.

The Tumbler.
This Dog is chiefly for Coney-Warrens, and is a bold de^^erate ^^n, taking his
Denomination from his Tumbli^g and Rolling, engaging the Game (...) at their
Ho^^s, without fear of Danger; however, hi^ is very Politic in catching
Conies; for, coming to the Borough, he sheaks quietly by, without giving
suspi^ion, or disturbance; and when he has well observed their Hol^^, taking
the Wind against him, that they may not scent him, he couches very close, as
much out of sight as may be; and so having by that means the advantage of the
Scent; he knews when they are coming, if he sees them not, and so starting up
on a sudden, s^aps them, and what he has taken, he immedia^ely runs with to his
Owner, who lies concealed at some distance, and then steals again to his Post,
to pursue his sport again; so that in a little time, he will take a dozen
couple.

The Tarrier or Harrier.
This Dog has a good courage and scent, is very bold and daring, and are used
on different matters for Game; though his best sport is at the Fox, or Badger,
and have their Denomination from creeping into their Caves, and Holes, to
unearth and drive them out, if there be any boulting places; and will fight
stoutly under Ground in the the Badger, or Fox, and is very good to boult out
C^nies into the Hays, or Nets.

The Leviner, and Beagle.
The Leviner, by some called, a Lyemmer, is a sine shaped Dog, as a Medium
between the Grey-bound and Tarrie^, having some proportion of either; he is
very swift, and of a true Scent, and will take his Game very fast.

The Beagle is a very cunning Hound, of a good Scent, pretty swift, and a close
follower of his Game, and is proper to England, not found in other Nations,
unless carried thither, or of our Breed.

The Spannel.
This Dog, though much the same in Resemblance, ( viz. the several sorts of
Spannels) are, nevertheless, different ^ the uses they are put to; some are
trained up for Setti^ Partridge and other Fowls, to be taken by Net, or reache^
with the Fowling-piece; others are for finding out the Fowl, and putting them
up for the Hawk to fly at, others: for the Water, to hunt the Duck, Mallard,
and other Waterfowl, and to fetch them out of the Water, after they are shot.
These are the tractablest of all Dogs, and may be learned many pleasant Tricks,
too tedious to be here recited: A good Spannel ought to be of an indifferent
big Size, have long rough Ears, a thick Head, and a short Nose, a rough Coat
and Legs, broad Feet, and bushey Tail.

The Ban-Dog, or House-Dog.
This Dog is as a Watchman to a House, and very ferviceable on sundry
occasions, and under this Denomination are those that are used in Game, at the
Bear and Bull, for ^astime, and Recreation.

As for the House-Dog, or Bear-Dog, choose him of a brindle Color, with white
about his Neck, or under his Throat, his Joints well knit, and set, his Eyes
fiery, and sharp sighted; his Head great, and his Face representing Ter^or,
like that of a Lion; his Teeth even, strong Fangs, and a sharp great Breast,
his Legs and Feet short, but big, and well Sinnewed; his Tail or Stern well set
on; let him be taught gentleness to Friends, but to breed Terror to Enemies, or
Thieves, with his thundering Voice; stayed, and not given to Ramble; and such a
Dog, especially in the Country, is much to be prized.

The Field Dog, or Shepherd's Mastiff.
This Dog is so necessary to those that keep Flocks, that he ^s as it were, the
right hand of their business in fetching up, and turning the Sheep when they go
astray, or attempt to pass their bounds into forbidden Pastures, keeping about
them as a guard to prevent the attempts of Beasts of prey, or of such Dogs as
come in the Nightime to worrey and suck their blood.

This Dog must be rather long than thick, that may give him the greater
volacity in the pursuit; yet he must be strong, the better to deal with the
Enemies to the Sheep, when they are restif, and not easy to be ruled. Their
great Feet and Paw, like a Lion, when very young, is a certain sign they will
prove well; a briadled, or yellowish Color is accounted the best; give these
kind of Dogs their Food in time, to sleep in the day, that they may be most
vigilent in the Night, when dange^ requires their attendance: When they are
about a Month old, cut their Tails; but beware they seed not on the Carcass of
any dead Sheep, lest it inure them to worrey the living ones.

Some further Observations on Dogs, as to their Breeding (...) Choice.
If you would have your Breach or Bitch bring a good Litter of Puppyes, keep
her close as soon as you perceiu she begins to be proud, and procure a Dog to
lime her suitable to your Mind, and her Inclination. The mo^ proper Months are,
January, February, and March, wh^ the Moon is in the increase. When she is
proud, take the most favorable signs, as those of Aquarius or Gemini, t^ put
the Dog to her; and let him be well chosen accordi^^ to the quality of the
Bitch that is to be limed, of goo^ proportion, and free from Diseases; so that
engendring ^ this time, it is held that the breed will never run mad.

When the Bitch comes near her time, use her to ^ Kennel designed to litter in,
that she may have the bette^ Love and Agreement with it; and in her whelping, ^
her be kept very warm; at two Months end, wean t^ Whelps, and if they are
Hounds, enter them into hunti^^ with old stench ones, while they are about a
year and h^ old, and so they will soon be trained up to every thi^ that is
required of them. As for the Marks of a goo^ Hound, the white, with black Spots
at the seting on ^ the Tail, and black Ears, are the principal; of which ^ is
proper to compose your Kennel. Consider by the wa^ however, that they of a good
Scent and Condition, a^ the Hounds that are black, or the all white, or all
live colored; and for the String or Line, the true Talb^^ are best: The
grizled, unmixed, or mixed, so it be sh^^ haired, is fit for a good
Vermin-killer; and a couple ^ them are pr^per in a Kennel.

To discribe them more particularly, see that t^ Hounds Head be of a middle
proportion, rather inclin(...) to long than round; with large Ears, wide
Nostrils, a^^ his Back bowed; great Fillets, large Haunches, w^ trussed Thighs,
straight Hams, the Tail near the Rei^ big, and the rest slender; big Legs, and
a dry sole of the Foot; great Claws, formed like a Foxes. As for their
tunableness, the Experienced Hunts-man must sort them, as best delights him or
others he keeps them for; and for choosing the Whelps under the Bitch, (...) I
(...) will prove the swifter, and the heavier the ^ on ^or* See your Bitch come
of a good kind, be well proportioned, and have large Flanks and Ribs; and that
your Dog be of a good breed, and young; for a young Dog and an old Bitch
produce very good Whelps; and the ^hird Litter is always accounted the best to
be preserved.

As for their feeding, there is no certain rule, but the ^ract^ce of it, they
feeding on any thing that is proper ^or them; yet often to change their Diet,
is wholesome: ^eed them not with too much raw Carrion, lest it breed Diseases.

Of Dieting, Coursing, and Airing a Greyhound, to fit him for a Match or
Course.
Upon particular occasions, you must observe Rules as ^or^d^eting a Greyhound
for Coursing, or a Match; and ^n that you must note four particular things,
viz. Food, Exercise, Airing, and Kenneling. The first for nourishing the Body,
the second the Limbs, the third the Wind, and the last the Spirits; and if you
design him for a ^atch, then over and above his Food, make him a Diet(...) viz.
Take a peck of the finest and dryest Oat-meal, ^wo pecks of good Wheat, grind
them together, and ^oult the Meal through a fine boulting Cloth; then scat^er
among it a pretty quantity of Anniseeds, and Liquor(...) finely beaten; knead
it with whites of Eggs, and new Ale-yeast; bake it in round loaves reasonably
hard.

With this Bread scalded in Beef or Mutton-broth, or that ^ade of Sheeps-heads,
you may likewise feed him. Let him be fed Morning and Evening, half an hour
after Sunrise, and as much before Sunset, and it will bring ^im to much
strength of Body, and pureness of Wind.

As for his Exercise, it consists of two things, viz. Cour^ing and Airing; as
for the first, course him at least twice ^ week, if your Courses be strong and
long; and in his Coursing, if he have taken any thing let him not break it, but
take it from him, and cleanse his Chaps from ^ Wool, and give him the Liver,
Lights, and Heart; ^ so take him up with your Leash, and lead him: Feed ^ with
his Diet-bread and Broth, and wash his Feet ^ Beer and Butter; but before the
Course, give him ^ more then a white-bread Toast and Butter, or one dipp^ in
Oil.

As for Airing or walking him, do it before Sun-r^ and after Sunset, viz. As
soon as you have opened ^ Kennels, rub him over with a clean Hair-cloath, and ^
him play a little about you; then take him into a F^ where there are no Cattle,
let him take his rounds, ^ about, scower and empty; after he has done this a
wh^ take him up and carry him home again, kennel him ^ feed him; and, except,
when he is feeding, or (...)sing, always keep him to his Kennel.

Diseases in Hounds, or other Dogs, (...) their proper Remedies or Cures, etc.
For the biteing of a mad Dog.
Take Honey-suckle Flowers, or the branches, and ^ them; or the Roots and upper
part of three leaved G^ mix the Ashes with the Fat of rusty Bacon, or old ^
grease; and lay it to the wound, and it will draw (...) Infection: Give at the
same time, the Juice of (...) Leaves or Berries, in White Wind very warm.

For the Stone.
Take the Seeds of Grommel, Radish and Parsley; ^ them, and give the Dog in half
a pint of Wine, the S^ having been well seethed in it.

For pains or other Diseases in the Ears.
Take Charvil-water, and Verjuice, mix them together; ^d pu^ a Spoonful of it
warm into the Ear, and hold it ^, by closing the Ear-laps with your hand half a
quarter ^ an ^our.

For the Mainge.
Take an Oat-sheaf, with its affles on, reduce it to Ashes, ^d make a Lie in
Man's Urine with it, and wash him ^hen it is warm, twice or thrice a day: Bleed
him on ^e Ga^brel Vein behind; or take an Ounce of Gun-pow^r, and as much
Flower of Sulphire, mix them with White-wine-Vinegar, till as thick as an
Ointment; anoint ^e places grieved, and it will Cure him.

For the Itch.
Take the Flower of Brimstone; Oil of Water Lillies, ^d Ellecampain-Roots,
dried and beaten into powder; ^f each of these an Ounce; add a handful of Bay
Salt, ^ryed and finely powdered; make these into an Oynt^ent, with a quarter of
a pint of Oil of Turpentine, over ^ gent^e Fire; and with a Wool Card, having
rubbed him ^ll the places appear a little bloody, anoint him with the Ointment,
as hot as may be well endured.

For the Tetter.
Ta^e Ink, made of strong Galls, Vinegar, and the ^uice of Mint; rub the scurf
from the Tetter, till it bleed; ^hen mix in these an equal quantity with the
Flower of ^rimstone, till it be the thickness of a Salve; and by ^nointing the
place often with it, 'twill kill the Tetter.

For the biting an of Adder, Snake, etc.
If any Venomous Creature have bit your Dog; take Calaminth, a Herb so called,
bruise it well in a Mortar, with Turpentine and yellow Beeswax, heat them o^
fire, till they incorporate to a Salve; apply it to Wound, and give him Milk to
lap, wherein the said ^ has been boiled.

For the Gauling.
If a Dog be gauled, take a little unslack'd Lime; ^ low-Bees-wax, and fresh
Butter, beat them together, ^ Salve or Ointment, and anoint the place, and it
is a ^ sent Cure.

For sore Eyes.
Take the Juice of ground Ivy, and fasting-Sp^^ and anoint his Eyes Morning and
Evening.

For the Worm in the Tongue and Body.
This is a little white thing under the Tongue, ^^ often makes the Dog run mad;
it must be taken ou^ ^^ a sharp Penknife, and anoint the Wound with Honey ^
Allom, well mixed together.

As for the Worms in the Body; give him a p^^ Milk, with an Ounce of the Juice
of Wormwood, ^ an Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone in it.

To kill Lice, Fleas or Ticks
Take three or four good handfuls of Rue^^ boil it ^ gallon of Spring water,
till hal^ be consumed, the(...) it, and put in an Ounce of the Powder of Staves
(...) and bathe him with it pretty hot.

For a Bruise.
Take Mallows, Groundsil and Chick-weed; bruise ^ boil them in the dregs of
Ale, till soft, and apply (...) Poultis-wise, with Hogs-Lard; but if the bruise
be ^ ward, put half an Ounce of Stone-pitch, and as (...) Bole-Armoniack in
powder, to a pint of Milk, and g^ it him warm.

For Surbaiting.
Warm Beer, and put Butter in; mix them well, and ^sh his Feet; then bind them
up with bruised Nettles, ^ Ho^s-Lard.

Of Madness in Dogs, and the Remedy.
There are accounted to be in Dogs, several sorts of ^duess; as the Dumb, the
Sleepy, the Falling, thee ^umatick, and the Lank-Madness; and when any of ^se
af^lict him, keep him up close from other Dogs, and ^e hi^ Grass, with long
Chieves, to cleanse his Blood; ^d hi^ only with thin Broths, and a little
Manch^t, for ^o or three days, giving him Salt and Oatmeal in the ^tle water
you give him.

At the end of those days, when he is a little prepared; ^e half an Onnce of
the Juice of Harts-ho^n, or Dogs^ngue, a Herb so called, an Ounce, of the
strongest ^nega^^ a quarter of an Ounce of Methridate; mix ^se together, and
give it with the addition of a Spoon^ or two of Salled Oil.

A TREATISE OF CONIES Wild and Tame. HOW TO Order, Feed them, and Cure the
Diseases.
Of C^nies in gneneral, their Nature and Generation, and^
CONIES, though in former days accou^^ Vermin, are now preserved and much in
es^^ for the delicacy of their Flesh and Furs; all ^ of these may be kept as
well tame, as wild above most other Creatures, delighting in Impriso^^ and
Solitariness, to shelter and secure them from the ^ Dangers their Fears
suggest, as being a very ^imerous ^ ^ightful Creature, and naturally subject to
Melancholy; ^lighting much in the Earth, and holes in Rocks, and ^her dark
Caverns; yet exceeding Lustful, and violent ^ the act of Copulation, that when
they have performed ^ they swoon, and lie in a Trance for a pretty while, as ^
they were dead; which they being sensible of, retire ^o the secretest Places to
perform their Generation work. ^s for the Males, they are very cruelly bent,
and would ^ll all the young ones as soon as the Females had kindled; ^d not
Nature by instinct, given the Females a cunning to ^de them, and so politickly
close up the holes, that ^e Buck Conie cannot, without extraordinary search,
find ^em, which he little minds, if they fall not in his way.

The ^oe Conies are great breeders, very wonderful in ^eir e^crease^, bringing
forth young ones every Month; ^d therefore, when you keep any tame, you must ^e
at ^e trouble to watch them when they kindie, and as soon ^ they have done it,
put them to the Buck, or else they ^ill mourn, and not regard the bringing up
their young ^es.

^o choose Conies for a profitable breed, to keep tame or in a close Warren.
If you design to keep Conies tame, or to put them to ^eed n^a Warren, or any
other convenient Ground; ^he be^^ marks to know a good breed by, is the
clearness ^f their Eyes, and the richness of their Furs; as for the ^tter, that
is accounted the best and richest, which has ^n equal mixture of white and
black hair; yet so that ^e black rather shadows the white, than the white any
thing it all over-mastering it: For a black Skin with a ^^ silver Hairs, is
accounted much the Richer, than a ^hite Skin with a few black Hairs; but
however, an ^qual and indifferent mixture of both is very acceptable, and will
produce a profitable breed: Consider next, that ^ be deep, thick, smooth and
shining; and a black Coat without Silver Hairs, though it be not so good as
that which has, yet is much to be prefered before a py'd, a ^^n, a yeallow or a
gray: Let your Hut be very large. Now as to the profit of the rich Conies,
every one ^^ them killed from Martilmas until Candlemas, are worth ^^ ordinary
ones; for they are in body much fatter, and l^ger; and when another Skin will
yield but two pence, o^ three pence, they are worth two Shillings, or more,
^cording to the scarcity of them. And again, they encre^ oftener, and at one
kindling, bring forth more than ^ wild Conie; and, if you keep them in Boxes,
are alw^ ready at hand for your use at every season of the ye^ without any
fategue or trouble, charge of Nets, H^ Ferrets, or any other Engines; and their
Flesh you h^ for nothing, for the Skins will recompense and over-(...) your
Charges.

How to order your Boxes to keep Conies in.
If you intend to have good success in your^ tame (...) you must have things
according to accomodate them, the they may breed and thrive; and particularly,
Boxes ^^ of good Wainscot in thin Boards, about two Foot squa^ and one Foot
high; and these squares divided into t^^ Rooms, the greater Rooth having open
Windows of W^^ through which the Conie may feed at pleasure; and the lesser
totally darkened, in which she may lodge, and ^^dle; and before them a Trough,
to put in the food, (...) other necessaries; and these Boxes you may set one
upon another, for diverse stories, where there is not larg^ conveniences;
keeping the Buck Conies by themselv^ and your Does separate, unless those that
have not b^ and with such it is convenient you let a Buck lodge: A^ when your
Does kindles one Nest, and then proceed^^ kindle another, take the first from
her, and put them to^^ther in several Boxes, among the Rabits of suitable a^
but there let them have sufficient room, for if they ^ pestered, or as it were
stifled up, you must not expect them to thrive.

Of feeding and preserving Conies.
This feeding (the best sort of Conies) may be done with a great deal less cost
and trouble than some People pretend to, or at least ways, than the ignorant in
ordering them, would make the World believe.

The best Food that you can feed a Conie with, is the shortest, softest, and
sweetest Hay; and one Lo^d will serve two hundred Couples a whole Year; and out
of this sto^k of two hundred, you may spend in your own House, or dispose among
your Friends two hundred, and sell two hundred more in the Market, and
nevertheless maintain the Stock good, to answer every ordinary casualty: Put
your Hay into little cloven Sticks, and so place it, that they may easily reach
it, and pull it out, yet so as neither to seatter or waste it; in the Troughs
under their Boxes, put Oats in their Water; and this may properly be their
ordinary and constant Food; for whatever besides you give them, is properly
termed rather Physical than Substantial Food; and is upon changing diet for a
time, conduceing to their health; and it may be so ordered, to ^e done twice or
thrice in a Fortnight; and such things may properly be given for the cooling of
their Bodies, naturally inclinable to heat.

The best Greens you can give them for the purpose, and intentions aforesaid,
are Mallows, young fresh Clover-grass, blades of green Corn, four Docks, young
Turnip tops, Cabage and Colwert-leaves, and the like, all which are very
cooling and nourishing; and now and then, yet but rarely, you may give them
sweet Grains, but beware you do it not often; for then you will certainly bring
the Rot among them, and sweep them away in a very short time.

In your greens, as Grass, Corn, or the like; see there be no young Hemlock in
it, for they will covet to eat it, though all of a sudden, it makes them sicken
and dye; being a kind of poison to them.

The Boxes and Holes must not be neglected to be kept clean, for they above all
things abhor^stench and nastiness, and therefore, they must not be omitted to
be cleansed every day.

Of Conies in Warrens, their ordering, feeding, etc.
As for those that are in Warrens, there cannot properly be this care taken of
them; however, something is to ^ considered, as to let them have Bushes and
Shelters, t^ prevent the Hoggard, or wild Hawks, Kites, etc. sei^^ their young,
when they bring them out of their Borough to Air, and teach them to feed; as
also sense such ple^^ as may shelter them from the Pole-Cats, that haunts the^
when they are out a feeding, on Moon-shiny Nights, ^^ other things that disturb
them; and in Winter, when (...) weather is hard, and little to be got, scatter
short swe^^ Hay, especially, when the Snow lies on the ground, ^ feed on;
scatter likewise some Greens, to nourish ^^ physic them so that they be kept
sound; but particularly, plash down small Twigs or Boughs of Sallow Birch,
Osier, Beech, or any wholesome Tree; scatt^ them in little heaps, lightly up,
that they may creep under them; and they will serve not only for a shelter, but
for very good Food; for they will eat the tender lea^^ Sprays, and also the
Bark of the biger; if you find they are ill, scatter Parsley, and a little sweet
Fennel ab^^ their Holes; and in so ordering them, they will b^ healthy, grow
fat, well furred, and increase in breed^

Of Diseases in Conies, their Causes and Cure.
The Diseases in this Creature are but few, yet th^^ are very dangerous and
fatal, destroying sometimes g^^ multitudes of them; and the worst and most
sweeping ^^ these is the Rot.

Of the Rot in Conies.
For this Infirmity, which destroys Multitudes where ^^ once takes place; it
comes by their too much feeding on green Meat, especially when the wet of the
Rain, ^^ Dew, or Mildew is upon it; and when you percei^ this, separate the
infected if you can, however debar them as much as possible of green Meats; and
give them dry sweet Hay* which will dry up the moisture, and knit them again;
and to restore them in the Warrens, you may thrust it into their Holes, and by
that means, keep them in for a time, that they may feed there.

Of madness in Conies.
This is a Distemper that often afflicts them, and is ingendere^ by corrupt
Blood, proceeding from the rankness of their feeding; it is known by their
disorderly leaping, tumbling and wallowing, with their heels upwards.

To Cure this, give them Hart-Thistle to eat, and it will remedy the Distemper;
and thus much of Conies.

A TREATISE OF POULTRY: AND How they are to be ordered in al^ circumstances, to
the best Advantage and Improvement.
POULTRY are exceeding useful and prof^^ble to the Farmer, Husbandman, and
othe^s* and therefore, though it he something ^^ of my Method, in a Book of
Cattle, it will ^^ be ungrateful to all that are Masters of any, but ra^^
oblige them as I hope, and farther adorn the Work: An^ since this Nation
affords as good a Store and breed o^ Foul, as any under Heaven, to give Rules
for the improvement, and increase of them, may farther increase ^^ Grandu^e of
this Island; and the first thing to do it, is^ a good choice; and first of the
Cock.

The choice of a Cock for breed.
For breed, the Dunghill Cock is always prefered before the Game one; consider
then to make a good choice; let him be large and well sized, his Body long from
the head to the Rump; thick in the Garth, his Neck loose and long, Arch-wise
bending; his Body straight and high erected, is a Faulkon; his Comb, Wattles
and Throat, raged, large, and of a great Compass; and of a very deep red his
Eyes; his Eyes great and round, in color, answering his Plume and Male; his
Legs thick, with good Spurs; as for his color, it may be indifferent; however,
red, mixed with yellowish, and a sprinkling of black, is accounted the best.

The choice of a good Hen
Having chosen your Cock, the next business must be to choose a suitable Hen,
and such a one should be in shape big and large, answering every proportion
with the Cock; having a turft of Feathers on her Crown, instead of a Comb, with
strong Claws; but for a sitting Hen, it would be best to choose one that has no
hinder Claws, for such there may be found; and then she will not endanger the
breaking of her Eggs.

Being thus provided, and the Hen producing Eggs, the next thing to be
considered, is the care in ordering, during, the sitting of the Hen.

How a Hen must be ordered, as to her sitting.
The best time for a good large breed, is to set her in Febru^ry, when the Moon
is increasing; and then by the next New Moon in March, the Chickens will be
disclosed; you may set them from March, till October, (but the first Brood will
be the best) but not after, for the Winter is an Enemy to their breeding; and
her proper time of sitting is twenty one days: But Turkeys, Pea-Hens, Ducks,
Geese, etc. sit thirty days; so that if you set her on any of their Eggs, let
it be Nine days before you ^^ any of her own to her: She will cover well Nine^^
Eggs, and let any number she sits on be odd, because they will then lie round,
even and close; mark the upper side of your Eggs when you lay them in the N^^
and if in some few days, you find the Hen has not tur^^ them, when she is gone
off to feed, you must do it, for then she is not a good sitter; be sure the
Eggs you set under her be sound and new, which you may know by their fullness or
heaviness, also their clearness, by holding them to the Sun, or a Candle; raise
her not unnecessarily at any time from her Nest; a Hen will be a good fitter
from the second Year of her laying, to the fifth; let (...) not go far when
she rises to seek her food, especially if the weather be cold, for then
the-Eggs will chill and spoil before she returns.

Chickens and their ordering.
When your Chickens are hatched, if you find any weak, wrap them in Wool, and
air them before the Fire, scent them with a little burnt Rosemary, and you need
not give them any Meat for two or three days, for they require it not; and then
let their first be Oat-meal, some dried, and some steeped in Milk; or else,
Wheat-bread-Crumbs; and after they have gained strength, you may give them
Crusts soaked, White-bread, parings of Cheese, or Curds, Barly-meal or
Wheat-bread scalded, or the like; and so as they grow up, proceed to Barley,
Wheat, or the like Grain: It is proper to keep them a Fortnight in the House,
before you suffer them to go abroad, and chop green Chieves among their Meat,
and that will preserve them from the Disease called the Rye, and other Diseases
in the head; give them fair water, for if for ware of it, they drink that which
is foul* it will breed the Pi^^

For the better keeping of your Eggs, cover them in ^ heap of good old Malt,
and they will remain sound all the year; gather them but once a day, and be
sure to leave a Nest Egg to fatten the Chickens, even under the Hen; you need
no more than give them duly feed, and not let them run and straggle too far to
seek it; but if you will have them Cram-fa^, Coop them up when the Hen is grown
careless of them; then mix Wheat Flour with Milk, make it up into a Paste,
roll little bits somewhat long, big in the middle, and narrow in the ends; dip
them in the Milk, and thrust them down their Throats, and in Fourteen days they
will be exceeding fat: And thus you may use Capons, Pullets and other ^owle,
suitable to be cramb'd, and make them fat. As for the carving or making them
Capons, the best time to take away the Stones of the Cocks, is when the Dam has
left them, and their Stones are come down; to do it, you must see it
experimented, or else you will never be an Artist at it, by private Directions.

Of the Turkey-Cock and Hen, their Choice, Laying, Sitting, Breeding, Feeding
the young ones, etc.
A Turkey is very profitable for the Eggs, Carcass, and Feathers, and is a good
shifter for his Food; and that your breed may be good, take the following
Directions:

Let the Cock not exceed two years, and such a one as will be loving to the
Chickens: As for the Hen, there is no doubt of her laying till she be five
years old, and upwards; let your Cock be large in Body, well crested, often
spreading his Tail, and proud in his Gate; for if he be dejected and careless
of himself, he will never make a good treader.

As for the Hen, when she lays, you must watch he, for she will endeavor to
conceal her Eggs in secret places; and if she be a stragler, shut her up in
laying time: The beginning of their laying time, is in March, and in April they
will sit; put not above thirteen Eggs under her, because she has not heat
enough to bring more kindly forth; and between five and twenty, and thirty
days, expect the Chickens to be hatched; take them then away, and keep them
warm, for any chilling cold destroys them.

You may feed them with new Cheese, crumbled small, or with Curds; give them
new Milk, or Whey, or Water, to drink; feed them often, for the Hen regards not
much to scrape for them, or find them food; let them ra^ in some senced
Grass-plats, that they cannot get out, ^^ house them a nights, for the Dew or
Wet is very off^^ s^^e to them*

To satin the Turkies, great or small; gve them boiled ^arly or Oats for
fourteen days, and the next fort night, cram them with crams of Paste, made as
directed ^ for the Chickens or Capons, they are not subject to D^seases when
abroad, because they find such Herbs or Food as physics them, and prevents
sickness.

Breeding, Feeding, Fattening, and other rules for ordering Geese and Goslings
to advantage.
Geese are very profitable to the owner, in their Feathers, Down, Eggs, Flesh
and Fat, and are little charg^ble in keeping, as contenting themselves with
Grass for want of other Food.

In choosing them for breed, the largest are accounted the best; and for
color, the white and gray are preferable; the black are accounted the worst;
let the Gander be stately, and of a good courage.

As for the laying time, it begins generally in the Spring, and some lay
earlier, which are accounted the best: They will some lay twelve, others
sixteen, and some more; when she is about to lay, she will take up Straw in her
hill, and scatter it about; and being desirous to sit, she will continue long
on her Nest after laying; she sits most kindly one her own Eggs, as knowing
them by the scent from another; her usual time is thirty days, but in warm,
weather she hatches sooner; in her sitting give her scalded Bran, and
Skeg-Oats, and set a Tub of water by her, that she may cool and wash her
Feathers.

Keep the Gosling in the house about twleve days after they are hatched; feed
them with Barly-meal, and Milk, Chipping, scalded Curds or new Cheese; Bran
scalded in water, Milk, or the tappings of Drink; when they are somewhat
strong, dismiss them of their imprisonment; watch them abroad, and show them
the water, and put them up again; so do till they grow strong: At six weeks o^^
they are turned green Geese; and to fat them, boil Ste^ Oats, and give them
thrice a day, with their fill of Milk and Water, and in three weeks they will
be very at*

To fatten Geese that are grown to Maurely, as five or or six Months; having
taken them from the Ba^n-door, or Stu^ble-Field, when they are pretty well
fleshed, put them up into Pens that are dark, or not much light; coming to
them, give them Oats ground, Malt and Beads, and water with Barley Meal, and a
sufficiency of these in three weeks, will fat^^ them to your mind.

As for pulling your Geese the best season is at moulting time, but be not so
covetous to leave her naked, lest the cold or Briers greatly injure her.

This Foul is troubled with a Gargil, ^ Disease that ca^ses stopings in the
Head, and often mortal. To remedy it, take little Balls or Pellets of Garlic
and Butter, well bruised together, and give it fasting, and shut he: up two or
three hours after it.

Of the Swan, her ordering, feeding and fatning.
The Swan is another Domestic Foul, yet give their owners no trouble; as to
their breeding, taking Rules for it themselves, better than can be directed;
therefore where they place their Nest, let them remain undisturbe^, and they
will very kindly produce their young, and bring them up: Their Down is
exceedingly beneficial, as also their Skins for many uses; and if you you will
have them fat for the Kitching, take the young Swans, called Cygnets, and feed
them in every point as directed for the Geese, but they will not fat so soon;
taking up for that purpose about seven or eight weeks, because their Flesh in
harder and dryer; either coop them up, or put them into a close walk, where
they may have a Pond or some other Water to trim themselves in, for nastyness
makes them sick, and loath themselves; set them Barley and Water, if abroad, as
also dried Malt, on which they may seed as they list, and then they will be
sooner fat.

Of breeding, feeding and fatning Ducks, wild and tame.
Ducks are profitable for their Eggs and Flesh, yet there are of these far more
wild then tame; yet such as keep them, finds the advantage; for they are great
shifters, as well as devourers, and will eat any nasty thing; as Guts, Frogs,
Spiders, and sometimes Toads, as well as loose scattered Corn; being ever
diligent to seek for their Food; they are great layers once a year, and when
she sits, you must give her Meat that she may not ramble for her Food, for then
she will not quickly return again; and Offal-Corn, and scalded Bran, with
water, is sufficient; as for her sitting, hatching, and feeding the Ducklings,
observe the same rule as for the Goose; you may easily fat them with any Corn,
Chickens guts, and the like, which may be done in a Fortnight or three weeks,

Several People keep wild Ducks, accounting them better feed than those bred at
home; but in this there is trouble; for you must have a convenient place,
Walled or Palled in, with a Pond or Spring in it; and covered over, if you give
them their Wings, with a strong Net over it high raised, or Archwise bending
Poles, with Turfs of Oziar, and Baskets, and other Covertures for them to
shelter and breed in; with secret holes and creeks for their other convenience,
to retire; and so delighting and feeding in this imprisonment, they will lay
and breed, and want no more attendance, than to he fed twice a day with Oats,
scalded Bran, Fitches, or the like; and in this manner you keep and feed
Plover, Widgeon, Sheldrake, and others.

Of the Peacock, Pea-Hen and Chickens.
The Peacock and Pea-Hen, have been formerly held for Dainties, but now are
kept more for show, than advantage; yet the Pea-Chickens fatted, are as good as
Partridge; and where you keep them, let the place be clean and neat, for they
much delight in it; and let there be no pysonous Seeds, Berries, or Insects in
their walks. When the Hen lays, she seeks the covertest place, to ^ide them
from the Cock, for he will else break her Eggs; ^or does she bring them to him,
till the Turft of Feathers on their Craw begins to appear, lest he should kill
them, ^ut then he is sufficiently in love with them; the Chickens are very
tender, and must be kept out of the cold, they will feed and thrive upon any
thing that is reasonable, and grow fat with Corn and crumbs of Bread, without
coo^ing or penning up, or taking of much care of, as being careful of
themselves.

The well ordering Plgeons and Dove-houses.
Pigeons are another Commodity, gainful to the owners, but injurious to the
Neighbors, by devouring abundance of Corn; they are great breeders, and put
those that keep them to little charge; for by flying abroad, they procure their
own meat; they bring two at a time, once a Month, if they be well fed, and well
paired; they will not of themselves divide: The Cock is not only loving to the
Hen, but to the young ones, and will sit contentedly one the Eggs, whilst she
goes off to feed; he will also feed the young, with as much diligence as the
Hen: P^as and Tares they much delight in, and to keep them to your house, set a
salt Pot up, where they may peck at it; that is, Bay Salt bruised small, with
Anni-seeds, Cummin-feeds, Ca^raway-feed, well mingled with it, baked in an
Oven, in an earthen Pot, like a Sugar Loaf, for at this they take great delight
to peck; and be careful to make the Wires and Holes where the young are, that
the Pigeons may enter, but not Birds of pray; for though the Owl seems large in
the Feathers, she will slip in at a little hole, and destroy them.

To keep tame Pheasants, Patridges, Quates and other Birds.
These are accounted Dainties, and the ordeing them may not be amiss, to be
incerted among Poultry*

To keep these, you must have a large room, with man little Boxes, so that they
may play, run and hide themselves at pleasure; in the middle, set Wheat-sheaves
(...) them to peck at, and little shallow pans of water, (...) when they have
pecked the Corn, they may drink at the pleasure; give them boiled Malt and
Rice, and if y^ would fat them, keep them up in their Boxes, with li^^ Wires
before them; give them Chilter-Wheat in Troug^ before them, as also water, and
in a Fo^tnight they w^^ answer your Expectation: And thus you may, keep a^
fatten Black-Birds, Feldefares, God-wits, Knots, Gray plover, Curlew, Thrush,
and all sorts of Birds, with ^ little variation of their feed, as you see them
inclined ^^ delight in one feed more than another.

Also Herons, Gulls, Bitterns and Pevits; but these latter, must mostly be fed
with Flesh, Worms and Fis^, cut small, and have store of water.

Diseases in Poultry and other Foul, with suitable Remedies, etc.
Crow-Trod^en.
IF a Hen be Crow-trodden, as many times she is, it is known by the staring of
her Feathers, and the duln^^s of her Eyes, and hanging of her Wings; for this,
stamp the blades of Onyons with Butter and Bay Salt, and give it her.

For any Stinging.
When you perceive this by their Lowering, and Swelling; give them Rue and
Butter stamped together, and made up in o little Pellets.

For the Pip.
This is known by a white scale on the tip of the Tongue, take it off with a
sharp Needle or other Instrument; and ^ub the Tongue with Salt and Vinegar.

For the Flux.
Too much moist meat occasions this; for this boil Sloes in their water, and
give them Peace, Barley, and scalded Fran.

For the Roup.
This is a swelling on the Rump, which will corrupt the whole body, if not
remedyed in time; to do it, pull off the Feathers about the Sore, open it and
squeeze out the Corruption; wash the place with Salt and water, and it will be
well.

For stopage in the Belly.
This binding is removed, by thrusting a Quill diped in Hog's Grease up their
vents, and giving them bits of bread or Corn, steeped in Man's Urine.

To kill Lice.
Take the siftings of Pepper, mix it with warm water, and wash them with it,
and it will kill the Lice.

For sore Eyes.
For sore Eyes, or other Diseases in the Eyes; take the Juice of ground Ivy and
Pimpernel, wash them with it, and they in a few times doing, will be well.

To prevent a Hens Crowing.
Pull her Wings, and a few Feathers of her Crown and Neck; then give her
parched Wheat, or Barley, and keep her for some time from other Poultry.

To prevent a Hens eating her Eggs.
Lay for the prevention of this vice, an Egg of Allablaster or Chalk in her
Nest, and when she picks at it, she will weary her self, and make her Bill so
sore, that for the future, she will be discouraged from meddling with the Eggs.

To make a Hen lay well.
This may be done by feeding, as giving her toasted Bread sopped in Ale or
Beer; Barley boiled, Spelt-Fitches, and the like, but not too much, lest she
grow over-fat, and that bind her for laying at all.

To prevent a Hens sitting.
Hold her in a Pan of cold water set in her Nest, after that run a little
Feather through her Nose, and the desire of fitting will be quite taken from
her.

For a Hen over fat.
If your Hen be over fat, that it hinders her laying, beat a Tilesheard into
Powder; mix it with scalded Bran, and give it the Hen, and she will be soon
reduced to a moderate flesheyness.

These are all the noted Diseases incident to Poultry, and for want of knowing
them, and their Remedies, many thousands have been lost; therefore I have set
them down for the use of the good House-wife, that plenty and profit may by
industry increase.

THE EXPERIENCED Vermin Killer: OR, A ready way to take and destroy all sorts
of Vermin, that are hurtful to Man, Beast, Fowl, or Fish.
A Sprine-Trap to take the Fox.
TAKE a sti^f Pole, so that it may be pliable; fix the great end fast in the
Ground, and tie a line to the end of the upper part, with a loop made fast on
with Sooe-makers wax; and to this Line fasten a small short stick, with a nick
in its lower end, made thin on the upper side, where the Pole is bound down
with it into another stick strongly fastened in the Ground, with a nick likewise
under; then join both these sticks together, as slightly as they will hold the
strong bending down of the Pole; and then open the end of the Line in a running
Nooze, and place it in the Foxes ^aunts, as wide as his Head will e^sily go in,
or more, (but as covertly as may be, for he is a subtle Creature,) so that
when he presses on it, (the two small sticks presently seperating,) the bent
Pole flys up with a swi^ jerk; and if it take him by the Neck, it certainly
hang him; but if by the Legs or Tail, it will hold him abo^ the Ground; but
then your Line ought to be small Wires about twenty or thirty well twisted.
These Creatures are very troublesome (where they abound) to the Country People;
in making a great destruction among th^^ Lambs, Poultry, and Rabits* and in
Parks, among the young Fawn.

Another way to take the Fox, by the Drag-hook.
Take a pretty large Hook, such as are used for salt water Fish, bait it with
Flesh, and tie it by a Line on a strong bough, so that the Hook (being
altogether covered with the bait) may hang so high that the Fox must leap to
catch it, or else he will discover the Deceit; and when he has the bait in his
Mouth, he will hang by it, and in pulling very hard to get it off, the Hook
will stick in his Jaws, and hold him; but it must be armed with Wire, at least
a handful above the Hook, lest, being only Line, he bite it in sunder.

To take the Pole-Cat.
This is a great destroyer of Foul, especially the younger sort of Poultry; to
take them, procure a square piece of Timber, about an hundred weight, boared in
the upper side just in the middle, and set fast in it a hooked crook; and in
the Ground fasten four forked Stakes, then on them lay two sticks ac^oss, on
which lay a long Staff that may hold up the dead-^all by the Crook; and under
that Crook you must have a sho^ stick with a Line made fast to it, which may
^each down to the bridge below, that is five or six In^hes broad; and place
Boards or Pails on each side the fall, or hedge it with close Rods, about ten
Inches, or a Foot high, which guiding her to the Trap, the passage being wider
then the ^all is broad, she cannot miss being taken.

To destroy Rats or Mice.
Take an ^arthen or brass Pot, pretty large, fill it with the dross or foot of
the Oil, and set it in any convenient place, where they haunt, about the middle
of the place; then show Potashes, such as the Sope-boylers use, round about
it; and when the scent of the Oil brings them ha^^ily to it, the Ashes will
strike a Scent in their Brain, tha^ will stupesie them, so that they can make
but slow has^e away; and thereby you have time to destroy them wi^h such
Instruments as are fitting.

To scare away Rats and Mice.
Take the Prains of a Weasle, mix it with (...) till it is made into a kind of
an Ointment, and anoint the Posts and Places near their haunts, and the very
scent of it w^ll make them fly the Place.

To gather Rats and Mice, and destroy them.
Take a couple, or more, of live Rats or Mice, and put them into an earthen Pan
close covered, set them over a moderately heating Fire, and when they feel the
heat, they will make a piteous cry, whereupon, those that are i^ hearing, will
flock as it were to their Rescue. They may be destroyed by scattering
Hemlock-se^d in their holes, which if they eat, they dye. Or, small filings of
Iron or Steel, mixed with Wheat-dough, destroys them.

To make Rats and Mice blind.
To do this, and easily to take them, mix the powder of Tithalamum with
Wheat Flour, and make a dough of it with Metheglin, and lay it in their
haunts, and such as ^ibble it will be quickly blind.

To make Weasles forsake a House.
Get a field Weasle, by some called the hedge Wea^geld him, and cut off his
Tail, then turn him loose, a^^ all that see him or scent him, will fly from
him; and the better to scare them, hang a little bell about his Neck, and he
will soon clear the House to your Content and Satisfaction.

To cause Weasles to dye, etc.
Take Mercury, Sal-Armoniack, and Wheat Flour make them into a Paste with
Honey; cut it into (...) bits, throw it into their haunts, and they will
greedily take it, and soon after dye.

To gather Weasles.
Take the guts of a Lizard, and the Herb Verjuice, bruis^ them, and put them
into Water to infuse; and when that is sufficiently done, strew it thinly on
the floor near their haunts, and the scent will allure them to it; where you
may set Traps for them, or lie in wait to circumvent their returning to their
holes, and so destroy them.

To destroy Moles.
This may be done by a Mole-spear, stricking down where you see them heave, by
setting Traps in their Tracks, especially glazed earthen Pots, as pi^fals, into
which if they fall, as consequently they will, if set in their way, they cannot
get out, if the height be above their length.

Some there are that fill a Jugg with a narrow Neck with Brimstone, Ceder-wood,
Tu^pentine, and Rosin, and clap it, when lighted, to the Mouth of their Holes,
which drawing strongly in with the Air, suffocates them.

Others make a paste of white Helebore, whites of Eggs, and Wheat Flour, which
laid in little pieces at the Mouths of their Holes, they will eat at coming out
to Air, and poison themselves. You may likewise call them that are in hearing
to you, by putting a live Mole in a Pot over a gentle Fire, as is said in
Relation to Mice and Rats, on that Account.

To rid a House, or any place of Pismires.
Take the Flower of Brimstone, half a pound; Sale of Ta^tar, or Wine Lees three
or four Ounces; mix them over a gentle Fire, till they become red; then mix and
beat the^ with fair Water, till they cool; and when dry again, beat them to a
fine powder; put the powder into Water, and let it infuse till the Water is
Tinctured, and wherever you sprinkle any, the Pismires, or Emets will dye, if
they speedily avoid not the place.

Mu^k Shells burnt with Storax, or beaten to powder, will do the like; the
smoke of burning the Roots of wild Cucumbers will drive them away out of any
House; and Ci^eni^um melted into Oil, and poured on their Nests, w^ll kill them.

Serpents, or Venomous Creatures, to destroy, or drive them away.
In Gardens where there is store of Wormwood, and Rue, they will not frequent,
nor come near Ash-leaves; strew Deers-suet, and the scent of it makes them fly;
large Radishes are the bain of them; burn Centaury and Walwort, and the smoke
will drive them away.

To draw them together, and to handle them, etc.
Take a handful of Sea Onyons, stamp them with Nine or Ten River-Crabs, and lay
them in any convenient place, where Snakes or other Venomous Insects pass, and
they will infallibly gather to it, so that they may be taken and destroyed; if
you wash your Hands in the Juice of Radishes, you may handle Snakes without
fear of being bitten, for the scent of it makes her Sick, and loath to ^ouch
you.

To destroy Caterpillars.
These are great hurters of Fruit Trees, Herbs, etc. (...) where you find them
entangled in the Trees, or ^ flicting the Plants, take wet Straw, or other
moulde^^ Stuff, lay it in little heaps, to the Windward side of yo^ Orchard, or
Garden, where the Wind is scanty; Fire ^ with some dry Straw early in the
Morning, or in the Eve^ing; scatter Pitch, Brimstone, and Rosin, or Turpent^^
on them, and the Smoke carried by the Wind among the Trees like a Cloud, or
over the Herbs, will kill them, ^ make them fall to the Ground, where you may
sweep th^^ up and burn them; this also destroys Flys and Wo^^ that bite the
early Bud, or tender Plants.

To kill Worms or Snales in Walks, etc.
To do this, you must new lay your Walks, and under a quarter of a Foot of
Gravel, lay a layer of Salt and Sea-coal-ashes, or slacked Lime, and whilst the
strength ^^ that remains in the Ground, neither Worms nor Sna^^ will live there.

To destroy Slugs, white and black, in Fields, Gardens, and other places.
These much afflict Pease, and Beans, at their coming ^^ also young Corn, and
tender Plants; and the most eas^^ way to destroy them, is to spread Lime
slacked amo^^ them, or sow it on the Ridges of the Land, and it w^^ kill them,
or keep them, or prevent any coming there ^^ annoy it.

To destroy Erwigs, or Emets in Orchards, or Gardens.
To gather them, lay Fern, and small dried Kekes, the first will bring them
together, and into the latter they will creep, then set Fire to this Fuel, and
so by renewing it, you may destroy them all in a little time.

To destroy Frogs.
If Frogs insest your Grounds, or Outhouses, which they will do, to the great
Annoyance, by gellying, and pi^sing on the Grass that lie near Marshes, or
Ditches. Take the Galls of a Sheep, Ox, and Goat, and being broken, lay them
for them, and in feeding on that bitter liq^id, will soon dye.

To destroy Flies and Wasps.
Where Flies or Wasps swarm, and are troublesome, take a large Board, and dawb
it thinly over with warm Turpentine, and the strength of the Scent will draw
them to it, especially if you scatter a little Coriander-seed fin^ly sifted on
it, viz. when it is dried, and beaten to powde^, and those that light on the
Boards will be entangled, and not able to stir; then by this means you may take
with diverse Boards, a Million in a day.

To destroy Bugs, and rid Houses of them.
To remove this noisome and troublesome Vermin, take Oil of Turpentine, wash
over the Walls and Bedsteads with it, or particularly where there are any
Crevises, Cracks, or Crannys, and they will dye away, and the Room, after some
time using it, no more pestered with it.

The Juice of wild Cucumers and Vinegar, is an excellent Remedy against them:

Or smoke your Rooms, being shut very close, with Storax, Assasae^ida, and
Brimstone.

The Juice of Wormwood and Rue is very good to wash the Bedsteads, Crevises, or
any place where you suppose they are; and if you would lie safe among a
thousand i^ a Room, Ri^ce your Sheets in Water wherein Sa^sa^rax has been well
st^^ped, and they will not enter upon them, or you may lay that Wood in Slices,
or Shavings among your Linen, and it have the same effect.

To destroy Fleas.
Take the Herb called, Asmart, or Hounds-Tongue, wi^ a long Leaf, and red
Fibers, growing almost in eve^ Ditch, and lay it between the Mat, or Sacking,
and ^ Bedding, scatter it under the Bed, and about the Roo^ and the Scent will
kill, or drive them away.

You may likewise set Vessels of soft Turpentine under your Bed, or hollowed up
between your Sheets, and ^ will draw the Fleas in abundance to it; and being in
i^ will stick them so fast, that they cannot move; Ox blood* or Sheeps blood
will take them in the same manner.

To destroy Lice in the Head or Body.
Take Hogs-lard, Quicksilver, and the Juice of S^g^ beat and mix them well
together, till they come into ^ Ointment, and anoint the place, and it will
destroy them.

Take Staves-Acre, beat it into powder, and it will by being rubbed among the
Hair, kill all the Lice, and prevent them a long time from coming again.

To destroy the Nits, and make them come from off the Hair smoothly, mix the
Staves-Acre with Oil of Almonds, and make a kind of an Ointment of it, anoint a
bridle^ Comb with it, it will cleanse the Hair to a wonder.

To destroy Crab-Lice.
Take Quicksilver, Oil of Spike, and the Pap of a Apple, make them into an
Ointment, by well mixing then together, and anoint the place, and they will dye
away, and not come any more.

To take and destroy the Otter
This Creature living sometimes by Land and sometimes by Water, and is a great
destroyer of Fish, and mostly of the largest, and best that are found in
Rivers, Ponds or L^kes. To take him, you must make a Wheel made with a double
Team or Tonnel, and set an Iron Grate like a Gridi^on against the Team within,
with fourholes, and the sliding stayed; or two round Sticks set upright, before
the Team in the Wheel, so that they may hold up the Iron; let them be fast
bound, to wheel beneath and above; then take a good stiff Rod, and set one end
over the Weel, to hold up the Gridiron or Grate, and the other end must reach
pretty well over the Teem; fasten a small Ozier at the end of the Rod made with
a round kno^, and so put down upon the end of the lowermost Ozier in the middle
of the inner Teem, being put on but a very little way, so that the Otter coming
within the first Teem, advances to the second, where the Fish is you ^^lt
withal, and there putting off the Ozier, the Rod flys ^p, then the Iron-grate
falls, and stops the outermost Teem; and when he hears it fall, he will haste,
to think to get out, but being stopped, fall a bi^ing the Grate, till he suc^s
in so much Water as will drown him; or if that fail, you may take him alive in
the Trap, and use him at pleasure.

To take the Heron.
This Fowl devours abundance of Fish, and therefore to circumvent her, take
Gudgeon, Roach, or Dace, run a sm^ll Wire along within the Skin, on the outside
of the Ri^s, then it coming out at its Gills, fasten a Hook to it, stake it
down, the Wire fastened to a Line, so far as the Heron can wade, and the Fish
will live and swim about a co^siderable time; then leave it, and if the Heron
comes, she will greedily swallow it with the Hook, and be taken; and in this
manner you may take in deeper places; you may take the Cormorant, Coot; and on
the surface, the Sea-pye, and Osprey.

To take the Buzard, Ring-Tail, Kite, or Hen-Hairer.
These are great destroyers of young Poultry, and young Rabits, and may be
taken easily with Lime-twigs, in the following manner: Take three small Rods
growing on the end of the ^ or three slender Twigs placed on the end of a pre^
Stick, so ordered, that two may lie on the Ground the third lie over them; the
Stick must have a Hole in the end, and a Mouse, or young Chicken stale stales,
to make them the speediler swoop and take ought to be alive, so fastened down
wi^h a String Peg, in the Ground, that they can but just move ^ these Twigs
smeered in Bird-lime, upon their swoop take the Stale, will catch hold of their
Wings, tha^ tering for a while in vain, they will fall down.

Tou may take them with Springes, or Iron-Trap^ cealed under Leaves, Grass, or
Straw; a dead Sta^ the representation of it, being placed so, that at swooping
they cannot well fail to be taken by the ^ Neck.

An excellent way to take Sea-^yes.
These Sea-pyes hovering over fresh Rivers, d^ much young fry of fish. To take
them, Lime O and fasten to them a small Fish by a Thread about a^ lay them on
Rushes, or Sedge, so that they may (...) the Water, and then the Pie stooping
and seizing the thinking to carry it away, will been tangled ^y the ^ so that
if you have a Boat, you may ^asily take her tering and struggling in the Water;
and by this, and Rules given, any other Ravenous and hurtful Cre(...) may be
taken.

FINIS.

