Englands Freedom, Soldiers Rights: Vindicated against all arbitrary unjust
Invaders of them, and in particular against those new Tyrants at Windsore,
which would destroy both under the pretense of Marshall Law.
OR,
Delivered to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and that which is called his
Council of War, the 14. of December, 1647.
Unto which is annexed his Letter to the General, wherein the said Plea was
enclosed. Also a Petition of the rest of his Fellow Prisoners to his Excellency.
May it please your Excellency,
I Am by birth a free Commoner of England, and am thereby intailed or entitled
unto an equal privilege with your self, or the greatest men in England, unto
the freedom and liberty of the Laws of England, as the Parliament declares in
their Declaration of the 23. of October, 1642. 1 part Book Decl. page 660. And
the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta expressly says, That no man shall be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold or Liberties, or free customs, or
be outlawed or exiled, or any other ways destroyed, nor past upon nor
condemned, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers (or equals) and that by
due course, or process of the Law of the Land See Sir Ed. Cooks Exposition
hereof in his 2. part Institut. fol. 46, 47, 50, 51.
which expressly says, that no man shall be taken or restrained of his liberty,
by petition or suggestion (made unto whomsoever in authority) unless it be by
indictment or presentment of good and lawful men where such deeds be done: and
that no man whatsoever be put to answer (any crime whatsoever) without
presentment before Justices or matter of record, or by due process and Writ
original, according to the old Law of the Land: and if any thing from
henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in law, and holden for See
the 5. Ed. 3. 9. and 25. Ed. 3. 4. and 28. Ed. 3. 3. and 37. Ed. 3. 18. and 42.
Ed. 3. 3. and the Petition of Right in the third of the King, and the Statutes
that abolished the Star Chamber and Ship Money, made this present Parliament;
and Lievtenant-Colonell Lilburnes Book called The Resolved Man's Resolution, p.
2, 3, 8, 9. and his Grand Plea against the Lords, p. 7, 8, 9.
error.

Therefore Sir, for you who are a General of an Army, and other of your
Marshall Officers, who are no Civil Court of Justice, nor authorized with the
least legal power in the world to administer Justice, and execute the Law of
the Land, upon, or unto any of the Commoners of England, to dare or presume to
restrain, imprison, try or meddle with me, as you have done, who am in no
other capacity in the world, but barely and altogether as a Commoner of
England, is the height of arbitrarie tyranny; injustice and Well says Sir
Edward Cook in the 2. part of his Institutes fol. 48. that every oppression
against Law, by color of any usurped authority, is a kind of destruction: for
when any thing is forbidden, all that tends to it is also forbidden: and it is
(says he) the worst oppression that is done by color of justice. See also
Lib. 10. fol. 14. in the ease of the Marshalsea.
oppression, and an absolute destruction of the very fundamental Laws of
England, the bare endeavoring of which cost the Earl of Strafford his head.
And what the doom of him is that destroys the fundamental Laws of the Land,
I shall give you out of the words of your own friend Mr. St. John, in his
Argument of law concerning the Bill of Attainder of high Treason of Thomas Earl
of Strafford, at a Conference in a Committee of both Houses of Parliament,
printed by G. M. for John Bartlet at the sign of the gilt Cup near S. Austins
Gate in Paul's Churchyard 1641. who in the 70. page thereof says, That the
destruction of the Laws dissolves the arteries and ligaments that hold the
Body together: he that takes away the Laws, takes not away the allegiance of
one Subject alone, but of the whole Kingdom: it was (says he) made treason by
the Statute of the 13. Eliz. for her time, to affirm, that the Laws of the
Realm do not bind the descent of the Crown; no Law, no descent at all: No
Laws, says he, no Pe^rage, no ranks or degrees of men And therefore you, with
your dealings with me, that am merely a free Commoner of England, and so not in
the least under your Marshall Discipline (but solelie and only under the
discipline of the known, declared and established Laws of England) by your
arbitrarie tirannicall actings upon me, have absolutely as much as in you
lies, destroyed the fundamental Laws of England, and therefore are as absolute
Hedge-breakers and Levellers as ever were in this Kingdom.
; the same condition to all. Jt's treason to kill a Judge upon the Bench, this
kills not the Judge, but the Judgment. And in page 71. he says, Jt's Felony
to imbezell any of the Judicial Records of the Kingdom; this, viz. the
destruction of the Law, sweeps all away, and from all.

It Is treason to counterfeit a twenty shilling piece, here is a counterfeiting
of the Law, we can call neither the counterfeit, nor the true coin our own.

It Is Treason to counterfeit the great Seal for an Acre of Land, no property
hereby (viz. the destruction of the Law) is left to any Land at all: nothing
Treason now, either against King or Kingdom, no Law to punish it.

And therefore I advise you as a friend to take heed that you go no further on
in your illegal, arbitrary, tyrannical and Law-destroying practices with and
toward me, least when for your own lives you claim the benefit of the Law,
you be answered in the words of your foresaid friend in page 72 That he in
vain calls for the help of the Law that walks contrary unto Law, and from the
Law of like for like; he that would not have others to have Law, why should he
have any himself? why should not that be done to him, that himself would have
done to another? It is true, (says he Ibid.) we give Law to Hares and Deers,
because they be beasts of chase, but it was never accounted either cruelty or
foul play to knock Foxes and Wolves on the head as they can be found, because
these be beasts of prey: the Warrener sets traps for Poulcats and other
vermin, for preservation of the Warren.

And in page 76. he says, in the 11. R. 2. Tresilian, And some others
attainted of Treason for delivering opinions in the subversion of the Law, and
some others for plotting the like Read also to this purpose Mr. John Pyms
Speech against the Earl of Strafford, the 12. of April 1641. printed by John
Bartlet, but especially p. 5. 6. 8. 9. 13. 18. 23. 24.
.

But if you shall object, that you deal with me as you are a General and
Officers of an Army by Marshall Law, for endeavoring to make mutinies or
tumults in your Army, or by blasting and defaming your reputations, and so
drawing your Soldiers from their affection and obedience unto you.

I answer in the first place, there can in this Kingdom be no pretense for
Marshall Law, but when the Kingdom is in a general hurly-burly and uproare,
and an Army or Armies of declared enemies in the Field, prosecuting with the
sword the destruction of the whole, and thereby stopping the regular and legal
proceedings of the Courts of Justice from punishing offenders and transgressors.

But now there being neither Army nor Armies of declared enemies in the field,
nor no Garrisons in the possessions of any such men, nor no general
hurly-burlies and uproares by any such men in the Kingdom, but all such are
visibly subdued and quieted, and all Courts of Justice open and free to punish
offenders and transgressors; and therefore even to the Army it self and the
Officers and Soldiers therein, there is no reason or ground for exercising of
Marshall Law, much less over Commoners that are not under the obedience of the
Army, which is my cause.

And that in time of peace, there neither is, nor can be any ground of
exercising and executing of Marshall Law; I prove out of the Petition of Right
which was made in the third year of the present King, and is printed in
Pubtons Collection of Statutes at large, fol. 1431. 1432. which expressly says,
that by Authority of Parliament, in the 25. year of the Reign of King Edward
the third, it is declared and enacted, That no man should be forejudged of life
or limb against the form of the great Charter and the Law of the Land, and by
the said great Charter, and other the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, no man
ought to be adjudged to death, but by the Law established in this Realm See
the 9. H. 3. 29. 5. Ed. 3. 9. and 25. Ed. 3. 4. and 28. Ed. 3. 3.
.

And whereas no offender of what kind soever is exempted from the proceedings
to be used, and punishments to be inflicted by the Laws and Statutes of this
your Realm: Nevertheless of late diverse Commissions under your Majesty's
great Seal have issued forth, by which certain persons have been assigned and
appointed Commissioners, with power and authority to proceed within the land,
according to the justice of Martial Law, against such Soldiers and Mariners,
or other dissolute persons joining with them, as should commit any murder,
robbery, felony, mutiny, or other outrage or misdemeanor whatsoever, and by
such summarie course and order, as is agreeable to Martial Law, and as is used
in Armies in time of War, to proceed to the trial and condemnation of such
offenders, and them to cause to be executed and put to death according to the
Law Martial. By pretext whereof your Majesty's Subjects have been by some of
the said Commissioners put to death, when and where, if by the Laws and
Statutes of the land they had deserved death, by the same Laws and Statutes
also they might, and by no other ought to have been judged and executed Yet it
is very observable, that at the very time when this Martial Law complained of
was executed, the King had wars with France, a foreign enemy, but there is
no such thing now; and therefore the Army, or the grand Officers thereof have
not the least shadow or pretense to execute it in the least, or to deal with
me a free Commoner, as they have done.
. And also sundry grievous offenders, by color thereof claiming an exemption,
have escaped the punishment due to them by the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, by reason that diverse of your Officers and Ministers of Justice have
unjustly refused, or forborne to proceed against such offenders according, to
the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said offenders were
punishable only by Martial Law, and by authority of such Commissioners as
aforesaid. Which Commissions, and all other of like nature, are wholly and
directly contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.

Therefore Sirs, if you have any care of your own heads and lives, (though you
have none of the Liberties and Freedoms of England) I again as a friend advise
you, to take heed what you do unto me any further in your illegal,
arb^trarie and tirannicall way that hitherto you have proceeded with me; for
largely understand that Canterbury and Strafford were this Parliament
questioned for their arbitrarie and tirannicall actions that they did and acted
man^ years before, and the Lord Keeper Finch was by this Parliament questioned
for actions that he did when he was Speaker of the House of Commons in the
thir^ of the present King An. 1628. and forced to fly to save his head.

In the sececond place I answer, that if since the wars ended, it was or
could be judged lawful for your Excellency and your Council of War to
execut^ Marshall Law: yet you have divested your self of that power upon the
4. an^ 5. of June last at Newmarket Heath, you owned the soldiers and joined
wit^ them, when they were put out of the States protection and declared enemies
and further associated with them by a mutual solemn engagement, as they were
a Company of free Commoners of England to stand with them according to the Law
of Nature and Nations See the late Plea for the Agents.
, to recover your own and all the peoples Rights and Liberties; the words are
these We the Officers and Soldiers of the Army subscribing hereunto, do hereby
declare agree and promise to and with each other, that we shall not willingly
disband nor dvide, nor suffer our selves to be disbanded nor divided, * See the
engagement in the Armies Book of Declarations, page 25. 26, 27, 28.
until we have security; that we as private men, or other the freeborn
people of England, shall not remain subject to the like oppression, injury, or
abuse, as have been attempted.

Hereby it appears, that from this time you and the soldiery kept in a body
and so were an Army, not by the States or Parliaments will, but by a mutual
agreement amongst all the Soldiers, and consequently not being an Army by the
Parliaments wills; they were not under those rules of martial Govermen^ which
were given by the will of the Parliament: and your Excellency could no longer
exercise any such power over them, as was allowed you by thos^ Martial Laws;
nay, the Soldiers keeping in a body, and continuing an Army only by mutual
consent, did by their mutual Agreement or Engagement, constitute a new kind of
Council, whereby they would be Governed in their prosecution of those ends for
which they associated, and made every Officer incapable of being in that
Council, which did not associate with them in that Engagement. The words of
the Agreement or Engagement are these: we do hereby declare, agree, and
promise, to and with each other, that we shall no^ willingly disband, nor
divide, nor suffer our selves to be disbanded or divided without satisfaction
in relation to our grievances and desires heretofore presented, and security
that we as private men or other the the freeborn people of England, shall not
remain subject to the like oppression and injury as has been attempted, and
this satisfaction and security to be such as shall be agreed unto by a Council
to consist of those general Officers of the Army, who have concurred with the
Army in the premises, with two Commission-Officers, and two Soldiers to be
chosen for each Regiment, who have concurred and shall concur with us in the
premises and in this Agreement.

So that your Excellency is so far from having a power to exercise the old
Martial Discipline, that you would have been no Officer nor Member of the
Council appointed to govern them, unless you had associated with them, and ^y
that Association or mutual Engagement, the Soldiers were so far from allow^ng
to their General, who ever it should have been (for at that time it was
^ncertain) the power of excercising the old Martial Discipline, that according
^o the Engagement, no Officer or Soldier can be rightly Cashiered unless it
^e by the Council constituted by that Engagement: so that your Excellency ^y
your own Engagement have put a period to your power of exercising your old
Martial Discipline, and whatsoever Discipline shall appear to the Army to ^e
necessary, must be constituted by the mutual consent of the Army or their
^epresentatives, unless you and they will disclaim the Engagement at
Newmarket, and those principles upon which you then stood, and yield up your
selves to the Parliaments pleasure, as their hirelings, to serve their
arbitrarie power, like Turkish Janisaries.

In the third place I answer, that it is against reason, law, conscience,
justice and equity, to subject me at one and the same time, or any other free
Commoner of England, under the sting and power of two distinct Laws, and such
a ^ondage as is insupportable, and such a snare of intanglement, that no man's
^ife whatsoever can be safe or secure under it, that I shall be liable to be
questioned and destroyed by the common Law of the Kingdom, and then be at the
wills of mercenarie Turkish Ianisaries, (in case the common Law will not reach
me) to be questioned and destroyed by an unjust arbitrarie Marshall law; and ^f
it can be justly proved against me that I have made any tumults, the Law and
^he ordinary Courts of Justice are open, by which and by no other rules and
pro^eedings I ought to be tried, and if it be said or can be proved, that I
have belied or scandalized the General, to the taking away of his good name,
etc. yet scandalum Magnatum is not to be tried by Martial Law, nor yet either
by the House of Commons, or the House of Lords, but only and alone (now the
Star Chamber is down) by an Action at Common Law As is clear by the Statutes
of 3. Ed. 1. ^3. and 37. Ed. 3. 18. and 38. Ed. 3. 9. and 42. Ed. 3. 3. and 2.
R. 2. 5. and 12. R. 2. 11. 5. part Cooks Reports, page 125. and 13. H. 7.
Kelway, and 11. Eliz. Dier 285. and 30. Assize pla. 19. and Liev. Col.
Lilburnes Grand Plea of 20. October. 1647. page 7. 8.
, by a Jurie of my equals, and no where else, it being a Maxim in Law, That
where remedy may be had by an ordinary course in Law, the party grieved shall
never have his recourse to extraordinaries See Vox Plebis page 38. and Lievt.
Co^ Jo. Lilburnes Anatomy of the Lord Tirannie, page 10.
: And besides, for you to proceed with me, and to be both Parties, Jurie and
Judges, is a thing that the Law abhorres See 8. H. 6. fol. 21. and 5. Eliz.
Dier 22^ and Dr. Bonhams Case, 8. part of Cook Reports, and Lieut. Col. Jo.
Lilburnes grand Plea, page 10.
.

In the fourth and last place I answer, that the Parliament it self, neither
by Act nor Ordinance can justly or warrantably destroy the fundamental
liberties and principles of the common Law of England; it being a Maxim in law
and reason both, That all such Acts and Ordinances are ipso facto null and void
in Law, and bind not at all, but ought to be resisted and stood against to the
death.

But for them to give you a power by Marshall Law, or under any other name or
title whatever, by your arbitrary tyrannical wills without due course and
process of Law, to take away the life or Liberty of me, or any free Commoner
of England whatsoever, yea, or any of your own soldiers in time of peace,
when the Courts of Justice are all open and no visible declared enemy in Arms
in the Kingdom ready to destroy it, is an absolute destroying of our
fundamental Liberties, and a rasing of the foundation of the Common Law of
England But besides all this I do confidently believe, that the Parliament
never gave power unto the General since the Wars ended, to execute Marshall
Law; neither do I believe that some chief Executors of Marshall Law have any
legal Commission from the Parliament, who never that I could hear of, ever
gave power unto the General of himself to make general Officers: and
besides, all the Parliament Men that are Officers in the Army were (as I have
been groundedly told formerly) taken off by an Ordinance of both Houses, which
was never replealed since.
.

Ergo, such a power of arbitrary Marshall Law, cannot justly by the Parliament
in time of peace, etc. be given unto you, nor (if it were) be justly or
warrantably executed by you.

And besides, both Houses themselves by an Ordinance (unless they alter the
whole Constitution of this Kingdom) can take away the life of no free Commoner
of England whatsoever, especially in time of peace.

And therefore that which is not within their own power to do, they cannot by
an Order or Ordinance grant power to Sir Thomas Fairfax etc. to do, it being a
Maxim in nature, That beyond the power of being there is nor can be no being.

But it is not in the power of the Parliament, or the two House, or the House
of Commons themselves, as the present Constitutions of this Kingdom stands,
either by Order or Ordinance to take away the life of any free Commoner of
England See Sir Ed. Cooks 2. part Institut. fol. 47, 48. and 3. part, fol. 22.
and 4. part, fol. 23. 25. 48 291. all of which Books are published for good
Law to the Kingdom by two special Orders of the present House of Commons, as
you may read in the last page of the 2. part Institut. see also the Petition of
Right.
.

Ergo, they cannot by an Ordinance or Order, especially in times of peace, give
power to Sir Thomas Fairfax by Marshall Law, (unless they totally alter the
Constitutions of the Kingdom) to take away the life or lives of any free
Commoners of England, (which all Soldiers are as well as others, See the
Armies Declaration of the 14. June, 1647. Book of their Declarations, page 39.
and their Letter from Roiston to the Lord Mayor of London of the 10. June,
1647. which the Printer has neglected to print in their Book of Declarations.
) and therefore it is absolute murder in the General and the Council of
War, now to shoot to death, hang or destroy any Soldier or other Commoner
whatever by Marshall Law.

And therefore I do the third time as a friend advise you, to cease your
illegal, arbitrarie, tirannicall Martial Law-proceedings with me that am no
Soldier, and so not under the least pretense of your Martial Jurisdiction,
least in time to come you pay as dear for your arbitrarie illegal proceedings
with me, as Sir Richard Empson and Mr. Edward Dudley Justices did, who as Sir
Edward Cook declares in his 2. and 4. part of his Institutes, were very
officious and ready to execute that illegal Act of Parliament made in the 11.
H. 7. chap. 3. which gave power unto Justices of Assize, as well as Justices of
the Peace (without any finding or presentment by the verdict of twelve men,
being the ancient birthright of the Subject) upon a bare information for the
King before them made, to have full power and authority by their discretions
to hear and determine al Offenses or contempts committed or done by any
person, or persons against the form, ordinance, effect of any Statute made and
not repealed, etc. by color of which act of Parliament, shaking (says he)
this fundamental Law (viz. the 29. Chapter of Magna Charta) it is not credible
what horrible oppressions and exactions, to the undoing of infinite numbers of
people, were committed by them, for which (though I cannot read they shot any
man to death, and though they had an express Act of Parliament to bear them
out, abundantly less questionable then an Ordinance for exercising Martial
Law) they were both indicted of high treason both by the common Law and Act of
Parliament, and in the 2. year of Henry 8. they both lost their heads See 2.
part Instit. fol. 51. and 4. part, fol. 41. 196, 197. but especially read their
Indictment verbatim set down ibid. fol. 198, 199.
.

Therefore, from all the premises by way of conclusion. I draw up this
protestation against you, that by the Laws and constitutions of this Kingdom,
you have not the least Iudicative power in the world over me; therefore, I
cannot in the least give you any Honor, Reverence or Respect, either in word
action, or gesture: and if you by force and compulsion compel me again to come
before you, I must and will by Gods assistance keep on my Hat, and look upon
you as a company of murderers, Robbers and Theives, and do the best I can to
raise the Hue and Cry of the Kingdom against you, as a company of such
lawless persons, and therefore if there be any Honor, Honesty and Conscience
in you, I require you as a freeborn English man, to do me Justice and right,
by a formal dismissing of me, and give me just reparation for my months
unjust imprisonment by you, and for that loss of credit I have sustained
thereby, that so things may go no further; or else you will compel and
necessitate me to study all ways and means in the world to procure
satisfaction from you, and if you have any thing to lay to my charge, I am as
an Engishman ready to answer you at the common Law of England, and in the mean
time I shall subscribe my self

Your servant in your faithful discharge of your duty to your Masters (the
Commons of England) that pay you your wages, William Thompson.
From my arbitrary and most illegal imprisonment in Windsore, this 14. December.
1647.
The forementioned Letter thus follows.
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Captain-Generall of the Forces in
the Nation for Imperial Justice and Liberty, these present.
May it please your Excellency,
I Here present unto you a Declaration and Protestation against the illegal
and unjust proceedings of your Counsel of War against me, I being a free
Commoner of England, as in the presence of the just God, before whose Tribunal
both you and I shall stand to give an Account of all ungodly deeds committed
against him. And so I rest,

Your Excellencies servant, if you are a true servant to the most excellent God
for justice and righteousness in the earth, without respect of persons. William
Thompson.
December. 14 1647.
The Petition thus follows.
To the right Honorable his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Captain
General of all the forces raised in the Kingdom of England. The humble
Petition of some of your Excellencies Officers and Soldiers, being under the
custody of the Marshall General.
Shows,
THat whereas there are mis-presentations of the intentions of the late Agents
of the Army and their adherents, by men of corrupt minds, who would make all
the end of your own and your Armies noble and valiant Achievements (under the
power of God) fruitless; and would destroy Justice and righteousness from
amongst men; and instead of common good, and equal distribution of justice,
would advance a particular selfish interest: and to accomplish their unworthy
selfish ends, amongst many other scandals cast upon the late Agents, they have
blazed abroad that they intended to murder the King, and that one of them
should affirm it was lawful: And whereas this was reported by one L. C. Henry
Lilburne; it being altogether most abominable in our eyes, and detracts from
the purity and righteousness of our Principles; tending only to make us odious
to the People, for whose good alone we have run not only all former, but also
these late hazards.

We therefore desire that the said L. C. Hen. Lilburne may be speedily sent
for to testify upon Oath (as in the presence of God) who used those words,
where those words were used, and when: and what in particular the words were;
That so, such a person may come under a public cognizance, and your
Excellencies faithful servants and soldiers may free themselves and others
from such aspersions.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Will. Eyers. Will. Bray, Will.
Prior. John Wood. George Hassall. Will. Everrard. John Crosseman. Tho. Beverly.
Will. Thomson Commoner.


FINIS.

