THE REMEDY OF SCHISM.

OR, A MEAN TO SETTLE the Divisions of the Times.

Set forth in a seasonable Sermon before an Honorable Assembly in the City of
LONDON.

By WILLIAM SCLATER, Batchelar in Divinity, Preacher of Gods Word in the City
of Exeter.

PSALM. 133.1. Behold, how good, and joyful a thing it is, for Brethren to
dwell together in unity.

ROMANS 16.17. Mark them which cause Divisions among you, contrary to the
Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them.

LONDON: Printed by T. Pain, and M. Symmons, for Tho. Slater at the Swan in
Duck-Lane. 1642.

Reader, thou must be entreated, for the prevention of my censure, e're thou
read, to correct these following errata, which, at the first view pervert the
sense.
Page 17. lin. 7. for his, read this. and l. 28. ib. for appellatur, r.
appelletur, p. 20. l. 20. and 22. for heresy, r. hearsay. and l. ib. 13. for
zealous, r jealous p. 22. l. 21. for clean, r. clear. p. 23. l. 13. for, for,
r. how. p. 24. l. 18. r. Bezaleel. and l. 37. ib. for last, r. least. p. 25. l.
14. for haerescit, r. haerebit. p. 31. l. 11. for earnest, r. Harvest. p. 36 l.
22. for true love Christian, r. true Christian love. p. 46. l. 31. for sew, r.
sow.

TO THE HONORABLE, Sir JOHN POVLET Knight, Son and Heir to the Right Honorable
JOHN Lord POULET, Baron of Hinton St. George, one of the Knights of
Sommerset-shire for this present Parliament; The Hope of his Family, and the
Honor of his Country, etc. The Felicity of Heaven and Earth.
AS it is no mean joy to your Country, to see the noble spirits of ancient
prowess, and virtue, eminent in your famous progenitors, to sparkle with new
vigor, in your breast; so, does it exceedingly glad me, to view the eximious
and heightened Piety of your present Parents, (the exemplarie Worthies of this
Age) so likely to become Hereditary, and by a sacred (...) to be transmigrated
to posterity: The happy Contemplation of both which, has animated me, (the
issue of your Father's Beneficiary) to shroud this poor piece of my
Theological Essays, under your protection: Not, that I, with Narcissus, can
so dote upon this offspring of my own brain, as to hold it worthy of your
eyes; nor that my shallow thoughts durst swell up to so high ambition, as to
think themselves competent to devise a meet present for so high an acceptance;
but for that your illustrious nobleness, as a Jewels splendour, adding grace,
and luster to some worthless case, can set an estimate on the lowest gift: It
comes unto you, not that you (chiefly in this surfeit of the Press) need it,
but, as that Hospitable Prelate, Alonso Cattilio, said unto his steward,
(complaining to him of the superfluous number of his Followers, whom yet he
still meant to entertain) because it needs you; under the wings of whose
countenance, and favor, it shall be sheltred, as Tiberius was by his Sueton.
in Tiber. ca. 69.
Laurel, from all the thunderbolts of envy, or malevolence; Nor am I hopeless
(Honored Worthy) that your amiable candor, and known suavitie will vail this
boldness, in your humble servant; who, (as the Queen of Sheba, heretofore, did
Solomon) cannot but, (besides my own private notices) admire you, upon 1 Kin.
10.1.
Report; as being a known Patron of Piety, a Maecenas to Scholars, a Foe to
Popery, a Champion of the Church, and a renowned Almoner to the needy: For all
which, (though at so great a distance) I (however but as an Amos among the Amos
1.1.
Herdmen of Tekoa) can assure you, as the Martial. l. 1. Epigr. 3.
Poet did the great man of his Time; that the several voices of ingenuous men
accord in this one harmony; Lo, a true Patriot of his Country. Vox diversa
sonat, populorum est vox tamen una,
Cum verus patriae diceris esse pater.
But the eximious eminency, in this kind, is so conspicuous to all; that I
shall but darken so blazing a Topaze, by my rude polishing: All I shall add
more, is that of Plin. in Paregyr.
Pliny to Trajan, Seria te carmina, honorque aeternus Annalium, non haec
brevis, and pudenda praedicatio colet: I shall leave this piece, to be better
blazoned by the Heralds of Time, and embellished in the lasting Chronicles of
after Ages.

What remains? but that I solicit, earnestly, the throne of grace, for the
accumulation of Heavens choicest favors, to be powered upon you; and with you,
upon your virtuous Consort, and whole noble family; to which, that together
with so ancient, and Honorable blood, the right Religion may become equally
hereditary, even until Time it self shall be no more, shall be the fervent
prayers of him, who shall strive to approve himself,

March 2. 1641. Your much devoted servant, to be commanded, WILLIAM SCLATER.

THE REMEDY of SCHISM.
1 COR. 11.18, 19. For, first of all, when ye come together in the Church, I
hear that there are divisions among you, and I partly believe it: for, there
must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made
manifest among you.


I Need not make Apology (Right Honorable, The occasion of this Text, why now
chosen.
and Beloved) for this choice of Scripture now; when as the practice of too
many seems not more to be a Comment on it, than, (which all good hearts may
bleed to meditate) after a sort, indeed, an invitation to it: that expression
of our Savior, on another, being alas! too true, on this occasion; Luke 4.21.
(...), this day, is this Scripture fulfilled in our ears: as if that first
Genesis 3.15.
enmity sown by the old serpent, (known to the vulgar by his [cloven] foot)
betwixt the two seeds; spawned in the infancy of the Creation, and nonage of
the Church; ran still, as tainted blood, in the veins of succession, and
strove, as Diotrephes, for an ambitious 3. Epist. Joh. 9.
pre-eminence; even in this dotage of the world; which is not, sure, more full
of the Mundus senescent patitur [phantasias]; Gerson.
fancy, than of morosity, and waspish discords.

Lord! what unnatural jars are here? as once between the Genesis 25.22.
struggling Twins of Rebeckah, in the same womb of one, and the same mother,
the Church: we are brethren, I confess, one to the other; Fratres uterini,
Brethren, from the womb, (...), having one Father, in heaven, and one mother,
upon earth; (for, he who has not the Habere jam non potest Deum patrem, qui
Ecclesiam non habet matrem. S. Cyprian, de unitat. Ecclesiae, Sect. 5.
Church, for his Mother, on earth, has not God, for his Father, in heaven, as
S. Cyprian truly) and yet, (which is not more the misery, than the shame of
Christians) how seems one estranged, in affection, from another, more than ever
Jews, and Samaritanes; of whom we read, in the Gospel, that they might not Ioh.
4.9.
converse: as if that tender Spouse of Gods own Son, characterized to us by her
one-nes, Cant. 6.9. enblematized by that glorious Metropolis of Judea,
Jerusalem, (a City, says the Psalm. 122 3.
Psalmist, built as one compacted, and at unity within it self) had now, like
Tamar, teemed an issue; which, as Pharez, makes rude Genesis 38.29.
breaches through her sides: lo! in their Music, naught but divisions, and,
in those divisions, endless parts: Quae gens, quae regio tulit, tam multa
dictu gravia, perpessu aspera, quam hodie nos? was once the just complaint of
Just. Lipsius, l. 2. c. 20. de Constant.
Lipsius; this is a sore grievance, and where is he, who can enough bewail it?
Non enim parts solum inter nos sunt, sed partium (o patria, quae salus te
servet?) novae parts; Our divisions being like to a Mathematical line, Semper
divisibiles in semper divisibilia; or indeed, like to S. Paul's condemned
Genealogies, or, King David's daily Troubles, 1 Timothy 1.4.
endless, and Psalm. 40.12.
innumerable: how much better were it for one Christian with another, to be, as
is observed of Saul, and Jonathan; who were lovely, and pleasant in their
lives, and in their death, they were not 2 Samuel 1.23.
divided? They should not be, as that Angel, at the poole of Bethesda, who
moved not, save only to Ioh. 5.4.
[trouble] the waters; but rather, as those Armies of them above in heaven,
Revel. 19.14. of whom S. John relates, that they followed the Word, upon white
horses, clothed in fine linen, white, and clean; they followed, not on foot,
says Barradius, l. 8. c. 19. concord. Evang. p. 447. D.
Barradius, in a slow pace; but, on horseback, in velocity, and Equus soli
sacer, apud Persas, and mactari solitus: in Graecos idem mos translatus, ut
Pausanias scribit, in Laconicis: quadrigae etiam eidem antiquitus dicatae,
velut (...). ut verba sunt Heliodori Aethiopic. 10. -- vide Seldom. de Diis
Syris, Syntag. 2. p. 2. 3.
swiftness; in fine [linen], to denote the clearness of their intentions, not
in the [linsy-wolsy] of double mindedness; in [white], the emblem of
Innocence; and in [clean] linen, without the spots of any secret, or close
impuritie; without the rents, and rags of Division: for, lo! as [Armies], they
troop [together], as in one band; much like to that flock of sheep, whereto the
teeth of the Spouse are resembled, Cant. 4.2. that came up from the washing
[even shorne].

For this, its worth our notice, how our Savior (who was, in prophecy,
forestiled the Isa. 9.6.
Prince of Peace) chose that time, (being the eternal Word of God) to be Ioh.
1.14.
made flesh, and to come into the world; when as the Emperor Augustus shut up
the doors of (...), Plut. -- vacuum duellis Ianum quirini clausit, Horat. --
Vide Barrad. l. 8. c. 16. p. 43. 5. D. etc. qua supra.
Janus Temple, and swayed the Monarchy of the world, in tranquillity, and
peace. The (...), or, the burden of the Angels Caroll, at his birth, was, as
well Peace on earth, as Glory to God in the highest, Luke 2.14. The subject of
his Sermons, afterward, was rest, and peace to the weary, and troubled, Matthew.
11.28. when he sent abroad his disciples to preach, he would not let them carry
gold, nor silver, nor brass, nor scrip, along with them, Matthew. 10.9. that
they might not have, as S. S. Ambr. ad cap. Mat. 10.
Ambrose notes thereupon, matter of falling out in the way, no nor staves,
verse the tenth, ut eriperet instrumentae ultionis, to deprive them (in case
they should differ) of a means of revenge: it was the first branch of their
Commission, into whatsoever house they entered, to say first, Peace be to this
house, Luke 10.5. Pax, quae praesentes sociat, absentes invitat, in the gloss
of Chrysolog. ser 138. p. 586.
Chrysologus; Peace, which is the glue, or soder, to conjoyn men present;
Peace. which is the load stone, to draw men absent: in short, peace was that
legacy, which he (as the map of the whole worldfull of his other favors)
bequeathed, on his last Will, and Testament, to his dear disciples; saying,
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, Joh. 14.27. After his
Resurrection, finding them together, he came, and stood in the midst amongst
them, and said, Peace be unto you, Luke 24.36. This was Christ's practice: And
now, as S. S. Bern. medit. and S. Cyp. l. de zelo. and livore, Sect. 10.
Christi [nomen] induere, and non per Christi [viam] pergere, quid aliud, quam
praevaricatio est divini nominis?
Bernard excellently, Operae pretium est, ut, sicut sumus haeredes nominis, ita
simus and imitatores sanctitatis; Its very meet, that as we all inherit the
name, so should we also imitate the sanctity of Christ, sutably unto that of
Ignatius, (...), it is convenient, not only to be [called] but (that which
alone can render us truly happy) to [be] Christians: and, as it was said of
Hippocrates, and Sosander, (two, who were nearly related) whose professions
corresponded not unto their Names; for, the one comprizing, in his Name, an
horse, the other, a man; The first of these, Hippocrates, was a great
Physician, and cured men; the second, Sosander, skilled better, to cure horses;
which thing a third observing; for shame, sirs, said he, Plutarch.
(...), either change your names, or alter your professions: For this, that
good Emperor Theodosius finding one Demophilus, a Christian, and a Prelate, to
be [contentious], told him plainly; Si tu pacem fugis, ego te ab Ecclesia
fugere mando; If thou fly peace, I Will make thee fly the Church: Our Apostle
here, verse the sixteenth of this Chapter, well assured him, that, if any man
did seem [ (...).
contentious], the Church of God [had] not, surely, [ought not] to have any
such Custom; and good reason, for if the thorns of strife be suffered to grow
up once among them; no marvel, if all thriving, by the means of grace, be
Matthew. 13.22.
choked in them.

And indeed, the main scope of S. Paul, in this text, is conceived to be, The
scope of the Text.
an acquainting the Corinthians of the cause of their non proficiencie by the
means of grace; and what the Reason was, that, when they came together, in the
Church, to partake the Supper of the Lord; yet they were still the worse, for
that holy, and salutiferous banquet, ver. 17. Now, the [cause], and withal,
the [signe] of that miscarriage, were those, intestine discords, and those
ill-hearing divisions, that' as some broken ulcers, or the running issues of an
impostumated body, he had heard to be both raised up, and too much fomented
among them, ver. 18. And the special inducement, that led the Apostle, and
father of their faith unto a likelihood, that his credulity of that report was
not wholly uncharitable was founded upon something [greater], that, of
necessity, [must] be in the Church; and that was heresy: For, if heresies,
which are the [greater] evil, [must] be; then schisms, and divisions [may] be;
but heresies [must] be; probable it was therefore also, that divisions might
be; For, so we read, First. of all, When ye come together in the Church, I hear
that there are divisions among you, and I partly believe it; For, there must be
also heresies among you, etc. And thus, as in a Landscape, ye have seen both the
aim, and the (...) of my Text; which by the key of Analyticall reason, may be
unlocked, and opened into a gallery, which leads us into two most fair, and
spacious rooms; plainly, it may be resolved into these two general parts.

1. An Imputation, verse. 18. That there were divisions among them. The Division
of the Text.
2. The Ground, or Reason of that Imputation, because there must be heresies.
The former of these, however I need not divide, (for that the words be, in
themselves, already full of divisions) yet, for order sake, I herein observe
these part culars.

1. The Crime it self imputed, There were divisions. 2. The place, where, or,
the Company among whom they arose; in the Church, and, among you. 3. The mean
of Information, by which S. Paul came to know it, Hearesay. 4. The Measure of
his Credulity, upon that Hearsay, He partly believed it.
In the latter, we have 1. The nature of heresies, what they are. 2. The
necessity of heresies, how they must be. 3. The place of heresies, where they
arise. 4. The use, or end of heresies, why they are permitted in the Church of
God.


These are the parts; in which, as in a piece of Arras displayed, I have showed
you the several pictures folded up in this Scripture: which, (were it happily
in a skilfuller hand) might yet be branch't out farther, and embroydered into
more variety, as some rich piece of Tyssue, wrought full of Demonstrations:
But, even thus we see, how this little 1 King. 18.44.
cloud of words, which in the first view, was but as that seen by Elijah's
servant, to be spanned by an hand, is now wombd-out, as it were, and swollen
into suller bottels; ready, (as King Davia's plentiful Psalm. 68.9.
rain), to be distilled; and to drop down into the ears, and hearts of you
(the Lords inheritance) to refresh them: In sum, ye have seen the measures of
my Sermon, and you Noble patience; daigne to favor me with the one, whilst I
am, by Gods blessing, in the dispatch of the other; I shall be as compendious,
as the majesty of the subject shall allow, in all: may the same hand, that
gave this opportunity, add also a success to this business: For, first of
all, when ye come together in the Church, I hear that there are divisions among
you, etc.

The first of these particulars, The first part.
the Crime imputed to these Corinth's charge, to wit, divisions; how gladly
could I wish them all from being the too-just occasion of my present discourse;
surely my desires are to have them sundred from all our practice, farther than
the East is from the West; and that the two ends of a Diameter might as soon
meet, or, the two poles be reconciled! But, since the Rev. 12.12.
shortness of Satan's kingdom has made him double his malice, and more
exasperated the Ephesians. 2.2.
children of disobedience, in whom he rules, unto dissentions; I shall be
forced to say something of them; and that, Non exclamantis studio, sed dolentis
affectu; Not, out of any desire I have, to declaim on the distempers of the
Age, but rather to declare my zealous sorrow for them: though, were I as
Jeremy, who is noted to have been (...), most full of passion; or, as S.
Gregory S. Gregor. Nazianz. (...). p. 2. Eton excus.
Nazianzene says of Isaiah, that he was (...), of a lofty, and a big
expression; yea, if I should lay Pelion upon Ossa, and make even mountains of
expressions; or, had more than Methuselah, even a breath like eternity; yet
were I never able, to set forth this evil, and this crying sin of the times;
either full, or loud, or long enough: however, I have resolved, with that poor
Mar. 12.42.
widow, to cast in a little, though but a mite, or two.

And, as that Luke 15.8.
woman in the Gospel, first lighted up her candle, ere she sought her groat; I
shall, first, say somewhat of the name; and, after that, of the thing it self;
according to that rule of the Stoique Epictetus, (...).

The word, (...), translated, in the Text, divisions, The nature of Schism
explained.
comes of a Greek original, derived (...), in the general notion thereof,
signifying any rent, or disunion, or separation of things combined, and united
together; so, Matthew. 9.16. If a new piece be put into an old garment, (...).
the schism; or the rent is made worse: Its from bodily things translated,
metaphorically, to denote disunion of minds, and affections; so Isidor. l. 8.
c. 3. Etymol.
Isidore, Nomen Schismatis a scissura [animorum] est: and thus, in a latitude
of sense, (according to the diversity of the contrary unions) it has a
various acception. There is consent, there is concord, there is peace; each
differ from other: Consent we call unity in judgment; Concord, unity of will,
and desire; Peace, quiet, and calm conversation, a life void of janglings, and
free from tumults: There may be consent, without concord; there may be concord,
without consent; there may be peace, without both; that is to say, men may
agree in their opinion, and yet differ in their desires; they may dissent in
opinion, and desires, and yet live in peace; S. Paul, and Barnabas; S. Austin,
and Hierome, were of different judgments; yet brake not out into public, or
any notorious violations of charity: This premised, schism sometimes denotes,
at large, [any] disunion in judgment, or opinion, in will, or affections; but,
more strictly, it signifies separation from the [unity] of the Church of God,
as Thom. 2.2. qu. 39. Art. 1. in Corp. confer Dr. Field, li. 3. c. 5. of the
Church.
Aquinas exactly; whether the disunion be inward, in mind, or affection; or
outward, in external society, and communion: When the kingdom of Israel
(which, under David, was one Politic, and civil Body) was, afterward,
parted, and divided, twixt Rehoboam, and Jeroboam; that was a civil Schism, a
rent made in the Politic Body; when Jews, and Samaritanes were so far dworced
in affections, that they endured no commerce each with other; that was a
schism grown, upon point of Religion: Again, there is, says Pet. Martyr, loc.
com. elass. 4. c. 6 Sect. 3.
Peter Martyr, a double schism, Bonum, and malum; a warrantable, and lawful;
a criminal, and a sinful separation: of the first sort was that of faithful
Abraham, when he separated from the Idolatrous Astrologers of Chaldea; It is,
when the unity, that is broken, is evil, then the division is good: on the
other side, when the unity is good, the separation is evil: Its evil unity,
that is in evil, and that criminal unity is forbidden; Simeon, and Levi, were
brethren in iniquity; into their secret, let not my soul enter, says good
Jacob, Genesis 49.6. To the same purpose, King Solomon, Prove. 1.10. My son, if
sinners entice thee, consent thou not; for, even briars and thorns will be
twisting one in the other, and shall, at last be bound up together, in bundles,
for the fire.

And indeed, says a reverend Bish Morton, Grand impost. c. 15. these. 4. Sect.
26.
Father of our Church; amongst men there are many unjust unities: there is Vnio
Leonina, an union of compulsion, and terror; there is unio vulpina, a
combination of craft, and cunning; there is unio Asinina, an union of
simplicity, or silliness, when poor Ignaro's hang together; but only as
creatures that follow in the drove, not knowing whither they are hurried: our
Romanists boast much of their Unity, or consent in Doctrine; yield it to be as
great, as may be; but whilst it is, by See Bishop Hall, Dec. 6. Epist. 4.
consequent, [ Dr. Sclat. on 1 These. p. 201.
against] the Gospel, it is no note of the Church; even in hell is a kind of
unity, Matthew. 12.25
Satan is not divided against himself: True union we call only that, which is
only in Gods truth, and for Truth's sake; otherwise, as S. Hilar. Pictav. l.
ad Constan. August. -- (...). Isido. Pelusiot. li. 3. Epist. 246.
Hilary says, Per speciosum pacis nomen, in unitatem perfidiae subrepimus; it
is not union of faith, but of perfidiousnesse, nor Christian communion, but
Antichristian conspiracy, and conjuration: There was an union among the body
of the ten Tribes, in the worship of Ieroboam's idolatrous Calves; They, who
under Hezekiah, and Josiah, separated from that society, and joined with Gods
people, in the pure worship at Jerusalem; their separation was good, for the
unity was evil: There was in the Church of Rome, (after that Vide Fran. Mason.
l. 2. c. 10. p. 167. nu. 7. de Minister. Anglicano.
Bethel, by a filthy degenerating, became a Bethaven) an unity, or conspiracy
rather, in damnable error: Luther, (whom yet Albertus Crantzius advised rather
unto a praying [for] than to the hopes [of] a reformation) he, with his
adherents, was by them condemned for schism, because they separated; howbeit
their separation was holy, for the unity was evil: Now, on the other side,
criminal schism is, when the unity is good, and in things good, commanded, or
permitted; yea, though it be with evil men, warily understood: so our Savior
himself, and his disciples, communicated with Scribes, and Pharisees, in the
sacrifices, and other services of the Temple, the [things] themselves were
good, and commanded; though some of the [persons] evil, that used them: hence
that Maxim, in Theology, Bonitas Ministri non est de essentia Sacramenti, sed
de convenientia, as Rayner, de Pisis, tom. 1. Pantheolog. c. 4. de Baptism. p.
210. 211.
Raynerius has it; the goodness, in these holy things, depends on the
virtue of Gods own immediate institution, and his divine ordination; not, on
the dignity of the person, whosoever administers them; though indeed, the
piety, and devotion of the Minister be a great [convenience] to the ordinance
it self; for, we read how, (through the misprision of the vulgar) for the lewd
conversation of Eli's sons, the very 1. Sam. 2.12.
sacrifice it self began to be abhorred: and yet, the spot of an impure hand
cannot discolor the beauty of Gods mysteries; no more, says S. Gregory S.
Greg. Nazian. Orat. 40.
Nazianzene, than the image of an Emperor, cut with art, in a signet, whether
of gold, or iron, can, by its impression, alter the matter, or the nature of
the wax, upon which its stamped.

There is, in the Church of Rome, retained See Dr. Prideaux, now Bishop of
Worcester, Sermon. styled [Ephesus backsliding] p. 12. on Revel. 2.4.
truth, in sundry Articles of faith, as, of the Trinity, of the Incarnation,
etc. Its no heresy, to conform in judgment, no not with those very
Antichristians, where they consent in truth: In the Church of England, we have
(God be blessed) purity of sound doctrine, and of the worship of God; what, if
some unsound for their particular persons, communicate with us herein? shall
we, as Brownifts, Neque propter [paleam] relinquam [aream] Domini, nec propter
pis^es malos rumpimus retia Domini, non enim propter malos boni deserendi. sed
propter bonos mali tolerandi sunt -- sicut toleraverunt Prophetae, etc. S.
August. epist. 48. -- confer Bp: Hall, Apology against Brownists, Sect. 4. and,
7.23.33.57. ib.
separate? we may be present with them, after that rule of S. Prosper, Spe
correctionis, non consensu malignitatis; in hope to amend them, out of the love
of compassion; not to allow their malignity, by an erroneous approbation: Hold
faith with the worst heretic, where his faith is sound; not indeed, I
confess, for the sake of the heretic, but merely for the love of the faith:
hold worship with the worst Idolater, where (for that Act) the worship is pure;
Communion in word, in Sacraments, in Prayers, with worst men; for, herein the
unity is good, the things themselves being allowed, and commanded by God;
therefore the schism, or the separation were evil: Even Rome, is a Calvin. li
4 ca. 2. Sect. 12.
Church still, says Calvin, but a beastly Harlot, intoxicated, and grown mad
with fornications; we See Bishop Morton, c. 15. Grand Impost. Sect. 24. of the
true causes of our separation from Rome.
forsake her not, in what constitutes a Church, (namely, the Word, and
Sacraments) but in her filthy errors, and corruptions: Let her leave her
whoring with strange flesh, and with strange gods; (for, whilst she follows
such Ion. 2.8.
lying vanities, she forsakes her own mercy) and then [Fugati] potius, quam
[fugientes], a Roma corrupta secessimus; iterum, si sanari velir, regressuri ad
eam, ut ad sororem: vide D. Prideaux Lectur. 9. Sect. 17. de Visibil. Eccles.
-- confer Franc. Mason. l. 2. c. etc. 13. qua supra: -- Item, Petr. Martyr.
loc. com. class 4 c. 6. Sect. 48. -- and cap. 20. ib. -- Item, Zanchium, ca. 8.
de Ecclesia, inter Miscellan. and alios, etc.
[so far] as she keeps close to Christ, and to that first, ancient, and pure
faith, (so famous, in S. Paul's days, that it was mounted on the wings of
honor, and carried throughout the Romans 1.8.
world) so far, we shall not refuse to give her an hand of fellowship; But,
till then, the danger of familiarity may be less, in a Pesthouse: For, ever
since the fountains of pure waters failed upon the seven hills; (...), as the
Theocrit.
Poet has it, this grape is grown to a dry raisin; yea, she has pitched her
Tents, in Campo Martio, and turned Religion into quarrel; and, much like to
those Galli senones, of old, whom Luc. Florus, l. 1. c. 13. Hist.
Florus writes of, to be so full of cruelty, Vt plane nati ad hominum
interitum, and urbium stragem videantur; that they seem to have been born for
destruction, not of Cities only, but of souls. Wherefore, Apoc. 18.4.
come out of this whorish Babylon, my people, says the Lord, separate, lest,
by partaking in her sins, ye share also in her plagues; for it is become the
very sink of filthiness.

To shut up this point; we must remember, that what is thus spoken, for matter
of faith, and doctrine, holds also (rightly understood) for outward Rites, and
Ceremonies of order, and decency, in the Church of God: In those rites, that
are not simply unlawful, there is a lawful unity; there may be, yea, there
is, often times an unlawful separation; so the Schoolmen define, Schism to be,
[ Nicolaus de Orbellis, Did. 13. qu. 6. in quart. Sent.
illicitus] discessus, an [unlawfull] departure from the unity of the Church:
If any abuse a Rite, (indifferent in it self, and innocent) with a
superstitious, or perhaps idolatrous intention, [that] is their foul sin: May
not another use the [same] indifferent things, for decency, and order-sake
only; if that he do not use them [so], as those sinners did? We may do [ Dr.
Sclater, p. 276. and p. 392. on 1. Thessalon.
eadem], but not [ita]; Turpis est omnis pars, quae universo non congruit suo,
as S. Austin expressly.

And indeed, the very proper, adequate, and full object, about which Shcisme is
conversant, is, critically, matter of Via. Lambert Danaeum, in Proleg^m. ad S.
August. lib. de. (...)s. p. 12. etc. --
rite, and circumstance; as both Fathers, Schoolmen, and the most judicious
Moderns, (with whom I have consulted herein) jointly accord; schism, in this
verse, differing from heresy, in the next; in this; viz. Schismaticus est,
sacrilega discessione; Haereticus, sacrilego dogmate: S. August. l. 2. c. 9.
cont. Gaudent. and l. 9. Evang. secund. Matthew. -- confer Pet. Martyr, qua
supra, Sect. 1. p. 789. -- and Fr. Mason. l. 2. c. 10. p. 161. 163. -- Item,
Alex Hales. part. 2. qu 164. and Thom. 2a. 2ae. qu. 36. -- and Kellison, a
Papist, l. 2. c. 3. Sect. 5. Survey of the new Relig. and alios.
schism, is a breach of unity, in point of discipline, and of the external
worship of God; heresy, is a corruption, through new, and false opinions, (as
may appear hereafter) of the sincerity of faith, and of sound doctrine.

Lastly, for the close of this part, and the clear explication of the Text; we
must distinguish Schism, thus explained, into its kinds, or degrees: The one
is inchoate only, or partiaty, the other, pertinacious and consummate: The
first is, when the division stays in judgment, or affection alone, proceeding
not so far, as actual separation; or, if so, its from private, and friendly
familiarity only; not complete, or obstinate disunion from the public
communion in the worship of God: And of this partiary nature was the schism,
now charged by S. Paul, upon these Corinthians, in the Text; and this too, to
be meant, not of the whole Body of the Church of Corinth, at large; (for [that]
he commended highly, for conforming unto his ordinances delivered unto them,
verse. 2.) but, as Calvin, Cornelius a lapide, and Pet. Martyr. class. 4. c. 1.
Sect. 1. p. 741.
other judicious affirm,) of some particular straglers, justly to be reproved.

And thus far, of the explication of the nature of Schism, the crime imputed
by the Apostle, on this Church of Corinth: First of all, when ye come together
in the Church, I hear that there are [divisions] among you.

The next particular is the place, The second part.
where, or, if you will, the company, among whom, these schisms, and divisions
arose; and that was, In the Church; (...), When ye come together in the Church.

Divines, of several judgments, give us a several interpetation of this
passage: Beza, ad locum.
Beza, and those of his way, will have it meant, de sacro conventu; or, as some
Vide Goulartinus, Annotat, ad S. Cyprian. l. de Eleemosyn. number. 32.
others, to the same effect, express it, De Caetu fidelium, only of the
company of the faithful, who make up the mystical Church of Christ;
understanding the words, not of the [place], but of the [persons], who, as
those (...), as S. Peter calls them, as 1. Pet. 2.5.
living stones build up the spiritual house of God; Christ himself being the
chief stone of the Ephesians, 2.20.
corner: And, in this sense alone, the now renowned Pastor, and Reader of
Divinity, in Geneva, Freder. Spanhemius epist. Dedic. 3. part. Dub. Evang.
Ann. 1638. -- But since the preaching of this Sermon. I perceive, that some
would make him, in this true [Assertion], to speak only a [complement] as if
an irrefragable truth had stood in need of so poor an excuse.
Fredericus Spanhemius, (he, who, though only as a looker on, and as it were
aloof, blesses God for those eminent graces, that have, in all ages, since
the Gospel, shined in the eximious Bishops of this Church) he, I say, if we may
take it upon trust, will have the word [ See the contrary, Act. 19.39, 40.
Church], to be no otherwise meant, in the new Testament.

But yet, Theophylact, and all Greek Writers, generally expound it, in this
Text, of the material place of meeting; where the Saints of Corinth usually
assembled together, for receiving of the Sacrament, and other sacred, and
religious performances.

If we take it, in this latter Vbi proculdubio, Ecclesiae nomen [locum] quo
Ecclesia congregatur, fignificat. Durantus, de Ritibus Eccles. Cathol. l. 1. c.
1. p. 2.
sense; as indeed S. Paul, by ver. 20. seems to interpret it; saying, (with
the very same relations) When ye come together, (...), which both, in Act. 2.1.
and here, is, by the Genevians themselves, rendered, in their own Bible, by
[into one, and the same [ See 1 Cor. 14 23.
place]: and ver. 22. taking the abuse of the [Church], by their (...), or
banquets, (though of love); he seems to contra-distinguish it unto their own
So verse 34. If any man hunger, let him eat, at [home.]
houses of habitation; which were much more meet for feasting, and
entertainment, than the Church, a place consecrate, and set apart for only
sacred, and divine refreshments; whereof that of eating the Lords Supper was a
principal: Thus if we interpret it, of the place, we may note; Hebr. 10.25.
this same Apostle excites them, to a frequentation of their (...), or
assembling of themselves together, by which Estius, ad Heb. 10.25.
Estius himself confesses, the Greek Expositors to have relation to some
places of Gods worship, where these Saints should meet, and come together.

I know its quaered among the learned, whether, till the days of Constantine
the great, namely, about 300. years from Christ, the Christians had any
Churches built up, or not? That which gave hint to the dubitation, is that
known objection of Heathens, against those Christians, who labored to convert
them, extant in Minutius Felix, and other Ancients; Non habetis Templa, non
Altaria; They had no temples, wherein to worship that God invisible, whom, they
said, they served? For answer, its most certain; that, in the Apostles days,
besides the Temple of Jerusalem; (which stood, till Titus, and Vespasian, the
Roman Emperors, surprised, and wasted it, nigh 40. years from Christ, as
Josephus, li. 7. belli Judaici, confer Cent. 1. li. 2. c. 14.
Josephus calculates); Eusebius. l. 9. c. 10. and Polydo. Virg. li. de Invent.
rerum. c. 6.
open, garnished Churches they had none; because the very name of Christianity
was so odious to the Emperors of those days, and (to use the language of that
time,) that [Sect] so every where spoken against, Act. 28.22. that, in stead
of being (as they should have been) Isa. 49.23.
nursing Fathers unto the Church, they proved rather, as Wolves, to fright,
yea, to dilaniate, and tear in pieces the flock of Christ: Nero, he began the
fray, and was, as Tertullian styles him, Tertul. ca. 5. Apologet.
Dedicator damnationis; unto him succeeded Domitian, and so the rest of those
scarlet Tyrants, onwards, until the times of Dioclesian, and Maximian, who rid
the Empire with more loose reigns, than some others of the sormer did; and
with rowels of [longer] cruelty, as Eusebius, and Eutropius inform us, so
spurred the sides, yea, gored the very bowels of it; that, except they meant to
found a Church in blood, they could not build: But, when there were (as God was
pleased to dart some gleames of ease through the blackest cloud of persecution)
some Lucida intervalla opened; they re-attempted the same work: so Rodolph.
Hospin. de Origin. Templor. part. 1. c. 6.
Hospinian assures us, that, under Severus, Gordianus, Philippus, and Galienus,
Churches began to be erected by Christians; (for what Ethniques called Templa,
says Pamelius, in Annot. ad S. Cyprian, li. de Eleemosyn. number. 32.
Pamelius, Christians styled See Hooker l. 5. p. 205. Ecclesiast, Polity, and
Sir Hen. Spelman.
(...)) but they were soon again demolished by Dioclesian: At length, that
famous Christian Emperor, (with whose birth our Baronius, An. 306. nu. 16.
Britain was enobled), Constantine the great, as an Orient star arose; and
he, not only as a Physician, to heal the wounds of the Saints themselves; but
also, as a Repairer of the breaches, made, by foregoing Tyrants, in the places
of their solemrie meeting. Not, but that they had [before], Conventicula, as
Arnobius, l. 4. contra Gent. versus finem.
Arnobius calls them, in quibus summus oratur Deus; they had (...), as Eusebius.
li. 7. c. 1.2.3.
Eusebius styles them; that is, places of coming together, Oratories, and
houses of worship, to perform the rites of their Religion in; But, all this
time, those houses were more humble, than magnificent: Beauty being the badge
of opulency, and See my Lo. Primate of Armagh, l. 9. Sect. 17. de Successione
Eccles. Christ.
ornament, of prosperity.

All which I have observed, on this occasion, to express, how welcome
joynt-devotion has ever been unto the God we serve; The effectual, fervent
prayer of a righteous man, though but one alone, avails [much], Jam. 5.16.
but, when two, or three, a [number] meet together, in one place of worship, and
those also [unanimiter] orantes, as S. S. Cyprian. l. de Unit. Eccle. Sect. 11.
Cyprian glosseth on it; praying in unity, and unanimity; variety of hearts,
and voices making up one sweet consort, and harmony of devotion; lo! says
Thom. 1^.2^. qu. 102. Art. 4.
Aquinas, orationes ibi fiunt magis [exaudibiles], ex devotione orantium; The
prayers become [more audible] in the ears of God, yea, it brings down the
Lord from heaven, after a sort, into the very midst among them, Matthew. 18.20.

We then, my brethren, enjoying more open freedom, and ampler beauty, (though
indeed, as S. S. Bern. de Templo, fol. 110. G. Deus magis diligit puras mentes,
quam superauratos parietes.
Bernard truly, Psalm. 93.5.
inward holiness becomes best the house of [that] God, Qui non tam politis
marmoribus, quam ornatis moribus delectatur, who is more delighted with the
ornament of morality, than with the best Psa. 144.12
polished corners of an outward Temple) we, I say, obteining more liberty of
access unto the places of Gods public worship, which our primitive
forefathers See Heb. 11.38.
wanted: though their zeal to build up Churches, and to endow them too, out-ran
ours, as Ahimaaz did Cushi, for they went by the way of the [ 2 Samuel 18.23.
plain]; they being, like Jacob, under the old Testament, Genesis 25.27.
[plain] men; unacquainted with the dark Meanders of cunning, and
deceiveablenesse; oh let not us neglect the means of our so great salvation;
nor forsake the assembling of our selves together, in the places of Gods holy
worship, as the manner of some was, even in S. Paul's time, Hebr. 10.25.

And, when we do See Eccles. 5.2.1.
approach that place, where the Lord professes, that, in a special manner,
his Psalm. 26.8.
honor dwells; let us say, as old Jacob did of Bethel, Quam reverenda sunt
haec loca! Genesis 28.17. surely, the Lord is in this place, and how dreadful is
it? this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
Such holy meditations would make us all abhor that swinish heresy of the
Fratricellians, who, as Turrecremata li. 4. c. 11. and 37. do Eccles.
Turrecremata says, asserted, Ecclesiam non plus valere ad orandum, quam
Porcorum stabulum; that a Church was of no more esteem, or value for devotion,
than was a swinestie; an opinion best suting to the devotion of the brutish
Author: This meditation also would make our stomachs rise against that
sacrilegious thought of all those cruel Edomites, that cry out nothing, but,
Psalm. 137.7.
Down with them, down with them, even to the ground: yea rather, we should,
with that man, 1. Sam. 13.14.
after Gods own heart, be Psalm. 122.1.
glad, and rejoice, when we go up to the house of the Lord; And, when we are
there, to pray for grace, to the Psalm. 65.2.
hearer of prayer, in that Matt. 21.13.
House of prayer, to serve God acceptably, with Heb. 12.28.
reverence, and godly fear: which service of so [great] a God, we shall then,
indeed, make most acceptable; when, as Ignatius, Epist. ad Magnes.
Ignatius, in much zeal exhorted his Magnesians, (...), we do all jointly
together, as one man; or, as Peter, and John to the Sepulcher, run Ioh. 20.4.
[together] in unity, to the house of the Lord: our coming together, otherwise,
into one place, may prove, like to that of these Corinthians, in the 17. verse
of this Chapter, not for the better, but for the worse; namely, because there
were [divisions] among them, even in the very [Church] it self; for so is the
Text, First of all, when ye come together in the [Church], I hear that there
are [divisions] among you.

And thus much has been spoken of this [Church,] in the Text, as the Greek
Expositors understand it, of the [place] of Gods worship.

Now, if we interpret it, with other learned Divines, not, of the place; but,
of the [person] even of the company of the faithful, (...).
called into the unity of one faith, by one Gospel, and one Spirit; and that,
among his company, in this Church of God, (called, and 1 Cor. 1.2.
sanctified, as these Corinth's were) there were Schisms, and Division, found;
we may note; Cor. 4.14. still, Brethren, 2 Cor. 13.11. the Apostle had respect
unto Gods testimony, Act. 18.11. who assured him, that he had much people, in
Corinth.

Know moreover, says Pet. Martyr, loc. com. class. 4. c. 1. Sect. 1. and p.
ib. 74^. Ecclesiam, non tollunt dissidia
Peter Martyr judiciously, Non ob quamcunque maculam Christi Ecclesiam ita
excidere, ut Dei non amplius appelletur; Every little blemish, in the face of a
Church, cannot cut off a Church from being Gods; no more, than a man molested
by an ulcer, or a sore, does cease, for [that] alone, to be a man: in S.
Gregory Nazianzen days, their were 600 errors, in the Church; do these, any
ways, derogate from the truth, and worth of Christian Religion? The Church,
Cant. 6.10 is resembled to the Moon, which, ye know, when it is most radiant, and
full of luster, shines but in a borrowed light; and still, some blots remain
indeleble therein, even incapable of any illumination; the costliest vesture
may take a rent; which rent may be repaired, without the utter abjection of the
garment even as some one tile, or more, misplaced, or shaken, or grown loose,
in the housetop, must not forth with occasion the taking down of the whole
roof, or contignation.

Neque vero (...) est Ecclesia Dei, que infuscari labe aliqua non possit, aut
non interd^m egeat instanratione; as that Juel. Apol. p. 95. vol. 16.
Jewel of his time, (a Prelate of immortal memory) says divinely: why are the
Apostles, and their successors, styled Ioh. 10.12.
Shepherds, and C^nt. 3.3.
Watchmen, and Matthew. 9.12.
Physicians if there are no sheep apt to 1 Pet. 2.25.
straggle, and need recalling; if no woolfe, to worrie the flock; no lamb,
that aileth ought, or needs an healing; Believe it, my beloved Christians, the
Church militant here below, on earth, shall never be without some wrinkles of
imperfections, and spots of infirmity; till she becomes completely, (...), a
glorious Church triumphant, above in heaven, Ephesians. 5.27. Coelum ipsum nulla
serenitas tam celatu purgut, ut hon alicujus nubeculae flocculo resignetur, as
Tertul. l. 1. c. 5. contr. Nationes.
Tertullian elegantly; in the clearest serenitie of the firmament, some
specking cloud may be discovered; as that mole was, in the very face of Venus;
or a foil nigh set to some precious Diamond.

Those Begardi, and Beguina, in Alemania, are justly, therefore, by Alphonsus a
Castro, adver. Haeres. li. 3. fol. 217. E.
Alphonsus a Castro, condemned, as idle dreamers, and Heretics, who asserted
apossibility of an absolute perfection of Beatitude, atteinable, even in this
life; whereas, indeed, faith the devout S. Multum in hac vita ille profecit,
qui, quam long sit a perfectione justitiae, proficiendo cognovit, S. August.
de spir. and lit. c. 36. -- confer. Fulgent. l. 1. ad Monimum, p. 20. etc.
Austin, the best Christians perfection consists alone in this; to see, and to
acknowledge his Vide Joh. Vossium, these. Theolog. De bonis oseribus, p. 60. 61.
etc. it. ib. p. 564. 565. these. 7. and p 579. 580 these. 12. de virtu^ Gentil.
-- See Arr. 26. of the Church of England: Confer Bp. Usher. c. 2. p. 20. etc.
7. p. 66. of the Irish Resig. and D. Field, l. 1. c. ^ etc. 16.18. of the
Church, and Bp. Hall, holy obser. 88 l. 1. and D. Rainolds, conclus. 5. against
quaest. 1. p. 5. 6. 7. and qu. 8. p. 43 and qu. 29. p. 132. edit. Cantab. Ann.
1634. and Mr. Reynolds, Medit. on the Lords Supper, c. 3. p. 7. 12. 13. 14. and
infinite others.
imperfection; or, in S. S. Bern. Epist. 253. fol. 262.
Bernards expression, Indefessum proficiondi studium, and jugis c^n^tus ad
perfectionem, perfectio reputatur; An unwearied N^h. 1.11.
desire of, and constant Phil. 3.14.
endeavor after perfection, is, interpretative, in Gods esteem, perfection it
self: And indeed, what Saint is he, who shall not be forced, often, to
acknowledge; that, when he labors most to fasten his cogitations upon God, he
finds not his mind unsteadie; and to be, even as when we look upon a star
(as one compates it) through an optique glass, with a palsey-shaking hand; its
long, c're we can bring our minds, to have ken of him and to place our eyes
upon him; and when we have come to that; how do our hands shake, and soon loose
the sight again or, if ye will, it fares with the mind, in this, as it does
with one, that windeth up an Instrument; that, as often the pegs Qui non sentit
malae concupiscentiae [Renitentia^] in honis suis actionibus, hune ego nullaw
bona^ actionem unquam fecisse sentio^ Bp. Davenant of Salisbury, quaest. 10. p.
52. qua supra.
slip between our fingers, whilst we are in winding of them up; so do our
very best thoughts, whilst they are in raising up themselves, unto a
contemplation of heaven.

Surely, men even the holiest, whilst they live [in] the flesh, have some Dr.
Rainolds against Heart, c. 1. divis. 2. p. 9.
contagion, [of] the flesh: sin, that Romans 7.24.
body of death, as a Jebusite in Canaan, will not out, universally, of the
coasts of our natures, till the death of the body: wherefore, that same Vide
Bishop Usher, Primar. Armachan. p. 225 226. etc. de Britan, Eccles. Primord.
(...), and that same (...), Impassibilitie, and, as S. Hierome renders it,
impeccancie; were the Dalilah's of that damned Heretic Pelagius, long since,
justly exploded from all Christian, and modest cares: it is with the primest
Saint upon earth, in respect of grace, and corruption, as with an instrument
strung with two strings; the one made of the gut of a lamb; the other, of a
woolf, fidibus lupi male obstrepunt agninae, saithwitty Cardan; the one makes
an harsh jarring against the other.

Even those very Cedars of the Church received, once, a shock; Paul, and
Barnabas, I mean, (whom yet the Lystrians, for the admirable graces so
resplendent in them, thought to have been Act. 14.11.
Gods come down from heaven, in the similitude of men) even those great
Apostles jarred; and had, sometime, most sharp [contentions] among themselves,
Act. 15.39. yea, even S. Peter himself, that rock for his faith, was yet
withstood, as worthy of blame, to the very face, by the same Apostle, Galat.
2.11.(...)

Truly made king Solomon the comparison of the Church, Cant. 2.2. to a lilly
among [thorns]; if she be a lilly, lovely to look upon, by the eyes of her
mystical Husband Christ; yet, living, or seated among [thoms], she may be torn,
and rent into a Schism: It was no wonder then, that here, among the very
[Saints] in Corinth, (chiefly, when, as yet, but [weak] in faith, and [babes]
in Christ, not totally uncarnalized, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3.) there arose divisions.

And yet, those private Schisms, in a [few], could not dischurch the City of
[all] the Saints; for howbeit, there were divisions among [some] of them; yet
were they still, [for the main body of them] a dear, and solid Church of God.
And thus much of the explication of my second particular; namely, the place,
where; or, if ye will, the company, among whom, divisions did arise; even in,
and among the [Church] of Corinth; For, so is the Text; First of all, when ye
come together, in the [Church], I hear, that there are divisions among you.

Follows next the mean, The 3. part.
whereby the Apostle came to know there were divisions among them; it was by
Heresy, (...), I hear so: And withal, the measure of his credulity, upon
that heresy; (...), I [partly] believe it: both of these I shall fold up, in a
compendious discourse together; that I may hasten unto that, which is the life
of a Sermon; the Application of this first General.

And first of the mean of his information, Hear say; [hear], there are
divisions among you: We see here, how the Pilote, that now steered the Apostle
unto this charge of Schism, upon Corinth, was an holy prudence, and
discretion; he made not his own brain the mint, wherein to coin so high a
taxation; nor his heart the shop, in which to forge it; but, he took it upon
[report], and, as Estius, ad 1. Cor. 1.11.
Estius well observes; lest they might surmise, he was some zealous Camelion, to
feed his credulity, only on the air of rumor, or of uncertain bruits, at
large; he names the household of Cloe, 1 Cor. 1.11. a Christian, and a godly
Matron, in the City, not more eximious for devotion, than fidelity; as if,
what S. John advised of spirits, S. Paul observed in fames; he would not 1 Ioh.
4.1.
believe every report; but try them first, whether they were of truth, or not.

And when he had done thus; The 4. part.
he would not neither be a sponge, to suck in all without a difference; and so
to sponge with vinegar, and gall, or, to shoot out the arrows of bitter words,
and of a virulent invective against them all; but lo! he carried a Chancery
within his own breast, to mitigate the rigor of common hearsay, with equal
candor, and favorable interpretations; (...), he did but partly believe it.

Which practice of the Apostle should be the mould for all moderate, and wise
Christians, Rules to direct charity, in the point of Reports.
to cast the order of their own credulity (for matter of criminal imputation)
in, to as that charity be not impeached.

The Rules are these.

Cor. 13.5. Charity thinks not evil; (...), it devises not evil, is not the
first projector, or contriver of it: unlike to those vindictive Enginers, Jer.
20.10. who, by an ungodly arietation, [devised] how to batter the reputation of
the holy Prophet, and to lay the honor of his good name, in dust, and ruin;
Report, say they, and we will report it; peradventure, he will be entised and
we (though by our very lies) may yet prevail against him; yea, take our full
revenge upon him: Lord! what cruel murderers were these, thus to stab the
holy Prophet absent? allowing him no life, without the death of his good name;
in the mean time, never anatomizing, or opening their own ulcerous insides; or,
asking with those soldiers, Luke 3 14. And what shall [we] do? but, as those
Grecians, in Suidas.
Suidas, who were wont to write, whether with ink, or blood, on a glass, and
so to set it against the Moon, when it was at full and brightest; and so those
spots, that were in the glass, they would make to be in the Moon; In like
sort, do some envious persons, (such, as, in the expression of Theophr. in
Charac.
Theophrastus, labor of a (...), which the learned Casaubon renders by,
Famigeratores, or, as Plautus in Trinummo.
Plantus, are goruli figuli) they make those blurs, which passion, or
discontent, (both of which, often, either utterly break the bars, or lift the
door of reason off the hinges) occasion, to be in him, who is maligned; such
are not much unlike that Theban Crates, in Laertius, who was nicknamed, (...) a
doore-opener, because he used to rush into every other man's house, and there to
find our faults; but like those hags, or fairies, (called Lamiae) though they
saw well abroad, and can ask, as S. Peter once did curiously about S. John,
21.21. And, what shall [this] man do? yet they put up their eyes in boxes, when
they come at home; becoming like Calisto, in the Poet, who being metamorphosed,
by Juno, into a Bear; yet could she never perceive, or see her own deformity:
This makes so many prodigal, and lavish of their neighbors reputation, and to
hang up their good names, as it were, in chains at their own doors: whereas,
indeed, good name is, and ought to be as dear to all good men, as is the
precious life it self; Qui fidens Conscientiae suae negligit famem suam,
crudelis est, as S. S. Aust. de diverse. Ser. 49.
Austin sweetly; He is, after a sort, an (...), as I may style him, a
sui-Timon, a self-man-hater; who so far leans on the staff of his good
conscience [within] him, that he neglects the bulwark of his good name
[without] him: Propter nos, conscientia nostra sufficit nobis, propter vos,
fama nostra non pollui, sed pollexe debet in vobis, says the same Father; A
clean conscience, indeed, may, as that costly spikenard of Mary Magdalene, Joh.
12.3. sill, with its fragrant odor, the whole house of the soul [within]
doors; but, believe it, brethren, the good See Dr. Sclater, on 1 These. p. 156.
157. -- and p. 305. -- 551. 552. confer Mr. Edw. Reinolds, on Psalm. 110. p.
475. 476.
name is that, which, as King Solomon's ointment, Can. 1.3. (far more precious,
than the gold of Ophir) is poured forth abroad, perfuming with its good savor,
all such as are [without] us, or that wish us well: wherefore, our Apostle
here, as, he endeavored to have (...), an inoffensive conscience toward [God],
Act. 24 16. so withal, he studied to provide things honest, and of good
report, before all [men] too, Romans 12.17. and Phil. 4.8. And, for this cause,
he would not [create] a scandal on the Church of Corinth; but entertained the
noise of a schism in it, on a fair report; so is the Text, (...), I [hear],
that there are divisions among you.

that there should be schisms, for there [must] be heresies: Its a most
satanicall evil, maliciously to devise [impossible] things, that thou might
accuse thy brother.

ver. 20, 21. their schism [appeared] openly, through too great siding, and
contempt of weaker brethren.

Fourthly, because, in never so manifest facts; there may be, notwithstanding,
some circumstances of extenuation; its a safe way, still to hope the best, and
rather to chuso, to believe too little, than too much, for, where too much
charity has, as Saul, slain its thousands; too little has, as David, slain
its ten thousands.

An exhortation, in this age of ours, (I had almost said also, in this
Metropolis of ours) most opportune, and seasonable: For were it to be wished,
that we could more tenderly, and with this Apostolical prudence, handle the
reputation of our brethren; chiefly of [Ministers]; for, of all the horrible
offenses, that boded ruin, and desolation to that City of God, Jerusalem; this
one alone is mentioned, as the model, and the sum of all, (after which,
destruction was inevitable) namely, the abusing, and the killing, and the
stoning of Gods Messengers, and of his Prophets, that were sent unto them, for
to save their souls; when once those holy instruments of their conversion
became contemptible, and an ungracious by word; behold! then, there was no more
Remedy; Jerusalem's house is left unto her desolate, Matthew. 23.37. compare 2 Chronicles. 36.16. but yet, with greater specialty, beware we, how we slander
[whole] Churches, and the governors thereof, without distinction; S. Paul's
aspersion was but only of some [few] particulars, in Corinth; the main [body]
of them was still unblemished.

And yet, who sees not, now too many, (but, the best is, store of those many
are but like to loose teeth, in a man's head, though troublesome, yet useless)
how do they, by the purulent excreations of their corrupt lungs, (found upon
their libellous, abusive, and irreligious pamphlets; by which, as that Fly, in
the lable, upon the axle-tree; they fancy that they have raised up a mighty
dust, and made a smother) odiously bespawle the beauteous face of our dear
Mother, the Church of England; whose two breasts (the two blessed Testaments)
she being far more uberous, and free of her duggs, (then was that Isis
mammosa of the Egyptians) offer themselves, so freely, to be jointly sucked by
us all.

What one point is there of her Doctrine, or of her Discipline, which she
maintains; I say not, what this, or that particular man [inventeth] but, what
she, her self, [maintaineth]; that has not been confirmed, and besprinkled,
and even enamelled with the very precious pearls of the blood of the blessed
Saints, (our own dear Countrymen and Forefathers) as ever held up innocent
hands to God?

Let not, oh let not that pearl of prejudice be [ever], in the eye of any your
judgments, or mis-conceit; so that, rather for defect of will, then otherwise,
ye cannot view the decency, and order which (as sweet, and goodly flowers,
hung in the Chaplet of Reformation) do so much grace, and beautify a Church.
S. S. Augu. Epist. i 91. confer Bp Juel against Harding, p. 291. 292.
Austin, I acknowledge, once complained, that the Church, in his days, was
burdened by too many ceremonies; and therefore he, as an Evangelicall Aholiab,
or Bezaleel, thought meet, to lay [by] some what of that nimium, or Exodus 36.5.
[too-much] of what was offered, by the sons, to add unto the glory of the
mother; and, in his sense, a statute of Mortmain might have been useful: But
sure, he had no sacrilegious thought, at that time, then; nor I presume, any
true son of the Church of God, at this day, now; under a pretense to cure a
Timpany of superfluities, to cut off the flesh of the Churches maintenance: we
have better, I trust, learned to know, and to fear too, that heavy, presaged
doom of See Bp Andrews, his Concio ad Cleru^, pro gradu Doctor^^, inter opera
sua (...) post huma, in front, on Prove. 20.25.
Solomon, Prove. 20.25. It is a [snare] to any man, to devour that which is
holy Condemn not then a [whole] Church, for the error, or, perhaps, the
superstitions of a [few]. But surely, it is too true; we are still
too-credulous, on the worser part; and, whether of spite, or pride, or
self-love, or all, or worse, (I cannot tell), by a sinful Chemistry, we labor
to extract our own, out of the ruin of another same: And bence come those
uncharitable, and, most times, fond surmizes, which make men gash deep wounds,
on the [intentions], when to the outward [actions], as good, at last
indifferent; their censures shall be forced to stoop, as the sheaves of Joseph's
brethren bowed to the sheaves of Joseph.

To end this point, let us all therefore consider, how precious a thing good
name is; far more, than gold, or rubies, yea, or the costliest ointment,
Eccles. 7.1. And if that be true (as it is most certain,) that Trespasses
against [men,] receive their greatness, according to the [dammage,] brought
thereby unto them; sure it is, we sin more hainously, in abusing [fame,] than
we can do possibly, by impeaching any other of their outward [goods;] for,
after that old Rule, non dimittitur p^ccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum; its
much more possible and facile, to [restore] letriments in [goods,] than
blemishes brought to the [fame] of our brethren; yea or of a Church: 'Twas
Machiavill's plot, audacter calumniare, and aliquid haerescit; and usually,
they find (chiefly in great crimes) a wound, and dishonor, such as is never
done away.

Wherefore, in all ill reports, offered to our ears, let us still place, near
by our overhasty, and preproperous credulity, a temper of equal Candor and
Charity: the brain is the coldest part in man, and is so placed, say
Physicians, to allay the heat of the liver; which being the fountain of blood
and spirits, would else set the whole body in a combustion; so should our
moderation herein, by a Christian (...), allay our temerity; and like the
water, observed by Anatomists, in the pericardium, cool the ebullitions about
the heart; or even as the Chrystalline Sphaere (by which some think, meant
those waters [above] the firmament, Genesis 1.7) is placed next to the primum
mobile, to allay the extremity of heat, raised by so violent a motion, as would
without a temper, fire the Universe, and in a moment, wast the World into
ashes: Casting (as I said but now) our practice in this, in the mould of the
Divine Apostle; who, when tidings were brought him in of some Divisions in
Corinth, would not suffer his belief to overreach; he did but [partly]
credit the report; (...) so is the Text, I [heare,] that there are Divisions
among you, and I [partly] believe it.



Now if I were as happy, as Solomon was, that I might have whatsoever I would
ask; I would at this time beg this favor of God, viz. that every particular
hearer, within this audience, this day, might thoroughly resolve in constancy,
what the Israelites once did in a fit, upon an earnest admonition from Joshua,
1.16. All that is now by God commanded them they would do; and become as so
many several, and Divine Proteus, to Metamorphose these instructions into a
zealous, and conscientious practice: And indeed, the very mention of my doubts
herein, had need crave pardon of presumption from all [good] hearts; for
[such,] (as Saint S. August. Epist. 252.
Austin courted some on another occasion) I have but shown them a mirror of
what they are, and should but wast my breath, to instruct them further unto
what they should be: All the oil, that I shall further power into such
blazing Lamps of piety, is only, in the expression of Saint Paul, to his
Thessalonians, a petition; that they would 1 Thessal. 4 10.
increase more and more.

But, as there is no Pomegranate, wherein some grains are not rotten; so few
assemblies where some are not, either, as the Apostles auditors at Jerusalem,
Act. 2.13. Mockers; or as Saint Paul's hearers at Athens, Act. 17.18. that in a
Stoicall or an Epicurean flout, esteem the Preacher but a Babbler; or as those
that listened to our Saviors Sermons, to [catch] him in his discourse, Matthew.
22.15. or at best, unfruitful in all holy practice; so it may be, some such
may have borrowed a vizar; and like those in the Ezekiel. 33.31.
Prophet, Come hither and fit before the Lord as his people; whereas yet, their
hearts are lodged (and it grives me to say it,) as those Philistims smitten
before David, 1 Chronicles. 14.11. in Baal-perazim, even in the valley of Divisions.

What else means this 1 Samuel 15.14.
bleating of the sheep, and this lowing of the oxen in our ears? such a noise
of dissensions in the Church, for which as of old, for the Judge. 5, 15.
divisions of Reuben, there are great thoughts of heart: A theme better suting
with our tears, that we cannot reform them; than with our lips, to declaime
against them: And woe is me for my mother, my Lam. 1.20.
bowels, my bowels! that what those did once in Babylon, in a Psalm. 137.4.
strange Land; the quiet and peaceable sons of the Church, should now be
occasioned to do at home in their own Land; even to hang up their harpes upon
the willowes, when they remember thee o Syon! For, whereas we are exhorted to
keep the Ephesians. 41 3.
Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, lo! as if with those Antitactae of
old, we meant to contradict the Gospel; what is there almost but strife, and
contention in the Church? witness the miserable distraction of the Christian
World, in point of Religion; which for the sins of the multitude, (whose
Psalm. 76.10.
fierceness, notwithstanding, the Lord shall at length turn unto his own
praise and glory.) Seems to have received so wide wounds in the sides thereof,
that none but Heavens Chirurgiry can cure: And indeed, it often so falls out, as
the Cardinal Cardinalis Perona, in Epist. ad Regem Franciae. p. 142. 145.
Per^one advised the Pope of Rome in the case of the Venetian stir, about the
Jesuits; (it was at that time, when he told his holiness plainly, that the
State stood so;) and every day more and more may it be so still!) that he must
now be forced to court the favor of Christian Princes; and not, as formerly
Christian Princes sue to him; He told his holiness then, that Saepe
providentia divina permittitur, ut etiam [justae] causae vim patiantur, propter
peccata populorum; By Divine providence, it was often permitted, that even
[just] causes suffer much for the sins of the people.

O Religion, Religion! It is a word derived, says Lactant. l. 4. c. 28.29. De
vera Sap. confer Calvin. l. 1. c. 12. Sect. 1. instit. and Episc. Daven.
quaest. 12 qua supra, ex S. August. l. 10 de Civ. c. 1. And Bp. King explaining
it, Lect. 16. on Jonah, p 204. 205 etc.
Lactantius, a religando, from uniting, and knitting Christians together, in
one indissoluble, and firm bond: but, behold! how distractions in religions
are like to be, (without a seasonable prevention) the destruction of Religion;
and Religion it self to be, in a manner, lost in the quarrels, and questions
of Religion.

If, after substance, ye recount Religions, there have been in the World,
from the first foundation thereof, (says that incomparable Hooker, l. 5. p.
367. Confer D. Field, l. 2. c. 2. Of the Church.
Writer of the Ecclesiastical Polity) but only three.

First, Paganism, which lived in the blindness of corrupt, and depraved
nature.

Secondly, Iudaisme embracing the Law, which reformed Heathenish impiety, and
taught salvation to be expected through a Messiah, that should in due time,
come into the World.

Thirdly, Christian belief, which yeildeth obedience to the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST, and acknowledges him alone, to be the Savior, whom God did promise.

But, if ye number Religions, after opinion; then we have Bp. Hall, Dec. 3.
Epist. 3 -- Conf. Burton, Melanch, part. 3. Sect. 4. p. 513 etc.
five at least: 1. Jewish. 2. Turkish. 3. Greekish. 4. Popish. 5. Reformed. And
Fuller, l. 1. c. 3. p. 4. Hist. of the Holy War.
Poland is the Pantheon of all Religions; and Amsterdam, the pattern of all
Sects; and woe is me! that even [it] should now seem to be let loose on
[us:] In attempting to speak of these; shall I smile with Democritus? or weep
with Heraclitus? they are so ridiculous, and absurd on the one side; so
lamentable, and tragical, on the other: But, what is to be thought, when about
the persuasions in one, and the same Religion; we shall hear the mere
language of Babel, when the tongues were divided and Genesis 11.7.
confounded? I am of Luther, says one; I of Calvin says a second; I of
Arminius a third; I of Fraucis, I of Dominick, I of Jesus; and in this
jangling, none almost for Christ: it faring with Religion, says a Reverend D
Curle, now Bp. of Winchester, Ser. on Hebr. 12.14. Edit. An. 162 2.
Prelate, as it did with her, in Plutarch, who had many Suitours; when every
one could not have her to himself, they pulled her all in pieces, that so none
might have her; for so many in Religion, Malunt nullam habere, quam non suam:
They had rather there should be none at all, than that their own should not
take place; yea, in such bitterness of Spirit, are the sons of the same Church
carried; that one in a manner, is become a curse, and execration to another;
blowing the Trumpet of 2 Samuel 20.1
Sheba, in a mutual defiance, and saying: They have no part in God, nor in the
inheritance of his Son CHRIST IRSUS; every man to his Tents, o Israel.

Lord! my dear brethren, what can Religion, so Mar. 3.24.
divided against it self, portend, or bode, but overthrow, and ruin? 'Twas a
rule in Matchiavel, Divide and impera: The mind of man is like the stone
Tyrrhenus; that stone, solong as it is whole, like to the miraculous iron of
Elisha, [ 2 Kin. 6.6.
swimmeth;] but, being once broken, lo! as that lead of Moses, Exodus 15.10. it
[ Dr. Plaif.
sinketh] in the mighty waters: what so near one, as two? and yet we must not
go so far from one, as two: The whole World said Alexander, could not hold
two Suns at once; nor surely, (with any happiness) one Church, [ See Bp.
King. Lect. 7. on Jon. p. 98. 99. etc.
divided] Religions; no nor a [ See Dr. Slater, my father, on 1. Thessal c. 5.
v. 6. and p. 426.
medly,] or a [mixture] of them at once.

To draw to a conclusion of this part, Saint S. Cyp. de unit. Eccl. Sect. 6.
Cyprian says, that our Savior, Sacramento vestis, and signo, declaravit
Ecclesiae unitaetem; By his Coat, that was without Joh. 19.23.
seame throughout, as by a sign declared; how his Church should be woven
together in unity; not piecen^d up by that, which might be rent into the
rags of Schism or Divisions: Yet see and consider, if this unseamed Coat of
his, be not worse dealt withal; than the Prophet Abijah, the Shilonite, did
with that new garment, wherewith Ierobeam had clad himself, 1 King. 11.30.
Even rent into more than twelve pieces; as if the Body of the Lord CHRIST were
no better, than the Body of that Harlot; which was chopped in pieces, flesh, and
bones, and all, and cast into all the quarters of Israel, Judge. 19.29.

Least I grow tedious, all that I shall add, upon this point farther, shall
be epitomized under these two heads.

First, An Apotreptique, or Disswasive from Divisions.

Secondly, A Protreptique, or Persuasive unto Unity and Love.

For the first of these, though I might not [say,] but [thunder] with Saint
Paul, who assures us, that such as cause Divisions in the Church, they serve
not the Lord JESUS, Romans 16.17.18. And again, If any man love not the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, let him be Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. which shall hold
likewise true of all such, as do not testify their love to CHRIST, by their
unfeigned love of their 1 John 3.14.
brethren, his lively members; or as the same Apostle said of some contentious
Galatians, I would they were even Gal. 5.12.
cut off that trouble us: though thus I might do; yet as Saint Paul to
Philemon Verse 9. For loves sake, I rather beseech them; and withal, I shall
be bold to tell them, that, where discords, and divisions have gone before as
Esau; there ruins, and desolations have been wont to take them by the heel
as Jacob: It has been found true in experience, that these have laid more
Countries to the dition of the Turk, than ever his bow, and his shield could
have purchased: It was prudently observed by Cortugall, one of the Turkish
Princes, in his oration persuasive to his Lord, to besiege Rhodes; Christianus
occasus discordi^s intestinis corroboratur, The fall of Christendom is set
forward, by civil disagrement: in the days of Mahomet the second, those
polluted Saracens, (to speak in the expression of a late Bp. King.
worthy of our Church) had gleaned out of Christendom, like scattered ears of
corn, neglected by the owners, Vide Jovium, and Dr. Helyn, Geograph. in
description of Rhodes.
200. Cities, 12. Kingdoms, and two Empires, what an earnest they have reaped
since that time, (or rather, we reaped for them) who knows not? and yet, the
Canker runs on, fretting still, and eating further, because the whole
neglects the parts, and seeks not to preserve them: Besides, who is not
moved, till his very bowels are Hos. 11.8.
kindled together within him, to hear what music our Romish Adversaries
have, too-long, made themseves merry with in our discords? How long, Lord, holy
and true? how long shall those superstitious Mass and Meritmongers, (who dare
obtrude their menstruous merits to thy dreadful justice; and profane the
purity and simplicity of thy sacred worship, by their garish vanities and
Idolatry;) How long shall they triumph in our variance? O ye, that make a most
unjust separation on the other side, be entreated, do not thus give advantage
to the Adversary, by your causeles withdrawing of your selves from the Society
of your Christian brethren; who long for your uniformity, and joynt-adoration
of the one only true God; by the one, and only Mediator CHRIST JESUS; in
one, and the same faith, once for all given to the Saints; in the use of one,
and the same means of salvation; in the same Word, the same Sacraments, the
same Ministry; in the unity of the same Spirit, that we might all grow up
together in the same love, and charity; and meet together at last, in one, and
the same Heaven: O cease to esteem us, (your fellow-brethren in the same
CHRIST,) who are of the same household of faith with you; as 1 King. 21.20.
Ahab did Elijah; or as the wavering, Galatians did Saint Paul, because he
told them the truth, your [ Gal. 4.16.
Enomies:] nor, as Quae apud concordes, vincula charitatis, incitamenta irarum,
apud insensos sunt; Tacitus.
Tacitus said of Segestes and Ariminius, the one, the father, the other, the
Son in law: That which bound them together in love, whilst they were at
concord, put them farther at variance, being once enemies: Let a stream sever
it self from the Common fountain, that it may be counted a fountain it
self, without dependence upon any other; what is this, but the next way, to
make an end of it self, and to be utterly dried up?

Yea I beseech you, consider, when Noutrals, Atheists, and Profane Persons,
and Papists, do hear of so many discordant, and contrary opinions in
religion; does it not harden them in their infidelity, avert them from the
Church, and make them to sit down in the Chair of Scornors? for it is
certain (as a great My Lord Bacon, Essay. 3.
dispenser of learning observed, that Heresies and Schisms, are of all others
the greatest scandals; yea more, than corruption of manners; for, as in the
Natural body, a wound, or solution of continuity, is worst than a corrupt
humor; so in the spiritual; so that nothing does so much keep men out of the
Church, and drive men out of the Church as breach of Unity: When Atheists
looking on, shall view two Christians [striving] together, as: Moses saw those
Israelites, Exodus 2.13. yea, so to bandy ignominious reproaches, each against
the other, as if they were indeed but as a shepherd, and an Egyptian; whereof
the one says Joseph, was an. Genesis 46.34.
abomination to the other; or like to that brood of Cadmus, of which the Poet,
-- Suoque
Mart ruunt subiti, per mutua vulnera fratres:
or as it is observed of those frighted Midianites, Judge. 7.21. whose mutual
bowels became the sheath of each others sword: whereas indeed, each Christian
professing one faith in one, and the same CHRIST, should rather be as those
Israelites, going up to Gibeah, Judge. 20.11. knit together as one man: can a
Pagan otherwise imagine, that the CHRIST, we all pretend to serve, is other,
than what in truth the Lord abhorres to be, even the Author of confusion?
Lo! even briars, and thorns, the very Sons of Belial themselves, are
twisted one within the other, in a kind of indissoluble combination, or bond of
Unity: O my brethren, are there not storms, and tempests enough abroad; raised
up by Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, even by the boisterous wild bores, and
cruel adversaries, to make the ship of the Church to reele, and stagger, and
to be driven upon the rocks; but the secret leakes of our own home-variances
must thus, insensibly, sink her, e're we are aware? as if this ship were
sailing in a Lacus interdum, nullo flante vento, it a imnense concitatur, ut
vel audacissimos nautas. quo minus solvant, deterreat; unde, vento cessante,
naves medio cursucorrestae cum maximo discrimine jectantur, Maginus Geograph.
page 46.
Loumond-lake (such an one, as Maginus tells us, there is, in a part of
Britain,) in which, they say, the danger is then most formidable, when the
winds are still: To be short, Let us consider, how bitter a word it was, that
King David uttered of Joab, that, whereas the end of war was peace, he chose
to shed the blood of 1 Kin. 2.5.
war in peace, but, it cost him dear at last: Now there is a saying in the
Psalms, that the Saints shall wash their Psalm. 58.10.
seete, in the blood of the ungodly; to imply thus much, says Lyra, that the
righteous seeing the vengance, executed upon the ungodly for those ungodly
deeds, they have committed, shall dread the like offenses; least they tread
also in the like steps of judgment: are Halcyon days esteemed happy? and
peace, felicity? then, woe is me, to think, that any man, or people should
wax weary of their happiness! is it not a very strange infatuation? Its an
old word, Quos Deus perdere vult, prius dementat.

But, I hasten to the other part, which is a protreptique, or persuasive unto
love, and unity: and, what stronger argument can there be devised, to incline
hereto; than this? that we, hereby, come most near unto the God, we serve,
and are even in this regard, partakers of the 2 Pet. 1.4.
Divine nature; though not, by communication of essence, yet by resemblance,
and analogicall assimilation, in that gracious quality: Hence was that Eulogy
of Ephraim Ephraim. Syrus, tract. (...).
Syrus, (...). Happy is that man, who has possession of love, for such an one
carries God always with him, in his heart; for, ever so Saint John assures
us, 1 Ioh. 4.16. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God,
and God in him: On the other side, says S. Ignatius, Epist. 6.
Ignatius, (...). Where there is division of mind, and anger, and hatred, there
God dwells not: Besides, only in love it is, that we [reciprocate] with God,
of all other affections; if we fear God, he fears not us; if we obey God,
he obeyes not us; but, if we love God, he loves us again; 1 Ioh. 4.19.
Love, says the Apostle, it is the very Col. 3.14.
bond of perfection; (...); and who is able sufficiently to amplify the great
things of the beauty of it? says S. S. Clemens, Epist. ad Corin. p. 63. 64.
Clement, in his Epistle to these very Corith's; Since it alone conglutinates us
to God, and makes us also, to wish well to men: Unity therefore is as another
ordalium, to try the chastity of the Queene-Mother, the Church; and like a
Gileaditish passage, at which the Judge. 12.6.
lisping Ephraimites are discovered in their Sibboleth; at which the faultring
Christian will be detected: For this cause, when the bosom favorites of
CHRIST rested in expectation of the holy Ghost promised, in a miraculous
manifestation, to be sent down upon them, from heaven; they were (...), Act.
2.1. all together, in one place; and the same Spirit descended before that,
upon our Savior himself, in the similitude of a Matthew 3.16.
dove; because it is the usual emblem of (...), Etymol.
love, and therefore, they who separate, and break this bond of love, are
styled sensual, by Saint Jude, verse 19. and without the Tales itaque faciles
sunt ad divisionem, quia Spiritum non habent, in quo uno membra Christi charam
servant spiritaliter unitatem, Fulgent. l. 2. ad Monimum, p. 67.
Spirit.

Even the sacred Trinity it self is delighted with the same Unity, or
One-nesse, 1 John 5.7. these three are one; there is but, (...), one God, and
Father of all, Ephesians. 4.6. but, (...), one Mediator, between God, and Man,
the Man CHRIST JESUS, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is but (...), one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.11.
All true-beleeving Christians are but (...), one body, 1. Cor. 10.17. yea, but
as one man, in CHRIST JESUS, (...), Gal. 3.28.

Even Plato, lib. 2. de Republ. versus finem.
Plato himself would have children, by no means, to be told those fictions of
the Poets, touching the varience of the Heathen gods: In short, there is no
stable assurance of any other grace, in soundness, severed from love: Faith
indeed, is necessary, Vt operis fundamentum, as the foundation of charity,
says Granatens. tom. 3. conc. de temp. conc. 1. in Die Pentecost.
Granado; but charity, as the perfect consummation of that gracious Habit:
hence was that maxim, in the Schoolmen, that charity was the [forme] of all
virtues Theological; because, however it gave them not their own essence, in
themselves, abstractively considered; yet did it form them unto
[acceptability,] before the Lord: therefore, all other excellencies though they
advance nature; yet they are, says one, subject to [excesse,] only this of
charity admits no excess; for, we see, for aspiring, to be like God in
[power,] the Angels transgressed, and fell; by aspiring, to be like God, in
[knowledge,] man transgressed, and fell; but, by aspiring to be like God, in a
similitude of goodness, or [love;] neither man, nor Angel, ever transgressed,
or shall transgress; for, unto that imitation we are called: And, as its
endless, in excess; so also, in continuance, 1 Cor. 13.13.

Now, according to the several motives, or grounds of love, so also is the
[degree] several: There is (...), when the motive, or ground is one, and the
same nature; so says the Philosopher; if we see a very Varlet in distress;
we may, we must relieve him; and give, though not (...), yet (...), if not to
the man, yet to the Quantum ad sustentationem [Naturae,] non ad somentum
[culpae,] Tho. 2a. 2a. qu. 31. Art. 2. ad 1^.
nature; thus David, and his followers are said to have relieved even a very
Egyptian, when they found him languishing in the field, 1 Samuel 30.11.12. and
this love of nature, (except directly to Romans 1.31.
reprobates) is common unto all men; and very nature moved even Barbarians to
relieve the distressed, Act. 28.2.

Secondly, There is (...), a nearer bond; when vicinity, or cohabitation may
induce to kindness; and thus far a mere Civillist may go.

Thirdly, (...); and this is only the cognizance of true love Christian; when
we love the brethren, Eo nomine, because brethren, 1 Ioh. 3.14. and to this is
that earnest exhortation of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1.22. See that ye love one
another with a pure heart fervently.

And I beseech you brethren, in the bowels of our Common Savior; let this
intimation be unto your hearts, as the Arteries running along the veins,
which, beating upon them; stir up the blood, and keep it warm, least,
otherwise, it should congeale, and become as coral, and though we cannot fly
up, yet as the Cherubims, let us still be clapping of our wings, in our
devotions, this way: And since, we well accord, (I trust) in the Principal See
Bp. Davenant his last book.
fundamental points of faith, for substance; let this seasonable advise unto
Unity, be, as the Angels snatching of the sword of Abraham, to stay the
farther, and the future rending of our selves, into Schism's, and Divisions; in
point of circumstance, and of lesser moment: Memorable is that story of Saint
Gregory Nazianzene, as Ruffinns lib. 2. cap. 9. Hist. Eccles -- Confer the
story of Bp. Colman, in Bp. Usher, c. 10. of the Irish Relig.-See Bp. Bilson,
c. 16. 395 etc. Of the perpet, Government of the Church.
Ruffinus, and others report it to us; who, in the tumults of the people cried
out, Mitte nos in mare, and non erit tempestas; That is, he offered both his
dignity, and himself too: to be cast into the Sea, rather than the Unity, and
Peace of the Church should suffer, or be disturbed: and indeed, what one true
Son of the Church, who heartily longs for the Psalm. 51.18.
building up, and delights not in the pulling down of the walls of
Jerusalem; but would gladly be content with Jonah, to be cast into the Sea,
rather than the storm should continue, unto the endangering of the whole ship?

But, oh the deadness of the heart, and the stoppage of the ears unto the
voice of the spiritual Psalm. 58.5.
charms, charm he never so wisely; for, though the bells of our Aarons have
sounded shrill; and every Pulpit, almost, (that has any clapper,) tolled men
long in, into the Temple of Peace; yet, if you ask them, as Iehoram's
messenger did Iehu is it peace Iehu, they retort, 2 Kin. 9.18.
what have thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me; alas! peace is not
the matter, but following, and party: So true is that of Salvian. l. 4. ad
Eccles. Cathol. in fine.
Salvian; Poeneomnis sermo Divinus habet aemulos suos; almost every Precept of
God meets with its adversary; If God command liberality, Man will practice
covetousness; if parsimony, prodigality; if he speak of Psalm. 120.7.
peace, they make them ready for war, as the Psalmist has it; impetuous
Salamanders, who live not, but in the flames of contention; not unlike unto
Tarquinius Priscus, in the Roman story, who was Luc. Florus, Hist.
Bello promptior quam pace; more apt in War, than peace; or, as Trogus tells
us of the o^der Spaniards, that they were Genus hominum ita infensum
concordiae, ut puro illius odio, inimicitias suscipiat: or, if men, that way
affected, do happily lend us their attentions; as the Jews to Ieremy's
passionate expressions; or, to Ezekiels pleasant voice Ezekiel. 33.32.
; or, as Herod gave John Baptist the Mar. 6.20.
hearing, in some things; Yet, it cannot better be resembled, than by what is
given us, in that fained relation of Orpheus Theater; where all birds, and
beasts assembled, and forgetting their several appetites; some of prey, some
of game, some of quarrel, stood all sociably together, listening unto the
aires, and accords of the harp; the sound whereof no sooner ceased, or was
drowned by some Louder noise; but every beast returned to his own Nature; so
is the Nature, and Condition of men, (says that eminent Lo. Verul. l. 1.
Advancem. of learning.
Patron of learning) who are full of savadge, and unreclaimable desires, of
profit, of lust, of revenge; which, as long as they give care to Precepts, to
laws, to religion, sweetly touched with eloquence, and persuasion of Sermons;
so long is society, and peace maintained; but, if these instruments be silent,
or that sedition, and tumult make them not audible; all things dissolve into
anarchy, and confusion.

To conclude this whole application: We wish, that our words mght fall upon
your hearts, as that Doctrine of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.2. dropped down as the
showers of rain upon the grass, and our speech might distill, as the dew,
upon the tender herb: or else, that your hearts might be as the [water,] on
which the Spirit of the Lord is said to move, Genesis 1.2. I say, on the [water,]
not upon the [earth,] for he will no muckish, earthy heart; nor moves he on
the [aire;] and heart swollen up with the wind of pride, and ambition; nor
moves he upon the [fire;] an heart enflamed with the ardor of choler, and
concupiscence; but, on the face of the [waters,] hearts, that are soft, and
pliable to receive the Divine impressions of Gods grace: And, if not, as the
grass, or the water, tender, and pliable; yet, at least, as that rock, in
Jeremy, 23.29. which, though hard in it self, yet was it by the hammer of Gods
word broken in pieces: but, oh the deadly perverseness of unsanctified souls!
who, not only as the same Jeremy, 5.3. says, of the obstinate Jews, have
made their [faces] harder, than a rock; but, as it is said of Nabal, 1 Samuel
25.37. Their very [hearts] are [dead] within them, and become as a stone; yea
rather, as Bonaventure, on like consideration, inverted that prayer, in
Ezekiel, 36.26. where God promised, to take away from them the heart of stone,
and to give them an heart of flesh; Nay rather, says he, take from us the
heart of flesh, and give us the heart of stone; for the stones, and the rocks
were divided, and clave in sunder, when our Savior suffered, on the Cross;
whereupon Saint Ambrose, O saxis duriora Iudaeorum pectora! on such stupid, 1 Timothy 4.2.
seared consciences, as these, I will not declaime; but convert a deserved
satyr into a mournful elegy: my heart shall bleed, in secret, and mine eyes
Psalm. 119.136.
gush out with tears, (those speechles Orators of an unexpressable grief)
for that they will needs, like the waters of Jordan, sundred by the mantle of
Elijah, both be, and remain [ 2 Kin. 2.8.
divided:] (...), says Sinesius: The sincere, and entire Preacher, has (in
the Isa. 49.4.
frustration of his hopes from his Hearers) no [other] at least, no [such]
refuge to fly unto, at the last; but, as the Pigeons to their windows, Isa.
60.8. So he, to his eyes; which are glazed with tears, (pearls far more
precious, than the waters, in those wels of Elim, (to which the weeping
Apostles are resembled,) Number. 33.9.) when they are powered out for the sins of
the unreclaimable people: And such as these, who so much hate to be reformed,
I leave to that heavy doom of our Savior; upon the Jews on another occasion,
Ioh. 12.48. The word that I have now spoken, the same shall judge them, at the
last Day.

And so taking my leave of these, with whom a pious discord is to be chosen,
and preferred, before an impious concord; (for, a just dissension is much
better, than an unjust peace; and such an unjust peace is all peace, which is
not, either joined with, or else, (as some read that text) (...), [according]
to [holinesse,] Hebr. 12.14.) leaving these; I convert my self unto you, --
Quibus art benigna,
Et meliore luto finxit pracordia Titan;
Whose hearts the Lord has molded to an yiedling, and obedient constitution;
fitted to receive the Ephesians. 4.30.
seal, and the mark of Gods Spirit: O be you entreated, as our Savior
advised his own dear Disciples, Saint Mark 9.50. to have salt in your
selves, and peace one with another; Now salt, as Saint S. Hilar in S. Matthew.
can. 4. Sal in se une continet ignis, and aquae elementum, and est revera unum
ex duobus, h. e. Quid tertiu^ ex utroque coalitur, etc. est aqua, ne plus satis
incalescamus; est ignis, ne tanquam frigore obterpeamus.
Hilary says, contains in its self the element both of fire, and water, and
is indeed says he, a third thing, compacted out of both; it is water; least
we should too-much be incensed unto heat, and passion; it is fire; least we
should grow too remiss, and chill, with neglect, and carelessness: First of
all, have salt in your selves, that is, as Saint Paul interprets, Col 4.6. Let
your speech be always with grace, seasoned with falt; take heed, let it not
be rancid, or unsavory, larded with bitter, and unchristian invectives; but
tempered always with sobriety, meekness, and discretion: And then, when the
salt is first set on upon the Table; peace, as the best, and choycest dish,
will follow after.

Hence those zealous exhortations of S. Ignatius, Epist. ad Trallian.
Ignatius, and other Saints, (...), love one another with an [undivided] heart;
and S. Paul also Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live
peaceably with all men.

Nor is this enough, but we must follow after the [things] which [ Romans 14 19.
make] for peace; the word translated here, [follow after], is in the original
[(...)] which signifies, to pursue, and follow with eagernes of Spirit, even
with as fervent an intention, as we have known some fierce, and violent
persecutor to follow-after the blood of an innocent Martyr; and who never
rests satisfied, till he has even surfetted on his own revenge: Now this
eagernes fixed on another object, may be imitated by us; even as our Apostle in
this Text has levelled it at the things, which make for peace.

Now, what those principal things are, that may, What are the maine things
that make for Peace.
indeed, be said to make for Peace, the same Apostle has epitomized into a
short compondium, in that one Text, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now, J beseech you, Brethren,
by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, (says he,) that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly
joined together, in the same mind, and in the same judgment: which words Pet.
Mart. loc. com. class. 4. c. 6. sect. 2.
Peter Martyr explicating, shows us; that, as S. Austin justly makes hatred
against our neighbor, to be the maine cause of Schism; so, of that hatred,
four other principal causes may be given: 1. First of all, that men accord
not among themselves, in regard of the first principles of faith; and therefore
S. Paul, in this Text, desires the Corinthians to be joined together in the
same [mind]; that is, as I apprehend it; Whereas the mind is the principal
faculty of the soul, and (as Estius, ad 1 Cor. 1.10.
Estius criticizeth it) men's in cognitione versetur, it is principally
conversant in matter of Science, and Knowledge, therefore, the mind, and
understanding should be determined ad idem, and the object thereof, for the
prevention of divisions, should be one and the same thing, for matter of the
chief foundation of faith. Secondly, because, though men may be supposed to
agree, in principles, and fundamentals; yet notwithstanding, may dissent in
those things, that are deduced, and concluded out of those Principles;
therefore, he desires them to be joined also together in the same judgment;
which may direct them into one, and the same practice. Thirdly, though men may
be conceived to agree, in the same mind, and in the same judgment; yet,
because some are, often, so in love with their own forms of speaking, and so
fond of their own invented expressions, that rather, than they will be
divorced from that new phrase, to which they have wedded themselves, they will
choose to separate, and be divided from the society of the faithful brethren;
as the case stood with Secrat. l. 7. c. 32.
Nestorius the Heretic, who, in the beginning, did not err, touching the
Unity of Christ's person, in the diversity of the natures of God, and man: but
only disliked, that Mary should be called the Mother of God; which form of
speaking, when some demonstrated to be very fitting, and unavoydable, if Christ
were God and Man in the unity of the same person; he chose rather to deny the
Unity of Christ's person, than to acknowledge his temerity, and rashness, in
reproving that form of speech, which Dr. Field, l. 3. c. 3. in fine, of the
Church.
the use of the Church had anciently received, and allowed; For this
confideration, it was, that the Apostle exhorts also, that they all [speake]
the same thing; which in other expression, is to hold fast 2 Timothy 1.13.
the form of sound words; and called sound, or wholesome speech, Tit. 2.8.
Fourthly, and lastly, because, though all this be agreed on; yet if there be
respect of Jam. 2.1.
[persons] in receiving, and entertaining the gospel; one man pinning his
faith upon the sleeve of Paul; another ravished with the Act. 18.24.
eloquence of Apollo; a third crying up Cophas above them all; so that the
doctrine is not entertained, after 1 These. 2.13.
a Thessalonian integrity, as the word of [God], (whose Romans 1.16.
power alone it is unto salvation, in them that believe) but as the word of
[man]; because, from this consideration, Saint Paul observed [contentions] to
arise among them, as we read, ver. 11.12. therefore, he persuades them, by the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, unto Unity, and unto Unanimity: for ver. 3. is
Christ [divided?] that is, by a resolution of the interrogative into an
affirmative, Christ himself is not divided: and therefore they that would be
counted Christians indeed, and truly in him, must not neither be divided;
either, from the whole body of the Church Catholic, at large, or else from
love, and Unity among themselves: For, if they be [divided], or do but cause,
or foment [divisions], in the Church; the same Apostle is peremptory,
elsewhere, Romans 19.18. that they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ.

To end all: Thus then let all the loyal sons of Peace do; As, labor to
speak, and to teach only [truth]; so also to do the same in Ephesians. 4.15.
[love]; and let me, (in this needful time,) be bold to exhort you all, in the
words of the Schisme-hating Apostle, to his Phillippians, cap. 2.1.2.3. If
there be, therefore, any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind, let
nothing be done through strife, or vainglory: Thus let us do; and it shall be
well with us, at the last; and know though the sinner, and lover of discords,
sin Eccles. 8.12.
an hundred times, yet God shall, one day, pay him home, in his own coin; For,
when the Peace-lover, and the Peacemaker shall be surely blessed; God shall
deal with them, as Jacob, on his deathbed, Mat. 5.9.
doomed Simeon, and Levi, (those Brethren in iniquity) Genesis 49.7. Even divide
them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel; and those, that study groundless,
and scandalous [Separations:] Lo! When all the Nations of the World shall be
gathered before him; (to make their shame more public, and yet their
confusion most just;) the just Lord, and the 2 Timothy 4.8.
righteous Judge of the whole earth, shall, (out of the just, and equal Law of
Retaliation) he shall [separate] the peaceable from them, as a shepherd
[divideth] the sheep from the goats, Matthew, 25 32.

Psalm. 1, 8.14.
so neare] unto the Lord, in his special grace, and favor, as was the Jewish;
Lo! says the Psalmist, Psalm 135.4. The Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself,
and Israel for his peculiar Treasure; The Jewish Church, was as that Luke 13.6.
Figtree in the Vineyard, that is, not, as Ribera in Joch, 1.7.12.
Ribera interprets it, some eminent Prince, or Magistrate, in the Church; but
the particular Church of the Jews, planted by the special hand of God, in the
Vineyard, or the Universal Church, at large; hedged in, and fenced with his
own protection; the least annoyance, or injury offered it, was as tender to
him; as the apple of his own eye, Zech. 2.8. And yet, though God is said to
have known them only, of all the families of the earth; he means, with the
knowledge of special favor, and approbation, Amos 3.2. Nevertheless, when
even this choice, and selected people, afterward degenerated into Civil rents
first, and then into such as divided them from themselves; and, most of all,
from God, by superstition, and idolatry: these sins of theirs made a
separation between them, and their God, Isa. 52.2.

Now, my beloved, we cannot be more dear to the Lord, than was this ancient
Church of his, unto him: will they have miracles? Lo! see them, as Leah said
of Gad, Genesis 30.11. coming in a troop; The Sea shall roll into an heap, and
the paths thereof be dried up before them; Exodus 14. Jordan also shall be
driven back, and fly, Psalm. 114.5. Is not this enough? then shall the Sun
stand still, in Gibeon, and the Moon, in the valley of Ajalon, Josh. 10.13.
Will not this do? then shall the very Rocks, before them, be dissolved into
Rivers; yea, the Heavens raine-downe the food of Angels upon them, Psalm. 78.5.
Lo! their King clothed them in skarlet, and put on ornaments of gold upon
their apparel, with other delights, 2 Samuel 1.24 Their little hill Hermon, and
their mountain of Zion were wet with the Dew of Gods bounty; Psalm 133.3. In
short, thousands, and ten thousands shall fly before them, if they have
enemies: each page of their story is but the record of their miracles, and of
their peculiarized favors.

Mutato nomine de to: change but the name, and we are the men; for, wherein
out-stript they us? They were delivered from the heavy bondage of Egypt, so
that, though they had layen among the pots, yet became they as the wings of a
Dove, whose wings were covered with silver, and whose feathers were like gold,
Psalm. 68.13. and, have not we been reskued from a worse thraldom? delivered
from the vassaladge, and bondage of Popish superstition; far more dangerous,
than the blackest, or the most Cimmerian darkness: and woe, woe be unto us,
if we long to return back, to that rotten garlic again, and to that heavy
yoke of bondage! They had Manna from Heaven; so have we the full measures
(far surpassing their Omers, or their Ephah's) of the spiritual, and the
best Manna in the Gospel: They had Sea-deliverances; remember the never to be
forgotten year of eighty eight, had not we? They were as firebrands plucked
out of the burning, Amos, 4.11. Say, fifth of November; were not we? The
Stars from Heaven fought for them, in their courses, as in the days of
Sisera, Judge. 5.20. and the elements conspired their victories; How often as
great experiments have we tasted? so that, we may well here resume that
Distich, in the Claudian, in laud Theodesti.
Poet, of our Nation; O nimiumdilecta Deo, cuimilitat ether,
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.
But now, woe is me! shall I go on? see then; they scorned their Messiah,
and, as bloody Atreus, in the Seneca Tragaed. in Thyeste.
Tragaedy, they cry out, Ruat in me, modo in fratrem; to ruin him, they cursed
themselves; His Matthew. 27.25.
blood, say they, be upon us, and upon our Children! and to this Day, some
say, the bloody issue runs on their women, about the passion: O heavy curse! O
direful imprecation! how has their Lamb been turned, ever since, into a
Lion to them? O barren figtree, long since, have thou had thy succide; Luke
13.7.
cut it down, says God, why cumbreth it the ground? O how are thy branches
become scattered, in the day of the Lords wrath upon thee, yea, even as very
dung upon the face of the earth? Ier. 18.17.

O England, England, what is thy silver also become Isa. 1.22.
dross? thy Bethel, a Bethaven? O where is all the fruit of Gods long bounty,
and favors toward thee? have they bred only Jud. 4.
wantonness, and not obedience in thee? Lo! I am loath to be the Messenger of
so evil tidings unto thee, and to tell thee so bitter a word; yet must I not
sew pillowes under thine arme-holes, or dawbe thee with Ezekiel. 13.10.18.
untempered mortar, to flatter thy security; Nor have I this bitter word for
thee, from the whisper of a Mahomet's dove; nor is it the dream of an
Enthusiasticall brain; No, I have it from the mouth of the Lord God himself,
who bids me tell thee, as Moses did old Israel, Deuteronomy, 28.59. The Lord will
make thy plagues wonderful, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and
sore sicknesses, and of long continuance, and they shall cleave unto thee: and,
take heed, thou do not be-come, as they, a Loammi, and a Loruamah, Hos. 1.6.9.
A not-my people, and not having obtained mercy: Behold! the owner of the
Figtree is now in visitation; he has often, and long, sent his Messengers, as
Joshua did his Josh. 2 1.
spies, before him, to see how his Figtree thrives, after so many years
dressing; His Vine-dressers, the Ministers of the Gospel, have been long
planting with their Doctrine, pulling away the stones of opposition, tearing up
the weeds of prophannesse, rooting up the furses of Heresy, and the thorns of
Schism, and faction; they have been Isa. 5.5.
hedging with Discipline; paring, and pruning with their seasonable reproves:
In short, what could the Lord have done more for this Church of ours, than what
he has done for it? Lo now! because his 2 Chro. 36.16. and, Matthew. 23.37.
Messengers have been slighted, and so lightly set by of us; He now seems
himself to come riding in visitation; and surely, when the Lord comes
himself, especially in a circuit of vengeance, or judgment; as soon may the
stubble hope to stand before a Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire; as a secure, and an impenitent people bear up under the
fierce wrath of so dreadful, and incensed a Judge: It is a remarkable
passage, Exodus 20.10. When the Law was given, upon mount Sinai, with
thunderings, and lightenings, and the noise of the Trumpet, and smoke, and
such like ghastly representations, setting out the mightiness, and the
formidable power of that great God, who gave the Law; and considering, how
fearful that Law must needs be to the breakers of it; which was so Heb. 12.21.
terrible in the first giving; They said unto Moses, speak [thou] with us, and
we will hear; but let not [GOD] speak with us, least we die: as if they had
said, Let Moses, a man of our own mould, speak to us; or, in Saint Paul's
expression, Gal. 3.19. Let the Law be ordained, in the hand of a [Mediatour;]
Let there be some to intercede, and to stand in the Ezekiel. 22.30.
gappe between the Lords power, and our impotence; for otherwise, if we shall
fall [immediately] into the hands of the Lord himself; (who, in his wrath, is
a consuming fire) we shall all be wasted into ashes, and be utterly, and
hopelesly consumed: Hence is that of the Apostle, It Is a Heb. 10.31.
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

For this cause likewise, ye shall notice it, throughout the Prophets; that,
when they have found themselves to become a reproach, and the word of the Lord,
a derision daily; so that they had no hopes left them to prevail for a
Reformation: they would then recommend the cause into the Lords own hand, and
desire him to behold the obstinate perverseness of a Rebellious people; which
done, there still ensued a speedy, and a dreadful overthrow; see Jeremiah,
20.8. and Lam. 3.14. compared with, Ier. 5.3.9.

But here, me thinks, I hear some English Gallio, as he, in the Acts,
18.14.17. interrupting Saint Paul; (One, I mean, that cares for none of these
things,) stepping in, with, a Why do thou thus discredit thy Nation? are we
not fenced? are we not friended? are we not populous? Is not the Temple? Is
not the Gospel, among us?

Ah sinful Nation! ah people laden with iniquity! says the Prophet Isa. 1.4.
of Israel: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem how long shall these thy vain thoughts of
immunity, from ruin, lodge within thee; whilst yet thine heart is not washed
from its wickedness? Jer. 4.14. I could bid thee, as the Prophet Jer. 7.12. go
to Shiloh, a place, where the Lord, once, let his name, yet, now, it is become,
(for the security of them that dwelt therein) a very den of dragons; and
again, Jer. 49.3. Howl, oh Hes^bon, for Ai is spoiled: and, others ruin should
be our warning; their (...), our (...), their suffering, our lessonings: look
about you, and see what a shambles is all Christendom become, What Matt. 27.33.
Golgatha's, and what Act. 1.19.
Acheldema's, or fields of blood are hare, and, how seem our neighbors
Churches, long, to have been whirried about in a continual tumult, whilst we,
as the Center, stand still, and immovable? (...)
(...);
says 8. Gregory S. Greg. Nazian. in Od. 4.
Nazianzene; Do the towns totter, and can the neighboring cottage be unshaken?
do the mighty Cedars suffer a shock, and can the humble Pine Tree be secure?
and populous and warlike Nations depopulated, and wasted? and can we look on,
and be secure? But, woe is me! when Israel had a divorce, yet her treacherous
sister Judah would not fear, Jer. 3.8. O foolish people, and unwise; do we thus
tempt, and provoke the Lord unto anger? nay, do we not, rather, provoke our
selves, to the confusion of our own faces? as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 7.10.
confer Pro. 8.36. Be not deceived, God is not Gal. 6.7.
mocked.

Wherefore, to hover no longer; Look what Idus in Judge. 3.20. said unto Eglon,
then King of Moab, in another kind; I have a message from God unto thee, oh
King; so have I unto thee, oh England; and it is, in the Prophet Nahums words,
unto vaunting Nineveh, Nah. 3.8. Art thou better then populous No? (he means
Junius ad Nah. 3.8. confer ler. 46.25.
Alexandria in Egypt) that was situate among the rivers, that had the waters
round about it, whose rampart was the sea, (right Englands Emblem) and her
wall was from the sea; Ethiopia, and Egypt were her strength, Put and Lubin
were her helpers; yet was she carried away: She, so populous, so fenced, so
friended: and what was the cause? see it, ver. 5. Behold, I am against thee,
says the Lord of hosts: lo! what a word is here? I am against thee, says the
Lord; in Quod remedium quaeritur, ubi [autor] remedti non conciliatur?
Hegesippus, de excid. urb. Hierusal. p. 672. in Anacephal. in octavo. See Ier.
3.
vain, then, is salvation hoped from the mountains, if the Lord, who is the God
of the mountains, be against us Oh woe, woe, woe be unto us, if the Lord of Hosts
be against us: if the Rock of our salvation, as Moses styles him, has forsaken
us: If God be [for] us, who can be [against] us? says the great Apostle; but,
if God be once [against] us, who can be [for] us? Romans 8.31.

In a word, let me tell you; and let my words, not as mine, but as the Lords,
sink deeply into your meditations: the word is this; That sin, that black, and
ougly monster sin, is of more force to weaken a state, and to ruin a Kingdom;
than all the strength of an Army can be, be it as potent, and numerous; as that
of Zorah, the Ethiopian, 2 Chronicles. 14.9. one of the greatest, that we read of,
in the Scriptures, even an host of a thousand thousand.

But, O my soul, why have thou made me to dwell, thus long, in these Cant. 1.5.
and Psalm. 120.5.
black tents of Kedar? and, why do I, with Noah's Genesis 8.7.
Raven, fly croaking, thus, about the dead carcasses of sinful men; floating
perhaps, yet drowned in sin, and shame? Surely, my beloved Christians, these
are not times for us, (it is in vain to flatter) to begin, or end our Sermons,
with those of Ezekiel's visions, that promise peace, and deliverance; but, as
the Prophets, Nahum, Habakkick, and Malachi, do their prophecies, with the
burden of the Lord, the burden of the Lord, that is, some Junius, ad 2 King.
9.25.
commination, and threat of a judgment, heavy as those burdens, under which
Issachar stooped down, Genesis 49.14.

But stay, what, art thou all for judgment? surely, that is the portion of
impenitent, remorselesse, and unrelenting sinners, there is no Isa. 57.21.
peace, says my God, unto the wicked: But yet, my breast shall not a ways be,
as some thunder-cloud, whose vapors never leave working, till they vent
themselves with terrors to the world; my speech shall rather strive to be as
King David's plentiful rain, to Psalm. 68.9.
refresh the inheritance of the Lord: For what? is there no Ier. 8.22.
balm yet left in Gilead? no mean, to intercede, as Genesis 37.21.
Reuben, to stay the slaughter of an endangered Joseph? no Moses, in the Psalm.
106.23.
gap? surely yes; see your remedy, in Amos. 4.12. Prepare to meet thy God, O
Israel: O Israel, Israel, Repentance is so welcome a Courtier, to solicit at
the throne of heaven, that it ever speeds in its suits: [meet] then thy God in
righteousness, (even now, whilst the day of grace, and 2 Cor. 6.1.
salvation lasts) and we may rest assured, as Isaiah speaks, Chap. 64.5. that
the Lord will be ready, to [meet] us in mercy: get we into this Arc, before
the flood come; gather we our Manna, and prepare to our eternal Sabbath, in
the Even, before hand; Qui laborat in vespere, Sabbati, vescetur in Sabbato,
say the Rabbis: be we forewarned, and so fore-armed too; Bp. Andrews, in
Praefat. ad concion. in Synodo Provin. p. 26. inter opera posthuma.
(...), praestantior, said an eminent Prelate.

So then, let every one mend one; and (declining that humor of declaiming on
the dismembered condition of the times,) let every one of us, in particular,
think, as S. Paul said of himself, in the act of a selfcondemning conscience,
that of all sinners, I am the [chiefest], 1 Timothy 1.15. and, that, for [my sake],
as good Jonah acknowledged, Ion. 1.12. the tempest of the Lords wrath is
abroad, in Schisms, and divisions, and in other grievous, heart-wounding
distempers; and let every one of us, in this regard, as the King of Nineveh
advised, in a time of danger, and distress, Iona. 3.8. cry [mightily] unto the
Lord: surely, if we could fasten, in every of our particular souls, this one
meditation, that, I am the [chiefest] of sinners, and that for [my] sake is the
Lord displeased, so highly; we could not, but exchange our mutual invectives,
into most zealous, and importunate clamours, at the gate of heaven, for pardon;
and, not beseech alone, but, as it were, by an army of joint devotions, even
besiege the throne of that Majesty, who will not Lam. 3 8.
shut out the prayers of his poor, Psalm. 102.17
destitute, Church, and children; and let us never leave wrestling with the
Lord, till, with good Jacob, we impetrate, and Genesis 32.26.
obtain the blessing: I remember Zanchius, l. 2. c. 4. de Natura Dei.
Zanchy has resembled this, that I am now closing up my Sermon with, unto a
company of ship-men; in a ship, tied by a cable-rope, unto a Rock: These ship
men are poor, penitent suppliants, within the ship of the Church, riding, and
tossed in a sea of misery; this rope is prayer; and the 1 Cor. 10.4.
Rock, is Christ: Now, when they draw at the Cable, they seem to pull the Rock
to the ship, and not the ship to the Rock; and yet, in truth, the ease is
otherwise; the Rock stands fixed, and immovable, and, in the issue, it is the
ship, that is drawn home to the Rock, not the Rock, to the ship: so, the more
we draw at the Cable, and are importunate with God, in prayer; the nigher still
do we approach, unto the Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Rock of our salvation, Christ Jesus; and the more we are still drawn out of
the waters of affliction, and tribulation: my dear brethren, we cannot enough
believe, how melodious, and ravishing in the cares of the Lord our
joynt-devotions, and servent prayers will be: what Eccles. 9.10.
Solomon, therefore, advises, at large, let us be advised to do, in this
particular, even do it with all our [might]; and doubt not of a gracious Matthew.
7.7, 8.
success.

And, as we would pray for peace, and salvation to our own souls; so let us be
importunate with others also, to follow after the things, that make for peace:
and, if it so fall out, that, when thou art persuading for peace, they are still
making ready for Psalm. 120.7.
war; and, all thy endeavors, this way, are but like unto the stone
Diacletes; which, though it have very many excellent soveraignties in it, yet
it loses them all, if it be put in a [dead] man's mouth; so thy godly
persuasion unto unity, and peace, (which is the only pearl, and jewel of a
Christian) though it may have a sovereign virtue in it, among the sons of
quietness, and peace; yet it loses all, if it be put into an ear, or an
heart, that is dead in sin; or, if it be applied to a man, who affects rather,
to be some body, in the trouble, than no body, in the peace of the Church:
notwithstanding, do thou thy endeavor; and rest assured, though the issue from
them fail of thy zealous expectation; yet, what King David said of the prayers,
that he made of his enemies, shall hold true of thy endeavors; The comfort,
and reward of them shall Psalm. 35.13.
return into thine own bosom: Neither indeed, can the reigning, and
continuance of Schisms, and Divisions, in the Church, (chiefly, in this dotage
of the world) much stagger, or afflict thee; for, what Peter said of the fiery
trial, holds true here, This is no 1 Pet, 4.12.
[strange] thing, that has happened among us: lo! it has ever been so,
(throughout all ages of the Church) since the original, and first Genesis 3.15.
breach made betwixt the two seeds, in Paradise: yea, the probability of the
thing it self, is grounded, says our Apostle here, on the [necessity] of a
[greater] evil, that [must] be, in the Church; and that is heresy; schisms,
and divisions [may] be, for, heresies [must] be; for, so is the Text, For,
first of all, when ye come together in the Church, I hear that there are
divisions among you, and I partly believe it; for there [must] be also heresies
among you, etc.

I conclude all, with that zealous exhortation of St. Paul unto his
Corinthians, among whom he had detected variety of Schisms, and Divisions; and
unto whom he had showed the danger, and ill consequence of them; and, willing
to raise up their hearts unto a desire of the remedy thereof, which was the
contrary amity, and unity, says; Finally, brethred, farewell: be perfect, be
of good comfort, be of one mind, live in 2 Cor. 13.11.
peace, and the God of love, and peace shall be with you: This God grant unto
us, and unto his holy Catholic Church, for his dear Son sake, Jesus Christ
the righteous; To whom with the Father, and the blessed Spirit be all honor,
praise, and glory, from hence forth, and for ever.

Amen.
(...).
FINIS.

