(...); OR, An Historical Discourse OF PARLIAMENTS in their original before
the Conquest, and continuance since.

Together with the Original growth, and continuance, of these Courts following,

Viz.
High Court of CHANCERY, UPPER BENCH, COMMON PLEAS, EXCHEQUER, DUCHY,
And other inferior Courts now in use in this Commonwealth.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Firby, near Grayes-Inne-Gate in Holborn. 1656.

To the Reader
THis treatise, though small, yet has undertaken a subject of a very sublime
nature to handle, the Author being unknown (by his person, though not for his
pains) another hand has presumed to insert a few marginall notes to it, with
his authorities for what he sets down; if thou compare both together, thou will
find that the notes and the text do help one another: when thou read the
book some of the notes will serve thee as an opened casement in windows,
through which thou may see more distinctly that afar off which he does see
down without citing his Authorities; some others of them are as blinds upon
windows (not to hinder thy light) but to direct and level thy eyes upwards
toward Antiquity with more Infalability. But take not the Penman of the notes
as one that herby would detract any thing from the Authors worth (who ever he
be) for it is easily seen by his Tract that he knew what he writ, and and we
know that those who are no Novices in the Commonwealth of Learning upon
perusal of this tract (though many of his authorities are not cited in the
very pages) yet can judge of Hercules by his foot, and that this Author was of
no ordinary stature in Antiquity. The notes then are to prevent such as are no
great proficients in the school of the Ancients from saying, That the Authors
ipse dixit is the warrant of some things he writ, and that it has no other
passable or current authority. If thou find faylings herein, I have but this
to say to thee, Humanu^ est errare; and if thou be more than mere man, then let
the Author and the World see thy perfect work that shall be subject to no
error, and thereby thou will gratify mankind more than yet the World has been
Blessed with in any thing, except the Bible. But not to make the Porch bigger
than the Church, I desire thee to be candid, and to read without prejudice.

Farewell, J. S.

An Historical Discourse of Parliaments and other Courts etc.
AS without doubt ever since the first propagation of Mankind on the face of
the earth; there were before the Deluge, Cain and Cains and proud Giants, and
after the Food, Cham, Nimrod, Esau and such like mighty Hunters, and injurious
Oppressors of the servants of God, so from time to time, God out of his
paternal care and merciful providence, has excited some of his own, endued
and armed with Wisdom, Authority, and power, not only to preserve his little
ones from the greedy and ravenous jaws of wicked persecutors, but also after a
sort to resist their cruelty and chastise them for their excess and sury.

For we read in Genesis that Adam; immediately after his Fall, had two sons (to
wit) Abell and Cain, whom he taught in the knowledge of God; and Cain was a
wicked person and slew his Brother, of which it grieved him not t^ll God had
afflicted him with the fire and torment of his Conscience, and then he cried
out Mayor est paena mea quam ut sustinere possim. Genesis 4.13. After Cain,
succeeded Lamech (born in the house of Cham) who corrupted the institution of
Marriage, by taking to his Wives Adah and Zilla. And besides them, many others
lived impiously, even to the days of Noah, when all the Earth was corrupted;
wherefore God destroyed all mankind with the rest of the Creatures from the
face of the Earth, except Noah and those that were with him. Genesis 7.23. And
again after that deluge, when the Earth was replenished with a multitude of
people, and consequently contentions were become so numerous, that there was
not found any one able to determine of their plaints and suites, nor place
spacious enough to hear the suitors: then according to Jethroes counsel to
Moses, the jurisdiction or charge of Administering Justice was divided among
very many, and several places assigned for that especial purpose, that the
people, as from so many Conduit-pipes, the aquam vitae the Law, that fountain
wherein the life and liberty of the people is conserved, might receive.

Wherefore the Israelites, that were the first people to whom any written law
was given, were wont to pronounce their Judgments in the gate of every City,
that the plainness and indifferency of their proceedings might appear; so
that none might need to go out of the right way to seek for Justice, and of
purpose to show, that Judgment was a divine thing; then afterward in Curia and
Foro the Athemians also in their temple called (by reason of a special
Judgment) Areopagus, and in the place called Palladium et Pritaneum:

And albeit that the Caules, our neighbors (now called Frenchmen) did hold
their Assemblies for justice, only at Charnute and Charters, a place situate
in the midst of their Country that all the people might have indifferent
resort; after which order also the Brittons of this Island did make their
meetings, as it may well be gathered out of Caesar's Commentaries, where he
plainly writes, that these Druides (which then were the Judges amongst the
Galls) had fetched that their manner of discipline out of Britain, where we
now dwell; yet Nevertheles the Saxons our Ancestors (which suceeded them in
this country) they retained the manner of the old Germans their own elders
(who as Tacitus writs Jura per pagos vicosque reddebant) and they made
distribution of Justice not in one town or in the princes palace; but also
sundry other special places within the country.

And truly the Normans, that invaded the posterty of the same Saxons here did
not so much after the substance, as the name of this the Saxons order, which
they found at their coming higher, for (in effect) they did but alter the word
Gemote (which in the Saxon tongue signified in assembly or meeting together,
into the french word Court or Cour (for so it is also found written) being a
term of the self same force and signification.

This court (or Cour) therefore is derived of the latin Curia, Cook Epist to
his 4 Instit. Curia a cura qui a est locus ubi publicas curas gerebant, or
Curia (...) from the Lord, and so it is the Ks. Court or Palatium Regium.
which also is fetched from Cura, (as Valla writes) whereby is notified, that
heed and care ought to be taken in the decidings of Controversies: it
signifies properly both the assembly of men for the hearing of causes in
variance, and the place also where that assembly is made; According to the
first of which significations, the Saxons as I said, called it Gemote a
meeting, of Gemettan, to meet, and agreeably to the second, the kings house was
first called a Court, because the chief Court of Justice was holden there.

But now of Courts some were called ecclesiastical, some Lay, and other some
mixed (that is to say) both ecclesiastical and Lay.

Of this last sort I find but one namely the high Court of Parliament, which I
call mixed, because it had the Bishops joined with the lay Lords to make up the
second estate thereof, the first estate consisting of the Prince alone, and the
third of the Commonalty, without any of the Clergy at all.

Of which Court, albeit it was rather sommoned to devise and create, reform
and repeal laws, than to put them in execution: yet forasmuch as it both
ministered the matter whereupon all the other Courts do work, and had in some
causes ordinary jurisdictions also, I will speak first, and then pursue my
division.

That which we now (agreeing with the Scotts and Irish) do call a Parliament,
the Frenchmen do call Les Estates or assemble de les estates, because with them
there (as with as also) the King, Nobility and Commons (which be the three
Estates of the land) do meet thereat to consult: and the same in Germany is
termed a Diet: for these other Courts that carry the name of Parliament in
France, be but ordinary Courts of Justice which as ( Paulus Jovius writes) are
thought to have been planted by us, (and of which our own Councels established
in Wales, and in the North parts do bear the nearest show and resemblance.)

This word Parliament (says one) is Compounded of parium and lamentum, because
(as he thinks) Peers of the country did at those meetings lament and
complain each to other of the enormyties of their country, and thereupon
provided redress for the same, but this is not very credible.

But their opinion is more probable (as I think) which derive the Parliament
simply from the French word Parler, and that also from the Greek (...) both
signifying tospeake, and so by adding the termination, mem (which is common in
the french tongue, as well to many nounes, as adverbs) do make up Parliament,
meaning thereby an Assembly of men called together to speak, or confer of
their advice and opinion, and so also it may not unfitly be called Parliament
for that every man there does or should speak his mind: but Laur. Valla
misliketh that kind of Etymology, Cooks (...) stit. fol^ 110. se^ 164.
yet my Lord Cook says that it comes from parler lament, to speak ones mind
and his authority is not mean.

I will not take upon me to set down the very time, The beginning of the word
Parliament.
in which the word Parliament came first in use, but forasmuch as it was
transported out of France, it is not unprobable to guess that it began here
shortly after the time of the Norman Conquest, One of the most authentic
reports, The name Parliament was used before the conquest in the time of Edw.
the Confessor, Cook 1 Instit. sect. 164 page 110
that I think can be sound of that name Parliament, is in the statute made 3.
E. 1. and commonly called -- where that assembly is said to be le Primer
Parliament general, apres coronement le Roy but yet that is not the very first
use of the word, for in the statute called Articuli clori and published 9. E.
2. these words are read amongst others, Tempore progenitorum nostrornm, quondam
regum Angliae in diversis Parliament is su is, etc. which word progenitorum and
quondam regum must needs reach higher than to E. 1. that was but father to him
that spoke it.

So that I can willingly herein subscribe to the opinion of Polydore Virgill
who in the eleaventh book of his English history which contains the reign of
King Henry the first, that was son to the Conqu. writing of the great assembly
at Salisbury, says thus, at illud apposite habeo dicere reges ante haec
tempora non consueuisse populis conventum consultandi causa, nisi perraro
facere, adeo ut ab Hemico id institutum jure manasse dici possi^, etc. and a
little after, more galico vulgo Parliamentum appellant etc. and this is so much
the more credible, as that King labored by all means, and especially by
restitution of the ancient, laws, (as all histories do agree) to heal the
hearts of the English men, which were before deeply wounded by the oppressions
of his father and brother William, to the end that he might thereby the better
keep the Crown, of this Realm against his elder brother Rob. Witenage Mote
Michall Sinoth, and Michell Gemote, names, of Parliament before the Conquest.
Cook Inslit. fol. 110
who both had good right, and had moved his claim thereto: but what time soever
this Court began to be called by the name of Parliament, this is certain, that
the same was before known to the Saxons (or English men) some times by the word
Sinoth and Micell Sinoth, of the Greek Synodos (now appropriated to
ecclesiastical meetings only, and sometimes by these terms, micel-zemoce
wizenazemoze and aupa-picena zemoze, (that is to say) the great meeting, the
meeting of all the wise men, for wizan signifies a wise man, and Gemote, a
meeting: of which last word the names Shiyremoote, folemoote, and halymoote
(that is to say) the assembly or meeting of men of a Shire of the men of a
Town and of the tenants of a Hall (or Manor) had their beginnings also. And
as Synoth is more used in the acts of Parliament themselves, so Gemote is more
familiar to the histories: thus much as well of the present as of the ancient
usual name, now let us look, into the thing it self.

Like as in war where the King is present in person, The conformity and the
reason of the Estates in Parliament
and with him the Nobility, Gentry, and Yeomonry, there is the force and
puissance of the Realm: even so in peace, wheresoever is the prince (as the
head) to give life (that is to say, yield the highest and the last assent, and
where the Baronie consistting of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the
Commonalty made up of the Knights and Burgesses) be (as the body) present at
his commandment, to deliberate, confer, consult and consent, there is also
the Council and policy of the Realm, so that forasmuch as every man, (from
the highest to the lowest) is there either in person or by procuration,
therefore of right every man is said to be bound by that law which does pass
from such an assembly.

And this frame of policy, is both Natural and Harmonicall: 1. Natural, in
that it has an imitation of the natural body of man, truly called (...) a
little world, out of the 3 cells whereof, namely, the head, breast and belly,
the whole three powers of the soul do open and utter themselves:

2 Harmonicall, because from such and so tuned a Base, Mean, and Treble; The
beginning of the Parliament
there proceeds a most exquisite consent and delicious melody, the beginning
of which manner of consultation, Parliaments holden long before the Conquest.
Mirror c. 8 sect 2
and namely, with us of this Realm I see not how I can derive it from any
other time then from that in which the Germans or English nation did set their
first foot on this land to invade vade it, for Cornelius Tacitus vvriteth thus
nec regibus infinita potestas, de minoribus rebus principes consultant, de
maioribus omnes.

Neither did they (together with the change of the soil) make change of this
their wonted manner of deliberation: for it is yet extant in monuments left
behind them, The con^^nuance of the Parliament until the Conquest.
that after their coming hither, they frequented the same order in counselling
which they had used in their own country before, These two Kings are great
exemplars of grave wisdom, and would not trust their own judgments in a ^^tter
of so ^^gh concernment, but consulted their wisemen about it knowing that plus
vident oculi quam oculus.
for proof whereof I might call Beda the Saxon historiographer to vvittnesse,
who (reporting that the Christian faith took root by little and little
amongst them in their particular Kingdoms within this land) vvriteth that
King Edwyne of Northumberland would not embrace the preaching of the Gospel
before he had communed and consulted with his friends and Nobility, and
Wisemen, and that Sigeberth the King of Eastsex, being likewise moved to be
baptized, did first call a Council of his subjects, and finding them all to
favor the motion, did then himself also assent unto it.

But because the Synodes (or Parliaments) themselves be most faithful
witnesses of their own doings, and for that also the kingdom of the west
saxons prevailing over the rest, and meeting (as it were) all their crowns to
make on for hereselfe, did in the end become mistress (or Monarch) of the
whole Heptarchie (or seven Kingdoms) into which this Land was first divided, I
will for a while leave historians, and come to the Synodes, first showing by
one or two examples, what persons were wont to be present at the parliament of
that kingdom, and then confirming the like to have been used, after such time
as the whole land was reduced to one entire estate and monarchy.

Ine the King of Westsex who began his reign, about the year of the Incarnation
of our Lord Christ 712. begineth his Parliament thus: I Ine by Gods gift King
of the west Saxons, with the advice and teaching of Cenred my father, Ireledde
my Bishop, and Ercenwold my Bishop, and with all mine Aldermen and eldest
wisemen of my people, and also a great assembly of Gods servants was careful
concerning the health of our souls, and the establishment of our kingdom etc.
Now let us see if three estates of Parliament (that is to say) the King, the
Nobility, and Commons, may besound here.

First the Kings name is expressly added, the Noblitie is signified under these
Bishops and Aldermen; for before the division of the Realm into Shires, every
large Territory had an Alderman or governor: who was after the allotment into
shires for the most part an Earl, in token whereof all our Earls to this day
do bear the name of one shire or other.

The Commonalty is partly included in the words: the Eldest wisemen of my
people, which betoken the laytie, and partly in the words, A great assembly of
Gods servants which do notify the Clergy so called then, as it may appear
by the first Chapter of the very same laws, for that they were consecrated
to Gods service. And lest any man should think that these estates were called
together more for their advice and counsel, to be given to the king, then for
any authority (or interest) that they had in making the law, the preamble
calls those laws, our dooms, or Judgments. And the purveivv says, we bid
or command, in the plural number, which also may not be restrained to the
King only for honor sake, as we now use to speak, for he is there named I
Ine, in the singular only: Thus much I note once for all. That I be not
hereafter troubled to repeat the same thing often.

About one hundred years after the death of this Ine, one Aldred a King of the
west Saxons also, as he calls himself, but rather King of the English men
and Saxons (as Asserius says that vvrote his life) did as he tells in his
preface to his laws, gather together and put in vvriting certain ordinances
made by wise men in sundry Synods of sundry former Kings: as namely Ine
aforesaid, Offa King of middle England, and Ethelbert of Kent, the first
christened Prince of all the Saxon nation; which collection of laws he also
says that he shevved to all his wise men, and they also thought them meet to
be observed, but what makes it to the three estates (will some man say) that
the kings and their wisemen (which may well seem to be but their privy
Counselors) did establish laws. yes very much: for here the word Witena.
(wisemen) does include the Nobility and Commons because they be Counselors of
the Realm for the time in respect whereof the assembly of them was of some,
called Witena Gemote a meeting of the wisemen as I told you, And of other it is
termed Commune consilium Regni, the common counsel of the Realm, and that this
must be so understood in this place, I will use none other argument, then the
testimony of Alfred himself drawn out of the same place; for he says (as
you have heard) that the laws of the King Ine were made by a Synod of
wisemen, and what those wisemen were, you here also understand by the report of
King Ine himself And the style of his own laws (that is to say) by the
Nobility and Comunalty besides the King.

Furthermore that I lose not another advantage offered me by this authority, I
must also gather hereby, That not only the Kings of Northumberland, Essex, and
Westsex used the three estates in making their Laws, but also that they of
Kent, and middle England, maintained the same order: for King Alfreds words (as
you see) are one and the same for them all, and then consequently their manner
was one and the same through all.

But now that I may at the length leave these heptarchies or petie Kings, and
pass to the Monarchies and great ones, the same Alfred after that the whole
nation had yielded themselves unto him, and were shrouded under his protection
against the furious storm of the Danish invasion, did at one time conclude a
peace with Guthrum the King of the Danes, the style whereof begins thus:
This is the peace that King Alfred and King Guthrum and all the wisemen of the
English nation have taken etc. Lo here you see ( Ealra Witena Gemote an
assembly of all the wisemen) After him, Edward called his wisemen to Excester,
and consulted with them for the better observation of the peace of his own
Realm, And he also at another time by the advice of his wisemen renewed and
confirmed the league that Alfred had before taken with the Danish Captain.

King Ethelstane concludes his famous Parliament holden at Grateley thus: All
this was ordained in that great Synod at Grateley, at the which was the
Archbishop Walfhelme with all the Noblemen and Wisemen, that King Ethelstane
gathered together, and the same King did also afterward call another assembly
of his wisemen, to Excester to consult for the better execution of those former
Ordinances.

Edmond the King summoned a great Synod at London both of the order of the
Spiritualty and Temporalty, the which (in the second part of the Law there
made) he called by a general name, his (Witena) wisemen, and thanketh them all
for their help in that advice.

And after him King Edgar published certain laws which were made (as he
says) by the Counsel of his wisemen. K. Edgar made laws frequenti senatu, he
began to reign, 959. Lambard. f. 62. Etheldred had consilium sapientium and be
began to reign 979. Lam. f. 88.


The like title and conclusion have those statutes also which King Etheldred
ordained at Woodstock and the league which he made with Anlaf, another of the
Captains of the Danish army, is entitled to be made by him and his wisemen.

And certain other acts there be (though hitherto not imprinted) of a
Parliament that was assembled in the year of Chist 1008. which fell under the
reign of the same King, which are there reported to have passed under the
authority of the King and his wisemen, both spiritual and lay, in which said
last ordinances, this one thing for this purpose is worthy of observation: That
whereas in the beginning of the laws all the acts are said to pass from the
King and his wisemen both of the Clergy and Laytie, It is also supposed that
the senatus consultum de monticolis Walliae, was in this Kings time, the title
is Consultum quod Angliae sapientes and Walliae consiliarij de monticolis
fecerunt. Lamb. 94.
in all the body and process of the law each statute says thus: And it is the
advice of our Lord and his Wisemen so (as it seems plainly) that it was then
a received speech, to signify both the Spiritualty and Laity that is to say
the Nobility and Commons, by the only word, Witena. (or Wisemen.)

Finally those laws of the great King and Monarch Canute or (Knoate) which he
made at Winchester and be yet remaining, do bear face and testimony that they
were made by him and his wisemen: Se of this Guliel. Lamb. 97.
And there is an ancient written treatise entitled Modus tenendi parliamentum
tempore regis Edwardi filii Etheldredi to be seen in many hands, purportng the
very order, form: and manner of all this stately Court and Assembly.

Now as these written authorities do undoubtedly confirm our assertion of the
continuance of this manner of Parliament, so is there also unwritten law (or
prescription) that does no less infallibly uphold the same: for it is well
known that in every quarter of the Realm a great many Boroughs do yet send
Burgesses to the Parliament, which nevertheless be so anciently, and so long
since decayed and gone to naught, that it cannot be showed that they have been
of any reputation at any time since the Conquest, and much less they have
obtained that priveledge by the Grant of the King succeeding the same; so that
the interest they have in Parliament grows by an ancient usage before the
Conquest, whereof they cannot show any beginning which thing also is confirmed
by a contrary usage in the selfsame thing: for it is likewise known, that they
of ancient demeasne do prescribe in not sending to the Parliament, for which
reason also they are neither contributaries to the wages of the Knights there,
neither are they bound by sundry Acts of Parliament though the same be
generally penned and do make no exception of them.

But there is no ancient Demeasne saving that only which is described in the
book of Domesday under the title of Terra Regis, which of necessity must be
such as either was in the hands of the Conqueror himself (who made that
book) or of Edward the Confessor that was before him.

And so again if they of ancient demeasne have ever since the Conquest, Mirror,
c. 1. sect. 2.
prescribed not to send Burgesses to the Parliament, then (no doubt) there was
a Parliament before the Conquest, to the which they of other places did send
their Burgesses; which seeing it is so, let us come nearer and examine whether
the same order have continued since that time or no. The continuance of
Parliament after the Conquest.


To look for a Parliament (assembled of the English nation and Commons) soon
after the Conquest were but to labor without expectation of good speed; for
Silent leges inter arma. There were in the time of, and since the conquest in
the raigns of H 1. K. Stephen H. 2. R. 1. K. John H. 3. etc. 280. Parliaments
and acts made at every session Cook 1. Jnst sect. 164. p. 110. See Polyd. l.
11. and Hollingsh, p. 354. of the beginning of Parliaments in England.
And during all the reign of the Conqueror either the sword was not put up
into the scabbard, or if it were, the hand was always upon the hilt ready to
draw it again.

So unwilling on the one part were the English men to take the yoke, and more
that rather their obedience was to be compelled, then their opinions to be
consulted, and so haughty on the other part were the Normans victors, that to
be called an Englishman was in their eye a great contumely and reproach.

His son William also did rather pretend in word, some release of the former
austerity in government than perform it in deed and experience: But his other
son (the first Henry that ever reigned here) did not only at his Coronation
promise restitution of St. Edwards laws (as we call them) but also delivered
out his free Charter of the Grant of the same; in which (as M. Paris reports
he acknowledges that he was crowned by the Common Council of the Barons of
the Realm of England and there it may happily seem strange to affirm that
this was a full Parliament; in the which there is no other mention but of these
Barons only: But if it be considered, first, that the Germans expound and
render the word Baro, by Freehears, a freeman, then that Math. Paris says that
the Citizens of London were at that time called Barons: And also that even yet
Burgesses of the Five Ports do pass under the same name of Barons, and that
every man (almost) has his Court Baron; It shall not be altogether without
ground, to say that both the Nobility and Commonalty of the Realm were meant
under these words (the Barons of the Realm) the rather because that speech is
accompanied with the words (Common Council) and for that also, the self same
Author does afterward use the words Comunis assensus Baronagii when he
intends to signify a just Parliament Ingulphus who died before 1109. says
Rex Eldredus convocavit magnates, Episcopos proceres and optimates ad
tractandum de publ. negotiis Regni.

Howbeit since I labor not with any penury of proof, I will relinquish the
advantage of this matter, desiring only that they may be called to memory
which Polydore Virgil has before acknowledged concerning the restitution of
the form of the Parliament made by this very same King, of whom also the Saxon
Chronicles of Peterborough Abbey do testify, that in the year after Christ
1123. he sent his writers over all England, and bad his Bishshops, Abbots, and
all his Theignes (which signify as much as Barons before) that they should come
to his Witena Gemote, on Candlemas day to Gloucester

But to leave him, and to leap over Stephen, because he has striven longer for
the Crown then he enjoyed it. King Henry the second (says Matthew Paris) in the
year of our Lord Christ, 1185. Convocavit Clericos Regni, and populum cum omni
nobilitate apud fontem Clericorum.

And yet again to pass over his two sons, Richard and John, whereof the one
spent the most part of his Reign in battle abroad, and the other in Civil
wars at home. I read in the same Author, that King Henry the third, did in the
year of our Lord, 1225. call together Omnes Clericos and laicos totius regni;
Which assembly the same writer also in some places expresses by the words
Vniversitas regni, but what need I to hang long on the credit of Historians,
seeing from this time downward the authentic writers of the Parliaments
themselves do offer me present help.

The great Charter of England (which passed from this King about this time, and
for which the English men had no less striven than the Trojans for their
Helena) bears no show of an Act of Parliament, and yet I will prove by the
Depositions of two sundry Parliaments, That it was made by the common assent of
all the Realm in the time of King Henry the third, for so says the statute
called Confirmatio Chartae. Anno. 25. E. 1. in flat Terms, and the statute
made at Westminster Anno. 25. E. 3. Cap. 1. says, that it was made by the
King, Peers and Commons of the land: in the 20. year of the same King Henry,
the statute of Mert^n was published, which says thus. Provisum fuit and
consessum tam a praedictis Archiepiscopis Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus quam
ab ipso rege and aliis.

And in the 52. year of his reign was the statute of Marle-bridge made,
provideat (as it self speaks) ipso domino rege ac convocatis discetioribus
eiusdem Regni tam majoribus quam minoribus provisum est and. statutum. etc.

The statute of Westminster the first, which was made in the third year of E.
1. has this title. The establishments of King Edward made by this Council and
by the Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops Abbots, Earls, Barons and all the
Comonalty of the land thither sumoned. The statute made at Gloucester in the 6.
year of the same Kings reign is there said to be thus made. Purrelant le Roy
and apelles le pluis discretes de son Royalme auxibien des greinders come des
meindres establie est and concordantment ordenie.

To draw to an end, King Edward the second held a Parliament in the 14. year of
his reign wherein are these words. Le (Roy per assent des Prelates, Counts,
Barons, and tout le Comunaltie de son Realm en le Parliament etc. and the like
speech has he in another statute that he made. Ne quis occasionetur pro morte
Petri de Gaveston.

I do not think that I shall need to speak for further proofs amongst the
Records of Parliaments after this time: for they do from henceforth not only
show themselves in such store and plenty, but also set forth the several
states themselves, the duty of their presence, the pains of their default or
departure, and sundry other circumstances so particularly and plainly, that as
I might well be charged (if you would stand upon them) in a matter not
doubtful to have used speech nothing at all needful: and yet least any man
should suspect, that any of the two estates of this Assembly derived his voice
in Parliament from the authority of any of these later laws, I must leave him
to understand that in one short Statute of Parliament (holden in the 5, year of
King Richard 2. statute 2. ca. 4. he may read it 4. several times plainly
spoken, that this was done anciently and of old time.

So that here again also Prescription is ready to serve the turn, and to say
the truth, this one law may stand for an Interpreter of all the rest, for
whether they be said to be made by the King and his Barons, or by the King and
his Clergy and Laytie, or by the King and his discreeter men, both great and
small, or by the common. Assent of all the Realm, as I have already showed, or
by the King and his Wisemen, or by the King and his Council, or his
Comon-Councell, or by the King, Earls, Barons and other Wisemen, or after such
other like phrases whereof you may meet with many in the volumes of Parliament;
it comes all to this one point, namely that the King his Nobility and Commons
did ordain them.

And (which is more) if you shall find any act of Parliament seeming to pass
under the name and authority of the King only (as some have that show indeed)
yet you must not by and by judge that it was established without the Assent of
the other estates.

To take one example for the rest, The statute of Gloucester (made the 6. E.
1.) speaks thus: Our sovereign Lord the King, for the amendment of the land,
has provided the statutes underwritten etc.

But yet the statutes made at Westminster (in the 13, year of that King) and
the statute of Quo Warranto (set forth in the ^0. year of that King also)
^eciting that statute of Gloucester, do plainly acknowledge; the one, that it
was provided by the more discreet men of the Realm, as well of the high as of
the low degree being called together; and the other, that it was made by the
King, calling together the Earls, Prelates, Barons, and his Council, And
therefore it was well noted by Judge Brook, That though magna Charta, and
sundry other old statutes do run in the name of the Prince only, yet the other
estates are supplied in all good understanding.

Again whether the form of an Act be thus. The King with the Assents of the
Lords and Commons does establish, or thus: It is enacted at the request of the
Lords and Commons whereto the King assenteth, or thus: by the Assent of the
King, and of the Lords spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons it is
enacted, or thus: It is enacted by the authority of this present Parliament; It
is also all one in effect and substance: for the words ( assenteth and
enacteth) are equivalent in this case, 7. H. 7.14. and 2 H. 7.^7.
as it is holden 7. H. 7.14. and. 2. H. 7.27. whereas otherwise the necessity
of the Assent of all the 3. estates of Parliament is such, as without any one
of them the rest will lose their labor: For it fell out upon a time, that the
King in Parliament willed that a certain man should be attainted, and should
lose his hands, whereunto the Lords assented. But because there was nothing
spoken of the Commons, it was adjudged by all the Justices (4. H. 7.18.) That
this was no Act that might bind, 4. H. 7.18.
and therefore the party was restored.

Hitherto of the Continuance and Assent of this our first and highest Court,
This Court of Parliament makes, inlargeth, diminishes, abrogateth, repealeth,
and reviveth Laws statutes etc. concerning matters ecclesiastical, capital,
criminal, common, civil, martial, maritine, etc. Cook. 1: Inst fol. 110.
sect. 164. see 4. Inst. chap. Parlia. meant.
whereunto after that I shall have added a word or two of the jurisdiction
thereof, I will proceed to the rest, if all judgments (as Cicero said) be
conversant either in the punishment of offenses, or in the decision of
controversies, then is the Judgment of our Parliament of as ample authority as
the assent of any or all other Courts whatsoever: for it declares the laws
that do bind all persons in all Causes as well ecclesiastical as temporal,
whereof you may see a great many examples in the volume of the old saxon
Parliaments, how strange a thing so ever the popish Clergy in former times
have thought it to be, it has jurisdiction also in such causes which have need
of help, and for which there is no help by any law already in force. And
whereon the erroneous Judgments of any other Courts must be reversed by a
higher authority, this Court does not only reverse the errors of the upper
Bench, formerly called the Kings Bench, which is superior to all other, but it
may also amend the errors committed by the Parliament it self, if any such
shall at any time appear.

Ecclesiastical Courts were many in number, and diverse in nature, whereof the
Chief was the Convocation of the Clergy of the whole nation of England and
Wales, which was assembled together with the estates of Parliament, and it
consisted of the Deanes, Chapters, Archdeacons, Procurators of all the
Cathedral Churches, the next were the 2. provincial Synods of Canterbury and
of York, to the later of the which, there were only three Bishoprics subject,
that is to say, Durham, Carlisle, and Chester, and all the rest owed their
obedience to the Sea of Canterbury.

After those were the general Courts of the Archbishops of Canterbury (that
is to say) the Consistory (or Court) of the Arches for Appellations, the Court
of Audience (of the Chancellours Court) which was wont to be in the
Archbishops house; The Commissaries (or the Praerogative) Court (which is now
in being) for probate of Testaments, and the Court of Faculties for
dispensations; then followed the special Courts of this Archbishop, namely
his Consistory holden by his Commissary at Canterbury for his diocaesse, and
lastly the Court of those peculiar Deanaries which did belong unto him, and do
ly in the diocaesses of other Bishopps; The other Archbishops (and each other
Bishop) had in his own Diocese the Court of his Chancellor, and the Court of
his Archdeacon or his Official.

But forasmuch as the description of these ecclesiastical Courts, pertains
to another learning, (I mean to the Civil and Canon Laws by which they were
governed) and do withal require a double treatise by themselves, I will
content my self with this bare enumeration of them at this time, and bend my
labor to the discovery of the Lay (or temporal) Courts that now have place
amongst us.

Lay Courts were of two sorts, The sorts of Lay Courts in ancient time.
at the first only base, and high; concerning the beginning whereof, I read
that even as Moses (the special minister of Justice appointed by God) finding
himself unable to sustain the burden of deciding all the Controversies of the
people, Deuteronomy. 1. Exodus 18.
did set Judges over Tribes, Hundreds Fifties, and Tenths of the multitude, to
whom he referred the determination of smaller causes, reserving to himself the
knowledge of matters that were of greater importance; so also that Saxon (but
Christian King of England) Alfred, divided his whole Realm of England first
into Shires, Division of the Realm for juris. diction.
then those shires into Rathes, Rapes, or Rideings, and these again into
Wapentakes or Hundreds; and lastly, those also into Leets, Barons, or Tything,
and did withal establish jurisdiction in every of these, permitting to the
Reeves or Judges of the lower rooms, authority of hearing smaller suites,
granting greater power to the Shiriffs and Aldermen, which have charge of
greater Assemblyes, and detaining to himself the decision of such matters as by
just cause of appellation, (either for Law or equity,) should be brought unto
him.

This Court of the whole Shire was of two sorts, whereof the one then called
Scyre-Gemote, that is the Assembly of the Shire, and now termed the Sheriffs
turn, was then (as now also) holden twice in one year: And this Court was of
like jurisdiction, to the Court of the Leet, or of the Boroughs or Tything, as
it was then called: The second and the Hundred Court (then named Hundre
des-Gemote) was in those appointed to be holden once in a month at the least,
and that was of like nature to the County Court (which is now kept every month
also) unto the Court Baron anciently called healgemote, and corruptly halymote,
that is (as I said) the Court of a Hall (or chief place) which is now at this
day to be kept, and maintained once in three weeks, if the Lord will so have it.

I read further more in the Laws of the Saxon King Edgar, thus: ne Gesece nan
man Sone Synz etc. Let no man seek to the King in matter of variance, unless he
cannot find right at home; but if that right be too heavy for him, then let him
seek to the King to have it lightened.

The very like whereof is to be seen (in effect in the Laws of Canutus the Dane
sometimes King of this Nation also. The high Court of justice before the
Conquest for Laws and equity.


Out of which laws I gather four things.

First, that every man had means to use in these base Courts at home in the
Country for the recovery of his right.

Secondly, Then that no man ought to use it out of the County, or to draw his
plea from thence without good cause, both which things lie plainly in the
letter of this Law.

Thirdly, that the King himself has a high Court of Justice wherein it
seems, that he sat in person, for the words be: Let him not seek the King.

And lastly, that the same Court of the King did judge, not only according to
mere right, and Law, but also after equity and good conscience.

For first the words be: unless he cannot find right at home, by which it is
permitted that then he might use to go to the King for right.

Secondly Again, if that right be too heavy, then let him seek to the King etc.
whereby it is meant, that he should have the rigor of the Law mitigated by the
conscience of the Prince, and after this order, and in these two sorts of
Courts was all Justice administered until the time of King William the
Conquerour^ during whose reign (as also under the Government of King Rufus his
son) it is to be thought, that the ordinary course of Justice was greatly
disturbed, as well by reason of the intestine and sorraign wars, as also
because that these two Princes governed by a mere and absolute power, as in a
Realm obtained by Conquest, but yet it was so far off, that any of them did
utterly abolish these Courts, That the same did not only remain during all
their times, (howsoever put to silence for the season) but also had continuance
afterward, and do yet (as they may) here bear life amongst us: for, as I said,
those base Courts of the Shires, Hundreds, Boroughs, and Manors, do yet
continue in manuer the same in substance that they then were, and that the
pleas ought no more to be taken from then now in our days (without cause) then
they ought to have been, may evidently be proved by the writs of Tolt, pone
accedas. ad Curiam, and Recordari, vhich we now yet use, and that to this only
end, to remove suits upon cause out of one Court into another.

The like I may also affirm of that high Court which then followed the King
himself, for albeit that many particular high Courts be now since that time
advanced, by reason that the multitude of suits (still increasing with the
iniquity of the age of, the World,) would not suffer them all to be ordered in
one place, without both into ler^ble delay of matters, and grievous vexation of
men, yet nevertheless if ye will thoroughly behold the matter, and subject about
which all these Courts are now occupied, you shall perceive that they are but
as it were so many branches sprung up out of that one tree or stream derived
from the same spring and sountaine.

For letting pass those Courts of the Country which I have already touched,
also those other small Courts of record that be in Cities and Towns corporate,
Pipowders of Pies and powldres, that is dusty feet: because it is for
Travailers to the sayr
yea, and the Pipowders Court it self that lasts no longer then the Fair, All
our higher Course at this day be either Courts of right and Law, or else of
equity and conscience, as they then were, although they now require another
subdivision, than they then had; And that (if you will) may be this.

The Courts of Law do either handle civil or criminal causes: The late
division of Lay Courts
And these Civil causes be either moved between the Lord Protector and the
people of England (formerly between the King his tenants and subjects) or else
between one subject and another.

Those Courts of Law that hold plea of common or civil matters that grew
between the Prince and subjects be these.

The Exchequer devised for the safe custody of the lands formerly called the
Crown lands, and for the faithful answering of the revenues of the same. The
Court of wards and Liveryes, and the Court of the duchy of Lancaster, both
which are now altered.

And the Chancery Court (at the least) so far forth as the same has to do with
Petitions, traverses -- de droith and such like.

Those other Courts of Law that have jurisdiction of civil or Common Pleas
arising between, subject, and subject, be these. The Common Place or Bench: The
Marshalsea for matters heretosore within the vierge, or limits assigned to the
Kings house or Palace: The Admiralty Court, which was for marine Causes: And
the upper Bench, in time past termed the Kings Bench, so far forth as it yet
does retain jurisdiction in matters of debt, Assumptions, Actions upon the
Case, and such other things properly tryable in the Common Place, and not there.

Criminal causes do generally belong to the upper Bench, and have formerly
belonged to the Star Chamber, or else particularly do appertain to the
Constables Court, to the Marshasie, Admiralty, Goal delivery, Oyer and
Detorminer, and Sessions of the Peace. And these be the Courts of Law that have
ordinary resort and jurisdiction. The Courts of Conscience be these, First the
Chancery open to all men at all times. Secondly the Court of the Request, that
did hear only the suits of poor men, and of the Princes servants. Thirdly The
Chancellors Court, that was within the Exchequer: and Fourthly, two Councills,
which formerly were established, the one in Wales, and the other in the North
Country, both consisting of President and Council, now taken away, which were
like unto those which in France are called Parliaments, as I said before.

But now to the end that it may the more evidently appear how, and by what
degrees of increase, these many Courts have sprung out of that one, it is
requisite that I proceed to the history of King, William the Conqueror (where
I left) and to descend from him, downward, until I have set all on foot. The
Court of Exchequer. The Authority of this Court is of original jurisdiction
without any Commission Cook: 4. Inst. c. 11. p. 130.


It is confessed by all writings that the Conqueror after such time as he had
suppressed the forces of those that made head against him here, did immediately
cause the whole Realm to be exactly surveyed by Shires, and Hundreds, severally
as well for the understanding of the woods, pastures, meadows, and tillage
thereof, The first survey of the Kingdom was by Alfred about 872. the Register
thereof was kept in his treasury at Winchester. Daniell f. 11.
as also of the profitts of Churches, Mills, Villains, and of all other
Commodities whatsoever. The record of which survey was then called Domesday
Book, and was appointed to be kept in the Exchequer at Westminster, where it
now rests. And that Court did he then also newly erect for the ordering of
his revenues, after the name of the Exchequer: in Normandy it had not only the
government of revenues of the Duke there, but was also the sovereign Court for
administration of justice amongst his subjects, Custom Normand. 48.52.635.
and so continued until that Lewis (the 12. King of France) converted it into
a Court of Parliament consisting of President and Counselors, and established
it at Roan in Normandy, where it now remains: But this his Exchequer in
England had only the direction of his demeasns and receipts, the administration
of Common justice continuing still in that other Court of his as it was before
his coming hither: For proof of which matter I call to witness Gervasius
Tilberiensis, a learned man that lived so near to the time of the Conquest,
that he confesses he had talk with Henry Bishop of Winchester, which was son
to the Conquerours sister.

This man was an officer of the Exchequer, here, and penned special dialogues
of the observations of the Exchequer which he dedicated to King Henry the
second, and are yet in the Exchequer in the Black Book there, in the first
part of which his dialogues, ca. 1. he writes (for the advancement of the
Antiquity of the Exchequer) that it was brought out of Normandy by the
Conqueror; and for the authority of the Court he has (amongst other words)
these following: Nulli licet statuta Scaccarii infringere, vel eis quavis
temeritate resistere, habet enim hoc commune, cum ipsa domini Regis curia, in
qua ipsc in propria persona jura decernit, quod nec recordationl, nec
sententiae in eo latae, liceat alieni contradicere.

Whereby it is plainly proved, the Court of the Exchequer was at that time a
distinct Court from that Court of the King, in the which he himself sometimes,
and commonly his justice (called then Prima justitia) did use to sit.

The one Court, having authority over the Kings demeasns and receipts (as
Gervasius in all that work at large discourses) and the other using the power
of distributing common justice, as his words in this place do sufficiently
purport.

And therefore I cannot (but here by the way) note the error of them, which do
maintain, that the Exchequer was (in this time of King Henry the second) a
Court of whatsoever Common pleas for all subjects, and which for proof of their
assertion) do allege the Title of Mr. Glanvil^'s book in part thus: Et illas
solum leges continet and consuetudines secundum quas placitatur in curia Regis
ad scaccarium, for overthrow whereof, first, I say, that the words of this
title be not the words of Glanvill himself, but of that man (whatsoever he
were) that published his book by print. for he entituleth the book thus,
Tractatus de legibus and tempore Reg is Henrici secundi compositus, illustri
viro Ranulpho de Glanvill juris regni and antiquarum Consuctudinum eo tempore
peritissimo, which does plainly discover, that he speaks of Glanvilla as of
another man, and which also lived not then but at another time.

Secondly I affirm, that if it were the speech of Glanvill himself, yet (if you
will take the rest of his words with you) then you shall see that they have
another meaning: for the words stand thus together, Secundum quas placitatur in
Curia Regis ad Saccarium and coram Justiciis ubicunque fuerint: which words
coram Justiciis ubicunque fuerint) do set forth the other Courts of the King
whereof I now speak.

Lastly, I undertake to show, not by the title, but by the Text of Glanvills
own book, that in his time the Kings Court was one, and the Exchequer
another: for throughout his whole work, he called the Court of Common P^eas
Curiam Domine Regis, And the Style of the writ therefore is, quod sit coram me
vel Justiciis meis: But when he comes to speak of the Exchequer, he talks
of Acompts to be made to the King there, and of none other matter: as namely in
the 7. book Ca. 10. where he has this, Si dominus Rex aliquam custodiam alicui
commiserit tunc distinguitur utrum ei custodiam pleno jure commiserit, ita quod
nullum inde reddere compotum oporteat ad Scae^arium, aut aliter.

But before that I leave the reign of this King Henry the second: I must add
this also, that he in the xxiii. of his reign did (by the advice of some of his
Bishops) cut the Realm into 6. parts, and to every of these parts appointed
three Justices, the which are (by Henry Bracton) called Itinerants, and in
Brittons Book, Justices in Eire quasi errantes, as Gervas of Tilbery expounds
it. The proper names of which Justices are set down by Roger Hoveden, who also
describes their circuits, not to differ much from the same that our Justices
of Assize do now ride.

And so I conclude, that not only during all the time of the Conqueror
himself, of William his son, and of his other son Henry the first, (which was a
peaceable Prince, and a maintainer of the ancient Laws, and learned in them,
whereof he had the name (Beauclark) but also under the government of King
Stephen, and of this Heury the second there was one Court following the King,
which was the place of Sovereign justice, both for matter of Law and
conscience; and one other standing Court which was Governess only of the lands
and revenues of the Crown, The first of which was then called Curia Domini
Regis and Aula regia, Bract. fol.
for that the Prince himself did many times fit in person there, and had
Justices (a latere suo residentes) as Bracton says, namely, his chief
Justice, Chancellor, Constables, Marshall, and others. The later was then (as
it is now) cal^ed Scaccarium eo quod lusibilis Scaccarii formam haberet. If you
will give credit to Garves. Tilber. or else it took the name of Statarium, Eo
quod stabilis et firma effect ibi
as Paulus Aemilius and (after him) Polydore Virgil does write of it and in
this the Prince sat, not personally at any time, but his chief Justice as
President, and then the Chancellor of the Exchequer the Treasurer and Barons.
The Common Place.


And in this manner that high Court of the King continued until that Henry the
third in the 9. year of his reign (which was about the time in which he
aspired to the age of xxi, years) granted unto his subjects that great Charter
of the liberties of England in the 11. Ca. whereof he ordained thus, Communia
placita non sequuntur curiam nostram, sed teneantur in aliquo loco certo:
whereupon followed two things, The first, This Court, was in being before this
statute it does not appear that it was then newly e. rected by the stat. of M.
Chapter
that this Court was directed for the determination of all such pleas as did
not concern the Crown and dignity of the Prince but were merely civil, and
did belong unto the subjects between themselves. The second, that this Court
was established in a place certain (and that was at Westminster) to the end
that the people might have a standing Seal of Justice where to they might resort
for the trial of their own causes, and not to be driven to follow the King
and his Court, but only where the matter respect him.

And after this, fo. 105.108.
all the Writs that are recited in Henry Bractons book (which was written in
the latter end of the reign of this King Henry the third) have this Commandment
to the party, quod sit coram Justiciariis meis apud Westmonasterium, and not
coram me vel Justiciis meis, as the former form in Glanvill was.

And thus began the Court, which (because it has power over Common Pleas) we
now call the Commonplace. About this time also, or not long after, some other
Courts of Justice were likewise opened, The book called Britton
as it may partly appear by Henry Bracton, but more plainly by John Britton,
which followed immediately after him, for in the beginning of the reign of King
Edward the first, this John Britton then Bishop of Hereford (whose name Mr.
Bale in his Centuries (or his Printers) mistaketh and calls Bekton) being
singularly learned in the Laws of the Realm, did at the commandment of that
King, and in his name) compile a book now imprinted and named Britton: in the
beginning whereof he d videth all jurisdiction thus: First, that the King
himself had sovereign jurisdiction above all others in his Realm to Judge in
all causes whatsoever: Secondly that the Marshall of the Kings house had the
place of the King to hear and determine the pleas of the Crown within the
verge, and that the Justices in Erie had like authority in every County once in
7. years. Thirdly, that the Justices which followed the King wheresoever he
went and sat in his place, had conusance of erroneous Judgment, Appeals, and
other matters of the Crown. Fourthly, That the Coroner of the Household had his
proper power within the verge and that he and others had the order of weight
and measure throughout the Realm. Fifthly, That Sheriffs, Coroners, Hundredors
Burgesses, Sergeants and Beadles, had (and so have) their Courts within each of
their particular limits. Sixthly, That Justices (being continually at
Westminster) have power over Common Pleas. Seventhly, That the Exchequer at
Westminster had authority concerning the Kings Debts and Feeds, and all things
incident thereunto. And Lastly, that other Justices had the charge of Assize of
the deliverance of Gaols in every County,

Forasmuch as after this distribution of power to hold plea thus made: some of
these Courts would not contain themselves within their appointed limits, but
sought to enlarge their authority, by usurping jurisdiction that was
appropriate to others. Articuli super Chartas ca. 3, 4, 5.


The same King did by Parliament (holden in the xxviii year of his reign)
confirm that great Charter for ever, and in certain articles (as he did call
them) set forth upon the said Charter: did then by like authority of Parliament
enact, that they of the Exchequer should not take knowledge of any Common Plea:
That the Seneschall (or Steward) and the Marshall of the Kings household should
not have plea in hearing of trespasses, Seneschall os Sein, a house and Scale
skillful. So steward, of Stow a place and Wear a keeper:
contracts and covenants made within the verge; And the Chancellors and the
Justice of the Kings Bench (now the upper Bench) should follow him wheresoever
he went, to the end that he might always have men about him that were able to
deliver Law to such as should require it.

Hitherto (as you see) there is no express mention in Britton either of the
Court of Admiralty, the Constables Court, or the Chancery, and therefore it
remains that we labor to find out from whence they also fetched their
beginnings and that shall we the more easily do, if we give heed to this that
Britton has already opened, for he leaves the sovereign jurisdiction of all
causes in the King, The Admiral^y. The British and Sa^on Kings had their
Chancellours, as Etheldred who began his reign 978 Edw. the Confess^^ had
Re^nb^ld for In^^^ Cha^^^lor. Edg^^ had A^u^ph and ^^ded and Edmund had
Turk^ull. and K^ag Athe^stone had Wolfaid for his Chan^^lor Cook 4. Inst. ^
97. and Ethel ba^d had Turketill for his Chancellor. about 718.
so that whatsoever the King has particularly de ivered out to others, his
Justices Commissioners and Delegats, that still remains in himself, and was
exercised either by himself in person, or by his Chancellor, Counselors of a
State, and Justices of Law that continually attended on him for that service.

And therefore first concerning the Admiralty, I think that the decision of
marine causes was not put out of the Kings house and Committed over to the
charge of the Admiral until the time of King Edward the third, whereunto I am
led partly.

And then (after this subscription of him and his Queen, and of the
Archbishops and Abbots) one Renibaldus is named Cancelarius: and in the end of
all, after the date of the Chreme it is written thus, Siwardus Notarius ad
vicem Renibaldii Regiae dignitatis Cancellarii, hanc cartam scripsi and
subscripsi; The next year after this King William the Conqueror gave (by
another Charter) to the same Abbey sundry Lands in exchange for Windsor, the
which King Edward had bestowed on them; and in the end of this grant he
likewise says; Ego Willielmus Dei Gratia Rex and Dux Normannorum atque
Princeps Cenomannorum hoc scribi precipi and scriptum hoc signo deminicae
crucis confirmando stabilivi nostraeque imaginis sigillo insuper assignari
curavi. And then (in order as before) it follows, Ego Mauritatus Regis
Cancellarius favendo relegi and sigillavi.

Hereby it appears that the office of the Chancellor then was at the first to
make and seal the Instruments that passed from the Prince, and this I call his
original duty, because it cannot credibly be showed of any history (as I think
that ever there was in England, any of sealing of writings or mention of the
name of Chancellor, before the days of this Edward, who (having spent agreat
part of his age in Normandy) first brought the use of the Seal from thence into
this Nation, See before of the antiquity of Chancelors
and with it (I suppose) the name of Chancellor, In whose time also Leofricus
the Britain is the first Chancellor I find named.

For that we learned of the Normans our manner of sealing, Ingulphus the Abbot
of Croyland (which came out of Normandy hither, in the Train of the Norman
Conqueror) assures us, writing thus, Normancii Cyrographorum confectionem,
cum crucibus aureis and aliis signaculis sacris in Anglia formari solitam, in
Cerae impressionem mutant etc. And that the name of him that kept the seal came
out of France, also it may be probably conjectured both by the word (which we
found nearer to the pronunciation of the French than of the Latin) and also by
the office it self, which has been exercised in France (under the same name
and nature that we use it) ever since the time of Charlemaigne at the least.

And so it is manifest that the Chancellor did bear this name, and had the
Charge of the Kings seal and writings both before and in the reign of the
Conqueror, the which also (without all doubt) he has ever since continued.

Howbeit when I say (writings) I do not mean, he had the authority of making
original writs here before the time of the Conquest, for those came out of
Normandy also, as the very forms of the most of them (being expressed in the
book of the Norman customs) may lead a man to think; and that rather also,
because the Saxons (our Ancestors) whose proceedings in Judgment was deplano,
and without solemnty did not use (so far as I have hitherto observed) to call
the parties by any writ or writing, but to send for them by certain Messengers,
which they termed Theins, that is to say, Ministers, or Sergeants, yea, and
what that manner of summoning by Writ was brought into use here, forthwith
committed to the Chancellor; For Original Writs of this time, had this form,
Test Ranulpho de Glanvilla, etc. Which was the name of the chief Justice of
the Kings Court, then under whose sealing they passed abroad.

Nevertheless for as much as it is to be read in Bracton, quod omnia bre^ia de
pace (which are prohibitions indeed) irrotulari debent in Rotulo de
Cancellaria, and for that not only the Statute of Westminster, the second
(which was made in the 15. year of King Edward the first, says in plain words,
that the for me done in reverter satis est in usu in Cancellaria, and has
often mention of the Clerks there; But also that other Statute of articuli
super Chartas has the express names both of the Chancellor and Chancery, it
must be confessed that the Chancellor had the keeping of the Rolls of Record,
and the making out of Writs either at the same time that the common lace was
erected, or not long after, that is to say, either under the reign of King
Henry, the third, or else in the beginning of King Henry the third, or else in
the beginning of Edward the first, which later King (as Judge Prisot reports
of him) labored carefully to reduce our Law into order and writing, and, in
mine opinion may therefore not unworthily be accounted our English Justinian.

And albeit that the House of the Rolls, which has been of long time as it
were, the College of the Chancery men, was builded at the first by the same
King Henry the third for another purpose, namely for the sustentation of such
Jews as would give their names to Christ, and was thereof called, Dominus
Judeorum conversorum: Mat. Paris
yet that hinders not, but that the same House might shortly after be
converted to another use, upon experience (as it is likely) that sew converts
was found amongst the Jews to inhabit it; and then thus have you the
Chancellor (or now instead of him the Commissioners) furnished with the Seal
of Grace, and Seal of common Justice, and with him or them the Chancery for the
keeping of Records, and the Clerks thereof for the framing of Writs; Coment.
^43.
and as touching the authority in Judgment, I see not what Jurisdiction he had
(his Court of Equity and some powers given by late Statutes only excepted)
which is not incident to the making or keeping of Records, for he could not
reform the error of another Court: yea, error committed in his own Court was
reversed in the Bench of the King, now called the upper Bench. Neither could he
try any Issue taken before him; ^4 E. 1.^5.
For that also was and is to be done in the upper Bench as a thing without his
Jurisdiction.

It remains then that I speak of this Court of Equity which (in my opinion)
is not altogether so ancient as others; Os the high Court of Chancery.
for (as you have heard before) King Edward the first and the Parliament took
order, that the Chancellor should follow the King, even as the Justices of the
Bench did, to the end that he might always have at hand, all men for his
direction in Suits that came before him, the meaning hereof (as I think was)
that the Justices should inform him of the Law, and the Chancellor of Equity;
for (otherwise) I see not what use he could have of the Chancellor in this
behalf: but only for that he being commonly a Bishop, or other Spiritual
person (was the more meet) after the opinion of men in those days) to give
advice according to equity and conscience.

In which respect also he was visitor for the King, and bestowed his Benefices,
so that such as then sought relief by Equity, were Suitors to the King himself,
who (being assisted with the Chancellor and Counsel) did mitigate the
severity of Law in his own person, when it pleased him to be present, and did
(in absence) either refer it to the Chancellor alone, or to him and some
others of the Counsel.

And this continued (if I be not mistaken) until the 20th. year of the reign
of King Edward the third, in which year (when he made preparation for his wars
in France) it was enacted by Parliaments that the Chancellor and Treasurer
should determine all complaints against extortion of Officers, maintenance,
imbracery, and such like offenses, and albeit that (indeed this authority be
neither granted to himself alone, nor does plainly erect any Court of Equity,
yet for as much as it is the very first several power of this sort, that I
find committed to him from the King (in which also it is to be thought, that
the proceeding was extraordinary and absolute, even as the Kings own before
was,) I suppose it to be the laying of the first stone of the foundation of the
Chancellours Court. But after this (in the 36th. year of the same Kings reign)
it was provided by Parliament; That if any were grieved contrary to the
Articles of that Parliament, or others, That he should have remedy in the
Chancery without other Suit, by which Law the Chancellor was not only made
sole Judge in this newly erected Court, but was enabled so to proceed in
Judgment after his own discretion, or (otherwise) the words (without other
Suits) were not Beneficial.

After this also his authority was enlarged by sundry Parliaments, as by one,
to award damages upon untrue suggestion made before him: by another, To send
Proclamation of Rebellion against such as would not appear: And by others, To
grant Commissions of diverse kinds, and to do many other things, whereof it is
not needful to make rehearsal here.

And truly as these be first beginnings (that I can find) in Statute Law
concerning this authority of Chancery Court, so also I do not remember, that in
our reports of Common Law, there is any mention of causes drawn before the
Chancellor for help in Equity; but only from the time of King Henry the
fourth, in whose days (by reason of those Intestine troubles) Feofments to
uses did either first begin (as some have thought) or else did first grow
common and familiar as all men must agree for remedy, in which causes of uses
(chiefly) the Chancery Court was then fled unto, as to the only Altar of help
and refuge.

But whence the Court of Equity took a beginning to be a distinct Court; I have
made proof (as I think) that the power thereof was always in exercise, and
considering that formerly all the Princes of this Realm, and now the Lord
Protector of this Nation is the immediate Minister of Justice under God, and
sworn to deliver to the people (aequam and rectam Justitiam) I cannot see, how
that it may otherwise be, but that (besides his Court of mere Law) he must
either reserve to himself, or refer to others a certain preemment power, by the
which he may both supply the want and correct the rigor of that positive (or
written Law which (of it self) neither is or can be made such a perfect rule,
as that a man may thereby square out Justice in all causes that may happen.

For written Laws must needs be made in a generality, and be grounded upon that
which happens for the most part, because no wisdom of man can foresee every
thing in particular, which in time experience does beget, and therefore
although the written Law be generally good and just, yet (in some special
case) it may have need of correction, by reason of some considerable
circumstance (falling afterward) which at the time of the Law making was not
forseen, whereas (otherwise) to apply one general Law to all particular cases,
were to make all Shoes by one last, or to cut one Glove for all hands, which
how unfit it would prove, every man may readily perceive.

And here of this Equity has this name in Greek (...), of (...) i. e.
secundum, and (...) id est conveniens; and assimulatum; because it does not
only weigh what is generally meet for the most part, but does also consider
the person, time, place, and other circumstances, in every singular case, that
comes in question, and does thereof frame such a judgment as is agreeable and
convenient to the same, so that (in sum) the written Law is like a stiff
rule of Steel (or Iron) which will not be applied to the fashion of the Stone
(or Timber) whereunto it is laid; and Equity (as Aristole says well) is like
to the leaden rule of the Leasbian Artificers which they might at pleasure bend
and bow to every Stone of whatsoever fashion.

And hereby it may also appear, what use there ought to be as well of the
positive (or written Law) as also of Equity it self, for seeing that the
positive or common Law, is made meet for the most part, and that Equity is
added for help in few or singular causes, it follows by reason, that commonly
and singularly the positive Law, should be put in ure, and that Equity should
be appealed unto, but only in rare and extraordinary matters, least on the one
side, if the Judge in Equity should take Jurisdiction over all, it should come
to pass (as Aristotle says) that the best should bear rule (for so he calls
man whose judgment (if it be not restrained by the chain of Law) it is
commonly carried away with unruly affection, and on the other side, if only
straight Law should be administered, the help of God (which speaks in that
Oracle of Equity, should be denied unto men that need it.

And therefore even as two Herbs being in extremity of heat, or Cold be (by
themselves) so many poisons, and yet (if they be skillfully contempered) will
make a wholesome medicine, so also would it come to pass, if either this
Arithmeticall Government as they call it) by rigor of Law only, or this
Geometrical judgment, at the pleasure of the Commissioners only should be
admitted, And yet if they be well compounded together, a most sweet and
Harmonicall Justice will follow them.

And as a good Chancellor then would not, so the Commissioners now will not
make this Proclamation, Nullus recedat a Cancellaria sine remedio, and so
receive Cognizance of every complaint, which shall be made before them upon
whatsoever suggestion, and thereby both overthrow the authority of the Courts
of Common Law, and also bring in upon men such a confusion, and uncertainty, as
hardly any man shall know how, or when he shall hold his own assured, but they
will rather have the Common Law to have her just honor, and not to be
interrupted in her right course or current, and will yet withal provide that
the Gate of mercy may be opened, in all calamity of Suit, to the end that
(where need shall be) the rigor of right may be amended by the Judgment of
Equity, in which behalf this our age has greatly to thank God, for that by the
Ministry of our Protector) he does not only leave to us the right use of the
Courts of mere Law, but has also hitherto placed in that Praetoritall Room (or
Chancery) men no less learned in the common Laws of the Nation, than
accomplished with the skill of this moderation and equity.

I see that occasion is offered me, to enter into the handling of some few
questious concerning the order of Chancery, and chiefly of this one, whether it
be meet that the Commissioners should appoint unto themselves, and publish to
others any certain rules or limits of equity or no? about the which men Godly
and learned have differed in opinion; For on the one part it is thought as hard
a thing to prescribe equity any certain bounds, as it is to make one general
Law to be a meet measure of Justice in all particular causes: And on the other
side it is said, That if it be not known aforehand in what cases they will
reach forth their help, and where not, then neither shall the people be assured
how or when they may possess their own in peace, nor the practiser of Law be
able to inform his Clyent what may become of his action, The later of which
opinions I hold to be the best, (according to the late Regulation of the high
Court of Chancery (together with the Common Law) in August the 22th. Anno 1654.
by his Highness the Lord Protector and his Counsel:) For though equity cannot
be limited; yet as it puts an end to controversies, it must have certain rules
prescribed to it, otherwise it can neither be called a Court, nor can the
Suitors be certain of any relief to be had therein, which Court (were it so)
would soon be destroyed.

Because this and the like matters be of more difficulty than that I may (with
modesty) take upon me to determine them. And for that also it is not my present
purpose, to dispute what is convenient to be done in any Court, but rather to
discourse the beginning, and acknowledge the benifit of them all, I will only
wish this one thing. That before any motion should be made for either the
parties Plantiff or Defendant, 4. or 5. days notice thereof were left with the
Clerk in Court on the other side, to defend that motion, that so he might not
be put off to show cause from day to day, which rather increases trouble and
charges, than either furthereth the suit for the hearing or benefits the
parties in their cause.

Which thing whether it might be more couvenient than the present manner of
motions, I will leave to the judgment of such as have more wisdom to devise,
and power to execute; And will sum up the rest of our Courts and make an end.

The Court of the Duchy (or County Palatine of Lancaster (which is by a late
Act of Parliament committed to the custody of a Commissioner) grew out of the
grant of King Edward the third, The Court formerly called, The Duchy Court,
the jurisdiction whereof is now committed to a Commissioner or Commissioners.
County Palatine of Lanc. erected in Parliament 50 E. 3. and Justices of Assizes
Jail delivery and of the Peace have been since the erection of it. Cook lib.
4. f. 204. 205.
who first gave that Duchy to his Son John of Gaunt, and endowed it with such
royal rights as the County Palatine of Chester had. And forasmuch as it was
afterward extincted in the person of King Henry the 4th. (by reason of the
union of it with the Crown of the Realm) the same King (knowing himself more
rightfully) Duke of Lancaster, then King of England, determined to save his
right in the Duchy, whatsoever should befall the Kingdom. And therefore he
separateth his Duchy from the Crown, and setleth it so in the natural persons
of himself and his heirs: as if he had been no King, (or Pollitique Body) at
all, in which manner it endured during the reign of King Henry the first, and
of King Henry the 6th. that were descended of him. But when King Edward the
4th. had (by recovery of the Crown) recontinued the right of the House of York,
he feared not to appropriate that Duchy to the Crown again, And yet so as he
suffered the Court, and Officers to remain as he found them.

And in this manner it came (together with the Crown) to King Henry the 7th.
who liking well of that policy of King Henry the fourth (by whose right he also
obtained the Kingdom) made by separation of the Duchy as he has done, and so
left it to his posterity.

It appears in our Books of the Terms of King Edward the 4th. The Star
Chamber.
and the Report of cases, happening under the usurpation of Richard the third.
This Court was in being before 28 E. 3. Cook lib.
That sometimes the King and his Counsel; And sometimes the Lord Chancellor
and other great personages, did use to sit Judicial in the place (then and
lately called) for that it is decked with certain Stats) the Star Chamber.

But forasmuch as (be like) that Assembly was not ordinary, therefore the next
King Henry the 7th. and his Son Henry the 8th. took order by two several Laws;
That the Chancellor assisted (with others there named) should have power to
hear complaints against Reteinors, Embraceries, misdemeanors of Offices and
such other offenses, which through the power and countenance of such as do
commit them) (do lift up the head above other faults) and for the which
inferior Judges are not so meet to give correction.

And because that place was before time dedicated to the like service, it has
ever since also been so used until it was taken away in the late King Charles
his reign. The Court of Requests


The Court of the Requests being of the same nature (as I said) with the
Chancery took beginning by Commission from King Henry the 8. before which time
the Masters of the Requests had no warrant of ordinary Jurisdiction, This Court
had no warrant by act of Parliament or prescription to establ shit. Cook lib.
4. fol. 97.
but travailed between the Prince and Petitioners, by direction from the mouth
of the King.

The same King also established one Court of President and Counsel in the
Marches of Wales 34. and 35. H. 8. The Court of the Marches of Wales and that
of the North parts were taken away in the late K Chapter his reign. Anno 17. Car.
And another like Court of President and Counsel in the North parts, which
Court in Wales was a Court of Law in its principal Jurisdiction, although it
did withal exercise other powers of equity. by virtue of other several
Commissions that did accompany the same, and the Court of York was in its
principal Jurisdiction Equity, and did exercise other powers by virtue of
other Commissions. Court of Wards.


The Court of Wards began about the 32th. year of the reign of King Henry the
8, who also (in the next year after) added thereto the office of the Masters of
the Liveries, and withal conjoined the names, ordaining that it should be
called, The Court of his Wards and Liveries.

The same King likewise had erected one Court of the general Surveiours of his
Lands; and one other of the Augmentations and Revenues of his Crown; and a
third Court of the first fruits and Tithes of Benefices. But all these were
afterward dissolved and (by Queen Mary) united to the Court of Exchequer. Thus
having run along these Courts deriving them from the Crown, I might proceed yet
further to show the original and beginnings of some Courts erected by the late
Parliament, and the nature and beginning of the High Court of Justice that was
erected in Westminster Hall Anno 1648. but they being so fresh in the memory of
this age, I shall not need to make mention thereof.

FINIS.

