THE CROWN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS: OR, The glorious Reward of FIDELITY In the
Discharge of our DUTY. As it was laid forth in a Sermon, preached in S.
Botolphs Aldersgate, London, Sept. 25. 1653. At the solemn Funeral of Mr.
Abrah: Wheelock, B. D. The first Public Professor, and Reader of Arabic, and
of the Saxon, in the University of CAMBRIDGE. Whereunto is added, An ENCOMIUM
of HIM.

By WILLIAM SCLATER Doctor in Divinity, Now Preacher of the Word of God in
Broad-street, Land.

DAN. 12.3. They that be wise [or, Teachers] shall shine as the brightness of
the Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars, for
ever and ever.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for John Clarke, and are to be sold at his shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1654.

To the Right Worshipful Thomas Adams, Esquire Alderman of the City of London, a
Patron of Learning, and a Pattern of True Piety, the eternity of Happiness.
Worthy Sir,
THat which I have in my inward thoughts secretly wished for, the Divine
Providence has now (by an unexpected Act) presented to my hands; a seasonable
opportunity, wherein I might make you some more than a private Testimony of my
acknowledgements, for your personal regards to my self; and withal, as
public as might be, for your munificence to my ever honored Mother, the
University of Cambridge; where, for above twenty years last past (out of a pure
glory to God, in the advancing the Oriental Learning) you erected, and ever
since continued, at your own proper cost, an Arabic Lecture; the praise
whereof were a task more meet (I confess) for an elegant Orator chosen by her
self, than for one of my so retired, and obnubilated a condition.

The much lamented decease of the learned Professor, Mr. Abrah: Wheelock, who
read it, (and of whom a more full mention is made in the close) gave occasion
to this sudden Sermon; which being through a vehement importunity, extorted
from me, beyond all imagination of mine own, after preaching, and so put to the
Press; there could be no more proper Patron for it thought upon, than your
self, of whom I have many things to say, but that I am overwhelmed with
copiousness of matter; there being no spiritual, or good gift wherein you are,
as S. Paul said of his Converts, the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.7
behind, yea wherein you do not excel: your very outward presence, as some
rare beneficent star, appearing with a desired and pleasing influence, wins
you a venerable observance of all Orthodox Christians, and good men; who cannot
depart from you but much improved, and made better by your most eximious, and
transcendent example in Luke 1.6. Act. 24.16
all piety toward God, and equity toward men: I need not mention your Ethics
or moral part, since if the vigorous exercise of all the virtues were not
interrupted only, but lost elsewhere, it might be all repaired from your Ephesians.
5.15. (...).
accurate practice: in your religious part an Israelite Joh. 1.47
indeed, without faction, without ostentation: your soul is made the 1 Cor.
3.16.
Temple for the Holy Spirit to dwell in by his graces, which are diffused in so
delectable a variety; that, as those fragrant spices, upon which the South
wind blew in the Garden of the spouse, they Cant. 4.16.
flow out, and are become as a sweet perfume to attract Observers.

To men of learning a known Maecenas, yea, a Sanctuary; To Gods faithful
Ministers an Romans 12.13.
hospitable Romans 16.23.
Gaius, a bountiful, and a most encouraging Benefactor, 1 These. 5.12, 13. 1 Timothy 5.17.
esteeming them highly in love for their works sake: of all Gods Ps. 122.1.
public Ordinances a due honouror, a most conscientious Act. 26.7
frequenter: In private also the devotion of your house has made it an house
of 1 Cor. 16.19.
devotion, where, like the double motion of the lungs, what is drawn in by
prayers, is breathed forth again in Psalm. 118.15.
praises and thanksgiving: Your faith is operative Gal. 5.6.
working by love, expressed 1 Timothy 6.18.
in rich 2 Cor. 9.13. Prove. 11.25.
liberality toward every good work, full of 2 Cor. 9.7.
cheerful Act. 10.2.
Almes-giving, the Job. 311.20.
loins of the poor and naked bless you in the streets, and the bowels of
many 2 Timothy 1.16.18.
refreshed by your hands, as S. Paul's were by Onesiphorus, occasion uncessant
prayers for you: And that which yet adds a beauty to all the rest, and proves
always as the most rich, and fairest (...), of (...) a curious Knot.
knot, decking the garment of other graces, is your great 1 Pet. 5.5
humility, attended with all 1 Pet. 3.8
courteous affability, and most 2 Cor. 6.6 Col. 3.13. 2 Pet. 1.7.
kind To. 12.16.
condescensions; as in whose lips is the Pro. 31 26
law of kindness, and in whose life a Phil. 1.15
shining exemplar of the 2 Ti. 3.5.
power of godliness, and all solid Christianity.

All which considered, my weak endeavors cannot but triumph in such a
protection, which now they shroud themselves under, not doubting to speed the
better for the Name of the Patron: The discourse, I acknowledge, is impolite,
yet Orthodox, I hope, and Thelogically substantial, the subject matter is no
less, than of a Crown of Righteousness; so that however, as it comes from me,
it casts no great luster outwardly, yet much what like to the stone
Garamantides, intus habet aureas guttas, it has drops of gold within it self,
enriching the believing soul with the hopes, and assured expectation of a
joyful reward of its fidelity in Gods service by a blissful immortality.

Unto the certain fruition whereof, that you, and with your self all yours,
all your relations, yea, all Gods Mat. 24.
elect by Christ, nay, after you have yet continued longer to Tit. 2.10:
adorn the Gospel* be at last advanced, is, and ever shall be the most constant
prayer of, Sir,

Your most affectionate Servant to be commanded in the Lord Christ, Will:
Sclater.

2 TIMOTHY 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the Faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give me at that Day: and not to me
only, but unto them also who love his Appearing.


I Shall not deteine you by any impertinent Preface, since the shortness of
time for this Service, together with the indulgence of this so Learned an
Auditory, anticipates an Apology, and gives hopes of much Candor, under so
manifold Impraeparations.

And so I address my self to the serious business of my Text; The scope
whereof amounts to this sum, Namely, to comfort Timothy about the nigh
approach of Saint Paul's Martyrdom, mentioned, ver. 6. The arguments of
Consolation are two, each depending on the other. 1. The first taken from his
Holy course of life, constantly continued, comfortably finished, ver. 7. 2. The
second, from the certainty of his Blessed estate, assured to him after this
Life, ver. 8. And indeed, the Apostle seems to put on him the affection of a
dying 1 These. 2.11.
Father, willing to inhibit, or at least to 1 These. 4.13.
moderate the passions (which like Ambergreese may do well in a compound of
grace) of his indeared children, encompassing, as Genesis 49.1, 2.
Jacabs Sons, his Deathbed; as if he had thus Deuteronomy. 32.2.
dropped his words upon them: What do ye thus Act. 21.13.
weeping, and breaking my Heart? 1 These. 1.10.
God, my own Romans 9.1.
Conscience, your selves are witnesses, how holily, and without crime, I have 1
Pet. 1.17.
passed the time of my sojourning here, God, by his grace has (according to
his promise) 2 Timothy 4.18.
preserved me 1 Cor. 1.8. 1 These. 3.13.
blameless unto the end: You know what happy things he has 1 Cor. 2.9.
prepared for them that love him, into the Heb. 11.40.
Beginnings whereof my Soul shall enter, at my Phil. 1.23.
Dissolution; the Psalm. 16.11.
fullness, and consummation I expect at that great and Act. 2 20
notable day of the general Resurrection, and Retribution: Right so the
Apostle here, to the same effect, to comfort Timothy, whom (having 2 Timothy 1, 2.
and 2.^.
begotten him spiritually through the Gospel, to the Faith of Christ) he found
even as a Natural Phil. 2.22.
Son, with his Father most affectionately tender, obedient and observant, unto
his very last expiration: I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
departure is at hand; (yet nevertheless be comforted, for) I have fought a
good fight, etc. and henceforth, there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, etc. This for the Context, and scope of this Scripture.

I have fought a good fight.] The expression is borrowed from those who strive
for 1 Cor. 9.25. 2 Timothy 2, 5.
masteryes, and after a sharp encounter, or heat of Contention, do at last
prove Romans 8.37.
Conquerors.

I have finished my Course,] id est. Cursum certaminis, qualis est little, qui
in stadio currunt, as Estius expounds it; The speech being taken from such as
run in a race, who give not out till the prize be obtained, see 1 Cor. 9.24,
25, 26. I have kept the Faith.] That is, That Fidelity, or trust, and
faithfulness, which he had constantly made good in the discharge of his
Apostleship, and Ministry, in preaching the Gospel far and near, throughout
many 2 Cor. 10.14.16. Gal. 1.16.
Regions, from the time of the first Commission of the same, unto his 1 Cor.
9.17.
Dispensation: The Apostle in his own practice, accomplishing that, which he
required in all other the Stewards of like sacred Mysteries, 1 Cor. 4.2. for
this also, he gave God thanks, for counting him faithful, in putting him into
the Ministry, committing the glorious Gospel unto his 1 These. 2.4.
trust, 1 Timothy 1.11.12. upon which he was assured of his, Euge, Bone serve, and
fidelis. Well done, good and Mat. 25.21.
faithful Servant, enter into thy Masters joy. Ere I come to the more
particular elucidation of the parts, I may not omit to mention those quaeries,
and resolutions, which some of the ancient Fathers have not unprofitably
raised, and given upon these words.

Whether Saint Paul did not, under this profession, boast in a kind of
vaunting ostentation?

Answ. To this Saint S. Chrysostom. in Loc.
Chrysostom makes answer thus;(...), He does not magnify himself, or boast
in any way of vainglorious Non haec jactantiae verba sunt, sed bonae
Conscientiae, Estius ad Loc. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Ostentation, (a sin which, else where, he extremely cautions against, Phil.
2.3. Gal. 2.16.) but they are the words of a Saint, uttered in a modest, meek,
and humble protestation, whereby he owneth the graces of God within him, and
gives all the * glory in their vigorous exercise, to God the Original
Fountain, and bestower of them.

Whether Saint Paul did well to Commemorate, and make mention of his gracious
Actions, and good Deeds?

Answ. To which Saint Gregory makes answer thus; Fas est viris sanctis in morte
recordari, imo and recolere virtutes vitae actae, etc. It is lawful for Holy
men, and Saints of God, in Death to recollect, and to recount the virtuous
deeds of their former lives past; Not indeed, as an occasion of exaltation in
themselves for the same; But, Vt fiduciam praebeant, and desperantem timorem
premant, for the suppression of fear, and Desperation, in the last Hour; in
as much as good works are the Jam. 2.18.
fruit of a saving Faith; that, as Faith justifies the person in a Correlation
to Christ's merits, (it as an hand Romans 5.17. (...).
receiving, apprehending, and applying them as all-sufficient to the soul) so
good works (being the way to eternal life, Ephesians. 2.10.) Declaratively, and
Praesentially justify the Faith, showing it not to be Counterfeit or dead, but
Real, and living; It being the innate property of such a Faith to be Vera
sides viva est, Nec potest esse otiosa. Juell. in Apolog
vivacious, manifesting it self in its godly Gal. 5.6.
Operations: Hence was the saying of the School Divines, that Charitas was
forma virtutum, Charity (which is the Romans 13.8.
sum of the Law) consisting in love toward God, for his own sake, and
toward our 1 Ioh. 3.14.
Neighbor, for Gods sake, it was the Form of the Theological Virtues; Not
but that Faith, and Hope, and other graces of the Spirit, have their own
several and particular Forms, which do specifically form them to their own
Identicall Natures, and diversifie them from others, so that Faith is not Hope,
nor Hope is not Charity; but for that love, does as it were, form them to
acceptability before God, to this purpose may be applicable that practice of
zealous Nehemiah, Chap. 13.14. Remember me, O my God, (says he) concerning
this, and wipe not out my good Deeds, that I have done for the House of my God,
and for the Offices thereof: and the like is that we also read of good King
Hezekiah, upon a Summons to Death, Isa. 38.3. And he said, Remember now, O
Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee, in Truth, and with a
perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight.

Whether Saint Paul spoke all this, as out of a selfe-confidence, without
having an eye to Gods Divine assistance therein?

Answ. To which, says venerable Bede, Absit ut tantus Doctor ignoraverit legem
Dei, Deuteronomy. 8.17. God forbid that so great a Doctor should be unacquainted with
the word of God, which teaches utterly to disclaim all selfe-power, though it
were but to become wealthy, or potent, even in things Temporal; yea, himself
seriously acknowledges all spiritual sufficiency to be of God, 2 Cor. 3.5.
evermore ascribing the total of his supernaturalls to the free grace of
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.10. through whose strength alone it was that he discharged
his Trust in the Gospel, and went through with all other gracious
performances, Phil. 4.13.

How Saint Paul came to know so assuredly, that there was a Crown of
Righteousness laid up for him in Heaven?

Answ. To which some answer, That he had it by Revelation extraordinary, as an
Apostolical privilege daigned to him from God, the better to cheer him on in
the course of the Gospel, and to steel his resolutions against all opposers
of the glorious Truth therein revealed: or, as Anselme thus, He had that
assurance, Non re plenissima, sed spe firmissima: grounded upon a firm hope,
and expectation: But of this more anon.

Having thus pointed at the Quaeries: I come now to the more particular
handling of the words, out of which I observe two general parts.

1. A solemn Profession of the discharge of his Office, verse 7. 2. A large
Remuneration, and Reward of that Discharge, verse 8.
In the former, we have 1. The Person, I. 2. His Act, fought. 3. The object of
that Act, A fight. 4. The quality of that fight, A [good] fight. 5. The time of
all this, noted from the expression in the Praeter tense, I [have] fought(...),
I have fought a good fight: the rest of the words in this verse I take to be,
upon the matter, but as the exegesis, and exposition of the former.

In the second maine part, The reward; We have it amplified. 1. By the Donor,
or bestower of it, The Lord, described here by a Periphrasis, and styled,
(...), The Righteous Judge. 2. By the Title given to it, A Crown of
Righteousness. 3. By the manner of it, it is laid up. 4. By the time of
Donation, In that Day. 5. By the persons to whom bestowed, To Paul himself;
and that, not by any restrictive enclosure, as if only to himself, and to
none other besides; but by a farther expansion, it reaches unto others with
himself; provided they be found under due qualification of loving the
appearance of the Judge; Not unto me only, but unto them also that love his
appearing.

These, at least, as to my observation, are the parts of this Scripture; which
being so many, I must be constrained, as the Disciples passing through the
Corne-fields upon the Sabbath day, (...), to pluck but an ear, Mat. 2.23.
or two of the choycest notice; or as some Lapidaries of rich Jewels are wont,
show them only in a short cursory view, and so lay them up again.

The first words, I have fought a good fight, admit of a diverse
Interpretations, yet each of them suitable to the Analogy, and Romans 12.6.
proportion of Faith.

They may then be taken, either as the expression of Saint Paul himself,
quatenus Apostolus, as under the notion of an Apostle: or else as a Christian,
in the condition with other Members of the Church of Christ with himself, for
that we read in the close of the eighth verse, The Crown of Righteousness was
laid up for all that loved the appearing of the Lord.

If we take them in the former sense, then from the first particular, The
Person; The note of Magalianus, ad loc.
Magalian is apposite, Stus Paulus Dux fuit, and antesignanus eorum quae
praecipiebat; That we look at Saint Paul as an Exemplary leader to all his
successors, (though indeed not in an Apostolical Latitude, yet) in the office,
and work it self of the Ministry, practically first doing what he would have
others to observe in, and about the dispensation of the Gospel: see Phil. 4.9.
And this was our Saviors own Course, Act. 1.1. He began to do and Teach,
first to do, and then to Teach; its noted by Barradius upon that Prophecy,
Isa. 9.6. which had relation to our Savior, it was said, The Government should
be upon his shoulders, intimating, that himself would first bear in his own
person, what he intended to impose upon others, to wit, in things capable of
Imitation; even as he said unto John Baptist, when he cender'd himself to be
Baptized of him, and he in an humble renuence grew shy, as deeming himself
unworthy of so great an Honor, Mat. 3.15. Suffer it to be so now, says he,
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness; Haec est enim Iustitia,
ut quod alteru^ facere velis, prior ipse incipias, and tuo alios horteris
exemplo, as Saint S. Am^^^^e in Luc.
Ambrose expounds the words; This was righteousness, that is, an equal, and
just thing, that what thou would have another to observe, and do, thou thy
self should first exemplify in thine own actions suitably; whereunto was
that serious advise of S. Paul unto his Son Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.16. Take heed
unto thy self, and unto thy Doctrine, for so thou shall both save thy self,
and those that hear thee; Where the chiefest heed was to be given to himself:
Truly spoke Saint Gregory in Job 23.
Saint Gregory, cum Imperio docetur, quod prius agitur, quam dicatur, Then
shall we with Authority speak what we do, when we do what we speak: But
this is a Discourse fitter for a Visitation, than a Funeral; were it not, that
it is at the obsequies of such a worthy Divine, (for whom we now perform this
last Christian good office) whose practice herein was an accurate Comment upon
the whole speech.

From the second and third particular, (in this acception of the words) its
obvious to every apprehension, that the work of the Ministry is a Fighting,
yea, a continual Warfare: so Bruno, and with him Espenceus ad Loc.
Espencaeus observes, that where the Verb and Substantive run in the same
terms, one conducing to, the other to perfect the Emphasis of the expression,
there is evermore a [Frequency] of that Act employed: I should but cast drops
into the Ocean, to endeavor a large proof of so clear a Truth: Whilst Noah,
both by his Lips and by his Hands (in Heb. 11 7.
building the Arc) was a 2 Pet. 2 5.
Preacher of Righteousness, in the old world, was it not thus? whilst the
spirit of God (in his Ministry) Genesis 6.3.
strove with the obstinate corruptions of that wicked world, what aspersions,
what oppositions, what misusages, and abasures had the Prophets in their days,
being Ier. 20.7.
derided, traduced, 2 Chro. 36.16. Mat. 23.37.
misused, insulted on, even for the Conscientious discharge of their Function?
The precious Sons of Sion comparable to fine Gold, how were they esteemed as
earthen Pitchers, the work of the hands of the Potter? Lam. 4.2. And, who
knows not the exact accomplishment of old Simeons Prophecy of our Savior
himself, Luke 2.34. How he was set for a sign, which was and should be In
signum contrad cib^le. Tert. de Ca^ne Christi, cap. 28. Is. 8.13.
spoken against, (...), for a sign of contradiction, he should be as a common
Illirio. Bishop Hall in Paraphr: Piscator and Franciscus Lucas.
mark, whereat the arrows of reproach shall be fully shot: Of all the Holy
Apostles its noted, 1 Cor. 4.13. They were made as the filth of the world, and
the Confer. Lam. 3.45.
offscouring of all things continually; (...), signifies that rejectament,
which is scraped from the dirty pavement, from whence the shoes gather
defilement; and (...), it being a word in a Composition, carries with it the
greater Emphasis, and denotes the polluted rakeings of the streets, fit for
nothing but the common Dunghill; In so low a state of abjection, and in so vile
an esteem were those very 2 Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors of Heaven, among an Atheistical and Act. 2.40. Phil. 2.15.
crooked generation: our very Apostle here professes, 1 Cor. 15.32. That he
fought with Beasts at Ephesus,(...), which some would have meant Literally, of
his being dilaniated, and rent in his body, (as many Primitive Christians were
in the first Cruel times of raging persecution) by wild Beasts to which Nero,
that Dedicator Damnationis, T^rt. in Apologet.
as Tertullian styles him, being himself a 2 Timothy 4.17.
Lion, was wont Tyrannically to cast the bodies of the Christians: But others
better, in my poor understanding, expound it of those Ethicall or Moral
Beasts, who with Demetrius, and the rabble that cried up the great Diana of the
Idolatrous Ephesians, so violently withstood and opposed Saint Paul, who cried
down that their abominable superstition at Ephesus, Act. 19. in which place a
great door, and effectual was opened unto him, but there were many 1 Cor. 16.9.
Adversaries, 1 Cor. 16.8, 9. those Apostles indeed experimenting the proof of
what their Lord and Master foretold them, that they must be sent forth even as
Sheep among Mat. 10.16.
Wolves, who would attempt to tear them in pieces: and which of us in
particular, encounters not his discouragements? Yea, woe is me! We seem to be
fallen into those times, wherein many men (as if directly Isa. 6.10
infatuated from Heaven) out of a gross misprision apprehend the Ministry it
self the greatest inconvenience; and (that great cheat, that grand Pantomime
of Christendom, the cunning Jesuit (now almost barefaced) has instilled (as
is feared) so pernicious a principle into such as are (for ought we can see)
willing to be deceived, as to question the 1 Timothy ^.1. Romans 11.13.
office it self, and to dispute the Institution; as if they would have men
scorn the Physician when sickest, and shun the Surgeon when sorest; And
(which must not be forgotten) there are not wanting some, who are apt to charge
on that sacred Calling, the occasion, if not the cause of all the Calamities of
this latter Age: just as those of whom Suidas reports, that they were wont to
write with Ink or blood on a glass, and so set it against the Moon, making
all those spots or blurres that were in the glass, to be in the Moon, and not
at all in the glass, upon which alone they were written: mean while, never at
all anatomizing their own Ulcerous, Corrupt insides, or repenting for their
Prove. 13.5. Ezekiel. 36.31.
loathsome selfe-abhominations (and among them as principal, for the contempt
of Gods faithful Ministers.) Which sins becoming so Epidemicall, and
National, as they are, call for Wrath and Indignation from that Lord, who is
here styled in my Text, the Righteous Judge. And yet, though this be a Fight,
nevertheless it is, for the quality, a [good] Fight, and that for these
reasons;

First of all, because its undertaken for the 1 Timothy 6.12.
Faith of Christ, and for the Salvation of Souls, whereof even one single one
is more worth than a Mat. 16.26.
whole World; O what comfort will it be, in the day of retribution, when a 1
Cor. 4.2.
faithful Minister, after all his sharp conflicts with the Act. 2.40.
wayward oppositions of corrupt men, shall say; Lo me, and the Isa. 8.18. Heb.
2 13.
people, which thou have given me, as the fruit of all my labor in thy
Gospel, being able thus to give up an Heb. 13.17.
account with joy, and not with grief.

Secondly, Because its undertaken for a good reward, which is no less, than a
Crown of Righteousness; What S. Gregory said of afflictions for a good
Conscience, will hold here alone, Consideratio praemii minuit vim flagelli, The
consideration of the Reward, abates of the Difficulty of the Fight; even so its
noted of Moses, that having respect unto the recompense of the reward, he
preferred the reproach of Christ to all the richest treasures in Egypt, Heb.
11.26. the same was it likewise that animated that noble Prophet under all his
discouragements, and fruitless endeavors among men, Isa. 49.4. I have
labored in vain, and spent my time for naught, yet surely my Judgment is
with the Lord, and my work, that is, the reward of my work is with the Lord;
who rewards his Ministers, secundum laborem, though not secundum proventum,
as S. Bernard speaks, according to their Labor, and pious endeavors, which
themselves undergo in the Gospel, though not according to the success of
their Labors, which is 1 Cor. 3.6.
Gods alone to bestow.

And thus far of the words, in their first acception, uttered by S. Paul as
an Apostle.

I might next consider them also, as spoken in the name of all other Christians
at large, even of all such as, who love the appearing of the Lord Christ Jesus
at his coming.

And under that notion of them, we may observe, That the Life of a Christian is
a continual warfare upon the Earth, so Chrysologus, Christiano militare est,
id quod vivit in seculo, suitably unto that of Job, Chap. 7.1. Where the word
rendered an appointed time, is by many translated a Warfare, which was hinted
to us in the first Genesis 3.15
enmity between the two seeds; after again, in Esau and Jacob Genesis 25.22.
struggling together in the same womb; and to this effect is that speech of our
Savior, I came not to send Peace on the Earth, but War, Division Mat. 10.34,
35.
and variance, namely, between Grace and Corruption; which was experimented
mightily in the breast of this our Apostle, when the Law in his Members
rebelled against the Law of his Mind, Romans 7.23. it was (...), a warring Law;
and elsewhere he says, The flesh lusts against the spirit, as the spirit
lusts against the flesh, Gal. 5.17. and to the same purpose also Saint James,
Chap. 4.1. From whence come Wars, and Fightings among you? Come they not
hence, even of your Lusts, that War in your Members? Surely Contention comes
from Corruption; see likewise, 1 Pet. 2.11.

Now, I might here take occasion to treat of the Doctrine of the spiritual
Warfare, and pursuing the Metaphor, present you with those several things that
concur to make up a complete Battle; as 1. A Bickering, and encounter it
self, Nisi praecesserit pugna non potest esse Victoria, as Saint S. Cypr. li
de Mortal. c. 9.
Cyprian, there cannot properly be said to be a Victory, where never was a
fighting, delicata jactatio est, ubi periculum non est, its but a fond, or
esseminate kind of boasting of a Conquest, where never was danger. 2. In a
War there must be Enemies, with whom to encounter, quis enim certat nisi
inimicum habet? says Prosper, there cannot be a Contention, where there is not
an Adversary: Now in this Warfare, the great and the grand Adversary is the
Devil, who, with an (...), is styled (...), The Adversary, 1 Pet. 5.8. Iam.
4.7. He is as the chief Champion, the World also and the Flesh as under him;

Sunt tria quae tentant Hominem, Mundus, Care Demon. And in relation to the
several Temptations of each of these, Schoolmen have given them distinct
names, or Titles, being called by them, either Obrepentes, or Ascendentes, or
Immissa: Those which are from the World seem full of slattery, and creep on,
after a sort, insensibly, and deceive us; Those from the flesh ascend, as it
were out of our selves, therefore the more dangerous, because the less
perceptible, they being so pleasing to Corrupt Nature, and a selfe-snare: Those
from the Devil are sent from without, with more vehemence, therefore called
(...), Darts (...), Ephesians. 6.16. because cast into a man; for in very deed the
Devils (...). Macar. Homil.
knows no man's Heart, only deals, at first, (till after farther experience)
by Conjecture; all which (if I had time) it were easy to enlarge upon. 3. In a
War, there must be Arms, and Weapons; and to furnish our selves with these,
we have a full Armory, or panoply in the Holy Scriptures; The whole armor of
God we have for all sorts of Weapons, whether Offensive or Defensive, in Ephesians.
6.13, 14. etc. 4. There must be policies, or stratagems in War; means to
Circumvent, disappoint, overreach, overthrow the Enemy, etc. These and many
the like, are the parts to make up this spiritual warfare: all which must of
necessity, (if, as it ought to be spoken to fully) will ingrosse more time,
than I have left to go through with my other business.

Wherefore, waving that so copious a Theme, at this present; I proceed on now
to the second general part of my Division, which is the Remuneration, or
reward of Saint Paul's fidelity in the discharge of his trust, in the
Dispensation of the Gospel; Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, etc.

Much (but that I study Brevity) might be said of the Dignity of this reward,
it being styled, a Crown; and largely also I might discourse of the certainty
thereof proved, and assuredly to be made good, partly from the promise of God,
of that 2 These. 3 3.
faithful God, who is ever Psalm. 111. 5.
mindful of it, and never disappointeth a true believer of performance, namely
so as he promises, Esaias 40.10. Behold, the Lord God will come with a strong
hand, and his arm shall rule for him, behold his reward is with him. See also
Isa. 62.11. and Psalm. 31.19. The Psalmist seems, after a sort, ravished, and
in a kind of ecstasy, transported out of himself, in wonder at the meditation,
O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men!
And elsewhere, Psalm. 58.11. Verily there is a reward for the righteous,
doubtless he is a God that judges in the earth. And Heb. 6.10. God is not
unrighteous to forget, etc. nor was ever any man's labor (maugre the blasphemy
of all those Infidels, Mal. 3.14.) in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. See also
Romans 2.7. And this is partly also to be made good from the meritorious
expiation of the Lord Christ, the virtue whereof extended not only to a
deliverance from all pain and misery, which he purchased by his Passion; but
also to the opening a way to everlasting happiness, by his all-glorious
Resurrection, and Ascension, Romans 8.32. 2 Pet. 1.11. Joh. 14.2. And lastly,
this may be collected likewise from the present afflictions of Gods servants, 2
These. 1.5. for else, as the present case now stands with them, they are in this
life of all men else most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19.

Now, the Schoolmen have reduced the sum of all the future Blessedness, and
Reward, unto two maine heads, which they style, Dotes animae, and Corporis; as
it were, the Dowries of the Soul and Body, both which, as they have been
sharers in obedience, so shall they also be in the Compensation of the just
reward. Those of the Soul are these,

1. The clear 1 Jo. 3: 2.
Vision of God, which they say is, tota merces, beholding him 1 Cor. 13.12.
face to face, namely, so far as a finite Being (for so our Humane Nature
continues still, though glorified) may be capable to apprehend of that Majesty,
which is Infinite; in this advanced condition, the Soul (which is here
clogged, and drossy, and much praegravated by the Body, subject to corruption)
shall beatifically see God, as he is, in the full splendour of his immortal
glory; whereas beneath, it sees only in part, and knows but in part, nor
can the greatest part of our sublunary knowledge, make up the least part of our
Ignorance; the discovery that we have now of Heaven, is but (...), as by
reflection from a glass Darkely, being changed into the Image of God, by
degrees, from one glory to another, 2 Cor. 3.18. but then, all clouds shall be
dispelled, the Intellectual eyes fully cleared up into a perfect and bright
serenity, and withal enjoy a sweet oblectation, Contentation and Delight
accompanying that inexpressible and blissful Vision.

2. In the will, perfect fruition of the Divine glory, tention, and (for the
measure of the Creature) Comprehension, a complete assimilation, and likeness
to that glorious Majesty, in Holiness and Righteousness; In those new Heavens
dwells nothing but righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13.

3. In the whole Soul, Joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. In the
Body, 1. Impassibility, it is not, nor can be subject there to any Ach, Ague,
or Pain, no discontenting or agonizing vexations whatsoever, All Tears shall
be wiped away from our eyes, Rev. 7.17. 2. Agility, expedite quickness, free
from all manner of Lumpish ponderosity, or defatigation whatsoever; Yea
moreover, perfect Clarity, and glorious splendour, such as the Sun it self, in
its full Brightness partakes not of: Here below the Beauty of the Saints is
shadowed, and much clouded, partly by the interposition of Hypocrifie (Copper
often passing before weak eyes for Gold, Formality for Reality) eclipsing that
2 Cor. 1.12.
(...), and simplicity which would both Tit. 2.10.
adorn the Gospel, and grace the purity of profession: partly also by
afflictions, to which the godly are Act. 14.22.
appointed in this life, where Christianus is quasi Crucianus, and that Mat.
^0.22.
Baptism of blood, and Suffering is made the character of a true Believer, as
that of Water is of an outward visible Member of the Church: And partly also by
Corruption, which like spriggs, or suckers sprouting forth even under the
choycest graffe, will sometimes be showing of it self in the defection of our
best actions, yea, in some particulars of Jam. 3.2. G^l. 6.1.
Exorbitancy; so that whereas, in these several regards, the Beauty of the
Saints is much obtenebrized, and obsoured, yet then shall they Mat. 13.42.
shine forth, (...), even as the Sun from out of a Clowd, in full clarity, and
refulgent Phil. 3.21.
glory; which was praefigured, after a sort, in that shining transfiguration of
our Savior upon the Mount, Mat. 17. When the vision was so glistering, and
resplendent, that Peter could have been contented, (though but from that
glimpse of glory) to have erected a Mat. 17* 4.
Tabernacle, for a farther sight and Contemplation, he found it so sweet, that
it was good to be there longer. 3. Lastly, To all this may be added
Immortality, as the Diamond set in the ring of all the rest, there Mortality
has put on Immortality, the Body never more, after it is clothed upon
therewith, being subject unto Corruption, Death it self is then struck dead,
and swallowed up in a final Victory unto all Eternity: To which purpose ye may
do well to meditate at leisure those very apposite and pertinent Scriptures, 1
Pet. 5.4. 2 Cor. 5.1. Rev. 2.11. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. compared with Hos. 13.14.
and to this purpose the places of bliss are styled (...).
mansions, Joh. 14.2.
or abiding and resting places, John 14.2.

And this is the reward, couched under this Metaphor of a Crown, the Bliss
whereof, indeed, transcends the skill, and tongue even of Angels themselves to
express: Saint Paul speaking of the excellent goodness was treasured up, but
in the gifts and graces of Regeneration in this life, says even of them, that
the natural eye has not Seen, nor the ear Heard, nor has it entered into
the Heart of an unspiritualized man, to conceive the things which God has
praepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. Much less surely can this be
done, in regard of the 2 Pet. 1.17.
Excellent glory above in Heaven; Wherefore the joy thereof being so
incomprehensible, as it is, when it could not enter into the faithful servant
mentioned in the Gospel, then he was bid to enter into it, even into that joy
of his Master, Mat. 25.21. And thus far of the remuneration it self at
large, both in the Certainty and the Dignity thereof, It is a Crown of
Righteousness.

I come next to consider the Donor, or the Bestower of the same, the Lord, set
forth unto us here, under the periphrasis of being (...), The Righteous Judge.

Where note, says the Roman Catholic, that the Reward is a Reward of
Justice, not of favor, rendered as a due debt, not given as a gratuitous
benevolence, so Cajetan on the Text, Dicendo, reddet Justus Judex, debitum jus
significat; and, so by consequent, the good works, to which its rendered, are
properly meritorious, and God shall be unjust if he deny them his due reward,
even due of debt: But whilst these overweening spiders suck poison, the Humble
Bees draw honey from these fragrant and sweet flowers: To Cajetan (though none
of the meanest Schoolmen) we may oppose Primasius, who has this more solid
expression, quomodo ista corona debita redderetur, nisi prius illa gratuita
donaretur? How can that Crown be said to be rendered as due, unless first it
was bestowed as free? and again, opera Bona sunt Dei dona, The Lord in
crowning our good deeds, does but reward us with his own gifts; in this case
we must be all constrained to say as David, on another occasion, 1 Chronicles.
29.14. All things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee;
Wherefore, Saint Paul (the great Assertor of free grace) has styled most fitly
life eternal it self, (wherein consists the absolute consummation of all
graces) (...), a free gift, Romans 6.23. a word not used in any Heathen Author,
but peculiarized to the 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.11
inspired penmen of Holy Writ; besides, the manner of the Apostles expression
is very remarkable, even in this very Text, where the word (...), [is laid up]
and the other of (...) [shall give] both these expression simply a free
Donation, no meritorious purchase at all; elsewhere, our reward in Heaven is
called an Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. Act. 26.18. which is a thing coming freely
by descent unto the rightful Heir: Moreover, works meritorious, according to
the determination of the Patrons of merit themselves; They must be, 1. Nostra,
our own works, wrought out of our own strength, and done by our own power,
whereas the Evangelicall Prophet has otherwise assured us, Isa. 26.12. Thou O
Lord, says he, have wrought all our works in us, He means, gracious works:
Alas, we are not such Silkewormes as to spin a thread of Faelicity out of our
own bowels; we must remember that the highest style, which the Scripture
gives the Saints, is but to be Act. 9.15. 2 Timothy 2.20.
Vessels of Salvation, to Romans 5.17.
receive the graces of God distilled into them from above; Not Our heart is as
barren of any good, as they report the Isle of Patmos is, where nothing will
grow, but on earth that is brought from other places. D. Stoughton.
Springs or Fountains to derive them to our Tanquam fi^ius gratiae B adwardin.
de S. Paulo.
selves; and by the very Schoolmen themselves, the graces of the Spirit are
called, Habitus infusi, Habits, not acquisite by frequent Acts, as moral
virtues are, but infused by God into the Heart, Every good and perfect gift
descending from above, as Saint James says, Jam. 1.17. Yea, it was the
positive assertion of our Savior himself, John 15.5. Without me ye can do
nothing, He means 1 Pet. 2.5
Acceptably; He does not say, as Saint Austin observes, sine me difficulter
potestis, or, non potestis perficere, without me ye can hardly do any thing,
or, ye are not able to bring any act unto perfection, but simply, and
expressly thus, Without me, that is, without Cant. 8.5
leaning upon me, having my special and gracious assistance, Ye can do
nothing at all that is good and gracious; and our Apostle also, elsewhere,
professes, that all our sufficiency, namely in things supernatural, is merely
and solely of God alone; 2 Cor. 3.5. Therefore we may well conclude, that
whatsoever good works there are in us, they be none of our own.

Secondly, As they must be our own, so likewise are they, (in the sense of
those grand Impostors of the Christian world) to be perfect, as in which
nothing is to be found defective, nothing redundant; whereas all our
righteousness, as it is inhaerent in us, Alas! it is but as a defiled, nasty,
and polluted menstruosity, Isa. 64.6. the highest pitch, or (...) of
perfection, that (whilst we are clad with the rags of our Pyil. 3.21.
vile flesh) we, the very best of us all, can attain to in this life, is (as I
have shown See my Sermon, styled, The Remedy of Schism, preached at Paul's
Land 1640 p. 18, 19.
elsewhere) but to see, and to acknowledge our imperfections; as in the
clearest serenity of the Firmament, some speckling cloud may be discovered, so
in our most accurate and exact performances, either in the Matter, or in the
Manner, or in the Degree, measure or end of doing, we all prove some way
defective; even the very best things that we do have enough in them to be
pardoned, if the Lord should discuss them without mercy in a rigorous
severity, and be so extreme as to Psalm. 130 3.
mark what in them is done amiss: To this effect the forementioned School
Divines have styled the greatest Saints, as they are yet Members but of the
Church militant on earth, but Viatores, walkers in the way, whose motion is but
only progressive, not Comprehensors, till actually instated Members of the
Church Triumphant above in glory, in the mean while, that maxim in Divinity
is Orthodoxe and solid, Successivorum non simul est esse, and perficere, Those
things which admit of a succession in their motion, or degrees of growth, their
being and perfection is not all at once, nor altogether; wherefore our very
Apostle elsewhere, Phil. 3.12.15. professes, though he were perfect, in regard
of sincerity and uprightness, yet not so, in regard of the full measure; He
was so in respect of Parts, he was not so in respect of Degrees, therefore he
said, that he had not as yet fully apprehended; Fuit perfectus, spe futurae
glorificationis, Fuit Imperfectus, onere Corruptionis; Fuit perfectus,
expectatione muneris; Fuit Imperfectus, fatigatione Certaminis, as most
appositely to our present purpose, Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Mo^im.
Fulgentius: perfect he was, in the Hope of future Glorification: he was
imperfect, under the burden of present corruption; He was perfect in the
expectation of his reward, but yet imperfect being tired under the great
conflict, and encounter that he had with the opposers of the Gospel of Truth;
complete perfection he professed not; much less may others, so far
inferior unto so great, and most illustrious a Saint, as S. Paul was.

3. Works meritorious, as they must be our own and perfect, so also (in their
sense) Indebita, more than due, supererogatory transcending the Command;
whereas (proud Catharists and brittle pot-sherds as they are) they might
observe what the great Lawgiver has declared in that Case, Luke 17.10. When
we have done all that we are able to do, we remain still most defective, and
most unprofitable servants, and have at the utmost (if we could reach to that)
done but duty.

4. Lastly, Works meritorious must be proportionata ad mercedem, exactly
proportionable unto the just Reward; but surely if (as they cannot) our
Passions, and Romans 8.18.
Sufferings cannot equal the Reward, much less can our Actions, or our
imperfect doings; sweetly sings the Psalmist, God Crowns indeed, but it is
in his own mere mercy, and loving kindness, not for any possible desert in
the primest Creature; yea, Meritu^ meum miseratio Domini. Be^n.
it is a maxim in the very Schoolmen themselves, That Principium meriti prius
est merito, and that principium is Gods free Grace, Mercy, favor.

How then is it free, and yet a Reward of Justice?

Answ. Some answer thus, namely, by understanding Justice, in this Text, of
Gods Fidelity, and faithfulness in keeping promise, as in that Text, 1 John
1.9. where (...) are joined together, if we confess our sins, God is
faithful and Just to forgive us our sins: And in this sense, (rightly
apprehended) its true indeed, to say that its Debita merces, A reward of Debt,
because God has, after a sort, bound himself by his own promise to give it
unto us: Promittendo se fecit Debitorem, says S. Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon.
16. Debtor Deus factus est, Non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed quod ci
placuit promittendo -- illo ergo modo possumus exigere Dominum nostrum, ut
dicamus, Read quod promisisti, quia fecimus quod jussisti, and hoc tu fecisti,
qui laborantes juvisti -- Non dicimus Deo, Read, quia accepisti; sed read,
quid promisisti, Gonr. Dieteric. Dn. 9 post Trin. in Fine.
Augustine, he has made himself a Debtor to his Church by promise, in which
only regard it is, that we may exigere Dominum, as he speaks, urge and press
the Lord upon his word, so we read the Church under affliction did, Jer.
14.21. Remember, break not thy Covenant with us; compare herewith, Neh. 1.8.
Deuteronomy. 9.5. Others more directly give us this answer; Aeternall life, is in
respect of us, (...), a mere Gratuity, or free gift; But in respect of the
personal merit of Christ, its a reward of Justice; The Lord Christ Jesus
having purchased unto all his true Believers, by his Humiliation and Obedience,
this Crown of their Imputative righteousness, how imperfect soever their own
personal Righteousness was: And from this title of the Lord, his being a
righteous Judge, all his faithful Servants may assuredly rest upon the
Infallibility of the reward of their Service and Fidelity, since the Lords own
word, aequity and faithfulness is engaged for it; Surely he is faithful who
has promised, Heb. 10.23. nor can he fail or deny himfelse, 2 Timothy 2.13. Yea,
he himself is our shield and our exceeding great reward; Genesis 15.1. and indeed,
in enjoying God, we enjoy all happiness, and soule-satisfying Contentation;
wherefore its not impertinently observed by the Hebrews, that in the Essential
Name of God (...) all the Letters are Litera quiescentes, Letters of Rest, to
denote, that without God there can be no solid joy, or quietness of Soul,
which will still be tossed in a kind of restless inconsistency, till it do
indeed terminate at last in him; which made that man, so much after Gods own
heart! as in a flame of fervent zeal) experimentally to put the question,
Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that
I desire besides thee.

The next particular that falls under my consideration is the time of donation,
when this Reward is to be actually conferred, expressed to be [in That Day, and
at the Lords appearing.]

These 1 Timothy 4.1. and 2 Timothy 3.1.
latter times, into which the 1 Cor. 10.11.
ends of the world are fallen, abounding (as men in old age) with variety of
Mund^^ senescens, patitur phantasias. Gerson.
phancies, have given us occasion to enquire, what Day of the Lords appearance
it is, which is here meant? whether it be the great. and Act 2.20. 2 Tit. 4.1.
notable day of the Joh. 6.39, 40, 41.
last general Judgment; or else of some other manifestation of the Lord
Christ upon earth, before that last day of all does come?

There are some (otherwise abundantly knowing) whose wits have herein proved
more wanton, than their judgments solid, whose apprehensions have led them to
conjecture, if not to believe an appearance of the Lord Christ personally, in a
way of reign and triumph, to be manifested upon earth, a thousand years
before the last day of the General Judgment: such, in the Greek expression,
are called Chiliasts, and by the Latins, Vid. Aug. lib. 20. De Civ. Dei c. 7
and Philastr. c. 59. De Here Is. and Aug. De Here Is. c. 8.
Mistenaryes: some have fetched the name, and conceit so high as from Eusebius.
1.3 c. 25. Histor. Ecclesiast.
Cerinthus, a blasphemous Heretic, even in the days of the Apostles
themselves, who daringly avouching the Lord Christ to be no more than a mere
man, and borne after the common way of humane generation (which gave occasion
to S. John, that soaring Euch. 1.10.
Eagle, to write that his so sublime Gospel, wherein, in the very Joh. 1.1, 2,
etc.
entrance of it (He proves his Divine Nature) He gave out, that after the
resurrection, there should be in the great City Jerusalem, an outward way of
pomp, and a kind of voluptuous indulgence to corporal vanities, and delights,
during the term of a thousand years; which opinion He was thought to have
sucked from the Breasts of the Jewish Synagogue, that people mistaking the
nature and quality of Christ's Mat. 20.21. A and. 1.6.
Kingdom, thinking it to be after an external glory, and not (as it is
indeed) consisting Luke 17 21.
within, in the soul, after a Romans 14.17.
spirirtuall manner, ruling and reigning over the spiritual part of man: But
this Blasphemer being exploded, and cried down by all the Primitively-Orthodox
Fathers, and Christians, as the Historyes of those Times inform us.

The next, who most clearly speak of it, or was, indeed, supposed the first
who more directly vented the opinion, was one Papias Bishop of Hieropolis, as
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 36. Eccl. Hist.
Eusebius acquaints us, a man of a weak and slender judgment, who if not
utterly neglecting, yet but slightly valuing the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, pretended for his conceit, Apostolical Traditions; and by reason
of the venerable name of Antiquity, it is not to be denied, but that some of
the ancient Fathers received some tang of the same opinion from him, as may be
seen, or collected of Justin: Martyr, Dialog. Cum Triphon Jud: page 239
Justin Martyr, and in the end of Trajans time Baron: in Annal. Ann: 118. sect
2. and Hieron. in Catalog. illustr. cap. de Papia.
Apollinarius, Tertul. l. 3. advers. Marc. c. 24.
Tertullian (too much misled by Montane and Lactantius) who were in part spiced
with this Millenarisme; so perilous a thing, it proves to the Supine, and out
of a secure or careless disregard, to suffer Humane Tradition to become a
Diotrephes, and to have the 3 Epist. John 9.
pre-eminence above the infallibity of the undoubted Scriptures; which sacred,
and unerring written Word of God does hold forth (as of certain credibility
inspired by the Divine, and first verity that can never deceive) no such clear
truth, that the Lord Christ shall in Person before the General Resurrection,
come visibly, and corporally upon the earth, and as by a Re 20.6.
first resurrection cause all those who dyed Re. 14.13.
in, and for him, to arise, and with him in a peaceful tranquillity, and glory
to reign, and to bear sway over the wicked, as Vassals, for a thousand
years; which date of time being expired, immediately shall ensue the General
Resurrection, and the day of the last Judgment. No such evidentiall verity is
demonstrated in Holy Writ, as of Absolute Necessity to be believed unto
salvation: But whatsoever is alleged out of the prophetic Scriptures for the
stablishing of that opinion, is to be understood, either of the first coming of
Christ in the flesh, or of the state of the N. T. in general; or else, of the
glorious estate of the Church triumphant to be expected hereafter in the
eternal Kingdom for ever in Heaven, as Joh: Gerard, loc. com. To. 9. c 7.
sect. 80
Gerard judiciously: I have not time to allege, or you patience to hear, on
this occasion, the several Texts cited by the Chiliasts, or of the Orthodox;
many See Bish. Hall in his Revelations unrevealed, edit. 1650. D. Pride: sermon.
on 2 Pet. 3.13. and sermon. on Joh. 6.14. Per. Them. of Probl. vid. Dierer. In die
fest. Bar. Ap. p. 7 14. etc. vol. 4. Bull. l. 2. c. 11. con^r. Anabapt. and
sixth. Senens. l. 6. Annot. 347.
reverend, and renowned Divines have eased us all of that labor; let it
suffice, at the present, to take notice, from our Saviors own lips, that his
Kingdom is not of this world, John 18.36. but within us, Luke 17.21. and from
Heaven; and besides, we find, in our Creed (which is founded on k Lactant. l.
7 c. 24. Institut.
the Scriptures, and may in every article thereof be Art. 6. of the Ch: of
England.
proved by them) we find, I say, in our Creed, mention made but of two visible
comings of Christ, the first in Phil. ^.8. Mat. 21.5.
Humility to suffer, and to be judged; the other, at the end of the world (but
not before) in the 2 Pet. 1.17.
glory of his Father, to Acts 17.31. 2 Timothy 4.1. 1 Pet. 4.5.
judge the world, both quick and dead in righteousness; and unto them that
look for him, says the great Apostle, shall he appear, the [ See my Sermon,
styled The Grand Assizes, page 37. edit. 1653. preached at Winchester.
second] time, without sin, that is, without suffering any more as a
sacrifice for sin unto salvation, Heb 8.28.

Leaving then those Millenarian conjectures to such as abound with leisure;
rest we in the solid determination of Orthodox, and stable judgments, who
resolve by the day, and by the appearing here mentioned in this text, to be
meant the last great day of the general Judgment, according to that Scripture
Acts 17.31. and the Lord Christ his second 2 Timothy 4.1.
coming upon that day, in Mat. 25.31.
glorious Majesty, unto the judgment of all the wolrd: so that however, those
who 1 Timothy 5.17.
labor in the Word and Doctrine, meet often with so great discouragements,
that they seem to labor all in vain, and spend their strength for naught, as
the Prophet speaks Isa. 49.4. yet surely their Judgment is with the Lord, and
their work, that is, the reward of their work is with the Lord; his goodness
is laid up for them; O how great! Psalm. 31.19. In the mean time, let it be our
delight and contentment that we Mat. 24.46.
do our Masters work, not as by constraint, but 1 Pet. 5.2.
willingly; since indeed such a virtuous service ever carries its own reward
with it, as being a thing to be desired, and embraced for its own worth; and
certainly that sweet comfort, and complacency that a righteous soul finds in
the sincere discharge of his duty (within its proper station) in conscience of
God, is infinitely more valuable than all the H^b. 11.25.
treasures the earth can afford without it; only, as the Husbandman, we may not
anticipate the season of the Harvest, but we must Jam. 5.7
wait, and then in due time, we shall reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6.9. Heb.
10.36.37. and when the reward actually comes, it (being so large) will
abundantly recompense all our work, yea, end all our patience too; since the
manner of it will be the more manifest, and conspicuous before all in that
great day, when Rev. 20.12.
all, of all sorts, both great and small, shall, upon the general summons,
stand before the last Tribunal, and then upon the appearance of the Chief
Shepherd, we shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4.

Hereof S. Paul had a particular assurance in his own person, when he says,
Henceforth is laid up for [me] a Crown of Righteousness; and if for him, why
may it not be also possible for others to be in like manner assured of the
same, especially provided, that we are such as do love his appearing?

This question, I confess, is solid, yet such, as wants not its intricacies:
The Roman Catholics in this controversy are wont to resolve thus, that indeed
for so great a Saint, as S. Paul was, this assurance might be possible, yea,
was attained to by Revelation extraordinary, by means of his fides
privilegiata, his special and privileged faith, which as an Apostle, and a
Act. 9.15.
chosen vessel of honor, he was endowed and adorned withal from Heaven; for
that God had a great 2 Timothy 4.17.
service for him to do, who was selected, as it were, to take up the Gauntlet
in the quarrel of the Gospel, against the manifold, fierce, and potent 1 Cor.
16.9.
Adversaries of the same, so that (as I said in the beginning) to steel his
resolution with the greater courage, he was fortifyed beforehand, and armed
with an extraordinary assurance of a glorious reward, after his work, and
warfaring therein was over: Certitudine Objecti, and also Certitudine Subjecti;
both, as it is sure in it self, as it is determined by God; and likewise, in
the particular evidence, and special experience of the same in the soul of a
true believer: and this is proved, partly from those Scriptures, which exhort
unto a diligent endeavor after it, 2 Pet. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.5. Now, the nature
of Evangelicall precepts, and exhortations, in a contradistinction to those of
the Law, is, that they carry a spirit, a secret energy, virtue, and power with
them, inabling, through grace, unto observation, therefore the Gospel is called
John 6.63.
life and spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. and I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. partly also, this is proved from one principal end
of the spirits Donation, his being given us, namely, That we may know the
things that are freely given unto us of God, and to co-witnesse with our
spirits, that we are his Sons and Daughters, 1 Cor. 2.12. Romans 8.16. 1 John
5.13. Thirdly, from the duties required of us, upon this account, as,
thankfulness, Ephesians. 1.3. Col. 1.12, 13. What wise man will give thanks for
that, which he has no certainty that he does enjoy? this were for a man to
boast of a Prove 25 14.
false gift, as of a Jud. v.12
cloud without water: so likewise of Love, we love God, because he first loved
us, 1 John 4.19. in so freely giving his Son to us. John 3.16. and together
with him all things that do accompany salvation, Romans 8.32. even to be the
Author of life and salvation unto all that obey him, Heb. 5.9. And how come we
to know of all this love, but by that experimental proof thereof, that is
shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us? Romans 5.5.
And lastly, by the examples of Saints that have had this assurance in
themselves, as Job 19.25. Abraham, Romans 4.21. and here, in my Text, Saint Paul,
which eminent Saints were not set forth in Holy Writ, as Wonders, merely to be
gazed at, but as Patterns of imitation; and though ordinary Christians and
Saints cannot reach to the same steps, yet they may walk in the same path, and
may possibly attain, though not to the same measures, yet to the same
foundnesse of persuasion; and indeed, as a reverend B. King, lect. 38. on Joan.
Divine observes its firmness, rather than fullness of assurance, (namely, in
respect of adherence, or of recumbency) that the Saints in this life arrive
unto, but to this firmness they may come by the use of the ordinary, and of
the right means, as here S. Paul did by fighting the good fight, by finishing
his course, and by keeping the faith; hereby, as by the ordinary means, he
concluded (therein likewise showing us an example) that from henceforth there
was a Crown of Righteousness laid up in Heaven for him, yea, and for all
others with himself, who loved the appearing of the Lord Jesus.

But, though it be (cautionately understood) thus possible; notwithstanding it
is very difficult, and hard to be attained, and that for many weighty, and
important reasons. As

First, in regard of the difficulty to put a distinction between seeming
Virtues, and real Graces, which are the signs, and fruits of Election, and
which give the best evidence of glory; so that there needs much discussion, and
an exact spirit of Phil. 1.9, 10.
Discerning, to put a Difference, and to discriminate the one from the other;
yea, we are to take notice, that there are many Vices near of Fallie cnim
vitium proximitate, honi.
kin to many Virtues, and carry in semblance, a near affinity, as it were,
with them; There is, says devout Bernard, a minium virtutis, a certain kind
of Vermilion, wherewith Satan paints over the outside of Vices, and makes them
show like Virtues, and but by an Eye and an Heart Heb. 5: 14.
exercised in piety hardly discernable each from the other; thus Flattery
sometimes carries the style of affability; Covetousness of Frugality;
Rashness of Fortitude; a Divellish Matchiavelisme, of a lawful policy;
excess and riot, of good fellowship; and under this mistake of judgment, that
is taken for zeal, which is nothing but an impetuous 2 Timothy 3.4.
headiness, or a fiery kind of vehemence, that in stead of heating the house,
is apt to burn it; Thus in short, presumption passes often for Faith, this
being the Jer. 17.9. 2 Cor. 11 3.
guile of our hearts, and Satan complying with it, (who can transform himself
into an 2 Cor. 11 14.
Angel of Light) and set a fair gloss upon naughty wares, making the tinsell
of Hypocrisy to pass for the Silver of sincerity* we must not too much rely
upon our Prove. 3.5.
own Judgments in this matter, but bring things to the 1 These. 5.21.
beam of the Sanctuary, and there Romans 12.2.
prove and weigh them; the Word of God ever gives right Judgment, and the
searching hereinto, John 5.39. Act 17.11.
and examining of these matters, hereby requiring great deliberation, this
makes the assurance difficult, when the Evidence is perplexed, and not
presently cleared.

Secondly, its hard, in regard of the plenty of Lusts, and of the Gal. 5.19.
works of the flesh, which too much over-grow, and abound in every man's Heart;
but graces are but rare, and come up thin, much chafe and little solid grain;
our graces are like Gideons Army, but a handful in comparison, but our sins
and like Midiknites, Jude 7.12.
Innumerable as Grasshoppers; Hipps and Hawes (says one) grow in every hedge,
when choycer fruits are but in some few Gardens; and every soil almost* yields
stone* and rubbish, but Gold and precious stones are found in very few places;
^nw S. Peter, who exhorts to give diligence to make Election sure, exhorts
also, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. to add to Faith, Virtue, to Virtue, Knowledge, etc. a
large enumeration, or induction of graces is required to clear up this
assurance, and certainly that is a matter of no ease.

Thirdly, (that I may hasten) this is difficult, in regard of the great
progress, that an Hypocrite, or a Castaway, may make in the ways of
Christianity, and yet never attain to this assurance; He may have some degrees
of Illumination, Heb. 6.4. much like a Coruscation, that a sudden flash of
Lightning makes in the Air; He may have good wishes as Balaam, Numbers 23.10.
A sight of sin as Cain had, Genesis 4.13. Confess sin as Judas did, Matthew
27.4. have zeal as Jehu had, 2 Kings 10.16. in these, and in like other gifts
may a very Castaway make a great progress; But no child of God can have any
real comfort in any thing, wherein he cannot say, he has (yet) therein gone
beyond a Castaway; and yet, but in the ground, or rule, or end of doing, these
things are hardly discernable each from other: All which, and much more that
might be added to the same purpose, show, though not the utter impossibility,
yet surely the very great difficulty of attaining unto this assurance, that a
man can say, as S. Paul does here, in a particular application unto his soul,
Christ loved [me] and gave himself for [me,] and henceforth is laid up for
Gal. 2.20.
[me] a Crown of Righteousness.

There yet remains but one Pearl more in the Cabinet of this Text, which I
shall only offer to your short notice, and so conclude, it is that due
qualification which renders other Christians, as well as it did S. Paul,
capable of the Crown of Righteousness; they must be such, as who do love the
Lord Christ's second appearing in the day of Judgment. And, indeed, it is the
property of none but Saints, to love it, and long for it. See Phil. 1.23. Rev.
22.20. Amen even so come Lord Jesus.

Some cautions, notwithstanding, must be here remembered, since it is possible
that times may fall out, when we tremble at the thought, or mention of it; as
when conscience is wounded afresh with some gross act of sin: this made David
afraid, yea, to roar out, and to make a noise through the disquietnesse of his
spirit, Psalm. 38.8. Psalm. 55.2. and, under that state of soul, to beg
earnestly to be spared, that he might recover strength (in Gods favor) before
he went hence, and was no more, Psalm. 39.13. or else, when the Lord shall, for
diverse ends and reasons, surcharge the soul and conscience with the sins of
youth, for which, perhaps, men have not, as became them, been sufficiently
humbled; thus, dealt he even with his servant Job, writing bitter things
against him, Job 13.26. see also Job 1.6.4.

But, out of those cases, it is proprium quarto modo, only the Saints love it,
all such love it, and always: and no mervaile, since by this second coming, and
appearance of Christ in the day of the last Judgment, they receive very great
and inestimable benefits, such as are final Redemption of the Body from
corruption, Romans 8.23. Freedom from the society of the wicked, which here
Psalm. 119.136.
afflict the godly by their violation of Gods Law and Precepts; Deliverance,
not only from the Romans 6.12.
reign, and Psalm. 19.13.
dominion, but even from the inhabitation and being of sin, which here they
find as a clogg, and a Ps. 38.4.
burden to Mat. 11.28.
heavy for them, and so long to be rid of it, Romans 7.24. and lastly, the
beatifical 1 John 3.2.
vision, and perfect fruition of the ever-blessed, and all-glorious Trinity, in
the Heb. 12 2*, 23, 24.
Heavenly Jerusalem, among the innumerable company of Angels, being admitted
to the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn, which are enrolled and
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all and to the spirits of just men
made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant; in whose presence
there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

And thus, my brethren, after my measure, as I could (upon so short notice of
about a day) though not so fully after my desires, as I would, in so great, so
learned, and serious an Auditory, have I dispatched my discourse upon this
Scripture; your candor will, I hope, connive at the want of polishing, and
entertain it as it is, according to the weight, and importance of the matter
of it: And may the 1 Pet. 5.10.
God of all grace reap the Total 1 Timothy 1.17.
glory. Amen.

Psalm. 16.11.
An ENCOMIUM of M. Abraham Wheelock, B.D.
Late Prosessor of Arabic and Saxon in Cambridge.
AS concerning our reverend, and learned Brother deceased. Mr. Abraham
Wheelock, Batchelar in Divinity, many years fellow of Clare Hall in Cambridge;
I could seriously have wished that some silver Trampet of that University (to
which he was an ornament, within his station) had sounded out his Encomium upon
this occasion: He was there best known, where Learning, of all sorts, is now
in the Zenith, and the exquisite perfection in the Tongues (much advanced by
his skill) in the very Tropic of Cancer.

But, since it is now fallen to my lot, I may more truly say of him, than
Paterc. l. 1.
Paterculus did of AE milius Paulus, Vir in tantum laudandus fuit, in quantum
Virtus ipsa intelligi potest, He was a man to be praised, so far as virtue it
self can be understood, he therein, indeed, being as the Moon at the Eccles.
50.6.
full.

For his Theological part, a Divine of Tit. 1.9.
Orthodex judgment, of a Tim. 2.2.
godly, an 1 Timothy 4.12.
exmeplary, and of a Prove. 11.30. Dan. 12.3. 1 Pec. 3.1.
winning conversation, 1 Timothy 3.3. Heb. 13.5.
abhorring covetousness, who did both (...), and also (...), rightly 2 Timothy
2.15.
divide that word of truth after which he walked with Heb. 12.^3.
strait steps to his feet: we might have read in his Noclurni juvat
[impallcsare] charis.
pale countenance the express Characters of his unwearied industry, and
studies; cujus vultum nec fuscavit maeror, nec levigavit risus, as s. S Bern.
de Mac.
Bernard wrote of his friend Malachy; be carried mortificati on in his very
looks; continuing, without interruption, a constant and 1 Timothy 3.3. (...) Romans
12.15. Ps. 1226. H.b. 12.14.
peaceful son of the Church of England: herein exercising Himself to have
always a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men: Those (...),
mentioned by the learned Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.28.
diversities, or kinds of Tongues, he was in much variety, from Heaven
superlatively endowed with, by the gift of Gods spirit: He being so eminent a
Linguist, he might have said (without envy, or disparagement to any be it
spoken) I thank my God I speak with 1 Cor. 14.18.
Tongues more than most of them all; the intricacies whereof he had a faculty,
and withal a facility hoth to find out, and to make pervious, elucidating
what was obscure, enucleating what hard, that as the Jewish Rabbis, so often as
they met with Texts, which were as S. Peter says, of some things in S. Paul's
Epistles, (...), 2 Pet. 3.16.
hard to be understood, out of which they could not extricate themselves, were
went to shut up all their discourse with this, Elias cum venerit, solver dubia,
Elias shall anser this doubt, when he comes; in like sort was he as another
Elias to the doubts and difficulties of many, who (being D. Lightfot Mr. of
Katharine Hall in Camridge in his Harmory.
accurate in the Rabbinicall Learning were very well able to judge: gave him
this testimony a good while since in print, that scarcely anything, that way,
proved too hard for him, for his condation or decisian.

Yet one thing I cannot but observe to you of him whom I so well, and so long
knew) and it is this, That whereas his experience found that sentence of
Thucydides a most authentic verity, (...) the less the Art, usually the more
the vaunting, but the more Ratiocination, the slower the Determination;
suitably to that of the great Dactor of the Gentiles, (...), unball anced know
ledge, like a bladder blown up with wind, 1 Cor. 8.1.
puffs and swells with ostentation; waking many (out of en overweening upon
their superficial excellencies) as Antipheron Orietes (in Aristotle) to
imagine, that every where they see their own shapes and pictures going before
them; yet, that I say, which I observed remarkable, and werthy of universal
imitation in him, was, under his many and exceeding abilities, his humble and
exeeding modesty; so that others took more notice of him, than he did of
himself; much like to the Violet, a flower of a sweet and delicous scent, yet
grows lowest in the Garden, covering it self often with its own leaves:
Howbeit, as the odorife rous fragrancy thereof cannot but be discovered; so he,
together with his accomplishments, could not be concealed; yea, as Eccles. 50.6.
Syracides said of Simon the Son of Onias, he was as the morning Star in the
midst of a Clound. His sufficiencies, and, withal, his integrity having made
him thus known; to his custody, and ever sight were committed the rich
Treasives of Learning, laid up in the choice Library of the University of
Cambridge: And about two and twenty years past, beyend his own expectation,
though not beyend his merit, he was chosen the first public professor, and
reader of Arabic there; A Lecture first founded at the sote and proper charges
of an eminent and truly religious Gentleman of this City of London (to which
having, like him self, bornall the principal offices therein, he has long
been an honor) Mr. Alderm. Thomas Adams, who ever since continned is by his
bounty to him, of full 40 l. per annum, constantly paid; for which munificent
Act he deserves of all Scholars (whom co nomine, he affectionately regards)
an honor able mention, and of all learned posterity and ps. 112.6.
everlasting memorial. Et memorem famam qui been gessit, habet. Ovid. To this
worthy Citizen, of so high a Gal. 2.2.
reputation; must be added the example of a noble Knight, to whom, and to whose
Heirs (inheriting his learning and (...). isocrat. Vid 1 Reg. 5.7.
virtues, as well as his lands) the Common wealth of Literature rests deeply
engaged, by name Sir Henry Spelman (of pious memory) who, with great expense of
time and treasure, restored many precious monuments of antiquity (very useful
to Gods Church and very tart Monumentum quasi monimentum.
warnings to pitchy Sacrilege) from dust and obscurity, to beauty and light:
who, at his own cost, first erected, about ten years past, a Saxon Lecture in
the same University, establishing it by an Annual Pension of 20 l. which was
seconded by his learned Sr. John Spelman.
Son; and since, continued by his M. Roger Spelman.
Grandchild (a Gentleman of gallant ingenuity) so that what the Poet said of
the golden branch holds true in that Progeny,

Virgil. An.
Uno avulso non deficit alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit virga metallo.
when one fails, another of the same metal buddeth forth, and flourishes:
And this Lecture also was first publicly read by this same Professor: Both
which he discharged with so complete abilities, as found acceptance of all,
admiration in many, hopes of imitation but in a few. yet this was not all, but
as when the clouds are full, they drop down, the ears shed, and the fountains
flow out; even so his goodness became still diffusive, and was very
communicative to others, even to the most distant and remote Nations; for which
purpose he spent himself, as a candle in the socket, to the very last blaze,
whilst he was here publishing the four Gospels of our Savior, with acute and
solid Annotitions, in the Persian Tongue; in the progress of which work, it
pleased God to call him Eccles. 12.5.
home to his happiness with himself in Heaven: but as S. S Ambr. De obitu
Vaientin. Imper. S. Aug. de Bapt l 4. c. 22.
Ambrose writes of the desire, and vowed resolution of Baptism in Valentinian,
that being disappointed, by providence, of the Act thereof, in respect of the
outward sign, yet God giving him the grace of that Sacrament, he was accepted
as a Christian; and as S. James speaking of Abraham's attempt in offering his
only Son, upon a Divine command, styleth it an Jam 2.21.
actual offering of him, for that in the serious preparation of his mind, he
really, and fiduciarily intended it, though the story acquaints us, that the
thing it self was Genesis 22. 11, 12.
prevented by an heavenly Angel: so the indefatigable endeavors of this pious
undertaker are interpreted, as a full dispatch of that work, by his gracious
God,

And that which yet farther adds a luster to his praises, is, the ample
Testimony given of him both Living, and Dying, by that oracle of all imaginable
learning that full magazine of all sanctified Devotion, the glory of the Church
of England, the wonder of Christendom, and the triumgh of the holy Angels, who
guard and protect him for good. Dr. Usner, the L. Primate of Armagh: as
likewise by that famous Antiquary, and living library, Mr. Seldom, of whose
transcendencies in the Oriental Tongues, and profundities, besides his
Classical Pre-eminence in all manner of History, and skill in the Laws, etc.
I might write even a voluminous Encomiastick, but that (through a secret
consciousnesse of my own tenuity) I fear, that I should but darken so shining
a Topaze by my rude polishing: Certes, its a verity, what from that Patriark of
Philosophers (as that incomparable Writer of the Ecclesiastical policy, Mr.
Hoo ker, styles Aristot. in Ethic.
Aristotle) is received, (...) honor reflects with beams of brightness, Non
potest benus uon esse, qui benis placet. S. Bern, ep. 248.
and splendour upon the persons honoring is mord conspicuous; such as of these
now mentioned is, who, in their several excellencies, have lighted up Tapers
to the Christian world, for its illumination.

Such was the esteem of our Brother, whom, since the world was not Heb. 11. 38.
worthy of him, we find as another Enoch Gen 5.24.
walking with God, to be translated to his bliss; Heaven having gained a Saint
triumphant, whilst we, for the present, miss him in the Church militant.

Miss him did I say? Yea, at this instant season, his loss is most
considerable, there being so much need of his shoulder under that Herculean
labor, and burden, that now lies upon many worthy renowned Doctors, and
eximious Divines, of this our Church of England, who are now about to publish
the Holy Bible in a greater variety of Tongues, and Translations, than ever
have been, hitherto, seen extant [together;] their Lamps, I trust, shall never
want oil, till that maugre the impostures of undermining Jesuitisme, of
phrentick Anabaptisme, or of Atheistical Barbarism) both the Light, and the
Heat of the Mal. 4.2.
Sun of Righteousness Christ Jesus, has enlightened the eyes, and warmed the
breasts of such as belong to Gods election, even unto the Psalm. 19.4, 5, 6.
ends of the earth.

I have only thus much to add farther, which also accumulates his
commendations, that it may be well said of him, what is recorded of righteous
Abel, Being dead, yet speaks,(...) or, is yet spoken of Heb 11.4.
Nor can his memory die, whilst so many hopeful plants of his setting, spring
up after him, and daily grow famous in Cambridge: And which I much rejoice that
I have occasion to mention, (my self having been sometimes a Member of that
Society) the Palm for skill in the Oriental Languages may well be given to
Kings College; unto some present M. Rich. Hunt. Mr. H: Austin, etc.
Fellows whereof (having atteined a large measure of perfection that way) the
inspection and correction of the press, to perfect the printing of the Persian
Gospells, was wished, and much entrusted, by the deceased Professor.

And what shall I Heb. 11.32.
more say? The time would fail me to mention the Catalogue of persons of Romans
16.7.
Note, who as the k Phil. 2.29.1.
Philippians did Epaphroditus, honored him living; and since his decease have
testified their regards by becoming Benefactors to those of his nearest
relations, as the learned Mr. Joh. Sadler, Master of Mag: Coll: in Cambridge,
M. Cassels, and diverse others of esteem among Scholars. But, quorsum haec? to
what purpose is all this profuse Panegy. rick? may some Act. 18.17.
Gallio say, one, I mean, who cares for none of those things; since without
humane Tongues, Arts, or Sciences, yea, without Schools, or Academyes, men may
be all taught of God, and Heaven it self undoubtedly obtained? To such Julians,
who would tumble down all Schools of Learning, lest their Enthusiasticall
irrationalities might be (as Nazianzen gives the reason of that Apostate)
pierced through by sharp arrows (...), Nazian.
feathered from thence; to such I say, I would have the sin laid to their
Hearts, though my charity prompts me to pray, as S. Stephen, that it may Act. 7
60.
not be laid to their charge.

We find mention made of the 2 Kings 6.1.
place of the ancient Prophets, and of their Sons, and 2 Kings 9.1.
Children educated (no doubt) See 1 Cor 14.32.
[under] them, and instructed in their way: we read even of our Savior himself
(in his youth) that he delighted to sit in the Luke 2.46.
midst of the Drs. both hearing them, and asking them questions; though in him
were Col. 2.3.
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: And S. Paul was frequent in
School-disputations, Act. 19.9. And whereas some have said, that many great
Philosophers have bin very unsound in belief; It may be possible, when that
skill is unsanctifyed; but otherwise, (without all controversy) many very sound
in the Christian belief, have bin also great Philosophers: Moses was Acts 8.22.
learned in all the wisdom of Egypt; Dan 4.
Daniel, of Chaldee; Job not unexpert in Job 38.31, 32.
Astronomy; Jer. 32.44. Am. 6.5. 2 Samuel 23.1.
Jer. in the common Laws of his time, David in w Music, 1 Cor. 14.18.
Paul in the Tongues, in Act. 17.28. Tit. 1.12.
Poetry, and in all the knowledge both of Jews and Gentiles; and the Historyes
of the Church acquaint us of Cyprian, Optatus, Lactantius, S. Chrysostom. (a
Father mightily taken with Aristophanes and Lucian's Dialogues) and many others
laden out of Egypt with the treasures, and spoils of that Learning, being
better instructed for Gods service by those helps; as the Temple it self of
God was forwarded in the structure and state thereof by the timber of Cedar and
Fur that 1 Kings 5.10.
Hiram (though an exotic Sidonian Prince) brought into that very building.

And, indeed, I am clearly of opinion, that the reason, why so few Jews are
converted, is the too remiss regard of their Tongue, and Rabbinicall
traditions, out of which (as Tertullian, Arnobius, Lactantius, and others, did
in their dealing heretofore with Ethnicks) till the vanity of their own
grounds be declared, and convinced, there is not so apparent hopes to win them
over to become Christian: and it may be by a good providence (even for their
seasonable coalition into the same sheepfold, under one and the same Joh. 10.16.
Shepherd, Christ Jesus) that their language and antiquityes are now so much
studied in our Universities, as scarcely, with more critical accuratness, in
any age.

It Is true indeed, we shall be all taught of God, but it is mediately, and by
the ordinary means; In vain shall there be an attempt to instill principles of
Christianity into either Jews, or other Pagan Infidels, till the Speech, or
Language of both be understood, which without learning in the Tongues, cannot
feasibly be achieved: Herein our Brother (whose Obsequies we now solemnize)
did excel, and so both do, and will others also, who had the happiness of
his Manuduction.

FINIS.

