A PLEASANT CONFERENCE BETWEEN A POPISH RECVSANT, AND A PROTESTANT MAID.

By way of Question and Answer, Touching, some Passages in Religion.

By J. S.

LONDON, Aug. 20. Printed by T. FAUCET. 1642.

A CONFERENCE BETWEEN A POPISH Recusant, AND A PROTESTANT Maid.
Quest.

WHat is your Name?

Answ.

ROVND-HEAD.

Quest.

Who gave you this Name?

Answ.

My Persecuters and Slanderers in my infamy, wherein J was made a wonder to
Wise men, a jeering stock to Pooles, and an inheritor of the scorn and
contempt of all the rabblement of Hell.

Quest. What did your Persecuters and Slanderers then for you?

Answ. They did Promise and vow three things in my name: First, that they will
make me odious to all that be of their fraternity: Secondly, that they will
work my ruin and confusion: And thirdly, they wish that GOD would sink them
many miles into Hell, if they do not so do.

Quest.

Do thou think that thou art bound to believe and be afraid of their
threatenings?

Answ.

I doubt not, but they shall sink as deep in Hell as they do desire, neither
do I question but their will shall be accepted for the deed, according to
their old tenit, but I am taught not to fear any but only him that is able to
cast both body and soul into Hell.

Quest. But they that are against you are many in number, and great in Power?

Ans. Well, if God be for us, its no matter who is against us, let Pharaoh
come, and Nebuchadnezer, Hamon, Absolon, and Achittophell, Jezabell, Judas, and
all other tray ors, the Irish Rebels, the madmen in the North, that sight
against themselves and some at home that have a mind to be nibling, as well as
the rest of the Serpent seed, but they are limited by an over ruling power,
else we had bin devoured long since; therefore we need not fear them though
they were more in number, and their power as great as the Seven headed Beast
can make it.

Quest. Can nothing hurt you, what strange creatures are you?

Answ. Persecution cannot, for that is our Livery or colors, which shows
under whom we are Soldiers, the only way to hurt us, is to let us live at ease,
for we are like Camomill, if we are trod on we shall smell the sweeter and
grow better.

Quest. It Is well you are so confident, but ere it be long your faith is like
to come to trial, and then we shall see what metal you are made of, what can
they not cast you in Prison, put you in Pillories, cut off your Ears, burn
your Face, strip you naked in frost and snow, kick your Bibles and curse them,
hang you, drown, stab you and such like?

Answ. All this they may do and yet not hurt us, but not without commission
from GOD; now God will never hurt Roundheads if they be Sound-heads, God never
intended hurt to JOB when he gave commission to Satan to afflict his Carcass
for the trial of his Faith and Patience, neither did he lose any thing thereby
in conclusion; so we it may be must suffer for a while, but in the end we shall
see who shall have the worst of it.

Quest. What have you done to these poor wretches, that they rage against you
so like Madmen, do not you use to Preach in a Tab as they say you do?

Answ. What if we do, is that such a capital Crime that nothing but our ruin
and confusion can make satisfaction, the old Whore begins to stink, and she
would feign father some of her Beastliness upon us; they can not say, we use
to lay tubbes of Gunpowder under the Parliament House, but let them be doing,
be that has set them a work will pay them their wages, all this while they
are meriting, and they will shortly come to works of Supererogation, let us
not doubt but they shall have a reward answerable to their works.

Quest. Well, look to it Roundhead, there is rods in piss for you to be sure,
what think you of it:

Answ. We do both think and know, that the rod of the wicked shall nor
always rest upon lot of the righteous, the Lord can chastise us with rods for
our profit, and afterward burn them in Hell, as they desperately desire in
their blasphemous and cursed execrations: The Lord preserve Hull, as for Hell
it is their portion, they will never be quiet till they have it in full
possession, indeed they have well deserved it long ago, and without repentance
they must of necessity have t.

Quest. Do they that are at so great a distance from Roundheads, practice any
thing that is amiss, far be it from them to preach in a Tub.

Answ. Indeed swearing, cursing, oaths of the new f^shion, lying, whoring, is
nothing, murdering Heretics, Sabbath-breaking, coveting Heretics goods,
ruinating whole Kingdoms by treason, all this and more his Holiness can
pardon, but has never a Bull for such as preach in a Tub, they must be cursed
with Bell, Book, and Candle; see, see, their matchless charity, they brag of
so much surly they will shortly spoil the fashion of their Christianity, and
prove downright devils.

Quest. If you Round heads were once brought to ruin, they are like to prove
admirable subjects.

Answ. But stay, we have a God that can preserve us, blessed for ever be his
great and holy Name, for blessing us with such a blessed Parliament, whom they
call Roundheads, for dealing so roundly with them; Let us not fear but that
power that has kept them hitherto, will keep^ them still in dispight of all
the Dragons malice with all his wicked angels to help him; they that cannot
willingly and freely dye with and for such a Parliament, are not worthy to live
to enjoy such precious mercies, the Lord enable us to gird up the loins of out
minds, and to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might the Lord
prosper our sweet Parliament, and enable us all cheerfully to resign up out
selves to undergo whatsoever he in wisdom knows best for his own honor
and glory, for that is best for his own people though wicked men do not so
think.

Farewell Round head.

If I can believe all things are possible, for Faith will carry me where I
shall farewell for ever.

FINIS.

