Of the GOVERNMENT OF CHURCHES; A discourse Pointing at the Primitive Form.



Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the Universitie of Cambridge. 1641.

To the most Gracious JAMES, Duke of Lennox, Earl of March, etc. L. Warden of
the Cinque Ports, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, his very good LORD.
MAy it please your Grace. The advantage this slight worthless piece aims
at, in this address, is of great consequence, but of a civil and moderate
nature. It is no marvel if it desire to go forth under so great a Name, that is
not like to appear considerable to the world otherwise. But the Countenance it
demands, is according as the cause may deserve: more it must not expect from
your Justice, less it cannot expect from your Goodness. If it fail of the
Truth, it is a Child rebellious to the Fathers intentions, and according to the
Law of Moses, here he brings him forth to receive his doom. If it have any
thing considerable in a Cause wherein the world is so well informed long since,
my suit is, that from your Graces hands it may be derived to the public. The
Lord of Heaven and Earth bless your Grace with happiness of this life, and of
that which is to come. So prays

Your Graces most humble Chaplain, HERBERT THORNDIKE.

To the Lovers of Peace and Truth.
THat style must serve me for a Preface to this short discourse. The love of
Peace and Truth, my hope is, has made some Impression in the reasons whereupon
it proceeds: And it were a wrong to the world to think that those marks can
be offensive. My purpose was, to contribute toward the true meaning of the
Scripture in these matters: If I have failed of it, the attempt will deserve
your excuse. But my heart tells me not that I have set any Text on the rack
to make it confess more then it means. Ecclesiastical writers, I have for the
most part stripped of the authority which their years and merits in the Church
have won, and produced them as witnesses at the Bar of common sense, to make
evidence from the Historical truth of their sayings. The meaning of them is
for the most part either translated by their words, or expressed in the current
of my discourse. Sometimes it is left to every man's apprehension to value: for
when all is done, men must and will be judges for themselves.

H. T.

Faults escaped.
Page 16. line 18. ac provide read ac proinde. p. 34. l. 5. expressed r.
expresses. p. 58. l. 3. because r. became. p. 62. l. 19. these r. those. l.
21. these r. those. p. 83. l. 20. Synagogues r. Synagogue. p. 85. l. 14. after
else, add. And the chief causes in Religion brought to no Court but this. p.
87. l. 19. after writes, add In Hilcoth Sanedrin. cap. 1. p. 102. l. 9. those
r. these. p. 114. l. 10. Baptist. r. Baptismo. p. 119. l. 5. dispersing r.
dispensing. p. 129. l. 1. Tertullian: r. Tertullian) p. 131. l. 13. Toreh r.
Joreh. p. 140. l. 22. some r. sound. p. 147. l. 24. always r. (always. p.
151. l. 5. after heart add being. p. 183. l. 11. and r. of.

CHAP. I.
The Apostles eyewitnesses of our Lord, and eare-witnesses of his doctrine. S.
Paul an Apostle. Many personal qualities in them. They were Governors of
Churches.

HE that desires to epsy light at a narrow hole, must lay his eye near, if he
mean to discover at large: So must he be curious in considering the Scriptures,
that means to discern those things that are not declared there at large, but
are collected by circumstance or consequence: especially in matters which we
view at this distance of time, which represents to us things done then
through a mist of succeeding custom. Those that seek for mines, have their
virgula divina, a rod which they hold even-balanced over the place where they
hope for a vein, which if it hit right, the rod of it self bends toward the
earth: Our Lord in the Gospel commands us to search the Scriptures as men
would seek for mines or treasure; let us keep an even balance of judgment, not
bowing, but as the vein of truth swayeth it: for if we put the grains of
affection and prejudice into the gold-scales which we weigh nice truths with,
no marvel if the lighter go down. Now because the question concerns the
Apostles time, and the next to it, and the purpose is to represent the form
pointed at in Scripture, by comparing it with such passages of historical
truth and primitive practice as shall seem best to express it, let us in the
first place consider the nature of their charge, that it may appear how far
the Church reteineth a succession of it. For true it is, diverse personal
qualities are requisite in an Apostle, because they were to preach the Gospel
to all Nations. They must be men to witness those things they had seen our
Lord do, those words they had heard him speak, upon their own knowledge; and
therefore men that had conversed with him from the beginning of his doctrine.
It is that S. Peter required at the choice of Matthias, Acts i. 21. Of these
men that have companied with us all the while that the Lord Jesus went in and
out among us, must one be ordained for a witness of his resurrection with us.
It is that the same Apostle challenges, 1. Pet. v. 1. The elders which are
among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of
Christ. He condescendeth to the rank of Presbyters, when he says, who am also
an Elder; but he voucheth the privilege of an Apostle, when he adds, and a
witness of the sufferings of Christ. And his fellow-Apostle of the Gentiles to
the same purpose, 1. Corinthians. ix. 1. Am I not an Apostle? am I not free? have I
not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? as if to be an Apostle required one that had
seen the Lord, which was supplied to him by his raptures and visions, as the
hearing his doctrine was supplied unto him by that revelation by which he
avoucheth to have received his Gospel, in the beginning of his Epistle to the
Galatians. This is that God had provided for satisfaction of common sense; men
that could witness upon the credit of their eyes and ears what they
published. But it required greater matters to convince the world of those
things which reason could not evidence: The gifts of the holy Ghost, for
knowledge, for language, for miracles, for all the like were requisite in a
mavelous nature for those that undertook to preach the Gospel to all nations.
This was the Apostles charge; and the power this charge imports, the
indowments it requires, are personal, wherein no man pretends to succeed
the Apostles: But the execution of this charge reason tells us must needs
proceed, and experience of that which is written tells us it did proceed,
according to the exigence of their several opportunities, concerted by consent
among themselves: For so we find the chief Apostles Gal. ii. 9. dividing their
care between the Jews and the Gentiles. If it appear then that the Apostles,
for their time, took upon them the oversight of Churches of their own planting,
if it appear that an Apostle fixed his abode and care both upon some Church in
several, though all the world were their Diocese in common, well may we
proceed upon these terms, to make the Apostles Bishops of such and such
Churches, and Bishops successors of the Apostles; though neither for the
extent of their charge, nor for their abilities to perform it, yet because they
are trusted with that oversight of one Church, which the Apostles for their
time afforded to all within their quarters.

CHAP. II.
The Church of Jerusalem under the charge of James and his Presbyters. This was
James son of Alpheus. How he was brother of our Lord. Cleophas and Alpheus
both one.

THis is that we must stand upon in the first place, to aver the first
pattern of the form, after which it shall appear that Churches were governed
from the beginning by Bishops and their Presbyters. It is to be seen in the
first Church, the Church of Jerusalem, Mother of all Churches, which we shall
find under the charge of James of Jerusalem one of the Apostles, and his
Presbyters, no doubt by consent and appointment of the Apostles, providing for
the Church there before their departure from it. Wherein we shall not need to
set up our rest upon the credit of Ignatius or Clemens Alexandrinus (though
either of them of age sufficient to witness as great a matter as this) having
so many pregnant passages of Scripture to aver it. The Apostle, relating his
going up to Jerusalem to see Peter, Gal. i. 18. prosecuteth it thus in the next
words, But other of the Apostles saw I none, but James the brother of the Lord.
How comes he to meet James at Jerusalem when he went to see Peter there, more
then the rest of the Apostles, but because he abode there at his charge? And
again, Galat. ii. 9. And when James, Peter and John, who seemed to be pillars,
saw the grace of God that was given to me, etc. we shall not need to think
James is put in the first place for nothing, when we have so fit a reason to
give for it, because they were then all at the place of his charge: for so you
shall find it again in that most considerable action, of the Council at
Jerusalem, Acts xv. 7, 13. The decree of the Council as it is resolved upon S.
Peter's reasons, so is it framed and drawn up in S. James his terms, verse. 7,
13. the one as first of the Apostles, the other as having the charge of the
Church there: which still further appears by that which is read Gal. ii. 12.
that before some came from S. James, S. Peter ate with the Gentiles; but when
they came, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing those of the
circumcision. We see S. Peter takes advise of S. James; as likewise afterward
S. Paul at his last coming to Jerusalem, Acts xxi. 19. went in to James where
all the Elders were present, to advise with him that had the care of that
Church, about the great business in hand, how to behave himself toward those
of the circumcision that believed. Now of the College of Presbyters at
Jerusalem, and of their concurrence and assistance with this James in the
government of the Church there, we have three unreprovable arguments in the
Acts of the Apostles. The first, in disposing the maintenance of the poor,
whereof we read Acts xi. 30. that the benevolence of the Church of Antiochia,
was sent to the Elders at Jerusalem by the hands of Saul and Barnabas to be
disposed of by them, but ministered and laid out by the Deacons, as shall be
showed afterward. The second is found in the passage of the Council at
Jerusalem, wherein their concurrence appears in that which is resolved, Acts
xv. 2. that Paul and Barnabas should go up to Jerusalem to the Apostles and
Elders, about that question. And verse 4. Being come to Jerusalem, they are
received of the Apostles and Elders. Again, verse 6. The Apostles and Elders
came together to consider of this matter. And verse 22. It pleased the Apostles
and Elders with the whole Church, to send chosen men of their own company to
Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. And the letter in the next verse runs in the
name of the Apostles and Elders. All to argue the concurrence and assistance of
the Presbyters with the Apostles, which were then present there, besides James
which had the particular charge. The third is, that which has been remembered,
at S. Paul's last going to Jerusalem, where we find the Elders, assembled with
James, as his assistants in advising with S. Paul about the matter on foot: for
it is plain, that the advice whereupon he proceeds in a matter of that weight
is given him by James, and the Presbyters both, as we read there, verse 20.
And they said unto him, that is, James and the Elders. This James of Jerusalem
I make no scruple to reckon among the Apostles, because S. Paul has done it
before me: For it is plain that he speaks of no other but the Twelve so called
by our Lord from the beginning, Luke vi. 13. Because of them the question might
have been made, whether he had received his doctrine from them or not, which he
there denies: And therefore it is plain this James can be no other then James
son of Alpheus reckoned in the Gospels among the Twelve, James the son of
Zebedee, brother of John being put to death by Herod before, Acts xii. 2. On
the other side, when S. Paul calls him brother of our Lord, without doubt he
means no other but him that is called in the Gospels, James the less,
brother of Joses and son of Mary, Matthew. xxvii. 56. Mark xv. 43. the same
Mary no doubt that is called, John xix. 25. Mary of Cleophas, sister to the
blessed Virgin. First, because these Gospels speak of the same women that stood
by our Saviors cross; and again, because the brethren of our Lord are
reckoned, Mark vi. 13. James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon. So that all the
difference that has been about the several Jameses and Mary's remembered in
the Gospel, is extinguished by making Alpheus and Cleophas both one in the
language then in use, though diverse ways written in the Greek. A thing nothing
strained: For though Cleophas be otherwise written in the Syriack, because it
is translated out of the Greek, yet the Syriack name CHALPAI may be expressed
either by Alpheus or Cleophas, which is also written Clopas in some copies,
John xix. 25. and in Hegesippus quoted by Eusebius, Eccles. hist. iii. 23. This
I perceive since the writing hereof, to be the opinion of Lud. Capellus, who
has alleged S. Hierome against Helvidius to strengthen it, where he makes
Mary of Cleophas, sister of the blessed Virgin, the wife of Alpheus and mother
of James the less: Wherewith agrees Clemens Alexandrinus in Eusebius, Eccles.
hist. ii. 1. where he acknowledges but two Jameses, the son of Zebedee, and
this James of Jerusalem mentioned by the Apostle. And herewith agrees S.
Chrysostom, upon that text of the Apostle, where he observes that for S.
James his honor S. Paul calls him brother of our Lord, whereas he might as
well have called him son of Cleophas, as the Evangelist had done. Here it is
plain that James the brother of our Lord and son of Cleophas, is the Apostle
son of Alpheus, according to S. Chrysostom. As for that which follows,
that nevertheless he was not of kin to our Lord according to the flesh, but
according to the opinion of the world, it seems to depend upon Hegesippus in
Eusebius, iii. 11, 26. where he makes Cleophas brother to Joseph, supposed
father of our Lord. Which is possible to be true, that Joseph and Cleophas
brothers, should take to wife the two Mary's, sisters or cousins: But otherwise
there is so much appearance in the Gospel, that Mary mother of James and Joses,
is Mary of Cleophas sister to the blessed Virgin, that it must needs be an
inconvenience to deny this James to be kin to our Lord by her side. As for
other relations and conjectures of Church-writers, the variety whereof is
endless and unreconcilable, it is not reason to draw them into consequence to
the prejudice of a conjecture which makes so clear an agreement of this whole
difference. It was my desire to show the true meaning of the Apostles words;
but it is not my purpose to build upon uncertainties. Whosoever this James of
Jerusalem was, we find the Church of Jerusalem under his charge, almost as soon
as there was a Church there, at least if we believe Ignatius, Epist. ad Trall.
where he says, S. Stephen was Deacon to this James of Jerusalem, which must be
betimes after our Lords death. And therefore thus we see whom the Bishops of
Jerusalem succeed.

CHAP. III.
The Apostles planted mother-churches in mother-cities. The Government of them
estated upon Presbyteries. Saint Paul at the beginning made no Bishops over
those Presbyteries. The reason. Himself had the oversight of the Churches of
his planting for the time. The like in the Churches of S. Peter's charge.

LEt us now go abroad with the Apostles, and see how they followed this pattern
in the Churches which they converted to the faith. Tertullian l. De praescript.
c. 20. speaks thus of them, ac provide Ecclesias apud una^quamque civitatem
condiderunt. This slight circumstance which he but points at, that the
Apostles founded Churches in Cities, is very considerable in our business. For
it is plain they could not bestow their pains on all places: reason required
they should labor most to plant the faith in the most populous. And common
sense and the least knowledge of times will serve to show, that from thence it
was propagated through the Countries that lay to those Cities, which therefore
in time became and were called the Territories, Parishes, or Dioceses of such
or such Churches. Now the form of government estated by S. Paul over these
Churches is pointed out to us Acts xiv. 23. where we read in the end of their
first journey that Paul and Barnabas, having ordained them Presbyters in every
Church, returned to Antiochia. But unto Titus the Apostle writes thus, Tit. i.
5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou might set in order the
things that are wanting, and constitute Elders in every city, as I had
appointed thee. Elders in every Church in the one place, and Elders in every
city in the other; both to the same effect: not meaning one in a place, but
Presbyteries, that is Colleges, bodies, companies of Presbyters, with common
advice to order the Churches planted in these Cities. Such a College of
Presbyters it was that we spoke of in the last chapter, instituted by the
Apostles in the Church of Jerusalem, the pattern whereof S. Paul follows in
the Churches which he converted out of the Gentiles. And thus in the Church of
Ephesus, you shall see S. Paul, Acts xx. 17. sending for the bench of Elders
there to Miletus. Thus in the Church of Philippi, you shall find that the
Apostle directs his Epistle to the Bishops and Deacons there, which must be
to the College of Presbyters, next above the order of Deacons. Thus when the
Apostle writes to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. v. 12. And we beseech you,
brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord,
the multitude whereof he speaks, is to be understood of the like company of
Presbyters. Thus in Ignatius his epistles, you shall find him up and down
reckoning next after the Bishops the Presbyteries of all the Churches to which
he writes. The like in S. Cyprians epistles, for the Presbyteries of Rome and
Carthage. To spare more words, in all Church-writers you shall find continual
remembrance of these Presbyteries, whenever there is speech of
Mother-churches in Mother-cities: And therefore those we are to understand,
when we read that Paul and Barnabas ordained Presbyters in every Church, and
Titus in every City: And such Bodies or Colleges of Presbyters they were to
whom the Apostle committed the Churches which he had planted. But this being
granted, the question will be in the next place, Where are the Bishops, the
chief and heads of these Presbyteries? For had the Apostle from the beginning
of his planting these Churches placed that rank over these Presbyters, it is
like we should have found some remembrance of it. Now these Presbyters are
styled by the name of Bishops, as has been observed ever since S. Hierome; and
which is more, to aver the observation for this purpose, neither in the
relation of his planting and ordering the Churches, nor in the style of his
Epistles, nor in his instructions concerning ministers of these Churches, is
there any remembrance or respect to be found but of Presbyters and Deacons,
which in so much eminence of place, so much difference of Bishops office, if
any then had been, could scarce have come to pass: and makes me conclude,
that the Apostle ordained none such from the beginning over the Presbyteries.
No Bishop the Apostle had yet settled at Ephesus, when he used these words to
the Presbyters there, Acts xx. 17. Take heed to your selves and to the whole
flock over whom the holy Ghost has made you EPISCOPOS, Bishops or Overseers.
For as he gives the name to the Presbyters, so he addresseth his instructions
to none besides. None at Philippi, when he directed his Epistle to the Bishops
and Deacons there, neither the custom of the Church bearing more then one
Bishop in one Church at once, nor being a thing reasonable to think if any such
had been, that the Apostle would not have found a room for him in the style of
his Epistle. None in the Churches within the charge of Timothy and Titus (set
aside their own persons, whereof we shall give account afterward) in whose
instructions the Apostle is large in qualifying Bishops and Deacons, (such
Bishops as we read of Tit. i. 7. where, having said that he left him in Crete
to make Presbyters in every city, the Apostle adds, For a Bishop must be
blameless) but of any other rank not a syllable. None in the Church of
Corinth. The Commentaries under S. Ambrose his name yield this reason of the
disorders the Apostle taxes there, 1 Cor. xi. 21. Because there was no Bishop
there. The words are not of ordinary mark: Hos notat qui sic in Ecclesiam
conveniebant, ut munera sua offerentes, advenientibus Presbyteris, quia adhuc
Rectores Ecclesiis non omnibus locis fuerant constituti, totum sibi qui
obtulerat vindicaret schismatis causa. So whereas that whereof the Eucharist
was consecrated should be spent by the assembly in the common feast of Love,
some made good cheer, others that had not offered went away without their
share. Therefore says the Apostle, ver. 22. Have ye not houses to eat and
drink in? but despise ye the Church of God? coming thither for dissensions sake
and belly-chear, not for the Sacrament and for peace? and shame them that have
not, sending them away without enterteinment? therefore verse 33. he exhorts
to stay for one another at their meetings. Thus far out of those
Commentaries. Which reason, as it gives a clear meaning to the whole passage
of the Apostle; so it grows still more probable, because we shall find
afterward that it continues still in force at the time of writing Clemens his
Epistle published not long since. And men of learning have argued, that this
reason might better be yielded for their dissensions, saying, I am of Paul, I
am of Apollos, I am of Cephas, which the Apostle reproves in the beginning of
the Epistle, to wit, Because there was then no Bishop there, and in the
Apostles absence. And indeed, if we reckonnot amiss, what reason have we to
think, that this Apostle should ordain in the Churches of his planting a higher
rank of Bishops to govern the Churches, above and with the Presbyters? Do we
not see that he charge himself with the oversight of these Churches wherein
he had planted the Colleges of Presbyters aforesaid, 2. Corinthians. xi. 28.
Besides those things which are without, that which comes upon me daily, the
care of all the Churches? To what purpose else is the journey he takes, Acts
xv. 36. to visit the Churches wherein he had ordained Presbyters before? Let us
return, says he to Barnabas, and visit our brethren in all cities where we
preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do. We see he takes care to
exercise discipline upon the incestuous person at Corinth, which it seems the
Rulers of the Church there had neglected to do, 1. Cor. v. 4. pronouncing
sentence of excommunication, and requiring the Church to see it ratified and
executed. And for a thing remarkable, observe in what terms he proceeds, 1.
Cor. v. 4. When ye are gathered together, and my spirit, says he, his Spirit,
which ruled there in chief for the time. So that it is not for nothing that
Tertullian lib. De praescript. cap. 36. reckons Corinth, Philippi,
Thessalonica, Ephesus, and the rest of the same rank, all Apostolical
Churches, from this one Apostle, because he planted and ruled them all for his
time: Apud quas, says he, ipsae adhuc cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis
praesident, which is in good English neither more nor less then here is
affirmed; The Apostles chair rested in them all till Tertullians time,
therefore the Apostle for his time sat in it. And to my apprehension, all his
Epistles are nothing else but so many acts of this government spiritual in
chief, which the Apostle reserved himself in the Churches of his own planting.
The like to be said of S. Peter's Epistles, and has been observed in part by
Eusebius, Eccles. hist. lib. iii. cap. 5. That the title of his former Epistle
addressed to the strangers dispersed through Pontus, Asia, Galatia, Cappadocia,
and Bithynia, that is, to the Jews sojourning in those provinces, argues it to
be a work of his care, in preaching the Gospel to the charge he had undertaken,
according to the division alleged before, Galat. ii. 9. And therefore, as has
been hitherto argued of the other Apostle, so when we see S. Peter, 1. Pet. v.
1. direct his exhortation to feed the flock to none but Presbyters, we have
cause to conceive that those Churches to whom he writes, and whom we shall
hear Epiphanius say anon that he went sometimes from Rome to visit, had as yet
no Bishops over their Presbyters. The same that S. Hierome has argued long
since out of Hebr. xiii. 17. where the Apostle writes in the plural number,
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves.

CHAP. IV.
As the Apostles withdrew, so Bishops came over the Presbyteries in their
stead. Timothy and Titus had not their charge till S. Paul left those parts.
His journey from Ephesus through Macedonia into Greece. By the way he left
Titus in Crete. Why he wintered at Nicopolis. At spring he returned by land
into Macedonia. There and then Timothy undertaketh the Church of Ephesus.
Timothy an Evangelist. The prophecies that went before of him, and the grace he
received. Titus and he over many Presbyteries. Bishops over each afterward.
The Angels of the seven Churches.

BUt as the Apostles began to wear out, or otherwise as their occasions gave
them not leave to attend in person upon the Churches of their care, reason
required, if but in correspondence to the state of government that had hitherto
rested in some Apostle and the Presbyteries of particular Churches, there
should be instituted some heads of these companies of Presbyters, to whom the
name of Bishops has been appropriated ever since: and certain it is, that
during the time of the Apostles instituted they were. This agrees extreme well
with the charge and instructions of the Apostle to his Disciples Timothy and
Titus, over the Churches of Asia and Crete: whom as all Ecclesiastical
writers, after Eusebius, acknowledge to be made Bishops of Ephesus and Crete,
so must we not fail to observe here, that this was not done till it was
revealed to the Apostle that from thenceforth the Lord would employ him in the
Western parts of the world. The business is most an end agreed upon on all
hands: yet because the observation is so effectual to this purpose, let me
take leave to enlarge it by clearing the whole passage of the Apostles last
voyage, from Ephesus, through Greece, and back again. Acts xix. 21. we read at
that time Paul resolved by the Spirit, having passed through Macedonia and
Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, When I have been there I must also see
Rome. In 2. Cor. i. 15. he writes to them, that he had formerly purposed to go
first to Corinth, thence into Macedonia, from Macedonia to Corinth again, and
of the Corinthians to be brought on the way for Judea: When I then purposed
this, says he, did I use lightness? or what I purpose do I purpose according
to the flesh, that with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay? signifying,
that not taking up his resolutions upon humane considerations, it was no
lightness in him to balk his intended purpose, to follow the direction of the
holy Ghost, in going first through Macedonia, God having so ordered it, it
seems, for the reason that follows. The first Epistle to the Corinthians
was sent from Ephesus about this time: From Ephesus it is plain it was sent,
though subscribed from Philippi, (for those subscriptions, it is well known are
of no credit) by the salutations he sends, 1. Cor. xvi. 19. from the Churches
of Asia, from Aquila and Priscilla, which dwelt there, Acts xviii. 19. And
after his first resolution was changed, because he says 1. Cor. 16. 5. that he
meant to pass through Macedonia. In the 2. Cor. ii. 12. the Apostle relating
one passage of that voyage, not mentioned in the Acts, When I came to Troas,
says he, to preach the Gospel of Christ, a door being opened me of the Lord,
I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother: but taking
leave of them I departed thence into Macedonia. Titus he desired to meet with,
because he desired to hear from Corinth by him that was coming from thence, 2.
Cor. vii. 6. for as he protests 2. Cor. i. 23. it was to spare them that he
came not yet to Corinth: not yet, as being directed by the Spirit to go first
through Macedonia, and to spare them, that is, not to be engaged to proceed
rigorously against them, in case they gave not due respect to his former
Epistle. From Macedonia he dispatcheth Titus to Corinth again, about the
business specified 2. Cor. viii. 6, 16. and it is most like, upon these
circumstances, that both those Epistles were sent by Titus, whatsoever the
subscriptions bear. To go on with the Apostle in this voyage, Acts xx. 2. we
read, that having gone over the parts of Macedonia, and given them much
exhortation, he came into Greece, and there abode three months. In this
journey, let me be bold to affirm, it was that the Apostle put in at Crete, to
preach the Gospel there: the relation agrees so well from point to point, that
I will use no other words to persuade it is true, but the coherence of it. From
Ephesus then the Apostle parts at Pentecost, 1. Cor. xvi. 8. By the way at
Troas he stayed not, but came straight into Macedonia, 2. Cor. ii. 12, 13. From
thence having dispatched Titus for Corinth, 2. Cor. viii. 6, 16. going by sea
for Greece, he puts in at Crete, to preach the Gospel there; and meeting
with Titus (returned from Corinth) in this journey, leaves him in Crete to
constitute Presbyters in every City, and to finish those things which he for
the strait of time was fain to leave undone: and thus his three months being
spent in Greece, he found winter at Corinth. There he had once thought to have
wintered, 1. Cor. xvi. 6. and that the Corinthians should bring him on his
journey, which there he expressed not, but 2. Cor. i. 16. it is for Judea. But
understanding the Jews laid wait for him as he returned into Syria by sea, Acts
xx. 3. he takes a resolution to winter at Nicopolis, whereof he certifieth
Titus, appointing him to meet him there at spring, Tit. iii. 12. This was a
convenient rendez-vow for the Apostle, in the mean while, to preach the Gospel
in the parts of Epirus, as far as Illyricum: which he purposed to do, when he
writ to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. x. 16. that when his spirit was in quiet in
regard of them, he had hope to preach the Gospel in the parts beyond them; and
which he affirms to have done, Romans xv. 19. where he writes that from
Jerusalem to Illyricum he had fully preached the Gospel of Christ. And
therefore, with leave I suppose, the Epistle to the Romans is rather to be
dated from hence then from Corinth, as the subscription goes: for before this
it could not be sent; after this we find not that he returned to Corinth: From
whence being new come, he might send commendations from Gaius his host at
Corinth, Romans xvi. 23. 1. Cor. i. 14. and by Phebe he might write, seeing him
in passing by the coast of Epirus, from Corinth to Rome. When winter was spent,
from Dyrrachium, the confines of Epirus, (where he had wintered at Nicopolis)
and Illyricum (whither his doctrine was got) the journey by land was short and
good to Thessalonica in Macedonia, by the great road in Strabo called via
Egnatia; so that in good time, after the days of unleavened bread, he might
sail from Philippi, as we read he did, Acts xx. 5. This for Titus. As for
Timothy's case, thus we read, 1. Tim. i. 3. I besought thee to abide still at
Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia. The sound of these words makes Baronius
believe that Timothy was left with his charge at Ephesus upon the beginning of
this voyage of the Apostle through Greece. And he had Theodoret to go before
him in the conceit: For in his Preface to S. Paul's Epistles he concludes that
the first Epistle to Timothy was sent from Macedonia, when the Apostle passed
through it. But it is easy to perceive that this cannot stand with the
Scriptures. He that sent Timotheus and Erastus before him into Macedonia Acts
xx. 19. how could he leave him Bishop at Ephesus? Besides, in the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, iv. 17. xvi. 10. it is plain, that he was then sending
Timothy to Corinth, though he overtook him before he got thither, in Macedonia:
for afterward Timothy was with him in Macedonia at the sending of his second
Epistle to the Corinthians, as appears by the beginning of it; and with him
he was at his return into Asia through Macedonia, Acts xx. 4. It remains then
that the Apostle coming through Macedonia to go into Asia, began then to move
Timothy to stay at Ephesus, 1. Tim. i. 3. and to take upon him the charge of
the Churches of Asia. Which being accordingly agreed and done, he sends him
before with the rest of his company into Asia, as we read Acts xx. 4, 5. not
knowing then how soon himself should follow them: For thus he writes, 1. Tim.
iii. 14, 15. These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly:
but if I stay, that thou may know how to behave thy self in the house of
God. Therefore it is plain, that he sends him this Epistle of instructions
after their parting from Macedonia, but before his coming to Ephesus, it
seems, while he stayed for him at Troas, as we read Acts xx. 15. And thus we
may well understand the words of Athanasius in Synopsi, (though Baronius
allege him for his purpose) because he says no more but this, that the First
to Timothy was sent from Macedonia. But the Apostle having resolved, if it were
possible, to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost, Acts xx. 16. makes have,
and overtaketh his company at Troas, Acts xx. 6. And thus we see the reason why
there is no respect of Timothy in his instructions to the Elders of Ephesus,
Acts xx. 18. because that then he began to enter upon his charge there, and
because of the instructions he had received from the Apostle by his first
Epistle, besides word of mouth. So the upshot of all this discourse is thus
much, That within compass of the time of this voyage, at the beginning whereof
the Apostle said in the Spirit, that when he had been at Jerusalem he must also
see Rome, Acts xix. 21. at the midst whereof he writes to the Romans, chap.
xv. 23. that he had no more place in those parts, and at the end whereof he
says to the Elders of Ephesus, Acts xx. 25. And now behold, I know that all
you among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no
more: knowing by revelation that he was to serve God no more in those parts,
appoints his two Disciples Timothy and Titus to be in his stead over the
Churches of Asia and Crete. Now that the charge of Timothy and Titus gives
them a power as great as that of Bishops was from the beginning, no question is
made: if they prove not more then so, the business is clear. For true it is,
something not ordinary in Bishops we must acknowledge in Timothie's person,
when he is called an Evangelist, 2. Tim. iv. 5. Do the work of an Evangelist.
To which we must refer that grace whereof the Apostle speaks, 1. Tim. iv.
14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, that was given thee by prophecy, with
the laying-on of the hands of the Presbytery. Whereof again 2 Timothy i. 16. I put
thee in mind that thou stir up the gift that is in thee, by the puttingon of
my hands: And 1. Tim. i. 18. This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy,
according to the prophecies that went before of thee. In this the Disciples case
is somewhat like the Apostles, as you shall see it anon, Acts xiii. 2. where
the Prophets in the Church of Antiochia, having foretold through the holy Ghost
what God would do in the planting of his Gospel by his hands and Barnabas, and
declared his will for setting them apart for that purpose, hereupon they
receive imposition of hands: So likewise we must conceive that these prophecies
went before of Timothy, to inform the Church of the will of God concerning him,
and the work he had appointed him to perform. As for the grace he receives by
imposition of hands, what other can any man imagine it to be then that which is
designed in the name of an Evangelist, which the Apostle meant when he said,
Ephesians. iv. 11. that our Lord has given to his Church, some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists? Or how can we further distinguish it otherwise from
the gifts of Apostles and Prophets, then placing it in the extraordinary
temporary indowments of the holy Ghost, inabling such persons, according to the
exigence of that time, to publish the Gospel and to persuade it? which
nevertheless comes short of the personal quality of witnesses of our Lord
and his doctrine, and of the measure and kind of those graces of miracles,
languages, and the like, that make an Apostle. But he that would draw this into
consequence, and argue that Timothy was no Bishop, because an Evangelist, may
with more reason conclude that Philip was no Deacon because he was an
Evangelist, and contradict the Scripture that says Acts xxi. 8. We entered into
the house of Philip the Evangelist, which was one of the seven. For if an
Apostle, in that eminence of graces and privileges, nevertheless abiding upon
a certain charge, and taking care of it, is to be counted Bishop of a
particular place, as was argued before, much more may an Evangelist for his
extraordinary gift be a Bishop for his several charge: which is to say thus
much in English, That the gift of an Evangelist may fall upon any rank of
ordinary Ministers: as we see Philip, for his place in the Church one of the
seven Deacons at Jerusalem, Acts vi. 5. is nevertheless an Evangelist for the
graces God had bestowed upon him, by his means to convert Samaria to the faith,
Acts viii. 15. Nay further, if the gift of an Evangelist be competible with a
Deacons place, it must be granted that Timothy as an Evangelist is no Governor
of Churches. And whereas it is argued, that it was but a Commission for the
time which Timothy and Titus are trusted with from the Apostle, because it
appears they were otherwhiles employed otherwhere by the Apostle 2. Tim. iv.
9, 10. (as any Bishop in case of public necessities of the Church must be
without the Apostle) let me be bold to affirm, that the rules of continued
settled government, directed to them by the Apostle to be executed by them in
their persons, are sufficient evidence that they were appointed by him for
perpetual Governors, and not for temporary Commissaries. Indeed as there is
something more then ordinary in Timothie's person, so is there something more
then ordinary in Titus his charge, in that he was left in Crete, to ordain
Presbyters in every city, Tit. i. 5. by which, as appears in the sequel of
the Epistle, the Churches of those cities were to be governed under Titus, as
was observed before. The like to be said of Timothy, whose instructions,
qualifying Presbyters and Deacons alone, leave him alone superior to all the
Presbyteries he should institute according to his instructions. Now if we
observed the custom of the Apostles, hitherto set forth, of instituting
Presbyteries in populous cities, and observe the custom of the Church after
their time, wherein a Bishop was always head of one of these Presbyteries,
(Quid est enim Episcopus nisi primus Presbyterorum? says S. Augustine) it will
not be hard to espy a difference between the place of a Bishop and the extent
of their charge. For it will not serve the turn to say, as some do, that Titus
was Archbishop of Crete, and so entrusted with diverse Churches: For an
Archbishop is a chief among Bishops, not a person to govern diverse Churches,
seats of Bishoprics. Besides that, these degrees among Bishops came in
afterward, when the Church became incorporate into the State of the Roman
Empire, as having the charge of Churches in head-Cities of Provinces, or
according to the precedence of places, wherein the Emperors or chief temporal
Powers made their residence. But in the mean time let me use Epiphanius his
words, The Apostles could not settle all things uniformly at once. Is it a
reasonable thing to argue, that because S. Paul takes no order for the heads
of these Presbyteries which were not yet made, therefore he did not intend
there should be any such in the Church? Rather let me argue, that because S.
Paul left two of his principal Disciples in two principal places, with charge
to plant Presbyteries as there was means to propagate Churches, therefore he
gave a pattern of that which these Disciples and all the Church was to do
afterward, in settling the government of those Churches, in the Presbyteries
of them, and in their heads, which themselves were for the time. And this we
shall find was done in good time, in the Churches of Timothies charge, if we
take but a short consideration of the beloved Disciple John the Apostle and
Evangelist, what we find concerning him in Scriptures, or otherwise received
and credible in this nature. He lived longest of all the Disciples, as is said:
and he will easily show us Bishops over the Churches of Timothies charge: for
such without doubt were the seven Churches of Asia, unto whom the Apostle
sending from our Lord seven Epistles, ii. and iii. chapt. of his Revelation,
directs them to the Angels of those Churches; a style not competible to a
person of common rank, and the act of directing Epistles to one in the name and
behalf of the whole Church, arguing the eminence of the head, fit to answer for
the body he represents. Herewith agree the words of Clemens Alexandrinus in
Eusebius, iii. 23. concerning this Apostle, that being returned from Patmus to
Ephesus, he used upon request to go among the neighbour-nations, (...) (...).
That is, in some places to constitute Bishops (to wit, where there were
Presbyteries before that yet had none) in some to found whole Churches, in
others to ordain a Clergy out of such as were signified by the Spirit, as we
read of S. Paul and Timotheus. For will you have these to be Bishops,
according to the use of the word in S. Paul, where it is all one with
Presbyters? Sure we must needs think of such as his own writings make Angels of
Churches. Ignatius, that was his Disciple according to some, in all his
Epistles specifieth, and sometimes by name, the Bishops of some the same
Churches, and some of others, together with their Presbyteries; and in
particular, Onesimus, Timothie's successor at Ephesus. Tertullian and Ireneus,
the most ancient we can allege, have named Polycarpus in particular, made
Bishop of Smyrna by this Apostle. It is not possible to say more in this case.
So often as we find mention of government in particular Churches in Scripture,
so often we meet with Presbyteries, or the heads of Presbyteries, Apostles
themselves, or deriving their charge from the Apostles. Nay, it is very much,
not pretending that Bishops came on otherwise then to be in stead of the
Apostles over particular Churches, that there is so much to be said for their
office out of Scriptures, all written during their time.

CHAP. V.
The Presbytery at Antiochia. S. Peter and S. Paul heads of the Church there:
Likewise of that at Rome. The difference about their next Successors.
Epiphanius his conjecture upon it. Another. Clemens succeeded S. Peter, and
Linus S. Paul. The succession of the Apostles there is unquestionable.

THe Church of Antiochia is remembered next to that of Jerusalem, in the Acts of
the Apostles, but of the government thereof we have nothing so distinct or
express in Scripture. Yet this we read Acts xiii. 2. Now there were in the
Church at Antiochia certain prophets and teachers. And as they ministered unto
the Lord and fasted, the holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the
work whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and
laid their hands on them, they sent them away. That these Prophets and Teachers
were all of them Presbyters of that Church, is more then can be affirmed,
because it is nowhere set down: But when we read that they ministered unto the
Lord (which must be understood of the service of God in their assemblies,
especially in celebrating the Eucharist) and gave imposition of hands, we find
among the number of them the works of ordinary Ministers, when there was no
higher rank then that of Presbyters able to do the like. For as concerning the
Heads of this Church, we must have recourse to Ignatius his Epistle ad Magn.
where he uses these words; For at Antiochia the Disciples were first called
Christians, Paul and Peter founding the Church. And in the Epistle ad Antioch.
(if it be his, as the other unquestionably is) (...) (...). That is, Ye are
Paul's and Peter's Disciples. Remember Euodius, that first had the rule of you
put into his hands by the Apostles. Be he what he will be that writ this, let
me be bold to say, it agrees mavelous well with what has been said, and
with the Scripture: In which it is plain there were at the beginning two
congregations of Christians at Antiochia, one of the Circumcision, the other
converted from the Gentiles: because S. Peter, Gal. ii. 12. fearing those of
the Circumcision, withdrew himself, and ate no more with the Gentiles. In
regard of the care of which two congregations, performed by S. Peter and S.
Paul, according to the division agreed upon Gal. ii. 9. the words of Ignatius
are to be verified, where he makes both Apostles founders of the Church at
Antiochia. Who finding themselves employed in other parts of the world, took
the same course with this Church which S. Paul did with those he commended to
Timothy and Titus, and put both congregations (by that time united and
concorporate in one) under the charge of Euodius, predecessor to Ignatius.
These two Apostles are usually counted founders of the Church at Rome, as well
as of that of Antiochia. Ireneus, iii. 3. Fundantes itaque and instituentes
beati Apostoli Ecclesiam, Lino Episcopatum Ecclesiae administrandae
tradiderunt. Hujus Lini Paulus in iis quae sunt ad Timotheum Epistolis meminit.
Succedit autem ei Anacletus: Post eum tertio loco ab Apostolis Episcopatum
sortitur Clemens. Where you see he refers the foundation of that Church to
both the Apostles, as does Dionysius also of Corinth some hundred and twenty
years after their death, in Eusebius, Eccles. hist. iii. 26. and others of
later stamp sans number. Whereupon Epiphanius, Haer. 27. reckoning the
succession of the Bishops of Rome, puts Peter and Paul in the first place.
But yet observe further the difference between the words of Ireneus (which put
Linus after the Apostles) and the Latin Church, which according to S. Hierome,
Catal. Script. in CLEM. reckons Clemens in that place: which Tertullian, the
most ancient of that language, lib. De Praescript. averreth. To which
difference we may ascribe the confusion that Baronius has observed in the
Pontifical book under the name of Pope Damasus, an ancient piece, but pieced
indeed out of several writings, and cross to one another diverse times: As for
the purpose; when it makes Linus to succeed the Apostles, and suffer
martyrdom the same year (who nevertheless sits twelve years according to
Eusebius) whereas Cletus, next in order unto him, begins seven years after
in time, but Clemens, third in rank, one year after Linus, suffering in the
third year of Trajane, long after both their deaths. Epiphanius in the place
aforementioned, stumbling, as it seems, at the credit of those that put Clemens
first, propounds this conjecture, (...) These words of Clemens, quoted by
Epiphanins, are yet extant in his Epistle to the Church of Corinth, published
not long since: wherein he tells him that was the occasion of the schism he
writes against there, that a generous man, and so forth, would say in that
case, I depart; I withdraw: let the people of God be in quiet. Epiphanius, it
seems, meeting them at the second hand, alleged for Clemens his advice to
some man mentioned in the Epistle, (as they are indeed) conceived nevertheless
they might have reference to his own case, advising to withdraw, and give way
to Linus and Cletus, for the quiet of the Church: which now, by reading the
Epistle, proves otherwise. Besides he sticks not to digest the inconvenience
of admitting more then one Bishop in the same Church at once. For because
according to his conjecture, Linus and Cletus as well as Clemens (that gave way
to them) must be made Bishops by the Apostles, he adds, that Bishops might be
made there during the time of the Apostles, because they traveled sometimes
from Rome, (S. Paul into Spain, as indeed he purposes, Romans xv. 24. S. Peter
into Pontus and Bithynia, whither he directs his first Epistle) and must not
leave the Church unprovided there. But if it be worth the while to vent a
conjecture that shall avoid this inconvenience, and make all good that is
reported by these ancient Fathers, that matters of circumstance wherein they
are at difference destroy not their credit in the main wherein they are at
agreement; let this be mine; That there were at Rome from the beginning, as at
Antiochia two congregations of Christians, one of the Circumcision, the other
of the Gentiles; That S. Peter was head of the one, S. Paul of the other,
according to the division aforesaid; That after their death, Linus, who was
Deacon to S. Paul, if we believe Ignatius in the Epistle to the Trallians,
succeeded him over the one; Clemens, who was Deacon to S. Peter, according to
the same Author there, succeeded him over the other, till both Congregations
being concorporate and united in one, because governed by Clemens, that
survived. And if any man be so disfavourable as upon these differences of the
By to discredit the main, let him know, that though he allow not the pillars of
the Church in their time the credit of discreet men, to have reason for what
they report, yet must he allow Ireneus and Tertullian to be men of common
sense, when they allege the succession of Bishops in the Churches of that
time, wherein that of Rome is always one, for an evidence of the faith which
had been preserved in them ever since the Apostles: the force of the reason
lying in that, which Calvine has exceeding well observed, That it was a thing
known and received at that time, that de facto the faith which the Churches
professed came by succession from the Apostles, from which succession the
Heretics were fain to separate, and make Congregations apart, wherein to
profess the belief which themselves had devised. Be all the world judges now,
whether a man in his right senses would appeal to the succession of Bishops, if
it had been a thing questionable whether any such were or not. The like is to
be said of Optatus and S. Augustine, when they appeal to the succession of
Bishops in the Church of Rome to prove the Donatists schismatics, not
communicating with the lawful successors both of the faith of the Apostles,
which both sides granted, and of their places, from which they argue.

CHAP. VI.
Dionysius the Areopagite Bishop of Athens. S. Mark of Alexandria. No Bishop at
Corinth, when Clemens writ his Epistle. How they were propagated, and by what
rule.

THus we are out of the Scripture: But because we are not yet out of the time
of the Apostles, I will name further Dionysius the Areopagite, S. Paul's
convert, Acts xvii. 34. because there is so ancient a witness to depose for
him, Dionysius of Corinth, some hundred and twenty years after that, averring
in Eusebius that he was the first Bishop of Athens. And so the last I will name
shall be the Church of Alexandria, and that for S. Hieromes sake, and in his
words, because he it is that is persuaded, and persuades men to think, that
the order of Bishops came in by mere custom of the Church, to avoid schisms
that arise for want of heads. In his Epistle to Euagrius thus we read, Nam and
Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos,
Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum
nominabant. How that can be said to come in by custom for avoiding of schism,
which was practiced at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist, let S. Hierome
devise: it shall serve our turn, that so it was there from the Apostles time.
Otherwise it is reasonable enough to believe that upon such occasions Bishops
came in over some Churches, in particular the Church of Corinth, in which we
find a schism, but can find no Bishop at the time of writing Clemens his
Epistle, some few years after the death of the Apostles: Because the reason
produced before to argue that there was no Bishop at Corinth when S. Paul writ
his Epistles, continues still in force at the time of writing Clemens his
Epistle. For p. 52. he is very earnest with them to keep due order and decorum
in bringing their Oblations and celebrating the Eucharist: For when he names
there (...), by the one we must understand the species of fruits of the earth,
and meats, which the people offered, out of which the Eucharist being
celebrated, the rest was spent in the Agapa, or feast of Love; to which the
words of the Apostle are to be referred: By the other, the Eucharist, for
celebration whereof he is so earnest with them to keep due order in their
assemblies; alleging that these things which the Lord had commanded to be
done, these he had not commanded to be done disorderly and at random, but at
set times and seasons, when and by whom they should be done. Where God has
appointed an order, when and where and by whom Christians should celebrate
their assemblies, is not to be found in Scripture further then the Apostles
rule, 1. Cor. xiv. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order. It seems
he argues from the pattern of the Leviticall Priesthood: for so it follows,
p. 53. (...), etc. To the high Priest, says he, are assigned his proper
services. Which further appears, when he urges the example of their
sacrifices that were offered before the Temple, being first visited (...), p.
54. But the Presbyters of that Christian Church he exhorts with these words,
(...), Brethren, says he, let every one of you give thanks to God (that is,
Celebrate the Eucharist, in his language) in his own order, being in a good
conscience, not stepping out of the set rule of his Ministry. Perhaps his
meaning is, that they should celebrate by turns. Howsoever here is my reason
that there was then no Bishop there, because then there could not have been so
much debate about the order in celebrating the assemblies of Christians, which,
as shall be showed afterward, were not to be held but upon appointment of the
Bishop, with advice of the Presbyters, being a mark of schism to assemble
otherwise. And if this be not enough, there is another to second it. Whatsoever
may be argued from the dissensions at Corinth, one saying, I am of Paul,
another, I am of Cephas, to show that there was no Bishop there when the
Apostle writ this, and in his absence, still continues in force at the time of
writing Clemens his Epistle: The whole subject whereof is, to quell such
another dissension as this, but only that it was not under such colorable
names, of Paul and Cephas and Apollos, as he complains, but (which is
remarkable to prove my intent) was (as he says p. 62.) a mere faction, for the
love of one or two persons, against the Presbyters; no Bishop bearing any part
either at one end or other of it. Neither is it marvel that this Church should
be still without a Bishop for some ten or twenty years perhaps after the death
of the Apostle, so many companions of the Apostles being then alive, Clemens at
Rome, Titus in Crete, Timothy at Ephesus, Dionysius at Athens, others
elsewhere, to furnish whatsoever assistance they had received from the Apostle
during his time, no otherwise then did Timothy and Titus to those Churches
wherein they had planted Presbyteries, before they had Bishops. And this must
be the answer, if any man ask the question how Bishops came to be propagated
through all Churches; the answer must be, They were made in due time by the
heads of neighboring Churches: which we shall discern anon, when we come to
speak of the course held from the beginning in the choice and constitution of
Bishops. And by the practice of the Church it should seem the aim was afar
off to propagate Bishops according to the first practice of the Apostles. For
as they planted Presbyteries to govern Mother-Churches in Mother-Cities, so
when it became questionable, which Churches should have Bishops and which not,
the matter was regulated according to the greatness of Cities, or the
multitude of Presbyters which the service of the Churches in them required,
whereof the Bishops were to be heads. And therefore in the Council of Sardica
Can. vi. it is provided, that there should be no Bishop in towns or small
cities where one Presbyter might serve; but in those places where Bishops were
of old time, or if a place became so populous that it might deserve to have a
Bishop; that is, either in Cities that had been so populous of old time as to
have Bishops, or which should afterward become so populous. But the xvii. Can
on of the Chalcedon Council providing against innovation in Dioceses, takes
order nevertheless, that when a place is promoted by the Emperor to be a
City, the form of the Church shall go along with the form of the
Commonwealth, that is, it shall have a Bishop, and his Diocese the territory
of that City. There is here a difference in the particular, and yet the same
general ground of both Canons, the practice of the Apostles, ordaining
Presbyteries to govern the Churches which they had planted in Cities, the heads
whereof were Bishops after their departure. And this seems to be the reason
why the seats of Cathedral Churches are wont to be Cities. And by this means
Italy is so full of Bishoprics, because it is so full of Cities.

CHAP. VII.
Presbyters govern with the Apostles in Scriptures. Nothing done in the Church
without their advise. Why both ranks are called Sacerdotes, Presbyteri,
Antistites, and the like.

HAving hitherto justified the ground whereupon we go, and showed that Bishops
came after the Apostles to be heads of Presbyteries, in consequence hereunto it
must now be averred, that the government of Churches passed in common by
Bishops and Presbyters, as from the beginning the Presbyters governed with the
Apostles themselves. If in that great action of the Council at Jerusalem the
Elders of that Church bore their part with the Apostles, what cause have we to
think they did less when they were dispersed, S. James alone remaining there?
If they concurred with S. James in his advise to S. Paul about a matter of
greatest weight, how to deal with those of the Circumcision that believed,
shall we imagine they did not do the like with his successors? If S. Peter
call the Presbyters of the Churches to which he writes his fellow-Elders, it
is to the purpose to put them in mind of their share in that office which he
charge himself with. If the Apostle of the Gentiles charge the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus, Acts xx. 18. with their part of that care of Christ's flock
after his departure, which he for his time had performed over them, shall we
think them eased of it because Timothy came to be Bishop there? Rather let me
conceive this to be the cause why Timothie's instructions are addressed in the
singular number to him alone, without mention of his Presbyters, because they
were to receive their charge by themselves about the same time: So far is it
from me to think that his Presbyters were not to concur in assisting that
course of government wherein he alone is directed by the Apostle to proceed.
And if we can go no further in proving this point out of Scripture, the reason
must be, because (as appears by that which has been said) the Scriptures for
the most part speak of that time when Bishops yet were not, but the Apostles
themselves. To which purpose nevertheless there will be still something to be
said out of the Scriptures, in the particulars which we shall survey. In the
mean time let us take notice of a few passages, among many more, out of
Ecclesiastical writers, to argue the general whereof we speak. Ignatius,
Epist. ad Trall. (...), says he, (...); We cannot understand righter what the
Presbytery means, then out of these words, a College or bench of Assessours
to the Bishop in sacred matters. The Commentaries under S. Ambrose his name
upon 1. Tim. v. 1. speak home to this purpose; Nam apud omnes utique gentes
honorabilis est senectus: unde and Synagoga, and postea Ecclesia, Seniores
habuit, sine quorum consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. This is as much as can
be demanded, when we hear that nothing was done in the Church, to wit by the
Bishop, without the advice of his Presbyters. The same is affirmed by S.
Hierome upon Titus i. 5. Antequam Diaboli instinctu studia in religione
fierent, and diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego Cephae,
communi consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur. In that S. Hierome thinks there
were no Bishops till Churches were forced to that course to avoid schisms, it
has been showed he is not in the right: But in that he affirms that at first
Churches were governed by common advise, we may well hear him speak in so good
company of witnesses. Last of all, S. Cyprian having said once for all, Epist.
6. Quando a primordio Episcopatus mei nihil statuerim sine consilio vestro
[Presbyterorum and Diaconorum] and sine consensu plebis meae, privata sententia
gerere, how well he observed it, is yet to be seen in the passage of diverse
businesses related in his Epistles. Out of which the like is to be conceived of
the Presbyters of Rome, by those things that are touched there. And this is the
true reason why many times (especially among the most ancient Church-writers)
Bishop and Presbyters both are comprised in the same styles and names, not
because there were then no Bishops (as some men imagine) but because both
States concurred in the same office. Clemens in the Epistle aforesaid, page 54.
speaking of the Ministeries instituted by the Apostles, says thus, (...), That
is, They made* the first fruits of believers Overseers and Ministers (that is,
Bishops and Deacons) of those that should believe. It seems indeed that
Clemens calls the Presbyters Bishops, because as yet there was no other
Bishop there, as was proved before: for so the word is used in S. Paul's Epistles
and the Acts of the Apostles, for the same reasons, as has been said. But in
Ignatius his Epistle to Hero his Deacon at Antiochia you have these words,
(...), Do nothing without the Bishops; that is, without the Presbyters: who
were indeed Bishops in Ignatius his absence, when this is pretended to be
written. And be he who he will be that writ it, I believe it will not often be
found that Presbyters are called Bishops in any monument of Church-writers
after this time, unless it be in these words of Tertullian De praescript. c.
3. Quid ergo si Episcopus, si Diaconus, si vidua, etc? where putting the Deacon
next to the Bishop, he seems to comprise the Presbyter with him in the same
style: For afterward the name of Bishops became appropriate to the heads of
Presbyteries: as we heard S. Hierome say of the Presbyters at Alexandria, that
the head whom they chose themselves out of their own number, they named BISHOP
of Alexandria. Otherwise, as it is well known that the name of SACERDOS is
common to both estates, in regard of the offices of Divine service which were
performed by both, so in regard of the government of the Church, common to
both, are they many times comprised together in the common style of PRESBYTERS,
the name of their age, or ANTISTITES, (...), PRAEPOSITI, and the like, the
names of their charge. For as the Apostle makes himself an Elder, when he
writes to them in this style, 1. Pet. i. 5. The Elders I exhort, who am also
an Elder; so is the like to be observed in that well-known passage of Clemens
Alexandrinus related by Eusebius, Eccles. hist. iii. 23. concerning the youth
which S. John the Apostle commended to the Bishop of a certain place, Clemens
proceeding in the relation adds, (...), But the Elder, says he, taking the
youth home to his house, etc. calling him a Presbyter whom he had named a
Bishop but just before. So Tertullian, Apologet. c. 39. describing what was wont
to be done in the Assemblies of Christians, adds, Praesident probati quique
Seniores, honorem non pretio sed testimonio adepti; not meaning to tell us that
there was no Bishop to be seen at these meetings, (for in his book De
praescript. where he names Polycarpus, whom we alleged before, cap. 32. Bishop
of Smyrna, he speaks as much of Bishops that succeeded the Apostles in the
rest of the Churches of their planting) but comprising both ranks and estates
in one name of ELDERS: And that upon the reason specified in the Commentaries
under S. Ambrose his name, upon 1. Tim. iii. 8. where he gives the reason why
the Apostle passes straight from Bishops to Deacons; Because, says he, every
Bishop is a Presbyter, though every Presbyter is not a Bishop, who is the chief
of Presbyters. And the true S. Ambrose Offic. i. 20. Viduarum and virginum
domos, nisi visitandi gratia juniores adire non est opus: and hoc cum
Senioribus, hoc est, cum Episcopo, vel si opus est, cum Presbyteris, With the
Elders, says he, that is, with the Bishop or Presbyters. Justine Martyr in his
second Apology relating the orders of Christians in their Assemblies, having
spoken of reading the Scriptures, Then, says he, the Reader having done,
(...), the Ruler, makes a speech of instruction to the people, exhorting them
to imitate what was read. And again of the Eucharist, Then, says he, bread and
wine is offered to the Ruler, (...). Was it the Bishop alone, or the Presbyters
alone, that preached, and celebrated the Eucharist? Sure both did it, and the
name of (...) was chosen on purpose by Justine to comprise both. The same is to
be observed in the words of S. Augustine Hom. ult. ex quinquaginta, cap. 11.
Veniat peccator ad Antistites, per quos illi in Ecclesia claves ministrantur,
and a Praepositis sacrorum accipiat satisfactionis suae modum. ANTISTITES in
Ecclesia is not the Bishop alone, but the Bishop and the Presbyters. Hegesippus
in Eusebius, Eccles. hist. iii. 20. relates how some of our Lords kindred were
brought before Domitian upon suspicion of danger to the State in regard of their
title to the Kingdom, but dismissed by him upon notice of their profession of
life, in tilling their grounds with their own hands, tried by the hardness of
them which it had wrought. These, says Hegesippus, were hereupon chosen (...),
to be leaders of Churches, as both Cousins of our Lord, and his witnesses,
comprehending both Bishop and Presbyters in one title. As in Ignatius, ad
Trall. (...) is put in one word to express Bishops and Presbyters both, as the
circumstance of the place will evidence. To this we must add the words of
Ireneus, iv. 43. Wherefore, says he, it behooves us to obey the Elders that
are in the Church, which have received according to the Fathers pleasure, the
certain grace of truth, with the succession of their Bishopric. And again,
iii. 3. he speaks of the tradition coming from the Apostles, which had been
preserved in the Churches through the succession of Presbyters. Ireneus, that
is wont to appeal to the succession of Bishops, to evidence that which the
Church then believed to have come from the Apostles, here refers himself to
the Presbyters for the same purpose, affirming that they succeeded the Apostles
without doubt, calling the Bishops by the name of PRESBYTERS in regard of the
office common to both. Thus are both ranks comprised in one name of (...) in
the first Canon of the Council at Antiochia, where we read, (...): Where we
are not to conceive that Deacons are reckoned among the (...), as has been
mistook; but the sense is to be directed by distinguishing the words thus,
(...), reckoning the (...) as well Presbyters as Bishops, neither more nor
less then ANTISTITES in Latin, which we had in S. Augustine before: And thus
you have both ranks comprised in the same style of PRAEPOSITI in S. Cyprian,
and of PRAESIDENTES in Tertullian: The first, Epist. 62. Et cum omnes omnino
disciplinam tenere oporteat, multo magis Praepositos and Diaconos curare hoc
fas est. The other, De Cor. mil. c. 3. Eucharistiae Sacramentum nec de aliorum
manu quam Praesidentium sumimus.

CHAP. VIII.
What pattern this Government might have in the Synagogue. Aaron and his
sons. Correspondence of the Sanedrin with the Bishop and Presbyters.

BEfore we leave this point, it will not be amiss to take notice what pattern
the Apostles might have for this form of government in the Synagogue. For when
our Lord in the Gospel, Matthew. xviii. 17. gives his Disciples in the case of
private offenses the rule, Dic Ecclesiae, it is to be supposed he reflecteth
upon some Bench to which that people were wont to resort with their causes
(otherwise what could the hearers understand by these words?) intimating that
his will was, the Church which he was now founding, to be provided of the like.
Nevertheless, in regard this Church was intended a mere spiritual State, to
be cherished and nourished in the bosom and entrails as it were of all
Commonwealths, there must no comparison be made in that which concerns the
temporal state of that people. Let us see then Moses his charge: Deuteronomy. xvii.
8, 9. thus we read, If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment
between blood and blood, between plea and plea, between stroke and stroke,
being matters of controversy within thy gates; then shall thou arise, and get
thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, and thou shall come
unto the Priests and Levites, and to the Judges that shall be in those days,
and enquire, and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment. He that
reads here on the one side two sorts of persons, the Priests and Levites for
one, and the Judge that shall be in those days; on the other side, two sorts
of causes, one concerning Ceremonies of the Religion in force, the other the
civil Laws of that people; has cause to think that the meaning of this law is,
that they should resort to several persons, according to the differences of
their causes: Especially, being indifferent in the words, to translate it thus,
Thou shall come to the Priests, the Levites, or to the Judge that shall be in
those days, as after verse 12. it is read. Had it been thus, the
correspondence had been clear between the high Priest and his inferiors in the
Synagogues, and the Bishop and his Presbyters in the Church. But the practice
of the Nation bears it otherwise: In which we must believe their Doctors,
when they tell us that the whole passage, as well that of the Priests and
Levites as that of the Judge that shall be in those days, is referred to the
Sanedrin, whereof R. Isaac Abartincell gives his reason in his Commentaries
upon that place, Because that Court for a great part consisted of Priests and
Levites, and therefore had the hearing of all sorts of causes. And though they
were brought hither from lower Courts, (whereof there was one of three and
twenty persons in every place which contained one hundred and twenty families,
one of three in less places) by the Judges themselves, as the Ebrew Doctors
will have it, arguing from the words, THOU SHALL ARISE, Thou that find a
matter too hard for thee in judgment, shall arise; yet can we compare the
Consistory of the Church with no Court but this. First, because all
mother-Churches in mother-Cities are absolute in their rule, so far as the
Scripture has appointed it; otherwise then as the law of love tieth Christians
to assist one another necessities: our Lord and his Apostles having instituted
no other judicatories in spiritual matters, but one of these Presbyteries in
each Church, and many of them in several Churches, when the matter required
common advise. And again, because Jerusalem was the only seat of the whole
State of Religion and Justice both, in that people, sacrifices being done no
where else. Well then, as Ignatius in one of his Epistles distinguishes two
parts of the Bishops office, (...), to rule the Church, and to perform Divine
service, so must we inquire the correspondency of the Church with the Synagogue
in both respects: reflecting from the Bishop and Presbyters, in regard of
Divine service to be performed by their hands, upon Aaron and his sons, or
the high Priest and the rest, as S. Hierome has done before us, writing in
these terms, Epist. ad Euagr. Quod Aaron and filii ejus atque Levitae in templo
fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi and Presbyteri and Diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia.
But in respect of Government and Discipline, whereof our Lord speaks in the
Gospel aforesaid, we must reflect upon the Sanedrin, as the same S. Hierome
has done in another place, upon the first to Titus, saying of Bishops in
respect of their Presbyters, Imitantes Moysen, qui cum haberet in potestate
solus praeesse populo Israel, septuaginta elegit cum quibus populum judicaret.
So then, Moses his Spirit is taken and divided upon seventie Elders, to help
him to bear the charge of the people, Number. xi. 25. The same thing is done when
the Apostles ordain Presbyteries by imposition of hands. Therefore we see the
Spirit of Prophecy rest upon the Presbytery by which Timothy was ordained, as
well as upon that of Antiochia, no otherwise then it did upon Moses his
Sanedrin, Number. xi. 26. To continue and procure the continuance whereof upon
their successors, it was, that this Court sat in the Temple, as the old Ebrew
Doctors observe it is said, Thou shall go up to the place which I shall
choose; signifying that the Temple in which the holy Ghost dwelt, occasioned
the influence of it upon the Court that sat there. But when Moses was dead, a
President was chosen over and beside the seventy, whom they called the Nasi, to
be in his stead from age to age, as R. Moses writes: such is the Bishop, chief
of the Presbyters, after an Apostle. All the difference is this, The Sanedrin
is but one, as the nation to which God was known was but one; whereas the
Apostle and his successors remains head of so many Presbyteries as his
office of preaching the Gospel to all Nations advises him to institute, as
has been said.

CHAP. IX.
Presbyteries composed of no lay persons, as the Sanedrin. What is brought out
of the Scripture to that purpose. The labor of Presbyters in the Word and
Doctrine. Preaching went by Gifts, under the Apostles. Those Gifts make no
different Ministeries. Teaching and ruling belong to the same Presbyters. No
color for lay Elders in the Primitive Church. Preaching, how rightly esteemed.

IT is well enough known, how this comparison and the text that occasioneth it
is drawn into consequence, to prove that Presbyteries were intended to consist
part of Elders of the people, part of Ministers of the Church, as the Sanedrin
of some Priests and Levites, some of the people: And it is as well to be known,
what a forced presumption it is, to require correspondence between the Church
and the Synagogue in that point which the difference of a mere Spiritual and
Temporal Commonwealth brings to pass. The Sanedrin consisted of the chief
of that people as well as of Priests and Levites, because the chief causes of
that Commonwealth as well as of Religion passed through their hands: The
Church is subject to all Commonwealths where it is maintained, in temporal
matters: In those which concern the soul, whom shall we think our Lord leaves
her in charge with, but those whom he trusts with the keys of his house? Who
those are we shall see anon: In the mean time let this serve their turn that
will needs presume that these Presbyteries must consist part of lay-persons, as
the Sanedrin; while we prove that de facto they did consist of none but
Ministers of the Church: For upon this occasion, it will not be amiss here to
add the utmost of the rest whereupon that platform is grounded in Scripture:
which is in effect no more then that text of the Apostle 1. Tim. v. 17. Let the
Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially those that
labor in the word and doctrine, carrying at the first sound an appearance of
two sorts of Elders, some Preachers, others nothing but Rulers. It is seconded
indeed by those passages of the Apostles wherein they reckon the graces, for
the edification of the Church, distributed upon the members of it upon the
Ascension of Christ, Ephesians. iv. 4. some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors; or else both for edification and for
other necessities, Romans xii. 6. Prophesying, Ministering, Teaching, Exhorting,
Communicating, Ruling; and 1. Cor. xii. 28. Apostles, Prophets, Teachers,
Miracles, Gifts of Healing, Helps in Government, Tongues: and before verse. 8.
those gifts which are called the manifestation of the Spirit, given to every
man to profit withal, because of their use to the edification of the Church of
that time, are reckoned as follows, the word of Wisdom, the word of
Knowledge, Faith, gifts of Healing, Miracles, Prophecy, Discerning of Spirits,
Tongues, Interpretation of Tongues; and 1. Pet. iv. 11. Speaking, and
Ministering. But that which is gathered hence, is but in consequence to the two
sorts of Elders, supposed out of the Text aforesaid. For out of these passages
are culled the gifts of Ruling or Helps in Government, and Ministering, the
offices of Pastors, of Doctors or Teachers; upon presumption of the
difference aforesaid, to argue, That the Ministeries appointed to continue in
the Church till our Lords coming to judgment, are, that of Pastors, to preach
in the Church; that of Rulers or Helps in the government, Elders of the people,
to assist in Ruling; and last of all Doctors or Teachers, to read lessons in
point of Religion, not meddling with Government; besides Deacons, to whom the
gift of Ministering belongs. Here it is plain, there is work cut out: And sure
it is a fit place to take into consideration the first part of that Office we
pretend to prove common to Bishop and Presbyters, consisting in labor in the
word and doctrine, as it was in the Primitive time, and is understood by the
Apostle: Which withal will make appear upon what sort of persons the Rule of
the Church was estated. Without doubt, when we have named the Preservation of
the true faith by preventing the creeping in of heresies and errors, the
Instruction of those that are converted in the mysteries of the faith,
Diligence in propagating it by converting more and more, we have named a very
great work of labor in the word and doctrine, and yet specified nothing but
that which is contained in the Presbyters office from the beginning. For when
the Apostle Acts xx. 29. foretells to the Presbyters of Ephesus the coming in
of grievous wolves, that should not spare the flock, and the rising up of
perverse Teachers, it is to the purpose to put them in mind, (verse 31) to be
watchful of these things, as of their own charge; vouching withal his own
example verse. 20. in preaching, and teaching them both in public, and house by
house, admonishing them with tears, every man in particular, as it follows
verse. 31. for them in their place and rank to follow. And the rule of the
Apostle, Gal. vi. 6. Let him that is catechized, communicate to him that
catechizeth in all good things, without doubt aims at this private way of
instruction whereof we speak. Be the same said of the other Apostles
instructions to his Elders, 1. Pet. v. 2. Feed the flock of God which is among
you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint but willingly, not for
filthy lucre (because it is said, the Elders that rule well are counted worthy
of double honor, that is, reward) but of a ready mind, neither as being Lords
of Gods heritage, but being ensamples to the flock. And again, the office of
Watching over the flock, by which the leaders of the Church are charactered
Heb. xiii. 17. the parts of a Bishop in the instructions of Timothy and Titus,
that concern Teaching and Instructing in the faith, as by the meaning of the
words they may consist, so for my part they are undoubtedly taken to consist
most an end, for the time of the Apostles, in that private diligence, those
abilities, that watchfulness, that Presbyters were to use in guiding and
instructing particular persons of Christians, which in consequence must be
understood of that labor in the word and doctrine specified in the leading
Text, 1. Tim. v. 17. And the reason shall be, because then, to the best of my
judgment, (which if it prove otherwise, then shall the spirits of the Prophets
be subject to the Prophets) the work of preaching in the assemblies of
Christians at that time, so far as we understand by the Apostle, went more by
men's gifts then by their places in the Church. Read the fourteenth chapter of
the first to the Corinthians throughout, and consider what great use there was
of the gifts of prophesying and speaking strange languages in their assemblies,
which the Apostle there regulateth, sure you will never imagine (for there is
not a syllable to intimate it) that these were all Presbyters, ordinary
Ministers in the Church. The like must be said of the gifts reckoned, verse. 8.
The word of Wisdom, the word of Knowledge, Discerning spirits, and the like;
of the gifts of Teaching and Exhorting, Romans xii. 7, 8. of Pastors and
Doctors, mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. iv. 14. The Office of the Presbyters
at Thessalonica, the Apostle recommendeth to the brethren there in these terms,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. We beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: And to esteem them very highly
in love, for their works sake. But we are not bound to think them all the same
persons whose graces he recommendeth, when he adds, verse. 19. 20. Quench not
the Spirit: Despise not prophesying. Acts xiii. 1. There were in the Church of
Antiochia Prophets and Teachers: and of them they were that gave Paul and
Barnabas imposition of hands. And 1. Tim. iv. 14. these are those that
prophesied of him, and Presbyters they were, I suppose, that gave him
imposition of hands with the Apostle. And so it was argued from hence before,
that the Spirit of Prophecy rested upon those Presbyteries. But that all such
Prophets were Presbyters, or all Presbyters such Prophets, neither is it
written in Gods book, nor of it self credible, in such variety of graces
specified, which all being given for edification, and used in the assemblies to
that purpose, must either rest in the rank of ordinary Ministers, or be counted
personal graces, whether miraculous or otherwise, used for the edification of
the Church, in supplement of their endeavors which have served the turn in
after ages. He that writ the Commentaries upon S. Paul's Epistles, under S.
Ambrose his name, upon Ephesians. iv. 10. having labored to accommodate the gifts
there specified to the Ministeries then in use in the Church, is at length
driven to this point, Tamen postquam omnibus loci^ Ecclesiae sunt constitutae,
and officia ordinata, aliter composita res est quam coeperat. Primum enim omnes
docebant* and omnes baptizabant, quibuscunq^^diebus vel temporibus fuisset
occasu^ And after a while, Vt ergo crescere plebs and multiplicaretur, omnibus
into initia concessum est and evangelizare and baptizare and Scripturas in
Ecclesia explanare. That which he says of a^^ persons publishing the Gospel,
is justified by that which we read Act* viii. 4. Therefore they that were
scatered abroad, went everywhere preaching the word. And again, Acts xi. 19*
Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about
Stephen, traveled as far as Phoenice and Cyprus and Antiochia, preaching the
Word to none but unto the Jews only. That which he says of expounding the
Scriptures, that is, speaking in the Church, will be justified no less, if it
be referred to that variety of gifts specified out of the Apostle, most an end
miraculous and concerning that time, the use whereof was for edification in the
assemblies. And the reason that is to be given for this must needs appear very
considerable; Because that among men chosen out of those that were newly
converted to the faith in their elder years, for which they are called
PRESEYTERS, and that in respect of other kind of abilities tending to other
parts of their office, there should be found men fit to speak in public
assemblies upon humane parts and endeavors, so as to preserve the decorum and
reverence of so great a work, is beyond the compass of common discretion to
imagine; these qualities being not often found but in those that are habituated
to them from their youth. Do but look on those of our Lords kindred that
confessed him before Domitian, and therefore were made leaders of Churches, as
was related before from Hegesippus, and think whether men whose hands were
hardened with the plough, already struck in years, were fit to make Preachers
when they were made Rulers of Churches: So far is it from us to think that in
the cradle of the Church no Presbyter was made, but for his abilities in
preaching. Let us now look back a little upon the platform pretended, and ask
what commission men have to turn temporary indowments into perpetual places?
or according to personal gifts and graces to distinguish oecumenicall offices?
(And yet it will not appear that ever Pastors were distinguished from Doctors
by the Apostle: For he never said that Christ has given some Pastors, some
Doctors; but his words are, Ephesians. iv. 11. that he gave some Pastors and
Doctors, having said before that he gave some Apostles, some Evangelists, some
Prophets, distinguishing those, but comprising these.) If Teaching and
Preaching must make two offices, as then they were two graces, why shall not
Exhorting come in for a share, and demand that there may be an office
instituted for the purpose of it, as well as for Teaching, which it stands in
equipage with, Rom, xii. 7, 8? why should not the word of Wisdom and the word
of Knowledge do the like? for these mentioned 1. Cor. xii. 8. are of perpetual
use, although Prophesies and strange languages were but for the time. There is
one good reason to be given and no more: Because perpetual Ministeries are one
thing, temporary Gifts are another thing: Those we know, by the institution of
them in Scripture, by the office of them specified in the Acts and in the
Epistles, by the practice of them in all ages of the Church; those we know were
in time of the Apostle, but not instituted for Ministeries, because not
continued. The Office of Presbyters we know was both for Government and
Teaching: Both are found in S. Peter's exhortation to the Presbyters of his
charge, 1. Pet. v. 2. feeding the flock, and overseeing it: both in S. Paul's
charge to the Presbyters of Ephesus, Acts xx. 28. and afterward: both in the
qualities of Bishops, (that is, as is acknowledged, of Presbyters) wherein
Timothy is instructed by the Apostle, 1. Tim. iii. 2, 5. both contained in that
very passage that is alleged to bring in a difference of Presbyters, 1. Tim.
v. 17. For those Elders that rule well are such as labor in the word and
doctrine: Why might not the Apostle then difference Presbyters by the execution
of their functions as well as by the functions themselves? Why might not some
Presbyters show more diligence in the most eminent point of the office, taking
special pains in the Word and Doctrine, which special pains the word (...)
signifies, and yet others be counted worthy of double honor, and good Rulers,
as well in respect of their diligence in the prime point as of their
performance in the rest? The personal gifts of the Holy Ghost were then
distributed on several persons, as the Apostle shows, that all might be
useful, and such indowments, in the time of spiritual graces, might be
employed to the edification of assemblies as well as the gifts of ruling, to
assist the Presbyters in their office of Government: But he that would take
order now, that who could pretend a gift in ruling should be helpers in
government, or in the word of Wisdom and Knowledge, should stand up to edify
assemblies, might soon find more help in government, more words of Wisdom and
Knowledge, and in time more prophesying, then himself would desire. Well may we
turn the world into confusion, if we think to do what then was done; but shall
never find any Ministeries of place and succession in the Church but Presbyters
and Deacons (for of the coming-in of Bishops has been said) to the parts of
whose office, consisting in Ruling, Teaching, and Ministering, all those other
gifts of the holy Ghost are to be referred as assistant at that time; and from
whose office, and the ordinary blessing of God upon it, the effect of them all
is to be expected at this time. For let me ask, What is become of those
Doctors, distinguished from Pastors, in all succeeding ages? Where have those
ruling Elders hid themselves, that they were never seen since the time of the
Apostles? Is it possible that the whole Church should conspire to suppress
such an institution of our Lord and his Apostles almost as soon as it was made?
Or is it imaginable, had it not been suppressed, that all Ecclesiastical
writers, whereof there is such store, should conspire so far to suppress the
remembrance of it, that among them all there is not one witness produced to
depose for them, unless it be by those that bring the meaning with them which
they desire to find in their writings? Were we alive in Tertullians time, we
might go into the assemblies of Christians, and see with our eyes what now will
not be believed, though it be told us in terms plain enough to them that will
understand, when he says as before, Praesident probati quique seniores, honorem
non pretio sed testimonio adepti. We might see them sitting in the headroom of
the Congregation by themselves apart from the people: whereupon they are called
by him otherwhiles Ordo and Consessus. And were there occasion to see any of
them censured to the loss of his office, we might see him for his punishment
sit and communicate in the rank of the people. It has not been my lot yet to
meet with any thing in Ecclesiastical Writers, or out of them, to bear an
appearance of this difference, but only those words of the commentaries under
S. Ambrose his name upon 1. Tim. v. 1. Vnde and Synagoga, and postea Ecclesia,
Seniores habuit, sine quorum consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. He speaks
in the time past, of that which had been in the Church and was not; and without
doubt gives men of excellent abilities, men of incomparable merit in the
Church, occasion to mistake his meaning, as if he had spoke of a sort of
Presbyters which had been in the Church and now were not: whereas they should
have taken the whole clause with them, when he says, Vnde and postea Ecclesia
Seniores habuit, sine quorum consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia; and then his
meaning had been plain, as in truth it is, That the Church once had Presbyters
that joined advise with the Bishop in all Church Matters; which my desire is to
prove was so from the beginning, and which he complains was now otherwise.
For so S. Hierome, about the same time, manifestly declares that he thought an
alteration in this point was come to pass, when he says that at the first
Churches were governed by common advise, but afterward all was referred to
one, hereupon exhorting Bishops to communicate the government of their Churches
with their Presbyters, as Moses did his with the Sanedrin of Israel. And this
further appears by that which follows in the said Commentaries, Quod qua
negligentia obsoleverit, nescio, nisi forte Doctorum quorundam desidia, vel
potius superbia dum soli volunt aliquid videri, imputing the change to the
negligence of Teachers, or to their pride: and therefore they are Teachers that
were called Elders before; and through their negligence, or the Bishops taking
all on themselves, all came into their hands: which perhaps may be referred to
that which by and by shall be said, that the Bishops afterward in some parts
took the office of preaching in the Mother Church, where they lived, in a sort
to their peculiar, not suffering the Presbyters to preach in their presence.
Which office of preaching nevertheless, as the matter is now, being become the
necessary charge of Bishop and Presbyters (temporary graces being ceased, and
Dioceses divided, Churches built, and means assigned) as it is without doubt
and always was accounted, in regard of personal performance, the most
excellent work they are able to contribute to the service of God, so is it for
the use of edification, as much to be preferred before other their employment,
as Prophesying is by the Apostle preferred before speaking with strange
languages: Always provided (since we must not now presume upon immediate
inspirations, but expect Gods ordinary blessing upon humane endeavors) that
men and abilities may be stored for the work before the work be cut out for
them, so as the honor and reverence thereof may be preserved without offense.
For as the Apostle says, that if unbelievers should come into the assemblies
of Christians, and hear them nothing but speak languages which most understood
not, they would say they were mad: So if the enemies of our Profession should
hear in our Churches a great deal of tongue, but the meaning of the Scripture
not in it, needs must this bring an evil opinion upon it.

CHAP. X.
Offices of Divine service, performed in chief by the Bishop: after him by the
Presbyters. Order of Christian Assemblies appointed by Bishop and Presbyters.
Maintenance of the Church and poor disposed of likewise.

Well then, this particular of labor in the Word and Doctrine is out of doubt
common to Bishop and Presbyters both. It is that which S. Peter most aims at,
when he exhorts those whom he calls his fellow-Elders to the office of
feeding the flock: It is that which S. Paul for the most part expresses, when
he exhorts the Presbyters of Ephesus to take heed to the flock which they
were to feed, Acts xx. 28. according to his example, that ceased not to warn
every one night and day with tears, verse 31. teaching them both in public,
and from house to house, as it is before, v. 28. And we shall find this office
of teaching and instructing the Church to rest afterward upon the Bishop in
chief, and upon the Presbyters in consequence, whether in private upon
particular occasions, whereof we find much argument of practice in S. Cyprians
Epistles, or in public in the assemblies of Christians. For thus the matter
went afterward, the principal parts and offices of Divine service, that is,
the Sermon and the celebration of the Eucharist, were wont to be reserved to
the Bishop, in honor of his place and the eminence of it, unless he were
absent or it were disposed of otherwise. Which I take to be the reason why
Justine Martyr, in the place alleged before, related that the Sermon was wont
to be made and the Eucharist celebrated by the (...), which name compriseth
Bishop and Presbyters both as has been said; because the office belonged to
the Bishop in the first place, to the Presbyters in case of his absence, or the
like. And you shall hear even now Ignatius his argument to persuade the
Ephesians not to assemble for the Eucharist, but with the Bishop; For, says
he, if the prayers of one or two have that force, that Christ is in the midst
of them, much more the prayers of the Bishop and Church; Therefore it was the
Bishop whose prayers the Eucharist was celebrated with. And in the Life of S.
Augustine is related, that it was not the custom for Presbyters to preach in
the Churches of Africa, (that is, not if the Bishop were present) whereupon the
Bishop Valerius being a Greek, and not so fit to speak to the people in Latin,
brought that into use there which he had seen practiced in the East, and
assumed S. Augustine to assist him by preaching in his presence. The
Commentary under S. Ambrose his name so often alleged, having said, upon
Ephesians. iv. 11. as we had it before, that at the first all sorts preached in the
Church, but afterward it was otherwise settled, prosecuteth it with these
words, Vnde nunc neque Diaconi in populo praedicant. And of Baptizing,
Tertullian l. De Baptist. c. 17. Dandi quidem jus habet summus sacerdos, id
est, Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, sed non sine autoritate Episcopi
propter Ecclesiae honorem, quo salvo salvapax est. To show us, That all
services of the Church, even to baptize, belonged in chief to the Bishop, in
respect to his place; that for the same reason the Presbyters were silent in
their presence; and the Deacons not suffered at all to preach at that time. Now
as the office common to Bishop and Presbyters was and is seen in the services
of the Church, so was it also seen in appointing the assemblies of the Church
for that purpose. This we have here to observe out of Ignatius his Epistles, in
consequence to that which was produced before out of S. Paul and Clemens
concerning the disorders of the assemblies at Corinth; that to correct them,
and to prevent the like, the order of the peoples Oblations, of the Presbyters
celebrating the Eucharist, of the Assemblies of the Church for that purpose,
was regulated by the appointment of the Bishop and Presbyters. His words are
these. Epist. ad Smyrn. (...), That without the Bishop, neither the people
might bring their offerings, nor Presbyters consecrate the Eucharist, nor both
celebrate the feasts of Love used at these assemblies. And for the purpose of
this particular it is that he is so earnest and frequent throughout his
Epistles in exhorting to be subject to the Bishop and Presbyters. Epist. ad
Trall. (...), He that is within the Altar, says he, is pure: wherefore he
obeys the Bishop and Presbyters: But he that is without, is he that does any
thing without the Bishop and Presbyters. He that is without the Altar, in
Ignatius his terms, that does things without the Bishop and Presbyters, is
meant of those of the people that assembled, or those of the Presbyters that
celebrated the Eucharist, without the Bishop and Presbyters or their
appointment: which was called erecting Altar against Altar in the Primitive
time: For so Ignatius again in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Let no man
mistake, says he; if a man be not within the Altar, he comes short of the
bread of God. For if the prayer of one or two be of such force, that Christ
stands in the midst of them, how much more shall the prayer wherein the
Bishop and Church agrees (that is, at the Eucharist, which he spoke of when he
mentioned the bread of God before) prevail? And therefore in the end of that
Epistle, (...), Obeying the Bishop and Presbyters without distraction of mind,
breaking one bread, which is the medicine of immortality. A plain case: The
intent of his exhortations is, to persuade them to assemble without schism,
because that to assemble and celebrate the Eucharist besides the Bishops
appointment was then the due mark of aschismatick. And that the Presbyters
concurred with him in ordering these matters, appears by the obedience he
requires to both: And so still in Ignatius the Presbyters are assistant to the
Bishop in all things. And this is the meaning of that vith Canon of the Council
at Gangra, whereof the tenor is, If any man assemble in private beside the
Church, and will perform Ecclesiastical Offices in contempt of the Church, no
Presbyter being there with assent of the Bishop, let him be anathema: Providing
herein against schism, as the occasion of that Council evidenceth. Wherewith
agrees the xxxii. Canon of the Apostles. And in the viith and viiith Canon
next following of the same Council there is provision against bringing or
receiving oblations otherwise then to the Church, beside the Bishops mind, or
his that is trusted for these things, for the benefit of the poor, under pain
of anathema: The heaviness of the sentence proceeding upon the mark of schism
which the action forbidden imports, though there is in it a respect to the
maintenance of the Church and poor arising for that time out of the oblations
of Christian people, the dispersing whereof was then another particular of the
office common to Bishop and Presbyters. For as we read acts xi. 29. that the
benevolence of the brethren of Antiochia was directed to the Elders at
Jerusalem by the hands of Barnabas and Saul, though the seven Deacons were made
before to attend upon the poor; so are we not to think that their office went
so high as to dispose of their maintenance, but to execute the disposition of
Bishop and Presbyters. For when the Church of Antiochia maintained four
thousand poor, as is read in a passage of S. Chrysostom, the Church of Rome
two thousand and five hundred in Cornelius his time, as is to be seen in his
words related by Eusebius, Eccles. hist. vi. 43. it is not reason to imagine
that all this means was put in the power of the Deacons: Whose office S.
Hierome well expresses when he calls them mensarum ac viduarum ministros, as
those that ministered not disposed of their maintenance. (Though perhaps the
advantage of fingring money was it that made them take so much upon them in his
time, whereof he complains) Nay, it is plain this must rest in the power of
Bishop and Presbyters by the portions and divisions thereof, wherein each of
them had interesse, as his maintenance; whereof we find remembrance in S.
Cyprians Epistles. In the last Canon of the Council of Antiochia is provided,
that the Bishop shall not alienate the Church-goods (which though immovable,
were given for the same purpose) without consent of his Presbyters. And in
those which are called the Canons of the Apostles (which the world knows are
not theirs, but yet do express very ancient customs of the Church) Can. iii.
and iv. having ordered what sorts of first fruits should be sent to the Church,
what home to the Bishop and Presbyters, it follows, Now it is manifest that
they are to be divided by them among the Deacons and Clergy: to the Deacons,
for the maintenance of the poor; to the Clergy, for their own: Where you see
the interesse of the Presbyters in disposing of such oblations.

CHAP. XI.
Of the discipline of Penance. Those that have the Keys remit sins by
prescribing Penance. The intercession of the Church. Particular persons
excommunicated among the Jews. Our Lord prohibiteth their course among his
Disciples. Two degrees of Excommunication as well in the Church as in the
Synagogue. The Keys are given to Bishop and Presbyters. The interesse of the
people, and what is required at the hands of the Commonwealth.

THere remains now two particulars of the office common to Bishop and
Presbyters, wherein the people also claim their interesse: the one is the
discipline of Penance; the other the making of Ministers: The due course
whereof assigned by our Lord and his Apostles will best be discovered, laying
together first what we find of them in Scripture, and then comparing of it with
the proceeding of the Primitive time, which we shall perceive the right to go
along with. The Keys of the Kingdom of heaven are given by our Lord to the
first of his Disciples, in those words, Matthew. xvi. 19. And I will give thee
the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou bindest on earth,
shall be bound in Heaven; whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed
in Heaven. If men's minds were not possessed with prejudice, it would soon
appear to be the same power that is given to all the Apostles, John xx. 24.
Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever
sins ye retein, they are retained. But Matt. xviii. 17, 18. to the same
purpose, though more at large, And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it
unto the Church: But if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as
a heathen man and as a publican. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye loose on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. To this must be added the proceeding of the Apostle,
in delivering to Satan the incestuous person at Corinth. 1. Cor. v. 3, 4, 5.
which he also did to Hymeneus and Alexander. 1. Tim. i. 20. Now, in the
practice of the Primitive Church, those that exercised this power, were in part
Judges (Censours you may call them, if you please) and in part Physicians. Both
parts comprised in S. Cyprians words, Ep. 51. Vbi lapsis nec censura deest quae
increpet, nec medicina quae sanet. Judges they are in shutting Gods house upon
offenders, and binding their sins upon their consciences. And the effect of
this censure such, (supposing the proceeding of it to be due) that as the
disease of sin is not to be cured without the medicine of repentance, no more
can this knot wherewith sins, notorious of themselves, or otherwise known,
are tied to men's consciences, be undone without known repentance. For since the
worst of the souls sickness consists in not acknowledging her disease, it
pleased God to give his Church power and charge to constrain offenders to take
their Physic, which the grief of bodily diseases is able to do alone.
Physicians they are then, in prescribing the medicine of Repentance: and in
that respect alone are truly said to remit sins. God himself says not to the
Soul, I absolve thee from thine offenses, but upon supposition of the means,
his own gift of repentance, that works the cure: so far it is from the
power of his creature to pronounce forgiveness without knowledge of the effect
which the medicine of repentance has wrought. But if we say true when a
Physician is said to cure a man's disease, though all the world know he does no
more but prescribe the medicine, or at the most see it applied; with as good
right is it to be said that men's sins are cured by them that prescribe the
course by which they are cured. Only, whereas he that is cured of a bodily
disease is able to tell himself when he is well; he that is once sensible of
the maladies of his soul, is not easily satisfied when the cure is done: It
has therefore pleased the goodness of God to provide an office and charge in
his Church to assure men of forgiveness of sins upon due knowledge of
repentance, by taking away that knot wherewith they remained tied upon their
consciences. Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea Cappadociae in his Epistle to S.
Cyprian, the lxxvth in number of his Epistles, thus writes, Lapsis quoque
fratribus per poenitentiam medela quaeratur. Non quasi a nobis remissionem
peccatorum consequantur, sed ut per nos ad intelligentiam delictorum suorum
convertantur, and Domino before satisfacere cogantur. To this purpose was the
time and order and fashion of Penance, regulated in the ancient Church, that
the diseases of the soul might receive every one their competent cure: and
therefore it is plain that among them it was a favor to be admitted to
Penance, in opposition to Novatianus, Qui nemini dandam poenitentiam putavit,
says Saint Ambrose, De Poenit. 2. 1. exhorting men to repentance indeed, but
leaving them for pardon to God who had power to give it, as his Disciple
Socrates writes Eccles. hist. iv. 13. That is, not employing the power of the
keys, and the benefit of it, to the cure of their offenses. Whereupon S.
Ambrose you see calls it dare poenitentiam, as on the offenders side it was
then called petere poenitentiam, demanding and granting of Penance. For this
cause it was that this medicine of repentance was wont to be joined with the
prayers of the Congregation, but in the chief place, of the Bishop and
Presbyters; which, if repentance be Physic, is correspondent to that which is
given to make Physic work: And this is called in Tertullian, Presbyteris
advolvi, Caris Dei adgeniculari, Omnibus fratribus legationes deprecationis
suae injungere; and in S. Augustine, Gemitus columbae, the Mourning of the
turtle, procuring their release at Gods hands. And to this purpose was the
Imposition of hands so often repeated in Penance, because as S. Augustine says
of it, in confirmation (wherein he follows Tertullian: the one in these
words, Quid enim est impositio manuum nisi oration super hominem? the other
before him in these, Dehinc manus imponitur per benedictionem advocans and
invitans Spiritum Sanctum, That it is but a Ceremony of benediction, imploring
the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost which it represents: So was it in Penance
nothing else but a form of benediction, interceding for their reconcilement.
This may very well be thought to be the intent of the words of our Lord, in the
Gospel alleged, Matthew. xviii. 19. For having delivered to the Church the power
of binding and loosing in the words recited, it follows straight, Again, I
say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing
that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven:
for where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
midst of them. For as in the words next going before, he shows how men's sins
are bound and loosed, to wit by the power which he gives his Church to that
purpose, so he may well seem in the next words to point at the course by which
this power may become effectual to the loosing of sins, to wit the
intercession of the Congregation of Gods people. At least, thus much has been
observed by men of excellent learning, that lamenting is a work specified by
the Apostle himself in the business of reducing offenders by Penance, 1. Cor.
v. 2. Ye have not lamented to put away such a transgression from you. And
again, 2. Cor. xii. 20. I fear that when I come unto you, I shall not find you
such as I desire, and shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not
repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness that they
have committed: meaning that he should put them to Penance, by consequence.
This makes the interesse of the Congregation in the work of Discipline to be
considerable, but intituleth it not to the keys of Gods house. For to conceive
our Lords meaning aright, let us take notice that there was among the Jews much
use of excommunicating by particular persons; (as is to be seen in their
writings: Maimoni in Talmud Torah, c. 7. Arba Turim, or Shulchan Aruch, in Tore
Deah, Hilcoth Niddui Vcherem) and that many times upon causes of their
particular interesse: For example, a Rabbi or Rabbis Mate was able to
excommunicate for his credit, when he found himself slighted. True it is, they
count it commendable in a Rabbi to pass over all disrespect to himself in
private, but he that shall do it in public, they bind him to remember it, and
watch his party like a Serpent, till he seek favor and reconcilement; Maimoni,
n. ult. And true it is that in some cases they void excommunication that is
grounded upon particular interesse, and not for the honor of God, Jore Deah
out of the Jerusalem Talmud and R. Joseph Karo upon it, f. 364. And generally,
he that excommunicateth without cause, is to be excommunicated himself; (it is
the last of twenty four causes for which they excommunicate) but what
disorders might come upon such practice, is easy to imagine. And therefore
there is great cause to think, that our Lords words whereof we speak are aimed
on purpose to abrogate this course among his followers, though covertly to
avoid offense. For two things he prescribes in opposition to it; first to aim
at a brothers reformation and nothing else in all the proceeding, Matt. xviii.
15. If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone: If he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
brother. The second is, that they shall proceed no further then contestation in
private; the rest he prescribes to be referred in public to the Church: So it
follows, But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church. Now this word,
(...), the Church, as also. (...), is first used in the Greek of the old
Testament, to signify the Congregation of the people of Israel. The Jews that
have lived since the Prophets have espoused and appropriated this later word
the Synagogue to signify sometimes the whole body of that Nation, or rather of
that Faith (as among the Fathers the Synagogue stands for the Jews, in
opposition to the Church of Christians) sometimes particular Congregations of
it, and by consequence the place of their assemblies, as in the Gospel, He
loves our nation, and has built us a Synagogue. And just so in all respects
is the word ECCLESIA, the Church, used in relation to Christians, our Lord in
the Gospel having begun to appropriate it to the Congregation which he now
began to institute, Matt. xvi. 18. Upon this rock will I build my Church: and
in the text in hand, Matt. xviii. 17. Tell it to the Church. So that it must
not be denied, it is not usual for the Church, which signifies the whole
Congregation of people, to signify the chief part of it. But it is as certain
on the other side, that looking backward to the Synagogue upon which our Lord
reflecteth, as was said, such censures as these are whereof our Lord speaks,
proceeding from the public (private ones being excluded as has been said)
issued all from the Courts of Justice mentioned before, without respect to the
Congregation of the people. As thus: There were among them two degrees of
Excommunication and no more, the less called (...), that is, Separation, the
greater (...), or Anathema, and the effect of them, to cut a man off, more or
less, from the Congregation of the people, (as is to be seen in the late most
learned work, De Jure Not. and Gent. sec. disc. Ebr. iiii. 9.) The ordinary
sentence of Separation, which is that we spoke of before, was for thirty days,
unless the Court thought fit to abridge or enlarge the term: for that time no
man must come within four cubits of him that stood excommunicate besides those
of his house; he must not be reckoned among three which is the number required
at Blessing of meat; he must not be reckoned among ten, which is the number
required to make a Synagogue: under that they go not to prayers in the
Synagogue. And how it is in the power of the Court to aggravate this, is to be
seen in Shulchan Aruch, as before Number. x. At thirty days end they iterated the
sentence, and stayed thirty days more: If then he stood out, it was in their
power to excommunicate him with curses, which is that which is called Anathema.
With these the proceedings of the Christian Church keep some correspondence,
according to Scripture. For when our Lord says, If he hear not the Church,
let him be unto thee as a Heathen man and as a Publicane, he intimates withal
a course the Church had to take for his correction and amendment that should
give car to it. Which as it might perhaps end in a verbal admonition of the
Church and real amendment of the party, yet those that were under the
discipline of Penance, we know, were in a sort excommunicate, because they were
not admitted to the Communion of the Eucharist, besides that (as those which
were separated among the Jews) they put upon them the state and fashion and
habit of mourners: And I showed before what we find in Scripture to argue this
course directed by our Lord, and practiced by the Apostle. But here was a
difference, that in that state we find not that a man was cut off from the
conversation of Christians, those which were admitted to Penance, being always
accounted in the way of salvation, supposing the performance of their enjoined
Penance. That was the effect of that grievous censure whereof our Lord
speaks, Let him be unto thee as a Heathen man and as a Publicane. Not because
he means to forbid Christians to converse with Heathen men and Publicanes,
who being to be converted from among them, must needs be compassed with them on
every side: And therefore that case the Apostle has resolved, 1. Cor. v. 9,
10. where he informs them that whereas he had written to them not to converse
with fornicatours, his meaning was not to forbid them to converse with the
fornicatours of this world, that is Gentiles, or with the covetous, or
extortioners, or with idolaters: for then must ye go out of the world; and as
it follows verse. 12. For what have I to do to judge those that are without?
do not ye judge those that are within? But our Lords meaning is, that
Christians should show that respect to a brother that should be refractary to
the Church, as the Jews did then to Gentiles and Publicanes, which the Apostle
secondeth there, verse. 11. Now I write to you not to converse, if any man that
is called a brother be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer,
or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one no not to eat: which is to
avoid them, as the Jews did him that stood separate. And the sentence whereupon
this is to be practiced is intimated in the next verse, For what have I to do
to judge those that are without? Do not ye judge those that are within? And
this censure it seems the Apostle presupposes when he writes to Titus iii.
11. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject.
For his meaning is not to instruct Titus alone what he in his person should do,
but in the person of Titus to instruct all the Church to reject and avoid
refractary Heretics: and therefore in the consequence of avoiding them, it
seems he intimates the censure whereupon they are to be avoided. The same
censure against the incestuous person at Corinth he intimates by the same
consequence, when he says, 1. Cor. v. 13. Therefore put away from you that
wicked person, which he calls giving over to Satan in the same case verse. 5.
before, and in the case of Hymeneus and Alexander, 1. Tim. i. 20. and which he
signifies 1. Cor. xvi. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be
anathema Maranatha: where anathema is the term that comes from the Synagogue,
and so does the other as some men think. So that this censure cutteth men off
from the conversation of Christians, which forfeit the privileges to which
they pretend, and so delivers them to Satan by consequence; as those that
lodged without the camp of Israel, were in danger to be lickt up by the
Amalekite. Which course nevertheless, as it was preservative in regard of some
members, that they might not be tainted, as the Apostle signifies when he
says 1. Cor. v. 6. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?
So was it medicinal in respect of the sick, shame and grief being a good way
to the cure: which the Apostle seems to respect when he directs, 1. Cor. v.
6. to deliver him to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit
might be safe in the day of the Lord Jesus; and 1. Tim. i. 20. whom I have
delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme. This is the
correspondence between the proceeding of the Church and Synagogue. And
therefore, as looking backward to the Synagogue whereupon our Lord reflecteth
when he says, Dic Ecclesiae, we see to whom they had recourse, so shall we
see, looking forwards upon the Church, which our Lord points toward in the
same words, to whom he directs his followers to have recourse. The Keys of
Gods house are given in the Gospel to S. Peter, with the effect of binding and
loosing, and the same power to all the Apostles, in equivalent terms of
reteining and remitting sins: For if there were advantage, it were an
inconvenience that in the third place the power of binding and loosing should
be given to the Church, which is pretended given to S. Peter for a privilege
beyond the Apostles. Well then might S. Cyprian argue, Epist. 27. that because
our Lord promised to S. Peter the keys of his Church, therefore the acts of
government of it were to pass through the Bishops hands, and without him
Apostates could not be reconciled. And it is the same which S. Augustine
affirms so often as he teaches (which many times he does) that S. Peter in
receiving the Keys represented the Church, as Ep. 79. Si hoc in Ecclesia fit
(he speaks of binding and loosing) Petrus quando claves accepit Ecclesiam
sanctam significavit. For what was promised to S. Peter was given the rest of
the Apostles, but was to rest in the Church, to which it is also given in the
same terms; as S. Cyprian is willing to acknowledge, so often as he calls the
Presbyters his Colleagues, and professes to do nothing without their advise.
So that it is not possible to give a more impartial meaning to the words of
our Lord in the Gospel then the practice of those times has expressed, when
that power was exercised in common by the Bishop and his Presbyters. This it is
Tertullian has showed us, Apolog. c. 39. alleged before, where having
commended the gravitie and integrity of Ecclesiastical censures, to show by
whom they were done, he adds as before, Praesident probati quique seniores,
honorem non pretio sed testimonio adepti. And S. Augustines words are plain,
which we had before, Veniat peccator ad Antistites per quos ipsi in Ecclesia
claves ministrantur, and a praepositis sacrorum accipiat satisfactionis suae
modum. And in S. Cyprian there is so much mention of reconcilement by
imposition of hands of the Bishop and Clergy, that I will say no more of it,
because this point of all the rest has continued a chief employment of
Presbyters in the corrupt and pernicious opinions and customs of the Church of
Rome. Let not any man think now that the Apostle communicates this power with
the Congregation of the Church of Corinth, when he writes to them, 1. Cor. v.
4, 5. being assembled with his Spirit, to deliver the incestuous person to
Satan. For it is plain, that the sentence is given by the Apostle, verse. 3.
where he writes, For I verily, as absent in body but present in spirit, have
judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that has so done this
deed. And to cause this proceeding to be the better digested, he has vouched
his power in the end of the chapter before, verse 18. Now some are puffed up, as
though I would not come unto you: but I will come unto you shortly, if the Lord
will, and will know, not the speech of them that are puffed up, but the power.
What will you? shall I come unto you with a rod, or with the spirit of
meekness? Which power otherwhiles he sets before them, in case of their
disobedience. And therefore it must be acknowledged, that he writes to them to
see his sentence published, ratified and executed, which the Presbyters there
had either neglected to do, as was touched before, or perhaps were not able to
bring the people under the discipline of Christ's Kingdom; which must needs
oblige the Apostle to interpose. And therefore the Italian gloss of Diodati,
which makes the Apostle in this place speak of assembling the Pastors and
Guides of the Church, as in Matthew. xviii. 17. though in effect true, (because
for certain, what is to be acted by the Congregation, therein the Presbyters
are to do their part, by the meaning of the Apostle) yet must leave us room to
think, that the words are to be understood of the public assemblies of the
Church there for Divine service, seeing we find in Tertullian the place before
quoted, that these censures were exercised at and in the assemblies of the
Christian people: Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes, and censur a
divina, says he, speaking of their Assemblies. And S. Cyprian in the great
case of those that fell away in persecution, writes to the Presbyters that he
does not think to do any thing in it, without their counsel, and the consent of
the people. And this without doubt is the reason why the Apostle writes in
these terms 1. Cor. v. 12. For what have I to do to judge those that are
without? do not ye judge those that are within? speaking to the Church in
general, (though the sentence passed, as has been said by Bishop and
Presbyters) because matters were censured in the Congregation, and executed by
the people: And thus the practice of that time gives a reason without
straining why our Lord seems to refer these matters to the Congregation, when
he says, Tell it to the Church, because they passed at their assemblies,
though under censure of Bishop and Presbyters. And great reason there is why
this regard should be had by the Apostle, and by the Church afterward, to the
people, because the Church, being a mere spiritual Commonwealth, and not
endued with temporal strength, so much as to execute those sentences which the
power of the keys given by Christ obliges it to inflict, always setting
aside that power of working miracles, which was in the Apostle, upon which some
think he reflecteth in some passages of those Epistles) requisite it was then,
the Congregation should be satisfied of the course of those proceedings which
must come into execution and effect by their voluntary submission to the will
of God and the office of his Ministers: And as the matter is now, that things
of this nature proceed not upon men's private consciences and judgments in
particulars, but upon general rules of common right, requisite it is that the
Commonwealth have satisfaction of those laws according to which the Church now
must proceed in their censures, it being acknowledged that they cannot proceed
with effect but by virtue of those laws that are put in force by the secular
arm: But as it is now no longer time to leave matters to the Conscience of men's
places which may be regulated by laws, which experience makes commendable; so
is it no longer time to expect at the peoples hands voluntary submission to the
discipline of the Church, further then it is enabled by laws of the kingdom to
exercise it. And therefore it is much to be wished that the laws by which the
Ministers of the Church are enabled, directed, constrained to exercise this
prime part of their office, may prove so sufficient, and that the power of the
keys given it by our Lord in the Gospel may be so strengthened by the secular
arm, and rules put in force by it, that it may be able to reduce all heinous
and notorious offenses under the discipline of Penance, and to cut them off
from the Church that refuse it. Is it to be believed, that our Lords intent
was, in settling such a power as this is; that it should take hold of sins of
incontinence or the like, letting all others, of as deep a stain, and as well
known, escape uncensured? Or could any man devise a more puissant means to
discountenance malefactors in a Christian Commonwealth, then that which our
Lord has appointed, by making them know, that when they have satisfied the
laws of the kingdom, with loss of goods or fame, or have escaped with life by
the gentleness of them, the fact being proved, nevertheless they can not
communicate with the people of God, till the Church be satisfied of their
correction and amendment? Nay, shall we imagine that the institution of our
Lord Christ is satisfied and in force in a Christian Commonwealth, so long as
the case of particular offenses, upon occasion whereof it is settled by him in
the Gospel, is scarce understood among us, because it is so far from common
practice by the law* of the kingdom? whereas it might easily appear what an
excellent and charitable course our Savior has chalked out to us, if a good
Christian heart, desirous rather of his brothers amendment then of his own
satisfaction, and able to make an appearance of such an offense, as our Lord
intended, by witnesses, the Church, enabled by rules of law, established by the
secular arm, should call the person offending to the acknowledgement of wrong
on his side, cutting him off in case he refused amendment. Thus much for
certain, if the zeal of well-affected Christians toward the state of this
Church did not mistake the true mark, the discipline of Penance, must needs be
thought one of the first points to be reformed in it. And then the rest of that
satisfaction which the people can demand of the Church, will consist in not
releasing the correction inflicted until there be reasonable appearance of the
effect wrought by it. For if in S. Cyprians discipline, the people rested so
unsatisfied of some whom his gentleness had reconciled, that they were hardly
persuaded to admit them to communicate, as he writes Epist. 55. just cause
have good Christians to be scandalized, when they see them admitted to
communicate of whose offenses they are sure, but have no cause to be sure of
their amendment.

CHAP. XII.
Of Ordinations what is remembered in Scripture. The course held in the
Primitive Church. The Election and constitution of Bishops upon what grounds.
Presbyters had their part in Ordinations: (...) was not Election by holding up
hands. Ordination of Deacons for common business of Churches. The interesse of
the people is satisfied in the course now practiced. What the Primitive form
requires in the Constitution of Bishops.

AS for the constituting and ordaining of Ministers, which is behind of my
promise, these are the particulars remembered concerning it in Scripture, for
the most part touched upon occasion heretofore, Acts xiii. 3. And when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away, Acts xiv.
23. Paul and Barnabas, when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, and
had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they
believed. and 1. Tim. iv. 14. Neglect not the gift that was given thee by
prophecy, with the imposition of hands of the presbytery; which is 2. Tim. i.
6. by imposition of my hands. And the charge of the Apostle unto him, 1. Tim.
v. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins.
And the whole instructions of the Apostle to Timothy and Titus, by whom he had
appointed them to be ordained. To which must be added the choice of Matthias,
and the seven Deacons, where is said, that they, the Congregation, put up two,
Acts i. 23. and the twelve said unto them, Acts vi. 3. look ye out among you
seven men of honest report, and verse 5. And they chose Steven and the rest,
and verse 6. They set them before the Apostles, and when they had prayed they
laid hands on them. Which are alleged by S. Cyprian for the interesse of the
people in this business. Wherein, we shall discern the course of proceeding in
the Primitive Church, by that which is read in an Heathen, (who being an enemy
to all, can not be thought partial to any rank of Christians) it is in the
life of Alexander Severus, where you have related, how that excellent young
Prince, being to promote to the government of Provinces, or the like charges,
was wont to set up the persons names, inviting the people to come in against
any of them upon any crime, whereof they could make evidence, upon pain of life
if any failed in it. And then it follows, Dicebatque grave esse, cum id
Christiani and Judaei facerent, in praedicandis Sacerdotibus, qui sunt
ordinandi, non fieri in Provinciarum rectoribus, quibus and fortunae hominum
committerentur and capita. These words, in praedicandis Sacerdotibus qui sunt
ordinandi, the learned Casaubon understands to be meant of that publication
of men's merits and qualities, which must needs fall out in discussing the
competence of persons put up to the approbation of the people to be ordained in
any rank of Ministers in the Assemblies of Christians according to the custom
then in practice: which custom S. Cyprian commends upon the pattern of
Eleazar, made and invested high Priest by Moses, in sight of the people, whose
interesse he specifieth when he says, Ordinationes Sacerdotales sub populi
assistentis conscientia fieri, ut plebe praesente, vel detegantur malorum
crimina, vel merit abonorum praedicentur, ut sit ordinatio justa and legitima,
quae omnium suffragio and judicio fuerit comprobata. But before men's deserts
and qualities could be scanned, it behoved that their persons should be
nominated in the first place, the publication whereof is called in the sixth
canon of the Chalced on Council, (...). where it is provided, (...). That no
man be ordained Presbyter or Deacon, or in any rank of the Church at large,
unless he be published to be ordained in some particular Church of a City or
village. That which is called here (...), Praedicatio in Latin, meaning the
Publication of persons names that were put up to be ordained, seems to come
nearer that which the Historian means when he says in praedicandis
Sacerdotibus, because hereupon followed the examination of their competence
which S. Cyprian declares to be the interesse of the people. For if we
conceive that all men indifferently had the right to nominate, we must think a
great deal of unsufferable confusion must needs follow at such assemblies. And
the same S. Cyprian when he writes to his Clergy, Ep. 24. concerning the
ordination of Saturus and Optatus in these words, Quos jampridem communi
consilio Clero proximos feceramus, excusing himself to them that he had
ordained them alone, upon this, that they had before promoted them to be next
the Clergy by common advise, sufficiently shows that the course was to advise
with the Presbyters and rest of the Clergy about the persons to be propounded
to the people. We need then no more to show us the course of that time. There
was first nomination of the person to the people, upon their knowledge and
approbation of the persons, and agreement; there followed imposition of hands,
wherein consisted the accomplishment of the work, from whence the whole was
called in Greek, (...), as ordinatio in Latin, compriseth the whole work
whereby they are promoted. In the Ordination of Bishops there must needs be
something particular. By the praecedent which S. Hierome has recorded us, in
the Church of Alexandria, where he said before, that the Presbyters were wont to
choose a Bishop out of their own rank, it is plain, their stroke was the
greatest in nominating the person, to be approved by the people, and ordained
by the Bishops. And the Commentaries under Saint Ambrose his name upon Ephesians.
iv. 11. tell us, that at the first, the next of the Presbyters in rank was wont
to be assumed, (and so might it well be practiced in some places) until it was
tried that diverse times they fell out to be unfit for the place. Then, says
he, immutata est ratio prospiciente consilio, ut non or do sed meritum crearet
Episcopum multorum Sacerdotum judicio constitutum, ne indignus temer e
usurparet, and esset multis scandalum, The course was changed upon advise which
provided, that a Bishop should not be made by rank, but by merit, to be
esteemed by the judgment multorum Sacerdotum, signifying by this term as well
the Presbyters of the own Church, by whom he was desired, as the Bishops of
other Churches, by whom he was ordained. For because, according to that which
we conceived before, from the beginning Bishops were propagated through all
Churches, by no other means but by the assistance of neighbor Churches, that
had Bishops before, hereupon it proceeded to be a custom in the Church, that a
Bishop was not made without approbation and consent of the neighbor Bishops,
from whom he was to recieve imposition of hands, and with whom he was to
preserve the unity of the Church, which at that time was actuated by no means,
but by the correspondence of Bishops in the name of their Churches. This is the
ground of the custom, that under three Bishops, it was not usual to ordain
one. Novatianus was ordained by no less at Rome, in the way of Schism,
against Cornelius who was ordained by sixteen, as we read in S. Cyprian. But
when the proceeding of this business came to be regulated by the Canons of
Nice and Antiochia, the Church by that time being incorporate in the state of
the Roman Empire, then was it thought fit that a Bishop should be made by all
the Bishops of the Province, the Metropolitan, that is, the Bishop of the head
City, in chief, without whom nothing to be done, so that if some few agreed
not, the business nevertheless to proceed, and be executed by three at the
least. The intent was indeed, so far as opportunity should serve, that these
Acts should be done at the Provincial Synods of Bishops, to be held twice a
year by the fifth Canon of Nice, as may be observed among others, in that which
Saint Augustine mentions contra Cresc. iii. 26. de vestris majoribus exstat
secundi Tigisitani concilium, cum paucissimis quidem factum, apud Cirtam, post
persecutionem codicum tradendorum, ut ibi in locum defuncti ordinaretur
Episcopus. If no such fell out it was provided, that three might do it, the
rest consenting under their hands, Can. 19. Conc. Antioch. Thus, without
consent of the Bishops all proceedings of Clergy and people were quite disabled
and becalmed, if any faction, any sinister practice appeared in them, and all
this upon the charge of the Apostle to Timothy, Lay hands suddenly on no man,
neither be partaker of other men's sins. And by virtue of their Ordination, a
Bishop was established and invested, so that a Bishop with Jurisdiction before
Ordination, was an estate not yet come into the world, so long as the primitive
custom and rule of the Church was in force, which it seems succeeding
custom has brought to pass since. Now of all parts of the office common to
Bishop and Presbyters, this of Ordination is that, which the Bishop first began
to exercise alone, so that with S. Chrysostom, and S. Hierome, it is taken in
a manner for granted, that it was to be done by him alone. The one Hom. 11. in
1. ad Tim. (...), Only in Ordination the Bishops go beyond the Presbyters,
that is it alone which they seem to have more than these. The other Ep. ad
Euagr. Quid enim facit Episcopus except a ordinatione, quod Presbyter non
facit? excepting Ordination, which a Bishop does, a Presbyter as he grants
does not. In which nevertheless (setting aside the stroke the Presbyters had
in making their Bishops) if we take not our marks amiss, we shall find
argument enough, at least at the beginning, for the concurrence of Presbyters
with him in making of Presbyters, and other inferior Orders. In the first
place, those general passages of the Fathers, wherein is witnessed that the
Presbytery was a Bench, assistant to the Bishop, without advice whereof nothing
of moment was done, must needs be drawn into consequence to argue that it had
effect in a particular of this weight. Then the Ordination of Timothy by
imposition of hands of the Presbytery will prove no less within compass of
the Scripture. Indeed it is well known that the word (...), in Ecclesiastical
writers signifies diverse times the office and rank of Presbyters, which
signification diverse here embrace, expounding imposition of hands of the
Presbytery to mean that by which the rank of Presbyter was conferred. But the
Apostles words running as they do, (...), oblige a man to ask when he is come
as far as the imposition of the hands, of whom or whose hands they were he
speaks of, which the next words satisfy; had it been (...), the sense might
better have been diverted, but running as it does with the article, (...), with
imposition of THE hands, it remains, that it be specified in the next words,
whose hands were imposed, as in the other place, 2. Tim. i. 6. (...), with
imposition of my hands. Thus this word (...) in the Gospel, Luke xxii. 66. And
in Ignatius his Epistles, signifies the College of Presbyters, which has the
nature and respect of a person in Law, and therefore is read in the singular
for the whole Bench, and being assembled and set, is called (...) in both
places, and in Cornelius of Rome his Epistle to S. Cyprian, where he says,
placuit contrahere Presbyterium. But to put the signification of the word out
of doubt by the circumstance of the sense, call to mind the Prophesies that
went before concerning Timothy, and compare his case with the Apostles, and the
prophesies that went before of him in like case, and the imposition of hands
which thereupon both recieved, and sure it will prove an unreproveable ground,
to conclude that what is expressed in the Apostle, is to be understood of the
Disciple, that these prophesies coming from the Ministers of the Church
concerning the purpose to which God has ordained them in his service,
occasioned that which they did about both in giving them imposition of hands,
and that as S. Paul received imposition of hands from the Presbyters of
Antiochia, so did Timothy from S. Paul and the Presbyters of that Church which
he speaks of but names not. Neither are the arguments of this interesse quite
worn out of the practice of the Church, either in the point of nominating the
persons, or that of imposing hands. For when S. Cyprian expresses himself so
often in this particular, that it was not his purpose to do any thing without
advice of his Presbyters and consent of his people, it is not his meaning that
the Clergy should bear no other part in this work then did the multitude, but
as they were distinct bodies, so according to his own words to expect advice
from them, as concerning the persons to be promoted, but consent from the
people if there were no fault to be found of moment with the persons designed.
And in these terms the matter stands in the 22. Canon of of that which is
called the fourth council of Carthage, where is provided, Vt Episcopus sine
consilio Clericorum suorum Clericos non ordinet, it a ut civium assensum, and
testimonium, and conniventiam quaerat. And as for imposition of hands, we have
in the Epistle aforesaid of Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea Cappadocia (if not
rather of the whole act of Ordination) Omnis potestas and gratia in Ecclesia
constituta est, in qua praesident majores natu qui and baptizandi and manum
imponendi and ordinandi habent potestatem. And in Ignatius his Epistle to Hero
(whosoever writ it, it is ancient enough to speak to our purpose) speaking to
his Deacon of his Presbyters, (...) (...), They baptize, they celebrate the
Eucharist, they impose hands in Penance, they ordain, thou ministrest unto them
as holy Stephen at Jerusalem to James and the Presbyters. And where it is
provided Conc. Carthag. 4. c. 3. that the Presbyters when the Bishop gives
imposition of hands shall likewise impose their hands by his, it behooves us in
their case also to call to mind that this is and was and ought to be, in sign
of their consent to what is done, the Apostle having said to Timothy, Lay hands
suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins. But the interesse
of the people is inhansed beyond all measure or rule of primitive practice. It
will not serve the turn that the people had then satisfaction of the persons
and their competence to the Ministeries to which they were ordained, unless we
will believe that when it is said, Acts iv. 23. (...), the meaning is, that
they were made by most voices of the people, signified by holding up their
hands (as we find in Demosthenes and others that custom to have been in
Greekish Communalties) Saul and Barnabas doing nothing but moderating the
choice, that is in effect telling the voices. And to this purpose is alleged
that of the Apostle, 2. Cor. viii. 19. And not that only, but who was also
chosen of the Churches to travel with us with this grace that is administered by
us: where in the Greek, is (...), signifying Election, as they would have it,
and not Ordination, seeing the office of carrying alms requires no imposition
of hands. To which let me add, if they refuse not that help, the words of
Ignatius much in the same kind, for in his Epistles ad Smyrn. and ad Polyc. out
of his care and affection to his Church at Antiochia, having received news of
their good estate, and finding himself in the like, he desires the Church of
Smyrna and Polycarpus to choose one to go with their letters to Antiochia, whom
he will have called (...), (so it should be read not (...)) or (...), a
messenger in matters belonging to God, to certify them of his good estate, and
to congratulate with them of their own: this office it seems, requires no
imposition of hands, and therefore that (...) by which Ignatius desires them
to appoint it, signifies, as it should seem, not Ordination but Election, by
the same reason, as that of the Apostle. The rest that is brought to avouch
this new conceit, is the words of Zonaras, upon the first of the Canons of the
Apostles, where in down right terms he delivers the use of this word (...),
to come from the fashion of giving voices by holding up hands, used in the
Church at first, to discern on which side most voices were, from whence it came
afterward to be used for imposition of hands. But let them bethink themselves,
that if these Presbyters were made by Saul and Barnabas by holding up hands of
the people, then were they not made by imposition of their own hands, for if we
take that sense of the word (...), the other must needs be excluded. And then
let me ask, if it be a thing reasonable, to measure the sense of the Apostles
language, by what was done at Athens, rathen then by that, which among the
Jews, from whence the faith of Christ was transplanted, was known and in use.
Or to imagine, that the Apostle, to follow the fashion of Greekish
communalties, never heard of in after ages of the Church, should balk the
Ceremony, which the people of God had received from Moses, which was from old
time frequented in creating their Sanedrin Judges, which the Apostles in their
own persons practiced, which the Church has always observed in promoting of
Ministers, signifying the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, and praying to
obtein it. To the words of the Apostle and Ignatius, seeing they have in them
no appearance of resolute sense, let me answer two ways. First, though they
were not ordained by imposition of hands, yet it is no inconvenience, they
should be called (...), using the word in a general sense, for those that are
ordained, or constituted, in any form, because this form was so frequented in
diverse occasions. As, for the purpose, among the Jews, all their Rabbis are
called (...), which in the letter signifies (...), or ordained by imposition
of hands, because at the first so they were made, though they be not promoted
after that form, but made, as since they are ordinarily made, by writing or
word of mouth, as Rab. Moses, in Sanedrin, chap. 4. writes. But in the second
place observe the words which Ignatius writing to Polycarpus about this matter,
uses, (...). Where for the constituting of a person fit for this purpose, he
advises him to convent one of these Assemblies wherein they used to advise
about Ordinations, as has been said. And therefore it seems no inconvenience
to think that he desires him to be ordained to that purpose. Whereupon it will
not be amiss to inquire a little further to what Ministry in the Church such
a person may be thought to be ordained, wherein if we fail not, perhaps it will
make us able to give a fair conjecture at that of the Apostle by the
correspondence of the cases. Ignatius in the Epistle to the Philadelphians,
writes to them, for the same purpose as here he does to those of Smyrna,
though the sense is hitherto disguised in the printed copies, in which the
words run thus, (...). Which words it is plain make no sense. But I have seen
the written copy of an old translation of these Epistles in barbarous Latin,
in Caius College Library here with us, in which these words are rendered thus,
Quod annunciatum est mihi pacem habere Ecclesiam quae est in Antiochia Syriae:
Decens est vos ut Ecclesiam Dei Ordinare Diaconum ad intercedendum illic Dei
intercessionem in congaudere ipsis in idipsum factis and glorific are nomen. He
that made this translation read here (...) in stead of (...), and (...) or
(...), which now is read (...) and makes it no sense, and this is without
question the true reading, for it follows, (...). And where he says
afterward, (...), it is agreeable to the charitablenesse of those times to
think, that neighbor Churches sent some their Bishops, some their Presbyters
or Deacons to comfort, to advise, to congratulate with his Church of Antiochia
in their Bishops absence; and reasonable it is that he should desire those of
Smyrna and Philadelphia should ordain a Deacon for that purpose; but that they
should make a Bishop for it, as now we read it, is without the compass of
common sense to imagine. Be it then resolved, that it is no other then a Deacon
which Ignatius desires these of Smyrna as well as those of Philadelphia to
Ordain, to carry this message. And let me have leave to conjecture, that those
whom the Apostle in the place alleged 2. Cor. viii. 23. calls (...),
messengers of the Churches, were by their rank in the Church no other then
Deacons: Which is by like reason to be said of Epaphroditus whom S. Paul. Phil.
ii. 25. calls the Apostle of the Philippians, and Minister of his
necessities, and perhaps of Andronicus and Junias, reading it for the name of a
man and not of a woman, Romans xvi. 7. where they are called (...) noted among
the Apostles. For the name Apostle is relative to him by whom he is sent; the
Apostles of Christ, are Christ's messengers, the Apostles of Churches, are the
messengers which they send on common business. Now ye shall often find in the
practice of the ancient Church, that Deacons were sent to foreign Churches
about the business of their own. And this practice bears correspondence with
the Synagogue, for those that are called among them (...), of whom Epiphanius
speaks in these terms describing their office, (...), that they are by
interpretation Deacons or Ministers, are by another name called (...) which is
verbatim (...) or (...), messengers of the Synagogue, because it is like
theywere wont to be employed about business of the Synagogue. And therefore if
the person of whom S. Paul speaks be no other then S. Luke the Evangelist as
many think, and the subscription of that Epistle bears, when he sets him
forth thus, 2. Cor. viii. 8, 18, 19. Now we have sent with him our brother
whose praise is in the Gospel (or in preaching the Gospel) through all the
Churches, and not that alone, but was ordained by the Churches to travel with
us, with this grace which is ministered by us, I shall not stick to think of him
as of Philip the Deacon and Evangelist, that for his rank he was ordained a
Deacon by consent of many Churches, in some of them, to dispense the alms they
sent with S. Paul to Jerusalem, though for his personal grace he was an
Evangelist. Nay if the question be asked, to what rank Timothy was ordained by
that imposition of hands of the Presbytery, mentioned by the Apostle, my answer
must be, seeing Presbyters are for the oversight of their Churches, and Bishop
he was none till he undertook his charge at Ephesus, that he was ordained
Deacon by that Church to give attendance on S. Paul in his travels, for which
purpose his personal grace of Evangelist was very opportune, for thus much
Ignatius has said writing to the Deacons at Trallis, That the Deacons were
such as ministered a pure and blameless ministry, as holy Stephen to blessed
James, and Timothy and Linus to Paul, and Anacletus and Clemens to Peter. Now
as for Zonaras, that had a mind to show his reading in Demosthenes, or the like
Greek Authors, and improve it by expounding the Canons according to it, it is
but sending him to Balsamon for his answer, who writing upon the same Canon,
has met with this impertinence of his, with an unavoydable reason to convince
his mistake, which is, that (...) in the Canons, cannot mean Election by most
voices, because the choice of a Bishop is done by all the Bishops of the
Province, according to the Canons of Nice and Antiochia alleged before* whereas
the Ordination, which is (...), is performed by two or three, by the tenor of
that Canon of the Apostles. And therefore Justellus, by the way, did not right
to allege Balsamon, for one that seconds Zonaras in this conceit, wherein it
is plain he has laid him upon his back. To which let me add this. The v.
Canon of Laodicea provideth (...), that is, Elections, says Zonaras: for this
Canon he alleges for his purpose, because at Elections, scandals were ripped
up, and men's faults examined. And so say all those, that allow the people
interesse, of approving, or excepting against those that stood to be ordained,
but he that looks as far as the xiii. Canon of that Council, will never
allow the people right of Electing by most voices according to that Council
which provideth, (...), (...), That the choice of such as are to be placed in
the rank of Presbyters, must not be yielded to the people. Now it is well
enough known, that many times at these assemblies for making of Ministers the
votes of the people, desiring such or such persons for Bishops, or Presbyters,
or others, prevented the order in practice, nominating such before hand, as
they desired to have made, as it is to be seen, in the eminent examples of S.
Augustine among Presbyters, and S. Ambrose among Bishops. Neither was it an
inconvenience, that those which ordained should balk the accustomed course, to
give satisfaction to the peoples desire when there was appeara^ce, that it was
bred upon a due opinion of merit in the person recommended. And the case is in
a manner the same, when the best Christian Emperors, did oftentimes of
themselves nominate to the Bishoprics of the chief seats of the Empire, where
the State was most interessed in the condition of the person to be ordained.
For in this they proceeded, as those, in whom rested all the right of the
people in that Commonwealth. The Bishops proceeding to do their office, upon
due knowledge and approbation of the person, without examining the course and
proceeding, as not so near concerning their charge. And thus it is plain, that
the Apostles did not leave the choice of Matthias, or the seven Deacons, at
large to the people: but qualifying the persons by their directions, in whom
those qualities were found, (resting indifferent themselves) they referred to
the knowledge of the people. For so we read of Matthias, Acts i. 21. Of these
men that have companied with us, ever since the Lord Jesus went in and out
among us, must one be chosen, to be a witness of his resurrection with us. And
of the seven Deacons, Acts vi. 3. Wherefore, Brethren, look you out among you
seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may
appoint over this business: but had the persons been found not qualified, no
man will be so gross as to think the Apostles might not, or ought not, to
control the choice. And though it were granted, which with truth cannot be
granted, that the Presbyters aforesaid were made by Saul and Barnabas, upon
most voices of the people, yet if we reserve to them, the Nomination of the
persons, the interesse of the people will be less, rather then more, then the
people of this Church uses at the present though not in themselves, yet in the
Patrones of Churches, to whom the Church yields it, in the name of the
people, in respect to the merit of those, that built or endowed Churches: at
least if the ancient Canon were in use. For though it be a little without the
terms of my subject, yet let me say this word, for the provision of Pastors in
rural Congregations, that by the order thus far specified, it must needs
come from the Mother Church, out of the gremialls of it. In the first ages of
the Church, there is little or no mention but of Presbyteries in gross, for
the common service of Mother-churches, whereof hitherto we speak. Afterward,
when the faith was planted, and Congregations ordered, in the Territories of
those Cities, or Dioceses of those Churches, we find in the 25. Canon of
Neocesarea a difference made between the Presbyters of them, whereof some are
called there (...), others, (...), these of the Mother Church, those of rural
Congregations. And by the Canon of Chalcedon mentioned before, forbidding all
Ordinations at large, but for the service of the city Church, or other
depending on it, it appears, that by virtue of the Ordination in the Mother
Church, wherein the people concurred no otherwise then has been said, whether
Presbyters or other Ministers were invested in their charge of those Churches.
Before that time it is to be observed that the Council of Nice, Can. xv.
forbidding Ministers to pass from City to City, (whether Bishops, Presbyters
or Deacons) that is, to leave their own Mother Church, to serve in another
Mother Church, proceeds in these terms, (...), It seemed good to put down the
fashion that is come up in some parts besides the Rule. Signifying that the
Rule of the Church from the beginning was to ordain Ministers in
Mother-churches, for the service of those Mother-churches. But in the xvi.
Canon next following, it is further provided, that they shall be constrained to
return to their first charges, in these terms, (...). They must be constrained
by all means to return into their own Dioceses. For (...) in the Canons
signifies the country lying to the City of the Mother Church, which we call
the Diocese. This Canon speaking of Presbyters and Deacons, and not of Bishops,
besides the voyding of such attempts, which is done in the xv. Canon before,
providing a course to constrain them to return, extends further then the
other did, to Presbyters and Deacons in country Cures, whereas that rested in
the Mother Church. So the 3. Canon of Antiochia, so the xv. of the Apostles,
providing that Ministers should not leave (...), their Dioceses, as was said,
speak plain to let us know how much the Cures of the whole Diocese, and the
Persons by whom they were exercised, were in the disposing of the Mother
Church, when it appears, that the Ministers of them could not depart, to
serve in or under other Churches, till they were dismissed their first charge,
with letters of license from the Mother Church, which they called (...) or
Dimissorias. Wherein, the condition of the Church, is just that of the Greekish
Colonies. They were wont to have their Priests sent them from the
Mother-cities, and reserved the first fruits which were the Priests due, for an
honor to their founders: as Thucydides lib. 1. and his Scholiast writes,
alleging this for an occasion of that war, because those of Corcyra,
neglected their Mother-citie of Corinth, in that accustomed right. So all
rural Congregations, being at first nothing but colonies of the Faith, planted
from Mother-churches, founded in Mother-cities, from the time of the Apostles,
it was but reason they should receive their Pastors from the head of the
Diocese, where the charge of overseeing, as well as planting them belonged. The
right of presenting then, yielded by the Church (to the people or to the
Patron, it concerns not in her regard) if it were to Orders as well as to
Cures, were more then the People should have, in choosing out of those which
Saul and Barnabas might nominate. But he that would have the people, both name
the persons, and choose out of those themselves named, neglecting imposition of
hands, or injoyning it upon the choice, must first put the Epistles to Timothy
and Titus out of the Bible, least at the first insight, that appear to belong
to the office of men of their place, the account whereof lies upon their
charge. As for the constituting of Bishops, fit it is in the first place,
provision be made, for the interesse of the State, as well in ordering the
choyces, as in approving the persons chosen, that no man be established,
prejudicial to the Commonwealth. But yet that course, in which the Christian
Emperors of ancient times, interposed themselves to nominate the persons being
acknowledged to be besides the Rule, did not destroy it in all but balk it for
the time. Now if the people from the beginning had a due share of interesse in
giving consent to those which were to be ordained their Presbyters, much more
must we needs think that it was due and of right, that the votes of the
Presbyters, and consent of the people, should go before, in designing the
Persons, under whom and with whom they were to guide and be guided in
Spiritual matters. As for imposition of hands of neighbor Bishops, with whom
the unity of the Church was to be preserved by the Ordained, it was not then
the formalitie of a thing done, but the substance of the Act, resting upon the
account of them that did it by virtue of the Apostles charge. And therefore
though it is not easy for me to judge, how far it concerns the Church to
retain the Primitive form, yet it is easy for indifferent persons to discern,
how much is required to the retaining of it.

CHAP. XIII.
The rule of censuring persons ordained, directed to Timothy alone. The office
exercised according to the other parts of it.

Something would here be said in the last place of that which depends upon
these two last particulars, of Penance and Ordination: that is, the censure of
offenses, whether in doctrine or manners of persons Ordained; because the
Apostle seems to refer this to Timothy, that is, to the Bishop alone, not
mentioning any concurrence of his Presbyters in it. For so we read, 1. Tim. v.
19, 20. Against an Elder receive not an accusation, but under two or three
witnesses. Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may have fear.
But having hitherto showed, that our Lord in the Gospel has appointed matters
of particular offense, to come before the Consistory of Bishop and Presbyters:
That the Apostles themselves, in diverse matters belonging to the Government of
the Church, used their assistance: That in the Primitive times of the Church,
even under the Apostles, matters of Censure and Ordination both were wont to
pass by the Presbyters, but in the Assemblies of Christian people: Let me
refer this to al indifferent persons to judge, whether the same course of
proceeding were in likelihood observed in the censure of Presbyters. The
Apostles direction, regulating what information to admit, is directed to
Timothy alone; for the meaning is not, that two or three should be present
when it is put in, but that it should not be admitted, but, (as the Syriack
translateth it) upon the mouth, that is, the word, of two or three witnesses:
But the censure of reproof is prescribed to pass in the congregation, when he
says, them that sin, that is, them that are found in fault, rebuke before
all, that others may have fear, no otherwise then the censure of the Apostle
did and was prescribed to do, 1. Cor. v. 4. 2. Cor. ii. 6. and therefore we are
to think, that the examination of such causes must pass, as others of like
nature, by him with the Presbyters, to whom the Apostle had assigned a charge
of governing the Church there, Acts xx. 28, 35. So the keys of the Church
given to S. Peter and to the Apostles, were nevertheless intended to be
exercised by the Church, as has been said. So the charge of excommunicating
Heretics is directed to Titus alone, Titus iii. 10. But we have no reason
therefore to imagine, that Titus is directed to proceed otherwise in it, then
we know the Church was wont to proceed in Censures of that nature, according to
that which has been said. And so it is in the case that follows a little
after, verse 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other
men's sins; where the rule of Ordinations is directed to Timothy alone, yet
have we no cause to believe that it was practiced by him, otherwise then
according to the form aforesaid, joining with him the Ptesbyters in imposition
of hands, as was practiced by the Apostle. The eminence of their place is to be
acknowledged, because the Apostles instructions, for managing these matters,
are directed to them alone: But their course of proceeding must be measured by
that which we know otherwise.

CHAP. XIV.
Retaining the primitive form, Bishops cannot be abolished. How Aerius is
counted an Heretic. All displeasure against Bishops occasioned by defect of
Presbyteries. To what purpose they might be restored.

THat which has been said, being intended to represent the form delivered in
Scripture by the agreement of Historical truth and primitive practice,
concerns no more as every man sees, then the government of Mother-churches
contained in Mother-cities: Because that is all the Scripture has expressed.
But what influence and effect this ought to have in the present state of the
Church, now that Dioceses are divided, Churches built, and congregations
assigned, is not for a private person to particularize, unless he meant to
build Churches (as some men do Castles) in the air. Let it be enough to say
thus much in general, which every man must think that believes what has been
said to be true, that he that aims at the Primitive form, and that which
comes nearest the institution of our Lord and his Apostles, must not think of
destroying Bishops but of restoring their Presbyteries. Were it but an humane
Ordinance of yesterday, established by due course of right, let me be bold to
say, that if Aerius withdraw his submission to it, he must come within
Epiphanius his list of Heretics: not understanding an Heretic in S.
Augustines sense, (wherein Tertullian in his book de praescript. went before
him) to be none but he that will not believe some point of doctrine necessary,
as the means of salvation, to be believed: but according to the latitude of the
word, taking all to be Heretics that make Sects, and assemble themselves apart
besides the Church of God lawfully settled. This sense is used in Can. 6. Conc.
1. Constantinop. where they are counted Heretics that hold the sound faith,
(...). And this latitude it seems Epiphanius comprised, because he reckons
the Quartadecimani in the roll of Heretics. These, when the position,
whereupon the separation is grounded, is not of weight (setting their
separation aside) to separate them from the invisible Church, are since
according to the Authors named before by a proper term called Schismatics,
though Heretics in the proper sense separate no less then they do. And of
this crime my earnest desire is, that those which have separated themselves
from this Church of England upon this quarrel of government by Bishops, or the
like unjust or unsufficient causes, may stand acquitted, though how they will
acquit themselves of it, I cannot yet perceive. But if the rank of Bishops over
their Presbyters be not only a just humane Ordinance, but estated in
possession of sixteen hundred years without deceit or violence at the
beginning, let me have leave to think it will be hard to show a better title of
humane right for any estate upon the earth. How much more when the possession
is avouched to have been delivered from the hands and time of the Apostles,
must it needs seem strange that the successors of their place should be
destroyed by the sons of their faith? Be it pardonable for our neighbors and
Brethren of the reformed Churches abroad to have overseen the succession of the
Apostles, because they could not discern it, as they found it blended with such
abundance of accessories, especially in the persons of men that hated to be
reformed: But among us, there has been time to plead the right to the quick,
and though not without eagerness of debate, which interesse breeds, yet
always with advantage to the true tenure: And among the multitude of speech
that this time has bred, we have heard little or nothing as yet of new reasons
to quell the cause with. So that before advancing new plea, the old right
descending from such hands, stands now in as good terms as ever heretofore.
As for the point of peace within our selves, and correspondence with our
neighbors, be it considered how large S. Hierom (of all Church writers least
favorable to the Order, as he that found himself pinched with the Bishop of
Jerusalem) has been nevertheless in acknowledging, that the peace of
particular Churches could not be preserved without it. To which we must add
the remembrance of so many happy days as this Church since the Reformation
has seen, without such ruptures as have fallen out in other parts, by the
benefit of it, among a people always observed to be of all others most daring
to innovate opinions, in matters of religion especially, as well as in those
that concern other knowledge. But he that calls to remembrance that
correspondence which in ancient times was actuated between Churches of several
nations and people, commercio formatarum, as Optatus speaks, by traffic of
those letters of correspondence, which under set forms were wont to pass
between Bishops, in the name of their Churches, (the true form of that unity
which our Lord commended to his Church, after it was become Catholic) must
needs lament to see that most beautiful peace of this Government in ancient
time, defaced and lost, by the fault of them that hate to be reformed, in the
dissensions of Christendom, alleged to destroy it. The honor and esteem
which the learned of the reformed Churches abroad have professed of the state
of our Churches, and our charity in excusing the necessities of theirs, and
acknowledging the efficacy of the Ministry which they use, will be sufficient
through Gods goodness to actuate the correspondence we desire to preserve with
them, without those innovations which they never required at our hands to such
purpose. But he that acknowledges and is glad to see these heads stand in
their right place, looking back upon their beginning, which was to succeed the
Apostles over several Presbyteries, in the place which they held over all for
the time, must needs miss their relatives, the bodies of these Presbyteries,
in the government of Churches. And though that alteration cannot be charged
upon any man, which is come to pass through time and insensible custom:
especially, seeing it cannot be counted an alteration in this Church of
England, because we are to think it had prevailed in the Church before this
Nation received the Faith: yet must it needs be remembered, by him that
believes all the evil consequences which this government is charged with,
whether in opinion or truth, to have come from the discharge of Presbyteries
from their part of the office. One particular no man need to be nice in
reckoning to be of that nature, though it is not in the power of one man (were
he as much in love as I am with the primitive form) or scarce of one age,
without a public act to amend it: That is the committing of jurisdiction at
large, (even that which is proper and essential to the Church, by the power of
the keys which our Lord has given it, as has been said) in effect, to Lay
persons, Which jurisdiction though for the present, it pass not upon present
advise, but upon Laws of the Church for the purpose, yet so long as Laws are
general and few, Cases particular and numberless, will always deserve to be
exercised, with mature and charitable advise of those to whose charge our Lord
first committed it, if we mean to attain the ends of correction and example.
Though the profession by which it is ministered deserve to retain the rank it
holds, in regard of those other points of jurisdiction in charitable causes,
by the favor of Princes, and laws of Commonwealths annexed to the Church,
passing as it does, by the laws whereof they profess knowledge. This
inconvenience, if such it be counted, seems to proceed from that unsensible
change whereof has been said: for had the Presbyteries continued, as at the
beginning, upon the exercise of this Discipline of Penance, it is not to be
thought that power could have been so lightly alienated as from one, wherein a
number had their interesse. But this, and the like consequences seem to have
brought this undue opinion upon the Church Government, that as Cathedral
Churches long since, so now the State of Bishops among indifferent men is
counted a matter of indifference, which had they continued in the Primitive
charge, must needs have been counted, as counted they ought to be, inviolable.
And therefore though as the case stands, it is neither possible nor desired,
to call the whole Presbytery of a Diocese to a share in the public government,
yet let me have leave to say, that the next course to retrive the Primitive
form, with the wholesome grounds and consequences of it, is to reestate these
Presbyteries in Cathedral Churches, and perhaps, in other populous places,
seats of jurisdictions, where the Diocese is great, furnishing them with number
of men of abilities, and joining them with and under the Bishops, for
assistance in all parts of the office hitherto proved common to both. It seems
the means that has brought to pass that insensible change whereof we speak,
was from the beginning no other then this, because the form of proceeding in
particular Churches was never regulated by Canons of the Church, but left to
particular custom: And therefore it is past my apprehension how more right
should be done, then distributing the common charge into particular interesse,
by such rules as may best express those general terms, which the purest
Primitive times were content with; that as without the Bishop nothing to be
done, so the Bishop to do nothing without advice of his Presbyters. The
performance of divine service in the Cathedral, common sense finds too slight
a work for such persons; the cures of all Churches within such populous places,
if they belonged to their titles, would be a work suitable to such prime
abilities. Then the exercise of the power of the keys in the discipline of
Penance, Trial and Approvement of persons presented to Cures, or assistance of
Cures, according to laws, (excluding all Ordinations without such title)
Censure of offenses in doctrine, or life of persons ordained, always under the
Bishop, and for his assistance, are works that require mature advise, and pass
best in common for satisfaction to the public, matters of religion being by
nature more popular then the Commonwealth. If this be not enough, such may be
men's abilities that all these Presbyteries may become schools of the Prophets,
and Seminaries of able Preachers through the several Jurisdictions or
Dioceses: A thing wished on all hands, but not to be expected without means to
bring it to pass. This has been always desired at the hands of Cathedral
Churches, and some steps of it remain still in some of ours, and though the
staple of this education being long since drained from other places to the two
Universities, the charge has been sustained by them alone with unspeakable
benefit, to the Church, as well as to the Commonwealth, yet the assistance of
these places with them, for the service of the Church, is not to be counted
their prejudice, leaving entire unto them the place they possess, of
Seminaries of the Commonwealth.

FINIS.

