DEMETRIUS HIS OPPOSITION TO REFORMATION. A SERMON VERY NECESSARY FOR THESE
TIMES. As it was delivered (this last VVinter) before a great Assembly in the
City of LONDON. By John Tillinghast, sometimes Rector of Tarring-Nevill, now
Rector of Streate in the County of SUSSEX

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. for Andrew Kembe at St. Margarets hill in
Southwark. 1642.

TO THE TRVLY VIRTUOUS, RIGHT HONORABLE, AND Noble Lady IS ABELL, Countess of
HOLLAND.
And to the most Religious, Right Honorable, and truly Noble LETICE, Lady
PAGET, Baroness of Beaudesert.
RIght Honorable and gracious Ladies, when importunity had so far prevailed,
as to suffer this Copy to pass the Press, my resolution was, to send it
forth under the shelter of your Noble persons; my presumption herein soaring so
high in the dedication, was not a little emboldned by the general and constant
Fame of your Honors Heroical and Benign dispositions, (...) Laert. lib. 6.
who (according to that of Antisthenes, that virtue and true Nobility go
together labor to excel other in goodness of mind, as greatness of place.
Indeed I must confess, when I duly consider the greatness of your excellent
persons, and the sublimitie of your unspotted Honors, I much condemn my self
of boldness; but on the other side, recounting the magnificence of your
bounty, and the humanity of your Noble dispositions, I cannot but blame my
self of slownesse, in not laboring sooner to express my thankfulness. I have
long purposed to offer unto your Honors some poor token of that duty, which
that underserved favor conferd upon me by both your Noble persons ( absque
ullo commerito, without any desert in the world) ties me unto: the remembrance
whereof cannot be buried in silence, without the just aspersion of shameful
Ingratitude; and should ere this time have been more really manifested in some
present of far greater value, if mine abilities would have reached unto it;
^orat. (...). ^azianz. ^cra gratula^o reprehendi ^n solet. (...). c. Epist. 7.
(...). 2.
but alas, the best requitals that we poor Ministers can make to our Noble
deserving friends, for their undeserved favors, Sunt verba and voces, (as the
Poet speaks in another sense) are our papers and our prayers, this is all we
can exhibit (as Nazianzen writes to Sophronius) and this kind of gratulation
though it come somewhat late, yet I hope shall find a candid acceptance with
your Honorable persons, according to the model of the offerer, not the
magnitude of the receiver. May it please your Honors to grace this poor piece,
(such as it is) with your favorable Patronage, and to let it pass under the
testimony of your pious approbation: I shall have great cause to rejoice in
your devoted eminency, and never cease to enlarge my thoughts toward heaven,
for the continuance of the welfare and felicity of your temporal, spiritual,
and eternal happiness, together of all those flourishing branches and
hopeful plants derived from both your Noble persons: And this shall be the
prayer of,

Your Honors most obliged and humble servant, JOHN TILLINGHAST.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL AND HIS MVCH RESPECTED Uncle, Mr ROBERT TITCHBOURNE,
Deputy-Alderman in the City of LONDON.
WOrthy Sir, Besides importunity of friends (that stale and common Apology,
which by many is made for their appearing in Stationary view) there is
something else which has cast me on the censure of these over-criticall
times, in the publication of this poor Sermon; and that is, the unjust
acception (as I doubt not but the understanding Reader, will so conceive it to
be) which was taken by some disaffected persons at the delivery of it, who, in
open street, (immediately) so soon as the Sermon was finished, were not
ashamed to affirm, that I were a mainteiner of Popish Superstition, and an
hateful enemy to the Reformation; upon what ground, the Lord knows; if there
be any just cause of offense given, let them judge, who shall be pleased to
take the pains to read over this following Discourse, wherein so far as I
can remember, I have not omitted any one thing, of what was then delivered.
Some few passages indeed, here and there are added, as being forced to cut off
part of what I had determined to express, because it was fit I should
proportion my speech, as near as I could to the hour, which notwithstanding
(upon entreatie) were fully handled before another Congregation in the
afternoon, and so all that was at the first projected, was in either of these
places (as you find it here) at large delivered. Concerning which, whatsoever
the sharp and uncharitable censure of some may be; I take God to witness, whom
I serve in my soul, that in all singleness of mind, out of an earnest and
(as I hope) sincere desire and tender regard of the peace of the Church, and
quiet prosperity of this Commonweal, I addressed my self to the work;
First invocating the great Name of God (in my private devotions) that it would
please him so to sanctify mine endeavors, that something might be spoken in
season for that purpose; wishing unfeinedly, that all we, who live in the
visible Communion of the same body as brethren, might also as brethren (so
far as were possible) Romans 15.6.
With one mind, and with one mouth, glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And therefore I shall not think I have labored in ^aine, seeing
I assayed and endea voured to have profitt^^, For (...) it may be with m^n, yet
sure I am with God, it is as Cuptian sp^aketh, (if Cyprian) that (...).
Not the fruit of their Labors, but the affection of men's hearts, gets them
respect with God. And yet I am not l^ft altogether hopeless of any profit,
that might be reaped by th^se ^y weak endeavors, since (without any
affectation of public notion or vain glory be it spoken) that which had so
unjust an aspersion cast upon it, by ill affected Spirits, with a great deal
more noise (I hope) then there was cause; was yet notwithstanding, highly
applauded in the judgment of the best able hearers in the Congregation; whose
commendation (I doube not, but) the judicious Reader, will better Mal^ ^^me
lo^uuntur, sed mali, Movere, (...) me ^m. ^ite, s^ Lelius sapi^^s, si duo
S^^^iones, ista Lo^uerentur nunc malis displicere laud^ri est, Sen. de rem.
fort.
approve of, then the others dispraise. Besides, the much solicitation of
deserving persons, for the making of them more public, may give me to
think, that they are not (though weak and undigested yet) altogether
worthless; whose importunity I should have easily resisted, (as being
conscious of mine own meannesse, and withal the great dispariritie, twixt a
Ha^er nescio quid latentis (...) viva vox. Hier.
lively voice, and breathless lines) had not the vindication of my Religion
and profession (upon so foul a scandal) called me to it.

Sir, J know there are a kind of people, whom the Prophet speaks of, Isa.
29.21.
That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves
in the gate; at the least Iere. 18.18.
smite him with the tongue; Some who are 1 These. 5.14. Inordi^ati ita sole^
Livius ho^ nomen usurpare, de Militihus qui stationem non servant: Eleganter id
transtulit Paulus ad eos, non qui sunt in tractabiles, ut putavit Erasmus, sed
qui tamen aliter quam per infirmitatem peccant. Beza in loc.
(...) (as the Apostle terms them) and Titus 1.10. Of a private. (...), Sonat
autem quasi di^^s, Qui in ordinem ^ogi non possit. Erasm. Vulg Non subditi.
(...), men that be Titus 1.6.
unrulie, that will not be brought into order, disobedient children, Deuteronomy.
13.13.
Sons of Belial, or (as the word in the notation of it will bear) (...)
Beliahal deducta ex (...) Bel^, non and (...) ja^^al, quod in Hiphil significat
prodesse, ut significetur in ^^itas asque pernicies. P^scat. in Psalm. 18.5.
Sons without profit, who are so perversely set upon their opinions, and so
stiffned in their resolutions, (though never so erroneous) that they are ready
to clamor against any reason, that might reduce them into the right way. Yet
God forbid, that we should therefore hold our peace, and refuse to preach the
truth, because some will be found to carpe against it. It were an happy thing,
that we could all Phil. 1.27.
stand fast in one Spirit, and 1 Pet. 3.8.
be all of one mind, 1 Cor. 1.10.
all speak the same thing, that there may be no divisions amongst us, but that
we may be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment, that so, by our joint conformity, we might all proceed in the
common cause of Religion, and lead the people in the right way of the
knowledge of Christ crucified, as the Israelites led David to Hebron, with a
simple and a perfect heart, (My record is on high) this was the maine thing I
aimed at in this ensuing Sermon, wherein I have endeavored the crying down of
such corruptions, as might always oppose it, that so the anger of God, and his
fearful punishments (for Salvian. Missil. de gubernat. Dei.
Ira divinitatis est poena peccantis) that are now ready to fall upon us; may
in the uniting of our affections, be both appeased and prevented: The Lord make
the effect answerable.

Howsoever it prove, I have made bold to assign you a place in the Dedication,
and in the Frontispice of the work to mention your name, together with those
Honorable Ladies, as being a special instrument in that favor, by them
bestowed upon me. Sir, I know your disposition is as free from ^aine-glory, as
I desire mine should be from flattery, otherwise I could ^^re insert a large
discourse of your forweardnesse and impartial execution of Justice in the
place committed to your trust; but you delight not in complements, else would I
give them, my desire is to be reputed thankful, and because I would (in this)
follow the Philosophers rule, not to tender i^ Senec. de Benific. lib. 1. cap.
23.
in angulo and ad aurem; I have made choice of this opportunity. May it find
acceptance, and in any proportion, further you in the way to Heaven; I have no
more to desire, only in the Apostles words, Act. 20.31.
I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace; which is able to build you
up, and to give you an inheritance, among all them which are sanctified; which
shall be faithfully prayed for, by

Your loving and poor kinsman, JOHN TILLINGHAST.

An advertisement to the Reader.
COurteous and gentle Reader, the Author of this Sermon living far distant from
Town, and (upon entreaty) leaving the Copy of it behind him, immediately so
soon as it was preached, lost not only that just liberty (which many take
unto themselves) of altering here and there, (for matter of words) what shall
seem best unto them; but also of viewing the Press, and correcting of such
errors as for want of due oversight from thence may arise; If therefore you
shall happily meet with any passages not so seasonable for the present times, as
perhaps they were, when they were first delivered, or with any mistakes either
in the page or margent. It is desired that you would be pleased to make a
favorable construction, and not to impute that to ignorance, which merely
shall, or may happen by means of the aforementioned inconvenience. Farewell.

DEMETRIUS HIS OPPOSITION TO REFORMATION.
ACT. 19.23. And the same time, there arose no small stir about that way.


THE blessed Evangelist St. Luke being instructed by the holy Spirit of God,
does in this book of the Acts notably describe, not only the persecutions
which were laid upon the Apostles by Magistrates and order of Law; But also the
raging seditions of the furious Commons. Amongst others, that tumult which was
begun by Demetrius against Paul at Ephesus, (expressed in the latter part of
this Chapter) deserves to be accounted the chief: and therefore Sic Tertull:
and Beza.
some do understand it, to be that persecution which the Apostle mentions, 1 Corinthians. 15.32. where he is said to fight with beasts at Ephesus, (i.) beastly
men, men of beastly condition (as the Sic Chrysostom. August. Cyrill. etc.
Fathers interpret it.)

But whether it be this, or that trouble, that happened to him from the sons of
Sceva, mentioned, verse the 14. (as others would have it) or generally (as
others) the total of his troubles that he found at Ephesus, which he
expresses in 2 Corinthians. 1.8. Brethren, I would not have you ignorant of the
pressures and troubles that we sustained in Asia; how we were pressed and urged
above strength, that we even despaired of life in our selves.

Sure I am, that this sedition which here they raised against him, may well be
called a fight with beasts;

If we consider, either,

1. The original and proper causes of it.

2. Their progress and continuance in it.

The former of which is expressed in the words of our text, and so forward to
the 28. verse. The latter from the beginning of that ver. to the end of the 34.

In the text there are three things considerable about this tumult, viz.

1. Parts 3.
The time when it was; the same time.

2. The thing what it was, no small stir.

3. The cause moving them unto it, that way.

1. For the time; it was (...). (i.) Elapsojam illo biennio and consultante jam
paulo de nova peregrinatione, etc. Aret. in loc.
illo tempore, the same time, then when St. Paul had set all things in order at
Ephesus, and now began to think of departing thence, purposing to go unto
Macedonia, and Achaia, and so to visit and confirm the Churches of the
Philippians, Thessalonians, and Corinthians; and after, thence he meant to go
to Jerusalem, and so to Rome, to bestow also some gift of the spirit upon the
faithful there, and to receive mutual consolation of their belief; then, at
the same time, this uprore began, whereby his purpose of visiting the Churches,
was for a time prevented. From whence diverse things might be observed. As,

1. The holy purposes of Gods children are many times hindered of their
execution; our intendments come not always to accomplishment, though they
concern the better things. 2 Samuel 7.2.5. 2 Chronicles. 17.1.4.
David would have built an house to the Lord, but he was not permitted; and St.
Paul more Romans 1.13.
oftener have visited the Romans, had he not been Dei jussu as Chrysostom. and
Theophil. understand it.
inhibited: Its a common speech, and yet no oftener spoken, then experience
makes it true; Pro. 16.9.
Man may purpose many things, but God disposes all things: Ier. 10.23.
the way of man (says the Prophet) is not in himself, neither is it in him
that walks to direct his steps. We many times promise to our selves, Multa
magna, many things, great things, we plot, contrive, and commence them; yet all
dies like Jonahs Jonah 4.7.
gouard, when we should expect their refreshings, unless the Lord put to his
seal and stamp of approbation.

Therefore, as it may teach us an holy reservation in all our intendments, to
submit our wills unto God; saying, Hebr. 6.3.
this will we do if God permit, (and leave unto him the disposition of all our
purposes, since neither tongue can speak, nor foot move, if he should enervate
them, as sometimes he did Luke 1.22.
Zacharias his tongue in the Temple, and 1 Kin. 13.4.
Jeroboams arm, when he would have reached it out against the Prophet.)

So it may also comfort us in an assured expectation of the Lords defeating the
mischievous plots of our malicious enemies, he may for a time suffer them; but
if he hinder the good purposes of his own Saints from execution; he will much
more defeat and bring to naught Psalm. 33.10.
the counsel of the heathen; and make the lewd intendments and devices of the
wicked of none effect.

2. How suddenly our hopes may be frustrated; St. Paul here thought that all
was well; his doctrine had taken good effect amongst them, so that not only
many of the people believed; but he had also gotten many of the chief of Asia
to be his friends: and therefore doubted not to leave them awhile. But see how
it fell out illo tempore, the same time, was this tumult raised.

So quickly can the Lord turn the tide, and make the current of our happiness
to run in a stream of heaviness: When we shall say, 1 These. 5.3.
peace and safety, then may sudden desolation come upon us.

It is not good to be secure; let no man say in pride, what David sometimes
said in the assurance of faith, Psalm. 30.6, 7.
I cannot fall, thou O Lord of thy goodness have made my hill so strong. But
rather let us praise God, both for what we possess, and for what we have in
hopes, and pray unto him that our sins subvert not either. If our privileges
be more then of late, let our presumption be less, its the safest way to
possess more then we brag of. He took not his mark amiss, that observed it as
an old and a sure rule, against the Atheist, against the worldlings, viz. that
Totum perfect dictum est, quod ex partibus substantialibus and quantis per se
unit is constat. Kecker. System. leg. lib. 1 c. 22.
the whole cannot be perpetual, whose parts be alterable; if Schism have torn
the members, the body cannot be found.

How many sons of Belial are there amongst us, who with the wicked Edomites
curse the prosperity of our Zion, and gape for the day to cry, Psalm. 137.7.
Down with it, down with it, even to the ground? We know they have openly and
privately assaulted the peace of our Jerusalem, but (praised be our God) they
have received much shame, and are likely to receive more, for their traitorous
and malicious attempts; let this make us thankful, and not secure; as if the
Lord could not stretch out his arm to punish us as well as others.

Oh, for those poor distressed Christians in France, Bohemia, Silesia,
Moravia, Germany, Austria, Voltoline; who have a long time eaten the bread of
unquietness, miserably wallowing in dust and blood; while we have lain upon
our pillows of peace, and eaten the bread of plenty; ah and alas for our
distressed brethren in Ireland, upon whom many bloodly massacres and inhumane
butcheries are daily committed by the Rebels, while we remain untouched. Let us
not be secure, there is still a devil, and a serpentine breed; who finding
that the Gospel has given a wound to the peace of hell, are the more busy to
give a wound to the peace of the Gospel; evermore watching their best
opportunities, for our disadvantage, which may be.

3. A third thing considerable from the time when this tumult was raised, even
then when Paul was purposed to do more good, to beat down the holds of Satan,
and to build up the kingdom of Jesus Christ; then, even at the same time the
devil raised this stir: so that we may see, the devil ever deals upon the
advantage, when he knows that his kingdom is but short, then he bestirs him
most; he Rev. 12.12.
has great wrath because he knows that he has but a short time. He makes
use of the present opportunity; and so recompenseth brevitatem temporis,
gravitate tentationis; the shortness of his time with the greatness of his
tentation; like a malicious Tenant, that perceives his term to be almost
expired, does what he can to ruin the house; or like a bloody Tyrant, that
daily suspecting the loss of his usurped sovereignty, makes havoc amongst his
subjects, and falls apace to cutting of throats. It shall be therefore our
wisdom, to be the more watchful, as he is grown the more wrathful.

But these are not the particulars I intend to insist upon; my meditations at
this present being only furnished for the second part; and therefore we will
pass from the time when it was, and so come to reveal unto you, the thing what
it was.

2. Part. 2.
St. Luke says it was (...), tumultus non medicus, non parvus, no small stir,
(i.) Pisca. Schol. in loc.
maximus, an exceeding great stir.

The word in the original to express this tumult, Significat proprie
perturbationem exprimens naturam seditionum. Aret. in loc.
properly signifies perturbatim, or disturbance, coming from a (...).
word which imports a vehement and strong commotion, and is usually spoken of
water, when it is muddied and stirred.

It serves here very fitly to express the nature of a sedition, Quae omnes in
se habet rerum turbas, aut certe bonos viros perturbant: as Aretius speaks.

It was raised against St. Paul, who endeavoring the reformation of the Church
of Ephesus, and laboring to overthrow their superstition; was cried down, by a
company of illeterate Tradesmen, Smiths and Tinkers (as its most likeliest by
their profession) who had gotten for their Captain one Demetrius, a
silver-Smith by his calling; he with this ratlement being met together, (the
most part of them not knowing wherefore, ver. 32. labor with might and main to
suppress St. Paul's doctrine by sedition.

From whose example, we are taught this point of doctrine, viz.

It is an usual thing in the Churches Reformation,

Thus it has been from the beginning; no sooner was order taken for Gods
worship and service, but hatred and spite fell to the portion and lot of
Religion; the first man that offered the better sacrifice was Genesis 4 4.8.
slain: the like has been verified time after time, even till this our age.

In the days of Moses, there were certain Exodus 7.11.
Magicians, sorcerers, Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith,
(as the 2 Timothy 3.8.
Apostle describes them) who wickedly and maliciously resisted the truth of
God, withstood Moses, and kept Pharaoh in his blindness, by their juggling
tricks (St. Paul names two of the chief of them, which he does (as Sic Chryso.
Theodoret. and Theophilact. in 2 Timothy 3.
some think) either by inspiration or tradition, because their names are not
elsewhere found in Scripture, or else (which is most likeliest) he had it from
some private records kept amongst the Jews, as in their Babylonian Tract.
Menacoth. cap. 9.
Thalmud to this day we may read, how Johanne and Mamre chief of the sorcerers
of Egypt withstood Moses, and mocked him, thinking he did his miracles by
sorceries, as the Magicians did.)

This is that which the Apostle speaks of, Galat. 4.29.
as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after
the spirit, even so it is now, and so it was indeed.

For to omit those sundry clamors and oppositions of graceless men, which our
Savior Christ met withal, when he began the reformation of the Church of the
Jews, (sometimes from the Pharisees, sometimes from the Sadduces, sometimes
from the Essens, and so from diverse others, pernicious Sects) that which Calvin
speaks of this holy Apostle St. Paul, is very remarkable for our purpose, viz.
Calvin in Acts 17.5.
that he could no where erect the kingdom of Christ without some conflict. And
though he were a man whose courses tended all to peace, tempering himself in
things indifferent to every man's infirmity; yet meets with tumultuous
contradictions: so soon as any fruit of doctrine appeared, there also arose
persecution with it.

Read for instance at your leisure, these places, Act. 13.8.45.50. and chap.
14.19. and chap. 17.5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 3.8. and chap. 4.14, 15. Experience in
later ages has verified this truth: in those manifold oppositions, that
Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and others found, who were notable reformers of the
Church in their times, and sweepers of many abuses and Popish errors.

What our times have and are likely to produce in this particular, I intend not
now to express: my desire is rather to pray unto God to prevent it, then to
trouble your patience to hear it.

Some Reasons for it, may be such as these.

Reas. 1. Pharaohs Genesis 41.3.
fat kine, they make the lean seem more ill favored. And hence it is, that
they fall into rage, and fury, and savage behavior, not abiding such as are of
a contrary temper with them, no more then clay and iron can weild together. Put
fire to fire, and water to water, and there is no commotion; but put water to
fire, and then you have a thundering coile: Even so, when riotous men and
enemies of Gods Church meet, there is shaking of hands, drinking of healths,
the other pint, and the other quart; but let the righteous come amongst them,
and Psalm. 141.5.
smite them with reproof, they will be ready to fly in his face.

Reas. 2. as that Matt. 16.18.
the gates of hell shall never prevail (nor fight) against it, yet he will have
it so, and that for these reasons.

1. For the better clearing of the doctrine of the Church; opposition of
heresy makes men sharpen their wits the better to confute it, the Mystery of
the Trinity had never been so exactly handled, by many of the Fathers in whole
Tractates; if the Church had not been opposed by diverse damnable Heretics, as
Arrius and Sabellius, and others; therefore as wormwood, though bitter to the
taste, yet good to clear the eyes: So opposition though no ways pleasing, yet
may be profitable for the truth.

2. For the greater manifestation of the graces that are in the children of the
Church; as their faith, their obedience, their love to the truth, and such
like; these in time of opposition, like stars in a dark night, make a
glorious luster; As in Queen Mary's days, when persecution wrung the Church,
Martyrdom gave a manifest approbation of many (unknown) Saints; the virtues of
diverse had been less noted, if this fiery trial had not put them to it.

3. For the better prevention of security in the children of the Church, that
the more they are opposed, the better they may be armed; and the more subtle
the enemies of the Church are, to lay snares and gins for them, the more
circumspect they might be to prevent them. As the Palm Tree, the more weight is
laid upon it, so much the more it strives and heaves against it. For these and
such like respects, when the Church in her reformation meets with opposition,
it falls out just as God would have it.

Reas. 3. Wicked men, Ioh. 3.20.
judged of others; they labor to have it so, and that for these reasons.

1. Because true reformation many times lessens their estates; now desire of
gain amongst such men, will quickly cause them to enter a wicked and ungodly
combat. Demetrius and the rest of the silver-Smiths perceiving (by the means
of St. Paul's preaching) a diminution of their gains, will withal therefore
make head against it; had they not been like to have suffered loss by the
Apostles doctrine; they would have Calv. in loc.
sit quietly at home, and neither have taken thought for the worship of Diana,
nor yet have troubled others: but because they were afraid of poverty and
hunger, they raise this tumult, and for their own gain sake are not afraid to
trouble a whole City with sedition.

2. It questions their credits; those places and offices which formerly they
enjoyed, either in Church or State (though with much corruption, yet) gained a
popular applause, a reputation of greatness and power; of which, being now
deprived by the reformation, their abuses are made obvious, and that to those
who before durst not take notice of them; this makes them impatient, to rage
and to rave, that a whole kingdom can scarce contain them, they endeavor to
set all in a combustion; as Diodor. Sic. Bibliothec^, lib. 12.
Pericles who being (not without desert) put out of his office by the
Athenians, and called to yield an account, turned Rebel, and so plunged them
into a grievous war.

3. By this means their lives many times are brought into hazard; their
treachery which formerly they were guilty of, being now discovered, is justly
punished with death, as in the reformation in Hesthers time Hest. 7.10.
Haman was hanged, and in Daniels time, his accusers were Dan. 6.24.
devoured. And therefore it is no strange thing that wicked men do labor to
oppose the Reformation.

Reas. 4. is 2 Cor. 4.4.
the god of this world) because as a God he reigns, and rules in this world,
and the men of this world do subject themselves unto him, as to their God: he
would have it so, and that for these reasons.

1. Because hereby he hopes to maintain his own kingdom, he is loath to be cast
out, and therefore rages and foames when he perceives any reformation in the
Church to this purpose; like a bad Tenant, when a Writ of ejection comes
against him, and he sees that he must out, he will fire the house about his
ears: see how he took on, when he was to be cast out but of one man in the
Gospel; no wonder then if he rage much more when he is to be cast out of the
whole Church, then he stands to it with all his strength, with all his power,
as the Nova glossa in Matt. 16.10
Gloss understands that place in Matthew. 16.8. by gates, Omne robur and omne
munimentum, all power and all fortification; and by hell. Omnem vim contrariam,
and Satanicam omnem hostis impetum, the devil himself and all his Angels, all
the power that they have, the wicked world, all tyrants and seducers, which are
the devils instruments, these strive vi and armis, against the Church in her
reformation.

2. Howsoever he knows that by this means he shall disturb the peace of the
kingdom of Christ, bring the members thereof into great straits, hinder the
free passage of the word, and scatter the doctrines of his own invention, and
for the greater strengthening of this opposition, will unite the hearts of the
Churches enemies together, join them in one, though otherwise at variance;
cause Isa. 9.21.
Ephraim and Manasses to be both against Judah, Act 4.27.
Herod and Pilate both conspire to crucify Christ: the Epicures and Stoics
(men as opposite as gluttony and sobriety) to agree in one for the persecuting
of Paul, and so disturbing the peace of the Gospel.

3. At least he doubts not, but hereby to stop the happy proceedings of the
Church in her reformation, persuading himself that with greater ease it may be
supplanted in the rising, then destroyed when once settled upon the foundation;
this makes him to bestir himself most at the first, and to take the
opportunity of the Churches infancy, when 1 Cor. 16.9.
a great door was opened, then were there many adversaries. Hence in the
primitive Church, those bloody persecutions and plenty of heresies, wherewith
the world was pestred: So at the first rising of Luther, those sundry uproares
and manifold distractions spread abroad throughout all the Churches of
Christendom; and still where the Gospel of Christ begins to be preached, and
the more purer estate and condition of Gods Church endeavored; great tumults
and outrageous storms are more frequently raised.

And thus you see the reformation opposed on Gods part, on man's part, on the
devils part, God suffers, man raises, and the devil furthereth this
opposition.

The use that we are to make of it is diverse, affording plenty of matter,
either for reprehension, information, instruction, or exhortation, all which
are very requisite and necessary to be applied in our times.

Use 1. First for reprehension; and so it may serve,

To reprove all such as are the main instruments and proper causes of this
opposition. Matthew. 18.7.
It must needs be (says our Savior) that offenses come: but woe to that man by
whom the offense comes. Opposition has been, and ever will be against the
Church of Christ, but beshrew them who are the authors of it. Would time permit
us to insist upon all particulars, there might a list be taken of sundry
several vices, whereof men being guilty, are justly to be censured in this
Use of reprehension, as great enemies to the Reformation; I will only name
some one or two. As,

1. The covetous whose heart is so infected with his private gain, and desire
extended to an insatiable wealth, that (like to our Monopolists) he neglects
all public good; tell him how our kingdom groans for a Reformation; Church and
State is in great danger without amendment; he minds it not, like Balaam, his
thoughts are so fixed on the gold of Moab, that, though miraculously he should
hear a beast speak, he will not regard it: In Ezec. 33.31.
words he will tell you that he loves God well, wishes the peace and
prosperity of his country, and desires that all that is amiss may be
reformed; but in his actions it may easily be perceived, that he prefers his
gain before all; what, part with a certainty for an uncertaintie? If he can
keep both well and good; but if not, what ere betides him, he will keep his
money, the which by his good will he would carry with him into his grave, and
so (as the story mentions of Hermocrates) in his last Testament, make
himself heir of his own goods, he must needs be an enemy to reformation, for
indeed he Anacharsis.
is hardly capable of good counsel and instruction (as one of the wise men of
Greece has observed) he will sooner take upon him to correct God, then to
amend his life.

Call upon him to leave his covetousness, he will either laugh at you as the
Luke 16.14.
Pharisees did at Christ; or else think you do but mock him, as Elisha did the
Assyrian Army 2 King. 6.19
: This is not the way neither is this the City, and say, you do but dissuade
him, (as the Fox in the Fable did the other beasts) from that booty which you
mean to make your own.

Now the least suspicion of loss, either of profit or gain, by the work of
reformation is ground enough in these men, of malice and madness against it.
If the covetous and deceitful tradesman cannot put off his ill commodities at
a dear rate, nor the oppressor buy in his neighbors land and houses, and so
depopulate whole Parishes, the Usurer make benefit of his money with the
greatest advantage of interest (if not more then) the Statute allows him, but
that he must be checked by the preaching of the Gospel: Authority must curb
him, by more stricter prescriptions then ordinary, then he will have none of it,
but oppose it what possibly he can; deal with the messengers of this news, as
the master and mistress of the Act. 16.19.
damosel, possessed with a spirit of divination, did with Paul and Sylas (when
some hopes of their gains were gone) bring them to be scouraged, and never left
them till they saw them in prison; Verse, 20.21.
These men (say they) do exceedingly trouble our City, and teach customs
which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe. That Lydia was
converted, and the Apostles lodged in her house, troubled them not; their
preaching to the Assemblies gathered by the waterside, and their bringing
every day new disciples unto Christ, were no motives to incense them,
comparable to the loss of their private gain: Thus was it here at Ephesus,
when Demetrius perceived the ruin (not so much of the goddess Diana, as) of
his own gain and commodity in making of silver shrines, he sets the whole City
in a tumult.

But what stand we in rehearsal of old examples (says Gualther in Act. cap 18.
Gualther) seeing in our days covetousness does chiefly hinder and stop the
course of the truth: The Bishops of Rome blinded with desire of lucre, fly all
kind of reformation, the same (says he) binds Princes and the Nobility unto
Antichrist, in that they perceive the Popes and Bishops may maintain many of
their kinsfolks with Ecclesiastical goods and livings, which otherwise may go
for rascals, and be fain to labor and toil with their hands: The same makes
Merchants, Customers, Soldiers, and all States of men, offended with the
Gospel, because they see, if the Gospel be received, such trades of waxing
rich, as many use in these days, cannot stand.

It was a sad complaint which the Lord by Jeremie, made against the people in
those times, Ier. 6.13.
from the least of them even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to
covetousness; and from the Prophet even unto the Priest every one deals
falsely. I would to God the like complaint may not justly be taken up in our
times; that there were not amongst us, Isa. 56.11.
greedy dogs which can never have enough, Ier. 5.31.
Prophets that prophecy lies, and Priests that receive gifts in their hands;
Isa. 56.11.
All looking to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter. Such
as Micah speaks of, who Mica. 3.11.
teach for hire, and divine for money: while they bite with their teeth, and
(i.) while they find the sweetness and have to feed upon, all is peace, they
cry peace to the feeders. But if a man put not into their mouths, (i.) satisfy
not their appetite and desire, they prepare war against him, as if he were an
enemy to God and man. Oh what abundance of time-servers be there amongst us,
which will soothe up greatness in errors, and labor to maintain the errors
of the times, against all reformation for their own advantage, which are ready
to embrace any religion, so that by it they may procure their own private gain.
Oh where is the zeal of the Primitive Christians in the first reformation, when
for the good of the Church, and the maintenance of the Gospel, they sold their
possessions? What is become of the forwardness of the blessed Israelites, when
they offered so 100. thousand pound sterling of gold, and 35. thousand 470 and
oddepounds of silver, besides brass and other things. Willet in Exodus cap. 38.
quaest. 10.
plentifully to the Tabernacle, that Moses was driven to publish a Exodus 36.6.
restraint, Chap. 35.23.
lawne and Chap. 38.8.
looking-glasses then furthered the building; the people (for that purpose)
were content to part both with their profits and pleasures; it were great pity
that these now should prove impediments to hinder it. Yet the truth hereof is
so apparent, that where men are wholly set upon their own private respects,
they fear not to oppose either the good of the Church or the commonweal: And
thus of the first sort.

2. The superstitious, who are so Long diversacarnificina and pietas, Lactant.
opposite to the reformation, that look what the one erects, the other dejects;
what the one makes, the other marres. Its observed by Weemse treat. of four
degenerate sons. Sect. 3:
some, that Religion has two extremes, (...).
Atheism and (...).
Superstition; between which (as Tertullian notes) she suffers in the
midst, as Christ betwixt the two thieves, only both prove her mortal
enemies; the one acknowledging no good to worship any way; the other will
worship God her own way: of these, its an hard matter to say which is the
worst, and greatest enemy to Religion or Reformation, yet the latter has been
so accounted, and amongst other causes for these two.

1. Because Atheism leaves a man to sense, to Philosophy, to natural piety,
to Laws, to reputation, all which are some kind of guides to moral virtue,
though Religion were not. But Superstition dismounts all, and prescribes a law
to it self a form of worship, which if God will not accept, he shall have no
obedience at all.

2. Because Atheism did never disturb States, but contracted it self with
civilitie and subordinate obedience; tumult and division for Religion were
evils unknown to the heathen, because they all served one devil under diverse
names and forms, and for their petty quarrels amongst their Mulciber in Troiam
pro Troja stabat Apollo.
puppet-gods, these differences were soon taken up at a Tavern, and reconciled
over a cup of wine.

But Superstition is always in garboiles, it has no Superstitione imbutas
ani^as nunquam quiet is esse potest. Cicero 1. de finibus.
rest, evermore causing uproares, bringing government into disorder, and
endeavoring the confusion of Commonweals. For proof hereof we need not go far
for instance; what has more undermined these Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, then the treacherous plots of superstitious persons? what more
endangered the ruin of the true reformed Protestant Religion, within these his
Majesty's Dominions established? what has more raised and fomented jealousies
betwixt the King and his people? what has more hindered the happy proceedings
of Parliament, whereby many illegal taxations have been raised to the great
burden and grief of the Subject? what has more endeavored the subversion of
the fundamental laws of this Kingdom? etc. Then diverse Innovations and
superstitions which have been brought both into Church and State; partly,

1. By Papists who justify a religion that gives way to all manner of
rebellion both against God and the King.

Against God, as is evident by that complaint of St. Bernard, who affirms
that Bern li. 4. de considerat. ad Eugentum.
the covetous, luxurious, ambitious, incestuous, sacrilegious, and all such
hellish monsters do flock to Rome, to get a Warrant from the Apostolic See for
their proceedings.

Against the King, by affirming, Bellarm. lib. 5. de Romans Pontific. cap. 67.
and 4 2. Sigonius 9. hist. Ital.
that it is not lawful for Christians to tolerate an heretical King: they may
expel him, depose him, (as they did z Henry the fourth, of his Empire, making
him stand barefoot with the Empress at the gate of Canessus) yea murder him
if he favor not their idolatries and superstitions, witness Walpole,
Cardinal of Coome in his instructions to Parry about taking away the life of
Queen Elizabeth; and Sixtus the fifth his oration in defense of the Jacobine
that murdered Henry the third King of France.

2. By Anabaptists, Familists, and sundry other Sects; who by their pernicious
and devilish Tenants do endeavor to cut the very throat of Reformation, and
labor what in them lies, to overthrow the true doctrine of Jesus Christ.

3. By superstitious Formalisticall Protestants, who are ready to embrace and
maintain all that is or shall be proposed, in hope of preferment; whereof if
their expectation at any time prove frustrate, they endeavor to set all in an
uprore, and care not what doctrine they prove of, though it be never so false
and erroneous, if by it, they may be revenged of their adversaries. Like August.
Donatus who when he saw Cecilianus preferred before him in the Bishopric of
Carthage, turned Heretic. These are such who endeavor to quench the fire on
the harth, and leave it burning on the top of the chimney; which will reform
their least faults, and let their worst be marring: who like Aesops dog, are
known to let fall the substance, by catching at the shadow, whose religion is
so mixed with multiplicitie of superstitious Ceremonies, as that its hard to say
whether they be Papists or Protestants; the too too many experiments we have of
such persons revives that, which sometimes an Pliny lib. 3. Britannia eam hodie
colebrat tam attonite, tantis ceremontis ut dedisse Persis vtaeri possit.
heathen man affirmed of the ancient Britains, that they were so supendly
superstitious in their Ceremonies, that they went far beyond the Persians,
(they much exceeded other Nations.)

Now when all these shall meet together in one Kingdom, what a combustion and
distraction will they make, by their several doctrines, one superstition
opposing it self against another, and all against Reformation, furthering the
ruin and destruction of a commonweal, to the disturbance of peace, if not to
the general confusion of all estates.

And thus of the second sort, to these we may add;

3. The profane and licentious, who Psalm. 50.17. Prove. 5.12.
hate to be reformed; and (like those Israelites mentioned by the Prophet Amos)
cannot abide Amos 5.10.
him that rebukes in the gate, (i.) the Magistrate, who gives public
judgment (as Tremel. Pis^at. in portis exerc^b. judicia publica.
some) or else the Prophet which reproves them in the open Assemblies (as See
the marginall note.
others) talk of Reformation unto them, and they will be ready to encounter
with you, as the Philosophers and Stoics sometime did with Paul, (when he went
about to reform Athens of idolatry) Act. 17.18.
What will this babbler say? or else as the Gergesites to our Savior, beseech
you to Matthew. 8.34.
depart out of their coasts: they will be plain with you you are no guests for
them; their secure lives and your severe laws will not cotton. May not the Jews
keep Ioh. 2.14.
open Market in the Temple, and make Matt. 21 13. Matthew. 11.17.
the house of Prayer Becles. 5.1.
(Gods house) an house of Merchandise; but that Christ must come and disturb
them, overthrow their tables, and whip them out. May not Luke 3.19.
Herod dally, and take his pleasure of his whore Herodias, but John the Baptist
must prate on it? Cannot Demetrius (here) make an unreasonable advantage by his
silver shrines, but Paul must cry down the goddess and so hinder his trade?
Cannot the proud wear a garment of the fashion, nor yet the drunkard drink
with a good fellow at his Tavern-session; nor the swearer strengthen his words
with the credit of an oath, but that the pulpits must ring of it? then down
shall that Gospel come (if they can subject it) that will not let them run to
hell untroubled. Non turbunt Evangelio, dum ab Evangelium non turbentur.
Let them alone, and they will let you alone: but if you fight against their
sins, with the sword of the Spirit, they will have you by the ears, and salute
you with the sword of death.

How may it be thought then, that this work of Reformation should go forward in
a Kingdom without opposition; wherein (almost in every passage) so much
profaneness and licentiousness is daily to be observed. Run through every
particular estate and calling, and you shall find by the practice (though not
of all, God forbid, that I should think so; I know there are in every
Profession which make a conscience of their ways, and in all their actions set
God before their eyes; God has his number amongst us, and I hope it is not
small, the Lord of his mercy every day increase it, to his glory, and the
Churches comfort: yet) of the most part, that fraudulent and deceitufll
dealing, or some other unlawful means, is thought the most expedite and beaten
way for supporting them. Otherwise how comes it to pass that we see so much
briberie and corruption in seats of Qui sedet crimina judicaturus, etc: Cyprian
ad Donatum.
Judicature, such perjuries at the Bar, partiality and unjust connivencie in
Magistrates, Sacrilege in Patrons, Symonaicall contracts in unconscionable
Levites, cozening in bargains, breaking of promises, perfidious underminings,
fraud in our houses, oppression in the open fields, robbery in the high ways,
and diverse such: which demonstrate unto us a general decay and declination of
all goodness: So that in these days, not only the state and strength of the
world, the alacrity and vigor of the whole creature is much worn; but the
integrity which was to be found, even in our Forefathers is much wasted; we
are fallen into the 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
last days, perilous times, (such as the golden age never knew) wherein men
shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankefull, unholy, without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good, traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures, more then levers
of God: Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.

There was indeed a time when this Kingdom fell so fast to commit wickedness,
that to be ignorant of sinful crimes, was held to be a crime (as Geruasius
Dorobanensis.
one living in those times affirms) Camden. Britan. hist. Darnorum.
the Commonwealth was full of an infinite sort of vices, the Priests were idle,
the people given to riot and loose life; but pride above all (whose waiting
maid is destruction) was come to a mighty head. Oh that our times might not (as
sometime Jerusalem did Sodom) justify those times! that our Nation were not
the Pontificiall seat of sin where these abominations are never non-resident!
but such is the continual concourse of all kinds of people from other
countries, that all manner of iniquity by a general confluence meets here, as
the lines at the center: Idolatry from Rome, whoredoms from Venice, Atheism
from Turkey, drunkenness from Germany, the ambition of Spain, the pride of
France, and what not? insomuch that I scarcely persuade my self, that Sodom
lies in ashes for a greater offense, then has been found amongst us, within
these few days. Whither shall a man turn his eye? into what place? what
Profession? what calling, and not behold that, which may truly 2 Pet. 2.8.
vex his righteous soul? All these fight against Reformation, and therefore the
more and greater the vices are to be reformed, the stronger will the opposition
be.

4. Last of all, I would to God this work were not opposed, and (in some
regard) hindered, even by some persons, who (I verily believe) seek and desire
it. For observe it, always in the Churches reformation, there are certain
public persons, appointed and set apart by God for that purpose; by whose
prescripts and rules the rest of the people are to be ordered and governed: as
Josiah, Nehemiah, and others in the reformation of the Church of the Jews, who
made a great alteration in the face of the Church, purging the Idolaters,
changing the office of the Levites, commanding a Passe-over: and under these,
there was an election of some eminent and able ones, to further this work (as
in the days of Josiah, Hilkiah was the high Priest, and executed these things
under him: and whatsoever he enjoined, was done juxtapraeceptum Josiae, etc.)

Now then if any private person out of a forward, though a misgoverned zeal (as
Robert Sanderson, Sermon. 2. ad Clerum, and 3. ad Magistratum.
one calls it) shall take upon him to reform what he thinks amiss, either in
Church or State, (as to refuse with the public congregation to partake in the
Sacrament, because some unclean persons presume to come unto it; to deny the
ordinary administration of it in that regard, (though it be probable that our
Savior suffered Judas whom he knew to be a thief and a traitor to partake of
it with his disciples) not to bury the dead, to marry with rings, and such
like, especially things of indifferency, which in the judgment of a great
Omnia indifferentia in Ecclefiae liberate posita sunt. Calv. instit. lib. 4.
ca. 17. Sect. 43.
Divine) ought not to be ordered by one or two private persons, but wholly left
to the disposition of the whole Church; I say, for any private man to refuse
these before such time as Authority, which first enjoined them, have again
repealed them: I see no warrant for this their forwardness, what is it but to
execute and perform the office of a Magistrate, and so go before them in this
work of Reformation, who are appointed for it.

That fact of Numb. 25.7.8.
Phinehees (being but a private man and no Magistrate) so often objected, in
such cases as these, makes nothing for this purpose.

He was indeed of the Tribe of Levi, of the sons of Aaron, and so of the family
and lineage of the high Priest; therefore not to meddle in matters of
Judicature, either to give sentence or to do execution. His fact
notwithstanding approved of God, and rewarded with a^ Verse. 12.13.
everlasting Priesthood, it was Psalm. 106.31.
accounted to him for righteousness.

Yet we are to know (and it is the common opinion of the learned) that he had
an extraordinary notion, and a peculiar secret instinct of the Spirit of God,
powerfully working in him, and prompting him thereunto: Id fit afflatu
peculiari Divini Spiritus (as Simlen. in Exodus 32.19.
Simlenus speaks of that fact of Moses in breaking of the Tables) it was done
by the peculiar notion of Gods Spirit.

Now those, opera liberi spiritus (as Divines call them) Non sunt exigenda ad
regulas communes nec trahenda in exemplum vitae. Chytr. in Genesis 14. and in
Exodus 32.
they are not to be measured by common rules of life, nor to become exemplary
unto others; they were never intended, either by God that inspired them, or by
those worthies that did them for that purpose.

Therefore the error will be dangerous from the privilege, examples of some
exempted ones, to take liberty to transgress the common rules both of life
and of laws.

Let no man think I speak this to quench any man's zeal, no, my desire is rather
to increase it: and I would to God that all the sons of Levi were more
earnestly zealous for the Churches pure reformation, then they are, that so the
true worship of God may be performed without the mixture of humane corruption.
But what I say in this case, is rather to regulate and keep us within the due
bounds of Christian sobriety and our particular callings, that we may not
disadvantage the truth nor this work of Reformation, by an overhastie and
unseasonable zeal.

I know there are some who are not afraid to say (though for my part I desire
to judge more charitably) that these men presume too much upon their own zeal,
and through an affectation of singularity, preach and commend themselves unto
the people, though in the mean time by consequence and an underhand judgment,
they do not only give an occasion of an uncharitable censure upon the rest of
their brethren, that they are overcold in religion; but also upon the
Magistrate and such as are put in authority for the Reformation, that they are
too slack and unmindfull of Gods affairs.

Nor is it my private opinion, but the opinion of the learned (whose judgment
in this case is not to be slighted) that such men who inconsiderately will run
before those who are put in authority to effect the Reformation; may as well
take upon them to establish Laws, raise powers, administer justice, execute
malefactors, or ought else belonging to a Magistrate, as to do what they do.
The which if it should be granted, who sees not but that the end would be no
other, then a vast anarchie and confusion, both in Church and commonwealth:
whereupon must unavoidably follow, not only an opposition to reformation, but
a speedy subversion both of Religion and State. For if every man (says Si
suoquisque feratur impetu^ non plane uni^as erit, sed magis confusio. Bern. in
Cant. sermon. 49.
Bernard) shall be carried according to his own motion, after that spirit which
he has received, and do fly upon every thing indifferently, even as he is
affected, and do not hasten to it by the judgment of reason, while no man is
contented with the office assigned unto him, but all will attempt all things
alike, by an indistinct administration, it will not be an unity, but rather a
confusion.

God for bid then that any of those who wish well to Zion, should be found in
the least respect to hinder the building of the walls of Jerusalem; what though
things be much amiss (as I believe no State in later ages more See the
Remonstrance lately set forth by the House of Commons.
corrupted) we that are inferior persons must lament it, show our dislike and
detestation of it, both in public and private, sigh and pray for redress of
it, and as occasion serves and our condition and calling permits, soberly
and discreetly put those in mind of it, to whom the reformation belongs (as
our Knights of the Shire, Burgesses, and such like, are from all several parts
of the Kingdom chosen for this purpose) but we must not take their office from
them to reform it; this were (as was said before) rather to oppose and hinder,
then any ways further the Reformation.

And thus have I done with my first Use, the Use of reprehension.

Use 2.

1. To acquaint us with the estate and condition of Christ's Church militant
here upon earth; it has evermore been subject to opposition, no age from the
beginning of the world till this present, but shows as much: if we consider her
oeconomically, while she remains in a family; or naturally being dispersed
through the country of the Jews; or ecumenically, dispersed through the whole
world, we shall find that she never had any long settled vacation from these
turbulent storms of opposition.

1. While she remained in Adams family, righteous Abel a principal member,
was unnaturally Genesis 4.8.
murdered by the bloody hand of his elder brother, here began the tempest
against this boat and little bark of Jesus Christ, and so it continued under
the families of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

2. Afterward, when farther dispersed (yet only limited to the Nation of the
Psalm. 147.19, 20. Joh. 4.22.
Jews) she was still exposed to eminent danger, as in the time of Moses
tyrannized by Pharaoh, distressed in the wilderness, and diversely tempted,
before she could take possession of the Land of Promise; and then, what with
the Philistines, Ammonites, Midianites, Babylonians, Persians, etc. in one day
of fair weather, she had an whole year of storms and tempest.

3. Last of all, under the times of the Gospel, since the times of Christ,
being now enlarged to all the Gentiles, not one or two Nations of them, but all
the world; her opposition has been much more increased, being afflicted (as
Loc. com. tit. de persecut. verae Ecclesue.
Luther out of Austin observes) by a threefold oppression; one violent by
persecuting Emperors, another fraudulent by subtle heretics, and a third
both violent and fraudulent, by pestilentiall Antichristians: Amora prius in
nece Martyrum, etc. (says Sermon. 33. super Cantic.
Bernard) her (opposition or) oppression in the beginning was great, by the
persecution of Tyrants, afterward greater by the conflict of Heretics: but
now greatest of all by the dangerous positions and practices of Antichrist in
the Kingdom of Popery: whose Dr. Boys Exposition of proper Psalms, Psalm. 110.
very Masses are sometimes for massacres, and their sacred sacrifices offerings
of blood. Every one of these, like those three regiments which came out of the
1 Samuel 13.7
Camp of the Philistines, though taking several ways, one to Ophrah, another
to Bethoron, a third to Zeboim, yet came all with a purpose to destroy; as
those times which immediately followed Christ, wherein Stephen was stoned,
Peter was imprisoned etc. and those w^^ after followed, which endured for the
space of three hundred years: the monuments of which days, and Ecclesiastical
Histories do abundantly show; how that a man could no sooner make profession of
his faith, but he was either Eutch. Ecclesiast. hist. li. 1. ca. 8.
maimed, racked, or scourged, or burnt to ashes, or drowned in the Sea, or
hanged on the gallows, or sowed in the Sulp. Severus lib. 2. and Tacit. li. 15.
cap. 10.
skins of wild beasts and so cast to the dogs, or burnt in the night for
lights; or made away, by some means or other, with more exquisite and more
tragical torments (if that be possible) then the Perilli of our time have
invented, to gratify the Romish Phaleris. Surely then Bellarmine, Sadell,
Stapleton, and diverse others of that Antichristian sect, were much deceived in
making Quicunque florent prosperi ii sunt vera Ecclesia etc. vide Bellarm.
controver. 2. l. 4. c. 4 de not is Eccles.
prosperity and outward happiness a special note of the Church of Christ;
though Austin say, (whose judgment they refuse not in other things to
subscribe unto) Vsque ad hujus se^ulifinem inter persecutiones mundi and
consolationes Dei peregrinando procurrit Ecclesia. August. de Civit. Dei. li.
18. ca. 51.
so long as the world endures she will go on, but as it were in a pilgrimage,
between the persecutions of the world and the comforts of God: yea though
Christ himself compare her to a Cant. 2.2.
Lilly amongst thorns; not only for her beauty surpassing all other
Churches and congregations of the wicked: but also for her adversity, being
assaulted on the one hand, by the contentious oppositions of Schismatiques; and
on the other, by the blasphemous propositions of Heretics, openly wronged by
cruel Tyrants, secretly wringed by backbiting hypocrites. These as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 94.5.
break in pieces thy people O Lord, and afflict thine heritage. And this is the
first thing that this doctrine may acquaint us withal, viz. the estate and
condition of the Church militant.

2. To make known unto us, that Reformation is neither easily nor suddenly
effected: the more corruption, the greater and longer time for the purgation of
it. A disease which has been long a breeding, will not presently be cured: how
much our Church and State is corrupted, does evidently appear by those
manifold grievances that are daily exhibited; our pollutions, like beds of
Eeles are so knotted together, that no less then a clap of thunder can
dissolve them: To prevent Reformation, we have great beasts and huge bulls of
Bashan, that will be pushing and goring; sons of Anak, who are strongly set to
maintain their gainful corruptions, (as here Demetrius his Temples of Diana)
insomuch that there is little hopes of amendment by a voluntary relinquishing
of them, unless the Lord come with a mighty hand, qualifying the Instruments
appointed for this purpose, as were the brethren of Gideon, Iu^g. 8.18.
each one resembling the son of a King: making them strong and a^^^e like
David's Worthies, 1 Ch^^n. 26.30, 31, 32.
men of valor, to turn the wheel of Justice upon the back of the wicked, and
to smite them that shall oppose it, as Sampson did the Philistines, both Iud.
15.18.
hip and thigh.

Experience, in the beginning of the reformation in the time of Henry the
eight, in the violent overthrow of the Abbeys, does evidently demonstrate this
truth unto us, as also under the reign of that gracious Instrument of Gods
glory, Edward the sixth, in whose time the reformation was encumbred, not only
with seditions of the Subjects, and umults of the Commons, but also with much
hurrying and banding of the Nobility.

It was prophetically spoken by that reverend man, Robert Gnosted, sometime
Bishop of Lincoln, who lived in the reign of Henry the third, and died in the
year of our Lord, 1253. a man who (as Cambden. Britan. ex Matt. Paris. Anonym.
Chronograph.
Cambd^n describes him from the words of one then living) was a terrible
reprover of the Pope, an adviser of his Prince, an instructor of the Clergy, a
maintainer of scholars, a Preacher to the people, a diligent searcher into the
Scriptures, and a Mallet of the Romanists. This man a little before his death,
complaining of the wicked courses that were held by the Romanists, said the
Church should never find any ease from the oppressive burdens laid upon her,
nor be delivered from the Aegyptiacall bondage she was holden in, till her
deliverance was wrought: In ore gladii cruentandi; in the mouth of the Sword
all bathed in blood.

What cruelty and barbarism these hellish monsters, have of late executed
(and do yet) upon our distressed brethren in Ireland, is not unknown to most of
us in this Kingdom, (and all to oppose the reformation) I do not say* that
either we or they are of the number of those Saints mentioned in the
Revelations, which shall Rev. 7.14.
come out of great tribulation having their robes washed and made white in the
blood of the Lamb. Neither is it my interpretation, but Marl^r in Rev. c. 7.14.
Marlorates, who makes it a periphrasis of the last persecution of the Church
by Antichrist, which of all others will be the most grievousest, to such as are
minded to live godlily in Christ Jesus, as the last assault of Pharaoh was to
the departing Israelites, and the last endeavor of nature is to the dying
patient, (though Veniuntenim omnibus aetatibus nec desinunt quamdiu durat hic
mundus. Aret. in Loc.
others understand it, of the persecution and affliction of every age, which
shall be from the time of Christ to the end of the world.

But this I am sure of, and experience to the great detriment of foreign
Nations, has made the truth of it known unto us, that where Religion sets
an edge upon discontent, there not only mutinies, heart-burnings, and
jealousies, but also bloody frayes and massacres are much to be feared. In Rome
when the fire took hold of the Temple of Ardeba^t sancti sceleratis ignibus
ignes, and mysta est flammae flamma prophanapiae. Ovid. fast. lib. 6.
Vesta, and mingled it self with the sacred flame; then was the greatest
mischief done; Even so, where the wild fire of contention mixeth it self with
the sacred fire of zeal, and both burn within the bowels of the same Church;
its verily thought that scarce a river of blood, will be able to quench this
direful flame. But the Lord of his mercy, in his good time, quench these
coals of contention, that they may never come to smoother the flame of our
zeal. And this is the second thing which this point may make known unto us,
viz. That reformation is neither easily nor suddenly effected.

3. To inform us of the difference betwixt the militant Church here on earth,
and the triumphant Church in heaven; here it is subject to opposition on every
side, the covetous, the superstitious, the licentious daily assault it, it is
in a continual warfare, and therefore called the Church Militant; the gates of
hell oppose themselves against it, (i.) not only persecutions and special
sins, but all manner of evils, sweet or sower, fair or foul, of what
condition s^ever, as the Origin in Math. tract 1. Chrysostom. cont. Gent. Quod
Christus est Deus. Greg. in 5. Psalm. paenitent. The opbilact in Matthew. 16.
Hieron and Rabon. Comm. in Matthew. 16. Raynold. conf. cap. 7. divis. 8.
learned well observe. But in heaven, nor Satan, nor any other enemy of the
Church, can enter there to assault it; none of all these opposers come near
unto heaven, nor covetous nor superstitions, nor licentious; the Church has
there no disturbance, no nor yet noise, unless it be the Songs of Saints and
Angels, and the shouts of praises, tuned forth in the sweet melody of
Hallelajah, which so many glorified voices shall sing unto God; there is
nothing but tranquillity and eternal peace and comfort within those blessed
doors; There our eyes shall not be dimmed with tears, nor our souls
surprised with fears, nor our hearts dejected with sorrows, nor one ears
disturbed with cries, nor our senses distracted with pain; There are
possessions without impeachment, Kingdoms without cares, length of years with
strength of delights, greatness of state, without conscience of corruption,
love of all, without jealousy of any; there men shall be good and not
persecuted, truly religious and not opposed, happy and not envied, rich and
not robbed, Kings and not flattered: Oh glorious Church triumphant, who would
be unwilling to be dissolved, when it shall seem good to the divine
Providence; that he may be translated thither, where is freedom from all
assaults and oppositions. (...) August. (...) Dei. cap. 22.
Cl^^mbrotus reading Platoes Book de immutalitate animae, cast himself down
from a Wall, and so ended his days, hoping thereby speedily to come to that
blessed estate, which is prepared for good men after this life. But for all his
have, his fact is rather to be lamented then imitated; we may desire the
fruition of this blessed happiness in the Church triumphant, but we must wait
and stay Gods leisure for it; possessing our selves with patience (in the mean
time) under the manifold oppositions, that we are here likely to meet withal
in the Church Militant; And this is the third and last thing which we may here
be informed of, viz. the difference between the Militant Church on earth, and
the triumphant in heaven.

A third Use may be for Instruction,

1. To put us in mind, that we be always well prepared against these
oppositions, it is no 1 Pet. 4.12.
strange thing that happens unto us, when we meet with disturbances in the
Church of Christ; For 2 Timothy 3.12.
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution; the
counsel of the Wiseman (though Apochyphall yet holy) in this case is not to be
rejected; Ecclus. 2.1.
My soon if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for temptation. Our
Savior Christ being to leave his Disciples, and knowing that after his
departure evil days would come upon them, prescribes them one Petition,
amongst the rest, for this purpose, which is the Matthew. 6.13.
last in his Prayer.

I know it is controverted among the Philosophers, Vtrum melius sit praescire,
vel nescire mala futura.
whether it be better to know or not to know future evils; and howsoever some
resolve it as a thing unprofitable, yet well disposed judgments have ever held
it as a fair conclusion, That it is better to know a calamity before we feel
it, then to feel a calamity before we know it; this makes the prepared heart
with more ease to undergo the trouble; and though the assault be great, yet
being before known, the fear will be the less. When the Prophets servant saw
the Host of Chariots compassing the City, he cried out, 2 Kings 6.15, 16.
Alas, Master, how shall we do? Elisha answered, fear not; for they that be
with us, be more then they that be with them. The like speech uses 2 Chronicles.
32.^.
Hezekiah unto the people; these both knew before what would happen, and
therefore were not dismayed when they were thus assaulted.

In the time then of our greatest tranquillity and Halcyon days of the
Church, it will not be amiss for the members thereof, to meditate of future
evils, to think of oppositions, that they may be the better provided for them.

The children of this world are in this respect wiser then many Christians, who
use in time of peace to have their traynings, musterings, tiltings, and many
other martial exercises, that so they may be before hand prepared for war;
the Mariner in a calm makes all his tackling sure and strong againvt a storm;
the traveller who is to pass in a suspected way, provides himself
accordingly: we of the Church are to fight a great battle, to encounter with
Ephesians. 6.12.
principalities and powers, etc. to sail in a tempestuous Sea, to travel
through a Wilderness of many distressefull dangers; the greater therefore the
troubles are we are like to meet withal, the better furnished and forearmed
we ought to be. Saint Ambrose his counsel, in this case, is to good purpose;
Ambros lib. 1. Offic. cap. 38.
Gratia praeparandus est animus, etc. The mind is to be prepared with grace,
and to be established unto constancy, that it may not be troubled with any
terrors, nor yet dismayed with any sorrows, nor ever yield with any
punishment. And this is the first thing which we are here taught, viz. that we
be always well prepared against these oppositions.

2. It may serve to teach us, not to be too much over-troubled when we meet
with them; He that is for Christ and his Church must fear no rumors, but in 2
Cor. 6.8.
good reports and bad reports, and through prospericie and mischief, he must
make way unto him that he seeks for, of whose name he makes profession.

This is the usual case of the Gospel, He that gave us that blessed Covenant,
meant not that we should stick at these conditions; it is enough to have this
Passover, though we eat it with sower herbs, and to enjoy the Cant. 2.2.
Lilly, though in the midst of thorns.

Be not then dismayed with the tumultuous oppositions, raised by the false
censures of the wicked world; What though the roaring sons of Beliall, make
sons of thee at their joviall compotations? What though they brand thee for
an hypocrite and dissembler? What though the erroneous Courts of men,
wrongfully adjudge thee, the friends and factors of hell compass thee in on
every side, reviling thine holiness, oppressing thine innocence, neglecting
thine equity, overlaying thy poverty, etc. yet quiet thine heart with this
encouragement, Ioh. 16.33.
In the world thou shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, in Christ
thou shall have peace, yea, that peace which Phil. 4.7.
passes all understanding; which is enough for a man to enjoy, though he lack
the (ill conditioned) peace of the world; for he is unworthy of Gods favor,
that cannot go away contented with it, unless he may also enjoy the favor of
the world. It was a worthy resolution of holy Jer^^e Vtinam ob Domint mei nomen
atque jus^^ttam ^^ncta ^^nti^^um turba mesersequuntur and tribulet; uttnam in
op^robrium meum stolidus bi^ mandus exurgat, tantum ut ego mercedem Jesu
consequer. Ieron.
I would to God that the whole Nation of the Gentiles, Pagans and Infidells,
would for the name of my God, and for the glory of his Gospel, persecute me
and trouble me; I would to God, this mad and foolish world, would rise up
against me, for the profession of Gods blessed truth, only that I may obtain
Christ Jesus for my reward.

He that expects here a soft and gentle entertainment (living in the Church of
Christ) will be much deceived; are not afflictions for the Gospel called by St
Paul, the Galat. 6.17. (...). Vide Bez^e. Annotat. major.
Marks of the Lord Jesus? and the 2 Cor. 4.10.
dying of our Lord Jesus? What are they? are they not (...) sic vocat vincula
car^eres cicatrices, etc. Paraeus in Galat. 6.17.
bonds, imprisonments, infamies, disgraces, etc. Yet here is our comfort, they
are the sufferings of the Lord Jesus; the bonds and imprisonments of the
members of that body, whereof he is the head; for his sake and the Gospells
they were inflicted; and therefore, let us not be over-troubled when we meet
with them; but rather rejoice in our tribulation, especially since it is for
our Saviors sake: the loyal subject that suffers in his Princes cause,
contents himself as well in his iron fetters, as the proudest Courtier does in
his golden chain; much more may he glory and delight himself that meets with
opposition in the Churches quarrel, and suffers ignominy for the profession
of the truth. It should be so far from disheartning us, that the more we are
opposed, the more should our zeal for the good of Gods Church be increased.
Like the Spirit of Elihu, being suppressed, it was Job 32.18, 19.
as Wine that had no vent; or as natural corruptions in carnal men, become
more sinful when restrained by the commandment; so love to the truth in Gods
children, should grow more fervent, when the Devil and wicked men labor to
oppose it.

And this is the third Use.

A fourth and last,

1. To encourage us, to stand fast in the times of opposition and to think
never a whit the worse, but rather the better of our profession; accounting it
an honor, that we are the true members of the Church of Christ, though others
(who are contemptible) do cast contempt upon us for it. Things of good esteem
are neither easily kept, nor yet attained unto, and were there not great worth
in the sincerity of our profession, it would never meet with such opposition,
the Devil and wicked men, would never so much band against it. Shall we then
loose our hopes of so blessed a Covenant, because there be so many enemies
strive against it? Shall we betake our selves into the Wilderness, and there
live a Monastical and Heretical life, alienating our selves from our work
and labor, because we are afraid of opposition? Oh, far be it from us, how
unworthy shall we show our selves of so glorious a privilege, that will not
stand to it, and for it, when the Devil and wicked men oppose it? Theodoret.
Eccles. lib. 4. c. 24.
Theodoret reports in his Ecclesiastical Story, that when Valens the
Emperor with his Arrian heresy, had bepestred the Christian world, and struck
a deep wound in the white bosom of the Church, by which means the flock of
Christ stood in great danger. Aphraates, a certain Monk, a holy man of that
time, contrary to his order, came forth of his vowed and confining Monastery,
to succor the endangered truth; and being asked by the Emperor (who was
offended at him) what he did out of his Ce^l^ I would (says he) have kept it,
and did keep it so long as Christ's sheep were in peace; but now that tempests
do come on, and storms bring them in danger; I cannot be cooped up and suffer
them in hazard of ruin, every stone is to be turned, every means is to be
sought, to free them from this peril. He further adds, If I were Daughter to
any man whatsoever, and were confined by my Father to a Closet or some secret
chamber, and (...) part of the house; yet if my Fathers dwelling were on fire,
should I not be very careless, if I would not then come forth to help to
quench it, or give direction for it? So if now I should not help to teach true
faith in Christ, by coming out of my Monastery, I should do much amiss.

A resolution very fitting for these times, wherein the affairs of the Church
call us forth; God forbid we should now keep our selves within our Cloisters,
and be terrified with the spightfull looks of our daring adversaries. He that
would wear the wreath of Victory, must not like a coward either absent
himself, or run out of the field, though he see much blood to be spilt before
his eyes. Israel had never gotten the promised Land of Canaan, had they been
afraid of the sons of Anak; the more and the greater the oppesition is, the
stronger should our resolution be. Its recorded of Saul, that when 1 Samuel 11.2,
6, 7.
Naash the Ammonite, came up and encamped against Jabesh-Gilead, and there
indenting with the people, to enter into Covenant with them, upon a base and
deadly condition, to the great disparagement of Israel; It is said the Spirit
of God came upon him when he heard those things, and his anger was greatly
enkindled, insomuch, that although the Ammonites were many in number, great and
terrible, and the case desperate, having but seven days respit; yet so much
the more strong was the Spirit of God in Saul. and he took a yoke of Oxen,
and hewed them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the coasts of Israel, by
the hands of Messengers, saying to this purpose; that even so should their
Cattle be dealt withal, whosoever would not follow him in this just quarrel.
It was valiantly done, and like a worthy Captain.

Such undaunted Spirits there have been, who in the Churches cause, have stood
it out against all oppositions; our blessed Apostle St Paul. when he came to
Athens, a place full of Idols, yea I may say of Devils; in every corner were
Temples set up for that purpose. It is said that his Spirit was Acts 17.16.
(...). In^^^abatur, Vulg. Irritabatur. Aug. Erasm. Tremell. Beza.
stirred in him, incited, exasperated, (as the word will bear) in so much that
he was as it were without himself, to see that horrible blasphemy against
God; and did he not here at Ephesus adventure himself in this uproare, when he
would have Acts 19.30.
entered in unto the people, hazarding his own life; as well for the
maintenance of that truth which was opposed, as for the defense of his friends,
which were then surprised. The like worthy resolution was in that holy man
Martin Luther, who having stirred up the whole world against him, and
perceiving little or no hopes, but that the doctrine of the Gospel should have
been stifled in the Cradle; endeavored the maintenance thereof against all
opposition, and hearing that the Divines of Massaeus Chron. 20. p. 27 3.
Lovaine and Cullen had burned many of his Books, by the command of the Pope,
he openly burned the Popes Laws, Decretalls, and Bulls, saying, I have done to
them, as they to me; and so heroycall was his Spirit, that he dared to
profess, that he would enter into that forewarned City of Fox Martyroll.
Anno. 1521. page 977.
Worms, though there had been as many Devils in their streets as Tyles on
their houses, to answer for himself before Charles the fifth of that name,
against Cekius and others.

Thus natural it has ever been to true Spirits, that are guided by the Holy
Ghost, not to be daunted with peril, nor to hang down their heads for the
opposition of the Devil. But what speak I of the noble Champions of Christ;
the very Heathens were so undaunted in their Heathenish Religion, that they
feared no danger, while they were about their superstitious rites. As Numa
Pompilius, sometime King of the Romans, when news was brought him of his
enemies, that they were at hand ready to surprise him, put the Messenger off
with this memorable Speech; Plutarch. Apotheg. and in vita Numae.
What tell you me of dangers or enemies, do ye not see that I am sacrificing
to my God? What a shame were it for us, if the true Religion should not beger
in us a more noble resolution, for the maintenance of it against all
opposition, since we have God bound by promise to deliver us, when we
faithfully crave his succor and assistance; and since it is almost all one (as
Fulgertius in his first Book to Thrasimund King of the Vandalles affirms)
Pene id esse fidem nolle asserere, quam negare, uno codemque silentia firmat
errorem qui terrore seu tempore possessus silendo non astruit veritatem.
to deny the faith and not to stand for it and maintain it, because, (as he
there reasons) a man by one and the same silence, strengthens error, who
through fear or negligence holding his peace affirms not the truth.

And thus of the first thing, which this point may move us to, considered in
this use of Exhortation, viz. to stand fast in the times of opposition

2. It may serve to stir up every one, (to the best of his power) to
endeavor the furtherance of the Reformation; A dutic belonging indeed,

1. Principally and particularly unto those that are put in authority for this
purpose, who by their Non quod natura sint Dej, sed quod officium little sit
ordinatio div na. Bern. in Joan. 10.
office and Ob communitatem ipsis potentiam and potestatem. Zanch. de natu.
Deilib. 1. cap. 12.
communication of power, are Exodus 22.8.18. and 21.6. Psalm. 82.6. Acts 23.5.
Gods upon earth; into whose hands, the God of heaven has committed the Romans
13.4.
sword of justice, that it may be drawn out of the Icabberd, to wound the
Psalm. 68.21.
hairie scalpe of such persons, as are the greatest enemies to the Church of
Christ; and who more then our s^ducing and seduced Papists, the pestilent
disturbers of this Kingdom, the sworn enemies of our Church and State, the
maine opposers of an hopeful Reformation. How shall Israel enjoy the Land of
Canaan in quiet, if those cursed Cananites be not subdued? What safety can we
be in, when such miscreants lurk in our dwelling? When Priests and Jesuits
shall be suffered to run from house to house, and seduce whole families? When
neither Country, nor City, nor Court, shall be free of such conspiratours?
who have not only ( foveas but foventes) their holes, but friends and fautors
to protect them. But blessed be the God of Heaven, who has so furnished those
Heroical Spirits (now at this present assembled in the Honorable Court of
Parliament) with Eccles ^.9.
stout hearts, and undaunted Exodus 18.21.
courages, that they fear not to execute Justice boldly, upon the great and
proudest offenders; Go on ye noble Worthies, with the Spirit of fortitude,
well tempered zeal, and godly constancy, to brandish the sword of Justice, and
to run through (as I may say) the very heart of farre-spreading Popery,
Atheism, and all manner of Superstition; to strike at the very root of all
those abominations, which you are daily petitioned to redress: Not fearing the
faces of men, though their faces be as the faces of Lions, and their visages
never so terrible. What should hinder you in this course of reformation? You
have the prayers, help and approbation of all good men, the assured assistance
of God himself (the supreme Magistrate) who will reward your care, and crown
your diligence: the Law, Religion, and Conscience, is on your side, You cannot
want seconds, while these take your part. Proceed then (as you have begun) you
blessed Instruments of this happy Reformation; not only severely to censure,
but utterly to suppress, the raging, ranging, and roaring sins, both in
Clergy and Laity. Let such be placed in Authority over either, as may not
only by the duty of their calling, seek earnestly the reformation of those
things that are amiss, but also may by their well ordered holy lives, be
Lanternes and spectacles of virtue and godliness, patterns and presidents of
well-doing, grace and goodness to all others. That the people by them, as by a
glass (even as the youth of Greece did by Epaminondas) may learn to trim and
adorn themselves with all virtuous ornaments; This, this, will be the most
hopefullest course, to rectify things that are depraved, to unite things that
are divided, to set in order and reform things which had need to be amended.

Besides, greater love you cannot show to the Church of Christ, more loyalty
to your Prince, more safety to the State and Kingdom, that it may continue in
peace; a greater increase of joy and comfort unto your own lives and livings,
your wives and children, your pleasures and contentments, than in taking the
Romish Foxes, and abandoning those Lyons-Whelpes, which hitherto have been
nursed in this Kingdom for our own destruction, proceeding (according to your
just Laws and wholesome Statutes) to confiscation of goods, to imprisonment,
banishment, or death it self, according to the quantie of their offenses; for
where lenity will not recover, nor smaller punishments work any correction
with them, to move, or remove them from their heresies and other corruptions,
no further clemency is there to be showed, since (as Lypsius has well
observed) Ipsa clementia est, in desperate malos, non esse clementem. Lyps.
lib. de unareli.
It is good demencie not to show any clemency unto those that are desperately
evil. And thus principally unto whom this duty belongs, viz. unto those that
are put in authority for that purpose.

2. More generally it belongs unto all; every member of the Commonweal ought
to endeavor it, and that two manner of ways, viz.

1. Privatively.

2. Positively.

1. Privatively, by avoiding all such things as may hinder it, I will (omitting
many others) only name these three.

1. Diversity of, Religions, there is no greater impediment to a blessed
Reformation, then a gallamaphry of religion, when every man shall be suffered
to worship God his own way. Symmachus indeed the Orator, labored by way of
argument to procure a general toleration of Religion, and thought of no such
inconvenience in it: Quia Deus immensum quiddam est and infi^^tum cujus natura
profecte cognosci non potest, equum e^go est ut diversa ratione colatur, pro ut
quisque aliquid de Deo percipit aut intelligat. Epist Sym.
Because God (said he) is immense and infinite, and his nature cannot perfectly
be known; it is convenient he should be as diversely worshipped as every man
shall conceive or understand. But he was deceived, and so was Th^mistius, that
labored to persuade Valens the Emperor, that God was well pleased with
variety of Sects, Dum ita pluribus modis colitur, etc. Socrat. Ecclesi. lib 4.
ca. 27.
because by this tolleration of diverse Religions, he is worshipped after diverse
manners: And so the Papist that sometime would have persuaded our late
Sovereign James (of happy memory) the great King of Britain, that it was not
only lawful and expedient, but also honorable for him to permit the public
profession and practice of the Romish Religion within this Kingdom, (as
Parsons, Allen, Bishop, and others of that heretical crew, have endeavored to
maintain.) But who may not see their aim in this, which is not so much to get
harbor for their own, as to shuffle out ours, and to bring all to theirs; or
at leastwise to set us together by the cares, that so they may the better work
their advantage: Which was the plot of Julian the Apostata (as St. Augu. Epist.
166.
Augustine reports of him) having a desire to set all Christendom in
combustion, cast a fire-ball of contention amongst them, by proclaiming
liberty to all heretics and schismat ques, to set abroach their damnable
doctrine; hoping thereby utterly to extinguish the name of Christians. True it
is, we are too too faulty i^ this kind, and whether I may say through the
subtlety of our seducing adversaries, or through the too much connivencie of
those which hitherto have sat in the seats of Justice, suffering the wholesome
Laws and Statutes (ordained for the suppressing of all heresy and
superstition) to rust (as the Habemus senatus consultu^ velut gladium in vagina
reconditum. Cic. orat 1. in Catil.
Orator speaks) like swords in the scabards, and never draw them forth
against the sworn enemies of our Church and State. I say whether by means of
either of these, or (as its most likely) by both of them, so it is, that if you
would seek the religion of all Heretics, here you may find them in this
Kingdom; insomuch that England (as sometimes a Member of the House of Commons
in a Speech of his has of late declared) is like to turn it self into a great
Amsterdam: there is amongst us a confusion of religions as there was in Babel
of languages. Ah and alas, that this Land which heretofore has been a
Sanctuary for true Religion, a refuge and shade in the heat of the day, for
persecuted professors, who have been chased like Bees from their own hives,
should now become a common receptacle for Atheists, Anabaptists, Adamites,
Famalists, Neuters, Hypocrites, lukewarm professors, and Popish wanderers:
can he be safe in the tolleration of all these religions? will the Lord hold
any Prince or State guiltless, which permit a pollution of his name? as the
worship of a false god, or the false worship of the true God, is a pollution of
his Name, (as himself has Ezec. 20.39.
declared.)

He is a jealous God, and will not endure any rivals; Theod. l. 6. ca. 4.
Valentinian the Emperor when his Soldiers had chosen him, consulted to have
joined another with him; No (faith he) it was in your power to give me the
Empire, while I had it not; but now when I have it, it is not in your power to
give me a partner. God will have the whole, and cannot endure that our hearts
should be divided between him and another: if we do he will cut us off from the
land of the living, (as he threatens, Zeph 1.5.)

Is not our Religion the foundation that even bears up the whole frame and
fabric of State? and can it be possible for a building to stand upon three or
four foundations? Religion, it is the soul which animateth the great body of
the Commonwealth; and will not that body prove a monster, that shall be
informed with diverse souls? The Church and commonwealth have but one center;
every new motion therefore in the one, must needs make a commotion in the
other: for as one Revel. 12.7.
heaven held not Michael and the Dragon in peace, nor one house the 1 Samuel 5.2,
3.
Arc and Dagon, nor one Genesis 25.22.
womb Jacob and Esau, nor one Ioh. 2.16.
Temple, Prayer and Marchandizing, nor one Numb 5.2.
lamp the clean and leprous, nor one Eusebius. Eccle. li. 2. ca. 22.
bath, John and Corinthus no more can this Kingdom an hotchporch of religions;
when one Congregation shall be Jews, another Samaritanes, one Papists, another
Protestants; some calling upon God, some upon Angels and Saints, creeping to
Crosses, bowing to Images, and so burning in emulation for their several
services, as fire and water shall sooner agree, then these accord in their
judgments and affections about a reformation.

It was therefore good advice and sage counsel, which Maecenas gave to
Augustus, to punish severally all innovations in matter of Religion: Non solum
Deorum causased quia nova quedam numina ^^^tales inducentes multos impellunt ad
rerum mutationem.
Non solum Deorum causa, etc. not only out of a regard of piety, but also for
reason of State: And Quod filentium ^ereticis indixerit. Niceph l. 12. c. 15.
Theodosius is commended for putting all Heretics to silence. Assuredly the
body and state is then strongest when the multitude of believers (like those in
the Acts) shall be of Act. 4.32.
one heart, and of one soul.

Beware then of sundring and distracting your selves into many religions, turn
neither to the one hand nor to the other, but keep you close to the true
Religion. I but in these troublesome times, you desire to know which is the
true. I must confess indeed, that we may truly and justly complain with
Calvin, Hoc nostrum seculum borrenda quedam sectarum portexta protulit. Calvin.
in 1 Ioh. 4.1.
This our age has brought forth strange monsters of heresies; and some (none
of the worst nor meanest neither) out of their just and great hatred to
Superstition, have overshot themselves, and run into extremes. Now it is no
slight stratagem of Satan (as a Dr. Featly Sermon. in 2 Cor. 2.11.
learned man, yet living has demonstrated) to bring us from one extreme to
another, and so by over reaching against heresy and superstition, to wrong the
true Religion; as St. Augustine in his zeal against the Pelagians, who
sleightned Baptism, went too far in urging the necessity thereof, pronouncing
all children that died unbaptized to be damned: and how many are there amongst
us (says mine Author) who out of hatred of the Antichristian tyranny,
condemn all Ecclesiastical Hierarchy? out of detestation of superstitious
rites, dislike even decent ceremonies? in opposition to garish and idolatrous
trimming of Temples, are brought to disallow all cost in adorning and
beautifying Christian Churches. This is not the truth: In medio consistit
veritas; errors in doctrine may be in both extremes, and truth in the middle.
As men therefore when they pass over a narrow bridge, if they be be not
exceeding careful, when the body swayeth, or the foot slippeth one way, by
hastily leaning too far the other, they may irrecoverably fall; therefore the
Medio tutissinius this.
middle way is the safest. Even so in this case. Tertullian (to find out the
true Religion) would have us fix our eyes upon that Quod Ecclesia ab Apostolis,
Apostoli a Christ, Chrisus a D^o didi^^t. Tertul. de praescript. ca. 21. and
37.
which the Church has received from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ,
and Christ from God. This was that which our Church of England resolved upon in
her first reformation, in the days of Edward the sixth, when for the avoiding
of diversities of opinions, and for the stablishing of consent touching true
Religion, those 39. Articles of our Church were agreed upon. To these (though
happily by some in these days contested against) let us still subscribe, if we
desire a reformation of those corruptions that are now crept into our Religion.
And this is the first thing we must avoid, diversity of Religions.

2. Division of hearts, a true effect of diversity of Religions, and not only
a great impediment to Reformation, but an open gap to confusion; the enemy
having thereby a greater advantage to work his purpose. For it has ever been
the wiliness of Satan, to make first a division in the Church, and then singly
to set upon her, that he may the easier make his conquest upon a part, then the
whole; as the last of the Horatii dealt with the two Curatii in the Addito ad
virtutem dolo ut dist^aberet host simulat fugam, singulosque (prout sequi
poteru^t) adortus exuperat. Flor. li. 1. ca. 3.
Roman story; the manner whereof by Livi. Decad. 1. lib. 1.
Livie is thus at large described. It being agreed by both Armies of the
Romans and the Albanes, for the sparing of much bloodshed, to put the trial
of all to the issue of a battle, between six brethren, three on the one side
the sons of Curatius, and three on the other side the sons of Horatius; while
the Curatii were united, though they were all three sorely wounded, they killed
two of the Horatii; the third remaining though not hurt at all yet finding
himself not able to make his party good against all three, begins to take his
heers, and when he saw them follow him slowly, one after the other as they were
able, by reason of their heavy armor and sore wounds he falls upon them one
after another, and slayes them all three. Even so, the devil assau^ts not this
body while it is healthy and strong, as long as the parts are nearly compacted
and condensated by charity; but like a wily enemy, takes advantage by some
dangerous breach, and enters through the disbanded troops of our armies.

Divisions have evermore been an enemy unto any good work, especially to this
of Reformation; how should our adversaries be ever persuaded to accord with us,
when we cannot agree amongst our selves? will not they boast the goodness of
their errors, whilst we differ in our truth? and be deterred from our
communion, when they shall see and behold our dissension? One of the maine
arguments whereby Genesis 34.21,
Hamor and Shechem went about to persuade their people to entertain Jacob and
his family, and their Religion, was, because they were peaceable: the very
Heathen will condemn what we profess, as untrue and unwarrantable; Quia omnis
secta Christianismi titulos sibi vendicat, tamen alia aliam execratur and
condemnat, Clement. Alex. Stromat. l. 7.
when every sect challenging to it self the title and right of true
Christianity, shall yet nevertheless one curse and condemn another.

It is a military principle, Tempt not an enemy by giving him the advantage:
what is this but to hearten their malignant opposition to assault us, when they
spy a breach amongst us? Anximus Philippum no^ ipsi Athenienses.
The Athenians complained, that they had strengthened King Philip against
themselves, by their own contentions: and so may we, our own seditions have
been our enemies gains, broken down the walls of Sion, and betrayed the peace
of our Jerusalem: and how indeed can it be otherwise, when as the dissolving
the union of parts, is the overthrowing the unity of the whole. It Is so in
other bodies, (...). Naz. orat. 12. p. 198.
every part of the world subsisting by a peaceable temper, and dissolving by
the contrary: so true is that maxim in Philosophy, in all States and
Societies, Omne divisibile est corruptibile. In the body of a man, so long as
the humors are at a fair agreement, choler proportionably allaid with
fleagme, and the sprightfull blood ballast with melancholy, the whole is
preserved by the harmony of its parts; the perfect Connexi^ totius corporis
unam sanitatem unam pulchritudinem facit. Leo Epist. 84, c. 11.
joining of each together, causes one health to bless it, and one beauty to
grace the whole composure of it; but when these are striving one with another,
when the blood and the choler are one against another, then there is an
evidence and open sign and overture of destruction; there being as it were all
the banners of nature displayed, to destroy it self. Even so in the Church of
God, when one member shall strive and fight against another, learned men set
themselves against learned men; one Protestant Preacher set to dispute that
which another teaches, and to pull down that which another builds: to
wrangle and jangle not so much (it may be) about fundamentals, as trifles,
mere unnecessarie superstitions, a consent (perhaps) of opinions in contrary
terms, (as 1 Sent. d. 11. q. 1.
Scotus censures the difference betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches) for
a little meat and for days, (as the Church of Romans 14 5.15,
Rome was grievously distracted, great stirs were raised (as afterward by
Victor Bishop thereof) about the use of leavened and unleavened bread, as Eusebius
li. 5. cap. 14.
Eusebius testifies) the like contentions about things indifferent, do trouble
the Angli^as quoque and Scoti^as E^^l^sias sim. lecerta^^n de re^^us adiaphoris
in hanc usque diem exerc^t. Paraeus in Romans cap. 14.
English and Scottish Churches to this day; about sitting and kneeling, about
black and white, (as sometimes the Constantinopolitanes did in the days of
Justinian about blew and green, till (as one says) they were all neither blew
not green, the slain swimming in blood, and the Emperor himself endangered.
So the factions of the Bianchi and Neri about the two colors of black and
white, cost the Dukedom of Florence dear, even the beauty and peace of the
Country.)

This of all others is most dangerous, and a forerunner of a great and
fearful calamity that must befall the whole house. Thus I was in Grecce, but
when? even a little before it came to rume. It is our Saviors axiom, Mark
3.14.
A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand: the building is much
endangered to ruin when the stones square and jarre one with another. Needs
must the daughter of Israel be disquieted, and her peace disturbed, when such
opposites, like Rebeckahs twins Genesis 25.22.
struggle in her womb. If the distraction of voices hindered the building of
Babel, will not division of hearts hinder the building of Jerusalem? Miserable
experience has made it manifest, to the great detriment of sundry Nations,
that disunion follows, where distraction went before. The division amongst the
Trojans, made way for the Grecians; the Grecians being divided, Philip was
brought in: The division of the Assyrian Monarchy, brought in the Persians; of
the Persian, brought in the Macedonian; of the Macedonian brought in the
Roman; of the Roman brought in the Turk; which unclean bird should never
have roosted in those sanctified Dominions, Mahomet should never have been
worshipped, where once the Arc stood; had Israel been true to Judah, but the
renting of the ten Tribes from the two, has made both the two and the ten
miserable.

Divisions in the Church do usually lead to a disturbance in the State, and so
both fighting one against another, until at length an utter extirpation devour
and swallow all. Oh the unhappines of civil dissentions! The Gallo^um decies
centum millia ceciderunt Ecclesiaru^ 20. millia fundamentis excisa. Collignius.
French our neighbors, can speak it by experience, in whose late civil wars
there were no less in ten years space, then ten hundred thousand men consumed,
twenty thousand Churches overthrown. Our own homebred garboiles are yet fresh
upon record, in those distracted times of Henry the sixth, betwixt the Houses
of Lancaster and York, in which unhappie quarrel before they were united,
there were cruelly butchered an hundred thousand men (as Pont. Heute.
one says) ten thousand families (as Comineus.
another) were rooted out, and fourscore Princes of the blood Royal, put to
death; insomuch, that no man can but marvel (says Sic Comineus, ut nullus non
execretur and admiretur crudelitatem and barbaram insaniam quae inter bomines
eodem sub caelo natos, ejusdem linguae sanguinis religionis exercabatur.
one) at that barbarous immanitie and ferall madness, committed betwixt men of
the same Nation, language, and Religion.

In a word, they that have been least endamaged, have but little cause to joy
in it: the Lord bless this Nation from it, rather let it befall the enemies of
God and his Church, that they may be Isa. 49.26.
fed with their own flesh, and made drunken with their own blood, as with new
wine.

As for us let there be no 1 Cor. 1.10.
divisions amongst us; but let us be perfectly joined together in the same mind
and in the same judgment. Psalm. 133.1.
Behold, how good and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together
in unity! when inter multa corpora non multa corda (as Aug. in Psalm. 133.
Augustine speaks) amongst diverse men, there are not diverse minds: It is
precious as the ointment of Aaron, and profitable as the dew of Hermon; the
Lord make this dew abundantly to fall about the Tents of the Church of England.

This sweet agreement amongst our selves, is (as Hoc praecipium est religionis
nostre caput. Calvin in 1. Cor. 1.10.
Calvin says) the main head of our Religion; upon this Hoc etiam consensu stat
and submixa est salus Ecclesiae. Calv. ib.
rock the health and safety of the Church is founded and settled; if therefore
we desire to further the reformation of it, from such corruptions and abuses as
are in it, let us beware of these divisions: which is the second thing we must
endeavor to avoid.

3. Dissension about teachers, which ordinarily effects a division of hearts,
and so makes a most dangerous rent and breach in the Church of Christ; Some are
so wise, that they care for no Preache^s at all, no man's gift likes them, nor
yet any man's labor prevails with them: like the Matthew. 11.18.19.
Jews, though John came in one sort, and Christ in another; yet neither John
nor Christ could please them.

Others are so wilful that such an one shall teach them, and no body else,
none comparable unto him: and they that do not hear him, are not worthy (in
their judgments) to be accounted Professors.

The refractorie will hear none but refusers of conformity, condenming all
others that shall subscribe and interpose themselves for the Churches peace, as
time-servers, enemies to all goodness, men of profane minds, haters of
Religion, despisers of the Word, and such as would be as forward for the Mass,
as the Communion, if the State should alter; on the contrary, the conformist
will not hear them as do not suit with him in every point, flouting and
deriding them under the name of Puritans, Brethren, Precisians, and such like.
The licentious and corrupt liver, he likes none but such as will 1 Pet. 4.4.
run into the same excess of riot with him, drink, and swear, and drab, as he
does; preach to his Parishioners in the Lycaonian language (...), Omnia been,
every thing is as it should be, when God knows all is stark naught; unless he
will Ezekiel. 13.18
sewe pillows (where indeed he should rather quilt thorns) and proclaim Ier.
8.11. Ezekiel. 13.10.
peace, peace, in stead of war, and Prove. 24.24.
say to the wicked, thou art righteous; he is no Parson for him: let him Micah
2.11. Isa. 56.12.
prophecy of wine and of strong drink, and he shall be a Prophet for these
men. Others again esteem of none, but such as are excellently endowed with more
then ordinary gifts both of nature and grace; to him they will flock, and him
they will admire: but if a man of less eminency and meaner parts, be in
place, (though approved of by the Church, and one who is conscionable in his
way, diligent and painful in the employment of that talent which is committed
unto him, for his Masters advantage, of an holy life and conversation) yet,
they will not vouchsafe to hear him: he is either of a slow voice, or else of
a bad memory, he looks too much on his book, his method pleases them not, nor
yet sometimes his doctrine; some say he preaches too much mercy, others too
much judgment (as if he knew not 2 Timothy 2.15.
rightly how to divide the word of truth) and so one way or other he is not for
their tooth.

Now this must needs breed a great distraction and unorderly confusion in the
Church, when some shall be extolled, others slighted, and others despised, it
works much upon the contemned part, stirs them up to anger, provokes them to
discontent, settles them in malice, incites them to envy: All which are
grounded upon contempt (as the Aristot. li. 2. Rest. cap. 2. ubi ira sic
difficitur. (...).
Philosopher shows) nothing being at any time taken offensively, but sub
ratione contemptus; when men shall be neglected by others, as if they were not,
and have no reckoning at all made of them, as if they were not worth the
whistling after, in respect of others (to whom it may be they are no ways
inferior in regard of some other graces of the Spirit) this I say is grievous
to their nature, makes them many times prefer greater inconveniences before it
(as he in the Satius est mibi quovis exitia interire etc. Plaut. in Cistel.
Act. 4. Scen. 3.
Comedy, who had rather be banished, then derided or contemned) this
exasperates men's thoughts, makes them impatient one of another, drives every
side upon a peculiar bottom, and so procures an inseparable division amongst
them.

The Church of Corinth, though otherwise a renowned Church, 1 Cor. 1.2.
sanctified in Christ Jesus; Verse. 6.
confirmed in Christ, Verse. 9.
called unto the fellowship of the Son of God; yet are blamed by the Apostle
for these Verse. 11.12.
contentions amongst them.

They had three famous Preachers, men of extraordinary worth and great eminency
in the Church.

There was St Paul, who for his learning, zeal, sanctification, miraculous
conversion, fiery devotion, though he were Novissimus Apostolorum in ordine,
yet he was Primus in merito, being rapt up into the heavens, where he learned
Divinity amongst the Angels in the School of Paradise, under the tuition of
God himself.

There was Apollo, who was borne at Acts 18.24.
Alexandria, powerful in the Scriptures, fervent in Spirit, received amongst
the Disciples, after some instructions from Aquila and Priscilla, teaching
Christ eloquently, and powerfully, and refuteth his enemies boldly.

There was Cephas, who (as Jerome. Catalog. Script.
Jerome styles him) was Princeps Apostolum, or (as Chrysostom calls him)
Supremus praecipuus, sive supremum locum obtinens. Excellentissimus, sive
Eminentissimus, apud Herodia. lib. 7.
(...), the Primate and chief of the Apostles, either for the privilege of
his age, or the liberty of his speech, or honors conferd upon him by our
Savior, as choosing him for his individual companion in raising the dead, in
his transfiguration on the Mount, in his last Vigils in the garden; his speech
always directed to him, as a person representing the rest, his favorite and
darling, etc.

All of them (no doubt) men of grace and excellent gifts, though not all of one
sort; and through this diverfitie, the Church of Corinth falls into as great
distemper; Some will be for Paul, professing themselves to be only his
followers; others for Apollo, magnifying his powerful Eloquence, and slighting
Paul's plainness; others for none of them both, but only for Cephas; they will
go hear him, he goes beyond the other two. Now these dissentions amongst them
about their Pastors, did not only hinder the Apostles proceedings, who was to
impart unto them some great mysteries; but also hatched contentions in their
secular affairs; as may easily be seen by his gradation, cap. 3.3. there
being amongst them 1 Cor. 3.3.
envying, and strife, and divisions.

The same effects has this dissension wrought in other Churches; What it may
do in ours, may easily be perceived, if in some reasonable time it be not
amended.

All you then that desire an happy proceeding in the reformation, avoid this
dissension. You that are Non-conformists, despise not them who have willingly
subscribed, (I do not say, like those subtle Gelas. Cyzic. part. 2. cap. 27.
Arrian Bishops, (...), only with their hands, but not with their hearts; but
such as have freely and cheerfully conformed) It is no impossibility for such
men to be good and honest, and religious and zealous men too, yea and to lay
down their lives for the testimony of Gods truth, and for the maintenance of
the Gospel, if they should be thereunto called; as many such in this Kingdom
did, both Bishops and conformable Ministers in the days of Queen Mary.

And you that are Conformists, neglect not to hear them, who refuse
subscription; there be of that part also, good and honest men, of unreproveable
conversation, who have upright and sincere hearts to Godward, who are
unfeinedly zealous of his truth, in the maintenance of pure Religion, there may
be Sanctistante charitate possunt errare etiam contra Catholi^am veritatem.
O^cham. Dial. part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 4.
error in judgment in both; both subject to infirmity, and therefore let
neither be despised more then either. Keep you close to your own Pastors
(especially at such times when they give their attendance within the doors of
the Lords Sanctuary, Heb. 13.17.
watching for your souls) though their gifts be far inferior, and come much
short of the gifts of many others; yet they are they that must give an account
of you unto God. Besides, all the Lords servants in the Ministry, are not
alike endowed; some have Math. 25.15.
five talents, some but two, some but one; some have a more excellent gift of
conference, some of prayer, some of exhortation, some in opening of a Text,
some in application, etc. and yet all are Gods faithful servants, and have
their gifts given them to 1 Cor. 12.7.
profit withal, and from any of their gifts, 1 Cor. 14.31.
all may learn and get profit, if the fault be not their own. He that has
the meanest, (being truly sanctified,) may yet confer aliquid in publicam,
cast his gift such as it is into the common treasury of the Church; which may
some way or other be profitable unto Gods people, and help on-ward the
edification of those committed to his charge (as I have In a Sermon preached at
a Visitation, holden at St. M^^haels Church in Jews April the ninth 1638.
elsewhere declared.)

Physicians say, that the Constitutions of all men's bodies, are of a mixture of
hot, dry, cold, and moist, and yet the wisdom of God has so diversely tempered
these, that scarce in the world are two men to be found, in every point of the
like temper; The face of man is not above a span over, yet let ten thousand men
be together, and their countenances shall all differ: So in the Church, let
diverse men Preach of the same Text, and all soundly and to the point; yet
scarce two of an hundred to be found, that have in all things the like gift,
either of matter or utterance (therefore it was to the amazement and admiration
of Ptolomie, that the Seventie Interpreters, being placed in sundry rooms,
never conferring and seeing one another, did yet upon the same Text, write the
same thing, not only for sense of matter, but even for sound of words (as
Augustine reports) but this is the same (...), That manifold wisdom of God,
that liking not one, we may like another, and the variety of men's affections
be satisfied with the variety of his gifts. Accord then in this particular,
do not abuse this great mercy, contemn none for the meannesse of his gifts
(if truly sanctified) but make a good use of all, that by some one or other of
them, you may be thoroughly reformed, and so brought from all your sins unto
God. And this is the last impediment which must be avoided, if we desire the
furtherance of the Reformation, viz. dissension about Teachers.

And thus of the first way, how it ought to be endeavored, viz. privatively.

2. Now positively, and that two manner of ways.

1. By a general Humiliation.

2. By a particular Reformation.

1. By a general humiliation, When all of us from the highest unto the lowest,
shall like the Jonah 3.5, 6.
Ninivites, present our selves before God, in sackcloth and ashes, and ply him
with our sighs and tears, our fastings and prayers, which are Hae^ sunt arma
coelestia quae stare and perseverare fortiter faciunt, hoc sunt munimenta
sptritualia and tela divina quae protigunt nos. Cypr^an E^^^^ 1.
the spiritual weapons, we alone can trust unto, and the proper armor of a
Christian Soldier, to fight against the fearful combinations, of the Churches
powerful and vigilant enemies. The Lord requires this at our hands, when we
desire great things to be wrought for us, he must and will be sought unto, in
the use of this means: At all times we ought to Macah. 6.8.
walk humbly with our God; in times of prosperity, in times of greatest joy;
but especially in such times as these, now this grace is chiefly called for;
when our crying sins have awakened Gods justice, and broken the Vial of his
anger over our heads, insomuch, that the drops of blood hang hoovering in the
air, like clouds of vengeance, ready to break down upon us; when the dark
and mistie fogges of wickedness, are gathered together from sundry places,
threatening some great tempest of thundering and lightning, insomuch, that we
have just cause to fear a black and dismal day, a bloody day of invasion and
utter desolation near at hand. Now, (if ever) we have need to humble our
selves, that if possible, the strong wind of our devotions, together with the
swift gale of our sighs and tears, may clear the sky, and so dispell those
cloudy vapors in such sort, as that they shall not fall upon us. This is the
course proposed unto us; the most effectual means for the averting of
judgment, and the obteining of mercy: This will fly to the Heavens, and
pierce the clouds, and not be terrified with the height, nor yet frighted with
the frowns of justice; therefore the Saints in their greatest streits and
strongest oppositions, have betaken themselves unto this means. The Judge.
20.26.
Israelites when they were distressed, for the murder of their men, which were
slain by the Benjamites, went up to the house of God, and there spent an whole
day, in weeping, fasting, and prayer. 2 Chro. 20.3.
Jehosaphat commanded a public fast to be kept, when the enemies of the Jews
invaded his Kingdom. So did Nehem. 9.1.
Nehemiah, of purpose to turn away the vengeance which might justly have
befallen them, for marrying of strange wives.

This kind of humiliation was exercised by Exodus 34.28.
Moses, 1 King 19.8.
Elias, and our Mat. 4.2.
Savior Christ, at such times as when great matters were to be attempted by
them, It is that, which in these dangerous times of ours, both God, our King
and Country, have called upon us to perform. The glistering ornaments of
Courtly robes, have already been changed into mourning weeds; The great King of
England (as sometime the King of Jonah 3.6.
Ninive) has arose from his throne, and stripped himself of his costly raiment;
the Princes, the Nobles, and Peers, have already moystned this way with their
tears, and put on with all their force of zealous prayers: You in the City,
and we in the Country, have sat in ashes, and girded our selves with
sackcloath; how far we have prevailed, the God of heaven only knows: My
charity gives me to think, that in the great and solemn days of your
humiliation, you humbled your selves 2 Chronicles. 33.12.
greatly before the God of your Fathers; and cried Jonah 3.8.
mightily unto him; with holy eagerness, ye devour those fasts, and are well
content with the austeritie of that pious penitence; It is the comfort of your
soul to be persuaded, you shall prevail with God; the very thoughts of the
continuance of his frowns upon you, were enough (with Genesis 4.5, 6.
Cain) to make you cast your countenance down to the ground. If success prove
not answerable to your hopes, there is yet required a greater measure of
humiliation; Joel 2.16.
Let the Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet;
Let every man humble himself in his own family, betwixt himself and his own
Spirit, himself and his own household, (no further I durst not warrant you, as
to assume that prerogative to your selves, by gathering (when you please) an
open assembly, to sanctify a public fast, to call to sackcloth and mourning,
before the Magistrate have decreed it; this were to deny Caesar his due, to
prescribe a service contrary to the president of many 1 Samuel 7.6. 2 Chronicles.
20.3. Ezra 8.21. Hest. 4.16. 1 Kin. 24.8. Joel 3.15.
Scriptures, and to teach a point of discord and confusion, which within a
Christian Commonwealth, must carefully be avoided) only with your selves, in
your own private domestical charge, (if need require) weekly use the benefit
of this means; Psalm. 55.17.
Cry aloud unto God, evening and morning, and at noone; Genesis 32.24, 26.
Wrestle with him (as Jacob did) never let him go, until you have obtained
the blessing; be your resolution as the Shunamites was when she spoke to
Elisha, 2 Kin. 4.30.
As the Lord lives, I will not leave thee. And if through the continuance of
his anger, the time shall require it, you may in a godly and modest manner, as
humble remembrancers, solicit Authority, for a more frequent dispatch of this
duty, and in your private devotions desire the Lord to move their hearts, to
proclaim that which shall be truly pleasing in his eyes, that a whole burnt
offering might be made unto the Lord, from the highest to the lowest, a solemn
dedication of every person and state, throughout the whole Kingdom; that so
every one in general may more frequently concur and agree, in seeking remedy
against our eminent danger; oh! what a pleasing sacrifice will this be unto
God, how may it prevail with him, to cause him to alter his purpose and change
his determination, concerning our destruction. Jacobs submission to Genesis 33.3,
4. etc.
Esau, altered the purpose of Esau, and prevailed with him, it caused his very
bowels to yearne, he was not the man that he was before; our submission has
ever annexed the melting and relenting, or (to use the Scripture phrase) the
Isa. 63.15.
sounding of the Ier. 31.20.
bowels of the Lord; How resolved soever he was to destroy Ninive (as
appears in the Message of the Prophet, Jonah 3.4.
Yet forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed,) upon their general
humiliation it is said, Verse 10.
God repented of the evil, that he had said, that he would do unto them, and
he did it not. So afterward to peevish Jonah, Cap. 4.11.
Should not I spare Ninive that great City, wherein are six score thousand
persons, not discerning between the right hand and the left. It is never in
vain to humble our selves, and call upon the Lord; the promise is, Psalm. 91.15.
He will hear and deliver.

Those many good things, which by this means the Saints have obtained, may
confirm us in the truth of it, (not to instance in Moses, Joshua, Samuel,
David, and Solomon,) by this mean 2 King. 19.15.
Hezekiah did turn that evil thought of Senacherib away from his Land and
people; by these very weapons St 2 Cor. 6.6.
Paul oppugned his enemies; by this the good Eusebius. de vira Constant. lib. 1.
c. 11.
Constantius was said to strengthen his family, and Lib. 4. c. 14.
Constantine the Great, his Son, did hereby fortify all his Empire. How
frequent were the primitive Saints in this means, against the Propositions of
Christ and his Gospel; When Arrius the Heretic (having an injunction of the
Emperor for it) would needs come to the Communion; Socrat. hist. Eccles. 1. c.
25.
Alexander the good Bishop, did betake himself to abstinence, and fasting, did
pray Christ Jesus to take the matter into his own hand, which accordingly was
granted unto him, to the destruction of the Heretic both in body and soul.
Long since this, in later ages that worthy member of Jesus Christ, Martin
Luther perceiving the doctrine of the Gospel to be brought into a great
streite; strong opposition being made against it, by the enemies thereof; he
flies to his God, lays hold upon him by faith, and offers violence to him by
prayer; never leaves wrestling with him until he received comfort from him;
at length rising up cheerfully from his devotion, comes out of his closet
triumphantly to his fellow laborers, saying, Vicimus, We have overcome. At
which time, Ioh. Sleidan. in Comment.
Sleidan observes, that there came out a Proclamation from Charles 5 that none
should be further molested for the profession of the Gospel. Every age
affords many examples of Gods gracious assistance in the conscionable use of
this means, when great matters are to be effected. Motives sufficient (in
these times) to stir us up to the performance of this duty; which is the
first I here positively commend unto your Christian practice, viz. A general
humiliation.

2. By a particular Reformation, when every man and woman in their own private
persons, shall endeavor to amend what they find amiss, and reform themselves
in their personal corruptions; so every one amending one, it will be a speedy
way to accomplish the reformation of all. Now what these corruptions are, you
yourselves best know, your own consciences being thoroughly acquainted with the
sundry passages of your conversation: for my part, I could be content, not to
tell them in 2 Samuel 1.20. Micah 1.10.
Gath, nor yet declare them in the streets of Askelon; but the Lord wills
that we Isa. 58.1.
cry aloud and spare not, that we lift up our voice like a trumpet, and show
his people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins.

He has somewhat against every inhabitant of this great Island, even from
Which were the utmost Towns bounding the Land of Palestina from North to
South. Dan. viz. Ab Aquilone and Bersheba versus Meridiem. Petr. Martyr. in 1 Samuel 3.20. and Piscat. Schol. in loc.
Dan to Bersheba, from the point of Catnesse to the cape of St. Burien, from
the King that sits in the throne, to the maid that grindeth at the Mill,
from the Cedar to the shrub, from the Eagle to the Wren, from the highest to
the lowest, from the youngest to the oldest, from the richest to the poorest,
we have all Genesis 6.12.
corrupted our ways; Aegrotat humanum genus (as Sermon. 6. de verb. Domini.
Austin speaks) we are all sick with sin, and overgrown with heaps of vices, as
was Cicer. Tusc. quaest. lib. 5.
Archimedes tomb with thorns, when Cicero came to visit it.

I cannot rip up, neither am I acquainted with all the particulars of our
national sins; time and your patience would prevent me, if I should but reckon
up so many as deserve our speediest reformation; as our transcendent pride,
unmercifull oppression, cruel extortion, over-mercifull connivence to sin,
open profaneness, wastefull prodigality, insatiable avarice, symonaicall
sacrilege, unbridled luxury, beastly drunkenness, bloody treachery
slanderous detraction, cunning fraud, envious underminings, ambitious
temporizings, and such like, together with coldness in zeal, contempt of Gods
Word, profanation of his Sabbaths, neglect of his Sacraments, and what not? to
name all were impossible. We need rather tears to bewail them, then a tongue to
report them; for every one of them threatens our destruction, thwarts our
hopes, hinders our proceedings, disturbes our peace, heartens our enemies,
displayes our weakness, and will in the end (if not amended) make us a
fearful spectacle of Gods justice. Oh blame me not for discovering the
wretched nakedness of this sinful Nation; I know indeed complaints, howsoever
they may be just, yet they are seldom pleasing; but now, not more unpleasing
then necessary; and therefore I could yet be more particular, Is it not before
the Lord, whom I speak? Is not Gods hand in those judgments which hang over
our heads? Is it for nothing that we are circuled round with so many eminent
dangers? that the glory of this our Kingdom (which not long ago was so
resplendent, that it dazzled the eyes of such as were near or about it;) has
been of late so darkly ecclipsed? that God goes not forth with our Armies, but
suffers our enemies to prevail? that our friends wonder, and our foes rejoice
at our ill success? hissing and clapping their hands to see our glory
swallowed up? that our own swords are daily threatened to be drawn against us,
and the unnatural brood of our own nests, ready to bite out our bellies? All
which are infallible tokens that God is highly displeased with us: is there not
a cause then that we enquire? that I cry? Do I alone speak of these things?
have not the Turtles of this land in every corner thereof, groaned out the sad
tunes of woe and misery? Is it not the usual subject of your public Sermons
in this City? has not God so guided the hearts and tongues of his faithful
Ministers, that almost all of them (even as one man) do constantly cry out
(with that Joseph. li. 7. ^e bell. lud. ^^.12.
Jesus the son of Anani a little before the destruction of Jerusalem) woe to
England and the Inhabitants thereof, by reason of such outrageous wickedness, as
does every where abound amongst them. These sad complaints occasioned by our
presumptuous sins, are manifest symptoms of some greater evil that will
certainly follow; as the cracking of the house is the fore-warning of his fall:
these be but the flashing lightnings, the thunderbolt of destruction will come
suddenly after, unless by our repentance and reformation, we house our selves
under the wings of Gods protection from the danger.

Oh, let us then in time bethink our selves of some remedy, Mittamus ^reces
and la^heymas cordis ^gatos. Cypr^an. li. 4. (...) 4.
dispatch messengers to heaven and meet God by the way, make an atonement with
him before the fullness of his wrath break in upon us: yet there is space and
opportunity (and not more then) enough; the manifest breaches threatening the
destruction of this Kingdom, may yet be repaired, upon our amendment; as some
reasonable cost will set to rights the beginning ruins of a decaying house,
which when it is once dropped down with danger about our ears, will hardly be
re-edified. Let every one in his several place and calling, put his hand to
this work; cease any more from complaints, and fall all to amendment.

You that be Magistrates, who sit in the stearn of this Commonwealth in the
seat of Justice, cease to beak your selves, like Ier. 36.22.
Jehoiakim before the fire of ease and rest; let not the Sword of Justice rust
in the scabbard of connivence, when God, your King, your Country, calls to have
it drawn against the enemies of our peace; do not stand like St. Georges
picture, with your hands up, and never strike; rather reason with your selves,
as sometimes the Orator did against Cateline; Did Publius Scipio, a private
man, kill Tiberius Gracchus, but lightly weakening the state of the
Commonwealth; and shall we that are Consul, let Cateline alone, desirous to
lay waste all the world with slaughterings and firings. Let it be your care
with David, Psalm 101.8.
Early to destroy the wicked of the land, and to cut off all wicked doers from
the City of the Lord: give a downright blow to those offensive evils, which
cry for a mighty stroke, that they may no more stalk by you, much less stare
upon you uncontrolled. For this purpose walk the streets, search all disordered
houses, and constrain the profane to frequent the sanctuaries; to hear the
good word of the Lord. In your own persons, follow the directions of the
Prophet Isaiah, Isa 33.15.
Walk righteously, and speak uprightly, despise the gain of oppressions, shake
your hands from holding of bribes, lest your ears be stopped from hearing of
blood, and your eyes shut from seeing of evil. Let not gold weigh heavier then
Naboths wrongs in the schools of Justice; lest you sell your connivence (and
withal your conscience) when and where you should give punishment.

You that are Ministers and messengers of God, Joel 2.17.
Weep between the porch and the Altar: Ier. 22.20. Hosea 5.8.
Cry aloud against your own sins and the sins of others; fear not any man's
person, nor yet spare any man's profession, teacher nor hearer, Prince nor
people, Ruler nor Subject, rich nor poor, your Commission stretches it self
as far as Christ, redemption to all sorts in general; Be not like those four
hundred prophets mentioned the 1 King. 22.6. slaves and vassals to any man's
affections, preaching no otherwise then the best man in your Parish would have
you, deliver the word of God plainly, powerfully, in 2 Timothy 4.2.
season and out of season; let your life and doctrine agree together (as it was
sometime said of Origin, Quale habuit verbumtale habuit vitam.
his life was answerable to his doctrine) beat down the body of sin in your
selves as well as in others: suffer not your gifts to be wrapped up in an idle
brain without practice, as 1 Samuel 21.9.
Goliahs sword was in a cloth without use; nor yet the fountain of your
knowledge like Genesis 29.10.
Labans Well, to be shut up with a great stone of security, making either the
Court with 3 Ioh. 9.
Diotrephes, or the Universitie with Ille Athenas profectius, desiderto
Philosophy captus est cujus ea fuit, etc. Ex Suida.
Cleanthes, a sanctuary for your idleness; but rather pass your time with
holy Hieron. epist. ad Marcel.
Ambrose, in conference with God, and practice of holy duties, as in reading,
or meditating, or praying, or conferring, or counselling, or comforting, or
writing, or preaching.

You that are called to the study of the Laws, (for such also I perceive to
tread on the pavement of this sacred place, and to sit within the compass of
these consecrated walls) your noble Science and profession is commendable, none
but Anabaptista arguunt illicitum, etc. Vide Paraeum in 1 Cor. c. 3.7.
Anabaptists will deny a Christian that liberty of seeking remedy from you,
when injurious persons shall grow worse by forbearance, and ground their
insolence upon others patience. Let not favor nor affection over-sway you in
your places; but rather count him an enemy that will allege friendship to
pervert justice Go as far as you can in offices of love and service to your
friends and betters, Salvis pietate and justitia but not a step further for a
world: if you seek to Galat. 1.10.
please men beyond this, you cannot be the servants of God. Do not hide the
native face of your Clients cause by shufling plainness into difficulties; you
should employ your best knowledge in untying the knots of the Law, and be as
Antroposes to cut off the thread of controversies between man and man, and not
feed those that come unto you for counsel, with golden hopes and sugared words,
and large promises, while in the mean time like Lachesis, ye draw in length the
thread of contention, using unnecessary delays, and posting off the matter
from Term to Term, from Court to Court, from year to year, dealing with your
best causes, as unconscionable Chirurgions are wont to do with sore legs, hold
them long in hand, not for the difficulty of the cure, but for present hope of
future gain.

But rather harden your faces, and strengthen your resolutions with an holy
obstinacy, against these and all other like temptations; so doing, you shall
further the Reformation, bring glory unto God, good unto his Church, safety
unto your Prince and State, peace and quiet unto the Commonwealth wherein you
live; and last of all, a crown of blessings upon your head for ever.

You that are Merchants and Tradesmen, do not like those in Amos 8.5.
Amos, grudge the Lord of his day, through the longing thoughts of your own
Market, nor yet falsify the balances by deceit, nor make the ephah small, nor
the shekel great. Let not desire of profit in over-prizing, nor yet pride of
wit in overreaching, be the main principles of your profession; do not
prejudice your conscience, by putting off your Verse. 6.
refuse wares, under a vain pretext of caveat emptor: sell not your oaths and
protestations, and withal your souls, by venting off your bad commodities; do
not through a dark window, nor yet by the help of an impudent tongue, deal
unconscionable, when as you tell your customers, you ask but reasonable; take
not advantage of any man's necessities; and so thrust your wares upon him, which
have stood longer by you then the years of an Apprentiship; watch not
opportunity to abuse the simple plainness of your honest customers, whose
apprehensions come far short of yours in the driving of a bargain. But in all
your trading, so carry your selves, as in the parting with your commodities,
you may still keep the peace of a good conscience.

You that are Masters of families, and petty Kings and Priests in your own
houses, look to your charges, with David Psalm. 101.6.
fix your eyes upon the faithful in the Land, that such may dwell with you,
and serve you; Be there within the compass of your own regiment, a 2 King.
5.25.
lying Jehazi, or a 2 Samuel 16.3.
backbiting Ziba, an Luke 16.6, 7.
unjust Steward, or a Matthew. 25.26.30.
wicked and unprofitable servant, an Atheist, a Papist, a swearer, a prophaner
of the Sabbaths, a swaggerer, an unclean person, or such like, endeavor by
admonition and correction to reclaim them, and if they prove incorrigible, with
Genesis 35.2.
Jacob cleanse and purge your families of them, do not suffer such to Psalm.
101.7.
dwell in your house; Let no corruption be within your compass connived a^,
nor yet unpurged; beware of giving ill example unto such as are under your
charge, through your loose conversation, but rather endeavor to the utmost of
your power, (by family duties) De salute little qui in domo tua sunt solicitus
ac pervigie exist as, quia pro omnibus tibi subiectis rationem Domino reddes.
Aug. de salut. do cum ca. 29.
to seek their spiritual edification; Deuteronomy. 6.7.
talk of the Laws of GOD when you sit in your house, and with Genesis 18.19.
Abraham command your children and servants to keep the way of the Lord; so
shall you not only love their bodies here on earth, but one day meet their
souls in heave.

In a word, Let every one that loves his Nation, that favors Religion, that
wishes continuance of the Gospel, the prosperous proceeding of Parliament,
peace and prosperity unto the Kingdom; reform himself in his conversation,
and consecrate his own hands, to the pulling down of the Kingdom of sin; Down
with it, down with it, even to the ground. And this is the second positive
duty which we must endeavor to perform, if we desire to further the
Reformation, viz. A particular amendment in every person.

But now I fear me, through too much prolixitie of speech, I have over-boldly
entrencht upon your patience; the time is more than past, and it is most
fitting we should draw to an end; The zeal of Gods glory, and the hearty
desire of my Countries welfare, has hitherto enlarged my discourse (further
then I had thought) against the transgressions of the time, the maine enemies
of God and this Kingdom; Let me crave your attendance but to one thing more,
and so I shall dismiss you for this present; and that is this:

Suppose the question which once was made by the Prophet David, should now be
propounded in this great Assembly, Psalm. 34.12.
What man is he that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see
good, or that he may see good days (as the 1 Pet. 3.10.
Apostle expresses it, following the Septuagint) (i.e.) good and quiet days;
Aynsworth Annotat. in Psalm. 3.4.
days of prosperity, pleasure, and comfort, etc. Such days wherein your
consciences shall be no more enthralled to the ordinances of men; wherein your
zeal shall be rectified by sound knowledge; wherein your Religion shall be
reformed by statutes of the highest God; Such days, wherein peace being once
more settled amongst us, we may 2 Samuel 7.1.
every one without fear, sit under our own Vines and Figtrees; Such days
wherein our Merchants may cheerfully trade abroad, and bring home Psalm. 104.15.
Wines to glad our hearts, and Oil to make our face to shine; Such days
wherein our Artificers may sit at home and sing in their shops; wherein our
husbandmen cheerfully following the plough, may James 5.7.
sow their Corn in hope, and reap with joy; Such days wherein our Psalm.
144.12.
sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; and our daughters may be as
corner stones, polished after the similitude of a Palace; Such days wherein
our Verse. 13.14.
garners may be full, affording all manner of store; wherein our sheep may
bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets; wherein our Oxen may
be strong to labor; wherein there may be no breaking in, nor going out; no
complaining in our streets, etc. I say, if the question should be demanded; Who
would desire to see these days? I doubt not, but we should suddenly hear a
whispering noise proceed from the joyful hearts of many here assembled. I
would, says one, I would, says another; yea, a loud cry, with an unanimous
consent of all your voices, even from the Magistrate in the Pew, to the
Water-bearer in the Bell-fry; I, I, I, defire to see it.

Be silent then a while; you have heard how this may be done; be not covetous,
nor superstitious, nor lice^tious, nor yet run before those appointed in the
reformation; Labor to be settled in the true Religion; be not divided in your
affections, dissent not about your Teachers; humble your selves mightily before
God, by fasting, by prawer; amend every one your evil ways.

Then will the Lord be merciful to this Land; he will quickly turn the sower
looks of an angry and sin-revenging Judge, into the smiling countenance of a
mild and gentle Father; he will take the rod which he has prepared for us, and
burn it in the fire; he will stay the stroke, which is now begun in Ireland,
and restore to them and us, our helps again: All things shall prosper with
us, and nothing shall stop the current of his blessings from us; he will
confound our enemies, by disappointing their hopes, and breaking their power in
sunder; he will wash away all the dreggs of Popery and superstition, which now
oppose and trouble the state of the Church of Christ; he will subdue
Antichrist, with all his Adherents, and so overthrow his purposes, that his
very memory shall be had in confusion. Of his liberal goodness, he will give
us more of such aid and help, as shall be needful to work the through
reformation of our State in general, and of every one of us in particular; He
will go on with that blessed work begun in Parliament, and increase the good
gifts of his holy Spirit, upon the happy Members of both Houses; furnish them
with such a measure of knowledge, zeal, diligence, and holy constancy, as that
they shall clear the passage of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, from all
disturbance: build up the profession of Gods pure Religion in sincerity, and
stablish the civil regiment of this Commonwealth in peace and equity.

The which God of Heaven grant for his mercies sake, Jesus Christ the righteous
for his merits sake, the Holy Ghost the comforter, for his names sake, to whom
be all praise, power, and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

