Sergeant THORPE Judge OF ASSIZE for the NORTHERN CIRCVIT, His CHARGE, As it
was delivered to the Grand Jury at York Assizes the twentieth of March, 1648.
and taken in Shortwriting.

Clearly epitomizing the Statutes belonging to this Nation, which concerns
(and, as a golden rule, ought to regulate) the several estates and conditions
of men.

And (being duly observed) do really promote the Peace and Plenty of this
Commonwealth.

Printed at York by Tho: Broad, 1649.

Sergeant Thorp, Judge of the Assise for the Northern Circuit, his Charge, as
it was delivered at York Assizes 20 March, 1648. and taken in Shorthand.
GEntlemen, Friends, and Countrymen, I do not question but that the Style, and
Title of our Commissions under which we are now to act and execute the
Authority and Power committed to our hands, being changed from Carolus Rex
Angliae, to Custodes Libertatis Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti, works diverse
effects upon the Tempers and spirits of men, according as the spirits
themselves are tempered and affected; and that some of those spirits (like the
Sun upon Wax) it softens into Obedience and compliance, and others of them
again (like the same Sun upon Clay) it hardens into stiffnesse and oppression.
Proud, Ambitious, and Malignant spirits finding themselves frustrated and
defeated hereby of their designed Hopes and hopeful Designs, for obtaining
their desired Ends; and being filled with prejudice to others, and self-love to
their own opinions, and therefore having turned themselves aside from the use
of their own Reason, and from all Overtures and Arguments of satisfaction, and
having given up their understanding to blind Affections, -- it startles and
confounds with Passions and Amazements, heightened into choler and disdain;
Because looking through the false Glass of their own self-Interest, they find
nothing therein but imaginary shakings of Foundations, overturning of Laws, and
confused heaps of Ruins and Distractions. But to these, if any such be
present, (especially if they have been formerly engaged in open War against
the public Interest of the Nation, and so are cast by Gods justice for their
Transgressions into a mean and low condition) All I shall say (with the poor
comfort of calamity, Pity) is this, That if they have not already tasted
enough of the Cup of Gods wrath for their misdoings, let them take heed they
engage not again, for fear that hereafter they be enforced to drink the Dreggs
of his displeasure. Other silly spirits there are, who standing unbottomed upon
any solid Principles of their own, find themselves tossed to and fro with the
Wind which blows from others mouths; one while, listening to the Prophet who
bids them go up to Ramoth-Gilead and prosper; and by and by again yielding to
him that bidds them not go up for fear of perishing, and so they are carried
into cross and oblique opinions and actions, tending to, and endangering their
utter Ruin and Destruction. And to these men, all I shall say, and advise, is
this, That they will forthwith repair to the School of Reason, and suffer
themselves to be guided and led by impartial and wholesome Lessons and
Instructions, to a better Information of their judgments, whereby they may be
settled upon undeniable grounds in the knowledge of themselves and the truth,
and of their own Right, Interest, and Concernment. But another sort of men
there are, who are willing to let their eyes stand in the place where Nature
set them, and to make use of that Reason and judgment which God has given
them, and with erected minds, to apprehend the sense of their own future
happiness, and to hearken to the voice which calls them to the flourishing
actions of a reformed Commonwealth, and therefore do entertain this Change with
suitable Opinions and Compliance from these grounds which they thus propound and
argue with themselves.

1. That all Power and Authority is Originally and Primarily in God, and comes
from God; and this they rest upon as being a Scripture truth.

2. That God, out of his Wisdom and Providence, has dispensed and transmitted
so much of this Authority and Power to men, as is necessary for their use.
First, as in relation to the Inferior Creatures, to Rule and Govern them as
Lord and King. And as in relation to one another from a Principle of Nature,
[Conservatio sui-ipsius] To seek and endeavor their own preservation and
security, which Principle draws them to this Conclusion [Salus populi suprema
Lex,] The safety of the people is the supreme Law both of Nature and Nations.
And from this Natural Principle, and supreme Law of Nature, however all men in
their Original Creation are all of one and the same Substance, Mould, and
Stamp, yet for preservations sake, they find a fitness in Subordinations and
Degrees among them, for the better ordering of their Affairs; and so they
appoint Rulers, and authorize Governors over them, as Trustees for themselves.
They also elect Government, create Rules, Orders, and Laws, by which they will
have their Rulers and Governors to guide and Steer their Actions in the course
of their Government, to which they will conform their obedience: and this Truth
is ascertained from hence, That there were People before there were either
Rulers or Governors of People, and that therefore these Rulers and Governors
were but made by the People, and for the people, with this Reserve, That
whenever the people should perceive that their Trustees and Governors did
turn potestatem into potenti^m, the Power and Authority of Government, by Rule
and Law formerly agreed upon, and consented unto by the people, into an Armed
Force; and that they did alter the Peoples Rempublicam into the Governors Rem
privatam, and that their Government ceasing to be free, was made to hang over
the peoples heads as a Lordly Scourge to their destruction; Then, and from,
thenceforth, and that with good comeliness of reason, the people betake
themselves to thoughts of Reformation; and finding cause to dislike their
former choice, being not tied by any Scripture to any one Form of Government,
they choose again and take some other Form, differing from that before,
whereby they will avoid the evils they suffered under their former choice, and
enjoy the good of a more beneficial preservation; for, like Mariners and men
in a Ship at Sea, they will no longer trust an unskilful or perfidious
Stearsman, lest they should be found guilty of their own ensuing Shipwreck and
destruction.

This brings me to the next Assertion and Position, which I own as a most
certain Truth and my greatest earthly assurance, That the People [under God] is
the Original of all just Power, and that let the Government run out into
what Form it will, Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy, yet still the
Original Fountain thereof is from the Consent and Agreement of the People.
From this Assertion and Position I am led on further, by plain reason to
understand, That Rulers and Governors are accountable to the People for their
mis-government; namely, when they transgress the Rules and Laws by which the
people did agree they would be governed. But let me not be mistaken, for when I
say Accountable to the People, I do not mean to the humors and fancies of
particular men in their single and natural capacities, but to the people in
their Politic Constitution, lawfully assembled by their Representative.

Touching the Government of this Nation, it has anciently been Monarchical in
the frame and constitution of it, but yet it never was a pure Monarchy, for a
pure Monarchy is a clear Tyranny; but it was a Political Monarchy, or
Monarchy governed by Laws, taking in thereto all the goods, and avoiding all
the ills both of Aristocracy and Democracie; and so I may truly say, that look
upon the Frame and constitution of it alone, and as it were, upon the
Theoreticall and contemplative part of it; and supposing it possible that the
Practice would answer the Theorie, no man can deny, but that it was a Frame of
most excellent Order and Beauty; For, first, it had a King the chiefest
Officer, one single Person; and therefore avoiding the proud Factions and
contentions usually happening in Aristocracy, as likewise the disordered
confusions common in single Democracy; but yet a King bounded and compassed
with Laws above him, being the Rules already made and given him to Rule by;
and with a necessity of concurrence and compliance with Lords and Commons
below him, for future Legislative Power and Authority, and so avoiding the
danger of Tyranny usually incident to Monarchies, which commonly makes the
Monarchs Will the Law, and so establishing the Government upon this Foundation,
Voluntas Imperatoris Lex esto.

But [alas] when I have showed you the Frame and Constitution of the late
Government, I have showed you all the Beauty of it; for when you come to
examine the practical part, you shall find nothing less then excellency or
perfection in it. Look into your own Stories, and you shall always find the
King and great Lords ( Comites suos, as they were called) incroaching upon the
peoples Liberties and Rights, incroaching to themselves superlative
Prerogatives, and Dominion over them: On the other side you shall find again
the People struggling to preserve themselves and their own Interest, laboring
still to avoid the miseries and to free themselves from the mischiefs of their
sufferings.

The Times and Transactions before the Norman William got the Crown, and which
past among the Britains, Romans, Danes, and Saxons, being dark and obscure, I
pass by, and therefore I shall only speak something of the times and
transactions since.

First, the Tyrannical Domination of that first William and his son the
second William, gave the People to see their ensuing miseries; for though they
made choice of the second William, who was but a second son, and rejected
Robert his Elder Brother, yet they soon found their kindness was suddenly
forgotten, when once the Crown was obtained, and therefore they refused when he
was dead to choose again, till by engagements, Oaths, and Royal Promises of
better Government, they were cheated into a second Election of Henry the first,
who was a younger brother likewise. But it was not long after ere Monarchy
played Rex, and Pleasure and Will Ruled, the whole Kingdom almost was turned
into Forests; the Laws which the people were brought to live under, and obey,
were the cruel and insupportable Laws of the Forest, which were made rather
to preserve the Beasts, then the People within the bounds of Forests. Then the
people finding no other remedy, betook themselves to thoughts of Reformation,
as I told you at the first. And in the time of King Stephen, at Renymeed, they
demanded restitution of St. Edwards Laws, for so they called that Saxon Edward,
who was dead many years before, without any Heir or Successor of that kind,
(for we never read of any St. King since him:) And by those Laws they say they
will be governed, and to those Laws they will conform. Hereupon a new Compact
is made, the Articles of Renymeed, containing most of St. Edwards Laws, are
confirmed and established, by consent in Parliament, and so the people are for
that time satisfied, and think themselves very safe (as they well might think
so) under the security of an Act of Parliament. But yet this Act proved no
security, for in a short time after all was let loose again, and the same
mischiefs and oppressions upon the people were still continued, as before, and
many more additions made thereto, to the utter inslaving of the English Nation.

Hereupon the people stand up once more for their Liberties and Native Rights
in the ancient Laws of the Land, and demand the second time to have them
confirmed, and to be kept from violation; and so in the ninth year of King
Henry the third was the great Charter of the Liberties of England [being but a
Declaration of the ancient Common Laws of the Land, and little differing from
the Articles of Renymeed, together with the Charter of the Forest,] framed and
consented unto in full Parliament, and are the first Acts of Parliament now
extant in Print. And so the people sat down again under the protection of this
second Security; but how weak a Security it proved, let the practice of the
next King, and all succeeding Kings tell you, though it has been confirmed and
allowed by themselves two and thirty times; for in the two next Kings times you
shall find the goodmen of the Land discountenanced, and vain, loose, and
wanton persons to be the men in highest esteem; nay, Murderers and Robbers and
the like, cherisht and maintained; and if brought to public justice, and
condemned for their misdoings, yet pardoned again, and set at Liberty, and
though [by the Fundamental Law] Parliaments [the usual Salve for the peoples
Soars] were to be called and held twice a year, yet were they laid aside, and
rarely made use of; and then when they were called, it was but to serve the
Kings turn for granting Subsidies, or the like And this when the people
perceived, in the time of King Edward the second, they thought fit to question
his mis-government by Articles of Impeachment in Parliament against him, and
then to depose him from his Kingly Office, and to make his Son (during his
Fathers lifetime) Warden of the Kingdom, and shortly after they made him King
(while his father lived) by the name of Edward the third. And now are Acts of
Parliament made against the former mischiefs: first, against the Kings granting
Pardons to Robbers and Murderers; and four Acts of Parliament are made in the
neck of one another, 6. E. 1. 9. 2. E. 3. 2. 4. E. 3. 13. 10. E. 3. 2. 14. E.
3. 13.
and pursuing one another before telling the King plainly, that he may not, he
must not grant Pardons, but where he may do it by his Oath, namely, in case of
Homicide, by misfortune, and Homicide in his own defense. Secondly, for more
frequent holding of Parliaments, namely, That they should be held once a year,
and oftener if need be. But little effect did these produce, for the mischiefs
have continued, and the people have still suffered (by the breach of those
Laws, even until these very times) the very same mischiefs as before.

In the time of King Richard the second, the disorders of the Court, and
Oppressions upon the people from thence were so great and unsupportable, that
the people Articled against that King, and likewise deposed him; and so they
afterward did in like manner Depose King Henry the sixth, and K. Edward the
fourth by consent in Parliament. Thus you see how the exercise of Kingly Office
within this Nation has been made use on to the damage of the people, and how
the people again have put in ure their Authority over their Kings, to call
them to an account for their mis-governments. Touching the last King much has
been said, and too much has been felt by this County, in relation to the last
War. But (pardon me if I tell you so) it was a just punishment of God upon us
of this County; for, I may truly say, the War had its Rise and Beginning
here, here in this County, nay, here in this Court, for this was the first
place in England where any Grand-Juries of the County charged themselves and
their Country men with any Tax to raise a War against the Public Interest
of the people, as they did here when at Summer Assizes in the year 1642. they
charged the County with a Tax of 8600 pounds, to maintain 1000 Dragoons upon
pretense to keep the Country in Peace. But, alas, the Dragoons were no sooner
raised, but they were made use on for another Service, namely, to attend the
Kings Standard at Nottingham, and from thence were carried to fight at Edgehill
against the Parliaments Forces, for better keeping the Peace in Yorkshire. And
though it be true, that this Tax of 8600 pounds was never levied, yet our own
great Lords and Gentlemen made it the Foundation and Rise of another Tax of
thirty thousand pounds, which they laid and levied upon the County in October
after, for bringing in the Earl of Newcastle and his Forces.

But (as I said before) Gods punishment is just upon us, for as the War began
here, so it has ever since continued among us, even at this day, when all the
rest of the Kingdom is in Peace and quietness, only we are now upon Sieging,
at our own Charge, of you cursed Castle at Pontefract, which began at first,
and continues to be the last of all our Enemies Holds and Garrisons within this
Nation.

But to return to the point of the Kings Encroachments upon the Peoples
Liberties, and therein I will clearly tell you my own thoughts in one
particular, and instance in that one, (but it is to my Apprehension, Vnum
magnum, and instar omnium) it is as the Lion said of her Whelp when the Fox
upbraided her, That she was not so fruitful in procreation as the Fox, but
brought forth only one Lion at once, ('it is true, says the Lion) but that one
is a Lion: And so I may say by the Kings Negative Voice in Parliament, for
admit but this one piece of Prerogative to be just, and consonant to the
Constitution of the Government, and I dare affirm, that the English Nation were
in a possibility (by that Constitution of Government) to be as arrant Slaves
and Vassals, as were in Turkey, or among the Moors in the Galleys: For let the
King put what Oppression he will upon the People, let their grievances and
burdens be never so great, and let him [at the peoples Desires] call
Parliaments for redress thereof never so often, and let never so good Bills be
prepared and presented to him, for Reformation, yet still he shall put them off
with this Royal Complement, Le Roy Sadvisera, signifying ( quoad the Practice)
in plain English, I will not help you, nor release the unjust Burdens and
Oppressions I have laid upon you.

But add to this that other Incroachment of the Lords Negative Voice upon the
people, which they also have with much Lordlinesse practiced in answer to the
Commons Bills, though of highest concernment for their Weal, (however they
express that Negative in Court Language and good words, We will send an answer
by Messengers of our own; as if the people should expect they meant to return
some concurrence with them, when [God knows] nothing is less thought upon, or
meant by them.)

And now let the people see their own condition, now let them consider how they
have been abused by good words and phrases, which if they had clearly and
universally understood the meaning of; or if these Negatives had been clearly
expressed, in downright language, [ We will not help you, or, We will not ease
you of your Burdens or Oppressions that lie so heavy upon you,] truly then I
presume the people would long since have been stirred up to help themselves,
and to have endeavored as well to take away the mischief, as to avoid the
misery of such a Government. For mine own part I speak it freely from my
heart, That as I am a Freeman both by Birth an Education, and am Inheritable to
the Laws and Free-Customes of England; so I do naturally desire the security of
Government, and I do willingly submit to the justice of known Laws: But I have
ever adhorred all Arbitrary Powers, or to be subject to the Wills or Passions of
men; and therefore I have always thought (since I could think any thing upon
grounds of Judgment or Reason) That so long as these two forementioned
Negatives remained upon the people, there could be no security or freedom in
their Government; and there was no one thing that has so firmly fixed me in the
way I have gone, wherein I now am, and to oppose the other, as the mischiefs I
understood to be in the two Negative Voices of the King and the Lords. Adding
to these two fundamental Court-Errours, and destructive Positions, maintained
and held forth to the people by flattering Royalists, and proud and ambitious
Prelates and Courtiers, viz. First, That the King had an Original right to
Rule; And secondly, That the King was accountable to none but GOD for his
misgovernment: Lay but these two together with the Negative Voice, and let any
man judge what they may and must necessarily produce in point of Tyranny and
Oppression over the people.

Thus have I showed you the true Original of all Power and Authority, and from
whence it is that the Exercise of Authority and Power is practiced among men,
over one another; I have showed you also the justice which lies in this, That
Kings, Rulers, and Governors [and particularly the King of this Nation] should
be accountable to the People for their misgovernments; and how destructive a
Tenent it is to say, That a King has right to Rule over men upon Earth, and
that yet GOD has not given a Power to earthly men to call him to account for
misgovernment; unless you will suppose that Kings at first did fall from
Heaven, and were sent down from above to exercise their wills, and act their
lusts below.

Having said thus much upon this subject only to give a hint, from whence you
may observe (till the Parliaments own Declaration be published, which I hope
will fully and clearly set them out) what the Grounds and Reasons were that the
Parliament has found the Kingly Office within this Nation to be useless, and
dangerous, and why therefore they will no more trust the Crown upon the Head of
any one Person, nor transfer the custody of the Liberties of England and
Englishmen into the Power of another, who may abuse them; and therefore why
likewise they resolve to keep the Crown within its proper place the Cabinet of
the Law, and to allow the Law only to King it among the people, and that the
people themselves [by their Representatives] shall be the only Keepers of
their own Liberties, by Authority derived from their own Supreme and Sovereign
power; which brings me now to the style of our Commissions, Custodes libertatis
Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti.

And touching the King of England his right to Rule, or Title of Law by
Inheritance and Descent to the Crown of England, thus much may be safely and
truly said, That if it be an Ancient and Original Inheritance fixed in one
Family, it was gained at first by the power of the sword, and by Conquest,
which Title in Law is but a disseisin and an unlawful Title, and therefore may
be again as justly regained, as it was gained at first by Force, and by the
stronger Arm and sharper Sword; And as it was so gained at first, so it has
been ever since either by the like pure force, or else by consent in Parliament
upon particular cases kept and maintained; and so you will find if you look
how every King since the Norman William (called the Conqueror) came to the
Crown; For of all those four and twenty Kings and Queens which have since that
time Kingd it among us, there are but seven of them who could pretend Legally
to succeed their former Predecessors, either by Lyneall, or Collateral Title.
I have not leisure to repeat the particulars, and this I have said may serve to
give you occasion (if you be so minded) to look further into it, and to
satisfy your judgments herein, and by consequence to keep you from engaging
against your selves and the Nation, for a Name, or for a Thing which is not
truth.

Now I come to that which is our true business, our work of the first
magnitude, Opus diei in die suo, the Articles of your Charge which I intend
[for the better helping of your memories] to deliver to you in writing, with
the Laws and the punishments, and briefly to run over the rehearsal of the
Facts only, without further mention concerning them; yet with such necessary
Expositions and Explanations of particulars as shall be needful in my passage
through them; adding only this for an Animadversion to you, That you and I are
trusted at this time with the administration of Justice in our own Country,
amidst all the Temptations which our several Relations of Friends, Kindred, or
Acquaintance can Offer unto us; which shows, that they who do so trust us, have
great assurance and confidence in us; and then we must conclude, that this
confidence puts a greater obligation upon us to fidelity and integrity in the
discharge and performance of that Trust committed to us; add to this that
[Vinculum animae] the Bond of the Soul the Obligation of an Oath, and I doubt
not but it will be found, that though Love, Fear, and particular Interest be
the usual Cords which halter Justice, that yet at this time they will be found
to be among us but sorry and unmasculine pieces of Rhetoric, either to
affright us from, or soften us in our duties.

The matter of your Charge will be to inquire into, and find out the several
Offenses which have been committed and done against the Politic Body of the
Commonwealth, as so many several Diseases and infirmities in the several
parts of the natural Body of a man, which distemper and endanger the health of
the whole, and they are of four sorts.

First, such as are against the Peace of the Commonwealth, or whereby Public
Peace is disturbed, and those I call Diseases indangering the heart of this
Politic Body.

Secondly, such as are against the Justice of the Commonwealth, or whereby
public justice is perverted, and those I call Diseases indangering the Head
of this politic Body.

Thirdly, such as are against the plenty of the Commonwealth, or whereby
public plenty is diminished, and those I call Diseases against the stomach of
this politic Body.

Fourthly, such as are against the beauty and good Complexion of the
Commonwealth, or whereby this beauty and good Complexion is discolored and
defaced, contained under the Name of Common Nusances, and those I call Diseases
against the Senses, the Legs and the Feet of this politic Body.

Touching those against Peace, they are of five sorts.

1. Treasons, which again are either High Treason or Petty-Treason.

2. Felonies, which again are done either against the Person, or Possession of
another. 3. Praemunire. 4. Misprisions. 5. Trespasses.

High-Treasons are these.
1. If any levy War against the supreme Authority of the Nation, or adhere to
the enemies thereof. And when I do so express it, Supreme Authority, I give
you the meaning of the Stat. 25. E. 3. 2. which mentions it thus, If any levy
war against the King, or adhere to the Kings enemies within the Realm; for
the name and word King [quatenus the chief Officer betrusted with the
Government in the Administration of that Government] is frequently used to set
forth the public Interest of the People, so we call it The Kings Peace, The
Kings Coin, The Kings Highway, and the like, all which in truth are the
public concernments of the people, being for their public use and benefit,
and are therefore expressed and exhibited unto us under the notion of the Kings
Name, because he is their public Officer, and trusted for them; so that to
levy war against the King, or to adhere to the Kings enemies, is to levy
war against the Kingdom, and the Government of it, and the Supreme Power and
Authority of it; or, which is more plain in the expression, to levy war
without lawful Warrant and Authority so to do; and yet this I believe was that
which has misled (and perhaps may still mislead) many of our Country men, That
because they had the Person of the King with them, [betwixt whom and whom there
were mutual and reciprocal deceivings] and they [never remembering that when
in Person he deserted the Parliament, he left the King and Kingly Authority
behind, him, because he left the Kingly Office, and the Power thereof, and
public Government behind him) they caught at the shadow, but let go the
substance, and so under color of fighting for the King, they fought against
him. Yet because omnis non capit hoc, every man did not understand this
distinction betwixt the politic and natural body of the King, therefore see
how mercifully and favorably the Parliament has dealt with these men, that
they have not pressed the rigor of Law upon the Offenders of this kind, whose
Offenses being High Treason by the fundamental justice of this Nation, and so
their Lives, whole Estates, Lands and Goods being forfeited to the Law for the
same, yet this forfeiture has not been exacted upon them; but, in hope they
will at last see their Errors, and repent for their misdoings, the Parliament
has been pleased to carry a more tender hand, and by way of commutation to
pass over their Offenses with the punishment of a small fine for such
misdoings, yet with this silent admonition, like that to the woman in the
Gospel, Go thy way and sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee.

2. If any counterfeit the Great Seal, Privy Seal, or Privie-Signet.

3. If any counterfeit the Coin of the Nation, or otherwise Clipp or diminish
it.

4. If any kill a Judge of Justice or Oyer and Terminer in his Place doing his
Office.

5. If any Jesuit or Seminary Priest, born in England, and Ordained and
Professed Beyond Sea, by Authority derived from the Sea of Rome, do come into,
or abide within this Realm.

6. If any the second time extol, defend, or maintain within this Realm the
usurped Jurisdiction or Authority of the Pope, or any other Foreign Prince.

7. If any bring over and put in ure, or receive from Beyond Sea any Bull or
Instrument of Absolution, or Reconciliation, to Absolve the people of this
Nation from their Allegiance here to the Sea of Rome, or endeavor the second
time to withdraw the People to the obedience of the Sea of Rome, or if any be
Absolved, Reconciled or withdrawn. And here you must understand, that in
Treasons all Actors and Consenters are Principalls, and there are no
Accessaries at all in Treason.

Pettie-Treasons are these.
If a servant kill his or her Master or Mistress.

If a Wife kill her Husband.

Praemunire.
Touching Praemunire, it is properly a Writ or Process of Summons awarded
against such as brought in Bulls, or Citations from the Court of Rome to obtain
Ecclesiastical Benefices, by way of Provision before they fell void; for of
old time diverse Acts of Parliament were made, viz. in the times of K. Edward
the third, K. R. 2. and K. H. 4. against the Popes exercise of Jurisdiction
within this Nation, and against those subjects that did appeal from the Courts
of Justice here to the Court of Rome, and who obtained Provisions there to have
Abbeys, and Priories, or Benefices with Cure here, which proceedings tended
(say those Statutes) to the destruction of the Realm, and of Religion;
Therefore these being held to be great Offenses, and so tending to the
disherison of the Rights belonging to the Crown and people of England, and to
the destruction of the common Law, are made to be grievously punishable, viz.
To be imprisoned during life, To forfeit Lands and Goods, and to be put out of
the protection of the Law. Afterward other later Laws were made in the time of
Queen Elizabeth against other Offenses of like nature, wherewith you have now
to do, namely,

If any send over or contribute money or relief for maintenance of any Jesuit,
or Seminary Priest, or College Beyond Sea.

If any extol defend or maintain the jurisdiction or authority of the Pope,
(or of any other foreign Prince) within this Nation.

If any bring over any Agnus Dei, Crosses, Pictures, or Beads, Hallowed (as
they call it) at Rome, to disperse among the People, or if any person receive
any such, or know of this Offense, and conceal it three days.

If any do Aid or Assist those who put in ure any Popes Bulls, or Instruments
of Absolution brought from Rome.

Misprision of Treason are these.
If any know another to be guilty of High Treason, and do conceal it.

If any Forge or Counterfeit Foreign Coin, not current here.

If any utter Counterfeit Coin, knowing it to be such.

If any strike, or draw a Sword to strike a Justice sitting in place of
judgment.

Fellonies against the person of another are those.
If any commit Homicide, viz. kill or slay another.

If out of precedent malice, expressed or employed, it is murder.

If upon a sudden falling out, it is manslaughter.

If in doing a lawful Action, it is called Chance-Medley, misadventure or
misfortune.

If in his own defense, it is so styled, Homicide se defendendum; and so also
Poisoning, Stabbing, and Witching to death are Homicides.

If any commit Rape, viz. have the carnal knowledge of a woman against her
Will, or with her Will, if she be under ten years old

If any take away, or consent, or assist to take away any Maid, Widow, or Wife
against her Will, she being then interested in Lands or Goods.

If any marry a second Husband, or Wife, the first being alive.

If any commit Buggery, or Sodomy, a crime Inter Christianos non nominandum,
says the Indictment.

If any Gipsey or counterfeit Egyptian have continued a month within this
Nation.

If any person appointed by Law to abjure, refuse it, or return after
abjuration.

If any do wilfully and maliciously cut out the Tongue, or put out the eyes of
another.

If any receive, or relieve, or maintain any Jesuit or other Seminary Priest,
knowing him to be such.

If any incorrigible Rogue, judged dangerous, and banished, return again:

If any dangerous Rogue, branded in the Shoulder, return again to a Roguish
life.

If any person infected with the Plague wilfully go abroad, and converse among
company.

Felonies against the Possession are these.
If any break a Dwelling House in the night, with intent to do any Felonious
Act there.

If any robb another by the high way, or take any thing privately from his
person.

If any take the Goods of another in his absence, with intent to steal them.

If any servant go away with his Masters Goods (delivered to him) with intent
to steal them, being of the value of forty shillings, or above.

If any robb a Church.

If any maliciously burn the House, or Stack of Corn, or Barn of Corn of
another.

If any take up a Hawk, and do not carry her to the Sheriff to be proclaimed.

If any do the second time forge any Deed, Evidence, or Writing, and publish it
to be a good Deed.

If any acknowledge a Fine, or Judgment, or Deed to be enrolled in the Name of
another, and not being the true person.

If any Raze, Imbezzell, or withdraw any Record of the Court.

If any use the Art of Multiplication of Gold, or Silver.

If any Hunt by night in Parks or Warrens with painted Faces, or other
disguises, and deny it upon examination.

If any persons above twelve in number raise any Tumults or unlawful
assemblies.

If above 40 persons shall assemble together to do any unlawful Act, and shall
continue together three hours after Proclamation for their departure.

If any depart out of this Nation to serve a Foreign Prince, without leave,
and before Bond entered, and Oath taken according to the Statute.

If any Soldier, or Mariner, who has received Prest-wages, according to the
Statute, do afterward depart from their Service without License.

If any such Soldier or Mariner do wander and beg, without a Pass, or if
they counterfeit their Pass.

If any Person having the Custody of public Stores of Victual, or Ammunition,
imbezzell or purloin any of it, to the value of twenty shillings, or above.

If any do the second time transport sheep Beyond Sea.

If any persuade another to commit any Felony, or receive and assist any Felon
after the Felony committed, these are Accessaries to the Felony.

If any rescue a Felon from prison.

if any Felon break Prison, and escape, or be suffered to escape, and be
rescued.

Misprision of Felony is this.
If any know another to have committed Felony, and do not reveal it.

Trespasses and Offenses against the peace Finable are these.
If any Menace, Assault, Beat, or wound another.

if any make unlawful entry upon other men's Lands, or unlawfully take away
other men's Goods.

if any make unlawful Assemblies, Routs, or Riots.

If any chide, or brawle, or draw a weapon to strike, or do strike in a Church
or Churchyard.

if any keep a Fair, or Market in a Church or Churchyard.

If any say, or hear Mass

If Papists be absent from Church a month together

If any keep a Recusant Schoolmaster, or other Recusant servant in his house:

If any shall voluntarily disturb the Preacher in his Sermon:

If any affirm that the eating of Fish, or forbearing flesh at set times is
necessary for our salvation, or for other purpose, then as a politic
constitution:

If any frame, make, or publish any false, scandalous, or libellous Writing or
Picture against another, or to the disgrace of others, or whereby to move
contention amongst men.

And touching this devilish invention of Libelling and Defaming others, in
these days more frequent then ever, by false and horrible lies and slanders,
and Pamphlets published even against the Parliament it self and every Member of
it, and every man that wishes well to it, your selves can testify how frequent
it is, and has been of late, and therefore I beseech you be careful to find
out some of those who have been offenders in it:

And thus you have here mention of the Offenses against Public Peace, which
are as so many Diseases in the Heart of the Potique Body of the Commonwealth.

Next comes the Offenses against Public Justice, which are also to be found
out by us; and these are either against Justice in the general, or are
Offenses by Officers trusted in particular Administrations, or by Artificers,
and Laborers, and Masters and servants.
Offenses against Justice in general.
IF any be a common stirrer and procurer of Law-Sutes, or a common Brabler or
Quarreller among his Neighbors; this is Barratry.

If any Buy or Contract for a pretended Right or Title to Land, or other thing
in Controversy of Suite, this is unlawful buying of Titles:

If any maintain the Law-Suite of another, to have part of the thing in demand,
or otherwise; this is maintenance of Champerty.

If any get Goods of another into his hands by false Tokens and Messages; this
is a deceit punishable.

If any counterfeit any Deed or Writing, and publish it as true, this is
Forgerie:

If any corrupt a Jurie man, by Briberie, or Menace, to divert him from giving
a just Verdict, this is Imbracerie:

If any corrupt you of the Grand-Jurie by Bribes, or otherwise, to make
favorable Presentiments:

If any Informer upon Poenall Laws do not duly pursue his Information, or if
he sue out Process before the Information be exhibited, or compound before the
Defendant has answered, or after answer, without License:

If any wilfully and corruptly swear falsely in evidence to a Jurie, it is
perjury, and to procure another so to do, is subornation of Perjurie:

If any take more Interest upon Loan of Money, then after 8 l. per Centum for a
year, this is unlawful Usury and Extortion.

Touching public Officers trusted in the administration of Justice, and
failing in their duty.
First the Sheriff.
THis is a great Officer, and is much trusted in the Service of the People, and
by the Statute of Articulum super Chartas, is to be chosen yearly by the
People, that they might the better be assured of those they trusted: But this
Privilege of Election (among others) the People have lost, and the Court of
later Times did learn how to make profit, both by Electing Sheriffs, as also by
keeping them off from being Elected:

In his Office you find him a Judge, and a Minister of Justice: He is a Judge
in his Court, called the Turn, and sits as Judge, and has the profits in the
Court, called The County Court.

Touching the Turn
If the Sheriff or his Deputy do not send Indictments found in his Turn, to
the next Sessions:

If the Sheriff or Bailiffs arrest any person upon an Indictment in his Turn,
or levy the Fines, or Amerciaments imposed in his Turn, without Warrant
indented from the Sessions.

Touching the County Court.
If the Sheriff, or his Bailiffe enter Plaints in his County Court in the
Absence of the Plaintiff, or of some other known person authorized by him.

If the Sheriff or his Bailiffs enter more Plaints then one in his County
Court upon one Cause of Action.

If the Sheriff or his Bailiffs fail to Summon the Defendant to appear at the
County Court:

If the Sheriff or his Bailiffs leavie the Amerciaments set in the County
Court upon the Defendants for not Appearing, called The Sheriffs Amerciaments,
without an indented Estreet between him and two Justices of the Peace, as a
Minister of Justice.

As a Minister of Justice.
If the Sheriff let his County or Bailiwick to farm:

If the Sheriff or his Bailiffes collect the Greenwax Estreats of the
Exchequer, without showing the Estreats under Seal.

If the Sheriffs Officer or Jailer for any cause but Court-Fees, detain any
prisoner in Gaol after the Court has discharged him.

If any Sheriff make out any Warrant to make an Arrest, not having the
Process then in his custody:

If the Sheriff or his Deputy take for Breaking-up a Common Law mean Process,
and making an Arrest, above two shillings four pence, viz. twenty pence the
Warrant, four pence the Arrest, and four pence the Bond, if the Defendant be
Bound, or four pence the Jailer, if the Defendant come to the Jail:

If the Sheriff or his Deputy take above one shilling at pound for raising an
Execution under one hundred pounds, and six pence at pound for every hundred
pounds more, and this after the Execution is levied:

If the Sheriff or his Bailiff take any Money, or other Reward for sparing an
Arrest, or for letting to Bayl persons not Baylable, or for showing him any
other favor:

If the Sheriffs refuse to let to Bayl persons Arrested upon mean Processes,
who are Baylable by Law:

If the Sheriff or his Deputy take a Bond for appearance of any other Form
then that directed by the Statute:

If the Sheriff return any Jurors without their true Additions.

If the Sheriff or his Deputy take any thing for making and returning Pannels
of Juries, or take above four pence for the Copy of one Pannell.

If the Sheriff or Jailer deny to receive without Fee Felons sent to the Jail.

If the Bailiff of any Liberty do not perform the same duties as they are
enjoined to Sheriffs in executing Warrants and Processes directed to them:

Touching the Constable. This is an Officer of Justice, and an Officer of
Peace, and is of great Trust and good use, if he perform his Duty, and
therefore by the way let me say, that care must be taken by the Justices of
Peace, and Stewards in Leetes, that able and honest persons, and fit for the
service be put into this employment.
IF he do not endeavor to preserve the Peace, and prevent the breach of it.

If he do not Arrest night-walkers, and suspected persons.

If he do not hastily pursue, Hue and Cry after Murderers, and Robbers:

If he do not cause Watch by Night, and Ward by Day to be kept within his
Office from Ascension day to Michaelmas day, and Ward by day the rest of the
year.

If he do not truly execute and return all Warrants sent to him from Justices
of the Peace:

If he do not appoint in Easter week Overseers of Highwayes:

If he do not apprehend Beggars, Rogues and Vagabonds that are wandering or
begging within his Office, and if any have hindered him from doing his duty
therein;

If he do not punish by Stocking such as refuse to labor in Hay and Harvest
Time:

If he do not Inventory Felons Goods happening within his Office.

If he do not once a month search Alehouses, Maltmakers houses, and houses of
gaming and Bawdery.

If he do not present at the Sessions, or to the next Justices, the disorders
in Alehouses, defects in Highwayes, Recusants absence from Church; And such as
keep Dogs, Gunnes, Nets, and the like, for the unlawful taking of
Wilde-Fowle, and Hares.

If he do not drive the Commons within his Office for infected and unlawful
Cattle, once (at least) in Summer:

Coroner.
IF he fail to perform his duty upon Summons, as well where the Fact is by
misadventures, as by man's hand:

If he take any Fee where the Fact is by misadventure.

If he take any Fee above thirteen shillings four pence where the Fact is by
man's hand, and that of the Goods of the Manslayer, if he be in Custody, or if
he escape, then of the Town where the Fact was done.

Cleark of the Market.
IF he take any common Fine for dispensing with faults in Weights and Measures.

If he take any Fee for Marking Weights and Measures, but those allowed, one
penny for a Bushel, and 100 weight; half a penny for half a Bushel, and
half 100 weight; a farthing for every less weight or Measure.

Cleark of the Peace.
IF he take any Fee for his Office doing, but those allowed, viz.

For an Alehouse Recognisance one shilling.

For a Badgers or Drovers License two shillings.

For Inrowlling Presentiments for Recusants,

For Inrowling of a Recognizance of a Rogue taken into service, one shilling.

For Inrowling a Deed of Bargain, and Sale of Land, being under forty shillings
per Annum value, one shilling.

And if it exceed forty shillings per annum value, two shillings six pence.

Ordinary.
If he take any Fee but those allowed for Proving of a Will, or granting an
Administration, viz.

Where the Inventorie exceeds forty pounds, five shillings.

Where it is under forty pounds, and above five pounds, his fee is three
shillings six pence.

Where but five pounds or under, he must have six pence.

Or a penny for every ten Lines ten Inches long, which Rate is also allowed for
their Copies;

And what is taken more then those, is Extortion.

If any Minister take any Mortuary, but where the custom of the Place allows
it; or where it is allowed, if he take any Mortuary for an Infant, Feme Covert,
or Traveller; or if he take any thing where the Inventory is under ten Marks,
or if he take above three shillings four pence where the Inventory is above ten
Marks, and under thirty pounds; or if he take above fix shillings eight pence
where the Inventory is above thirty pounds and under forty pounds; or if he
take above ten shillings where the Inventory is above forty pounds.

Searchers and Sealers of Leather.
IF they be not appointed by the Owner of the Market in Market Towns:

If they (being appointed) refuse the Office:

If they do not in covenient time perform their Duty and Office upon
particular occasions when Leather is brought to them to view:

If they be not furnished with a Register-Book and a Seal.

If they fail to set down all Bargains of Tand and unwrought Leather.

If they allow such as is insufficient or disallow such as is sufficient.

If they take any Fee, save such as is allowed, viz. for every can Hides two
pence, and for every six dozen of Calf-Skins 2 pence:

If Triers of Tand-Leather seized for insufficient be not appointed by the
Owners and Rulers of Fairs or Markets.

If the Tryers refuse to perform their duty.

Tolgatherers.
IF Owners or Rulers of Fairs and Markets have not appointed some certain place
for sale of Horses there, and a Toll-gatherer to attend.

If the Toll-gatherer do not sit in open place in Markets and Fayers, where
Horses and Cattle are sold, and continue there from ten of Clock in the
Morning, till Sunne-set.

If he do not keep a Register-Book, and therein set down the Bargains brought
before him, and have the Parties and Vouchers present which he knows.

If he take any Fee or Reward save that allowed, viz. a penny for one Bargain.

If any person coming in as a Voucher, take upon him the knowledge of the
Seller, and do not intruth know him.

If the Toll-gatherer refuse to deliver a Copy of his Entry, or take above two
pence for it.

Overseers of the Poor.
IF they refuse to execute their Office, being appointed thereto by the
Justices of Peace.

If they do not provide a common stock, and take care to keep the Poor at work
upon the common Stock of the Parish.

If they do not meet once a month particularly to confer about the
performance of their duty.

If they do not raise a weekly Taxation for the maintenance of the impotent
poor.

If they suffer their Parishners to wander and beg out of their Parish.

Overseers of Highways.
IF they refuse to execute the Office, being chosen thereto by the Constable
and Neighborhood.

If they do not upon the next Sunday after Easter appoint publicly in the
Church six days betwixt that and Midsummer for the Neighbors to meet for
mending the Highwayes in the Parish.

If they do not attend at the days appointed to direct the Works.

If they do not present to the next Justice of Peace, or at the next Sessions
the defaults of absent Parishners.

If they do not present to the two next Justices of Peace the defects of
Highwayes, and of not scowring the Ditches, that should lead and avoid the
Water from standing in Highways.

Touching Artificers, Laborers, Masters and Servants.
IF Artificers, Laborers or Servants conspire what Wages to take and not to
work under those Rates.

If Artificers or Laborers undertake Work, and depart before it be finished.

If they do not continue from five a Clock in the Morning till seven at night
in the Summer, and from seven till five in Winter.

If Laborers or Servants take any more Wages then the Rates allowed by the
Justices.

If any Servant assault Master or Mistress.

If a Tradesman retain a Journeyman for less time then a year.

If for every three Prentises they do not keep one Journeyman, and for every
Prentise above three one Journeyman more.

If they refuse to labor in Hay-time or Harvest.

If a servant depart from one Parish to another without a Testimonial from his
Master.

If any Master Hire any such servant wanting a Testimonial.

If any servant depart within his Term, or at the end of his Term without a
Quarters warning, unless the cause be allowed before two Justices of Peace.

If any Master put away his Servant within his Term, or at the end of his
Term, without a Quarters-warning, unless the cause be allowed before two
Justices of Peace.

Braziers and Pewterers.
IF any Brazier or Pewterer buy or exchange any Metal belonging to his Trade,
but in his open Shop, or Fair, or Market.

If they sell their Wares of Metal not of the Allay of London.

If they use any deceitful Weights, or false Beams.

Cordwayners, viz. Tanner, Currier, Shoemaker and Butcher dealing with the Hide.
Tanner.
IF he set his Fatts in Tannhills.

If he overlime his Hides.

If he Tann any Leather in warm Owze:

If he do not work the Lyme well out of the Leather:

If he use any Stuff but Malt, Meal, Tapwort, Henn-dung, Culidding, Ashbark,
Oakbark:

If he use any deceitful mixture for raising his Hides:

If he suffer his Hides to be frozen with Winter Frost, or to be parcht with
Sommer-Sunne, or to be dried by the fire:

If he Tann any rotten Hides:

If he do not renew his Owze so often as need requires:

If he do not keep his Soal-Leather twelve months, and upper Leather nine
months in the Owze:

If he sell any Tanned Leather, which is insufficiently Tanned.

If he sell any Tanned Leather out of a Market.

If he sell any Tanned Leather before it be searched and Sealed.

If any Tanner be a Curryer or Shoemaker, or use any other Trade which cuts
Leather, or e contra.

Curryer.
IF he dwell out of a Market Town, or exercise his Trade in a Shoomakers House.

If he Currey any Leather but such as is sufficiently Tanned.

If he use any other stuff in Currying outer Soal Leather, but good hard
Tallow, and no less thereof then the Leather will receive.

If he gash or scall'd any Hide, or shave any Leather too thin.

If he refuse to Curry Leather brought to him with stuff to work it, or if he
keep it in Summer above eight days, and in Winter above sixteen days

If he be a Tanner or Shoemaker while he is a Curryer.

Shoemaker.
IF he do not make his Wares of good Leather, Soal and Upper Leather well
Tanned, and well Sewed with thread well-wax'd, and twisted, and hard-drawn with
Hand-Leathers.

If he mix his Wares, part Neats Leather, part Calf, Horse or Bull Hide.

If he Sell any Wares upon Sundays.

Butcher.
IF he gash, slaughter, or cut any Hide in Fleaing.

If he water any Hide save in June, July, or August.

If he sell any corrupt or rotten Hides.

If he sell any Hide but in open Market.

If he use the Trade of a Tanner.

Tanned Leather.
IF any buy Tanned Leather Red and unwrought, and do not make it into made
Wares.

If any but Tanners buy rough Hides.

If any buy Tanned Leather out of a Market.

If any buy Tanned Leather, before it be Searched and Sealed.

If any refuse and resist the Searchers to make Search.

If any ingrosse Oak-Bark.

Cloth-makers.
IF any use Racking of Linen Cloth, or use Lime, or other undue mixture in
Whitening Linen Cloth.

Cooper.
IF he make his Ware of unseasoned Wood:

If he do not make it of due Assize, viz. The Barrel 36 gallons of Beer, and
of Ale 32 gallons.

The Kilderkin 18, or 16, gallons of Soap:

The Firkin 9, or 8, gallons.

If he do not set his Mark upon it:

Tile-maker.
IF he do not digg his earth before the first of November, and turn it over
before the first of February, and turn it again before the first of March, and
then try and tue it from Stones:

If he make them of less Assize then ten inches and a half long, and six
inches and a quarter broad; gutter Tyle ten inches long, and ridge Tyle
fourteen inches long, and half an inch and quarter thick.

And so I have done with the Offenses of this kind, which are against public
Justice; and now I come to those which are against the public plenty of the
Stores of food and provision for the people, and are therefore in these hard
and dear times to be most carefully prevented, if it may be, at least by such
ways as the Law directs:

Touching the Plenty of the Country, and the disorders by Victuallers
IN general whatsoever tends to inhance the Price of Victual by unlawful
increasing particular men's profits by, it is an offense against the plenty of
it, and therefore

If any do buy any sort of Victual as it is coming to a Market or Fair either
by Water or Land, it is forestalling.

If any buy Victual in a Market, and sell it again within four miles, it is
regrating:

If any buy any dead Victual or Corn growing upon the ground, with intent to
sell it again, it is engrossing:

If any Victuallers conspire to sell their Victual at unreasonable prices:

If any Victuallers sell any unwholesome Victuals:

If any buy Corn having sufficient for his House-Provision for a year, and do
not bring so much other Corn to the Market to be sold:

If any Drover or other buy Cattle, and sell them again alive within five
weeks:

If any person take upon him to be a Bagger of Corn, not being lawfully
Lycensed by four Justices of Peace.

If any buy Butter or Cheese in gross, and sell it again in gross, or by
retaile out of an open shop.

If any forbear to rear Calves yearly, viz. one Calf for every two Kye, or
every threescore sheep he keeps; or do not keep a miltch Cow for every
threescore Sheep.

If any transport Sheep, Corn, Butter or Cheese beyond sea.

If any keep above two thousand Sheep at once.

If any destroy Wilde-Fowls Eggs, or take Wilde-Fowle between the last of May
and the last of August.

If any Hawk in standing-Corn:

If any (not qualified) keep Dogs, Ferrets, Netts, or Engines to take Hares,
Conies, Phesants, or Partridges:

If any trace Hares in the Snow:

If any Take or Kill Phesants, or Partridges with Engines, Nets, or Snares, or
by shooting in Gunnes.

If any shoot Hail shot in Gunnes:

If any hunt or kill Deer in Park or Warren:

If any sell Phesant Partridge or Hare.

Alehouse-Keepers.
IF any Alehouse-Keeper keep an Alehouse not being Licensed thereto:

If they sell less then a quart a penny the best, and two quarts a penny of
the worser sort:

If they suffer unlawful Games, Tables, Cards or Dice in their Houses:

If Inkeepers do not sell their Hay and Oats at reasonable Prizes:

If Tavern-keepers suffer people to sit Tippling in their houses

If any person continue Tippling and Drinking in Tavern, Inn or Alehouse:

If any person be drunk.

Bakers.
IF any Baker sell his Bread of less weight then the due Assize, viz.
proportionable to the price of Corn in the Market, as it is regulated by a
Printed Assize-book, set out to that purpose.

If they do not set their proper Mark upon their Bread:

If they give above thirteen to the dozen.

If any but Bakers bake Horse-Bread to sell.

Butchers.
IF any Butcher kill and sell Calfes under five weeks old, or any weanling
under two years old:

If they sell any mezelled Hogs, or Beast that dyed of the Murrain, or other
corrupt or unwholesome meat.

Fish.
IF any destroy the Fry of Fish, or Fish with Nets less then two Inches and a
half, wide in the Mash:

If any kill any Salmon under sixteen Inches long, or Pickerils under ten
inches long, or Trowts under eight inches long, or Barbels under twelve inches
long:

If dried fish (brought in by strangers) be not of due Assize, viz. in Barrells
of Herring two and thirty gallons, in Barrells of Eels thirteen gallons: in a
Butt of Salmon fourscore and 4 gallons.

If any bring Codd or Lyng from Beyond Sea in Barrels to be sold, or otherwise
then loose in bulk:

if any set Tax, or Toll, or restraint upon fish brought into this Nation to be
sold:

If any cut out or destroy Heads or Damms of Ponds, Motes, or Stews of fish, or
fish many several fishings.

Malt-makers.
IF any Maltmaker do not make his Malt of good and sweet Barley, not Mow-burnt
or Spired Barley.

If they do not rubb it, and dress it well, and fan half a Peck of dust out
of every Quarter:

If it be less time then three weeks in the Fatt, Flower, and drying.

Milner.
IF any Milner take excessive Toll for grinding Corn, viz. above a twentieth
part, or four and twentieth part, according to the strength of the Water.

Wine.
JF any bring in Wine in Foreign Bottomes.

If any bring in Wine in Vessels not of due Assize, viz. the Butt 126 gallons,
Hogshead 63 gallons, Pipe 126 gallons, Terce 84 gallons, Tun 252 gallons.

If any sell Wine above the Price Proclaimed in Chancery.

And thus you see how the Public plenty of the Country is diminished for a
few men's particular gains, and you see also how the abuses may be reformed, to
a general advantage of all the people.

Lastly, Common Nusances are to be enquired after.
TOuching Common-Nusances, or Offenses done against the general easements of
the People, as against the health, beauty, and good Complexion of the Body
Politic, are these.

If any erect a Cottage, and do not lay four Acres of ground to it, to be
occupied with it:

If any continue such unlawful Cottage.

If any keep an Inmate, or undersitter in a Cottage.

If any common Bridge be out of repair:

If Highways to Market Towns be not enlarged and cleansed of Wood 200 Foot at
least:

If any common Highway be out of repair, or if any Ditches be unscowred, or
undrest, which should convey and avoid the water from standing in Highways:

If the Parishners have not met at the day appointed to mend the Highways, as
the Law directs:

If any keep common-gaming houses, Bowling-Allies, or the like:

If any common Vagabonds and Beggars, or wandering Rogues, or dangerous Rogues
do pass, or be suffered to pass from place to place, or be relieved in places
where they come:

If any keep or use unlawful Weights and Measures not according to the
Standard of the Exchequer; or if Weights and Measures of the Standard Assize be
not kept in every Market Town:

If any use any Weights or Measures unsearch'd or unsealed:

If any profane the Lords Day, viz. by traveling that day, or by using
sports, and unlawful exercises that day:

If any profanely swear or curse:

If any keep a stoned Horse in any common ground, not being fourteen handfuls
high

And thus you see how the wisdom of the Common Laws of this Nation, and of the
Parliaments from time to time has provided for the security and ease of the
people, and has furnished us with a Salve for every Soar, and gives us rules
and instructions how to govern our selves, that we may be helpful and useful
to one another; and from whence it is that we may well conclude, If we keep the
Law the Law will keep us, and that If we place the Law in the Throne the Law
will preserve and protect us in safety and security. Touching these Offenses
which are committed by disobedient and lawless persons, you who are culled out
from all the parts of the Country and chosen to be the chief Agents and first
Movers (as I may speak) in this work of Justice, which is the subject of this
days Service, and are the Countries Trustees for that purpose; I do not
question but your public spirits are such, and common love to your Country
such (taking in even your own Interests and particular Profits and
Concernments) that you will be more then ordinarily careful to cleanse the
Country of these Weeds, and darnell and Cockle that grows up among the Corn,
Those wicked and unreasonable men, which are as Pricks and Goads in the Sides
of others, and live idly, loosely and wickedly among the people, and are as
so many Plague-Soars spread over the body of the County; and the way to
cleanse the Country of them, is is to execute Justice upon them; for the
execution of Justice is the work of God himself, the end of the Law, the
Command of the Parliament, the Magistrates Honor, the Offenders Terror, and
the expectation of all honest men: And therefore (as once it was spoken in
another case) let it not seem a small thing to you who are to begin this Work
of Justice, that you are separated from the Congregation, and brought near to
the God of Heaven to do the Service of the Tabernacle and to stand before the
people, and to minister unto them. And having said thus much, I leave what
remains to your diligence: All our Service begins in you, its your Ignoramus,
or Billa vera which opens and shuts, which shuts and no man opens.

FINIS.

