It Is a plain Case GENTLEMEN:
OH the distraction of this Factious age!
Have not wile-men (who are stark mad with rage,
Brought this fair Land to such a combustion.
That rhrough their means we may fear confusion.
A horrid Tragedy is now begun.
And still continues, would to God 'twere done.
It Is write in blood, as all the World may see,
And plainly read this Kingdoms misery
Oh! who would have thought that two years ago,
That so much Christian blood should on the earth flow,
As has been shed this last year? cursed be he
That was the cause of this Phlebotamie.
Some are confident in their opinion,
Papists have fomented this Division;
Others say, the Brownists (of whom beware)
Have stirred up this unnatural, wretched War:
For my own part, I think they both have been
The Ruin of this Nation. These estill spin
The thread of our undoing: these a^e those
Besides these two that are this Islands foes.
Nay' besides these, there are some high in State,
Who to this Land are most unfortunate.
I dare not name them yet there is few but knows
Who are the Kings and Kingdoms professed foes.
May all that wish ill will unto this Land,
Never subsist in Peace, but may the hand
Of divine Justice bring them unto shame;
Blaste their fame, forgotten be their name.
They that breath blood, and do defy fair Peace,
May they want joy their sorrows never cease:
Torn with possessed whirlewinds may they dye,
And Dogs bark at their murtherous memory.
There is no honest heart but needs must greive,
To consider the Times wherein we live.
What eye can refrain from shedding salt tears?
To see the many mischiefs our vain fears,
And causeless jealousies have on us brought,
Kindled this strange fire, and all our woes wrought.
These are the Jonans, that the tempest raise,
These are the Achans that our Israel amaze.
Were not for fears and jealousies at first,
We had not with the plague of War been cursed,
But blessed with happy Peace; there had not come
On this same Kingdom such a Martyrdom:
The King had not gone from us, no discontent
Arose at all, 'twixt Him and's Parliament.
But we our selves have caused our several woes;
Though we be victors, yet we have overthrowes.
Let the King or Parliament have the best,
Both King and Kingdoms suffers lies oppressed;
Let who can have the day, with your favor,
Both Armies are loosers, for their labor;
Much precious blood is lost, many a poor soul,
And cannot the thought of this condole
This civil, uncivil war? But you will say,
If it please God our Forces get the day,
We shall be then most happy live secure,
Our dwellings being entrenched about most sure
From our enemies. Do not your selves deceive,
The enemi's within you that believe.
It Is not your Bulwarks can save your ^uck nor pelf,
Man is the greatest enemy to himself.
It Is not your boasting that you are safe in the City,
You Are no where safe, though ye seem near so witty,
And thus much know from me, for verily,
We Are certain of nothing but uncertainty.
The King not certain is of's Royal Crown,
Nor the Subject of what he calls his own.
Such is th'inconstantcy' of this worlds Ball,
No man knows whether he shall stand or fall.
Rely not therefore on the Arm of flesh,
Depend not on the Army neither trust fresh
Horses, not the power or prowis of Kings;
All these without the Lord are but vain things.
Unless God keep your City, the watchmen watch
In vain, and without him much harms you will catch.
Oh! whether is our ancient courage fled?
With our forefathers it is long since dead,
And now we English are even like our Bows,
That once won Battles, now skares non but Crows,
Our homebred jarrs and civil contestations,
Have rendered us a storm to Foreign Nations.
LONDON you count is yours, and the Court's yours,
The King must then be yours, and his Crown yours,
And what are you then? Royal thieves, you will blow,
Seditious fire which still does spread and grow
To such a huge intolerable flame,
That all your wit can never quench the same.
You that sit threatening what storms you will raise here,
Do you know where they will light? I Will tell you where,
You like so many Joves, do throw them down;
You regared none, neither Scepter nor Crown,)
And what then? you like Tyles on houses tops.
When foul wether comes, will shift the rainy drops,
From one, to one and whilst from you it sheads,
Where falls the showers? on the poor Peoples heads,
I Will tell you a pretty tale. There grew a tall,
A goodly fence of Hawthorn and of Bryer,
That when the Sun was chollericke and hot
Kept sheep and yeaning Lambs safe from his rage
Or when the Sky stormed did his wrath assuage.
This goodly row of Briars still anon,
Would as the Sheep went by, tear from their backs
Rags of their wooly coats, at which the sheep
(Though by protection of this good old Bryer
They were fed fatt, and therefore were grown proud
Rep^n'd, and did prefer bills of complaint
Up to the shepherds: The rude hairbrain shepherds
Cried down with this proud Bryer; the hedging bills
So laid about them, down the Bryer did fall,
And vvha^ ensued? a tale most tragical.
Being laid along, they trod on it in despite,
Put fire unto it, and burnt it in the flame,
The green bovvs wept, seeing men past ruth or shame
What follows next? marry hail, rain and snow,
Beat on the sheep and Shepherds, cold winds blovv
But vvhers their shelter? gone. Then did the heat
So scorch them, that they had no lift to eat.
But where is their cool shade now? gone, gone, and then
Others break in, and feed, whilst these fed lean.
At last starved wolves and ravenous foxes came,
And ear up all left neither ewe, nor lamb;
The Shepherds pin^d to nothing and like men
Made wise by their harms, wished th'ole Bryer again.
I'have read a Text, preach you upon it it is plain,
They stab themselves, that strike their Sovereign.
YORK, Printed by STEPHEN BVKLEY, 1643.


