THREE SPEECHES, Being such Speeches as the like were never spoken in the City.

The first by Master Warden to the fellows of his Company, touching the
Affairs of the Kingdom.

The second by Mistress Warden, being her observations on her Husbands Reverent
Speech, to certain Gentlewomen of Ratliffe and Wapping.

The third by Mistress Wardens Chambermaid as she was dressing her Mistress, the
Wisdom and Learning whereof will amaze your judgments.

Published by Antibrownistus Puritanomastix.



Printed at London for S. R. 1642.

Three Speeches, Being such Speeches as the like was never spoken in the City.
The first by Mr. Warden to the fellows of his Company, touching the Affairs
of the Kingdom.

The second by Mistress Warden, being her observations on her Husband Reverend
Speech, to certain Gentlewomen of Ratliffe and Wapping.

The third by Mistress Wardens Chambermaid as she was dressing her Mistress: The
wisdom and learning whereof will amaze your judgments.

Brethren and fellow Counselors. I begin with an acknowledgement of thanks
for your election of me to wagge my beard amongst you this day* for the good of
the Commonwealth, I confess my self as very a Woodcock as the best of you,
yet (with your patience) I will express my simple affection to the Weal
public, to show the spleen of my shallow capacity.

Be pleased first to consider the Liturgy of the Church, now generally spoken
against by grave and Orthodox Coach-men, Weavers and Brewers Clerks, and
grown od^ous to our she divines, who look asquint with the very thought of
it, what this Liturgy is I know not, nor care not, yet as simple as I am, I
believe it is a hard word, either Greek or Latin, or both: whence I conclude
if no hard word, no Greek or Latin nor any that know them ought to come
within the Discipline of the Church, but plain Hebrew and English. Let us then
avoid t^is Liturgy, and if it concern the Common Prayer, (as my singular good
wife says) then questionless if the new Convocation be but as wise as
himself they will doom it to be burnt, nay and consumed as the loggs in
Lincoln in Feilds were, for it has caused the Gospel to prosper so slowly
under Preaching Tradesmen, and Lay Clerg^-men, who have coupled in laborious
conjunction to procreate young Saints in this new faith, making Barnes,
Stables, Woods, Sawpits, old Ditches, Cellers open houses of Office their
private Synagogues, where unseene of the wicked they may do what I will not
speak, but speak I will again of and against this Liturgy, the Heathen word
Liturgy, which if blotted out of the Church, they would increase and multiply
spiritual Children and make them sw^rme in Parishes. For having liberty and
being strong of spirit, through high f^re, they are so zealously impudent that
they would go to it in the streets; but I will conclude with good man Greenes
Hebrew Exhortation, Quicquid liber cuquodlibet* away with the Liturgy, and so
say I.

For the Militia Brethren, I know not the words signification, yet I conceive
it absolutely requisite, because the King does absolutely oppose it. This
Militia is a hard word too, and if not Hebrew (for then I could love it) it
shows that hard word words fit the Camp better than the Church, my
observation holding it necessary, that Scholars who understand hard words
should be military Officers, and those that understand nothing should be
Churchmen. This Militia affords a glorious sight in the Leaders, in their Gold
and Silver, large Horses, Gorgets, leading Staves, being ornament in War, and a
witty policy in a case of surprisall by the enemy, to carry their Ransumes in
their rich habi^e and it is a brave sight to see their Buffe and Scarlet flesh,
and not stained with one drop of blood, the new Drums and Ensigns, peales of
shot wounding the Air, more courigiously I verilly believe than if it were the
enemy. I that near discharged a piece before rejoiced to hear not to see my
Gun crack, for indeed I winckt, yet in my conscience durst I have charged a
Bullet I could have hit the great Tent twenty foot off. Well, the Militia is a
brave invention to consume Powder, and furnish weekly employment for want of
Trading as heart can wish, and fit in my opinion to be ordained Colonel of all
hard City words since the Conquest of Wat Tyler and Jack Straw. This Militia
leads me to my third Argument, which I hope to handle with as much discretion
as formerly, that is the extirpation of Papists.

Let us with elevated Notes smell out their treacheries, and root them out not
swinishly with our Noses but let us like our Ancestors be horned beasts, that
yoaking our selves together, we may Plough them up like the Earth. Let us
cross them till they fear to cross the way of us least we account it
superstitious; and let all that are not of my opinion, and wisdom, be reputed
Papists. Let the honourer of the Name of Jesus be held a Jesuit, a Graduate,
in the Universities a Seminary, and both be charitably hanged, drawn, and
quartered for high Treason. Let no woman wear beads unless it be
Pearle-beades in a Hatband, because my wife (that piece of devout obstinacy)
esteems that a decent wearing, thereby expressing the haughty pride of a
Citizens wife* Moreover lets draw the King (if we can) to favor no man for
learning, wit, affability, or any perfection unless he be a Roundhead, that
can pray four hours more vehemently than the best Divine can pray a quarter,
and loves none but English and Hebrew Sermons as I do; though I understand not
this Hebrew, yet I honor it, as being the Language of Amsterdam, and of
Lay-Doctors; such Amsterdam godly men would make glorious Courtiers, the Kings
Graces would be longer than morning and evening prayers are; the reversion of
his Diet not given away but swiftly devoured, etc. Ambassadors without
Audience would be answered by the instinct of the Spirit, long locks would be
changed to large Ears, Maskes and Plays to Conventicles and Psalm singing,
and their very sight would affright Taffaty sinners from coming near the
Throne of Majesty, and they themselves become the prime sinners of the
Kingdom. Would they not also be fit for Statesmen? would not How the Cobbler
make a special Lord Keeper? or Walker a Secretary of State? or the Lock-smith
that Preached in Crooked Lane ^n excellent Master of the Wards? the Tailor at
Bride-well Dock might be Master of the Liveries, the Master of the Horse a
Lords Preach^ng Groom, and Brown the Up-holsterer might be Groom of the
Bedchamber, and I that am Warden of the Company would be Warden of the
Cinque Ports. If we could attai^e these preferments, (as I fear we shall not)
how would we then firke the Popish any malignant Party, they should be made
Traitors, and superstitious Innovators, and Latin in a Sermon should be flat
damnation. We would be Devils incarnate to plague those Papists that stand
upon a Philo^ophy, reason and sense; as if reason and sense and such fooleries
pertained to Religion and the spirit. But I must correct my rapture, now I
think on 't in cooler blood we (...) not have all the sway, the Kings part
will bear half, and though we are self conceited* the wiser sort hold us
Roundheads to be but zealous silly, mad fools, nay Cuckolds; yet I have
showed my affection to this happy change which you and I desire, and we would
then call a perfect Reformation. And here my invective against Papists ends I
will plunder my brains next with the design for Ireland, belabouring the
Subject in such a manner as if I were a railing Lecturer, that you may crown
me Cobwarden of all Wardens in Europe or New England. In this design two
things are considerable Reparution of losses past, and Expectation of profit to
come; the losses are more than Arithmetic can number, for many since the
Rebellion in Ireland have wittily compounded their debts here under pretense of
losses there, which I confess I would my self have followed, but that it
being contrary to City pride, I must have lost my Wardenship, and my wife must
have given the wall which would break her heart, or breed between us a
heartbreaking dissension. But this was a trick to enrich Debt-b^okes, to
trebble Estates, to cozen Creditors, and the Commission of Bankerouts I tickle
with the conceit of this power of knavery, whereby they might have preserved
money to buy Land after the Conquest of Ireland. By your Hum given to my Speech
I do discern your liking thereof, and you show that you will follow my advice
be not pacified to return again. Secondly the mighty benefit thence accrewing
makes me press this design; the purchases may be exceeding profitable to
Money-mongers, as my man Iehosophat Singularity cast them up this morning;
besides the soldiers shall get invisible benefit and treasure of honor, which
they would be hindered to obtain by having lands and estates, they may come
home lame, maimed, and lousy, and having got a Pension keep Alehouses, or
Tobacco-sconces, a Fortune fit for smoking Soldiers. To conclude, for my
speeches coming off with a a twange and pleasing tone, and to show the Garland
of my good will to the public; concerning fears and jealousies now possessing
the Kingdom, I will only grant you out a modicum, and end with as much
modesty* gravity and wisdom as I began.

The dangerous consequence of these fears and jealousies are not to be
compared with any other time or Nation, but who can tell what they are, or from
whence they arise, but cause there is for both, and much cause as may be
discerned by the much talking of them* and your present snoring now so loud is
the effect of this fear, fears and jealousies having kept you waking, and so
consequently made you sleepy, and my self do suspect and fear lest my man
Iehosaphat should prove a carnal Boy, and get my Daughter Dorcas with child;
for Iehosaphat has said prayers at a Conventicle, and the Girl has a strain
both of Father and Mother in her, and such a Conjunction would to the grief of
our spirit, and compunction of our hearts disgrace all Protestations and
Reformations by such a procreation, if Iehosophat should graft on my Daughter a
young Warden that could not be baked in a Pie, but must be bred up with great
disgrace and charges. Your neighbor Gripe do fear least your wife should
know that you keep a whore at Putney, and your brother Brush fear hanging for
speaking high treason against the King, this we are in fear. As for jealousies
we are all zealous of our crimes, and jealous of our servants, and thus we
have considerable grounds for fears and jealousies, though we know not how to
prevent their effects; for neither the Militia, he stopping of Ports, nor
holding Garrison Towns, can keep our wives, daughters and servants honest if
they will Cuckold us, no Italian locks can keep a Theife or enemy out of their
private Boxes or long chests; your wife, neighbor Spider may be unknown to
us all now doing the ^eate, for I saw Green the Felt-maker go that way as I
came to the Hall. O tremble no^ neighbor, for no doubt she is spiritual and
secret, and would thereby abate fleshly desires, which that act does mortify
as much as the longest fast. There are other fears and jealousies though as I
said I know not their Original, yet fear we may least the Divill should take
vengeance on us for our Extortions, and consenage in the sale of our
commodities, yet fear is vain in certainties, though still we will fear and
be jealous; for when the danger comes we shall know the cause, until then I
will sit down, sleep, and be silent.

Mistress Wardens Observations upon her Husbands Reverend Speech, in the
presence of certain Gentlewomen of Ratliffe and Wapping.
MOst pure and chosen of the Times, my Daughters and Companions in
Predestination, whereas some profane wretches have laughed and gibed at Mr.
Warden himself, and his thrice endowed Speech, and at our Petition concerning
redress of State matters penned by as zealous a Brewers Clarke as ever prayed
in Hebrew, I know you will not doubt that truth, which a learned friend of ours
has ignorantly and impudently set forth, that Democracy, Aristocracy, etc. or
Hypocracy are as much from God as Monarchy, which Position shows his wisdom
in his ignorance by proving nothing. It holds that a Stable or House of Office
are places, and as ancient as Churches, therefore as proper to teach in; and as
in this so in other matters we may confide and trust in our own opinions
before all things, which inference throws me fitly on my Husbands Argument of
the Malitia.

The Malitia (dear Daughters of the Pint) already faithfully handled by a
great observance, and learnedly by my husband afford, my first observation,
that as we are borne for our Country, and eve^^ ^an is next to himself it
followe^ that if men be bound to hazard their estates, wives and children to
requite them for their security and protection, so that it appears the Malitia
is a mutual bond of men's estates and affections, and a legal invention to
keep the City loyal to the King and to make the King confide in the City.
Besides, the Militia is beneficial to Feather-makers, Brokers, and other
dutiful subjects, whereas the Commission of Array is another thing and if any
presume to think it legal yet there is an equity in the Law beyond the
Letter, by which we may dispense with our estates and consciences, believe what
we list, and take up new Opinions and Arms, as we shall think fitting for
Church or Commonwealth. Nor are we now bound to confide in the Exposition of
Judges and Lawyers before our own. But as my double-comb Husband has often
said, Oh what a flourishing Commonwealth should we see if it were contrived
into Halls and Companies, and governed by Wardens and Masters? It would be very
like that Model of Church Government laid down by that seditious Fox of the
Church, who begot the Protestation protested. And now I am come so near the
Church, I will handle my Husbands point as it stands. The Language of the
Liturgy is nothing, for it is confessed the unlearned may know enough to be saved,
ergo learning is needless; and if needless, why not profane? nay if learning
were either necessary or convenient the Scriptures would enjoyne it, but the
most unlearned may be saved, nay are saved: ergo learning is neither necessary
nor convenient, and consequently if not Learning neither Reason nor sense. For
as that man of Revalations Mr. Green proves it fully, ignorance and noise are
sufficient marks of our Election, and sanctified Mr. Hunt in his Tale of a
Tub, both maintain that Learning is a trouble and vexation to Religion.
Moreover it is as lawful for women as men to be Bishops (if Bishops were
lawful) which we must deny, for it is Orthodoxly believed that Bishops are
Antichristian, not because of their estates and honors, which are not to be
despised if placed upon the right Saints, and resigned to us and our righteous
seed, who ought to inherit the earth. And we give thanks that in despite of
the profane bridle of the Laws, the bowels of our hope is somewhat enlarged.
The Anabapaists excellently deny all the Scriptures than make against them and
we, and so do we calling them Apocriphall* A Barn, a Stable or any hole are
places proper to our Doctrine and conversation, for a Church makes not
Religion, but our religion makes any place a Church, where we congregate in the
spirit to feel as well as hear, and what Church can be more universal for
Simplicisme, Dotagisme, and Hypocrisis^e. The Antichristian Wardrop will serve
the Kirk of Scotland and Amsterdam, wondering that our Brothers of Scotland
could at their first coming hither, over-looke this trumpery in the Church,
when they begged the loades of it.

Concerning my Pearl Hatband which my Husband mentions in his Speech, I never
wore it with any pride since he compared it to Popish Beads, though there be
some wholesome principles, which we scorn to own from the Jesuits, but from
our own inventions, being the rule of all our Faith Hope and Charity. That
Church holds Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, so do we: They have
Revelations, Visions, Dissentions, so have we: they have shrifts, venial sins
with Sisters, or with a Neighbors wife, so have we: they allow deposing and
regulating of Princes and ruling over Church and State, so would we do: Lastly
they hatch Faction., deny all this inwords, but grant it in deeds, and so do
we. And though we cannot endure a Surplisse or Cross, the Popish Bulls, nor
Jesuits* yet we hold it lawful by the same virtue of Equivocations and
mental reservations to cheat, swear, and lie in a holy Cause. So that
whether the Jesuit or we were the best or most honest Subject, would be a hard
question, if we were suffered to make our own Laws. And ^herea^ my Husband
speaks out of his good will concerning the advancement of ^he holy Brethren,
methinkes it would be a more heavenly sight to see Mr. How, (...) grave
observator himself in his Bar Gown, mounted on the steps at the Banqueting
house in White Hall, expounding Chapters to the Courtiers and Cavalliers, and
to have all the Privy Counsel chosen out of the Elect, the Pentioners
Lay-Dostors, and the Guard devout Elders, then for the Lord Chamberlain,
Groom of the Stool, and Bedchamber (places most fitting for women) some of
the holy Sisters, taught to resist the world of flesh, and the Devil in the
Zion of New England, that both the King and State might the more securely
confide in their continence and purity. Let us all fling up the whites of our
eyes in an holy hope, that the strong breathing of the Spirit may stir up some
worthy instrument to say amen to the work. But to draw to a conclusion,
because I perceive by your twinkling eyes, and licking of your lips that you
would feign be at your Devotions, I shall but wag my Petticoate at the first of
his two last Reasons concerning Ireland. And I observe that the Spirit does
always help us to overcome our Adversaries the Protestants, for if we break
in knavery or begary we may still have a Land of Promise to sly to. Yet
sincerely though living in Ireland might be very advantageous, I know not what
to say, since no venomous beast will live there as they do in New England,
therefore I will speak little of that design, for I had rather all the
Soldiers were in Hull than in Ireland; for if the King take it, it will put
the Brethren to many hard Texts, and tedious prayers, and even break the heart
of the Conventicle. And therefore let any reverend Roundhead that is not a
Cuckold, judge what fear or jealousy can be like that? Therefore it is high
time to best^r^us (Mistress Sprit-sayle pray lend the Chamberpot) and so I will
conclude all with another quart, and with this application.

A Speech made by Mistress Wardens Chambermaid.
Mistress Wardens Chambermaid called Abigaile, was a pretty white-fac'd thing,
of a right Puritan complexion, and thought (as other maids do) to get a
Husband by a simpring show of Religion. She had offended her Mistress in
bringing up her clean warm s^^^k too late one morning when she was to go
very early to a Conventicle, and being c^^dden for this delinquency, to
vindicate her diligence, and confirm her words, through passion she said 'twas
true by the Mass. Her Mistress presently taking notice of the abominable word
Mass, grew exceeding angry with Abigaile, and called her Reprobate, and
baggage Papist. The color in Abigailes cheeks rose at her words, scorning the
word, much more the name of a Papist; biting the lip a while and powting, at
last her zealous anger for being called Papist flew out in this Speech,
consisting of many parts starched together.

I must tell you forlooth good Mistress, that though I was brought up in the
Country, yet my Father being ^exton of the Church in the Market Town would
after Evening Prayer was done make his house ring with singing of Psalms, and
though I say it, I was bred as well as any of the elect Maids here in London, so
that I had rather you had called me a zealous dislembler (as some of our
Sisters be) than a Papist. For I am so absolutely against them, that if all
Papists heads were on one neck I would cut them off with one blow, that so in
Country Towns I might be drawn in the painted cloth like Iudeth cutting off
Holofernes head. A Papist is in my conceit an abominable creature, and holds
damnable Opinions, some bad and some good, whereof I was never guilty; I count
fasting to be but a foolish thing, for our Cupboard at home stood always open,
and on fridaies or fasting-daies I could go to it, and take what I list
without any resistance of the Spirit, for Religion must lie in a maids heart,
though her fortune does sometimes lie in her belly, and for good works, I
never loved them since I left my Sampler, and then I was out of Charity with
them because they were wrought in Crostich: and another Reason was, because (as
you know forsooth) embrodery was much used in times of Popery, for Copes and
other Idolatrous apparel; so that not only their opinions, which I naturally
detested, being as I said, a Sextons Daughter of the reformed Religion, but
also their Persons have bin odious in my sight, and if I were as my Master, and
you good Mistress, (for you are wise learned, and can be as Religiously angry as
he) I would ^faith tickle these Papists, and firke them out of the Parishes in
London, my Mr. talks of yoaking themselves like horne-beasts to plow them up,
but now let us rather with Hey-forkes taken out of Barnes, where we exercise
zealously, prick them forward, till for very fear they leap over Sea and
utterly forsake the Land. If Master Warden would but play the Devils part in
punishing and plundering, and plaguing these Papists, I my self when I come
amongst any of them am fully resolved to scratch out their eyes, for it is a
proper sign of an elect young man or maid to condemn that we understand not,
and to be furiously obstinate in our zealous anger. Therefore good Mistress I
wish in your presence, that are a great spiritual observer (as appears by
your learned observations on my Masters wise Speech) that I may never see
Conventicle more, but that if I had the power I would be worse then all the
Devils in Hell, Haggs, Furies, Witches, and instruments of Damnation
whatsoever to punish these Papists.

O Mistress! you know not how stiff maids are in their opinion, and if they
once get a thing by the end they will hold it fast; and I will ever hold that
Papists are in a certain state of Damnation, as certain as the Elect and the
Brethren and Sisters of Predestination are sure of salvation. Thus have I
proved my self no Papist, now I will tell you (good Mistress) my opinions,
which jumpe just with yours as a Chambermaid should do; I like Hypocrisy as
well as Monarchy; and that a Barn, or Stable may be a Church: our old Church
in the Country being decayed, was like a Barn or Stable, I never loved
Learning nor learned men, sir Roger our Curate deceived me in a deep point,
therefore learning is no Religion nor learned men are not always zealously
religious, and learning Mistress (as you say) is profane, and sense and reason
in Religion are unnecessary, for though we can have feeling other ways, yet we
can have no sense of Religion* and feeling I hope is a sense respected much of
us the Elect, and therefore though you banish sense and reason, yet let there
be always a religious feeling in and amongst us. This said, she finished the
dressing of Mistress Warden, and so ended her speech.

FINIS.

