The true Relation of the taking of the Town of Preston, by Colonel Seatons
Forces from Manchester, Sent in a Letter from a worthy Minister, (an eye
witness thereof) to an emminent Divine in London.
Worthy Sir,
BE pleased to accept this poor rude paper, it is a Messenger sent to tell you
good Tidings: We have assaulted and taken Preston, a Town very considerable,
and which much tends to the advancement of the Public work in this County,
and so not altogether impertinent to the Kingdom. We were about 900, or 1000
Firemen, horse and foot, and about 600 Bill-men, Halberdiers and Clubmen; our
march in the night was tedious, especially to many who had marched the night
before, and to accommodate us in that, God gave us a fair night, such as had
not been of a space before, yea, and indeed the day forerunning threatened us a
very foul night; this was of God: Our men assaulted it a little before
Sunrising, in an hours time they were Masters of it: It was well fortified
with Brick-Walls, outer and inner: Our men (but especially 3 Companies that
came from Manchester) fell on with notable resolution: Captain John Booth
scaled their walls, bidding his Soldiers either follow him, or give him up;
but they forgetting their own safety followed him. The garrison fought it out
stoutly, they kept their inner works with push of Pike, and also the Breach
they kept with their swords, which aggravates the matter: We have not lost
above 3 or 4 men (very strange) falling upon them in their Works; of theirs I
saw lying dead in one street end at least 5 or 6, besides other parts of the
Town several, and many in the houses not calling for quarter; And as if men
must have been singled out for slaughter, we could scarcely have picked out
better, the Major (that was resolute to desperateness in the Cause, that had
often times been heard swear, He would fire the Town ere he gave it up, and
begin with his own house) was slain, and that very day he had appointed to
constrain the well-affected, or to have seized on their estates, Sir Gilbert
Houghtons brother a Captain, and a desperate Papist; Mr. Westby a Physician and
a desperate Papist; a Sergeant to the Freehold, that came lately out of
Ireland, a most wicked wretch, were of the number of the slain: Several of our
men are shot, but none mortally, (its notable) many are shot in two or three or
four several places, and neither to death, nor dangerously: We have taken some
prisoners of note, Captain Farrington, Sir John Talbots son, one Fleetwood,
and they say, Anderton of Clayton, if so, I assure you, he is one of the most
considerable men for estate, and activity in the County, and many others, with
many Arms, and a large part of things justly, and by plunder (alas, that that
is so much lamented, but most hard to be prevented,) seized on: more prisoners
of note, we had been possessed of, but that honest flight rescued them: The
fruit of this design is not yet perceived, but will shine forth more and more,
I am confident: It blocks up the way, that all the North vast part of
Lancashire, where were the chief Malignants, and the Cream of the Earls Forces;
yea, and indeed, they will come in (I am persuaded, and partly perceive
already) and subscribe to the Propositions. So soon as matters were settled, we
sung praises to God in the streets (Sir it was wonderful to see it) the Sun
brake forth and shined brightly and hot, in the time of the exercise, as if it
had been Midsummer. Truly Sir, we owe (subordinate to God) a great deal to Sir
John Seaton: Things are artificially and methodically done, past what they were
before; he is a man of wonderful care, and unwearied industry; only rather
too harsh for our Northern knotty rigged dispositions; had he the meek spirit,
and smooth tongue of S. M. Sparrow, he were Peerlesse, and without parallel,
doubtless. Sir I am in have, just come from Preston, and the Post about to
take horse, pardon my rudeness, and brevity; only, I beseech you assist us in
praises, that we may not loose God for want of praises, and pray for us, that
plunder cry not louder for justice then prayer for mercy: Remember my love and
service to your wife, Farewell is the wish of

Preston, Feb. 11. 1642. Your humble servant and respective friend, John
Tilsley.
Postscript.
ANderton of Clayton is out of question taken, Captain Preston taken also, he,
with Captain Farrington came this night to Preston, The Sergeant mentioned
before was an Irish Rebel, And Fleetwood before named, was he that killed the
man in Manchester, at that time the Earl came thither a little before the late
Siege.



London, Printed by J. R. for Luke Fawn. Feb, 14. 1642.


