THREE LETTERS SENT FROM ROME TO Some of the principal Actors of the Rebellion
in IRELAND. Dated 4. of January. 1642. After the Roman Account.

Showing their zealous affections and advice to their Rebellious proceedings,
whereof the two first were written in Irish and translated into English
according to the Original Coppies.

DVBLIN: Printed by William Bladen. 1642.

To my honored friend Phelim Roe o Neale with my welwishes in IRELAND.
My honored Lo.
THe great God help you. I would have often written unto you, since I received
St. Francis his habit, and especially during these six years I have lived in
Rome, had not the Lord, which lately died, and Hugh Roe my brother charged me
to keep no correspondencie with you, or with any other friend there, to avoid
all suspicion and damage, which might happen unto you thereby. Now if that
which is written unto us, and which we hear from all parts be true, to wit,
that the thing which we long desired, whereof our hope was in God, and in you
heretofore, be come to pass: The time of writing and keeping correspondencie
with you touching such matters, as are best, and most needful unto you in the
present opportunity, is now at hand. Therefore I could not choose, but write
(above all things) these few lines unto you in my mothers tongue, as being most
safe. The holy father, and his two nephews, Cardinal Anthony Barberinus
protector of Ireland, and Cardinal Francis Barberinus, who has all the power
here in such matters as concern the Pope, have heard of the war and
confederation, which you make for your religion and liberty. And truly I
cannot express the grea^nes of the joy (no wonder) which they ^onceive thence,
in such manner, that if they had received Letters, if you had sent an Agent
unto them with auth^^ity to express your will, or designe^ (...) should want
no help for your better proceedings. Wherefore send without delay some able man
with a Declaration of your grievances in form of Law. My brother Owen Roe o
Conny the priest is in Spain, except he begone into Ireland before this, he
has finished very well his study of Philosophy, Theology and Law, and is
well spoken in the Latin, Spanish and Dutch: He is (as I know well) sober,
discreet, learned, and bred according to the manner of several Nations to
treat with any Prince of what matter soever: Furthermore, he is (as you know)
faithful and natural to the other Lords your confederats; which qualities are
most requisite in any man to be sent hither, or to any other place upon the
like Embassage. I protest unto you before God, that I commend him not in that
he is my brother, but that I am not acquainted with any man of better ability
and faithfulness to be employed here in your service, and in the service of
the Country, then he, since Hugh Roe my brother died through the great misery
and pains he has taken in his last travells: I am teacher here, teaching in
the College of the Irish these six years, and employed all that time about
the affairs of the late slain Lord. I might do you some service, if I had
some intelligence from you, and some help of him whom you intend to send
hither. There is nothing I desire more then to return to my Country, though I
be settled here to my own contentation: I pray use me and the rest of my
function after such manner, as shall seem best unto you for your own service.
Father Arthur mac Genis is in Madrill, and so are many other, who would
perform any service, wherein you would be pleased to employ them. Father
Francis mac Genis is in Germany, so likewise is father Francis o Farrell, who
loves and honors you, and is very intimate with the Emperor, who might well
help you now, since you have eased him of the troubles of the Palatinate, whom
only he feared. There is here also a priest from the County of Tyrone, Edmund
mac Grana a learned man having of late commene'd Dr. In France there is a
Divinity Professor Patrick o Connor, descended from the Connors of Leinster,
who did much service unto the late deceased Lord. He is of nature loving,
constant, of audacitie guided with discretion, as is his Couzin Brandon o
Connor, who (I doubt not) will do any service for you, Michael o Gormbey is in
the Low Countries, Guardian of Lovain, and many more of the like sort. See your
self, what is best to be don with Owen o Neale, who is in Flaunders, and with
Conn mac Cormack, who is Sergeant Major in Spain, but (more is the pity) a
man of no great policy or wisdom: I would all the old trained Soldiers were
there. I will write to my brother Murtagh o Conny, who was ancient to the
deceased Lord, and is now Captain, and to the rest of the Nobility of Ulster,
that they repair unto you without delay, you may write to the King of Spain,
among other things to give them leave to come unto you. I know not what will
the Earl of Tirconell do upon this occasion, his Regiment is disbanded, and
he himself gone to the Court to Madrill. I fear much that if he should go into
Ireland, he would do more hurt then good. Noble Sir, Fear God above all things
in prosecuting wisely the fortune, which God offers unto you. Let love and
unanimity be among your selves, show all possible kindness to the old Irish of
Leinster, and oblige unto your self all men as near as you may. Beware of the
tricks of the Munstermen, who at this hour show no candid dealing toward you
in Rome as you shall soon understand, except you send your Agent to prevent it
with all speed, for they ascribe unto themselves without any ground the praise
and glory of all your Heroical deeds, as you may learn of Evir that lives
with your self. Be sure to have a great heart, and make some chief Head among
you, but reserve the Crown for Conn his side. 1. the Neales. Remember the old
Slavery, wherein you have lived of long time, and the destruction which will
generally come upon you, except you get the upper hand: You will prevail, if
you join together as you ought, God send it. I would advise every chief
Officer among you, to have a Secretary along with him to write a diurnall of
your passages and overthrowes which your Enemy receive, which will redound
much to your glory. Spoil not the Country for fear of Famine. I will not
fail to write according as I shall hear from you. We would send unto you a
Bull after the form of the Bull which Hugh mac Baron got, if we had received
your Letters. If the Church do wisely, they will turn over the Election of
Prelates there to the Nobility, and will give them authority in that point.

Your faithful Servant Bonaventura o Connye.
Rome from Isiodor's Coll. 4. January. After the Roman Account.
The Superscription. Deliver this to Connor mac Guyre Lord of Iniskillin, or in
his absence to his brother Roory mac Guyre in IRELAND.
My honored Lo.
THousand Commendations unto you, to Brian, Roory, and the rest; I have heard
of yours, and Hugh Oge his imprisonment, and truly I never heard worse news in
my life: but I was comforted by some men wiser then my sel^, who esteem, that
it is (...) much good, then any hur^^ which (...) redound to (...) the whole
Nation from (...) your r^^^les. Truly (my Lord) if you be dead through that
attempt, the which God forbid: it is a most glorious and everlasting name which
you have added to your self. The Pope, and the two Cardinals his nephews are
acquainted with your case, and heard likewise how valorously Phelim and Roory,
and the rest of the Gentlemen their assistants have behaved themselves, and
rejoiced greatly thereat, so that I make no question he will help you, if you
demand his aid as becomes you. Therefore Bonaventura o Conny brother to Eneas o
Conny, who is Lecturer here, thought sit to write unto the General Phelim
touching this matter, and I advise you to see wisely into the reasons which he
writ, and into the good which will arise from them in time, and that you and
Phelim be guided and directed by them, and rather, that Bonaventura is a wise,
prudent, and learned man, and as loving and faithful unto you, as I am. If you
be not present, Roory will supply your place. I beseech you, above all things,
and for the love of Jesus Christ, let true love be established among you all,
and let not the temptation of the devil, or man divert your mind from
cherishing all possible love and amity between your self and Brian mac
Coghonaght and his Children, as I doubt not you will. Endeavor to draw unto
you, not only your own kindred; but also all the ancient roots of the Irish
wheresoever dispersed, or distant, and all to the glory of God, and the defense
of your Religion, and I will be bound, God will be your help. If you bear out
one year. Believe me. The Pope, and all the Catholic Kings will be glad, that
you crave their assistance. The merciful God grant it, and defend you from the
outrage of your Enemies, so will he pray night and day who is.

Your poor Kinsman. Francis mac Guyre.
Rome from Isiodor's Coll. 4. January. 1642. After the Roman Account. Were it
not, that I have not finished my studies, there is nothing in the world I had
rather, then to live with you, to do for you any service, even to my death,
though I want nothing where I am: And seeing I am not present with you, let
none be your Counsel, but such as be wise and conscionable men, and acquainted
with the customs of other Nations. I commit you to Gods protection, and behave
your self nobly for your religion: Commend me to Hugh mac Mahon and his
children: seeing the way is very long, I will be so bold as to send unto you no
more paper at this time.

Malachias is Lecturer in this Country, an excellent Italian: as you think
best, either send for him to go over, or else let him tarry here.



To Sir Phelim o Neale.
Right Honorable,
YOur honor and worth does embolden me, though unacquainted, to present unto
your honor herewith my humble duty and service, which shall be always at your
Lordships Command, if in ought your Lordship may be pleased to make use
thereof. I have received of late some letters out of London, wherein they write
that your Lordship have taken Arms in Ireland against the King of England, of
this I have informed our old Father, who received much comfort thereby, and
promised to give his helping-hand to all your exploits, which our Munster men
here understanding, do offer to make his Holiness believe, that if any such
business or alteration be in IRELAND, is rather begun by my Lord Roch or
Woormouth, then by you, or any in your Province, being very poor, and wanting
the ability or means to maintain, or make up any such Army, this with other
sinisterly informations, does this Munster Agent (whom in Gods name Master
Riley nominated for Ulster) offer to diminish the Fame and Credit of those who
ventures their lives and health for the common good of their Country and
Church. It is most necessary that your Lordship do write with all speed, by
several ways, both to this old man with his Nephew Cardinal Francisco, and
also to our own Protector Cardinal Antonio, or send some natural Prelate
that may inform them at large of all your proceedings and mind, in the mean
time, what I or Father Bonaventurae Conneo can do, shall not be wanting;
observe always good correspondencie with the ancient Catholic houses of both
England and Scotland, as your predecessors (the defunct) did, and also with
those here and elsewhere, Father Francis Farrell is in Viena to serve us, and
Father Francis Magnesius in Madrill, so as nothing may be wanting, if due
Correspondencie be observed, trust and make use of old Rosse de Cruce, who
knows how to see your letters directed unto me, see that you live all in a
general Union, and not have any Contradiction among you, otherwise can hardly
arrive to what we desire you, if any service I can do you either here or
elsewhere, be sure to command me as your own, in the mean time my daily
prayers shall not be wanting for your happy and prosperous success in all
your proceedings, desiring the mighty Majesty to lend you his helping hand,
and so will take leave, wishing your Honor a most happy new year.

Your Lordships most humble Servant, and Cousin to Command Francis Farrell.
Rome the 4. January 1642. Here I send your Honor a letter from Father
Bonaventura Conneo a most good and discreet friend of yours.




