Three Several LETTERS OF Great IMPORTANCE.

The First, containing the brave exploits of the Lyme men at Axmister in
Devonshire; Together with a perfect List of the number of Prisoners, Ordnance,
Arms, and Ammmuition taken there.

The Second, containing the late Affairs at Duncanon Fort, and the City of
Cork in Ireland, Together with the Conversion of one Bishop, and two Deanes;
Showing that they are willing to relinquish their Pomp and great Titles and to
become single Ministers again.

The Third, concerning the late loss of Monmouth, and the possibility of
regaining it.

Passed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for G. B. December. 6. 1644.

THREE LETTERS Of CONSEQVENCE, from LYME in Dorsetshire, CORK in Ireland, and
MONMOUTH in South Wales.
SIR,
AFter tender, of my best respects, I know you have a longing desire to hear
how this g^ go in these parts, as we much desire to hear (...) you, (...) we
cannot enjoy you as formerly. For news in these parts, viz. The 15. of this
present November, we fell upon Axminster with our Horse and Foot, and,
through Gods mercy, beat them off their Works, insomuch that we were possessed
of the Town, and they betook them to the Church which they had forrified, on
which we were loath to cast our men, being we had a Garrison to look on, My
Brother and my self were both there, we fired part of the Town, what success
we had, you may read by the particulars here enclosed, we lost only one man
in the taking the Town, and had five wounded. The Monday following we marched
to Axmister again, Major Sydenbam having joined with us that Lords day at
night before, thinking to have seized on the Church, and those forces that were
in it, but finding them so strong, as that is might endanger the loss of many
of our men, we thought is not fit to fall upon the Church, but rather to set
the Houses on fire, that were not burnt in the first firing, which accordingly
we did, and burn down the whole Town, unless it were some few houses, but
yet they would not come forth of the Church. The next day being Tuesday, we
marched to Chedeock, thinking to have carried that House, and summoned them,
but they refused to yield, whereupon our Soldiers were all willing to storm
it, which we did, but we were forced to leave it, and lost in the storming,
nine killed, and seven wounded, and in the night marched to our Garrison
again. Had we but 500. Horse, we should, through Gods mercy, clear all the
Country. The Enemy has since quitted Axmister Church, and Mourt-House, so
that we are at present only molested with those at Chedeock-House, which we
should easily suppress, had we but five hundred Horse to clear the Country
of the Enemy, from falling in our Rear, for the Enemy lies at Chard with five
hundred Horse and Foot, besides those that beleaguer Taunton Castie, which is
much admired at, that they being so long besieged, which is now eight weeks,
and no assistance: God stir up the hears of those that have the power in
their hands to help them.

We have intelligence from Plymouth, that on Friday last, they were like to be
betrayed by blowing up their Magazine, which thorough Gods mercy was
prevented, and four of the Actors were hanged, but there is a Scottish Mayor
that had a hand in it, (as it supposed) who is either sent up, or to be sent.
Grenvill was ready with five thousand horse and foot to fall in at the very
instant, when it was to be done, yet we may see how good our God is to us
notwithstanding our unworthiness. I am persuaded the West may easily be
regained if forces were sent, and that those Gentlemen thereunto belonging
would but deny themselves and set to the work. The Sickness is ceased in this
place, I know not of one has died this fortnight of the Fever, it did reign
very hot a while.

Our men are in miserable condition for want of pay, and they must have
something to buy them clothes. It is pity that Lyme should be quitted, and
greater pity so many men should be lost for want of subsistence. If you know
of any that may be a means of sending relief to the Garrison, I beseech you
that you would stir in it, for if it be not speedily relieved, we must of
necessity quit the Garrison.

The very day we took Axmister, it pleased God through distress of weather to
send us in a ship bound from Morlais in France to Tapsham near Excester, laden
with Linen cloth which belongs to the Malignants of Excester, for the most
part I believe the goods, as near as I can guess by the several letters and
bills of lading that belong to the Enemy, will amount to three thousand pound
clear of all charges

Lyme Regis, November. 21. 1644. Your dutiful Son. P. C.

A List of the Prisoners taken and slain at Axmister, November. 15. 1644.
LIeutenant Dugdale. Lieutenant Byam. Lieuten. Bydgood. Henry Bartus, Col.
Cholmeleys man. William Knight, Sir Rebert Brets man. John Vile, Henry Harly,
Richard Stout. Lieut. Col. Paulets men. William Tailor, Hugh Douson, Major
Hinckleys men. Richard short, Richard Walcome, John Irish, Alexander Pring,
William Braford. Lieut, Col. Perciyes men. Antony Pargam, William Call, Willi.
Bowyer, Rock. King. Major Percyes men. Sampson Pickford, John Jacob, of Capt.
Hen. Berkleys Troop. Joh. Barret, Lieu. Col. Rawsings man. George Randall of
Capt. Ca-litons Company. Ambrose Besitha, Thomas Anste^s. Capt. Whibbyes men.
John Gamon, of Capt. Southcotts Company. The Harris, Hugh Ebbens, of Capt.
Slowleyes Company, George Cley, Andrew Skinner, William Smith, Robert Hodgsley,
John Rodd. of Capt Yews Company. Will. Ellis, Rich Ellis, Rich. Rowell Will.
Coals, John Randall, of Capt. Manu^ks Company. John Dudney, John Palmer, John
Cotley, of Capt. Turners Company. John Kent, Laur. Husband, Robert Husband, of
Majors Sprats Company. Will Jones, Rich. Cornelis, of Capt Harris Company.
Maurice Caudry, Timothy Palmer, of Capt. Kotolls Company Rich. Cornelis, Rob.
Cawley, Lieut, Ducalfs Company. Nicholas Wright, Capt. Edward Barkleys man.
Robert Salter, Capt. Henry Berkleys man. Robert Stark, Robert Singent, Robert
Dyer, of Lieut. Webbers Company.

In all 56. Prisoners.

S^aire, Sir Richard Cholmeley Knight, Commander in Chief. Two Majors, one of
them Major Hartley, with other Commanders and Officers, not known amongst the
rest, which were in all 30. Baronet Bret dangerously wounded.

Taken. 4. great Pieces of Ordnance. 150, Arms. 50. Horse. 3. Drums. 105.
Halberts. 3. Barrells of Gunpowder.

A Letter from CORK in Ireland speaks thus.
Kind Friend,
A Sodaime and altogether unexpected opportunity of writing unto you offering
it self, with much gladness I embrace the same, and according to this very
little scantling of Time, shall endeavor to give you an account of my present
condition, and of the proceedings in these parts. The last I wrote was by a
Minister to Captain Moulton, who set sail out of Milford Haven in Wales, and
was bound for England about the tenth of August last; I doubt not but those
lines enclosed, to a Gentlewoman came to your hands, since that time our
design is changed, the Lord has been pleased to dispose other ways of us,
our Ship is hired by Captain Richard Swanley Admiral of the Irish Seas, for
the Service of the State, we were by him employed the 20. of September, and
presently sent to Duncanon Castle near Waterford in Ireland, there we
continued about thirty days, passing through many dangers, our Enemies lying
on every side of us, ready to sink us by day, and fire us by night, if the
Lord had not bin on our side we had bin destroyed: He who has promised to be
with his People when they pass thorough the waters, and walk through the
fire, has graciously preferved us out of the mouths of Lions, for such indeed
are our implacable Enemies, who have left no stone unturned to work our
overthrow. They are Jrish and Dunkerkers, who often have set sail in dark
nights, come up by us, and fired many Gunnes upon us, but blessed be God we
lost little on our parts, we have shot them thorough and through, but sunk
none of them as we know of yet; we had only the Fort of Duncanon our friend,
where I found the old Lord Esmund, who maintains the Fort with two hundred men,
against the whole Province of Linster, my Lord of Esmund and his Chaplain
refuse to take the Covenant, but the Captain of the Castle and all the
Soldiers have freely taken it, I doubt not of their reality. They wanted
victuals, bread, and pease, and my Captain has supplied them sufficiently,
until more expected provissions come to them from our Admiral in
Milford-Haven.

From the River of Waterford, we came to the Harbor of Cork, October. 23. and
the last Sabbath, by the desire of my Captain, I went in our Pinnace to the
City of Cork, where through the importunity of my Lord Inchequin, I preached
in the afternoon, on Monday morning my Lord furnished me with one of his
Horses, and we rode together with the Governor of the City, to our Ship,
riding then about twelve miles from Gorke, my Captain entertained my Lord very
generously, and all his attendants, with variety of cheer and triumph, of
firing Ordnance.

My Lord Inchequin has given good testimonies of his reality to the Parliament
in England, he has about twelve hundred Souldi Soldiers, above six hundred
of them have taken the Covenant, the rest must, or else soon be cashiered the
Army, all Papists, and almost all the Irish, are excluded the City; the
Governor thereof, Captain Banister, is a very honest godly man, who is a very
great and good assistant to my Lord: I doubt not, but they will prove
instruments of much good, in carrying on that noble and pious work begun by
them, in this poor, distressed, and bleeding Kingdom of Ireland.

The Hollanders have sent three Ships laden with Provisions to Cork, otherwise
they might have famished long since, they have received nothing as yet from the
Parliament, I hope they will soon send a supply.

This Bearer, Captain Walker, is employed in this Expedition, by my Lord
Inchequin, for this very purpose. My Captain has furnished Cork with seven
Barrells of Powder, many Muskets, and other necessaries, out of his own
Ship-store.

One thing is very remarkable in Cork: I found two honest Deanes, and an old
Bishop, somewhat well-affected to the Parliament in England; the Deanes are well
contented to loose their Titles, and the Bishop to be only Master Bishop, this
is no small wonder as I suppose.

We are at the first opportunity of wind, to set Sail for Duncanon, and there
to continue, as it is thought, for two or three Months.

This afternoon, there came a Ship into this Harbor from England, has
brought uewes, that the Earl of Essex had routed the Enemy, and pursued them.
I hope you will soon have a full end of the Wars in England, and that the
Irish Rebels will be forced to feel the weight of our English Swords.

I have no further news to acquaint you withal, there is a Ship, that within
these ten days (if God permit) will see Sail for Portsmouth, then I intend to
trouble you with a few lines. And for the present I rest,

Your loving Friend. S. S,
From my Study on Board the Ship Jews, riding in the Harbor of Cork in
Ireland, November. 10. 1644.
The News from Monmouth is this.
Noble Captain I know you expect news, I always told you, good or bad, you
should hear of it, as long as God sends life and being.

Now as you have heard good, accept of what pleased God, we have lost
Monmouth, a considerable place, and men of quality taken Prisoners there, but
no question of redemption.

Our loss was 13. Pieces of Ordnance great and small, powder and match, with
bullets and great shot, but few men lost, nor above six on either side, in all
I mean to that number, all resting on the bed of security, and carelessness,
God mend it, we are apt to presume: to conclude it was a great loss, and a
great grief to the Governor, he being absent, and left a better Charge.

God blessed me well being but four days before in the Town, where I was most
forward in action and a man made choice of for the overseeing of the works,
which I did to my best endeavor.

I praise God I lost nothing but Oats for my horses, but I got by the hay, for
I was two hundred strong in Lice at the least.

I was never in so base a place in my days, I made a shire serve eight weeks,
and durst not change, for Lice are mad at clean Linen.

Come, we are not daunted as yet, but by Gods good blessing hope to recover all
again, but the waters are up there, and here to, so that there is no marching
to do good.

We must wait Gods time, or the best man may fail of his skill, I fear
presumption is and was our fauit, and I believe no less.

November. 25. 1644. I C

FINIS.

