THE HOLY HISTORY. WRITTEN In FRENCH by Nicolas Talon, S. J. And Translated
Into ENGLISH by the Marquess of WINCHESTER.

LONDON: Printed by Y.W. for J. Crook, and J. Baker, and are to be sold at the
Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

Representation of a classical doorway to a temple or cathedral, with figure of
Moses holding the tables of the Law, and a female figure, representing Wisdom,
holding a mirror in her left hand. Round the doorway are four oval plaques of
biblical scenes. The Holy History
Per Speculum in Aenigmate omnia in figuris Fide Moses Invisibilem tamquam
Videns Sustinuit WHollar
LONDON Printed for John Crook and John Baker at ye Ship in S^. Paul's
Churchyard.



THE AUTHORS DEDICATION TO THE KING OF FRANCE.
SIR,
I Should fear to profane the Holy History, if I did not place it in the
Sacred hands of your Majesty. It is the Book of God, which deserves the Eye of
a King; It is the Testament of a Father, which cannot be denied the Eldest Son
of his House; And it is the Table of all Divine and Human Laws, which ought to
appear under the Canopy of a most Just, and most Christian Monarch. I know that
heretofore this Magnifick pledge was never seen, but on the Altar, and within
the Tabernacle: but now I believe I shall not far remove it thence by demanding
a place for it in your Majesty's Cabinet, which without Flattery may be termed
the Sanctuary of the Louure and Court. For my part, I would not have been so
bold, as to touch these precious Relics of the increated Wisdom, and these
illustrious Pourtraicts of so many Princes, to make an offering of them to your
Majesty; If I did not persuade my self, that you would rather fix on the
Original, than the Copy; And would have less regard to the hand which presents
them, than to the passion which renders me

Your Majesty's Most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Subject and
Servant,NICHOLAS TALON.

Table of Chapters.
FIRST BOOK. God the Creator.
CHAPTER 1. GOds first sally out of himself in the birth of the Universe.
CHAPTER 2. The work of the six days. CHAPTER 3. The Creation of Adam. CHAPTER
4. The terrestrial Paradise. CHAPTER 5. The disasters and Banishment of Adam
and Eve. CHAPTER 6. The murder of Abel, and despair of Cain. CHAPTER 7. The
desolations and spoils of Envy. CHAPTER 8. Remedies against Envy. CHAPTER 9.
The building of the Ark, and the Deluge. CHAPTER 10. Noa 's descent out of the
Ark, and his Sacrifice on the hills of Armenia. CHAPTER 11. The Rainbow in the
Heavens. CHAPTER 12. The unhappy effects of Wine. CHAPTER 13. The Tower of
Babel.
BOOK SECOND. Ahraham and Isaac.
CHAP. 1. Abraham's departure out of the Territories, and his entry into the
fields of Moreth, where he erected an Altar, and where God appeared to him the
second time. CHAP. 2. The voyages of Abraham and Sara into the Land of Egypt.
CHAP. 3. The agreement of Abraham and Lot, upon the Controversy between their
Shepherds. CHAP. 4. The Victories of Abraham, and the assurances God gave him
of a most flourishing Posterity. CHAP. 5. The assurances God gave unto Abraham,
of a most flourishing Posterity. CHAP. 6 The Continuation of the favors which
God conferred on Abraham. CHAP. 7. The Charity of Abraham toward Pilgrims, and
the tenderness of God toward him. CHAP. 8. The firing of Sodom, and the
deliverance of Lot. CHAP. 9. The birth of Isaac, and the banishment of Lot and
Ismael. CHAP. 10. The Sacrifice of Abraham, and the artifices of God, to try
his constancy and fidelity. CHAP. 11. The Masterpiece of obedience, and the
triumph of Love in the Sacrifice of Abraham. CHAP. 12. The death of Sara. CHAP.
13. The Marriage of Isaac with Rebecca, and the death of Abraham.
BOOK THIRD. Jacob and Esau.
CHAP. 1. THeir Birth. CHAP. 2. The Education of Esau and Jacob, and the
shameful sale he made of his right of primogeniture. CHAP. 3. The dexterity of
Rebecca, to procure for Jacob the blessing of Isaac. CHAP. 4. Gods design in
preferring Jacob. CHAP. 5. Jacobs Ladder. CHAP. 6. The constancy of Jacob in
the quest of Rachel. CHAP. 7. The reward Jacob received for his services, and
his departure out of Mesopotamia. CHAP. 8. Jacobs wrestling with the Angel, and
his return into Canaan.
BOOK FOURTH. Joseph and his Brethren.
CHAP. 1. JOseph sold by his Brethren CHAP. 2. The Combats of Joseph for
defense of his Chastity. CHAP. 3. The Predictions of Joseph. CHAP. 4. The
releasment of Joseph. CHAP. 5. The government of Joseph in Egypt. CHAP. 6. The
voyages of Jacobs Children into Egypt, and the entertainment they there
received from Joseph. CHAP. 7. Jacob resolves to send Benjamin into Egypt.
CHAP. 8. Joseph known by his Brethren. CHAP. 9. Jacobs going down into Egypt,
and the honorable entertainment he received there from Pharaoh. CHAP. 10. The
last words of Jacob. CHAP. 11. The last Will and Testament of Jacob, containing
the Benedictions given to the twelve Patriarks. CHAP. 12. The lamentations of
Joseph for the death of Jacob.
BOOK FIFTH. Moses.
CHAP. 1. HIs Birth and Education. CHAP. 2. The zeal of Moses, and his marriage
with the Daughter of the Prince of Madian. CHAP. 3. The flaming Bush. CHAP. 4.
The Commission of Moses, touching the deliverance of the people of Israel.
CHAP. 5. The assured marks of Moses power. CHAP. 6. The Embassy of Moses and
Aaron into Egypt. CHAP. 7. The obduration of Pharaoh 's heart. CHAP. 8. The
plagues of Egypt. CHAP. 9. The Waters of Egypt turned into blood. CHAP. 10. The
Frogs of Egypt. CHAP. 11. The Flies of Egypt. CHAP. 12. The Plague and Ulcers.
CHAP. 13. The Hail-storms, Lightnings and Thunders. CHAP. 14. The Grasshoppers
of Egypt. CHAP. 15. The Darkness of Egypt. CHAP. 16. The Death of the first
born of Egypt. CHAP. 17. The Pascal Lamb, and the departure of the Children of
Israel out of Egypt. CHAP. 18. Pharaoh swallowed up in the Red Sea. CHAP. 19.
The Canticle of Moses, after the death of Pharaoh. CHAP. 20. The Manna of the
Desert. CHAP. 21. The fountain of Horeb. CHAP. 22. The defeat of the Amalekites
by the prayers of Moses. CHAP. 23. Moses is visited in the Desert, where he
Creates Judges and Magistrates. CHAP. 24. The Sanctification of the people to
receive the Law of God upon Mount Sina. CHAP. 25. The promulgation of the Law
upon Mount Sina. CHAP. 26. The subversion of Idols. CHAP. 27. An Edict against
Blasphemers. CHAP. 28. The Sanctification of the Sabbath. CHAP. 29. The duty of
Children toward, their Parents CHAP. 30. A Sentence of death against
Murderers. CHAP. 31. The triumph of Chastity. CHAP. 32. Against the unjust
usurpation of other men's goods. CHAP. 33. Condemnation of False witnesses and
Liars. CHAP. 34. The Tomb of Concupiscence. CHAP. 35. An abridgement of the
Law. CHAP. 36. The Ancient Policy. CHAP. 37. The Adoration of the golden Calf.
CHAP. 38. The There-establishment of the Laws and Ceremonies of the old
Testament. CHAP. 39. Of the Ornaments, and other utensils ordained for the
Sanctuary, which were useful in the Ceremonies of the Law of Moses. CHAP. 40.
The Ark of the Old Testament. CHAP. 41. The Tabernacle. CHAP. 42. The Altar of
Holocausts. CHAP. 43. The Vestments of the High Priest. CHAP. 44. The
Sacrifices of Aaron consumed by fire from Heaven. CHAP. 45. The Pillar of fire,
and the Cloud. CHAP. 46. The Brazen Serpent. CHAP. 47. The last actions of
Moses. CHAP. 48. The last Canticle of Moses. CHAP. 49. The death of Moses at
the sight of the Holy Land.
THE HOLY HISTORY, FIRST TOME GOD THE CREATOR;
FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Gods First Sally out of himself in the Birth of the Universe.
THough God was what he is, and in the perfect fruition of his Grandeurs,
before his omnipotent hand had drawn the Creatures out of their Nothing; The
motives which invited God to create the world.
yet his Nature required Hommages, his Majesty Servitudes, his Glory
Admirations, his Goodness Acknowledgments, and his Beauty hearts and
affections. It was needful, though he were independent of all Beings, Immense
in his extent, Eternal in his duration, and Infinite in all his perfections,
that he should cause himself to be seen and felt by Emanations out of himself.
It was not sufficient, (me thinks) that God should contemplate himself in the
Myrror of his Essence, and that without issuing out of himself he should beget
his Word in the splendors which flow from his Claritie. It was not enough to
love himself, and in loving himself to produce without change, loss, or
alteration the sacred fire of his Love. All these immanent and infinite
productions could not exhaust the Treasures of so fruitful a Nature: For in
giving it self, it suffers no detriment, since amidst these sallies and
Emanations the Father and the Son in such sort communicate their Nature and
perfections, the Father, to the Son, and both to the Holy Ghost, that all three
by a Common power can act ad extra or exteriorly, and they needed to employ but
one single word to create not only a World, but even Worlds without end.

I represent unto my self that Nature sighed even without tongue or voice, The
sighs of Nature.
before she had a being: Me thinks I hear her silence, and that she says to
God before her Creation;

Speak then, O speak (Great God) stretch forth thy arm and cast thy looks out
of thy self; issue forth of the Luminous Darkness, which forms thee a day
without Night, and a Night more resplendent then the day. Give some little
passage to those Ejaculations and flames which from all eternity are enclosed
within thy bosom, and which frame therein a Circle of Light and Love. Thou
needst but open thy mouth and immediately all Creatures will be obedient to thy
commands: The least of thy Irradiations will dissipate the shadows, and open
that abyss, in which they are buried. It is true that nothing ought to disturb
the peace and repose of thy solitude; It is true thou have and possessest in
thy self all that can ever be. But thou can bring it to light, and art able
without noise and disorder to break that eternal silence which hitherto has
made thee heard but of thy self. In fine thou art a God of Love, and this love
would be Captive, if it had not Sallies, and Ejaculations. It was not satisfied
to remain in thee by eminence, and as it were in the source of beauty and
goodness; but having made its folds within its self by numberless revolutions,
Dyonys c. 11. divin. Nom. (...) appellat munifestationem Dei per se ipsum.
it must descend upon external objects, to attain that effect and property,
which is natural to Love (viz.) that amorous ecstasy, that prodigious effusion,
and that pompous and magnificent show, which, to speak properly, is the Torch
of Love, or rather the Chariot of its triumph.

Well then, Creatures, come forth of the Mass in which you lie confused,
Heaven, Earth, Sea, Stars, Trees, Fishes, Furnaces of fire, and flames, The
first allarum of Nature.
vast extents of Air, Clouds, Abysses Precipices, listen to the voice and
Command of God, of the Word, and of their Love. O God! O Power! O Love! what
word? what speech? and what voice? we must proceed in order and pursue the same
which God himself has followed.

The word was in God the Father and this word was God, from that beginning
which could never begin, the Common Spirit of God animated the Father and the
Son: But in fine, this glorious and happy moment, which saw the birth of times
and seasons being arrived. The eternal God seeing no Object out of himself,
which could deserve his love; and besides this Love being incited by a holy
desire of communicating it self, it was requisite to frame a Copy of the
Intellectual Original, which was in his Idea, Love the architect of the World.
and in his heavenly mind. From that instant the world, then but a lively
vacuum, but an universal privation of forms and qualities, was chosen as the
blanck Table, whereon he resolved to draw the first strokes of his goodness.
That Nothing which has but the bare name men give it; In principio creavit
Deus Coelum and Terram. Genesis 1. v. 1.
became immediately a fruitful Abyss of Essences, and Nature was engendered out
of it by the sole power of the Divinity.

First Heaven, Earth, Water, and Darkness appeared in an instant as the Field
on which all the effects of a most Amorous and sage Prodigality were to be
displayed. Terra autem erat inanis and vacua, and tenebrae crant super saciem
abyssi. Genesis 1. v. 2.
It was before any other thing that this tenebrous Compound, this confused
Medley and this heap of Water and Earth, was the object of him who alone was
able to chase away its shadows, and convert its dust into Gold and Cristall.
This is the Throne on which the title of Sovereign Monarch and Lawgiver shall
be seen ingraved; But what! this Theater is too obscure to behold therein the
birth of the World; we must expect the Aurora and the rays of the day.

CHAP. II. The work of the six days.
NAture awake, The first day of the Creation.
it is time for the World to rise, the Night has preceded, and twelve hours
are as it were already past since Heaven and Earth have been in obscurity.
Dixitque Deus fiat tax, and facta est lux. Genesis c. 1. v. 3.
Behold the break of day; and those delightful colors, which play upon the
waters, are the Companions of that light, which in Palestine has already
opened the doors and windows of the East, and is going to spread it self upon
another Hemisphear. Nevertheless to finish this Carriere, to perfect this
course, and to round the whole Globe twelve hours more are required; And then
counting from Evening till Morning, and from Morning till Evening, you shall
find all the Moments, which form the first day, a glorious day, a day
illustrious for having first received the light, which gives glory and splendour
to all days. Et vidit Deus lucem, quod esset bona. Genesis 1. v. 1.
God himself made even a stand to be hold these lights, and could not contein
himself from praising the attractive charms of this glistring and pompous
quality, which is as the life of the eye, and a most lively representation of
the spirit.

The second day was not less glorious: The second Day.
for it was that in which God chose to raise up the Firmament, like a Circle of
Brass, Dixit quoque Deus, fial Firmamentum in medio aquarum and dividat aquas
ab aquis. Genesis 1. v. 5.
or rather like a Globe of Gold and azure which might serve to divide the
seven Orbs of the Planets from the empyreall Heaven. Now it was in the midst
of the waters, that this admirable work was formed, whether they were necessary
to temper the rays and orders of the Stars, or that the course and revolutions
of a mooving body would be more even and free in an Element so pure and so
pliable to all sort of Motions; Or finally whether it were for some other
reason known only to the incomparable Architect, who caused his power and
wisdom equally to shine in the Fabric of the Universe.

The next day God descended from Heaven upon Earth, and it was on this day, he
marked out bounds, The third Day.
and limits to Rivers, Streams, Seas and Torrents; so that the waters retyring
some on one side, and some on the other, Congregentur aquae quae sub Coelo
sunt, in Deu^ unum, and apra^cat arida. Genesis 1. v. 7.
just as they were shut up within their banks, Clifts and Channels, the Earth
appeared, and immediately her sides were found pierced with Caverns, and her
back laden with Mountains and Rocks which raised her in a stately manner.
Instantly her entrals were filled with Stones and Metals; and whilst those four
great portions of the Earth which divide the World, and all the Islands of the
Ocean and Seas were Levelled to serve for Empires and possessions of men, The
hand of God as just as liberal, did in the bosom of the Earth uphold the
Arches of her Prisons and Dungeons, to the end that if the Paradise of Eden was
a Garden of delights and pleasures, Hell on the contrary might be an abode of
dread, horror and Misery. It was likewise very convenient that as God had mixed
Light with Darkness, he should create wild places and deserts to render the
Gardens, Fields and Meadows more delightful; and finally having the very same
day given Plants, Herbs and Flowers for an ornament to the Earth, his wise
Providence mingled Thorns with Roses, and the most wholesome Herbs sprung out
of the same soil with the Mandrake and Aconite.

The fourth day, The fourth Day.
having bin as it were the Chariot of the Sun, Fiant luminaria in Virmamento
Coeli, and dividant diem ac noctem, and sint in signa, and ten pora, and dies
and annos. Genesis 1. v. 14.
Moon, Stars and Planets which shine in the Heavens, may in some manner be
called the day of days, since it has bin the Origin of the fires brightness
and flames which are the soul of the Day.

Then were the frozen and condensed waters gathered together with more light
and heat to form the Body of the Planets: Et luceant in firmamento Coeli, and
illuminent terram. Genesis 1. v. 15.

Fecitque Deus dun l^minaria magna, lumanare majus, ut praeesset diei, and
lumina^e minus, ut traeesht nocti, and st^llas. v. 16.


Next the Sun, Moon and Stars began their courses, periods and revolutions, and
took the tracks and ways which were traced out to them from East to West; they
began likewise to cast their favorable aspects, and from that time their
influences fell upon the Earth, and they received the Orders and Laws, which
they have since observed so inviolably and with so great respect. But whilst
these Torches roll over our heads, for fear lest our eyes should be dazeled at
such luminous objects.

Let us turn them upon the Fifth day, The ^ift Day. Producant eq^as re^tile
animae vtventis and volatile super terram sub Firmamento Coel^ Genesis 1. v. 25.
wherein God created the Birds which fly in the Air, and the Fishes which swim
in the Water: One must hear represent unto his thoughts some fair Summers day,
and imagine that he sits in the cool upon the shore of some Island, From thence
he must lift up his eyes toward Heaven, and behold over head thousands of
little feathered bodies, cleaving the air with their wings, piercing the
Clouds, and mingling with their flight the sweet Harmony of their warblings; He
must afterward behold at his Feet a River full of Fishes armed with scales,
some of which cut their way near the surface of the water, and others through
the midst of the waves; some swim aloft against the stream and Current, others
are carried down at the pleasure of the winds, and by the favor of so sweet
and rapid an Element.

This is that which God took pleasure to see and do, five days after the
Creation of Heaven and Earth: This was the day he chose to people the Air and
Sea with their guests, which were in so great numbers, as since it has not
been necessary to create other species of Birds and Fishes. But what? the Earth
which serves for a Basis and foundation unto Sea and Air, would have some cause
to murmur against both, and might with reason complain, as it were, of God her
Creator, if she were abandoned and without Inhabitants. Soft, a little
patience: It belongs not unto Creatures to prescribe laws to their Creator.

Scarce had the Morning brought news of the arrival of the sixth day, The sixth
Day. Producat terra animam viventem in genere suo: jumenta, and reptilia, and
bestias terrae secundum species suas. Genesis 1. v. 24.
but at the same instant the Earth opened her eyes unto her Sun, and her ears
unto the voice of her God. This dull heavy and insensible Mass not satisfied to
have brought forth Flowers Plants and Trees, yet farther displaid it self to
produce all sorts of Beasts and Animals, Behold the World in her Cradle, and
Nature in her Infancy, The unmovable Earth round about her Center is sown with
flowers, tapistred with Turf and Verdures, beautified with Woods and Forests;
she is stately in her Mountains, pleasant in her Valleys, delightful in her
Meadows; She is rich in her Metals, fertile in her Fruits, and plentiful by
her Rivers and Seas which inviron her on all parts, and form her a thousand
liquid transparences. The Air encompasses her on all fides, and serves her for
a veil to temper the over-humid Influences of the Moon, and the too ardent Rays
of the Sun. The Heavens like pendent Roofs and rolling Arches are strewed with
Flowers, Emeraulds and Rubies. Hesiod in the genealogy of false divinity.
What does remain after all these Prodigies of Power, and all these works of
Love? O Power? O Love? I cannot condemn his fancy who said that Love produced
Heaven out of a Chaos, and the World out of a confused and undisgested Lump.
These are the draughts of a powerful God which were victorious over the
Nothing; These are the conquering flames of his Love who has carried his rays
and Torch even into the Abysses of an eternal Negation.

The World then had not its Origination in the Water as Thales supposed, The
Errors of some Philosophers.
nor was the impression of the Universe framed in the Air as Anaximines
affirmed, Heraclitus was extravagant when he taught that fire was the Source
and Origin of Nature; And Democritus was a mere scoffer, and fitter to be
laughed at himself, than to laugh at others, when he said that the World was
formed by an accidental concourse and mixture of invisible Atoms. No, no, the
beginning of beginnings must be without beginning. But the Heavens, Air, Fire,
Earth and Water, the World and Atoms cannot be from themselves and without a
Producer; therefore grant that God alone is the Fountain Cause and Origin of
the Universe.

Ah then let the Heavens and all the Elements, C^n^ort of Creatures.
Let the Sun and Stars, let the Plants and Herbs, let the Birds and Fishes for
evermore praise and bless the powerful hand of the increated Love who formed
them all out of Nothing. Let the World never have any propension, instinct, or
inclination, but to become pliable to the impulses of its Author. Let the
Morning and Evening Stars imitate him, conveying every where their Influences
and Clarities. Let Rain be the Pledge of his favors, and Dew the Symbol of his
Graces. Let Thunder and Lightning be the Heralds of his Justice, and the
Ministers of his Indignation. Let the gentle Western Winds awaken our hearts to
listen to his most holy inspirations. Let his Threats be heard amongst Storms
and Waves. Briefly let the World, and total Nature, be an Altar whereon vows
and Sacrifices may be continually offered to his Law, and let the Feast of the
six days, during which God created the Universe, be for ever celebrated? But
what O Lord? who is it that has hitherto spoken? From whence came this Voice?
And where is the Person that can present Sacrifices unto thee? The World has
Altars, it has Water, Fire, Wood and Victims, But where is the Priest? Man
necessary for the world.
There wants a Man upon the Earth, and without a Man all thy works seem not
sufficiently perfect. Yes, my God, this man who is to be the Image of thy
Essence, the Accomplisher of thy Commands, and thy Lieutenant upon Earth, well
deserves the last touches of thy hand, to the end that after his Creation thou
may continue in the repose of thy most holy Entertainments.

CHAP. III. The Creation of Adam.
IT is almost incredible how bold and eloquent men are when it concerns their
own praises; Eloquence of self love.
To hear them speak, would not a man swear, all the Members of their bodies are
converted into Tongues to publish, without blushing, the advantages of their
Nature above what ever the rest of the World can boast of rarest and most
beautiful. The Earth, say they, is but an Abode or rather a Highway which
shall be their Pilgrimage; Excellent conceptions of diverse authors.
The Air and Sea are but their Harbingers and Hosts; Lightnings and Celestial
flames shape but a picture, even gross enough, in which the features of their
minds appear as it were rough drawn: And Heaven it self is but the Haven and
shore, which after the course of some months and years is to receive them all.
Man according to their opinion is the fairest piece of the Universe, the All of
All, Anasta. (...).
and as it were the Soul of this world. Anastasius in his Homily of Man's
creation observes some lines of honor and veneration in his Fabric. Clemens
Alexandrinus compares him to the Thessalian Centaur by reason of the mixture of
the Soul with the Body; Clem. Alex. 116 4. Strom. (...) Lactant. lib. 7. cap. 5.
And Lactantius Firmianus speaking of the composition of man, says That he is
a work which may rather beget admiration than words. Trismegistus calls him the
Interpreter of the Gods; Pythagoras.
Pythagoras looks upon him as the Measure of all things, in whom are found the
Longitudes, Latitudes, Altitudes and Profundities of all Beings; Plato (...).
Plato cries out that he is the Miracle of all visible Miracles. Theophrastus
considers him as the Copy of the Universe; Synesius.
Synesius calls him the Horizon of creatures; And Zoroaster, as one transported,
scarce finding words to express him, concludes at last That man is the
Portraict of an attempting and daring Spirit. Are not these very excellent
terms and expressions? which sufficiently evidence that albeit those Learned
Authors did speak of Man in general, yet all of them were interessed therein
as to their own particular. But what ever they have said, it is certain that of
all the Encomions can be given to Man, the most Noble, the most August, the
most transcendent and high is, that Man is the Image of God, the Character of
his Substance, and the most faithful Copy of his Divinity. I know he has a
Being common with Stones and Marble, a Life common with Plants, a Sense with
Beasts, and an Understanding which equals him with the Angels, but he excels
them in this, that he was created from Gods Idea, as the most lively and
sensible representation of his Maker.

God deliberates upon the enterprise of this work, Faciamus hominem ad imaginem
and similitudinem nostram. Genesis 1. v. 16.
and the Council is held in the Conclave of the most holy Trinity, the three
Persons are assembled; Power, Wisdom, and Love take their seats near the
Paradise of Eden. But let us not deceive our selves, is it not peradventure
Gods intention to recall into favor those proud and Rebellious Spirits, whom a
shameful revolt has most justly precipitated from Heaven to Earth, where they
wander as Exiles and reprobates? At least would it not satisfy him to banish
them from Heaven, and to grant them the World for a Paradise, after so long and
funestous a Captivity? Nothing less, the Act is past, the Angels are lost
without Redemption, and the punishment their Insolence has merited, will
pursue them without relaxation, term, or pity. Et creavit Deus hominem ad
imaginem and similitudinem Dei creavit illum. Genesis 1. v. 27.


It is concerning Man and his Creation that the decree is past; It is on him
God reflecteth, and it is he who must be substituted in the place of Angels. It
is this Act which makes the World behold Gods Masterpiece, the object of his
Favors and the most glorious term of his Power. O Sun stop here thy course and
be witness of his birth who has bin the cause and end of thine.

It was as I conceive about high Noon when the Earth was resplendent with
Light, The time of man's Creation.
that this Animated Sun was born. It was by the Light of Natures greatest
Bonfire that God vouchsafed to stoop so low as Earth to take Clay, Formavit
igitur Dominus Deus hominem de limo terrae. Genesis 2. v. 7.
out of which he formed the Body of the first Man. This wise and all-knowing
Workman to whom all things are possible, drew out of Dirt, Mortar, and Dust,
the Bones which were to be not only the Pyles, Pillars, Basis and strength of
the Body, but even the instruments of all its Motions. He added to it
Ligaments, Joints, Carthelages, Nerves, and an infinity of fibers or little
strings which were to lock the Bones and Members within one an other, to be
serviceable to all motions, to arm every part, to keep in or draw superfluous
humors, or rather to be assisting to its Nourishment. The Body being thus
rough-drawn, or as I may say, in its first draught, appeared at the same
instant divided into three parts, of which the highest and most elevated was
the Head, the Bulk appeared in the midst, and the Joints linked together the
Legs, and Arms, to become more useful to all the extreme parts. The Economy
of humane bodies.
Within these joints were, as inchased, all the Instruments of life. Within the
Trunk reigned the Vital parts, as the Heart, Lungs, and Liver; about which
were found a thousand little Veins, and as many little skins, which are the
Channels of the Blood and of all the Humors. O strange! this little Labyrinth
was no ways confused. The Heart, though Monarch and Sovereign in this Empire,
disdains not to unite its self with the Liver, and to join by a mutual and
reciprocal agreement its virtue and heat to act with more force upon the
Aliment. From thence issues a world of interlaced Veins, which are to suck in
the purest of the Chilus, and to discharge the grosser part, which afterward
conveys it all at leisure into the Bowels; At the same time the Liver will
separate the Blood, and divide the Humors; and whilst the Heart is
distributing all the Spirits through the Arteries, lest it chance to be
overheated, the more light, humid, and spungeous Lungs will give it air, and
refresh it by so regular intervals, as even amids this palpitation, it may
receive from the Arteries its purest Blood, and its most delicious Nourishment.
All the rest passes into the Brain which is the Summet of this admirable
Structure. It is covered outwardly with skin and hair, and wrapped up within
two panicles which cover its out-lets, its substance, and the source of all the
Nerves. It is in this Fort or Dungeon where the Animal spirits are to be
formed, which the Sensitive soul distributes to the Five senses; spirits which
are but fire and ray, which very often get loose, and escape by the eyes like
lightnings, and so many stars which appear to us at high Noon.

There is the seat of the Common sense, where all the Nerves of our exterior
Senses meet, through which the Spirits slide, and is the way by which the
Species pass when they are the Messengers of their Objects. Well may this part
receive these Images, but cannot retain them. The Imagination then must be
placed further within, which collecting and preserving the Species, will borrow
part of their name. Behold the Body thus perfect, and accomplished; but not to
descry all the bones naked, and a flesh too lively and bloody, cover it with
the whitest, smoothest and thinnest skin you can find. Afterward fix your eyes
upon his Face, behold his lovely Hair sweetly floating on his shoulders;
contemplate his Forehead smoother than Marble, and his Eyebrows forming an Arch
of Ebony over his eyes; consider his Mouth surrounded with Coral; observe his
Cheeks mixed with Roses, and Lillyes, and smell his Breath a thousand times
sweeter than Ambergreece. In truth are you not ravished with the aspect of his
Eyes, which are the Windows of the Soul, the Doors of Life, and the most
faithful Interpreters of our Minds? What say you to the disclosure of this
living Theater of Choler, Theater of passions.
of vengeance, of pity, of hate, of fury, and Love; Do you see by their looks
how they rise and fall, how they flatter, how they excite, how they weep, how
they smile, and how they show upon their liquid and transparent Crystal, all
that is discernable in the World? But who will wonder at this, since in truth
these are the two Suns of the Little World, and the Myrror of the Great one,
which is to be comprised and enclosed within the Humane Body.

Should not the Eyes of total Nature open themselves here to admire this
Miraculous Body, The Masterpiece of Nature.
and this Prodigy of the Universe? But the thing of greatest Admiration, is
that God has caused the Soul of Hearts, and the Life of Bodies, to flow into
his mouth and heart; and that Heaven has powered the seed of Immortality into
his Breast. Et inspiravit in faciem ^^us spiraculum vitae: and factus est
humo^^ animam viventem. Genesis 2. v. 7.
God by a Divine breathing communicated this Fountain of Life, to wit, the
Soul, which instantly made the Image and Pattern of the Divinity reflect on his
face. This heavenly Form without noise or delay disfused it self entire into
the body, remaining nevertheless whole in every part. The Soul s^urce of
beauty, and of operations.
God alone knows with how many Lights the Understanding of man was illuminated,
with how many Ardors his Will was infired, and with how many Species his Memory
was filled in a moment.

My God, what do thou, Gods goodness toward men.
and who has incited thee to heap together in one vessel, wrought out of Clay
and dust, all the Treasures of Wisdom, greatness, and sanctity? Why so many
sciences, so many knowledges, and so many splendors in this Soul? Why so many
virtues and so many Graces in this Heart? And why in one single Man the
Primitive Justice, and the Empire of the Universe? What necessity was there to
make him partaker of thy Secrets, and to raise him to the View of such a light
as doubtless might make him blind? Great God thou art good and liberal, yet
just and all foreseeing. If then thou fore-seest some danger and evil, lest
thou should be obliged to take revenge of a fault, dissolve the occasion, and
obstruct the ways which lead unto a Precipice; extinguish those Torches which
may dazzle the eyes; stifle those Flames which may inkindle such sad fires; or
at least fasten not so many branches to a Tree, which may be unrooted by the
Winds, and torn up by Storms: Unite not so many Members unto a Head, which is
able to corrupt them all in an Instant, and finally leave unto all our hearts
Independency on Created things, which are Natural to them, and cause our
affections to be Eternally fastened unto thee, that thou alone may be the
Source of all the Motions and Effects which slide unto them.

No, No, Adam and Eve must be the causes of our Good or Evil, and on their
good or bad Fortune ours must wholly depend.

CHAP. IIII. The Terrestrial Paradise.
THe Earth is a large habitation common to all men, Terrestrial Paradise the
first habitation of Man.
but it has many copartments of which some are appointed for those whom God
intends to raise unto Grandeurs and delights; others are ordained for some
wretched Persons, whose lives pass away in misfortunes and amidst afflictions.
Some there are who are born upon Thorns and in Straw, others in Purple and upon
Silk. Some enter into the World as into a Gally, others as into a Palace.
Scarce was Adam created but he found himself in a Paradise; and he even from
the Morning of his birth, was placed under the most happy and delightful
Clymate that Nature did afford.

Go then Adam, Plantaverat autem Domin^s Deus Paradisum voluptatis a
Principio, in quo posuit hominem quem formaverat. Genesis 2. v. 8.
it is God who both calls and conducts thee. Enter happily this Garden and
Paradise into which he leads thee; put thy self under the shelter of this Tree:
For it is the Tree of Knowledge and Immortality, which he has planted for
thee: divert thy Eyes upon these Tulips, upon these Gilli-flowers, upon these
Roses, upon these Purple Velvet flowers, and upon these Lillys; walk thou over
the Daffidill, over the Thyme, over Camomyle, and over this green Tapestry,
Dominamini piscibus maris, and volatilibus Coeli, and universis animantibus
quae moventur super Terram. Genesis 1. v. 8.

Adduxitque ea ad Adam, ut videret quid vocaret ea: omne enim quod vocavit Adam
animae viventis ipsum est nomen ejus. Genesis 2. v. 19.


which is so odoriferous; be not affrighted at the sight of these Tigers, these
Leopards, and of all these more furious Beasts: For God has given thee power
to rule them, and there is not one in whom thy Innocence begets not respect.
Take then the rod into thy hand, and govern all these flocks and herds, impose
Laws on them, and give them what Names thou please. This is no petty Office.
Some have believed that God only can properly call a thing by the name
convenient for it: Because Names, as Plato says, are as it were so many
Chariots which carry Essences and living Pictures, as Diaphanus styles them,
wherein are seen all the Draughts of Nature which they clearly express: From
whence I conclude that Adam for this end received from God more than humane
Knowledge, since he called every thing by the Name which was most proper and
Natural to them.

Immediately after God resolved to give him a Companion, The production of Eve.
Non est bonum hom^nem esse solum: faciamus (...) adjuterium simile sib^. Genesis
2. v. 18. Immisit ergo Dominus sup^^em in Adam, cumque abd^^m^v^sset, tulit
unam de costis ejus, and replevit carnem pro ea. Genesis 2. v. 20.
for it was not convenient that Man should be all alone: For this end he closed
Adam's Eyelids, and charmed his senses by a Heavenly Sleep, which the Major
part of the Greek Fathers, according to the Translation of the Septuagint, call
an extatick and ravishing repose. This man then thus rapt in his Ecstasy felt
not Gods hand, which gently and without pain plucked out a Rib, whereof he
formed the first Woman, who was immediately brought unto Adam to be his
Companion and his dear Moity.

Scarce had Adam cast his Eyes on her but he cried out, Ah, these are Bones of
my Bones, Dixitque Adam: hoc nunc os de ossibus mus and caro de ca^ne mea, haeo
vocabitur virago, quoniam de virosur^pta est. Genesis 2. v. 23. Erunt duo in carne
una. Genesis 2. v. 24.
and this Flesh was drawn out of my Flesh; Just as if he had said, Come O my
Love, the dearest portion of my self, you shall be from henceforth my Wife, and
I will be your Husband. We will be but one Heart in two Bodies; And though we
have two Souls we will have at least but one Mind and Will.

Wives and Husbands, An excellent lesson for Husbands and Wives.
learn then from hence a lesson which teaches you the Laws of Conjugall Love,
and what powerful Motives you have to live in Unity, and in a most perfect and
holy Union. Let Man remember that he is the Master, but not a Tyrant. Let Women
also never forget their own extraction, and that they were not produced out of
the Head as Queens, nor out of the Feet as Servants and Slaves; but out of the
Side, and near the Heart, to the intent they may spend all the time of their
Marriage in a most sweet Intelligence, and in a most inviolable society: To
which Love having given a beginning, nothing but Death alone is able, or at
least ought, to Dissolve it.

For this purpose it is infinitely advantageous to receive with respect and
Reverence the Benediction which the Church is accustomed to give upon the
Marriage day unto the Married pair, Benedixitque illis Deus, and ait, ^rescite,
and multiplicamint, and replete terram. Genesis 1. v. 45.
and which replaceth in our thoughts the very same that God gave to Adam and
Eve, when he commanded them to People and fill the World by a most pure and
chaste generation.

The Nuptials of Adam and Eve are past, Dixitque Deus, ecce dedi vovis omnem
herbam asserentem semen super terram, and universa ligna quae habent in
se^et^psis sementem generis sui, ut sint vobis in escam. Genesis 1. v. 29.

Praecepitque ei dicens: ex omni ligno Paradisi comede. Genesis 2. v. 16.


nothing now remains but the Banquet. The Tables are already furnished, and
they need but choose amongst all the Dishes of the World, that which shall
appear to them the most Delicious. They are Masters of all that Flys in the
Air, of all that Swims in the Water, of all that Creeps or Walks on the Earth;
Briefly of all the Fruits in the Terrestrial Paradise they have the choice;
and amongst all the Trees which God has Planted there, he only reserved the
use of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, De ligno autem scientiae boni
and mali ne c^medas: in quocunque enim die comederis ex eo, morte morieris.
Genesis 2. v. 17.
of which he Expressly and upon pain of Death forbids these two guests to gather
any Fruit. And in truth it was convenient that as Master he should leave them
some Commandment: It was likewise reasonable that Adam and Eve as his Servants
and Creatures should be pliable to so just a Decree.

In this Conjuncture of time the Moon began to assemble her shadows, and God
finding all his Works perfect entered into his repose with the Seventh Day.

Adam and Eve enjoy then at present, The first Monarchy of the Universe.
all that their Hearts can desire. They possess the Monarchy of the Universe
for their Inheritance and Government: Their Empire extends over all out-bounds
and limits, the Winds do not blow but at their pleasure, the Rivers and
Streams do not Roll along but at their Command; Praesit piscibus mari^ and
volantibus Coeli universaeque terrae omnique rep^ili quod movetur in terra.
Genesis 1. v. 16.
the Birds do not tune their Warbling Notes but to afford them delight; the
Lions themselves and the Leopards dare not roar in their presence; All is in
Peace, all in Joy, and all in a pleasing silence devoid of Fear and
Apprehension. Their Bodies are neither subject to Weariness nor the Butchery of
any tormenting Maladies. Their Paradise knows neither Anxiety, grief, nor pain.
In that place no sound was ever heard of those frightfull terms whose thought
alone is able to raise strange Commotions in our Hearts. The mind cannot there
be diverted by those sad thoughts which are inventive to bring us Torment. In a
word, they are as it were the Gods of the Terrestiall Paradise, and partake in
a manner of all the delights which can be tasted in Heaven.

CHAP. V. The Disasters and Banishment of Adam and Eve.
ADam and Eve are happy, but how long will this happiness endure? Does Adam
remember that he is a Man, and a Man of Earth? Does Eve well understand that
her Sex is more Light, more frail, and less constant? Adam art thou Ignorant
that nothing is more flattering, and more cunning than a woman, when her mind
is excited by some passion? Audax est ad omnia quaecunque odit vel amat famina;
et artificiosa est, nocere cum vult. Valerius in Epist. ad Rufum. Cum invisa
est mulier, se od^sse ait, Cum amat, amari, cum suratur, se compilari queritur.
Nicephor. Gregorius. Just. l. 7.
One must will what she wills, and even the force and reason of the wisest men
are often obliged to give way unto her. Beware then Adam of this Woman; for my
own part I imagine to have in a manner seen her behind a Tree, and to my
thinking I have heard her speak unto a serpent. Behold how she comes wholly
affrighted? Adam advance, and observe a little what ails her: And if thou
desire to know the truth, believe the contrary of what she shall tell thee.

Eve from whence do thou come, Disunion the first misfortune of the World.
and why do thou leave him all alone, who is the heart of thy heart, and the
soul of thy soul? Where can be the Members without the Head, and the Head
without the Members? What? do thou not know, that I am to be witness of all
thy Actions, and that I must give an account unto God, for what thou shall do?
what fruit is this, that thou hold'st in thy hand?

Ah my Son, Sed et serpens erat callidior. Genesis 3. v. 1.
my Friend, my dear Husband, would you did but know what has happened since I
was absent from you? Not far from hence I met a Serpent of a Prodigious and
extraordinary shape, A diabolical serpent.
he also spoke to me, contrary to the use of Beasts. For my part I did believe
that he was a Prodigy of Heaven, Cui respondit mulier, de fructu lignorum quae
sucrunt in Puradiso ves^imur. Genesis 3. v. 2. De fructu vero ligni quod est in
Medio Paradisi, praecepit nobis Deus ne comedemus, et ne tangeremus illud, ne
f^rte moriemur. Genesis v. 3.

Dixit autem serpens ad mulierem, nequaquam mart moriemini. Genesis v. 3. c. 4.

Scit enim Deus quod in quocunque die comederitis de eo aperientur oculi
vestri, et eritu sicut dis scientes bonum et malum. Genesis 1. v. 5. Vidit igitur
mulier quod bonum esset lignum ad vescendum, et pulcrum oculis aspectuque
delectabile, tulit de fructu illius et comedit. Genesis 3. v. 4.


and an Angel which God sent me under the form of a Serpent. He showed me the
Tree of life, and promised me, that if I would eat of it is fruit, I should
become like unto God, and have a perfect knowledge of Good and Evil; I told
him, that God had forbid it us upon pain of death; But he protested to me,
that on the contrary this fruit had the Juice of Life and Immortality: For my
part I have gathered it, I have eaten of it, and I entreat you to taste as
little of it as you please.

O God! how eloquent is the malice of a woman, and what powerful charms and
persuasions has she? Her lips and Mouth distill at once both Honny and Poison;
her Tongue shoots forth Arrows of Death, and Life; her very Looks are so many
Lightnings, which she mingleth with the darts of her Passions.

This is that which destroyed the Angel of the Terrestrial Paradise, the
Monarch of the World, and the Father of all Mankind. He chose rather to disobey
God, than contradict his Wife. He resolved to be rather a complice in her
Disloyalty, Deditque viro suo et comedit. Genesis 3. v. 6. Et aperti sunt oculi
amborum, cumque cognovissent se esse nudos consuerunt folia ficus et fecerunt
sibi perizomata. Genesis 3. v. 7. Abscondit se Adam et uxor eius a facie Domini
Dei. Genesis 3. v. 6.
than to take revenge of it. It was from his own Wife's hand he took this
fatal Apple, which would choke his Posterity. O wretch! what have thou done?
open a little thine Eyes, and blush rather at the sight of this Crime, than of
thy Nakedness? Adam what have thou done; why do thou hide thy self? Have
thou swallowed down that bit which has since infected all of us? Proud man!
thou thoughtst to be free, but thou now bear the shackles of an eternal
captivity. Thy weakness could not deny that to thy wife, which God had reserved
to himself; And thou have done for the love of a foolish Woman, what the
Eternal Wisdom had so expressly forbidden thee.

Blind and disloyal Man, thou gave more credit to a Serpent which deceived
thee, than to God and truth which can never fail; Art thou not ashamed to have
committed this Sacrilege, which made thee submit to the allurements of a Woman
against the Decree which God himself has published.

Adam where art thou? God calls thee, Vocavitque Dominus Deus Ad met dixit ei
ubies, G. n. 3. v. 5.
thou must Answer, thou must appear; in vain is it to seek out shades and
groves; to oppose the Word who gives speech to the Dum, and those Eles whose
least glances make the day to break in the darkest dungeons and greatest
obscurities. Adam behold this lightning which tears the clouds, and is about
to imprint upon thy Spirit the difference between Grace and Sin: thou shall
discern what thou now art, and what thou were before, and all the future
disasters which are to fall on thy Self, and thy Posterity. I was heretofore
thy Father, now I am thy Judge; I treated thee as my Son, and at present I
cannot look upon thee but as a Slave and Fugitive. And my Spirit that chaste
Dove, and that sacred Phoenix, which lives and breathes only by Love, must
transform it is self into a cruel Vulture to tear thy heart.

Adam, what answerest thou? Alas, have thou no pity on thy Self, and all thy
Children. But do thou not happily lay the blame upon thy Wife, who has so
cruely deceived thee?

Womam do thou see the periods and progress of thy sin? Do thou discern
the offense thou have committed, and the effect of thy Levity? Do thou hear
thy Husband who accuses thee? And on whom will thou dischardge thy self?

It is a strange thing that Sinners instead of sobbs and tears, Blind Sinners.
to wash away the stains which their Souls have Contracted, still seek out new
precipices, into which they feel themselves as it were carried by their own
Blindness.

Adam lays the fault on his Wife, Dixitque Adam, mulier quam dedisti mihi
sociam, dedit mihi de ligno and comedi. Genesis 3. v. 12. Et dixit Dominus Deus ad
mulierem: quare hoc fecisti? quae respondit, serpens decepit me et comedi. Genesis
3. v. 13. August. lib. 11. ad lit. c. 3. Gregor. lib. Mor. c. 23. v. 16.
the Woman accuses the Serpent, and instead of accusing themselves, to sweeten
the Indignation of the Judge, they make excuses to inkindle his Wrath, and to
render themselves unworthy of Pardon. Ah! how far more prudently had both of
them done (cried out St. Austin) if with bended Knees on the ground, with tears
in their Eyes, with sighs from their Hearts, and confession from their
Mouths, they had said unto God, Lord take pity on us, and upon all our poor
Children? It was for this (says St. Gregory) God called them, and his voice as
it were solicited them to humble them by the amorous accents of his paternall
Clemency. But alas, they are wholly insensible, they cannot acknowledge their
offense, wherefore no Clemency, no Pardon.

Go then Serpent accursed of God, Et ait Dominus Deus ad serpentem quia fecisti
hoc, Meledictus es in^er omnia Animali^, et bestias terrae: super pectus tuum
gradteris, et terram comedes, cunct^s dicbus vitae tuae. Genesis 3. v. 14.
^^imicitias penam inter te et mulierem, et semen tuum, et semen illius, ipsa
conteret caput tuum, et tu insidiaberis calcaneo ej^s. Genesis 3. v. 15.
go creep upon the Earth, and with Shame trayl thy body and thy Scales, biting
the Earth with thy Teeth. It is thou that have unhappily seduced the first of
Womankind, and therefore War shall be eternally inkindled between Thee and the
Woman. There shall be immortal hatreds between the Children of Women and all
Serpents, The Woman shall crush Thee under her feet, and Thou shall set snares
for her, wheting thy Tongue and thy poisonous shafts to dart them at her by
means of thy Little and scarce discerned paths.

As for thee O Woman, Mulieri ^uoque dixit, mutiplicabo erumaas tuas et
conceptus tuos: in dolor paries filios, et sub viri potestate eris, et ipse
dominahitur tibi. Genesis 3. v. 16.
who were the Origin and source of Evil, know that thy miseries shall daily
find deplorable increases: Moreover thou shall conceive with pain, and shall
not bring forth thy fruit but amidest the throws of a painful Labor. In fine,
thou shall be under the Command of Man: And he shall be not only thy Master,
but sometimes thy Tyrant.

As for thee, O Man! remove far from this sacred abode: Adae vero dixit, quia
audisti vocem uxoris tuae et comedisti de ligno ex quo praeceperam tibi, ne
comederes, maledicta terra in opere tuo: in laboribus commedes ex ea cunctis
diebus vitae tuae. Genesis 3. v. 17. Spinos and tribulos germinabit tini, et
comedes herbam terrae. Gen, 3. v. 18.
go seek thy Bread at the price of thy Sweat and blood; go follow the Plow and
Cart, to be the Companion of Beasts, and to Cultivate the Earth, which thy
pride has swollen up with winds, and covered with Thorns, Brambles, and
Briars. Go whether thou please: but know that thy life shall be but a large
course of misfortunes, and a disastrous list, where thou must continually
wrestle with all Creatures, and be the fatal Mark of all sorts of accidents
and mis-haps, which in fine will give thee no repose till thou shall return
into the Bosom of the Earth, In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane, donec
revertaris in terram de qua sumptus es. Genesis 3. v. 19.
because thou art but Earth, Ashes, and Dust, and until thou shall be there
consumed and reduced unto the self same thing of which thy Body is formed.

Behold thy Lillyes, Ejecitque Adam et collocavit ante Paradisum voluptatis
Cherubin et stammeum gladium, atque versatilem ad costodiendam v^am ligni
vitae. Genesis 3. v. 24.
thy Roses, and the harvest of thy Posterity.

Scarce were these destroying Thunderbolts darted upon the head of Adam and
Eve, and consequently on all mankind, but an Angel environed with fire and
Flames, seized on the gate of Paradise, and shut it for ever against these
miserable and Exiled persons. Alas! why would not the Earth have rather
swallowed them up? and why would not that beautiful garden, which had bin the
Throne of their Innocence, become at least the Sepulcher of their Sin? What!
was it necessary, that the four great Rivers, which flowed out of the
Terrestrial Paradise to water the Earth, should serve to transport from East
to West, A dolesfull inheritance
and from North to South, the memory of this disaster, and the shameful
portions of so sad an inheritance.

But what! I hear some Pelagian, who laughes, and gently whispers in mine Ear,
that I relate fables and Romances. I likewise feel my heart demanding of me how
and for what reason it came to pass that the sin of our first Parents should
become Hereditarie, and that it should be, as it were, transmitted from branch
to branch, and from father to son, by veins and Channels of blood, Aug. lib. 1.
Reb. cap. 9. et al by
which nature has cut and broken in every Individual person. Pelagians, I
send you back to your Master, and to the school of that incomparable Doctor,
who has so often shown you the truth.

To thee my heart I will make answer, or rather for solution of thy doubts, ask
of thee, whence does it arise, Very clear companso^s.
that the birds of the day inherit from their Fathers and Mothers certain
Horrors, which make them fly at the least noat of the birds of Night? Whence
comes it, that the skins of Sheep, though dead, break in pieces at the approach
of the skins of Wolves? and that Lambs, scarce come out of the Yeows belly,
have nevertheless natural apprehensions of the Wolf?

My soul! have thou not seen Chickens hiding themselves under the wings of a
Hen at the mere shadow of a Kite? Partridges flying before Hawks, and even
Lions roaring at the sight of a Cock? I ask of thee: From whence proceeds this
fear, these affrightments, and Antipathies? If thou tellest me they are
Natural, and have bin as it were infused by Nature, even from the first to the
last of each kind; I likewise answer, that this Original stain of culpable
Nature is derived from father to son, and from the first man to all his
offspring, and so it comes to be imprinted in the substance of their Souls.

And if thou have a desire to pass further, and know the reason, I am content:
stand then upon thy guard, my Soul; for I intend to fight thee with thy own
Weapons. Is it not true, that when by thy desires thou kindlest fires and
infamous flames in thine Eyes, thou art the cause of this Burning, and that it
is thy self, who renders them Criminal? Is it not as true, that when thou
armest thy Hands to commit a Murder, and thy Tongue to detract and bite like a
Dog, or to vomit forth some Blasphemy, it is thou that make both thy Hand and
Tongue culpable; which are thy Members, thy Officers, thy Slaves, and
Executioners, which act, perform, and execute what thou have commanded them?

In like manner Adam having bin chosen by God for the Head, and Father of all
mankind; Original sin
his Heart was the Fountain, which should power out it is qualities into the
substance of their Souls: even as does the Head, and Heart, into the arms,
into the tongue, and into all the Members of the Body, Moreover the Will of
Adam was so straightly united to that of his Children; as when he acted, they
seconded all his Actions. From whence I conclude, that as Actual sins
committed by the Ears, Eyes, and Hands, take their Malignity from the Heart,
and Will, which is their Cause, and Origin; so likewise those sins, which are
commonly called Original, The first Contagion.
and are found in the Soul of all Mankind, have as it were crept in, and taken
their Descent from Adam, as their Author and beginner, which having been once
infected, has afterward made its venom pass from Father to Son as by
Hereditary right.

Poor Children of Adam, pitiful Relics of an unfortunate Father, behold
your Patrimony, the Rights of your Families, and what Adam and Eve have left
you for Legacies. Let no Man hereafter be astonished to see you wandering about
Countries, Pitiful Relics of Sin
and going from door to door in Cities, with Tears in your Eyes, Sighs in your
Mouths, with dusty Hair, and Sunburnt Faces; Let no Man be any more astonished
to see you go bare-Headed, and Barefooted, a Wallet on your Shoulders, and a
Staff in your Hand; for these are the portions of Sin. Miserable Mortals, the
Earth from henceforth shall be to you but a Dark Prison, Life but a Gally, and
the World but a great Chain of Misfortunes. The Elements shall join in Arms
against you. The Fire shall inkindle frightfull Comets over your Heads; The Air
shall dart forth merciless Thunderbolts upon your Houses; The Sea shall raise
its Billows against your Towers, and the Earth shall be the Theater of Wars, the
Meadow in which the Plague shall Mow, and the Field of Battle, where all the
powers of the World, and Hell it self, shall deliver you up to Tragic
Combats. In fine your Bodies shall be Subject to all sorts of Maladies, and your
Minds to all kinds of Passions.

I hear already Envy grumbling and murmuring in the Heart of Cain. I hear the
cry of Abell. Let us observe a while what passes.

CHAP. VI. The Murder of Abel, and the Despair of Cain.
Anciently in Temples, Houses, and Closets, Council. 6. in Trullo. Can. 32.
the Images of Jesus Christ were drawn in form of a Lamb; which was the most
lively Mark, and Symbol, that Painters could find out to frame some Copy of
Meekness. Abel was this Picture from his Birth, and showed from the beginning
so sweet and facile, so plyant and tractable a disposition, as Adam and Eve
were even enforced to bestow on him their most tender affections. Cain on the
contrary, who was his Elder Brother, Diversity of Natures.
appeared to be of so fierce, and imperious a Nature, that at length to sweeten
it, they resolved to oblige him to cultivate the Earth, that his spirit might
learn how to soften the hardest of Elements, and to temper the harshness of his
Courage.

Abel at the same time employed himself in keeping Sheep, Fuitque Abel pastor
ovium, and Cain agricola. Genesis 4. v. 2.
and guiding his Fathers Flocks amidst the Pastures: His mind in repose, and
amidst the silence of the Fields, began to take its flight; And as God had
chosen his Heart to power into it his dearest favors, he easily felt himself
surprised with a Holy thought and a Sacred desire; which was elevated to God,
to offer unto him the purest and choicest Sacrifices.

Cain also felt some touch of Piety, Factum est autem post multos d^es, ut
offerret Cain de fructibu^ terrae, munera Domino. Genesis 4 v. 3.

Abel quoque obtulit de primogenitis gregis sui, and de adipib^s little. Genesis 4.
v. 4.


and but passingly beheld, a glorious Light, which sufficiently showed him all
he was to do: from whence I gather by the way, That there is no Clymate so
barbarous no Land so desert, nor no Cave so tenebrous, into which God casts not
his Shafts, and darts not his Lights to illuminate our Hearts and Souls.

But it often comes to pass, that we shut the Doors and Windows, suffering our
Day and Life to slip away, to expect Death and Blindness in the Night. Abel
received the Day from its Aurora, and neither the Interests of the World, nor
the Goods of the Earth, were ever able to separate his Soul from the Interests
of Heaven and Piety.

His Intentions were still most pure, and he had no other Object, than the
Glory of a God, who requires the whole and not a single part; who demands
Hearts, and not bare Words; and who cannot permit upon his Altars, but the
fairest and most liberal Victims of Love. Now this is what our innocent
Shepherd did, when he rendered his Sacrifice most perfect, offering unto God,
what he had most beautiful, most fat, and rare among his Flocks: having first
set apart the First Fruits, and afterward Immolated them with the rarest
Lights of his Understanding, and the purest Flames of his Will.

Cain on the other side erects Altars, Very different Sacrifices.

Rupert. lib. 4. in Genesis c. 2. Cain cum De^ of seriet sua, scipsum sibi retinet.


and offers Fruits: But in offering his Presents (says Rupertus) he retains
Himself; And his Earthy Soul was so violently transported with terrestrial
affections, as he gave nothing unto God, but by constraint, and with regret.
This was the cause, Et res^e^it Dominus ad Abel and mun^ra ^sus. Genesis 4. c. 4.
why God cast his Eyes upon Abel, and his oblation: That is to say as Saint
Hierom notes, God approved it, and in the twinkling of an Eye, as with an
amorous lightning, consummated the Sacrifice, which was offered to him; Ad Cain
vero and munera illius non respexit: Iratusque est Cain vehementer, Et concidit
vultus ejus. Genesis 4. v. 5.
leaving Cains Fruits, and offerings, dry and aride upon the Altar. The which
so violently disturbed the mind of this Impious Sacrificer, as it immediately
enforced a change in his countenance, as not being Master in the Trade he
learnt of betraying by his Mouth and Eyes, his sincerest thoughts.

God then said unto him, Dixit D^minus ad eum: Quare iratus ^s, and cur
concidit facies tua? Genesis 4. v. 6.
Cain, what does transport thee? what Excess of Anger appears on thy Brow? And
whence comes it, that thy Countenance is thus dejected? It is a token
doubtless, that thou art meditating on some tragic Design: But return into thy
self, raise a little thy Eyes, and read in me, what may and must befall to thee.

Remember Cain, that I have upon my Heart, and in mine Eyes, a great Myrrour of
Essences, which bears for device these terms of Justice, Just toward all. The
Device of the Myrrour, Omibus aequus.

Nonne si been egeris, recipies? sin autem male, statim in foribus peccatum
aderit. Gin. 4. v. 7


If then thou feel some Storm, and touches of Fury in thy Soul, thou will
discern them in this Glass. And if thou enjoyest therein Tranquillity, Peace,
and Meekness, thou will acknowledge that I have no more Justice for thy
Brother, than thy self. Besides what ever thou do, doubt not but I
understand all that thou will act: for Sin speaks in silence: And its shadows
though thick are not obscure enough to extinguish the Day and Lightnings of my
Vengeance. Sub te erit appetitus tuus and dominabitur illius.
Nevertheless though I am both God, and a most powerful God, yet will I not
enforce thy Liberty.

O Liberty, Liberty, cruel Liberty, Dangerous Liberty.
pernicious Indulgence, tyrannical Power, disloyal Free Will, proud Will,
blind Mistress of all our Motions!

Cain, on what think thou? Answer me, I prithee, thou can what thou
willest, but if thou will have thy Liberty entire, thou must desire what God
desires, and thy desire ought to be conformable to thy power, and then thy
power will be consonant to those of thy God. Why then art thou deaf to the words
of God, why art thou blind to his Lights, art thou in Despair?

God calls him, but he flies away, his Parents are willing to detain him at
Home, and he inforceth his Brother to follow him into the Fields; As if the
presence of the Elements (as St. Ambrose says) were a terror to this wicked
man, he seeks out desolate places, Dixitque Cain ad Abel Fratrem suum:
Egrediamur for as, cumque essent in agro, consurrexit adversus Fratrem suum
Abel, and inter secit eum. Genesis 4. v. 5.
and where Air and Earth appear not, but amidst the shades, and by halfs. This
untamed Horse runs on without Bit, or Bridle, and drags along his younger
Brother with him. In fine, as soon as he perceives himself in a Solitary place,
he casts himself upon Abel like an enraged Wolf upon a Lamb, and as a Vulture,
seizing on his prey. Cain what do thou? It is thy Brother, it is Abel, it is
thy other self, it is the second support of thy Parents, and of thy Family.
Cain, even Pity, Blood, Nature, and the Laws, thunder already over thy head;
Alas! stay thy hand, and the revenging Thunderbolt of the Just and powerful
God, which is ready to cleave the Clouds.

It is too late, The murdering of Abel.
the stroke is already given: Abel is dead. I see nothing but a Body stretched
out upon the Earth, which swims in his own. Tears and Blood: Behold the Waves
of his Blood which mount to Heaven, and even unto God himself, who is ready to
mingle his Lightnings, Thunder, and Voice, with this Storm.

Cain where is Abel? Et ait Dominus ad Cain, Ubi est Abel Frater tuus?
Qutrespondit, nescio: nam custos Fratris mei sum ego: Genesis 4. v. 9.
where is thy Brother? where have thou put him? what have thou done with him?
Oh what Answers Cain, Am I my Brothers Guardian? have thou given me him in
charge? I know not where he is. Ah! thou brazen-faced Creature.

Observe, I beseech you, how vices spring from one another; and how they frame
a long Web of Miscries, which heap shadows upon shadows, until they have at
last lead us into a Precipice, and into the Eternal obscurity of the Tomb, and
of the dismal Night.

Cain has not washed his hands since the Murder of his Brother; he still
keeps the Knife in his Throat, and he could not wipe away the stains, and Drops
of this Innocent Blood: Execrable impudence.
and yet this Homicide denies his Crime, and this Murderer attests an
abominable Lie to his Assassination. Good God! what boldness? what insolence?
what temerity? Cain art thou not ashamed to disavow this prodigious Inhumanity,
these Brutish Furies, and the Massacer on which thy Eyes are still fixed?
Perjured Man as thou art, thou say, thou know not what is asked of thee,
thou seem amazed, and thou art even ready to cry Murder first, and to call
for help. But thy Brothers Blood speaks louder than thy self; that Blood more
pure, and innocent than Milk, is become blacker than Ink, to write and mark
out thy offense in Characters which will never be effaced. The Earth it self
calls incessantly on Gods justice, Quid secisti? vox sanguinis fratris tui ad
me clamat de tora. Genesis 4.2.10.
and thy Brother's blood seems to have given it a soul, a sense, and voice, to
excite, complain, and provoke his Indignation. Detestable Cain, insolent
Hypocrite, execrable Liar, Envious Brother, most cruel Executioner, thou
say, that Abel was not under thy tuition, and that thou never tookest charge
of him. Oh! Art not thou his Elder Brother? But I hear thee, yet thou hear
not me. It is thy sin, which casts a veil over thy face; And it is the shadow
of this dead body, which dazels thine Eyes, and is the Cause thou can not
discern it. What e're it be, the Earth has spoken too efficaciously, its
demands and accusations are too Just, and a man is obliged to give Credit to
Blood and Nature, when they freely condemn themselves. There needs then no
further proof, no other accusers, or witnesses: But nothing now remains saving
the decree and sentence of the Judge.

Hear then unnatural Brethren, hear, and, A dreadful sentence
as many as you are, become wise at the Cost of Cain.

Let Execration, Anathema, Nunc igitur maledictus eris super terram, quae
aperuit os suum, et suscepit sanguinem, sratris tuide manu tui. Genesis 5. v. 11.
Vagus et profugus eris super terram. Genesis 4. v. 12.
and Eternal Malediction, says God, fall on the infamous Head of Cain. Let
him be accursed upon Earth, and let all disasters power down on the labors of
his hands; and to the end his sight, and presence, may not infect, nor corrupt
his fathers House, he shall be a fugitive, vagabond, and wanderer upon the Earth.

At this stroke the Heart of Cain becomes a little sensible, and the hardness
of his Soul, although too late, begines to soften. Dixitque Cain ad Dominum,
Major est iinquitas mea, quam ut veniam mercar. Genesis 4. v. 12.


Alas Lord! (says he) my Iniquity is greater than thy Mercies: and my sin is
too enormous to hope for Pardon. I confess it, and from this very moment I
depart from hence like a banished man to wander day by day without peace or
relaxation, where the Sun, and Moon, spread their light and clarities. Besides,
my Brothers Ghost pursues, and torments me, with too much severity: Ecce ejicis
me: Hodie a facie tua abscondar, et ero ^agus, et profugus in terra: Omnis qui
invenerit me occidet me. Genesis 4. v. 14.
Even thy self, O my God, and my Judge, chasest me away far from thy
Countenance, and far from the pleasing glances which issue from thine Eyes. Ah
then let the Sun, and Moon, cease to enlighten the World, and let me for ever
wander amidst the Murtherous shades of Abel, Stings of conscience
and let my life pine away in obscurity: Otherwise I fear (says he) that at
the first sight, and encounter, some one may kill, and treat me according to my
deserts.

No no, Dixitgue ei Dominus, Nequaquam ita fiet, sed omnis qui occiderit Cain,
septuplum punietur, Posu^tque Dominus Cain signuum, ut non interficeret eum
omnes qui invenisset cum. Genesis 4. v. 15.
Cain, says God, nothing of what thou fear shall happen to thee; and if any
one be so rash to attempt on thee, I will make him feel the excess of my
wrath, and his punishment shall pass even to the utmost extremity my vengeance
can extend. For this effect God imprinted a sensible mark upon his forehead,
which served him for a safeguard against all the Assaults of his Enemies. This
done, the poor wretch went away of his Enemies. The disquiets and the
banishment of Cain.
This done, the poor wretch went away all alone, pale, trembling, pursued by
the stings of his Soul: and after some wanderings arrived in the Land of Eden,
lying Eastward. It was under this Clymate, and near unto Mount Libanus, that
this Fugitive at last made his retreat: there it was, where he built a City,
and had by his Wife a very numerous posterity.

CHAP. VII. The Desolations and Spoils of Envy.
Imagine, that it is from this first Colony, and this unfortunate Marriage, that
Provinces, Cities, and Villages, are since peopled with so many Brothers and
Sisters, who have been the lively Images of Cain; I mean, with so many
unnatural Men and Women, who without respect or compassion toward their own
Blood, have violated the purest, and most holy Laws of Nature. Blood raises
every where storms against it self, and the Members of the Body, and all the
Powers of the Soul, seem only united to wage War against themselves at a nearer
distance. Republics complain, Families and Races sigh, all Countries lament,
and there is no House nor little Cottage, that shows not the Prints and
Footsteps of this poison, which has seized the Hearts of all Brothers and
Sisters. Cain has so far extended his Race, that he has every where
Associats, Followers, and Children; and one would swear, to behold the
Cruelties, Outrages, and Treasons, which are daily discovered amongst
Brethren, that the Tomb of Abel was the Sepulcher of that Piety and mutual
Amity which to all Brothers should be in lieu of Fortresses and impregnable
Holds.

This abominable Monster of Jealousy, whose Teeth and Breath are putrified,
has exhaled the blackest vapors in the self same Cradles; insomuch as
Brothers suck in with their Milk its Plague and Venom.

Scarce are they born, Ex relatione Michaelis. Angli ad an. 7. perig.
but at the same instant they resemble those Birds of blood and prey, which
live in the unfortunate Islands near the North Pole, and devour one another
even in their Neasts. These Envious and Jealous Spirits, these Angels of Night
and Darkness, carry continually in their hands glasses of a thousand Faces, and
colored, with as many passions, which cause fire to be taken for smoke, black
for white, and all beauties for deformities or deceits.

I know not by what name to call these incarnate Devils, these Jealous Souls,
and these Heirs of Cain. I know very well, that there are such every where:
They are seen at Balls, at Feasts, and Comedies. They insinuate themselves into
designs, Councils, and the most secret Assemblies They have the Key of Closets,
and private Houses, and cause themselves to be seen in Public, and felt in
Secret. They resort the Randevouz of pleasure, they delight in Circuits, and
are every where without abandoning themselves.

In fine, In vitis Patrum A^uch.
that which is less credible, and which for my part I would not have believed,
if a most Holy and learned Anchorite had not said it above seven hundred years
ago, that this invisible Murderer, this impious Cain, and this Jealous
Spirit, is so presumptuous, as to pass even into the Precinct of the Worlds
Paradise, and of Religion: There it cartys its Torch and Firebrand to the very
foot of the Altar, It enters even into the Sanctuary, and powers out into the
same Chalice the Blood of Jesus Christ, and of his Brother. This Deicide, this
Assasin, and this Anthropophagus, eats the Body of the Son of God with the
Flesh of Men, and that Table which serves for the repast of the one, serves
also for the Feast of the other; from whence it ascends into Pulpits, it
passes through Tribunals, and in the midst of all the Sacrifices it bursts, it
fumes, it inrageth, it detests, it waxes pale, it resolves to make a thousand
factions unworthy of a generous spirit, it makes secret Conspiracies, it
springs Mines, it provides Dungeous, it besieges Hearts, it sells the
friendships of some, it purchases the protection and favor of others, it
renders it self a Slave and Mercenary to this or that Man to be the Tyrant and
Master of an other. Finally in all places and times, when it perceives it self
the strongest, and amongst those who have either given or sold themselves to
its Service, this Sacrilegious Soul, this future Apostata, this Traitor, this
Envious and wicked Monster, Jealous of his Brothers Life and Happiness, not
being able to strangle them, nor put a Halter about their Necks, or a Poniard
into their Bosoms, casts every where the Darts of its Tongue, and sends forth
words a thousand times more cruel, and pernicious, than the murdering Knife,
which Cain plunged into the throat and Heart of Abell.

CHAP. VIII. Remedies against Envy.
BUt what! will any remedy serve for all these Franticks, and all these
Cyclops, whose Hearts are ever-flaming Furnaces, and where Jealousy continually
forgeth Chains and Irons? O God! O Heaven! O Laws! Justice, Sanctity, Sovereign
Powers of the World! Physicians to our Maladies! Arbitrators of our lives! It
is you whose sweetly rigorous hands can both ordain, remedy, and give health;
It is you then I implore, and of whom I crave assistance. It is you Fathers and
Mothers, who in your Houses ought to be Judges of all the differences, which
arise between your Sons and Daughters, and first of all you ought to know the
natural disposition of your Children, to the end that if some Cain be found
amongst them you may timely suppress him. Spare then neither Fire nor Steel,
Hunger nor Thirst, Disdains nor Rebukes, seek out even Domestique Prisons; It
is much better for them to feel the Essays of your. Paternall rigours, than to
fall afterward into the blind hands of Justice.

And it is far more gentle, that you your selves upon the first Symptoms of
Evil, should take the pains to apply a Costick to them, or give them a stroke
with your Lancet, than after too much remisness to see them take a sharp Razer
cutting in pieces the Heart and all the Members of your other Children. Do not
say, that he is beautiful, he is tender, he is the Eldest, or Youngest Son,
for after all, though he be your Son, the rest are likewise yours, and you
cannot be a Father, if you are not a Judge common to them all.

As for those visible Angels, which God has placed in Sacred Mansions, like
the Cherubin of the Terrestrial Paradise, there to Watch and Govern, It is
enough for them to know where the Evil is, that they forthwith apply some
Remedy.

I pass then farther, and speaking both in general, and in particular to all
the Heirs of Cain, and to all those whom a Bloody Jealousy armeth against their
Brethren, or against their Sisters. I conjure them frequently to meditate on
this verity, that the mischief they do unto others can afford them no benefit,
and that when they raise designs, and Trophies on the Ruin of others, they are
but Crowns of Straw and Feathers, where instead of finding Mountains, and
Elevations, they meet with Precipices and Abysses, in which they will destroy
themselves.

In fine, what delights and contentments can an envious Person have, whose Eyes
are destroyed by the purest lights, and to whom Acclamations and Songs of
Victory are distasteful, and whose Heart Swims always in bitterness, and
poison? What Pain! What Torment! And what punishment to resemble a Man accursed
of God! to walk as a fugitive, and banished person upon Thorns, and Briars?
what peace can one have, who makes War against God, his Friends, and himself;
and when both Night and Day he is seen amongst his Brothers Ghosts, amongst
Specter, and Fantasmes, amongst the Stings and Remorces of a guilty
Conscience? what hope of good? when one is assured, that after the having
passed away some Months, some Days, or rather some Years in the City of Enoch,
and amidst some slight Clarities of the East, he shall go end his life in a
Bed, leave his Body in a Sepulcher, and lose all the pleasures, all the
Blessings, and all the lights of his Soul, in the shades of Night, and of the
setting Sun, where no Day shall be seen, but amidst the Lightnings, Flames, and
Thunders, of a God provoked to an holy indignation.

CHAP. IX. The Building of the Ark, and the Deluge.
ITt is a Maxim amongst Philosophers, that Beauty is to Love, what the Soul is
to the Body; and it is she says St. Denis, that gives wings to the inconstant,
subtle, and penetrating Bird, which passes by the Eyes, Ears, and Mouth, to
advance directly to the Heart, to make, like an other Phaenix, a Pyle upon the
flames and fires of our desires and wills. It was perhaps for this cause
Socrates called the Beauty, which spreads its attractives on the Body, An
amorous Tyranny, by reason this imperious Step-dame is accustomed to captivate
all those that abide under the Empire of her Looks.

Plato in his Timeus had almost the very same conceptions, as Socrates, when he
said, That the Colors, and Luster, which give light unto the shade, and revive
the Body and Face, have a flame, which flows insensibly from matter and form,
to infire the Souls of all Spectators. Elianus lib. 22.
It was this mixture (says Elianus) of Charms and Splendors, issuing out of
the Eyes and Mouth of a Maid beautiful as the day, The power of beauty.
which so much surprised a certain Knight called Dioxipus, that although he had
gained famous victories in the Olympic games, and was in the midst of Glory,
and Triumph, laden with the Palms and Laurels he had so often watered with his
sweat, and blood; he was yet constraind to make a stand in the presence of all
the people, acknowledging his own weakness, and confessing that the beauty of a
Lady had vanquished him whom the strength of Man was never able to overcome.

I add to these thoughts, Dulcem illecebram, carum venenum. Greg. Naz. Orat.
13.
that of St. Gregory Nazianzen, who has terms and words no less eloquent,
than true, to express, that the beauty of the Body is a deceiptfull allurement,
and a most pleasing poison, which passes from one Sex to another, and conveys
it self so far into the veins, that afterward it cannot be drawn forth but
with Death.

These are verities, which have bin proved from the cradle of the World by
Examples and accidents, which have caused too Tragic, and Public Ruins, to be
called in question? Cumque cepissent homines multiplicare super tecram and
filias procreassent. Genesis 6. v. 1.
Amongst others, the first and most exemplar was the Deluge, which happened
unto the World one thousand six hundred and fifty six years or near upon after
the Creation, by reason the Inhabitants of the City of Enos, and the Children
of Adam being multiplied by strange increases, and in respect their bodies
being fortified, and become like so many Collossusses of impiety, these
Lascivious Giants went every where like impetuous Torrents, Videntes filii Dei
filias hominum quod essent pulcrae, acceperunt sibi uxores ex omnibvs quas
elegerant. Genesis 6. v. 2.
which nothing could stop but a brutish beauty, upon which they entertained
their Eyes, and loves, with an execrable Liberty. I have a horror to relate it,
but it is true, that the World was then but an Infamous retreat, where all
Sexes without Order, Law, or respect, breaking all the Lines and Degrees of
Blood, and Alliances, were monstrously confused. I should be unwilling to black
this Paper in setting forth so many horrors and Ordures, and to recall the
memory of them; but I cannot conceal, what God and Moises have published:
Moreover the Heavens are ready to power down Water enough to efface all these
stains, and all the marks of those abominable sins. Nevertheless I feel my
Spirit affrighted at the sight of these Horrors: and my Eyes would need tears
of Blood to divert all these mournful Objects.

O God! who art the Origin of all Beauties, and whose least Glance compleats
the happiness of Angels and Saints; What! must Man! must thy Children and
Creatures adhere to an other than thy self! why do thou permit the fairest
City of the World to be but a horrid and common Sewer? And must the World
become a heap of Murders and Uncleanness? What! do you not see these Ravens
to whom some worldly beauty gives Wings to make a sudden stoop at carrion
putrifi'd and almost consumed by it is own rottenness? do you see all these
incarnate Devils? these Giants of the Earth, and these Men devoid of Soul and
reason? who employ all their study and care to Court an Idol of Clay,
Detestable Idolatry.
a Face of Marble, and the Picture of a Nice dame, who is attended by excess of
Diet, Pomp of Garments, painting, musk, perfumes, wantonness, attractives,
artifices, amorous looks, gestures, freedom, sport, Raillerie, Idleness, Night,
Solitude, and all sorts of privacies.

Surely so many vapors and exhalations as are risen from the World, or rather
from Hell, for above sixteen ages together, have too much thickened the Clouds;
God is necessitated at last to pluck up the Floodgates, Videns autem Deus,
quod multa malitia hominum esset in terra, and cuncta cogitatio cordis intenta
esset ad malum omni tempore. Genesis 6. v. 5.
and open the Cataracts to swallow up the World, and cause Shelves and
Shipwracks upon Mountains and Cities, as well as upon the Ocean. The iniquity
of Men is too deeply rooted in the bottom of their Hearts, and all their
thoughts are too strongly fastened on Evil. The Decree is given, and I see
nothing that is able to withold an arm holily irritated.

God repents himself for having created Man, Panituitque eum quod hominem
fecisset in terra and tactus dolor cordis intrinsecus. Genesis 6. v. 6.
and bestowed on him all his labor, and affection; he repents himself, and his
heart rises at the sight and thought of this Object: In fine, being no longer
able to restrain his wrath and indignation, I swear by my self, says he, that
I will destroy Man, and Efface his name and memory over the face of the
Universe. Deleho, inquit, hominem quem creavi a facie ^eirae, ab homim usque ad
animantia, and a reptilt usque ad volucres Cae i, ^oe^^e^ enim me secisse
illus. Genesis 6. v. 7.
I will not spare even Beasts and Birds: to the end, that what has been a
Witness, Complice, or even a slave of his crime; shall also be the Companion of
the pain and punishment which is ordained him. This said and done: Of so many
men, who then lived upon the Earth, and of so many Families, Noe va o invenit
gra tiam coram Domino. Genesis 6. v. 8.

Cumque vidisset Deus terram esse corruptam (omnis quippe caro corruperat viam
suam super terram.) Genesis 6. v. 12.


that only of Noah deserved favor, and was freed from Shipwreck.

God then calls this holy Man, ^^^^t ad Noe sints untversae carn^^ veniet coram
me: Kepleta es^ terra iniquitate a facie toru^, and ego aisperdam illos cum
ter^a. Genesis 6. v. 13.
and great Patriark, to advertise, and communicate his whole design unto him.

Friend, says God, the World is in its agony, and my Justice shall put an end
to this Work, which my Love began. All my patience and delays have only served
to make way for evil; And my clemency is converted into rigor; After all, my
goodness is tired, and I am resolved to open all the Torrents of my wrath; that
the World being no longer but a great Abyss, and a vast Scpulcher, may be
drowned in it self, and that there may never be more mention of it.

Go then Noah, Fac tibi arcam de ligms laevigatis, mansiunculas in arca factes
and birumine lintes intrinsecus and extrmsecu^. Ger. 6. v. 14.

Et sic factes came; ^recentorum cubitoru erit longitodo arcae, quinquaginta
cubitorit altitudo ej^. Genesis 6. v. 15. ^enestram in arca sacies, and in cubito
consummabis summitateme^us: Ostrum autem arcae pones in latere; deorsum
senacula, and trillegafacies in ca. Ger. 6. v. 16.

Ponamque faedus meum tecum and ingredieris arcam tu and sil^i tui, uxor tua,
and uxores fitiorum ^^cum, Genesis 6. v. 18.

Ex omnibus animantibus mundis toll septena and septena, Masculum and
Faeminam: De animantibus vero immundis duo and duo, Masculum and Faeminam. Genesis
7. v. 2. Sed and de volatilibus Caeli septena and septena, Masculum and
Feminam: ut salvetur semen super faciemuniversae terrae. Genesis 7. v. 3.


and build an Ark of Timber and Planks: make small apartments in it, and pitch
it both within and without. Let it be three hundred Cubits in length, fifty in
breadth, and thirty in height: make then a Window a Cubit high, and in the side
contrive a door to go in and out; dispose also Chambers therein, and be
careful, that the whole be divided into three stories, to the end the Body of
this large structure may be the more commodious, and better proportioned.
Afterward I will make my accord and pact with thee: and thou shall presently
enter in with thy Wife, Children, and Cattle. Besides thou shall conduct into
this Sanctuary all sorts of Beasts and Birds, with this distinction, that
amongst the clean thou shall choose seven of every species; and of the
unclean, two only: pairing always the Male and Female, that they may repair
the Earth and Air by their Copulations.

This good Man performed exactly all that God had commanded him; he is already
in the Ark, Fecitque Noe omnia quae praeceperat illt Deus. Genesis 6. v. 22.

Cumque transissent septem dies, aquae diluvii inundaverunt super terram. Genesis
7. v. 10.

Rupti sunt omnes sontes Abyssi magnae and cataraclae caeli apertae sunt. Genesis
7. v. 11. Et facta est pluvia super terram quadraginta dicbus and quadraginta
noctibus. Genesis 7.12.


and he busieth himself in disposing and nourishing all these different Species
of Beasts, and Birds.

Seven days were spent about these preparations, and in the miraculous
enclosure of this new House. At the end whereof the Heavens opened on all
sides, and the Sun, Moon, and Stars, seemed to be changed into Sources and
Channels, the Air and Clouds became a Sea, and all the Elements joined together
to make of the whole World an Ocean without shoars, without bottom, without
Haven, and without limit. I represent unto my self the liquid firmament,
all-inflamed with his wrath and indignation who intends to alter the whole
State of Nature. I firmly believe, that amidst this storm, Thunder upon
Thunder, and a thousand Claps were heard, which served to arm the Heavens, the
Planets, and the Clouds. It is probable that the Night and the Winds were mixed
together; and I cannot doubt, but that Hell and Earth did also conspire to
increase the horror of so dismal, and universal a Punishment.

Mean while, where are you the unhappy Inhabitants of the City of Enos? Giants,
of what use is your Mass of Body, and those vast dimensions, which have only
served to make you fall from a higher pitch, and rendered your ruin more
remarkable? Poor Heirs of Cain, Children of Men, Effeminate Spirits, wanton
Souls, where are you? The Heavens fall on your Heads, the Air stifles you, the
Water swallows you up, and the Earth vanishes away. Fathers, Mothers,
Children, Husbands and Wives, Brothers and Sisters, Kindred, Friends where are
you? and where are your Monsters and Prodigies of Alliance? I behold, I behold
your Towers buried under the Waves: I hear your cries, your sighs, and your
voices notwithstanding the Tempest; In fine your floating Bodies and your dying
Souls acknowledge but too late the Excess of your Sins.

Ah Sin, Sin, these are thy Spoils, and this is the Tempest thou have raised;
Sin do thou discern the State into which thou have reduced the World, the
Air, the Earth, and the Heavens? Sin do thou at l^st acknowledge that thou
art the Origin of this Disaster, and of all these Calamities?

O God! Factumque est diluvium quadragenta diebus super terram, and mul
iplicatae sunt aquae, and chvave unt arcam in subleme a terra. Genesis 7. v. 17.

Vehementer enim inundaverunt and am^ia repleverunt in superfi^e terrae: porro
arca fercbatur super aquas. Genesis 7. v. 18.

Et aquae praevaluerunt nimis super terram, opertique sunt omnes montes excelsi
sub universo Caelo. Genesis 7. v. 19.


Is it possible, that those Fires, and Thunders were to punish Sin? Is it
possible, that so many Streams, so many Rivers, and so many Seas are needful
to Efface his Image? Must all the Elements weep forty Days, and as many
Nights: And in fine must all Nature be in Mourning, or rather in Triumph? Since
every where she erects Trophies, and Mountains of Water to swallow up the most
shameful, and most Insolent of all Vices: I mean that which a Chaste and
Christian Mouth dares scarcely Name.

During this Triumph, and Mourning, Noah stears his Vessel, his Family, and
Troops, upon the Billows. This holy man enjoyes a Calm, and sails securely
over these Storms and Billows. He beholds the Day in the midst of Might; And
the Tempest, which sinks the whole world even as low as Hell, lifts him up
even as high as the Heavens.

Range then O Noah, Range upon the waters of the Deluge, and expect the day and
moments, when God shall land thee in the Haven. And thou O Ark that carryest
the world, and its Spoils, behold how the Sea makes a halt at thy approach, and
keeps back its Suspended waves as it were out of complacency, and an orderly
respect. Holy house of God; Fortunate Sanctuary of all mankind! float on
without oars or sails, float on, for it is the Spirit of God, and the hand of
the justest of men which directs and guides thee.

In effect, scarce were the Forty days expired, Recordatus autem D^us Noe
cunctorumque animantium and omnium jumentorum quae crant cum co in area,
adduxit spiritum super terram and imminutae sunt aquae. Genesis 8. v. 1.

Et clausi sunt sontes abyssi et ca^aroctae caeli et probibitae sunt pluviae
decaelo. Genesis 8. v. 2.

Reversaeque sunt aquae de terra eu^^es and redeuntes and caeperunt minui. Gen
8. v. 3.

Requievi^que a^ca mense scptimo, vigesimo septimo die mensis supermontes
Armeniae. Ge^. 8. v. 4.

At vero aquae ibant, and decrescebant usque ad decimum mensem: Decimo enim
mense aparuerunt cacumina montium. Genesis 8. v. 5.

Cumque transissent quadraginta dies, aperiens Nee fenestram arca quam fecerat,
dimisit corvum. Genesis 8. v. 6.

Qui egredichatur, and non revertebatur, donec siccarentar ^quae super terram.
Genesis 8. v. 7.

^^nisit qu^que columbam post cum^^ videyet si sam cessassent aquae super
faciem terrae. Genesis 8. v. 8.


when in an Instant the Heavens dried up their sources; the air appeared most
serene; and the great drops of Rain were turned into Pearls and dew, as it were
to give notice of the return of the Sun and Morning, which should begin to
spread every where a Calm together with the Day. In a word, God remembered the
hour and Moment which he had promised unto Noah to restrain and stop all his
Torrents.

The Earth at the same time impatient of bearing a burden which was not
natural to her, rose up on all sides, and in her emotion forced the waters to
make a thousand Fluxes, and refluxes, which sufficiently testified the violence
of these two Elements; At length, after seven Months contest and conflict,
this wandering Island, which carried Noah and his family, landed upon the
Mountains of Armenia, expecting till the tenth Month, when the other Hills
showed their heads and tops: Forty days after which, this most Holy and wise
Pilot, who had almost spent a whole year in the pleasing obscurites of his
prison, still victorious and trumphant, resolved at last to open its window to
give flight and passage to a Crow, which indeed went forth but never returned:
For he entertained himself on Stinking Carkases and Carrion, finding there his
Nourishment and repose. There needed then a purer and more faithful Messenger:
Noah chose a Dove a among all the Birds; that she might discover whether the
waters were quite retired. But this innocent Creature, and amiable Spy,
finding no ^resting place clean enough, returned presently into the Ark and
advertised Noah that the waters of the Deluge were not wholely decreased. Quae
eu^ non invenisset ubi requiesceret pes ejus, reversa est ad eum in arcam:
aquae enim erant super universam terram, extenditque manum and apprehensam
intulit in arcam. Genesis 8. v. 9.

Expectatis autem ultra septem diebus aliis ru^sum dimisit columbam ex arca.
Genesis 8. v. 10.

At illa venit ad eum, ad vesperam, portans ramum olivae virentibus foliis in
ore suo. Intellexit ergo Noe quod cessassent aquae super terram. Genesis 8. v. 11.

Expectavitque nihilominus septem alios dies, and emisit columham, quae non est
reversa ultra ad eum. Genesis 8. v. 12.


It was this news that obliged Noah to expect yet the space of Seven days,
after which he took the Dove again and instantly gave her leave to take her
liberty and Flight; Whether will she go? And where will she find a rest to
perch on?

Noah in expectation, stands one while him self, an other some one of his
Children, at the Window to see whether this Angel of peace would return.

Behold good news, the Dove is returned; Notwithstanding the Night and the
approaching obscurities, I have a glimse of her with the Olivebranch she
carries in her Beak.

Noah what say thou? Make have I pree-thee: receive this little Legate, and
take from his mouth the earnest of peace; And if thou have a mind to have more
certain assurances, the term of seven days will put a period to all thy
desires.

Here was the last delay; for as soon as the seven days were expired Noah
cast out again the Dove to the mercy of the Waters, of the Air and Earth, where
having at last found footing, she resolved to abide.

CHAP. X. Noah's descent out of the Ark, and his Sacrifice on the Hills of
Armenia
NOAH seeing what had passed, Et aperiens Nee tectum arcae, aspexit, viditque
quod exsiccata esset superficies terrae. Genesis 8. v. 13.

Lecutus est autem Deus ad Noe, dicens: Genesis v. 15.

Egredere de arca tu and uxor tua, filii tui, and uxores filiorum tuorum tecum.
Genesis 8. v. 16.

Cuncta animantia educ tecum, and ingredimini super terram, crcscite and
mul^^^camini super eam. Genesis 8. v. 17.

Egressus est ergo Noe etc. Genesis 8. v. 18.

Sed and omnia jumenta and reptilia quae reptant super terram secundum genus
suum, egressa sunt de Area: Genesis 8. v. 19.


uncovered the roof of his Ark, and presently perceived the Earth, the Islands,
the Haven, the fields, and the dry'dup ways. He heard God also commanding him
to depart out of the Ark with all his Company, that he might re-people the
universe; which was done according to the Orders God had given him, and
immediately the same Providence which guided into the Ark the Lions of Africa,
the Bears of the North, the Tygars of the deserts, and the Phesants of Numidia,
sent every one back unto their own Country. I leave unto the curious to imagine
what pleasure Noah had at the opening of his Cage: when he saw Eagles,
Vultures, Austridges, and all birds take their flight, following the track
which was to carry them under their own Climate; God knows also how the Sheep
fled far from the Wolf, the Lion from the Cock, the Hare from the Dog, which
Nevertheless by secret and devine Charms, held in the Ark a Correspondence
without Noise, War, or Enmity.

In fine, during this Jayle-delivery, and these separations, Noah was careful
not to do like Seafaring men, who during the Storm and Tempest, invoke all the
Saints of Paradise, and make a thousand vows unto them, which Nevertheless
they perform not in the Haven, and calm, but by an infinity of Blasphemies, and
by the continuation of their Impieties.

Scarce was this eminent man (chosen by God for the conservation of the world)
descended out of the Ark, but he instantly built an Altar, Adificavit autem
Noe^ altar Domino, and tollens de cunctis pecoribus, and volucribus mundis,
obtulit holocausta super altar. Genesis 8.20.
on which he offered Holocausts and victimes in honor of him who had so
sweetly, and by such mavelous ways, conducted him to the shore and harbor.

Never was any Sacrifice more pleasing unto God than that; Odoratusque est
Dominus odorem suavitatis Genesis 8. v. 21.
For he was not satisfied to approve it by a motion of his Eye, as that of
Abels; but as if the Smoke which rose from the Altar had bin a perfume imbalm'd
with musk and odor, Odorem suavitatis, legunt Hebraei, odorem quietis (Noach)
God fed himself, or rather to believe what the Hebrews conceived, the Spirit
of God took its repose in the midest of these imbalmed fires and Flames which
consumed the Sacrifice of Noah.

It was in this repose that the Spirit of God and goodness felt it self as it
were touched both with horror, and pity in consideration of men's misfortunes
whose propensions and inclinations to Good are so cold, and unto Evil so
ardent.

A poor heart meets sometimes with so harsh Combats, Weakness worthy of
compassion.
so violent Assaults, and so unexpected Trials, that scarce can those crimes be
imputed to it, which the Hands, Eyes, Tongue, and Ears have committed. It is
often blind, often it is deceived; Men speak unto it and it is deaf, they
interrogate it and it has neither Tongue nor Speech; What will thou do? It is
in vain to awaken it; For its Duskie, Moist, and Terrestrial humors have cast
it into a deadly lethargy and into a cruel stupifaction: And if at last
Remedies awake this heart, it is molested with so much noise, is it is amidst
so many passions and importunities which provoke it, and whisper into its Ears
on every side, as it is almost impossible for it to hear the voice of its own
Conscience, and the clamors of God.

It is then peradventure for this cause God promises unto men and Noah, Et ait
nequaquam ultra maledicam terrae propter bomines: sensus enim et cogitatio
cordis bumani in malum prona sunt ab adolescentia sua. Non igitur ultra
percutiam omnem animam viventem. Genesis 8. v. 20.

Cunctis diebus terrae sementis, and messis, frigus and aestus, aestas and
byems, nox and dies non requiescent. Genesis 8. v. 22.

Benedixitque Deus Nee and filits ejus. Genesis 9. v. 1.


that the Earth shall be no more accursed for their sake: He assures them that
his revenging hand shall never take the Rod so universally to scourge all
sinners: that from henceforth Winter and Summer, Cold and Heat, Day and Night,
shall have their courses, periods, motions, and vicissitudes, with order, and
by regular intervals.

Afterward he stretched forth his paternal, and most merciful arm upon Noah,
and his family, blessing his Children, and all his posterity: And it was from
this fountain of Graces, and Benedictions, men received their re-establishment
in the World, and a general Command over the Elements, and Animals, which felt
at the same time either horror, love, fear, or respect for them.

CHAP. XI. The Rainbow in the Heavens.
GOD resolving to confirm the Oath, Arcam ponam in nubibus, and erit signum
soederis inter me, and iater terram. Genesis 9. v. 13.

Cumque obduxero nubibus coelum, apparebit arcus in nubibus. Genesis 9. v. 14.

Et recordabor foederis mei vobiscam, and cum omni anima vivente, quae carnem
vegetat, and non erunt ultra aquae dilavii ad aelendam universam carnem. Genesis
9. v. 15.

Hoc ^^t signum soederis. Genesis 9 v. 17.


and Covenant he had made with Noah, was so good and gracious as to imprint the
Seal of his contract in the Clouds, to the end the malice of men might never be
able to efface it, and that on the contrary he might be obliged never to make
war against them, when he should see between him, and the World, those
illustrious caracters of Love, and those magnificent Articles of Truce, pardon,
and peace. Moreover this sign, which appeared in the heavens, was but a Bow
without Arrows; It was a resplendent Arch, and a Circle beset with Diamonds,
Emeraulds, and Rubies; It was a chain of Gold, Silver, and Pearls; It was a
Scarf interwoven with the most lively splendors and the most sensible lights of
the Sun and Day. It was the Portraict of Peace, which appeared under feigned
and imaginary colors, or to express in a word all that can be thought, and
said when we cast our Eyes on this wonder of the Air; It was the Diadem which
St. John discovered on the head of Almighty God: and which therefore was to be
for all eternity the Crown of a God, who can never change, but will
everlastingly conserve this Garland and Diadem of peace.

O God of peace, goodness, and Love! Great God, who art always loving, and
can never be loved enough! Ah! let not the World be so bold as to take up
Arms to disturb thy peace. Lord let all hearts love thee, and let them be
tributaries to thy affections. O God of Heaven! all Good, all Just, all
Powerful, power down no more Storms and Abysses on our heads. Yea my God drown
us in those amorous billows, that if the World must perish at last, let it be
in the Torrents and flames of thy holy Love.

CHAP. XII. The unhappy effects of Wine.
IT is true, that Men were never more at Peace, the Earth never more pure, and
Heaven never powered down so many favors as it shed upon the Earth and the
Children of Noah. Coepitque Noe vir agricola exercere terram and plantavit
vineam. Genesis 9. v. 20.

Bibensque vinum inebr^atus est, and nudatus in tabernaculo suo. Genesis 9. v. 21.

Quod cum vidisset Cham Pater Chanaan, verenda scilicet Patris esse nudata,
nuntiavit duobus Fratribus suis for as. Genesis 9. v. 22.


Nevertheless in the midst of Pleasure, Peace, Concord, Love, Joy, and all
sorts of Benedictions, this poor Man, whom all the Waters of the World, and of
the Deluge, could not vanquish, was drowned at last in a Glass of Wine.

O God! what scandal, what shame, what disquiet, and what disorder in the
family of Noah! This good old Man, fell cold, and stiff on the ground, and it
is not known whether he be dead or alive. His Children run presently to help
him, but as if the fume of the Wine, which their Father had taken too
inconsiderately, had dazel'd and blinded the youngest of them; Unnatural
Impudence.
instead of casting ashes, and water on the flaming Coals, which consumed his
poor Father, At vero Sem and Japheth Pallium imposuerunt humeris suis, and
incedentes retrorsum operuerunt verenda Patris sui: faciesque eorum aversae
erant, and Patris visilia non viderunt. Genesis 9. v. 23.
he made a bon fire of Mirth, and scorn about his Nakedness: and with an
unparalleld Impudence discovered to the Eyes of all his Brethren, what Nature
has concealed. His Brothers nevertheless were more respectfull, and prudent
than himself: for immediately Piety cast veyls over their Eyes, and Love, though
Blind, found out Artifices to cover an Object which was neither decent nor
lawful to behold. Ingenious respect.
It was in recompense of these chaste duties, Evigilans autem Noe ex vino, cum
didicisset quae fecerat ^i filius suus minor, ait: Maledictus Chanaan, servus
servorum erit Fratribus suis. Genesis 9. v. 24.

Dixitque: benedictus Dominus Dous Sem, sit Chanaan serv^s ej^s. Genesis 9. v. 26.


that Noah being returned out of that Abyss, into which Wine had precipitated
him, opened the Eyes of his Body, and Soul, and afterward perceiving the
unnatural Impudence of Cham, he darted forth the Thunder of his Malediction
against his Son Chanaan, beseeching likewise God to bless, and fill Sem,
Japhet, and all their Progeny, with his Graces. It was from their Posterity all
the Generations of the World are descended; Dilatat Deus. Japbet, etc. Genesis 9.
v. 27.
and they were the Persons who laid the foundation of Sodom, Ninivie, Salem,
and Gomorrha; as also of so many other famous Cities, from whence afterward
Arts, Republics, Policies, Governments, and all the Empires of the Universe
took their Rise.

CHAP. XIII. The Tower of Babel.
AT that time though Hearts were divided, Erat autem terra labii unius, and
sermonum eorundem. Genesis 11. v. 1.
and all opinions different, yet there was but one Mouth, but one Interpreter
of Souls, and one common manner of Speech. Cumque proficiscerentur de orient,
invenerunt campum in terra Sennaar, and habitaverunt in eo. Genesis 11. v. 2.
But as it is very difficult for the Tongue long to belly the Heart; So it
happened not long after that the Inhabitants of the Earth feeling the Justice of
their own Consciences which called upon that of God, and threatened them with
the coming of another Deluge, resolved to build a Tower, Et dixerunt: Venite,
sactamus nobis Turrem, cujus cusmen pertiagat ad Caelum, and celebremus nomen
antequam dividamur in universas terrae. Genesis 11. v. 4.
and raise the top of it even as high as the Clouds. The chief Undertaker of
this famous Structure was the Giant Nembrod, Granchild to that Reprobate Cham,
who discovered his Fathers shame. This Architect was of a proud Nature, and of
a Capricious humor, believing that his enterprises, and designs, were to be
executed without the least opposition.

In effect, never was any work undertaken, Descendit autem Dominus, ut videret
civitatem, and Turrim quam edificabant filii Adam. Genesis 11. v. 5.
and advanced with more Expedition, nor with more Ardor, Zeal, and Submission.
But the Grand Designer of the World, the Architect of the Universe, and the
general Producer of all things, who takes delight to confound the Wisdom of
the Wise, and to overthrow the Plots, and Enterprises of the most Powerful,
beholding these Fortifications raised near midway, and being able no longer to
endure this Audacity, and these presumptuous Attempts, resolved at last to over
turn all these Forts, Venite igitur descendamus, and confundamus ibi linguam
eoru^, ut non audiat unusquisque linguam proximi sui. Genesis 11. v. 7. Et idcirco
vocatum est nomen ejus Babel, quia ibi confusum est labium universae terrae,
and inde dispersit eos Dominus super faciem cunctarum regionum. Genesis 11. v. 9.
and to cast a general confusion of Tongues amongst the Carpenters, and
Masons. This made a Tower of Babel, that is to say of Disorder, War, and
Confusion. This stately Building, this lofty Cittadell, this impregnable Fort,
was but a Labyrinth of deaf and dumb people, who spoke without hearing one
another, and cried out when it was not in no man's power to help them.

Behold the Enterprises and Designs of the World: Behold the Structure of the
Giants of the Earth, and the Sanctuary of their Pride.

Men are wont to build, with much trouble, they raise Towers, they Flanck
Bulwarks, they strive to render themselves impregnable, or rather unaccessable
by inferior people, they have also cemented their Walls with their purest Blood,
and a thousand poor Husbands, as many Widows, and six times as many Orphans
must needs have bin swallowed up under these foundations. What comes of all
this? The Roof is not yet laid, when a Wind and Tempest rises, which must
carry them away: The sweat and tears of the Workmen, over whom they tyrannized,
are ready to make the whole Body of the Fabric to shake under sad ruins; what
ever happen, the Masters and Tyrants shall never enter into it; or if they do,
it shall be but to enclose therein the anxieties of their old age, as in a
doleful prison. Yes, those great Bulls of Brass shall be the first Furnaces of
those cruel Phalarisses; and those imaginary Theaters of their Grandeurs shall
serve but as a Scaffold on which their Glory and Honor shall be immolated.

Vanity of this World! Phantasms of the World.
glory of a few days! Phantasms of the Earth! seeming beauties! Men, what do
you think? and why I beseech you, so many Houses, so many Castles, Cities and
Villages? cast your Eyes, on the Tower of Babel, and dread at least the fate of
the like disaster. Finally then make your Wills, Ingrave your Epitaphs, seek
out six or seven Foot of Earth, and from henceforth think only on erecting
your Tombs. Go, consult your Ancestors, your Fathers, and Masters; cast your
selves at their Feet, enter into their Sepulchers, search into the bottom of
their Monuments, and be not affrighted to behold so many ravell'd Crowns, so
many broken Scepters, and so much Purple serving only to cover Worms.

Imitate those many Princes, and great Ladies, who have commanded their Coffins
to be made, when they were in perfect health, and who often descended into them
to learn, during life, what must happen after death; At least do like Philip
of Macedon, Advertisement of Philip of Macedon.
who every Day at his waking had a Page to remind him, what he was, and what he
should quickly be. Homo mortalu morti subditus.
I assure my self that these practices will suddenly alter your designs, and
that your most serious thoughts will at length rather entertain themselves on
Death, than Life, and rather on a Sepulcher, than on a Family.

The end of the first Book.
THE HOLY HISTORY, FIRST TOME. ABRAHAM and ISACK.
SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Abraham's departure out of his Territories, and his entry into the
Fields of Moreth, where he erected an Altar, and where God appeared to him the
second time.
THe Genius of Philosophers had reason to say, That the most dreadful and
difficult Trade of the World was to govern Men. In my opinion nevertheless it
is not impossible to meet with Kings capable of this Government, provided their
Crown, Scepter, and Empire exceed not the bounds, and limits of Nature, and of
a purely Politic, and Civil Life, which follows the Conduct of Men, and Laws.
And if by the Government of men, this ravishing Spirit understood the Orders,
Idea's, and designs, which are needful to guide men amidst the Accidents, and
by-ways of a Moral, Supernatural, and wholly Divine Life; I say, and maintain,
that it is not an employment proper for Men, but only the Office, and Function
of the most wise, and most holy Providence of God. It was also, as I believe,
the opinion of Aristotle's Master; Plato in pluribus locis.
for I heretofore took pleasure to remark in his most charming, and true
Idea's, that Man was in this Life, as in an Army, The mavelous State of Man.
that the Destinies were his ranks, Occasions his weapons, his Enemies all
sorts of disasters, his Confederates misfortunes, and finally for conclusion,
that he was in the World as in a Field of Battle, in which God was to him a
King, Master, Captain and Sovereign Governor. Pythagoras was then mistaken,
when he said, that God ruled not the sublunary World, to wit Men, but by the
assistance of two great Powers, which are Counsel, and Fortune, or Destiny. It
is God who governs us, it is his Hand which guides us, his Eye which conducts
us, and it is his powerful Finger which has Engraven his Laws, not in Tables
of Brass or Marble, but in the Center of Hearts, and Souls. Philo differed not
in opinion, as I imagine, when he said, that Man bears his Master within
himself, which is nothing else but an internal Light which is the Signet of
our Souls, the Spirit of our Spirits, the Life of Reason, and according to the
Hebrew Text, Vexilla super nos limen vultus tui. Text. Hebr.
a Standard sparkling with Heavenly Lights. Finally it is in the midst of these
Lights, that the Voice of the Holy Ghost, and the Word of the Word is heard,
and Imprints it self in the Soul with the most resplendent, and luminous Rays
that can enter our Spirits.

Now it was, by the Favor, The calling of Abraham.
and Splendour of these conquering Lights, and victorious Voices, that Abraham
was chosen amongst Men, as the Person who would be the most obedient, most
faithful, Cyril. lib. 3. cont. Jul. Apost. Ex medio deceptorum ereptus ad luc^
verae agnitionis Dei vocatus est.
and most conformable to the Will of God. It was says St. Cyril about the
time when Ninus held the Reigns of the Assyrian Empire, and when the World was
buried in the darkest obscurities of Infidelity, that this Angel was drawn out
of the Errors of Night to adore the Verities of the Day. It was, as one may
imagine, even according to the History of Moses, either during a most Heavenly
sleep, or in an Exstatick awaking, or finally by means of an Angel clothed
with an humane Body, that Abraham heard distinctly the Voice of God, which said
unto him,

Abraham, it is time to leave thy Country, and Kindred, and to abandon thy
Fathers House.

Follow me then, Egredere de terra tua, de cognatione tua, and de Domo Patris
tui, and veni in terram quam monstrabo tibi. Genesis 12. v. 1.
and repair unto a Land, and under a Clymat, which I will show thee; every
where I will be thy Star, thy Pole, and my Eye shall serve as Guide, and Torch
to conduct thee to the Haven and Landing-place.

Well then Abraham, get thee out of thine own Country, leave all thy Friends,
and break those many ties, which Blood has woven in thy Veins and Heart. The
Milk thou have sucked is from henceforth no other than poison, the Nourishment
thou have received from thy Parents does but sustain thy Body, and stifle thy
Soul: In fine the Light and Brightness of Heaven cannot be seen amidst the
Shades and Smoke of thy Country.

But what! must poor Abraham leave himself? O my God! why do thou oblige him
to forsake his beloved Chaldea, and why would thou have him separate himself
from his Kindred and Friends? He is in a flourishing City, and thou perchance
wilt lead him into some solitary place or desert. He lives in Glory and Honor,
and possibly thou intendest to reduce him into a state of Scorn, and Contempt.
He wants nothing at Home, and it may come to pass, that every thing will fayl
him amongst Strangers.

These motives are too weak to break the Desires, and Designs of a Soul which
God courteth. It is a delicious thing to leave the streams for their source,
and to forsake our selves to give our selves unto our Maker. The World and
Chaldea are but a point in comparison of the Firmament, and all the Elements in
respect of the Impyreall Heavens, are but a heap of vapors, and a Globe of
exhalations. To this I add, that the most peopled Cities, and Provinces, are
frightfull Dens, liveless Bodies, and most solitary Deserts, if God be not
there; and on the contrary, the most dreadful Solitudes, and least inhabited
Grots become Courts and Palaces, as soon as God and his Spirit reside therein.
Finally all Reposes are Disquiet, all Peace is but War, all Honors are
Contempts, Parents are Traitors, Brothers Envious, Friends Deceivers, Houses
and Beds Sepulchers, and Life is but a Death, or at best, but a long, and
dolorous sickness, unless God be the Loadstone of our Hearts, the highest pitch
of our Glory, and the Center of all our affections: for he shall then be our
Father, our Brother, and our Friend, and in his bosom we shall find our
Country, Parents, pleasures and delights without bitterness, and without any
mixture of those passions, which are still armed to besiege our Hearts.

Abraham understood all these verities from the very morning of his vocation;
and at the first overture of the favors which God imparted to him, he took a
Staff in his Hand, and became a Pilgrim in the World, sufficiently discovering,
that the life of Man is but a Pilgrimage, and that a Man shall first, or last,
reach the Port. It was nevertheless hard for him, as I believe, to take his
Wife for a Companion in his voyages, to adopt his Nephew for his Son, and to
bring away all his Goods, and Baggage, before his Kindred could have notice of
it. Then God knows what Noise, what Tumult, what Astonishment in the whole
Family, and amongst his Allies: God knows whether Friends appeared
troublesome, and whether the most indifferent strove in this case to express
their passion. Let every one represent unto himself what may befall him, and
what is wont to surprise all those that depart out their Country, and are
obliged to forsake their Friends; They imagine that even Iron, stones, trees,
and beasts, look upon them with the Eyes of Compassion, and that what ever has
least of animation assumes Voices, and Tongues to testify their regret, and bid
them adieu. A poor Soul has then very sensible convulsions, and amidst so
violent, and sweet assaults, it is almost impossible to remain a Conqueror.

It is in vain to advertise him, that it is God who speaks unto him, that it is
an Inspiration from Heaven which presses him, and that they are the Graces of
Paradise which will triumph over Nature, and Hell.

Notwithstanding these thoughts, and inspirations, the Sun does not rise, but
to present unto him a thousand Portraictures of those whom he has left behind.
The Moon, and Stars, show him by Night, and in sleep, nothing but the Images
of those whom he has abandoned, and he awakes a Thousand times with sighs
from his Heart, and tears in his Eyes, to embrace the Shadows, and Phantasmes
of his dearest Friends. This is that at last which makes him often renounce his
good purposes, and take truths for Illusious, and Darkness for rays of light.
Alas what Shame, and Cowardice! This poor man is not gone a Musket Shot from
the City, and scarce has lost the sight of his steeple, but he presently
reassumes his former ways, and returns with an intent to build his Tower, or
rather his Tomb, on his Chimney's Harth.

Abraham was far more courageous, and the rays which God darted into his heart
made not only more lively, but more constant Impressions therein. For
immediately he begins his journey, he goes on without prefixing any Limit to
himself, he obeyes a single voice, and follows a guide, who having once
spoken, disappeares.

Let any one stay him that will, his heart cease not continually to fly, his
spirit sees an object which is invisible, and leaving what he has, he is
assured to find what is promised him.

Is not this a strange resolution, and will not these generosities be thought
too blind in a worldly mind? No truly, these thoughts will never fall into a
Soul, which knows the force and power of a vocation wholly divine, such as was
that of this incomparable Man, Faciam te in gentem magnam, and benedicam tibi,
and magnificabo nomen tuum, eri^que benedictus. Genesis 12. v. 2.
chosen to be the father of Nations, and in whose person God blessed all people
and generations.

Well then: are not the first effects of this vocation great Prodigyes? It is
peradventure for this reason Gregory Nazianzen terms the vocation of holy
Souls, a grace, S. Greg. Naz. orat. 3. ac orat. 20, and orat. 25. (...).
Zozomenus. lib. 2. c. 16. (...)
which has nothing Common in Nature, and this is that which induced Zozemenus
to call it a Convicing Revelation, and whose lightning is like a Thunderbolt
which carries away all that stands before it.

Whatever it be, the vocation of Abraham was a stroke from Heaven, and one of
the fairest conquests God has ever made over hearts.

March then Abraham: Carry with thee that happy Sara, who makes up the moity of
thy self; and till God shall please to give thee Children, let Lot be the Son
and be thou a Father to him.

Farewell then for ever dear Land of Chaldea; And you Lot, Abraham, and Sara go
joyfully unto Canaan.

They are already gone, Pertransivit Abraham terram usque ad locum Sichem, usque
ad vallem illustrem. Genesis 12. v. 6.
and I see them departing out of the Territories of Sichem to advance directly
unto the plains of Moreth. It was in this famous plain, and in this
delightful valley, which divides the Mountains of Gelboa from that of Hermon,
Borcardus. 1. Paral. c. 7.

Aparuit autem Dominus Abram, and dixit ei: semini tuo dabo terram hanc. Genesis
12. v. 7


where the more languishing, and less rapid waves of Jordan are seen. There
God a second time appeared to Abraham, and there also he gave him both the
promise, and possession of the land of Canaan for himself and his posterity.
Admirable magnificence.


Is not this a most admirable draught of Gods sage prodigallity and illustrious
Magnificence, who in exchange of a foot of ground gives entire worlds? He will
have the Heart, and for the heart he gives Himself, and in him the Creator of
souls, and the Soul of all hearts. Alas! what is a corner of the Earth compared
with the Land of promise? what is a country and City in respect of the
firmament? And where shall we find brethren, kindred or friends without
pretension, interest, or any suspicion of deceit, as are found in Heaven?

Ah! I no longer wonder that so many Kings and Queens, so many great Lords and
Ladies, have followed the happy, and blessed steps of Abraham to enter into the
territories of the earthly Paradise, and of Religion. I remain no longer amazed
to see so many young gentlemen, brave, rich, courageous, and learned; So many
tender, fair, and wealthy virgins who often in the sight of Royal Palaces, and
Courts, make a most sweet, most holy, and most honorable retreit into
Cloisters, to see them place their honor, all their delights and riches in a
most amiable and delicious prison. Good God! How peaceable are these divorces,
how free are these Captivities, and how holy are these resolutions? If God give
the whole for a part, Worlds for one kingdom, the Heavens for one Country, and
a hundredfold for one; who will be astonished to see a Theodosius, Zeno: tom. 3.
an Anastasius and a Michael quitting the Empire of Greece to enclose
themselves in a Monastery? Who will wonder to see a Charlemain, Son to Charles
Martell, who abandoned all the hopes he had in France to live out of the road
of the world, and the Court, on Mount Soractes? and what great wonder is it to
see in the Kingdoms of Spain, a Veremond King of Castile, and a Remirus King
of Aragon, following the happy steps of a like conduct? Surely I see nothing
which is too admirable, when for the same cause Sigebertus left his England,
Charles his Germany, and so many others, who have forsaken their most vast, and
most glorious Monarchies. It was little considerable for Radegond and Baltildus
to despise France, though it were one of the Largest, most Noble, and most
August Kingdoms under Heaven. It was then yet less considerable for all those,
who have followed their steps and examples: for doing what Sara and Abraham
did, they could not doubt but God would guide them out of their Empires into a
Land of plenty, where Crowns and Scepters are the Arms of an Eternal
possession.

It remains then for all those, Qui aedificavit ibi Altarem Domino qui
aparuerat ei. Genesis 12.
whom he has taken by the hand, as he did Abraham, and led them over the Banks
of Jordan, and through the shades of Hermon, to build there an Altar on which
they might offer Sacrifices of Love, and Acknowledgments, as Abraham did.

CHAP. II. The Voyages of Abraham and Sara into the Land of Egypt.
SAint Thomas has excellently well noted, D. Th. c. 26. etc. 28. 1 in
aggrediendo. 2 in sustinendo.
that courage is a force of Spirit, always bold, always constant, and which
is found not only amongst assaults, onsets and sieges, but it delights also, to
sustain a long time the violences which present and oppose themselves to it is
desires. It is not then a perfect Act, of Courage, and Force, to undertake some
voyage, and to put our selves on our way; But we must advance even unto the End
we propose to our selves. And whether it Hails, whether it Rains, whether it
Blows, or whether it be fair Weather, we must still have, as a brave Pilgrim
said, our track and way marked out not on Sand, and Earth, but in the Heavens;
that is to say above the Sun, and Stars, which have always regular motions,
and pass through the midst of Monsters without either stop or seeming
astonished. It was, as I believe, on this pleasing Mirror, and on this Card of
the most constant designs, and of the most assured voyages, or rather on God
himself, that Abraham leaving his own Country instantly cast up his eyes, well
resolved to follow him every where, who served him for a Master, a Conductor, a
Sanctuary and Country. He left then the plains and valleys, to ascend the
Mountains, as still desirous always to make new progresses, and to advance
without any intermission.

It is he then whom I see spreading his Pavillions on the top of a Mountain, Et
inde transgrediens ad montem, qui erat contra orientem Bethel, tetendit ibi
tabernacutum suum, aedificav^t quoque Altar Domino, and invocavit nomini ejus.
Genesis 12. v. 8
and erecting an Altar to invoke the name, and assistance of God his Conductor.

Listen a while, and hear from his mouth the thoughts of his Soul.

Great God! I have forsaken all for thee, and at the first command I received,
I obeyed the voice of thy most amiable providence; A farewell to the World.
at length behold me here out of my Country, far from my own Possessions, and
severed from my friends: I am ignorant, where I am; but I only know, that I am
with thee. It suffices me, O my God, all my desires are pleased, and my Soul
is fully satisfied. Farewell all my kindred, farewell my friends, farewell my
Country. O my God! me thinks at every step I make, I conquer a Kingdom, all my
guests are Kindred, the little Hills are my Dungeons, the Fields my Cities, and
all that the day discovers to me of Earth, of Rivers, of Air, and of Seas, is
my Country, my House, and my place of entertainment. O God! how Magnificent are
thy bounties, and how delightful it is to follow, and serve so sweet a Master
as thy self? Ah! let my Mouth, and Tongue bless thee, and let them not from
henceforth serve but to invoke thy holy name. In fine, I will not only ingrave
these thoughts upon this Altar: But to the end I may publish them through all
the Countries whither the Sun carrys his light; I make my self the Companion of
this Story, Perrexitqu^ vadens, and ultra progrediens ad Meridiem. Genesis 12. v.
9.
and without further delay I leave the East to advance unto the South.

It often happens that God makes use even of the least sensible, and most
inanimate Creatures to impart his graces unto his Elect. Sometimes he enters
into the Heart with the break of Day. His Lights, and Clarities often mingle
themselves with the Night, and when the Sun sets to give rest unto the Body he
causes a miraculous Morning to arise, which awakens the Soul: Now I no ways
doubt, but our Pilgrim in his journyes toward the South feels also more
resplendent ardors, and more infired lightnings, which inflamed him with more
violent, more zealous, and more lively desires and designs.

Mean while a general famine came over all the Land of Canaan; Facta est autem
sames in terra, descenditque Abram in Aegyptum, ut peregrinaretur ibi
praevaluerat enim fames in terra. Genesis 12. v. 10.

Cumque prope esset ut ingrediretur Aegyptum, dixit Sarae Uxori suae: novi quod
pulcrasis Muli^r. Genesis 12. v: 11.

Et cum viderint te Aegyptii, dicturi sunt: Uxor illius est, and interficient
me and te reservabant. Genesis 12. v. 12.

Dic ergo, obsecro te, quod soror mea sis: ut been sit mihi propter te, and
vivat anima mea, ob gratiam tui. Genesis 12. v. 13.

Cum itaque ingressus esset Abram Aegyptum, vider^nt Aegyptii Mulierem quod
esset pulcra nimis. Genesis 12. v. 14.


in so much as our happy Traveller is enforced to take a farther journey, and
to descend into Egypt: where flying from the sithe, and weapons of that
merciless thing, which always takes his enemies by the throat, he falls into
the hands of an other no less cruel Monster, who commonly steals in by the
eyes to surprise and suffocate Hearts.

This man wholly inlightn'd by God, and who carried in the bosom of his
faithful moity, the purest, and most holy flames of his Love, beheld a far off
the smoke of a most dangerous fire, and fearing least his dear Sara should be
there either by mishap or force surprised, he thought it fit to say unto her.

Wife, we are here on the Confines of Egypt: but yet I am afraid, lest these
souls a thousand times more black than their bodies, lay not some blemish on
thy chastity. I fear lest these Ravens of Egypt should power down on the beauty
of thy Face, and make it serve as a prey to their most infamous Loves, and
afterward my life as a victim to their sensuality. Tell them then I pray thee,
that thou art my Sister, and that I am thy Brother, to the end I may escape by
this amiable Stratagem.

All these forecasts were not grounded on a vain fear, Et nuntiaverunt
principes Pharaoni, and laudave^unt eam apud illam, and sublata est Mulier in
domum Pharaonis. Genesis 12. v. 15.
and some erroneous Judgment: for scarce were these two Doves of Chaldea, these
two Turtles, and these two chaste Lovers entered into Egypt; but instantly the
Princes of Pharaoh, who were the Ministers of his impurities, carried away the
chaste Sara, and brought her to Court; which was a Seraglio of luxury and
lubricity. Mean while what can a chaste, and courageous Husband say, or think,
who sees before his eyes the rape of his Wife. Unfortunate Abraham what will thou do? are these the Promises which God so often made thee of filling thee
with all his favors and benedictions? Ah what can the loss of a Wife make a
Man a Father of all People, and Nations? and is this the recompense of that
Faith, Obedience, and Piety, which seemed not to raise up thy Body from the
Earth, but to Elevate it to the Heavens? Behold War on the one side thundering
against thee; and on the other side Famine pursuing thee, and Egypt which has
ravished from thee all the honors, pleasures, and purest entertainments of
life.

From whence then spring all these misfortunes? Most just apprehensions for
Worldly Men.
Is it perchance because thou have too suddenly left the way which God had
marked out to conduct thee between the arms of a most loving Providence, which
was able to nourish thee in the midst of deserts and famine? It is peradventure
because thy vows, and Sacrifices, were not perfect; Or else art thou not
charged with the spoils of thy Family, by the excess of an ill regulated Love?
Or finally have thou not proposed to thy self for the end of thy travel the
hopes of some gain, or trafick? Or else that which is apparently more
honorable, has not the curiosity of seeing, and knowing, what is done
elsewhere, snatched thee out of Caldea to hurry thee into unknown Countries?

I confess, that commonly these are the Western Winds, which swell the sayls of
those who travel either on Land or Sea.

But certainly as for Abraham nothing less than such designs: Why then will you
tell me, that it is God who afflicts him, and wherefore is that, which he does
for his sake, so rudely, and furiously crossed?

Ah! my friend whoever thou art, who ask this question, take not ill what I
say unto thee, that thou art a stranger, and Pilgrim in the Land of God, and in
the ways of virtue. In a word, Trial of Constancy
thou know not the secrets of a Conduct wholly Divine, which is accustomed
to employ all the instruments of mis-hap, and all the disgraces of fortune, to
erect trophies unto its dearest friends: often war, plague and famine,
maladies, affronts, falls, exiles, and all that is most dreadful in Nature,
take up arms to assault the life of one predestined person; but afterward
Comets transform themselves into Rainbows, Famine changes its sith into the
horn of abundance, affronts become honors, misfortunes become favors, Fine
Metamorphoses.
banishments palaces, and all the moments of Days and Nights will render
themselves celebrious by some new benefit in favor of these happy infortunates.

Courage then Abraham, and no ways doubt, but the fidelity which Sara has
vowed unto thee will be proportionable to that thou rendrest unto God. As for
Pharaoh his Hands are bound, his Eyes blind-folded, and his Heart so full of
bitterness, and grief, as at present he cannot attend to the research of
remedies, and of his own liberty. Lay aside now all thy fears, and thou also
Sara: for thy Heart is a Sanctuary of Peace, and a Temple of Love, of which God
alone, Flagellavit autem Dominus Pharaonem plagis maximis, and domum ejus
propter Sarai Vaorem Abram. Genesis 12. v. 17.
and Abraham keep the Keys: Besides, these clamours thou hear, and which
resound every where, are but the forerunners of thy liberty, and the witnesses
of the vengeance God has already taken of Pharach, and likewise of all the
Princes of his Court.

In effect this great God, Vocavitque Pharao, Abram, and dixit ei: Quidnam est
quod fecisti mihi? nunc igitur ecce conjux tua, accipe eam, and vade. Genesis 12.
v. 19.
who is jealous of the glory of his, sent such harsh scourges to Pharaoh, and
all those who had bin his accomplices, as scarcely had this unhappy Prince the
means to see the Face of Sara. This disastrous Court is no longer but a Dungeon
of Darkness, a Galley of Slaves, and a large Hospital of despairing Franticks.
Every where Violated Chastity, the Rights of Marriage, and Hospitality, dart
forth Thunderbolts; The Court of Pharaoh.
And from the poisoned shafts nothing but lamentable voices, and bitter plaints
are heard, which correspond with the strokes of a most holy and just severity.

Ah God! if these salutiferous cries could be carried upon the wings of the
Winds from one Pole to the other, to advertise so many Egyptians, who are
either in the Dust of the World, or breath the air of the Court. Cry out then
Pharaoh, cry out, and awake so many sleepy Souls, which lie in soft Downy Beds,
as Coals under Ashes to entertain the ardor of their impurity.

Do you see these lascivious men, and these ravinous Wolves, who are in quest
of their Golden fleece, and seek out Flesh, and Blood, to satiate the rage of
their brutality. For this they engage their Servants, and Handmaids they
subborn confidents, they lay ambushes every where, and either, soon, or late,
some chaste Sara must be taken away.

But at the same time, Luxuria dulce venen^m, pernic^osa potio humanum corpus
deb^ita^, and v^^l^s animi robur ^nervat. Hugo a S. Vict. lib. 4. inst. Monast.
let. l.
says Hugo Victorensis, the poison of their infamous Mouths cast forth into
the Bosom of Virginity, reascends into its Source and steals almost insensibly
into the Veins of a Body, which immediately becomes corrupted; from whence
arises, that the Heart it self is presently infected, and it is from this
Plague of Souls, and this Canker of Bodies, so many fatal blindnesses, so many
blind furies, and so many furious errors do afterward Spring, which cause in
the Body an Abyss of Maladies, and in the Soul a Maze or Labyrinth of reason.
These burning coals, and these flames, says Justinian, which beget such sad
fires in the body, and fill souls with so black, Ignis internalis est luxuria
cujus materies gula, cujus flamma superbia, cujus sintillae prava colloquia,
cujus fumus infamia, cujus cinis inopia, cujus finis gebenna. Laur. Just. c. 3.
de sop. in lig. vitae.
and thick a smoke, rise from the fire of hell. It is this fire to which good
cheer serves for Nourishment; It is this fire which Pride, and Presumption
inflame and inkindle on all sides; It is this fire whose sparkles are
Lascivious provocations, its smoke is but a most dishonorable Fame, its ashes
are Miseries, and Calamities, and in fine, it is only in the Hells of this
World where this intestine fire is found.

Let us judge then after this of the Greatness of Evil by the excess of
Punishment, and if some one have a mind to die the most detestable death in
Nature, let him lead the most enormous, and execrable life which can be in the
sight of Heaven.

But let us return to Pharao, who was constrained to stifle his unlawful Loves
in the Ocean of his miseries, and who at last restored to Abraham the flower,
which had bin cruelly wrested from him.

CHAP. III. The Agreement of Abraham and Lot upon the Controversy between their
Shepherds.
PEace and Purity are two sisters, which have no other Father or Origin but
Love, and the Spirit of God, which cannot breath but in a calm and in
cleanness, there is its native Air, Element, Temple, and the usual place of
its residence; And it is peradventure for this reason Solomon was accustomed to
adorn the gates of his Temple with Lillies, and Olive-branches, Inseparable
companions.
desiring thereby to inform us, that none are to enter there, but by the doors
of Peace, and under the shade of the Olive-branches, which are marks and
symboles of Peace and Purity.

This being so, I wonder not that Abraham, who was animated with the Spirit of
God, and endued with no other than the purest passions, did express so much
love, and inclination to Concord and Peace.

He seemed Nevertheless to have some cause to commence a suit, Unde et facta
est rixa inter pastores gregum Abram, and Loath. Genesis 13. v. 7.
to wage war against Lot for the preservation of his rights, and authority,
which might receive some prejudice by the strife, which arose between his
servants, and those of Lot, their design being to become Masters, contrary to
Justice, and Reason. Which Abraham seeing, to prevent all the disorders which
might ensue on this first design, he says unto Lot,

Nephew I pr'y thee remember, Dixit Abram ad Loath: ne quaeso sit jurgium inter
me and te, and past^res meos, and pastores tuos, fratres enim sumus. Genesis 13.
v. 8.
that hitherto I have not treated thee as an Uncle, but rather as a Brother;
what a scandal would it be, if we should begin to live together either like
strangers, or else as Enemies? I had rather lose all the goods of the world,
than that of thy friendship: But I see clearly that these Shepherds, Ecce
universa terra coram te est, recede a me obsecro, si ad sinistram eris, ego
dexteram tenebo, si tu dexteram elegeris, ego ad sinistram ibo. Genesis 13. v. 9.
and mercenary friends, are the persons who endeavor to engage our passions
with their interests: It would then be more prudently done to sever our flocks,
than to disunite our Minds, and therefore dear Nephew take what you please. If
thou go to the right hand, I will take the left: and if the left, I will
pass to the right.

Well then, is not this to love peace, and to purchase at his own expense so
precious a treasure? Is not this to be magnificent, and can any one seek an
accord with more Prodigality? Interessed Souls.
Where are then these little hearts, and these narrow Souls, which are still
buried amidst their own interests? Where are these worldly People whose Eyes
may sooner be turned out of their heads, than moneys out of their hands? Where
are all these Pertifoggers, and these Lawiers, who are always for delatory
futes, and place all their hopes on a forged will, or a false contract? They
are like Moles, which have always their Noses in the Earth, and incessantly
enlarge their holes and graves. What shame is it for a man of courage to be
still fighting on a flight occasion, and to contest upon the point of a Needle
who shall carry it? Alas! where are the Abraham's, where are the brothers,
kindred, and friends, who shall say one to the other, for Gods sake let us live
peaceably, rather let us dye a thousand times, than wage war for those goods
which either soon or late we must leave?

My God! These are generous, The Golden Age
and heroic thoughts; To hear them, I conceive my self to be in those golden
Ages when men carried their hearts on their lips, Crowns of Olive-branches on
their heads, horns of plenty in their hands, their eyes in each part of their
body, and the Chains of a holy friendship as bracelets and collers of Gold;
Finally where the goods of the earth were trodden under foot as common to all
men. And this caused that plenty of all things was carried every where upon a
Triumphant Chariot, casting Gold, and Silver to all, that would but take the
pains to gather it. God himself governed the Reigns of this fortunate
Chariot, and as if he had a purpose to make every man a Monarch of the
universe, he said the very same to them as to Abraham, when the love of
Concord, and Peace, had severed him from Lot.

My friend Abraham, lift up thy Eyes, Dixitque Dominus ad Abram, le^a oculos
tuos, and vide a loco in quo nunc es ad aquil^nem, and m^ridiem, ad orientem,
and occidentem. Genesis 13. v. 24.

Omnem terram quam ^^spicis tibi dabo, and semini tuo usque in semp ternum,
faciamque s^men tuum sicut pulverem terrae. Genesis 13. v. 25.


and turn thy self on all sides from East to West, from North to South: These
immense spaces, which thou beholdest, shall be under thy Empire, and afterward
at the end of thy life, thou shall leave them for an inheritance unto thy
posterity, which shall be numerous, which shall equal the sands of the Earth:
Rise then Abraham and begin again thy journies, and ways, over the whole
extent of the Earth; for this is the reward I intend to give thee.

Well then; Surge ergo, and perambula terram in longitudine sua, quia tibi
datu^us sum eam. Genesis 13. v. 17.
Is not this a most powerful motive to Love Peace, and to bestow all that one
has to acquire a Good which draws with it all sorts of blessings and
felicities. For my part, I believe, that Gregory the XIII. had learnt by
example the happy advantages of this verity; for having Commanded a Picture of
Peace and Justice to be drawn, he caused a Vessel full of Flowers, and Fruits
to be added, Typot. lib. 1. Symb. Justitia pacem, copiam pax attulit.
with this Motto, Justice has given us Peace, and Peace has bestowed on us
Goods in abundance.

Abraham might have justly taken the same Arms, and the like Inscription. I
represent also to my self, that such as seek Peace, and Tranquillity, may all
say, and do like Abraham. Let us conclude, that we must often give way unto
their Interests to become Masters of Hearts, Goods, and Possessions: that it is
a most sweet and profitable art to lose a little for the gaining of Peace,
which is wont to bring with it all that can be desired.

CHAP. IV. The Victories of Abraham, and the assurances God gave him of a most
flourishing Posterity.
THe desires, A Warlike Tranquillity.
and inclinations, which we may have for Tranquillity ought not to destroy
force of Courage, which, as a Philosopher heretofore said, are the Arms of the
Soul, and as it were the Wings of the Body. There are nevertheless
faint-hearted Men and Effeminate Spirits, to whom the name of Peace is not
venerable, by reason the bare noise of the justest combats uses to put them
into a Fever. They are like that Coward of Athens, who died hearing a Trumpet,
which was sounded at the beginning of an assault, or rather that heartless
Sybarite, who seeing a Dart but in Picture made a vow never to use a Sword, or
Dagger, never to come into the Field, were it but to mow Grass.

This is not to have a pacifique Spirit, A shameful Pusillanimity.
and inclinations unto Meekness, and Peace, but rather to bear under a humane
Body the Soul of a tender Chick; or at least such people resemble those
Indians, who tremble at the sight of their own shadows, and from whom, if one
should take away their Hands when they are obliged to Eat or Drink, one would
judge them to be Statues and feathered specters, which tremble at the least
breath of Air.

There is then an other Spirit of Peace, which delights in Tranquillity, and
knows not what it is to seek occasions of War, and pretenses of dissension; But
where once Right, Piety, Alliances, or violated Justice put Arms into their
Hands, at the same instant this vapor which was hidden in the Clouds, and
framed Veils against the violences of the Sun, begins to convert it self into a
Mass of flaming Coals, which set fire on the Heavens, and puts the Earth into a
dreadful fright.

Behold here the Image of a generous courage of a pacifique Soul, and of a most
valorons Heart; every where it setleth Peace, every where it accords
differences, and never refuses any Treaty of Union: But where it is provoked,
and that there is need of preserving its own Rights, or revenging the injury
done unto Allies, you instantly see it in the Head of an Army: It orders
Troops; It is in the fight, at the charge, at the spoil, at the chase, and in
action; briefly it is all Heart, and its Body seems to be changed into Arms,
and Hands, to defend its Life, its Right and Honor.

But who would have believed, that Abraham's humor, and courage, had been of
this temper, when he was only seen to take Lot by the Hand, and say unto him,
that all his goods belonged unto him, and that to avoid War he gave the World
for a Field of Peace, and for an assured testimony, that he preferred a quiet
Life before all pretensions whatsoever.

Nevertheless when News was brought him, Talerunt amnem sulistantiam Sodomorum
and Gomorrhae, etc. Genesis 14 v. 11.

Nec non and Lot, and substantiam ejus, etc. Genesis 14. v. 12.

Et ecce unus qui evaserat nuntiavit Abram Hebraeo, etc. Genesis 14. v. 13.

Quod cum audisset Abram, captum videlicet Lot Fratrem suum, number ravit
expeditos vernaculos su(...) december and o^to: Et persecutus est eos usque Dan.
Genesis 14. v. 14.

Percussitque eos, etc. Genesis 14. v. 15.

Redaxi^que omnem substantiam, and Loath Fratrem suum, etc. Genesis 14. v. 16.

At vern Melchisedech Rex Salem, proferens panem and vinum: E rat enim Sacerdos
Al^ssimi. Genesis 14. v. 18.

E^^edixitque ei, and cat: B^nedictus Deus excelso, etc. Genesis 14. v. 19

Et dedit ei d^cimas exomnibus. Gen 14. v. 20.

(...) essus est and Rex So^omerum in occursum ejus. Genesis 14. v. 17.


that the King of Sennay, the King of the Elamites, the King of Pontus, and he
that was commonly called the King of Nations, were become Masters of the Field,
and of the Sodomites Country, (who were his confederates,) and that even after
the taking of Sodom, poor Lot, who fell into their Hands, was lead by their
Command into a sad Captivity; At the very same instant this peaceable
Traveller, instead of a Staff, took Arms into his Hands, and having selected
three hundred and eighteen of his bravest Servants, he went forraging the
Country, and so courageously pursued his Enemies, that afterward being come to
the confines of Judea near the Fountains of Jordan, and finding them still
wholly puffed up with the success of their victories, and laden with their
booty, he set upon them with so great courage, and dexterity, as at last he put
them to a shameful rout, and gave them so general a defeat, that he brought
back both Lot, and all his Goods, with the remainder of the spoils of all the
Assyrians, who were all either dead or put to flight.

After this defeat Melchisedeck, who was King of Salem, and also high Priest of
the most high, offered Bread, and Wine, as a thanksgiving for the victories he
had gained: Afterward he gave his benediction to Abraham, who also presented
him with the tenths of his spoils and of his whole booty.

The King of the Sodomites sailed not to render his duties unto the Conqueror;
for he presently made have to Abraham, who treated him as a King, and as one of
his Allies.

CHAP. V. The Assurances God gave unto Abraham of a most flourishing Posterity.
A Midst all these successes and congratulations Abraham who had settled Peace
in Judea and in the Neighboring Territories, felt his Heart to have some
desire of making War against him, and, as if fear and distrust had been willing
to banish Faith from his Soul, he began already to complain, or at least to
present some request unto God, saying,

Ah my Lord! where is this so flourishing Progeny? where is this so numerous
posterity? and where are these Children thou have promised me? Can it possibly
happen, that a Stranger and a Servant should be the support of my House, and
the Inheritor of all my Fortunes? I see my self encompassed with Enemies: I
feel my self burdened with old age, and there is as it were no longer any
probability I should ever hope for Children.

I very much doubt whether Abraham had ever an intention to complain. However
he was somewhat afraid, and God to deliver him out of his fear said unto him in
most express terms, Abraham fear nothing, Noli timere Abram; Ego protector tuus
sum, and merces tua magna nimts. Genesis 15. v. 1.

Dixitque Abram: Domine Deus, quid dabis mihi. Genesis 15. v. 2.


for I have promised to keep thee always in my protection and to be for ever
the recompense of thy Faith and hopes.

But yet Lord! says Abraham, what is that thou will give me? for a long time,
is already spun out since I have been in expectation, and I have not the
possession of any other Goods, than those I could hope for from your bounty.
Certainly the Privacies of a Holy Soul are in high esteem with God; was there
ever any thing more free, more open, and Genuine, than the Heart of Abraham?
What Favorite of the Kings of this World would be so confident as to say unto
his Master, what this Good Old Man said unto God? Nevertheless God was pleased
with this Liberty; And as if he meant to increase so amiable a freedom by new
assurances of his Power and Will;

He made Abraham come out of his Pavillion, Eduxit illum for as, and dixit illi:
suspice Caelum and numera stellus si potes. Et dixit ei sic erit semen tuum.
Genesis 15. v. 5.

Non erit hic haeres tuus: sed qui egredietur de utero tuo, ipsum habebis
haeredem. Genesis 15. v. 4.

Igitur Sara Uxor A^^aham, etc. Genesis 15. v. 6.

Dixit marito suo: cece conclusit me Dominus, ne parerem; ingredere ad ancillam
meam, si sort saltem ex illa suscipiam filios. Genesis 16. v. 2.


and then not satisfied with having promised him a Posterity numerous as the
Sands of the Sea, He showed him the Heavens, with promise that the number of
his Children should equal the Planets and Stars of the Firmament. Adding to
him afterward, that suddenly he should have a Son by his dear Sara, who
should be the Heir of his possessions, and the ornament of his Family.

Notwithstanding all these Assurances and promises Sara who felt her self
Barren permitted her Husband what the Law and Custom of that time allowed; And
much more, for this Chaste Wife humbly entreated, that Agar though a Servant,
might share with her in his Bed and affections; but as it commonly happens that
Honors trample on the Right and Duties of Nature, Agar was no sooner become a
Mother, but she would be at the same time also a Mistress.

It is a very strange spectacle to behold the insolences of Fortune. There is
nothing so insupportable as a proud poor Man, as a Servant who is become
Master, and, as a beggarly Woman who has the Keys of a good House. These
Monsters of Mankind resemble those Exhalations, Humane Monsters.
which after they are raised from the Dunghils of the Earth, take the shape of
the Sun, or of a Comet, whose aspect is terrible and dreadful to all
beholders. They are also like those little Streams about four or five Feet in
breath, which run Serpentizing about Cities, and sometimes commit so many
spoils in one hour as the Sea would not do in a hundred years.

But as the Sun with two or three Days of heat drys up these Torrents; so God
in the twinkling of an Eye humbles the Pride of all the insolent, and there is
nothing so detestable in his sight as a Proud Man, who was Born in Misery and
Poverty, unless those blind furies chance to relent either through due
consideration, or some cross fortune, which invites God to resume his Eyes of
Compassion to behold their Disaster.

So Agar having been disgracefully driven out of Abraham's and Sara's House,
when her wandering heart had leisure to entertain more humble and mild thoughts;
God who has fatherly tendernesses for those who place their whole strength and
Consolation in Meekness and Humility, immediately sent an Angel to her, who
promised her a favorable return; and besides, gave her assurances that shortly
she should have a Son, who should be called Jsmael: in effect, she conceived,
and was delivered, as the Angel had said, Abraham being no less than fourscore
and six years old or near upon.

CHAP. VI. The Continuation of the favors which God conferred on Abraham.
THE Love which God bears to all Creatures is a rare Artist, it is always
active, Love never idle
always ardent, and never seen idle; It is a fire which is continually seeking
new aliment; It is a torrent which never stops; it is a lightning which cannot
long remain enclosed within a Cloud, and a Planet which knows not what repose
or retirement means. Painters for this reason gave it wings, and in pictures
it is for the most part ever seen with one foot in the air.

We must not then wonder, if the heart of Abraham being replenished with this
Love, God commanded him to March, and still to advance.

But what! was it not sufficient to have even run for the space of Ninty and
Nine years, and been in a Continual journey during the whole course of his
life? was it not time to make a halt, when he saw himself near the shore, and
that his life was arrived almost in the Haven?

It imports not (says God unto him) it is I that speak, Apparuit ei Dominus,
dixitque ad eum: Ego dominus omnipotens, ambula coram me, and esto perfictus.
Genesis 17. v. 1.
and thou must obey: On then Abraham, pass farther, I will be a Spectator of
thy Voyages, and of the Progresses thou shall make in the way of perfection.

Alas! if all Men had this lesson deeply engraven in their Souls, and if all
such as make Profession of following God were resolved never to make a stop
upon the Earth, until they were arrived at the proposed end; What Progress
would be seen in Virtues, what advances in the way of Paradise, and of Glory?
Moreover, if we had often this thought, that Gods Eyes are fixed on all the
Motions of the Body and Soul, should we find so many Cowardly, Idle, and Lazy
Persons standing with their Arms across, and whose Reason is buried in a
shameful Brutality?

Is it vain then God Commands us to go always ascending, Equality sometimes
very dangereus.
from one degree to another, and not to do like those stinking Waters which
stop in the Mire? But sometimes to little purpose does he show himself, and
make himself felt by the effects of his Holy presence; no Body sees him, and
none but an Abraham has Eyes to know him, and Feet to follow him every where.

It is likewise with him he makes an atonement, and it is in his Person he
establishes the King of Men, and the Father of all believers. Moreover as it
is the Custom to impose on things a name Conformable to their Nature, and as it
appertains only to the Elect, and such as are predstinated, to have Names which
must be registered in the Book of Life, and which neither times nor seasons will
ever efface; so God changed his name, which till then was Abram, adding to it
one Divine Letter, and one of those Sacred Ciphers of which Men use to express
the ineffable Name of God, a very evident Sign that he was one day to take (as
the Apostle says) his Origin and temporal Birth from Abraham. Hieronymus in
trad. Heb. in Genesim Lipomanus ad Heb. 2. (...)
I add to these Conceptions of St. Jerome, that Names (as the most faithful
Disciples of Plato believed) being the Chariots of Nature and of Essences, It
was necessary that Abraham, who was the Father of all Nations, should have also
the Title of it, and that his name should be an Illustrious Witness thereof.

Presently after, as if this fortunate and glorious Name had been the Seal of
the Contract, and of the Alliance which God made with Abraham, he would render
it more sensible, and add to these Ciphers of Love an Impression of Grief, and
a Character of Blood.

Then was Circumcision commanded not only for Abraham, but for all his
Children, and Servants, Commandment for Circumcision.
and in general for all those that should be numbered amongst his Generations;
Hoc est pactum meum quod observabitis inter me and vos, and semen tuum post te:
Circumcidetur ex volis omne Masculum. Genesis 17. v. 10.

Infans osto dicrum circumcidetur in vobis, omne Masculum in generationibus
vestris: tam vernaculus quam emptitius circumcidetur and quicumque non suerit
de stirpe vestra. Genesis 17. v. 12.


provided nevertheless they were Males; for Women were exempted from the Law:
Concerning the time prefixed for the accomplishment of this precept, it was not
to pass the term of Eight days; and the proposed End was no other than men's
accord and peace with God, who foreseeing the War which the Body is wont to
wage against the Soul, gave a Command to cut off the Prepuce, as the Center of
the impurest and grossest humors, which use to nourish and infire the flames,
to inkindle the funestous Pyle in which the chastest purities are consumed.

This is the opinion of Saint Thomas, St. Chysostom, and Theodoret; who add,
that the Circumcision of the Jews was but a Corporal Figure of that
Circumcision which should be in the Spirit of Grace, and in the blessed Law of
the Messiah, who desires not a Sacrifice of Blood and rigor, but of Love,
whose amiable and holy tyranny is sometimes more violent over the Soul, than
the Law of the Jews has ever been over the Body.

Moreover Circumcision was not only a Figure of Baptism, of cumcision sign
Peace.
but a Constant and infallible Mark of the agreement God had made with Abraham:
Now this ordinary denotation of Love, and this sacred Testimony of Peace was to
be imprinted on the Body of the Hebrews, that the remembrance of the favors
God had showed them might increase their duties of Obedience, Piety, and Faith
toward God.

Thirdly this effusion of Blood was a lively representation and animated by the
Faith of Abraham who obeyed the Voice of one God, who presently cast Veils over
his Eyes, infused Light into his Mind, and Fires into his Heart, which made him
abandon all Creatures to remain under the sole Protection of Heaven.

In the fourth place this Phlebotomy served to distinguish the Jews from other
Nations; so that as heretofore the Grecians esteemed all the People of the
World barbarous and brutall; so the Jews had a Custom to call all those
Uncircumcised, who would not subject themselves to Circumcision.

In fine, this rigor, and this Bloody precept God imposed on the Hebrews was
an effect of the first Disafter which deserved tears and cicatrices of Blood.
This was the Remedy which Men had to heal this satall wound which remains still
bleeding.

Now there needed such a healing hand, as that of Abraham, to receive this
Bloody but efficacious Medicine, which was to mollify not only the Obduration
of the Jews, but had also a secret virtue to wipe away the stains of that
mortal Poison, which the Serpent of Paradise, or rather of Hell, had vomited
into all Hearts. This was then a particular favor of God unto Abraham, but it
was not the last; for he gave him afterward the ultimate assurance that Sara
who was 90. years old should be the Mother of a Son, Et ex illa dabo tibi
silium, cui benedicturus sum, cri^que innationes, and reges populorum orientur
ex eo. Genesis 17. v. 16.

Et ait Deus ad Abraham: Sara uxor tua pariet tibi filium, vocabisque nomen
ejus Isaac, etc. Genesis 17. 1 Cecidit Abraham in faciem suam, and risit, dicent
in cord sho^ putasue cen enario nascetur filius, and Sara nonagenaria pariet?
Genesis 17. v. 17.


who was to be not only the Prince but the Head and Father of Nations. This Son
at the same time received his name from the Mouth of God even before his Birth,
and the name imposed on him was that of Isaac, a happy and pleasing name,
which sounded so sweetly in the Ears of Abraham, as presently his poor Soul
being unable to bear the excess of this contentment, he felt himself surprised
with an Amorous fainting, which cast him upon the Earth, and left him no words
in his Mouth, but smilingly to say, My God! is it possible that an aged Man a
hundred years old should be the Father of a Child: Omnipotent God! what News
do thou bring unto these poor Parents? what joy, what pleasure, and what
transport in their Souls? what will Men say, when Sara shall grow great with
Child by a Miracle from Heaven? what Song of Triumph, and what acclamations
will there not be heard throughout all Judea? will not so many Servants and
Handmaids who see all their hopes dying with Abraham, resume a new life, when
they shall perceive the Birth of a Master, whose life must be their only
support.

In truth these thoughts and a thousand such as use to happen upon a like
accident, are too deeply engraven in Nature and in our Hearts to appear barely
on the Lips, and upon Paper. The Spirit may well conceive them, but Hands have
but too weak and liveless touches to frame some draught of them. Most just
resentments.
It appertains only unto silence and raptures, to say what we can scarcely
believe or think.

France I call thee as a Witness; for thou can represent unto us, if thou will, an Image of Abraham's and Sara's Joy; thou can publish to us, if thou
art so pleased, the sentiments of the justest and most holy King and Queen in
this World, for whose felicity, we can but wish the Birth of a Child. At least
we should even hear themselves, when Heaven gave them a Dolphin, who was
expected for the space of two and twenty years, and then we might have beheld
on their Faces the smiles of Abraham and Sara, we might have seen that which
cannot be expressed by words, and finally, those Echo's, which corresponded
with the public acclamations, might have opened to the understanding what I
cannot lively enough explain.

CHAP. VII. The Charity of Abraham toward Pilgrims, and the tenderness of God
toward him.
I Know not whether I ought rather to admire the continuation of Gods favors
to Abraham, or the constancy of his virtue and piety toward God and his
Neighbor. Gods Paternall Love.
God cease not to follow him, and since his departure out of his Country, as
a good Father should do to his Child, he always held him by the Hand; And
Abraham hardly ever lost sight of him, or at lest his Heart has always most
dearly conserved him. The life of Abraham then was a Combat of Constancy, and a
Duel of Love, where on the one side when God attaques him, this generous
Courage corresponds on the other side, and makes a strong defense. It is a
Pilgrimage in which God goes first and Abraham next. These are but researches,
pursutes, and solicitations. God gives himself entirely to Abraham, and Abraham
has nothing which he gives not for his sake.

He made this evidently appear, Appar^it autem ti Duminus in convalle M^mbre
sedente ostio tabernaculi sui in ipso servore dici. Genesis 18. v. 1.
when being in the Valley of Mambre at the opening of his Tents, about high
Noon, he saw three Pilgrims tanned with the Ardors of the Sun, and tired at
least in appearance with the pains and toil of their journey: for immediately
this magnificent, cordial, and devout man, Cumque elevasset oenlos, aparuerunt
ei tres viri stantes prope cum etc. Genesis 18 v. 2.

Et dixit: Dominest inveni grattam in oculis tuis ^ne transeas servum tuum.
Genesis 18. v. 3.

Sed asseram pauxillum aquae, and l^v^te pedes vestros etc. Genesis 18. v. 1.


who bore God and men in his heart, prevented these travellors, and his Soul
which always discovered truth amidst shadows, adored the Majesty of one God
hidden under the habit of these three pilgrims. Afterward he offered them his
Table and house; and not satisfied with these profers, he treated them in words
and deeds, and then to render his duties more perfect he mixed them with so
much sweetness, so much cordiality, and so much reverence, that afterward he
would needs wash their feet, honoring them not only as guests, but also as
Masters of his House: wherein I first observe the promptitude of a good work,
and of a Charity, which should have wings to fly, and prevent him that receives
it. It is a verity proved by Axioms too popular to be doubted of; And the
freedom and cordiallity, Liberalitas quod e libero arbitrio prosiciscatur
nominata est. Senec. de beat. vit. c. 24. and lib. 2 de benef.
which are so natural to magnificence, must partake of this promptitude: It
were likewise to take away its Arms, and Eyes, and even its Name, as Seneca
says excellently well, if one should make a man Liberal without the freeness
of this Cordial liberty.

Thirdly this bountiful Cordiality ought in some manner to be blind, though
discreet; for it is obliged to discern what is seeming, and what is real: But
when once necessities are discovered, the heart, says St. Denyse ought to be
like God, and the Sun, who inlighten all shadows and have no disdainful
brightnesses, but communicate themselves unto all bodies: And it was for this
reason as I believe, (...) Sines. ep. 31. (...) Clem. Alexand. lib. 2 Strom.
that the learned Sinesius called liberallity a Virtue common to God and man;
and Clement Alexandrinus termed it the Image and picture of the Divinity. St.
Austen adds, that presents must be made with Mouth, Heart and Hand. Finally
Honor and Respect are requisite to it, as a mark, Seasoning of favors.
that we acknowledge God in Man, and that we are bountiful unto men for his
sake. This is what our incomparable host did, when after all sorts of
courtesies and duties he further desired to wash the feet of these three
Pilgrims. The which Solomon has since so expressly recommended, when he
described to us a River, Mitte panem tuum super aquas qui a post tempora multa
reperies cum. Eccl. 11.
whose moving Crystal floated in a bed of gold, and in silken curtains, Cast
bread, says he, upon the current of these waves, and I promise thee that all
such as shall sow upon these liquid Fields shall there find a Harvest even
after many Ages.

Is not this the same which Abraham did washing the feet of these three
Travelers? Kings of France true successors of Abraham.
and is it not that which our Kings of France, the Successors of Abraham, have
since so holily observed, when once at least every year they wash with their
own hands the feet of diverse poor people?

This is doubtless to expose his grandeurs and charitable profusions upon a
basin of water, which is presently converted into a Source of Graces and
immortalities. This is to sow in a well-watred Land, and where one shall find
the Abundance of Ages, which the wise man gave for an inscription to his River
of Charity. Abundantia seculorum


In fine, this River is no other than that of the Terrestrial Paradise which
loses it self for a while under ground, Moses Barcephas e Syria Antistes, lib.
de Parad. cap. 28. Fluvius Phison.
and afterward goes as it were gliding upon the billows of the Ocean, until
it issues forth, as out of a prison, which opens it self upon the bounds of
the West, where after a thousand windings this poor water which had been so
long detained prisoner returns from thence toward the North, and into the
Indies.

If you desire more, the washing of poor men's feet is represented to us by the
River Nilus, or rather by that of Jordan, Solinus: c. 35. Pausanias, Sieionius.
Apol.
or finally by the waters of Alpheus: For all these miraculous Rivers hide
themselves for a time, and what is cast into them remain some days absorpt
under the Abysses of water, but at length we receive all that is thought to be
lost.

This is in a word, as Solomon said, to cast ones bread upon the torrent of
waves to receive it in aeternity.

In fine, this is to resemble those Roman Emperors, Vopiscus in Aureliane ait,
eum fecisse corenas de panibus.
and amongst others Aurelian, who made crowns of bread, or to conclude, and not
to intermix profane Emperors with Christian Kings, and with the father of all
Christian Princes, which is Abraham, let us say, that this most charitable Man
washing these three Pilgrims feet sowed benedictions upon a River, Seminate in
benedictionibus. 2. Cor. 9. Beati qui senunatis super omne^ aquas. Jsa. 32.
and that he put himself the first in the list of those blessed persons, who,
as Isay says, sowed upon all the waters and lands of Paradise.

In effect, these three guests whom Abraham received into his tents with so
much affection, zeal, and reverence, made a Paradise under one Pavillion; these
were also Angels of Heaven, having only the shape and countenance of men; from
whence I gather, that under ragged garments, and a skin torn with ulcers, and
eaten up with cankers, God hidden under the habit of poor men.
God and his Angels conceal themselves, to teach the purity of heart, works and
intentions, which ought never to stay upon the rind and exterior appearance,
but to pass even to the Center where God himself is retired. Presently after
the veiles are seen removed, and the shadows unfoulded, to disclose celestial
lights, the Angels of God, nay God himself, who makes the heart melt into joy,
and the eyes distill tears of Love and rapture, there are seen miraculous
generations and fruitful sterilities, which produce Families, Nations, and
Worlds at the birth of one Infant.

In sequel of these favors the tendernesses of a human heart, and the least
touches of compassion, which men have toward one another, hold so secret
intelligence with the heart of God, as even at that instant men open their
hearts, God dilates his own to impart unto them his most intimate secrets.

The confidence he expressed to Abraham was a very Divine conde^^^^dency.
evident mark of this verity: for when the crimes and the execrations of Sodom
and Gomorrha pressingly called upon his Justice, and when the blackest vapors
of these horrid sinks ascended even as high as Heaven, this most absolute
Judge, who makes his definitive decrees without dependenco^r^ counsel demeaned
himself as if he durst not do it without the advice of Abraham.

Ah what! Diaitque Dominus: number celare petero Abraham quae gesturus sum?
says he, can I conceal my designs and thoughts from my dear Abraham, who is
to be the Pillar of the World, and the Father of so many Nations? No certainly,
but I must discharge part of my displeasure into his bosom, that he may share
with me in my designs as well as in my contentments,

Hearken then Abraham, Dixit itaque Dominus; clamor Sodomorum, and Gomorrhae
multiplicatus est, and peccatum little aggravatum est nimis.
do thou well understand, says God, what passes? for my part I hear a
confused Noise, which daily sounds louder and louder; it is surely the Voice of
my Justice which requires vengeance against the Inhabitants of Sodom and
Gomerrha, which have rendered their Cities an Abyss of horrors and abominations.
Do thou not hear these impure Mouths, these poisonous Tongues, these
bewitched Hearts, these fleshy Souls, these Soul-less Bodies, and these ungodly
Men without Faith, without Law, and without Honor?

I hear them and their infamous clamours awake my indignation; Descendam and
videbo, utrum clamorem, qui venit ad me, opere compleverint: An non est ita, ut
sciam. Genesis 28. v. 21.
I perceive also the sparkles and flames of their fire which are converted in
my Hands into ardent and murdering Torches which consume them: I am resolved
then to descend even into their Hearts to see near at Hand the Ashes and the
Wood, which nourishes so enormous a Fire.

But what my God! have thou not Eyes which pierce from the highest Heaven, even
into the Center of Hell? and is not the least of thy glances able to dissipate
all the shadows of the Night and of the Sun to produce there the Day of thy
most rigorous Justice? have thou not a myrror in thy self, which without
disorder and confusion presents all objects to thee? If thou art a God, why
do thou speak to us like a Man? And is it not well known, that thou art
every where, and as well in the Desert where Cain killed his Brother, as in the
Paradise where Eve gave her Husband the mortal wound? Have thou not been seen
in Heaven precipitating the Angels, upon the Waters of the Deluge drowning Men,
and in the highest story of Babel over-turning this great Edifice, and
confounding those Giants? Why do thou then say that thou will descend into
Sodom, and see in person what passes before thine Eyes? Alas Lord! take not
the pains to draw aside those shameful Courtains which hide so many
lubricities from our Eyes: Lord do not debase thy self so much as with thy own
Hand to discover those Ashes which take from us the prospect of so many
volatile fires, and so many poisonous coals.

Notwithstanding God descends (as I may say) into this gulf of impurity; Fair
example to Judges.
and resolves to be not only the Judge, but the Witness also of those crimes
which he must afterward punish with so much severity.

Is not this a fair lesson for those who hold the balances of Justice in their
Hands, and with whom God intrusts the most terrible and dreadful of his
Attributes.

I would willingly demand of these Masters who judge so often upon bare
breviats, and instead of confronting witnesses, and making a diligent inquiry
into the fact and truth, consult their passions, follow their own interests,
and too inconsideratly pass sentences of life for Criminals, and of death
against the Innocent.

I would gladly ask of them (if nevertheless there chance to be such kind of
people in Christian Republics) whether they have learnt that style from God,
Most exact Justice.
who is the Sovereign of all Justice, and who is not satisfied to hear
complaints, and accusations, yet disdains not to cast down his Eyes, even to
the Earth, upon the Authors of crimes, to be, as I have already said, not only
their Judge, but also their Witness. Notwithstanding we must not imagine that
God at the first sight of a fault takes presently arms into his Hands: for
sometimes his patience gives truce during the whole course of life, and expects
the repentance of a Sinner even till Death, otherwise the World would be
quickly a Desert, or the Earth would at lest transform it self into a Hell of
Punishments and Torments.

Nevertheless we must not weary his Patience, An i^ritated patience is terrible.
and abuse his Goodness: for sometimes he Darts his Shafts in an instant, and
the very smoke of evil is no sooner risen in the Air, but presently Thunder
breaks all the Clouds without Threats or Lightnings. At least he is wont after
some delay to send public chastisements, and his zeal at last appears
thoroughly inflamed after some sparks of fire which his Clemency had cast forth
as the Messengers of his wrath. Thus did he long before the inkindling of the
funestous Pile of Sodom and Gomorrha, where these incestuous Cities quenched
their flames in the midst of their own fires.

Abraham himself took the Liberty to confer with him upon this design, Freedom
of Holy Souls.
and when he beheld the Lighted Torches which were to be the Instruments of
this sad Incendium, the Sanctity and freeness of his Heart permitted him to say,

Ah! Et appropinquans ait: nunquid perdes justum cumimpio? Genesis 18. v. 23.

Si suerint quinquaginta justi in civitate peribunt simul, and non parces loco
illi propter quinquaginta justos si fuerint? Genesis 18. v. 24.


what great God! could it possibly happen that thy indignation should be Blind,
and that thy Thunderbolts should equally fall upon the Just and Sinners? God
of Goodness can thou behold the innocent in the midst of punishments, without
some touch of Compassion? Alas Lord! will thou not pardon this Criminal City,
if in case but fifty Innocent Persons be found in it; Is not this a Motive
powerful enough to invite thee unto Commiseration? Absit a te ut rem hanc
facias, etc. Genesis 28. v. 25.
Ah! let it be never then said, that thy just providence, which extends it self
over all the Empires of the World, has stifled Vice and Virtue under the same
Ashes.

Is not this an Innocent freedom, Dixilque Dominus: sl invenero. Sodim^s
qui^quaginta justes in medio civitatis, dimittam omni loco propter eos. Genesis
18. v. 26.
and capable of moving even the Bowels of Gods mercy? Indeed God promised him
to deliver all those that were invelaped in that crime, in case there were
found not fifty, but ten only worthy of pardon.

But it seems the iniquity of Men is so much the more enormous, as the goodness
of God is immense and admirable. Ineffable goodness.
Who would believe this if truth it self had not revealed it? Et dixit, Non
delebo propter december. Genesis 18. v. 23.
who would credit it if God himself had not said it? And who would believe that
Virtue and Piety are in such sort banished from the Earth as some good Men may
not be found in it? It is then for this cause God advanced toward Sodom,
Abiitque Dominus postquam cessavit loqui ad Abraham.
to chastise their Vices, and to extinguish the Lust of their Women with a
Deluge of Fire.

CHAP. VIII. The firing of Sodom, and the deliverance of Lot.
MAximus of Tire and Dion Chrysostomus had but slightly, and as it were in
passing by considered the Nature of God, when they believed it was a shameful
exercise for a Sovereign Essence to mingle rewards with punishments.
Atheistical Ignorance.
It is an employment (say they) worthy of Gods greatness to give Crowns, but to
Dart Thunderbolts is the Office of a deformed, cruel, unpittifull and
rigorous Spirit.

Pliny the great was possessed with the same Errors, when out of an Atheistical
flattery, Deus est mortali juvare mortalem, and haec ad aeternam gloriam via.
and an Idolatrous Complancy, he gave unto his Prince the name and title of a
God who had only power to do good. Is not this a pernicious flattery and
altogether unworthy of a Divinity?

But I will believe that in the time of Vespatian and Pliny, Rome had not yet
seen that famous Statue of Justice, The Statue of Justice.
which in the one Hand carried the Tables of Equity and of the Law, and in the
other a Scepter covered with a Stork, the true Symbol of Piety, upheld also by
a Hippocentaure, which denotes cruelty; Besides her Head was armed with a great
Helmet wrought out of Gold and Iron; At her Feet appeared an Ostridge, and a
World on which certain Enigmaticall terms were read, yet clear enough to
manifest that it was the Picture of Gods Sovereign Justice, which holds in one
of her Hands all the Laws, and in the other a Scepter of Clemency and Severity;
the World is under her Feet as under her Empire, and close by her the Ostridge,
which disgests Iron, sufficiently evidenceth that her rigors break Diamonds
like Straws, and consume Steel and Iron like Air and Wind.

Behold the Portraict of Gods Justice, her Scepter has not been seen hitherto
in the Land of Sodom and Gomorrha, but upon the Wings of a Stork, that is to
say, by Clemency and Meekness; Now the Hippocentaurs and the Ostriges will
serve her for support, and a Hand of Justice will shortly appear in the Clouds
which will power down upon these Rebellious Cities a flood of Sulphur, Ashes,
and Fires. And truly if God had not a Hand of Justice, how could he govern the
World? whose Empire cannot Roll but upon two commanding Wheels, which are
Justice and Goodness: Moreover, if God had no other Marks but of Meekness and
Love, the Earth, says Aristotle, would be without a Sun, and the Elect as well
as the Reprobate would be seen perishing in the self-same Chaos; Finally,
Criminals would have no terrors which might induce them to penance, and the
Just would want motives to preserve their purity. It stands then with reason,
that God should have Justice, and that his wrath should from time to time power
down upon the Heads of Sinners. Too long have the horrors of Sodom irritated
and provoked him: the Night already approaches, Veneruntque due Angeli Sodomam
vespere, and sede^e Loath in soribus civitatis. Genesis 19. v. 1.

Qui cum vidisset eos, surrexit, and ivit obviam eis, adoravtique pronus in
terram, and dixit: obsecro, Domini, declinate in d^mum pucri vestri, qui
dexerunt minime, sed in platea mancbimus. Genesis 19. v. 2.

Compalit eos oppido ut divertereat aa eum: s^cit convivium, and comederunt.
Genesis 19. v. 3.


and there remains no Day but to behold two Angels in the habit of Pilgrims,
who seek out Lot even at the Gates of Sodom; observe how welcome they are, and
certainly, they have met with an Heart who perfectly understands the Rights of
Hospitality; observe what have he makes to them, how he casts himself at their
Feet, how he conjures them to spend at lest one Night in his House: In fine,
after some refusals and Complements, he inforceth them by his Charitable
importunities to shelter themselves in his Lodging; they enter into it, and
nothing but Feasts and congratulations are seen in this House. But they were no
sooner risen from the Table, and preparing to take some repose, when immediately
Sodomites came from all parts like enraged Wolves howling and trembling as if
they had already felt the Agony of Death, and the Flames which were ready to
devour them.

O God? Prius autem quam irent cubitum viri civitatis vallaverunt domum, etc.
Genesis 19. v. 5.

Nolite, quaeso sratres mes, noli^e malum hoc sacere. Genesis 19. v. 7.


what frenzies and what furies of a brutish appetite when it is once let loose!
Disastrous passions! blind will! enchanted desires! shameful brutalities!
Tyrannical Love! Alas! is it not true that your Eyes are veiled with a fatal
Scarf? Blind Sodomites are you not yet satisfied to have exceeded all the
bounds of humane Nature? Sacrilegious Effeminats, Diabolical Men, must Angels
be constrained to satiate the ardors of your beastialities?

Mean while Lot is very much afflicted; Habeo duas filias, quae necdum
cognoverunt virum, educaem eas ad vos, and abutemini eis sicut vo^^s p^acuerit,
dummodo viris istis nihil faciatis, etc. Genesis 19. v. 8.

At illt direrunt: recedo illuc, and rursus: ingressus es, inquiunt, ut a. vma,
etc. Genesis 19. v. 9.


for these Cyclops of Hell are come out of a Furnace of obscurities with
Hammers and Iron Bars in their Hands to break his Gate in a thousand pieces, to
destroy Fathers and Children, Masters and Servants. Briefly even from the
highest to the lowest, all the Inhabitants of Sodom have befieged this chaste
retreat, and desire to make it the Den of their Impurities. In vain does Lot
entreat and declare unto them that the honor of his Guests is more precious to
him than that of his Daughters. Et ecce miserunt manam viri, and introduxerunt
ad se Loath, clauseruntque ostium. Genesis 19. v. 11.
For after all this these enraged Beasts made him no Answer but with
Blasphemies and reproaches, and they were already as it were Masters of this
fortunate Sanctuary, when the tutelary Guards of this House carried him away as
a Lamb in the midst of these Wolves, and a while after the Gate being shut
these Angels of I ight cast forth so many glorious and resplendent Rays, as at
last these desperate Sodomites were blinded with them: After this blindness,
Lot began to open his Eyes to discern yet more clearly the force and Virtue of
these blessed Guardians of his House; Et eos qui foris crant, percusserunt
caecitate a minimo usque ad maximum, etc. Genesis 19. v. 11.

Dixerunt autem ad Loath: habes ^i^ que^piam tuorum? generu^, aut filios, aut
filias, omnes qui tui sunt educ de urbe hat. Genesis 19. v. 12.

^gressus itaque Ioth, locutus est ad generos suos qui acc^pturi erant filias
ejus, surgi e egredimini de loro isto: quia delebit Dominus civitatom hanc.
Genesis 19. v. 14.


They also perceiving the hour, which God had chosen to Execute the Decrees of
his Justice, and having made an inquiry concerning the number and quality of
those persons who were with Lot, they advertized him presently to depart out of
this reprobate City, which was even ready to serve as a Theater for the most
rigorous vengeance of an irritated God. Instantly Lot informed all his kindred
of this strange news, to the end they might remove their Wives and Daughters
out of this danger. But what! they that had no Eyes to discern God, had no Ears
to hear their Father, or at least they made but a sport at his most serious
Remonstrances.

Mean while the Night slips away, Cun que ess^^ mare cogehant cum An^^li,
di^entes: surge, tell uxo em tuam and duas filias quas h^bes, etc. Genesis 19 v.
15. Eduxeruntque cu^, and posuerunt extra civitatem, th que loc^^ sunt ad cum,
dicentes: salva animan. tuam, etc. Genesis 1^. v. 17.


and from the break of Day, as if the Sun should have served to inkindle the
Pyle of Sodom, the Angels delegated for the preservation of Lot, taking him by
the Hand with his Wife and two Daughters, constrained them to depart together
out of the City, advertizing them that to preserve their lives, and to enjoy
the benefit they had received, they must seek out a refuge upon some high
Mountain, without turning their Heads or Eyes toward the unhappy Sodom, lest
some Whirlwind of Flames should chance to surprise and devour them.

Behold then Lot much astonished: Nevertheless he conjures these amiable
Spirits to afford him a Retreat in a little Town not far from thence; Dixitque
Loath adeos: quaeso Domine mi, Genesis 19. v. 18.

Quia invenit servus tuus gratiam coram te: ne forte deprehendat me malum and
moriar. Genesis 19. v. 19.

Est civitas haec juxta ad quam possum fugere, parva, and salvabor in ea:
Nunquid noa modica est, and vivet anima mea. Genesis 19. v. 20.

Dixitque ad cum: ecce etiam in hoc suscepi preces tuas, ut non subvertam urbem
pro qua locutus es. Genesis 19. v. 21.

Festina, and salvare ibi: quia non pole^o facere quidquam doaec ingrediaris
illuc. Genesis 19. v. 22.

Respiciensque uxor ejus post se, versa est in statuam salis. Genesis 19. v. 23.

Igitur Dominus pluit super Sodomam, and Gomorrham Sulphur, and ignem a Domine
de Caelo. Genesis 19. v. 24.

Et subvertit civitates has, and omnem cirda regionem univosos babicatores
urbium and cuncta terrae vireatia. Genesis 19. v. 25.


the Angels granted all he desired, and the Village assigned him for a
Sanctuary was also freed from the flames for his sake.

But as there is nothing weaker and more wavering than a Woman's Mind, Lot had
not power enough to hinder her Head, which was filled only with Wind, from
moving at the sight of the first Lightnings which preceded this Storm; so in
testimony of her inconstancy she was transformed into a Pillar of Salt, as if
God intended by this exemplar punishment to leave unto over light Souls a
Tragic monument of Inconstancy, and a dreadful effect of Temerity.

Mean while the Heavens are no longer but a lively Source of Flames and Fires:
The Sun, Moon and Stars are so many Channels through which God powers down upon
Sodom and Gomorrha all the Thunderbolts of his wrath. The Clouds are the
Torrents of Thunder which makes a hideous Noise which tears the Skies and
carries away all without pity; Nothing is seen in the Air but flaming
obscurities and ardent shadows heaped upon one another, which form a
Hearscloath to cover the shameful Relics of these loathsome Coals.

The Earth on the other side is an inlivened gulf of burning Coals, which
vomit forth so many Firebrands and Torches, as at length one would believe that
the Air, the Skies, the Clouds, and the Earth were no other than a Hell.
Nothing is heard there but Clamors, Sobs, Rages, Blasphemies and roarings out.

What a spectacle is it to see Men and Women with Bodies all on fire running
through the Streets, their Hair flaming, their Eyes sparkling, The Image of
Gods Judgments.
their Mouths burning, and their Hearts filled with Sulphur? What a monstrous
Specter is it to behold an Infant in his Mothers bosom, and in his Nurses Arms
like a lump of Sulphur which is consumed with the flash of a Torch? Who has
ever heard that the World was watered with a Rain of Sulphur, with a Deluge of
Fire, and with an Inundation of burning Coals and Flames? What Thunder, what
spoil, what desolation of Woodpiles, of Houses, and Furnaces? Beds, Tables,
Cubbords, Gold, Iron, Marbles, and Diamonds turned into Firebrarnds? Alas!
where are the Heavens? where is the Air? where is the Sea and Earth, when the
whole World is on fire? Ah poor Lot! what is become of thy Wife, and where are
thy Kindred, and what may thy Daughters think beholding the smoke of that fire
which devours the Bodies of their unfortunate Husbands.

Me thinks I see him with his Daughters in the foulds of a Mountain, Et mansit
in spelunca ipse and duae siliae ejus cum eo. Genesis 19. v. 30. Dixitque major ad
minorem, etc. Genesis 19. v. 31.

Veni, intoriemus eum vino, dormi^musque cum eo, ut servare possimus ex patre
nostro ^emen. Genesis 19. v. 32.


where he endeavors to shelter himself from these frightfull inundations,
which burn and desolate all his Country. But with what grief will Abraham's
chaste Heart be touched when he knows that the Daughters of Lot are consumed
with an other fire, and they inkindle such black flames, as even hinder them
from knowing their own Father, or at least from treating him with that respect
and piety which Nature required?

Blind Nation! brutish Treason! Crime whose horrors have not a name in Nature:
Thy Firebrarnds and Murdering Darts must pierce the side of a Mountain to
defile and destroy what God had reserved to himself. Abraham autem consurgens
mane ubi steterat prius cum Domino Genesis 19. v. 27.
None but Abraham remains Constant in his Sincerity; he is still in the same
place where God spoke to him with so much tenderness and privacy.

Faithful Friend of God, Intuitus est Sodomam, and Gomo rham, and universam
terram regionis illius, viditque ascendentem favillam de terra quasi surnacit
sumum. Genesis 19. v. 28.
Father of all Nations, Support of men, Vice-King of the Earth, Abraham, can
thou behold this dreadful fire without Sighs and Tears? Weep then Abraham,
weep to quench these flames; but rather inkindle some pile to swallow up these
Monsters which infect the World by the Contagious shafts of their Incestuous
brutalities. Let there never be any mention made of Sodom, nor of the Lands
which are accomplices in her disloyalty; Let no man ever think on her, unless it
be to place before his Eyes the Image of Gods Judgments, and of the Eternal
punishments of Hell.

There will never be a more sensible and exact draught of those endless
torments, than Sodom, Gomorrha, Adama, Seboim, and all their Neighborhood.

Let us have then a horror to enter into these flaming Prisons, and into these
Sulphurous Dungeons; The Picture of Hell.
let us listen awhile unto these Sighs, Sorrows and Lamentations which rise
from the bottom of these Abysses.

My Eyes, what do you see? what Phantasms? what Specters? what Tormenters?
what Monsters? My Heart, art thou not affrighted at the sight of these flaming
Furnaces, of these Mountains of Fire, of these dead which are always living,
and of these lives still dying amidst Immortal Languishments and Endless
Torments?

O my God! how will it be, when thou shall descend upon the Clouds, and on a
flaming Chariot to enfire not only five Cities, but all the parts of the
Universe?

Where will the most shameful and detestable of all Vices find Caves deep
enough, when at the Sound of Trumpets and Clarions the Earth shall open her
Sepulchers, like so many Furnaces, which will vomit forth men all environed
with Fire?

Whither will the confederates of Sodom and Gomorrha go, when all the Saints
and Angels of Heaven shall even wax pale with fear?

Will Vice be in a place of Security, when Virtue it self shall hardly find a
Sanctuary?

The Pillars of Heaven will shake, Luc. 21. D. Thom. sup. q. 73.
the Cypres Trees and Oaks of Libanus will roar out, all Trees will melt into
drops of blood, the Sun and Moon will change their countenance, all the Planets
will make a stand, or dread will even tear them from their Orbs to follow,
Pugnabit cum eo orbis contra insensatos. Eccl. 5.
like trains of fire, the astonishing Splendors of God; The Earth, though most
insensible, will arm it self in so just a quarrel.

Afterward the Ocean touched with so cruel a Sympathy will raise its billows
and waves even five Cubits high above the Mountains, Signs of the day of
judgment given by the Hebrews, collected by St. Jerome. related by St. Thomas.
sup. q. 73. a. 1.
immediately after they will tumble down to make Abysses, and presently extend
themselves upon their ordinary Bed: Then will all Fishes, though naturally
dumb, cast forth fearful moanings and outcries.

In the Air Birds will tune sad Noats, and their sweetest Harmonies will be but
Songs of Death.

Nothing but Hairy, blew, sparkling, burning and bloody Comets will be seen;
and nothing but Cries, Howlings, and dreadful Lamentations will be heard, not
only amongst Men, but also amongst the fiercest Beasts, and in the midst of the
least sensible and most inflexible Bodies.

In fine, this will be the great Day denounced by the Mouth of God, by that of
the Prophets, and of which Sodom has been but the first draught.

If then the representation thereof were able to affright the Eyes of the
Impurest Souls, and to stop the Course and Torrent of so many flames which an
infernal and Diabolical Love casts into Hearts, I would willingly advise the
most part of Men to have the Picture of Sodom always before their Eyes, to the
end so tragic a misfortune, might at lest divert a far more dismal disaster.

But all these Pictures are too weak if Love takes not off the cover, and if
Faith shall not open the Eyes.

My God! Dissipate then all the Shadows of Sodom, and fix our Eyes upon the
Lights of Sion; O God illuminate our Minds, and inflame our Hearts, to the end
we may follow the bright Splendors of thy adorable bounties, and that our Souls
may never be consumed but by the fire of thy Love.

CHAP. IX. The Birth of Isaac, and the Banishment of Agar and Ismael.
IN fine, Visitavit autem Dominus Saram ficut promiserat, and implevit quae
locutus est. Genesis 21. v. 1.

Concepitque and peperit filium in senectute sua, tempore quo praedixerat ei
Deus. Genesis 21. v. 2.

Rursumque ait, quis auditurum crederet Abraham, quod Sara l^ctaret filium,
quem peperit ei jam seni. Genesis 21. v. 7.

Dixitque Sara: risum fecit mihi Deus. Genesis 21. v. 6.


Heaven has heard the vows and prayers of Abraham; Isaac is born, and Sara
is so much ravished at the sight of this happy prodigy that she can hardly
believe what she sees: This Child nevertheless come by Miracle into the World,
grows visible, and who ever has Eyes to behold him, may quickly discern that
he is the Image of Abraham's and Saras virtues; He is the fruit of Benediction
which came in the Autumn, and therefore is almost ripe even in his birth; He is
a Phoenix, on whom all the hopes of his race depend, and a Sun whose Aurora
shows what will happen all the remainder of the day. His dear Mother has no
other pains and throws in her Labor, than smiles and admirations; Scarce was
he weaned but his Father changes his Nurses Milk into good cheer, and invites
his Friends unto a solemn Feast to rejoice with them for his happiness.

What a wonder is it to see this Child of Tears and Desires become an object of
a Ravishing Joy. Cumque vidisset Sara filium Agar Aegyptiae Iudentem cum Jsaac
filio suo, dixit ad Abraham: Ejice ancillam hanc, and filium ejus. Genesis 21. v.
9. Dure hoc accepit Abraham pro filio suo. Genesis 21. v. 12.
Sara art thou afraid that the life of thy son will bring thee death, and that
the excess of a joy so little expected, will even melt thy heart? For my part
I already apprehend lest the pastime of Jsaack and Jsmael prove the occasion of
a quarrel, and that at last either the Mother or child must be chased away: In
effect, Sara could not endure the sight of Agar and Ismael, she intreates
Abraham to put both of them out of his House. But Abraham who has the
Tenderness of a father for Jsmael, cannot condescend to her desires. It seems
to this good man that the severing of Jsaack and Jsmael would even cut his
heart in two. There is a necessity Nevertheless of obeying the request of
Sara, Cui dixit Deus: Non tibi videatur asperum super puero, and super ancilla
tua: omnia quae dixerit tibi Sara, audi vocem ejus, quia in Jsaac vocabitur
tibi semen, sed and filium ancillae faciam in gentem magnam, quia semen tuum
est. Genesis 21. v. 13.

Surrexit itaque Abraham and tolleus panem and utrem aquae imposuit scapulae
ejus, tradiditque puerum, and dinusit eam. Genesis 21. v. 14.


for God commands Abraham in this occasion to execute all his injunctions, with
promise that Notwithstanding all contrary appearances Isaac and Ismael shall be
the first seeds of a most ample and happy posterity.

Nevertheless I would very gladly know what was Abraham's thought, and whether
he could abstain from mingling some tears with the water and bread he gave unto
Agar, when he carried her the news of the will of God and Sara.

What pity was it to see this poor handmaid enter with her son into a solitary
and uninhabited Desert, and leave a plentiful House, where she had ever lived
as a Mistress? Are not these very rigorous commands and most austere providence
for those who have only Eyes for their own Interests, and for what appears to
them a present good.

To see Agar and Ismael in the deserts of Bersheba with hunger and thirst, Quae
cum abi^sset, orabat in solitud^^e B^rsab^c. Genesis 21. v. 14.
and in a general want of all the conveniences of Nature, will not men believe
them to be as it were dead in the world, and alive in a Tomb? What hope is
there amongst stones and Rocks? What society in the midst of Woods, where
nothing is heard but cries, and the roarings of Monsters? What succor amidst
Wild places, and out of the road of men? What light under the shades of grots
and caverns, where the Sun dates not approach? What means of Livelihood, where
all Animals are dead? Where nothing but frightfull dens are seen, but aride
sands, and some old Trunk of a Tree, without branches, leaves, or fruit?

What then will Agar do, Cumque consumpta ^ss^t qqua in utre, abjecit puerum
subter un^marborum quae iberat. Genesis 12. v. 14.
she has no more water nor bread? And mean while her life, her Love, and her
dear Ismael can no Longer endure the torments of hunger and thirst; he is
already constrained to stay at the foot of a tree, and there to cast forth loud
cries; Distressed Mother, what will you do? What a happiness would it be for
you to die first that you might not die twice? Sara what have you don? Abraham
where are you? Ah God! what grief is it unto a Mother to see between her Arms
the Tomb of her son? Agar have you not Tears to shed upon the Tongue of Ismael
to quench the Thirst which consumes him with a slow fire? Have you not a Heart
to satiate and qualify his Hunger? Where are those maternall Bowels, and that
holy passion, which Parents ought to have for their Children?

Ismael has lost his speech, he is without hope, and Agar abandons him as no
longer able to live, seeing her heart half dead before her Eyes.

Farewell Ismael, Farewell poor Orphan, A pitiful separation.
farewell all the affections and hopes of Agar.

And when any man shall chance to pass by this solitary place, let him ingrave
upon this Trunk, that here Agar and her son found their Exile, their death, and
at length their Monument.

Agar what do you say? Flente enim matre, and mortem filii miserabiliter
praestolante, Deus exaudivit puerum, D. Hieron.

Et sedens contra, levavit vocem suam, and flevit. Genesis 21. v. 16.


Is this the hope you repose in God? And are these the promises he made unto
Abraham? Ah! do you not know that Heaven has Eyes always open to Innocence,
and the least of Ismaels sighs is able to draw God into this Desert? Join then
boldly your Cries and lamentations with those of Ismael: for one cannot hear
the Child without hearing the Mother.

In effect, Et abiit seditque e regione procul quantion potest arcus jacere,
dixit enim, non videbo morientem puerum. Genesis 21. v. 16.

Vocavitque Angelus Dei Agar de caelo dicens: quid agis Agar? Noli timere,
exaudivit enim Deus vocem pucri de loco in quo est. Genesis 21. v. 17.


when Agar was removed a flight shot from Ismael, as she sent forth her Cries
after the Moanings of her son, an Angel called her by her name, and said unto
her,

Go Agar, and return to thy son; take him by the hand, and reanimate this
little dying body. O God! who will not admire thy sage Providence, and the
miraculous Conduct of thy Designs? Who will not remain astonished in
contemplation of thy works, and above all when he shall discern the care thou
have of thy Elect? Alas! Surge, toll puerum, and tene manum illius, quia in
gentem magnam faciam eum. Genesis 21. v. 18.
how stupid is the Wisdom of men? how imprudent are their conceptious, and how
feeble are all the forces of their understandings when they are severed from
thee? There needs but one Heavenly Ray to inlighten all the obscurities of the
Earth, but on single drop of dew to soften all the rocks, and but one glance of
Gods Eye to give a Soul and life unto all the most Inanimated bodies in Nature.
In fine, when a man thinks himself lost he presently finds his way in the midst
of all his wanderings, and there is no climate, nor Earth so dry, Aperuitque
oculos ejus Deus; quae videns puteum aquae abiit, and implevit utrem deditque
puero bibere. Genesis 21. v. 19.
and aride, where his Omnipotent goodness may not cause a Thousand Fountains
and springs to rise, to the end it may be every where known, that he is the
Source of Living and salutiferous Waters, who is able to quench, as he showed
to Agar, the most ardent thirsts in the midst of Deserts and Solitudes.

CHAP. X. The Sacrifice of Abraham, and the admirable Artifices of God to try
his Constancy and Fidelity.
I could almost have a mind to complain of God, and to accuse the apparent
rigours he exercises on his favorites, If the little experience I have in the
life of Saints had not taught me, that there are admirable Secrets to try his
most faithful Servants. To this effect, Mobilis, semper inc^ss^bilis, calidus,
fervidus. Dionys. cap. 7. coel. hicracb.
says St. Denis, He is always in Motion, never at rest, and his ardors are so
penetrating and lively, that he passes like an inflamed Arrow even into the
bottom of the heart to see there all that is enclosed. Nevertheless he is not
like those petty Tyrants, who cover their Eyes, place veiles over their
foreheads, and hold Torches, Bows, and Arrows in their hands, as Weapons which
they use to give death with blindness; But if Divine Love has Veiles they are
wrought with the purest lights of Heaven; Trial of Love.
and if it has Shafts it is to open hearts, and its Torch serves but to
disclose all the secrets of souls in which nothing can remain concealed.

It is for this he is compared to a Goldsmiths who purifies Gold and Silver in
the crucet; to a Captain, who tryes the valor, dexterity and Courage of a
Soldier; or rather to a Friend who neither promises nor bestows his Amity
but after very Long trial.

Behold doubtless what God did, when he tempted Abraham as the most faithful,
most constant, and most affectionate person that lived in his time.

Nevertheless I am troubled to say God can perform the office of a Temptor,
since the least of his looks pierces all the Clouds of future things, Nemo
cum tentatur dicat, quia a Deo tentatur. Jacob. c. 1. epist.
and that St. James in his Canonical Epistle says in express terms that God
can tempt no man, because he cannot be the Author of Evil.

But this is to be ignorant in the nature of temptation, Ambros. lib. 1. de
Abraham, cap. 8. Aug q. 57. in Genes^^.
and to have never read St. Ambrose, St. Austin, and the major part of the
Fathers concerning this point, who sufficiently evidence, that there are blind
and wicked temptations which cannot come from God, as also prudent and
officious ones, which are as the shafts and stimulations of Love, or else like
sounding plummets wherewith the extents and capacity of hearts are measured; so
God knew but too well how great was the Love of Abraham, but it was requisite,
that this Love should appear, and with arms in its hand, to acquire a force
wholly new, and in a fresh combat.

We must not wonder that God tempted Abraham, Exercise of faith,
since this kind of temptation was but an exercise of his fidelity, and a
trial of his affection: Exercitium fidei tentatio. D Ambr. in 8. Luc.

Tentat vos Deus, ut sciatsi diligitis illum, Deuteronomy. 13.


Just as the Masters in Academies, and Fencers in their schools, use to do,
when by some sophism or feigned thrust they exercise the spirits, dexterity,
and courage of their bravest scholars.

I feel a horror nevertheless, Tentavit Deus Abraham, and dixit ad eum,
Abraham, Abraham: at ille respondit, adsum. Genesis 22. v. 1.
when I think of the matter on which God resolved to tempt Abraham; I tremble,
and my Heart groans, when I hear him twice called by his name, and that all the
Commissions which are given him tend but to the death of his Son.

Abraham, Abraham, can it possibly be that this so sweet so amiable, and so
Holy a Name must serve to summon thee to an office which appears so cruel, and
unnatural, as the Murder of thy Son? Is it peradventure to carry thee more
promptly to the execution of this sad decree that thou art twice called? Art
thou deaf to the first words of thy God? or do thou not perform readily
enough what God commands? Art thou so fixed on thy Isaac that thou no longer
think on God? what is the matter? Art thou stupefied and have neither Heart
nor care for thy Master?

Lord behold me here, says Abraham, what is thy will? and where, and in what,
may I manifest my Obedience and Love?

There are many who have complements enough in their Mouths, Fruitless
Complements.
and offer, themselves freely enough, but if a Man must engage either life,
goods, honor, or the least of his interests, he instantly retires, and his
dearest friends remain without offers and effects.

Let us examine whether Abraham's. Heart be of the same temper of those faint
friends? God calls him, and he returns answers unto God? God calls him again,
and he protests that he is ready to execute all his commands: much more; for
this Holy Man never contradicted the least injunction God had laid on him; he
left his Country, he forsook his Parents, and his life was but a voyage of
Obedience, and an exile of Love. What can God desire more of him?

This is yet not all God requires of him, and the trials, though too long and
too harsh, God hitherto made of his fidelity, were but the Prologues of a
combat which must be far more rigorous. Love is content to put a staff in his
Hand to walk him through the World, but he immediately presents him with a Sword
to undertake a dreadful Duel, though it be a Duel of Love.

Well then, Abraham take your dear Isaac, Ait illi: toll filtum tuum
unigenitum que^ diligis Isaac, and vade in terram visionis, atque ibi offeres
cum in Holocaustum super unum montium quem monstravero tibi. Genesis 22. v. 2.
this only Son, and this Amiable Child, on whom you fix all your hopes, and all
your most solid contentments. Abraham, it is time to restore unto me the
depositum I gave you; he is mine, I lent him to you, but now demand him back;
and I command you to immolate him unto me, take him then without further delay,
and from this instant go whither I shall conduct you.

Is it not unto God alone the absolute power of command belongs? and is it
not the duty of Abraham to be silent and to perform without reply what God
commands? But what, I beseech you, would a passionat Father say upon this
occasion? would he not have some ground to say, if he had the same cause as
Abraham?

Alas, Lord, The Speech of a passionat Father who speaks for Abraham.
where are the advantageous promises thou have so often made me? Have thou lost
the remembrance of Abraham, Sara, and Isaac? Do thou not take me for some
other? or at least if thou look upon me as a Father, why do thou enjoin me
to perform so rigorous an office? I hambly beseech thee, my God, Semel be^tus
es Deus. Psalm.
not to forget thy words and thy own self; remember that thy Mouth is as
unchangeable as thy Heart, and that it is an injury unto the immutability of
thy Essence, to alter the least of thy Decrees. How can we then believe that
the Sacrifice of humane Bodies are detestable in thy sight if thou do command
them? whither will Innocence go to seek life, if thou Judge an Innocent to
death? what encouragement shall we have to serve thee, if thou thus treatest
thy Servants? and what attractives will creatures have to love thee, if
Massacres be the pleages of thy Love? for my part I am afraid lest the
strongest spirits may revolt, and that the weak be scandalized at the
instability of thy oaths; thou have swern by thy self that my Isaac should be
a spring of Grace, and behold how thou dryest it up even when it is upon the
point of becoming an Ocean of Benedicities. My God! what shall I say unto my
Son, when he shall entreat me to tell him the cause of his death? How shall I
tie his hunds, when he shall embrace me? and if I have the Heart of a Father to
love him, how can I have arms to kill him? Ah! surely no Man shall ever
persuade me that a God, who is the anther of Nature, will command me a streak
which appears to me so unnatural; and should I assent, Sara would even snatch
the weapon out of my hand, she would rather offer her self to serve as a
Victim, than give way to the Sacrifice of her Son: Let us then no longer think
of it, O my God, my Eyes would be dimmed with tears at the sight of my Ifaack,
my Heart would burst into a thousand pieces at the lest dart of his affection,
and my Hands could never be cleared of this stain, if I had once sullied them
in the blood of my Son. My God, permit me rather to Sacrifise unto thee the
Remnant of my old age, and receive rather this Soul which I have upon my Lips,
and which is but too weary of the World; But as for Isaac, suffer a flower to
grow which thou have planted with thine own hand, and according to thy promises
water it with thy Benedictions. What! An Abraham to Massacre an Isaac? A
Father, the most Cordial, and the most affectionate of the World, to kill the
most amiable and the most accomplished Son that has ever been? A Father, who
for the space of a hundred years has expected a Son, to lose him in a moment?
The preparation for his Marriage was already in my thoughts, and they show me an
Altar, a Pile, and a Sepulcher for his Nuptial Bed. What rigor more inhumane?
what Laws more barbarous? And what command more cruel can we figure to our
selves? My God pardon me, it is visible to me that I have erred, but grief even
extorts these Blasphemies, and my Tongue betrays my Heart, I will speak then
from benceforth with more respect; Give me I beseech thee the Eyes of a Tiger,
the Teeth of a Wolf, and the Soul of a Lion, if thou will have me devour this
Lamb; blind me lest I behold this Forehead, this Face, and these Eyes, on
which my Love has engraven his Picture. Lord I acknowledge my fault for having
so often begged him of thee, my vows have been over-violent, my desires too
importune, and I still feel an overardent fire in my Bosom; cast then into it a
Deluge of Wormwood, to stiflle such sweet ardors: However, if thou do command
me to be the Executioner of thy severest Judgments, and if thou absolutely
desire I should strike off my Isaacks head, and that I should bury him in the
fire, I beseech thee instead of a Sword put a Thunderbolt into my Hands, to the
end at the same instant I shall give him the stroke of death, I may so him
environed with the flames of thy severest Justice.

Without doubt, this would be the discourse of a Father, whose Soul should be
agitated with various passions, and the most part of these resentments are more
proper for a Man whose Eyes Nature, Blood, the World, and Infidelity had snut
against the purest lights of Heaven, than for Abraham who never followed other
Torch than that of Divine Providence. Never then were such Sacrilegious
Complaints, and shameful murmurs heard to issue forth of his Mouth, as daily
proceed from Fathers and Mothers, who have nothing but worldly respects, and no
other care but to erect upon the Cradle of their Children all the Trophies of
their desires and hopes.

Abraham wills but what God wills, The resignation of Abraham.
and instead of following the Motives of Reason and humane discourses, he
abandons himself into the arms of a perfect Obedience, and of that Faith which
showed him Life even in the Bosom of Death. He was ready to immolate Isaac,
and the Love he had for his God made him wish to himself a Destiny like that of
his Son. This Man, says Origin, was not astonished at the voice of so harsh a
Command, he refused nothing, and took Counsel of no living Soul, resting
content to obey his God.

This Just Patriarch, says St. Zenon, preferred the Love of the Creator before
that of the Creature. And albeit a natural resentment tore his very Bowels and
Heart, yet at the same time his Soul did Swim in the delights of a passion,
which has nothing in it but Supernatural; so that two Loves offered two
Sacrifices, the one Immolated the Father, the other Sacrifised the Son.

O Love, The Empire of Love.
Love, delicious Tyrant, adorable Conqueror, Independent Monarch, how powerful
are thy Darts when God casts them? What Power, what Victory, and what Command
do thou Exercise on the Heart of Abraham? whence come these dazeling
Charities thou minglest with thy Killing shafts and with thy Consuming fires?
My God, what Miracle of Power? what Prodigy of Faith? what Triumph of
Constancy? a Heart without Motion, Eyes without Tears, a silent Tongue, a
Father without regret, without grief, and without complaint upon the Tomb of
one only and dearly beloved Son.

This faithful Minister of the Will of God, would be much more grieved that
other hands than his should be used, and that a Sacrificer should be sought
elsewhere. The Spirit of Abraham is like a Rock in the midst of the Ocean, The
Emblem of that Rock immob^^is.
beaten with Waves, watered with Rain, subject unto Winds and Tempests;
whatsoever happens always unmovable, ever immutable. It is enough that God
speaks; All comes from him, all is his, and all must return to him. It
suffices Abraham, that God is the Master of Abraham and the Father of Isaac.
It is enough that God is the King, the Master, and the Father of Abraham, and
Isaac. It is in vain to be disquieted, since it suffices that God commands,
and that whatever he enjoins be performed, and to live in the practice of this
verity is to be in the Paradise of this World, and to enjoy Beatitude by
anticipation. It is to row upon the sea as a vessel under the conduct of a
Pylot who cannot be deceived; It is to be at court under the command of a most
sage and powerful Prince, who seeks only to replenish us with his favors, or
like a Star guided by an Intelligence, which cannot stray out of the way marked
out unto it. Perform then, Abraham, all that God says unto thee; and thou O my
God command Abraham all that thou desire. Is it his life thou requirest? It
is thine. Is it that of Jsaack? it is thy self who have bestowed it on him,
take them both.

But O God of goodness! remember that Abraham is a Man, that he is a Father,
that he has but One Son, and that he Loves nothing in comparison of this Son;
place not all these objects of Pity before his Eyes, rest sattisfyed in
Sacrificing the Son without causing the death of the Father; lay some cover
over the Fore head of the Priest, and over the Eyes of the Victime: And do not
solicit the tenderness of either, and speak neither of Abraham nor Jsaack,
nor of the Father or Son; but pronounce the decree in most rigorous terms, and
call no more upon the name of Sweetness and Love, for that were to solicit
his disobedience.

God nevertheless calls Abraham twice, Martyrdom of Love.
and expressly commands him to Sacrifise his Son, and not only his Son, but
also his Only Son, and to wound him yet more to the quick, he adds the name of
his beloved Son, that is of Jsaack.

O God! what shafts: what Thunderbolts? and what Lighting? In truth, says
Procopius, any one but Abrah^m had taken this advertisement from God for an
illusion, or for a subject of contempt: But, as Abbot Gue^y has excellently
well noted, this venerable title of Father, and this amable name of Son, serve
but to conjoyn Love with Piety, and oblige Abraham to perform more religiously
and cordially what was given him in charge. Vt postea praepouat amorem Dei suo
carnali emori, ut cum vintet gloriosier esset victoria. Hug^ a S^ncto victore
ann. in. 22. Genesis sint and in hoc parenti triplicata supplicia, etc. Origenes
hic.
Moreover, says Huge of St. Victor, God recalled into his Thought that this
was his Only Son, as if he had desired the more to excite his natural
affection, to the end the Victory and Triumph might be the more famous, since
the Love of God became Master of his heart: In fine, as the subtle and learned
Origin concludes, God will have Abraham first sacrifise his Only Son, secondly
his Only and Welbeloved Son, and thirdly his Only Son and his dear Jsaack, as
if he had meant by these three shafts of Love to have three Sacrifices, and
three Conquests, of Obedience, Faith, and Love. Behold very powerful combats,
and as many Strokes of death as words. Abraham did not yet change color, and
his face was as the Sun, which sees all the horrors of the Earth without
emotion: his Constancy appeared in the midst of Passions, The Emblem of the
fish. Immersabilis. Nec dolor patri lacrymas persuasit, sed exultat and gaudet.
S. Zeno veron. sermon. 1. de Abraham.
like the Dolphin in a Tempest and storm, without danger of drowning. This
Magnanimous Soul, this generous heart, and this obedient spirit, shed but tears
of joy, and his thoughts were fixed only on Hope, Love, and Resignation.

CHAP. XI. The Masterpiece of Obedience, and the Triumph of Love in the
Sacrifice of Abraham.
A Heart perfectly Submissive, and obedient unto Gods will, S. Bernard. de
praecepto, and dispensat.
knows not what languishment, refusal, grief, and delay means. It is enough
that he is commanded to obey, all the rest is indifferent to him. And it is
peradventure for this Cause, that even the civil Laws moderate the rigours of
Justice, Just^ home ad legem. Aquisiam.
when we proceed against those who have acted in pure obedience; and in such a
case, he is to be fallen upon, who gave the command, Provided Nevertheless he
had the power to Command. Even so when it is the will of a Sovereign, all
Subjects ought to Obey: And chiefly, when God, who is the absolute Monarch of
the Universe, does Command, nothing must appear under his Empire which adores
not his Laws, and follows not his Lights even amidst the shadows of an
affectionate Blindness.

Such was Abraham, The Symbols of the Heliotropium. Non possum alto me vertere.
Typ. in Symb. A solis ortu usque ad occasum.
and his Spirit blind as it were amidst the Splendors of Faith and Obedience,
resembled that Flower which incessantly courteth the Sun, and has neither
Life, Motion, nor Eyes, but from Morning till Evening to follow this Star.

He sets forth as soon as God Commands him, and as if his Eyes had been shut
against the Lights of the Day, he rises in the Night, by the favor of those
Lights and Rays, which God communicates unto him amidst the obscurities of the
shades to serve him for a Watchtower, Sun and Day. This happy Paricide, as St.
Austin says, undertook the Murder of his Son with the same devotions where
with he had demanded his Birth and Life: and least the Morning, Devotus Pater
eo voto suscepit paricidium, quo susceperat filium, Aug. Ser. 73.
says Rupertus, should prevent his desires, he rose before Day, and presently
provided himself of all necessaries for his Journey, and for the Sacrifice of
his Son.

My God! Igitur Abraham de nocte consurgens stravit asinum suum, ducens secum
dues juvenes, and Isaac filium suum. Genesis 22. v. 3.
what sad preparation and sorrowful departure! this poor old Man takes his
Ass, and chose two or three of his Servants to go along with him; and having
made up a Faggot of Thorns and Bushes with his own Hands, he laid them on the
Shoulders of his dear Isaac.

But what will Sara say? And what can she think when at her waking she shall
find neither Abrahare nor Isaac? Poor Mother! what will thou do? Is it
possible that Abrah^m could conceal a Design which cannot be kept from (...)?

We must freely confess, that there are Souls of Gold, and Hearts of Diamond in
Bodies of Crystal: It cannot be denied that there be Women as constant and
courageous as Men; their Sex though frail, tender, and delicate, often brings
forth Amazons, who have nothing of Softness, Levity and Effeminacy, but the
bare name. It cannot be also doubted but Sara was of this number, And I am
confident if Abraham had made known to her the will of God, at the first news
she her self would have performed the Office of a Sacrificer to immolate her
Son.

Nevertheless I will believe with the most part of the interpreters of
Scripture, and of the Greek and Latin Fathers, that Abraham who might have
discharged into her Bosom part of his afflictions, resolved to endure alone
this Martyrdom of Love.

He is then all alone upon the way with his Son and his two Servants, and he
advances directly to Mount Moria as to the appointed place.

My dear Reader, I leave unto thy imagination what passed for the space of
three days this journey lasted; represent unto thy self, I beseech thee, that
thou art with him, whom thou do love above all men, thou see him, thou
speak to him, thou drinkest to him, and sleep with him, how will it be if
at thy departure thou must see him die? and if thou thy self must present him
the poison which is to stifle him? Husbands and Wifes, Fathers and Mothers,
Brothers, Kindred, Associats, Friends, what Torments? what despairs? what
punishments? when you stand at the Beds Feet, where you shall behold your
dearest affections, and your most pleasing delights in the Agony of death, what
corabats, Duel of Grief and Love.
and what Duels of Love, and Grief? what strength and resolutions to receive
the last words and sighs of a dying Mouth, to which a thousand and a thousand
chaste kisses have been given, and whose least breath was able to wipe away all
sorts of sorrows? what Prodigle of constancy to close with your Hands two which
served as sunns in the saddest obscurities of Life, which is but too much
intermingled with mourning and pleasure? In fine, how can we see with out
dying, an other self at the point of death?

Nevertheless, this was but the image of a dying life, Martyrdom for three
days.
which Abraham led for the space of three days; one would swear that God had
undertaken to make him dye ten thousand times upon this sad way; every glance
of Isaac was a mortal Javelin, which pierced his Heart, and yet he must have
him three times four and twenty hours before his Eyes; there was a necessity of
eating, drinking, and speaking with him: were not these entertainments, and
Feasts of Death? He was constrained during the night to lay on his Breast, and
in his Bosom, that Head he was to cut off with his own Hands: was not this a
murdering sleep and a cruel repose? In fine, he must render all the duties of
a Father to so amiable a Son, before he was to be his Executioner, and he must
needs hear almost every moment the voice of Isaac calling him Father, who went
to murder him.

My God! what Preludes of death? what Preparation to a Martyrdom, what Dialogue
of Passions? what affections, what dissimulations, what sorrows, what
pleasures, what hopes, and what despairs? A Father, a Son, a Priest, a Victim,
Wood, Fire, a Sword. Isaacks Eyes and Heart are fixed on his Father, and
Abraham lost not the sight of Isaac but to behold his God. At every step this
poor old Man sends a sigh to Heaven to evaporate grief, which being shut up
redoubles the more.

Surely my Heart even bleeds upon the bare thought of this pitiful object.
Alas! how could Abraham look on the criminal Sword which was to give the
stroke: where did he carry this instrument of Gods Justice? me thinks I hear
Isaac at every stop saying, My Father and Abraham answering Son, take courage,
Die autem tertio ete natis ocutis procul. Genesis 21.2.4.
let us go my dear Child, we draw near to Moria.

O God! what vision and what approaches? Mountain of Moria have thou no
compassion, will not thy tops, thy rocks, and thy stones mollify rigours, at
the sight of so tragic an act, and which seems so unnatural? Mountain of
Moria become thou a plain rather than put this poor old Man, and this young
Child to the trouble of ascending thy top, where they are going to erect an
Altar, and hew a Tomb.

But what! Nature cannot be sensible when her God deprives her of feeling, Aug.
in ser. de temp. 71 existimat eundem faisse montem Moria qui Calvaria.
and Moria must not have greater tendernessees than the Heart of Abraham; These
Mountains make an essay of rigor at Jacobs cost to become afterward
insensible at the death of a Jesus of whom Isaac was but an Image and figure.

Let Abraham then perform resolutely the office of God the Father, and let not
Isaac be ashamed with his own Blood, to mark out the way unto Jesus. Let
Abraham take his Sword to strike off Isaacks Head, and let Isaac take the Wood
on his Shoulders which was provided to consume him, since Jesus has carried
the Cross on which he suffered.

O God! Dixitque ad pueros suos: expectate hic cum asino, ego and puer illuc
usque properantes, postquam aderaverimus, revertemur ad vos. Genesis 22. v. 3.
Tulit quoque ligna Holocausti, and imposuit super Isaac filium suum: ipse vero
portabat in manibus ignem, and gladium, cumque duo pergerent simul, Genesis 22. v.
6.
O Abraham! O Jesus! O Isack! where is Sara? where is Mary? my God what
Relatives are these? Abraham is already at the foot of the Mountain, he
commands his Servants away, he takes his only Isaac, he loads him with the
instruments of his punishment. Let us go my dear Child, let us go my Son, let
us go my Isaac, my Joy, my Hope and my Love.

Father whither do we go, Dixit Isaac Patri suo: Pater mi, at ille respondit,
quid vis fili? Ecce inquit ignis, and ligna, ubi est Victima Holocausti? Genesis
22. v. 7. Dixitque Abraham, Deus providebit sibi victimam Holocausti fili mi,
pergebant ergo pariter. Genesis 22. v. 7.
answered Isaac? Alas what is your desire? I indeed see the Fire and the Sword
which you carry, as also the Wood on my Shoulders, but where is the Victim,
which must be offered as an Holocaust? My Son trouble not your self; for God
will provide one.

O Holy! Piety where are the Bowels of a Father? Heaven and Earth where are we?
my God! how long will this storm endure? Whence comes this ebbing and flowing,
which strikes so rudely on the Faith of a Father, and the Obedience of a Son.
My God! if thou desire a Holocaust, give unto Abraham an other Victim then
Isaac; how comes it to pass, that Abraham can observe the Law of the
Hollocaust, which injoyns the Victim to be cut in pieces, and ordains, that the
Members be disposed at the Altar taking their turns, to burn them afterward
and reduce them to ashes. Ah! there is no Fathers Heart which can exercise so
inhumane cruelties and so horrid and unnatural a Butchery on the Body of his
Son. Vultures devour only the Flesh, Tigers leave at least the Bones, Wheels,
Ironclaws and wracks do but tear the skin, and after all these punishments
there are found relics of anguish and death, but the Holocaust consumes all,
and reduces the Body into ashes and dust. What will remain then of Isaac for
Abraham to carry unto Sara, but ashes, dust, and the eternal regret for a loss
that can never be repaired?

Abraham notwithstanding persists in his fidelity, Et venerunt ad locum quem
ostenderat ei Deus, in quo adificavit altar, and desuper ligna composuit,
cumque alligasset Isaac filium suum posuit eum in altar super struem lignorum.
Genesis 22. v. 9.
he makes ready the Altar, he sets the Wood in order, he kindles the Fire, he
draws his Sword out of the Scabbard, he takes Isaac into his arms, he places
him near the pile, he ties his Hands, and puts the cover over his forehead; In
fine, this Innocent Lamb being on both his Knees, his Body half naked, and his
Head bowed a little forward sighing sweetly without making the least complaint,
or demanding any more why, expected, the stroke of death when his Father (as it
is very probable) began to acquaint him with the secret of his happy Lot.

Isaac, my most dear Son, Joseph. lib. 1. hist. S. Ambr. and alii.
thou did ask me at the foot of the Mountain, where was the Victim of our
Sacrifice, I answered thee, that God would provide one; his Paternal Goodness
has done it, and his will is that thou must be the Victim, and I the Priest:
It is very true, that thou art the object of my sweetest hopes, and that I
should look on thee as the support of my house; but it is in God we must place
our only hope; It is he that serves for a Basis and Pillar to all fortunes, and
it is his sage Providence, which holds in its hands good and evil, favors and
disgraces, Life and Death. Dye then cheerfully my dear Child, and rest assured
that I would willingly put my self in thy place, if God had so ordained. I
adore his will, and I am too happy to serve as an instrument unto his commands?
As for thee my poor Son, I had very constant proofs of thy sweet disposition,
and, if I had not often tried how obedient and pliable thou art unto Gods will
and mine, I should endeavor more efficaciously to persuade thee; but it would
be fruitless, and it is from Gods goodness and thy constancy I hope for the
Grace of being enabled to offer and immolate thee with my own Hands.

What can Isaac say to this? it is enough for him to assent and be silent; I
yet frame in my imagination, that he besought his Father to give him his Sword,
that he might kiss it as the rod of the wise Providence of Heaven. I believe
also he bowed down his Head a little more forward to testify that his thoughts
accorded with his Heart, and that his most real affections were ready to be
immolated unto God and his Father.

In the mean while Abraham takes his Sword again into his Hand, and having
bathed it with his tears, he lifts up his arm to discharge his blow upon the
Neck of his Son.

O Religious Soul, O religiosam animam, o fortem mentem, O trgens robur animi!
utrum admirer, and obstrpescam sustius, fortemue spiritum Patriarchae, aut
constantem pueri obedientram, Ch^yf. ho. in. Genesis 48.
cries out St. Chrysostom, O vigorous Spirit, O prodigy of constancy and
fidelity! I know not whether I ought more to admire the undaunted force of
Abraham's Spirit; or the constant immutability of his Isaacks Submission.

But what will be the issue, will not all the Angels of Heaven who look upon
this Sacrifice put some Victim in Isaacks place? divine Spirits, I call on you
for Abraham and Isaac.

Ah! says St. Austin, Videte Abraham non cum aliqua fera luctantem, sed cum
natura pugaantem, decotio dicebat pecute, pietas clamabat parce, illa
revocabat, issa provocabat. Aug. Ser. 73. de temp.
behold I beseech you the conflict of Abraham, not with a furious Beast, but
with Nature. Religion bids him strike, and pity says, do not strike, the
first lifts upon his Hand, and the other stays his arm: what will this good
Man do? what will he not do; if he obeyes not God, he commits Sacrilege, and
if he obeys, he is a Murderer.

But is it not better for him to be accounted a good Father, than a good
Servant? And will not Abraham's Disobedience be rather excused than the Murder
of his Son? Abraham believed otherwise, and the choice he made was to lose the
quality of a Pitiful Father, to receive the title of an Obedient Servant.
Nevertheless he still hopes, and is assured whatever happen that God is too
full of Clemency to leave him in extremity.

In effect, as Abraham had already lifted up his arm, Et ecce Angelus Domini de
Caelo clamtvit dicens, Abraham, Abraham, qui respondit adsum. Genesis 22. v. 11.

Dixitque ci, non extendas manum tuam super puerum, neque sacias illi quidquam
nunc cognovi quod limes Deum, and non pepercisti unigenito tuo propter me. Genesis
22. v. 12.


and was ready to dart the Thunderbolt God had put into his Hand, the Voice of
an Angel cries out, Abraham, Abraham, I command thee from God not to touch the
Child, and to pass no farther.

It is certainly the very same that commanded Abraham to strike, who stays his
blow; It is the Voice, it is the Angel and Nuntio of our Lord which keeps back
his Arm. And surely, it was requisite that the same power, which before had
armed him, should force the Weapon out of his Hand, and that Abraham should
have as much promptitude and resignation, to leave his Sacrifice, as to
undertake and begin it. O God! what mysteries of Wisdom, Clemency and Goodness?
My God! what Trials of Love, what Essays of Fidelity, and what grounds of Hope
and Confidence? have we ever seen so many temptations heaped together, so many
Artifices to know a Heart, and so many divine experiments upon poor Mortals? so
that the whole Sacrifice of Abraham was but a stratagem of Gods Providence, and
a Masterpiece of Abraham's and Isaacks Obedience.

The Altar of Moria which was to be the Scaffold of Death, became the Theater
of Life, and his Pile served but to make a Bonfire of Joy, and a triumph of the
fidelity which Abraham and Isaac testified unto God.

Besides, I know not who was most astonished, the Father or the Son; however it
were, Abraham unbound his Isaac, and then they both together adored the
admirable contrivances of Gods goodness who did tear out a Man's Heart to put
his own in the place of it, A Divine Stratagem.
and who commands us to give him a mortal and perishable life, that he may
place us in the fruition of one eternal and immortal.

It is sufficient for this God of Clemency and mercy, to see Men at his Feet;
he is content with that Sacrifice which the Heart offers to him, and he will
have neither Blood nor Murder presented on his Altars. It satisfies him to
immolate his only Jesus for the ransom of Mankind: His Death gives us Life, and
the least drop of his sacred Veins is able to wash away all the stains of the
Universe.

Stay then Abraham; Levavit Abraham oculos suos, viditque post tergum arietem,
inter vepres haerentem cornibus quem assumens obtulit Holccaustum profilio.
the blow is reserved for some other not for thy Son, and it only belongs to
the Eternal Father to offer the Sacrifice in verity, the figure whereof has
preceded. No, it shall not be Isaac, thou must immolate but this Ram, which
thou see in this Bush surrounded with Brambles, and Crowned with thorns, take
him, and burn this Victim, till a Man-God come in Isaacks place. It is enough
for me, says God unto Abraham, to know that thou love me, and I can now no
longer doubt, after so long and sensible trials. It is the Hand and not the
Mouth which has given me the assurance of it; It is also rather by effects
than complements that I try thy fidelity.

O God of Hearts, it is then in verity that Hearts must be Sacrificed to thee.
Fathers and Mothers, if God will have your Children, make a free gift of them;
if God be content with you, offer your selves unto him. My God! I will even now
then consecrate my Heart to thee: I renounce at present all those things I may
not Love with thee; I present unto thee the Sacrifice of my humiliated Spirit,
and I refuse no pain if thou ordainest it for me; Burn, Sacrifise, and spare
neither Health, Honor, Riches, Children nor Friends; I am even content to
Immolate my Isaac to thee, that is my Soul, my Affections, and my Life,
provided I may Live with thee and Love thee in Glory and Eternity.

CHAP. XII. The Death of Sara.
A Certain person holily curioius, went heretofore examining all that is
dispersed in Nature; I asked, says he, of the Sun, whether he were a God, and
he answered me no, in regard he was subject to Eclipses, Circumvolutions,
Vicissitudes, Genesis 22. v. 13.
and a thousand periods which keep him in a perpetual mutation. Inconstancy of
created things.
I entreated the Moon to tell me whether she were a Divinity, and she protested
to me no, by reason of Exiles, Defections, Retrogradations, Ascendants,
Conjunctions, Separations, Elevations, and falls to which she is liable. All
the rest of created Nature will confess the same if we interrogate her in
particular, upon this verity; God only can say, I am God, and I neither can nor
do change, because I am God. He is in the midst of the World as the immovable
Center in a Circle, about which all is in motion; he is as a Rock upon the
Ocean, who beholds the Waves and Billows rolling under his Feet, without
inconstancy and astonishment. He is pleased nevertheless to see those he loves
in the Flux and Reflux of a thousand accidents, which teach them, that their
fortunes, hopes, affections and delights may alter every moment; that the most
smiling prosperities often swim amidst tears; the clearest and most serene
days are followed sometimes by the obscurest and most dusky Nights: Bodies for
Companions have their own Shadows, Roses are mixed with Thorns, and even the
Life of Man never Ends but in Death. To see Abraham, Sara, and Isaac, after
their deliverance, and the trials God had of their fidelity, would not one have
believed them almost immortal and exempted from all the miseries of life? Tunc
est tentatio fiaienda, quando finitur and pugna, and tunc finienda est pugna,
quando post hanc vitam succedit pugnae secura victoria. S. Prosper. lib. 3. de
cont. vitae.
And yet scarce were they returned to their own home, but Abraham and Isaac
met with a new occasion of grief for the Death of Sara; And no wonder, says
St. Prosperus, since the Life of Man is a War without truce, and since we ought
not to hope or expect Peace but in the Tomb. And indeed, as Hildebert has well
noted, it is not without reason that these storms succeed one another, Attend
miscrias hominis, intuere cineres vectigalia peccati sunt. S. Hild. Ep. 56.
and that usually one vapor draws others, by reason the Earth since the
contagion of the terrestrial Paradise, has been a fatal source of Miseries
and Calamities, which took their birth from the first sin of our unfortunate
Parents, who left unto their Children for an inheritance and punishment a chain
wrought with all sorts of infelicities.

This yoke then is common to all Men, and there is no person, whom God has not
subjected to the Laws of this sad Captivity.

The strictest unions must break, the sincerest friendships must have an end,
and even Marriages themselves of which God was the sacred knot, must at length
make a Tragic Divorce upon a Bed which is the most common Theater of the blind
furies of Death.

We ought to confess nevertheless that it is a spectacle able to excite the
Constancy of a good Courage, when we shall behold this unmercifull Murdress
which snatcheth away Daughters out of their Mothers Bosoms, and Sons in the
sight of their Fathers, and Wifes between the Arms of their Husbands.

In such a case, if Nature had not some tenderness, she would be unnatural,
and we must have Hearts of Marble not to be touched with some sense of grief
and pity: Abraham had then just cause to testify by his tears, the regret he
had for his dear Sara's Death; Vixit autem Sara centum viginti septem annis.
Genesis 23. v. 1.
And surely since he lost so rare a blessing, well might he disconsolatly
bewayl it.

This mourning was not yet blameable, and he was very careful not to do like
those, who bury all their affections in the preparation of a Funeral pomp, and
who have but a shadowed mien, or else not being able sufficiently to disguise
their looks, strive to hide under the Veils and shadows of a Bed or dark
Chamber, the shame of their insensibility.

Abraham shed more tears from his Heart, Et mortua est in civitate Arbee quae
est Hebron in terra Chanaan, venitque Abraham ut plangeret and fleret eam. Genesis
23. v. 2.
than by his Eyes, and in rendering all duties to Nature and his Wife, he most
amply satisfied God, and his own piety: while he was a Pilgrim and stranger in
the Land of Canaan, Sara being Dead in the City of Hebron, he went directly
into the place where his Wifes Body reposed.

There he offered up his Prayers unto God, and kissed a thousand times these
amiable relics, watering them from time to time with his tears.

All those who assisted this Holy Man, might well perceive the tears which
distilled from his Eyes, and hear the groans which issued forth of his Mouth;
But God alone knows the Acts of resignation.

He presently entreated Ephron to sell him a double Cave which was close by the
vale of Mambre to interr Sara in that place.

Ephron is willing to grant what he asks; but being at last as it were
enforced to take a sum of Money for the purchase of his Land, Abraham became
Master of the Field and Grot in which he laid the Body of his dear moity.

It is in this monument where the most generous Woman of her time reposeth;
Atque ita sepelivit Abrahum Saram uxorem suam in spelunca (...) duplici. Genesis
23. v. 19.
And under this Rock of Diamond will be found a Diamantine Heart in the Body of
Sara, who was a perfect pattern of Constancy and Fidelity.

CHAP. XIII. The Marriage of Isaac with Rebecca, and the Death of Abraham.
THe World is a Theater on which very different actions are seen. There
Voluptuousness smiles, and Grief has tears in its Eyes; Hope flies in the
imbaulmed Air, and Despair plungeth it self into an Abyss of Gall and poison;
Love and Sweetness catch Men in Nets wrought by the Hands of the Graces, and on
the contrary Hatred and Envy assasinate the Hearts of Men with enchanted Darts.
A Bloody Amphitheater.
In fine, whilst Life is fowing on all sides, Death mows down all before her.
Behold the common objects of the World, pleasures, sorrows, hopes, despairs,
loves, envies, furies, flatteries, Marriages, solemnities, life, death, birth, a
Chaos of disorder, a Labyrinth of unions and divorces, which make the course of
this life, but a list and Theater where all we can imagine is to be seen. Have
we not beheld all this in the life of Abraham? This poor Man then was in the
Hands of God and Providence, as a feather in the Air, which serves for sport
unto the Winds, and as a Planet in the Heavens, which never rests, or as a
Wheel in the Water, which is always turning and in a continual motion: God
led him out of Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Canaan and Egypt; from thence he causes
him to return unto the Cunanites, where he stays for some time in the City of
Sichem, sometime in that of Hebron, afterward in Gerara, and then in Bershabe,
and again in Hebron, as if he could not live but in Traveling, during whose
Voyages Heaven is pleased to afford him a thousand Combats, and as many
occasions of Victory.

In fine, after the deliverance of his Son, ^rat antem Abraliam senex,
dierumqtie multorum, etc. Genesis 2^. v. 1.

^orrvaque ad servom seniorem Domus suae qui praeerat omnibus quae Dabebat:
pone manum tuum sulter s^mur meum, Genesis 24. v. 2.

Vt adjurem teper Dominum Deum Caela and terrae, ut non accipias u^o^em filio
meo de filithus Chananaeorum inter quos habito. Genesis 24. v. 3. Sed ad terram,
and cognationem meam praficisearis, and inde accipias u^^orem filio meo Isaac.
Genesis 24. v. 4.


and the death of his Wife, he feeling himself wholly broken with old age, and
upon the point of following the happy Lot of Sara, resolved to seek a Wife for
Isaac, and for that end he calls one of the most faithful Servants of his
House called Eliezer, and having commanded him to lay his Hand under his Thigh,
he conjured him by the name of God to seek a match for his Son in the Land of
Haram, as if this Country had inherited from Cham, its first Lord, the
malediction which Noah had fulminated against him.

Which being done, this wise Ambassador chosen amongst the Domestics of
Abraham, began his journey to execute the designs and Commission of his Master,
Posuitergo servus manum subsemore Abraham Domini sus, etc. Genesis 24. v. 9.

Tult quc december Camelos degrege Domini sui and ^biit ex omnibus honis esus
portans secum, prof^^tusque pervexit in Mesopotamiam ad urse em Nachor. Genesis
24. v. 10.


and departing from Bershabe he went directly to Mesopotaneia carrying with him
ten large Camels laden with the rarest and most magnificent presents which
were in Abraham's House.

Behold him then in the City of Nachor meditating with himself upon all the
readiest and most facile means to expedite what had bin given him incharge.
What will he do?

First he departs out of the City and repayring where Women in their turns were
wont to draw Water, Cumque Camelos fecisset accumbere extra op illum juxta
puteu^ aquae, etc. Genesis 24. v. 11.
he there rests his Camels, expecting until Heaven should offer the
opportunity he desired.

During this expectation he offered up his prayers unto God, saying, Lord God
of Abraham, Dominus meus Demini met Abraham, occur obsecro milu hodie, and
fac mise^^cordiam cum Domino meo Abraham. Genesis 24. v. 12.

Ecce ego sto prope fontem aquae, and filiae habitatorum hujus Civitatis
egredientur ad hauriendam aquam. Genesis 24. v. 13.

Igitur puella cui ego dixero: inclina hydriam tuam, ut biba^, and illa
responderit, bibe, quin and Camelis tuis dabo potum: ipsa est quam praeparasli
servo tue Isaac, etc. Genesis 24. v. 14.

Nec dum intra se verba compleverat, and ecce Rebecca egrediebatur, habens
bydriam in scapula sua. Genesis 24. v. 15.

Occurritque ei ser vus, and ait: pauxillum aquae mihi ad bibendum praebe de
hydria tua. Genesis 24. v. 17. Quae respondit, bibe Domine mi, etc. Genesis 24. v. 18.

Ipse autem contemplebatur eam tacitus, etc. Genesis 24. v. 21.


cast I beseech thee some propitious and favorable look upon the designs of my
Master; Great God take pity of Abraham thy faithful Servant, it is by his
appointment I am in these territories, I expect here but the hour when the Maid
shall come to draw Water out of this Fountain; If then, My God, thou do give
me this advice, I resolve to entreat the first which shall approach it, to
afford me some Water to drink, if she grant me this favor, by this Sign I
shall presently believe, that it is doubtless she, whom thy holy Providence
has appointed for Isaacks Spouse.

Scarce had Eliezer ended this Coloquie, when a Maid called Rebecca appeared,
fair and chaste as the Day, who carried under her Arm and Earthen Pitcher to
take up Water, Eliezer presented himself, humbly beseeching her to afford him
some drink, to which Rebecca presently assented performing all that Courtesy
and Charity required.

The holy Scripture observes, that Eliezer very seriously contemplated all the
actions of Rebecca, as being a Myrrour, in which he was to discern the marks of
Gods conduct concerning Abraham and Isaac.

In fine, Pollquam autem biberunt Cameli, protulit vir inaures aureas
appendentes ciclos duos, and armill as toticem poudo ciclorum december. Genesis 24.
v. 22. Dixitque ad eam: cujus es filia? indica miht: est in domo Patris tui
locus ad manendum? Genesis 24. v. 23.

Cueurrit itaque puella, and nunttavit in domum matris suae omnia quae
audierat. Genesis 24. v. 28.

Habebat autem Rebecca fratrem nomine Laban, qui festinus egressus est ad
hominem ubi erat sons. Genesis 24. v 29.

Et intreduxit eum in hospititem, etc. Genesis 24. v. 32.


this prudent Man chose a fit time to present unto Rebecca some Eare-rings and
Bracelets. Afterward he informed himself of the conveniences which were in the
House of this Maids Parents who spoke unto him. Being then well instructed
concerning the alliances of Rebecca, and what was in her House, seeing also
that all corresponded with his desires, he threw himself on the ground to
render thanks unto his God, and to adore his ineffable goodness toward Abraham.

Mean while Rebecca hastens to her Parents to bring them the first news of what
had passed, whereof her Brother whose name was Laban, having taken notice, he
went presently unto the Well from whence Rebecca came.

Finding Eliezer, he most affectionatly entreated him to visit his Fathers
House, and having conducted him thither, he immediately gave Hay and Straw to
his Camels, afterward he washed his Feet, as also the Feet of those who came
with him. Then Eliezer took occasion to publish the Commission which had been
given him, and the artifices he had used to bring them to a Head, and to
understand whether it were the will of God that Rebecca should be Isaacks Wife.

Eliezer could not doubt it, and Rebecca but too much testified by her silence
that her desires consented thereunto. Bathuel and Laban were also of this
opinion, Respondernntque Laban and Bathuel, a Domino egressus est sermo, etc.
Genesis 24 v. 50.

Quod cum audisset puer Abraham, etc. Genesis 24. v. 52.

Prolatisque vasis argenteis, etc. Igitur Rebecca and puellae illius asconsis
Camelis, etc. Genesis 24. v. 61.


and therefore they were to dispose themselves to the commands of God.

The promise then of Marriage being given on both sides; Eliezer made presents
to Rebecca and her Brethren; after this there was nothing but Feasts and adieus
to the kindred of this new promise; briefly some Days must be spent in rendering
those duties which Honor and Nature required.

At last Rebecca took leave of her Mother and Brethren, she with Eliezer and
his servants got up upon Camels, and they advanced with the best diligence they
could to arrive at Abraham's House.

Isaac, who was always in expectation, Eo tempore deambulavit Isaac, etc.
Genesis 24. v. 62.

Cumque elevasset oculos vidit Camelos. Genesis 24. v. 63.

Rebecca quoque conspecto Isaac descendit de Camelo. Genesis 24. v. 64.

Servus autem cuncta quae gesserat narravit Isaac. Genesis 14. v. 66. Qui
introduxit eam in tabernaculum Sarae matru suae, etc. Genesis 24. v. 67. Abraham
vero aliam duxit uxorem nomine Ceturam. Genesis 25.


first received the news of Rebecca's arrival. I leave to your thoughts what
Joy, what kisses and what embraces. However it were, Rebecca is brought into
the same apartment which Sara had while she lived, and immediately the Marriage
of Isaac with Rebecca was accomplished according to the Ordinances of Heaven,
and the desires of Abraham, who after this Marriage took a Wife called Ketura,
by whom he had six Children, who served to carry their Fathers Name and Blood
through numerous Generations.

Moreover, amongst all their Children Isaac is the Master of the House, and
Heir to all the possessions of Abraham.

I leave men to think as they please in what Ocean of delights Abraham's Heart
did Swim, Deditque Abraham cuncta quae possederat Isaac. Genesis 25. v. 6.
seeing all the Graces wherewith God had filled him; I am astonished why he
dyed not a thousand times for Joy at the sight of Isaac and his dear Wife, who
had no affections but for God, for him, and for the general good of his family.

But Abraham must render unto nature the ordinary tribute due unto her. Et
deficiens mortuus est in senectute bona, provect aeque aetatis, and plenus
dierum. Genesis 25 v. 8.

Sep^lierurt eum Isaac, and Ismael filii^fui. Genesis 25. v. 9.


This happy old Man, this Father of all the faithful, this King of Nations,
this incomparable Patriark, having lived like a Pilgrim upon Earth was obliged
at last to arrive at the Haven, and to dye in the arms of Isaac and Ismael,
who buried him in the same place where his Wife was interred.

End of the second Book.
THE HOLY HISTORY, FIRST TOME. JACOB and ESAU.
THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. Their Birth.
THere are many Causes, Fernelius Path. lib. 6.3.17.
according to the saying of Physicians, which may hinder the fruitfulness of a
Woman. There needs but an accident, and too violent, too obstinate, and sharp a
Malady to corrupt the humors, to burn, and to dry up all the vital Spirits,
and make a cruel havoc in the principal parts of the Body, where
obstructions, skirrusses, Impostumes, and distempers which divert the course of
Generation, are formed. This is that which rendered the most illustrious Women
of the old Testament Barren; And Rebecca amongst others, was so, for the space
of nineteen years, Theodoretue. 74. q. ^. Genesis
as Theedoret has well observed, but by a particular disposition of the Divine
Providence which would manifest unto all men, that the multiplication of the
Children of Israel, was not so much the work of Nature as of Grace.

This hindered not Isaach from being much astonished, seeing Gods promises to
him unaccomplished; yet his Constancy was not shaken but he appeared always
the worthy Son of Abraham: These Verbal ejaculations of his Mouth were
agreeable to the sentiments of his Soul, and he had no other Weapons to assault
Heaven, and render it favorable and propitious, than Prayers, and Vows which
he incessantly presented unto God in the behalf of his Wife, who never ceased
on her part to demand the Birth of a Son: where it is to be noted with St.
Thomas, S. Thom. 1. p. q. 23. art. 8. and Thom. Anglicus in cap. 25. Genesis
that although God had engaged his word unto Isaac, and though Isaac could
not doubt of the assurances which had been given him, yet it was necessary to
solicit this Promise, and implore God to perform what he had promised; for
albeit God had from all Eternity ordained the Children of Isaac, yet this
Engagement was not so absolute, that it did not presuppose some endeavors on
Isaacks part, by which his expectation was to obtain its effect. This is the
reason why St. Thomas did observe in the design of God, and in the
predestination of Creatures, first an Eternal design, and next an Effect, which
follows at the same time God has ordained. Efficacious Prayers.
This first design conceived from all Eternity, is Independent of Vows and
Prayers; but the Effects of his Divine Ordinances are therein totally united,
because God has predestined them by the intervention of concurrent causes
which are as it were the voices which soilicite and call upon the sage
Providence and the ineffable goodness of God.

At the request then of Isaac Heaven was obliged to grant that at last, which
along time before God had promised him; and in effect behold Rebecca great with
Child and ready to lie down. But as the pleasures of the World are not durable,
so she quickly feels the appreaches of her labor; They are no other than pains
and throws, (...). Id est colluctabantur Scholiastes ex Symmacho (Rasas) Hebr.
confringere, Oleaster.
and her womb seemed to be a thick Cloud of thunders, and a Field of Ba^^tail,
in which two little Children begin an intestine War against each other, which
cannot end but by the destruction of the Mother, or the death of her Children.
O God! Collidebantur in utero ejus parvuli, quae aim si sic mihi futurum erat
quid necesse suit conciperei Genesis 25 v. 22.
what punishment (says this poor woman) what assaults? what torment? from
whence come these Vultures and Tigers which even tear my Bowels, and make a
bloody Butchery in my Womb? Ah God! why did I conceive if this misfortune must
befall me? Tyrannical desire! disastrous ambition: disloyal vanity! whither
have thou precipitated me? my God! what torture, what torment, and what a
Martyrdom is it to be a Mother? Alas! we conceive not, but amidst momentary
pleasures, we bear Children in our Womb as the Sea does Fishes in the midst of
Storms. We bring them forth like Amber and Pearls amidst Lightnings and
Tempests, like Pelicans we Nurse them up with Tears and Blood, and after all
these pains and cares, they prove Wolves and Vipers, which have only Teeth and
Claws to eat even into the Bones of their Parents.

Was it not for this reason, Mary Stuart.
a wise Queen of Scotland called Marriage a conflict between Grief and Love? Mar
ages subject to many mafortunes.
yes surely, many of them are but a Duel, a Martyrdom, and a Life where
affections run the first Cariere, but presently after either disdains, hatreds,
contempts, furies, jealousies, and finally all difasters are in continual
motion: Sometimes it is a Sword, S. Greg. Nys. lib. de virg. c. 23.
as St. Gregory says, whose Hilt is gilded, and the rest but a Murtherous
Blade, and the most common Instrument of Death.

The chaste Rebecca but too soon received the first wounds, and the
languishments of her sterility sufficiently taught her for the space of twenty
years how true it is. This nevertheless was but an essay until she came to
feel the struggling of two fencers of whom she had scarce conceived, but
immediately they began to tear the most tender and delicate parts of her body.
These preludes of death were so sensible, that she clearly discerned that it
was more than a human hand which gave her so harsh Combats. She immediately then
had recourse unto God, and perceiving that men could not help her, she
consulted with the Oracles of Heaven.

I will believe, with Theodoret, that to this effect she kept her self for
some days out of noise and tumult, knowing that it is almost impossible to
hear the voice of God amist the clamors and outcries of Men: Or at least as
the Author of the Scholastical history affirms, this virtuous woman ascended
the Mountain of Moria to offer sacrifice upon the same Altars Abraham had
crected; where, conformable to the opinon of St. Chrysostom, it seems more
probable that she took no counsel but of Melchisedeck, who was yet living in
her time, and the Interpreter of Gods will.

However it were, Perrexitque ut consuleret dominum. Genesis 25. v. 22.

Qui respondens ait: duae gentes sunt in utcro tuo, and duo populi ex ventre
tuo dividentur, populusque populum superabit and Major serviet Minori. Genesis 25.
v. 3.

David Chimbi in cap. 34. Jsaiae and Rabbi Solomon in 4. Thren. Aug. lib. 16.
de Civit Dei c. 25.


she consulted God^; and God answered her, that she bore too Nations in her
womb, and that two people should issue forth of her bowels, one of which should
triumph over the other, and the Elder be slave unto the Younger.

O God! what Mysteries under this answer? I know that the Jews and Rabbi
Solomon amongst others, unfolds these shadows in favor of his Nation, but
these are no other than fables refuted by most of the Fathers, and amongst the
rest by St. Jerome who discovers the rours of the Talmud, and lays open the
dreams of the Hebrews who would confound the Romans and the Idumeans.

True it is then that Jacob and Esau, as St. Austin affirms, were the figures
of the Christian and Hebrew people meant by this Prophecy; And at present there
is scarce any place in the World, where Christianity has not raised her
Crosses as so many Trophies upon the ruins of Judaism and impiety; David
vanquished Edom, says Rupertus, and Jacob though the Younger, supplanted Esau
who was his Elder Brother.

For this reason Jacob received his name; Jam tempus pariendi advenerat, and
ecce gemini in utero eius reperti sunt. Gen 25. v. 24.

Qui prior egressus est, rufus erat, vocatum est nomen ejus Esau: protinus
alter egrediens plantam fratritenebat manu, and idcirco appellavit cum Jacob.
Genesis 25. v. 25.


for as his Elder Brother was styled Esau because his whole Body was covered
with rough Hair; so Jacob was called, Jacob, because at the issuing forth of
his Mothers Womb he held Esau by the soal of his Foot, to testify that he
would supplant him?

Is not this an early beginning to War with each other, since in their Mothers
Womb they began the intestine Duel?

Now their Birth is but amidst surprises and strifes, where the one labors to
become Master of the other. I leave then to your thoughts what the rest of
their lives may be, and what assaults these two little Soldiers gave each
other even to death.

What ever happens, Jacob shall be vanquisner; For Heaven is on his side, and
the supplanting of Esau shall rather proceed from the Hand of God than that of
Jacob.

It is not then the office of Jacob to supplant his Brother, and to ruin the
fortune of his most intimate friends. They that contrive such designs, are not
the Imitators of Jacob, but the Disciples of Cain.

Jacob followed only the Instinct of the Divine Providence, Supplanting
Brothers.
and Brothers for the most part regard nothing but humane prudence, and blind
interests, which convey Impiety into their Souls, Treasons into their Mouths,
Venom into their Hearts, and Weapons into their Hands to assault blood and
nature, and to confound all Humane and Divine Laws.

But alas! what strife? what victory? what triumph? when the Crowns we gain are
but Roses staind with Blood, and Laurels which wither in a moment, and
transform themselves into eternal Thorns.

It is not for this prize Jacob so ught in his Mothers Womb, but he assaults
and supplants Esau for the purchase of Immortal Crowns.

CHAP. II. The Education of Esau and Jacob, and the shameful sale he made of
his right of Primogenture.
SCarce has the return of the Sun chased away Night, and Darkness, but the
Aurora shows on its Horizon, Image of Man's life.
what the Day would be at high Noon and in its Evening. It is an Image of Man's
Life, who usually at his Birth gives assured marks what he will be even till
death; he bears on his Forehead and Body (says Pythagoras) a Divine
Impression, which is even against his will the visible Character of his Soul,
and Disposition. In vain is it for him to feign and dissemble; his Eyes are
living Myrrours in which all the Cogitations of his Heart are discovered; the
Horoscope, as we see by daily experience, is formed not only of Men, but also
of Children, and often times the very Cradles and Swath-bands give out Oracles
touching their adventures and destinies.

We need not be overmuch versed in Physiognomy, Assured marks of our
disposition.
to foretell what Esau would prove; for in his Birth he gave so many evident
signs, as we cannot be ignorant of his future inclinations. Totus in morem.
pellis hispidus. Genesis 25. v. 25.
His Body Hairy like a Bear, could not be animated but by the soul of a Beast;
his Eyes, his Hair, his Skin, and all that appears exteriourly was too
frightfull and ardent to be the Element of Meekness and Humanity. In fine, from
his very Childhood all his inclinations seemed so brutish, that we cannot
wonder if he being in the flower of his age, Quibus adultis factus e^t Esaii
pergnarus venandi and homo agricola. Genesis 25. v. 27.
his most usual entertainments and most serious exercises were to ramble over
the Fields and lead a savage Life, which besides the exercises of Tilling the
Earth and Hunting (which of themselves are commendable) gave him but the
employment of a Wolf or a Vulture.

Jacob on the contrary had only the qualities of a Dove, Jacob autem Vir
simplex halitabat in cabernaculis. Genesis 25. v. 27.
and his Heart had less Gall than a Lamb. He went scarce ever out of the House,
and showed so much simplicity, sweetness, and moderation, as but to see him a
Man was constrained to Love him.

Notwithstanding Isaac had more violent inclinations toward his Eldest Son;
Isaac amabat Es^ii, to quod de venaniouibus ejus vesceretur.
and herein Interests were more prevalent, than Reason: For this Love was only
grounded upon Esau's constant custom in bringing him every Day some piece of
Venison.

The Love of Rebecca, Et Rebecca deligehat Jacob. Genesis 25 v. 28.
who preferred Jacob before Esau, was then more wise and considerable. This
prudent Woman says St. Cyril, had no passion but for the goodness and virtue
which shined in the behavior of her Son; she accorded her Heart to the Words
of God, and most tenderly Loved him, to whom God promised more Favors; that is
to say, as Procopius observes, this virtuous Mother framed her Will unto the
impulses of Heaven, and her inclinations followed the assistance of this
Intelligence, which is the Dart and stimulation of the purest affections.

We must grant then that Isaac had thoughts somewhat too humane toward Esau:
But Rebecca was a good Mother who rendered unto Jacob those duties which his
sweet disposition deserved, and as soon as he came into the World she had
inclinations suitable to the goodness which appeared in him, and endeavored
with her Milk to infuse into his manners all that could render him most amiable
and accomplished.

It is also particularly from Mothers (as heretofore said one of the seven
Sages of Greece) that Good and Evil flows into the Souls of those to whom they
give Suck: Hence it arises that Nurses are sought out with so much care in the
Houses of Great Men, Advantage of good Education.
for fear lest by some defect of Nature, the Milk become corrupted and
converted into poison. This happens but too often, and experience teaches us,
that Children from the Breast suck their most Malignant inclinations; and
afterward as Childhood, which is most susceptible of good and evil, is
usually spent under the wings of Mothers; so we ought not to wonder if they be
the sources from whence Spring those humors which are generated with Education.

Such was the belief of the Romans seeing the Cruclties of their Emperor
Caligula, Dio Cassius.
who was Nursed by a Woman who had a Beard like a Man, and who had nothing
sweet in her but her Milk; And on the contrary France acknowledged the blessing
of the Sanctity of Lewis the Ninth, whom his Mother Blanch had made as it were
to suck Virtue with his Milk.

There are no Palaces, no Cortages, no Houses in the World where we shall meet
with families and communities without seeing examples and proofs of this verity.

Moreover we must not imagine that Fathers are therefore more exempt from those
Duties which Education requires, Oblation of Fathers and Mothers.
than Mothers. For they can equally cause Vices to flow into the Souls of their
Children. It will proceed says St. Parents sensimus paricidas. Cypr. de
lapsis.
Cyprian from Fathers and Mothers that their Children shall complain in the Day
of Judgment, and cry out upon the Brink of the Abyss that their Parents have
been their Murderers.

Isaac then would have deserved more commendation, if he had had less
indulgent affections, and less interressed, toward Esau. But I will believe,
that if Rebecca should have presumed to reveal the secrets wherewith God had
entrusted her by the means of some good Inspirations, he would have had, like
her, more affection for the Younger than the Elder Brother.

However it were, the Liberty Isaac gave to Esau of running all the Day long
through Woods and Forests, was the occasion which brought him to his first
misfortune: Coxit autem Jacob pulmentum, ad quem cum venisset Esau de apro
lassus, Genesis 25. v. 29.
For this poor Chaser coming one Day weary and Hungry from hunting, and
meeting with Jacob who had caused some Pulse to be sod, he entreated him to
give him a share of it; to which Jacob willingly agreed, Ait: da mibi de
coctione hac rufa, quia oppido lassus sum. Genesis 25. v. 31.

Cui dixit Jacob: vende mibi primogeni. ta. Genesis 25. v. 31.

Ille respondit: en morior, quid mibi proderunt primogenita. Genesis 25. v. 32.

Ait Jacob: Jura ergo mihi, juravit ei Esau, and vendidit primogenita. Genesis 25.
v. 33.

Et sic accepto pane, and lentis edulio, comedit and bibit, and abiit,
parvipendens quod primogenita vendidisset. Genesis 25. v. 34.


upon Condition he would yield up to him his right of Primogeniture.

Alas! I dye for very hunger answered Esau, what will this Right avail thee
after my death? if it be so replied Jacob, take an oath that thou will give it
me; Well, in truth then I swear it (says Esau) and I acknowledge thee in
quality of my Elder Brother: whereupon this poor wretch took immediately Bread
and Pulse from his Brothers Hand, little valuing the loss he had made of the
first advantage wherewith God and Nature had favored him.

What Infamy! what Ingratitude! and what Impiety! Can a man represent unto
himself so weak an act as to part with the singular Favors of God for a bit of
Bread? Is there any Ingratitude more Enormous, than to misprise the gifts of
Nature? and is it not a Sacrilege and Simony to sell his Priesthood for a Mess
of Pottage? In fine, is it not to be hunger-starved even unto rage to swallow
with the Pulse the right of his Primogeniture, which was one of the most
Illustrious qualities a man could possess in his Family.

It was this brutish appetite which desolated the Terrestrial Paradise, which
consumed Sodom, The disasters of Gluttony.
which daily devours the Wealth of the richest and most Illustrious Houses. It
is the Well of the Abyss, the Cistern of Babylon, and the Gulf of Heil. The
Air, the Earth, and the Sea cannot satiate these devouring ardors, and this
Fire which still requires aliment. These are those Horse-leaches which never
Quench their Thirst; these are the Men who have their Eyes in their Bellies,
and their Reason Buried in Wine. I am deceived, these are not Men but Spunges,
and Tuns, like those of the Danaides into which the Ocean might enter without
silling them: Finally, It was this Infamous Vice which caused Esau to direct
his first step into the Precipice where afterward he was swallowed up.

CHAP. III. The Dexterity of Rebecca to procure for Jacob the blessing of
Isaac.
THere is a false Divinity in the World which has Temples in the Lungs, Deus
tibi venture est, and pulmo templum. Tertul. advers. Psych.
and Altars in the Bellies of most Men. The appetite of Gluttony is the Origin
of all Vices, the Furnace in which the most dreadful flames of Impurity are
nourished and inkindled.

We must not then wonder if Esau, who was not ashamed to sell the right of his
Primogeniture to satisfy a Gluttonous desire, had the Impudence afterward to
Mary against the will of his Parents, and to take two forain insolent and
furious Wives, and which is worse, addicted to the Worship of false Gods. These
were two incarnat Devils, and two Spirits bearing neither respect nor any pity
toward Isaac and Rebecca, they raised also a War and tumult in the whole
House, and sufficiently manifested what a Woman can do when she has once
trodden honor and devotion under her Feet.

Nevertheless Isaac waxing old amidst these misfortunes, Senuit autem Isaac,
and caligaverunt oculi ejus, and videre non poterat. Genesis 27. v. 2.
insensibly felt the approach of Death, and as if his Eyes abhorred to serve as
witnesses to the disasters of his old age, they covered themselves with the
Darkness of a lamentable Blindness.

Amongst these Accidents his Eyes being shut against all the Clarities of Life,
Vocavitque Esau filium suum majorem, and dixit ei, fili mi: Genesis 27. v. 2.

Vides inquit, quod senuerim and ignorem diem mortis me^e. Genesis 27. v. 2.

A most uncertain uncertainty.


his Soul went penetrating the shade and Night of the Tomb. He calls Esau, and
says to him with a pitiful Tone, Alas my Son! I am upon the Brink of my
Grave, and yet I know not when I shall descend into it.

Surely there is nothing more certain than the end of Life, and nothing less
certain than the time when we must Dye: The Sun is not more clear and
perspicuous in the Heavens, than this Decree on Earth; one must be a Beast
amongst Men, and Dead in the World, to doubt of this verity.

This hinders us not from providing for our necessities, and prudence enjoins
that meditating upon Death, we forget not the Duties of Life as Isaac did.

This good man feeling his life to extinguish as a Lamp whose Oil begins to
fail, called Esau, Vocavitque Esau si lium majorem, and dixit ei fili mi; qui
respondit, adsum. Genesis 27. v. 1.

Sum arma tua, Pharetram, and arcum, and egredere for as, cumque venatu
aliquid apprehender^s, Genesis 27. v. 3.

Fac mihi inde pulmentum, sicut velle me nosti, and affer, ut comedam, and
benedicat tibi anima mea antequam moriar. Genesis 27. v. 4.

Quod cum audisser Rebecca, and ille abiesset in agrum, ut jussionem Patris
impleret. Genesis 27. v. 5.

Ambr. lib. 2. de Jacob, and vita beata. c. 2. Rebecca non silium filio, sed
justum praeferebat infusto, etc. Nunc ergo, fili mi, acquies^e co^si iis meis.
Genesis 27. v. 8.

Pergens ad grege^, adfer mihi duos ^^^dos optimos, etc. Genesis 27. v. 9

Quos cum intuleris, and comederit, benedicat tibi prius quam moriatur. Genesis
27. v. 10. Cui ille respondit: n^sti quod Esau frater meus homo pilosus sit and
ego lenis. Genesis 27. v. 1^. Si attractaverit me Pater meus, and senserit,
time^ne putet me sibi voluisse illudere, etc. Genesis 27. v. 12.


and commanded him to take his Quiver, his Bow and Arrows, and to go a hunting
that he might bring him something to eat, with this promise, that at his return
he would give him his benediction before his Death. Esau immediately performing
what his Father had commanded him, Rebecca who heard Isaacks whole discourse,
made use of her time very seasonably to do what the Spirit of God directed her.

Ah! how ingenious is virtue! and how dexterous is Love when it follows the
will of God! who would believe that a Woman durst undertake what Rebecca did?
Her design was not (says St. Ambrose) to prefer the Younger before the Elder,
but only the merits and perfections of the one before the bad qualities which
appeared in the other: and so her fraud was more full of mystery than malice.
Her Artifices then were innocent, and her intentions very just and holy, when
she disguised Jacob to deceive Isaac, and frustrate Esau of the blessing he
expected.

Go then my Son (says she) and make choice amongst our flocks of the two
fattest Kids you shall find, I will so dress them, that I will make them serve
for your Fathers repast, to the end having fed on them he may bless you before
his death.

But what replied Jacob? Mother you know that my Body is not Hairy like my
Brothers; I am fearful then lest my Father touch me, and believing I intend to
mock him, lay on me his malediction.

Can we wish more Respect, Candor, and Piety, in a Son toward his Father?
Surely this did not agree with the comportments and bad humors of so many
Children who daily sell their Fathers and Mothers for some slight interests.
The World is full of Sons, Daughters, Kindred and such brutish persons who
treat the Authors of their Life as their Servants and Handmaids: A dangerous
Malediction.
But do they well understand that the lightnings and thunderbolts which are
formed in the Air, cause less dangerous spoils, than the furious Darts which
issue out of the Mouth of an Incensed Father? Do they know that Fathers and
Mothers are empowered to thunder out the tempests of their Malediction, and that
they have as many or more killing shafts than Death, to punish the Insolence
and presumption of their Children?

Jacob would never have been so adventurous as to undertake an action which
might irritate the goodness of Isaac, if Rebecca had not relieved him in his
fear, and if she had not made appear to him that her Wiles were very just, Ad
quem matter, in me sit (ait) ista maledictio fili mi: tantum audi vocern meam,
and pergens asser quae dixi. Genesis 27. v. 13.
and her design most Innocent. Ah! says she, my Son, leave unto me this fear;
I will preserve thee from this danger thou apprehendest, and if any ill chance
to happen, I wish it may fall on me; do then boldly what I shall say unto thee.

She presently apparelled him in Esau's Garments, Et vestibus Esau valde bonis
quos apud se habebat domi, induit eum. Genesis 27. v 15.

Ded^que pulmentum, and panes, quos coxerat tradidit. Genesis 27. v. 17.

Quibus illatis, dixit pater mi, at ille respondit, audio, quis es tu fili mi?
Genesis 27. v. 18.

Dixitque Jacob: Ego sum primogenitus tuus Esau, feci sicut praecepisti mihi:
surge, sede, and comede de venatione mea, ut benedicat mibi anima tua. Genesis 27.
v. 19.

Rarsumque Isaac ad filium suum, quomodo, inquit, tam cito invenire potuisti
fili mi, qui respondit: voluntas Dei suit, etc. Genesis 27. v. 20.

Dixitque Isaac: Accede huc ut tangam te fili mi, etc. Genesis 27. v. 21.

Accessit ad patrem, and palpato eo dixit Isaac, vox quidem vox Jacob est, sed
manus sunt Esau. Gen 27. v. 22.

Et non cognovit eum, quia pilosae manus similitudinem majoris expresserant:
benedicens ergo illi, ait: Ecce odor filii m^^, sicut odor agri pleni cui
benedixit Dominus. Genesis 27. v. 27.


covered his Neck and Hands with Skins which had some resemblance of his
Brothers, and gave him such Bread and Meat as she knew would be pleasing to
Isaacks taste.

Jacob presents them unto his Father, who hearing his voice asked if he were
Esau; he answered that he was his Eldest Son, and that having exactly performed
all his commands, he besought him to eat of the Venison he had prepared for
him: But what? said Isaac to him, how could thou take and provide it in so
short a time? Jacob answers, it is God who has so disposed it, and made it as
it were fall into my Hands. If it be so, approach my Son, and give me thy Hands
that I may touch them, and feel whether thou art my Son Esau or not. Jacob
obeyed; and after Isaac had touched him, he says unto him; surely this is the
voice of Jacob I hear; but if I be not deceived these are the Hands and Hair of
Esau I feel: Notwithstanding this doubt, Isaac gave his benediction to Jacob
and made good cheer of all he had presented to him.

Imagine whether Rebecca stood not watching to observe all that passed. I
represent unto my self that she encouraged Jacob with Gestures and Signs which
made up a good part of this action: The time must needs seem long unto her out
of the fear she might have lest Esau should come in and disturb the course of
Divine providence, and the conduct of her prudent designs.

Make haste then Isaac, and do quickly what God inspires thee; thy Bed is the
Altar on which God will have Jacob consecrated, and it is the Table of a
mysterious repast, and the Theater of the prudence and dexterities of Love.

It was then neither Rebecca nor Jacob that guided this enterprise; But God,
who from all eternity had chosen Jacob for his Eldest Son.

It is a great advantage when those favors which arrive to us are presents
from Heaven, and an illustrious Prerogative when our fortunes are established
by the decrees of God.

These are adorable decrees, and mysterious obscurities, dazeling clarities,
and dark verities, which must be penetrated to discover that light which is
inveloped under the secrets of the Divinity.

Isaac is blind, Rebeca sees but the shadows of a mystery which was revealed
to her, Jacob is in doubt whether what he does will come to pass, Esau runs and
beats the Bushes, whilst an other takes the Prey. It is God nevertheless who
instructs Rebecca, who inspires Isaac, and directs Jacob. Behold also how all
succeds agreeable to his own desires and those of his Mothers.

Approach my son says Isaac, Dixit ad eum: accede ad me, and da mihi osculum
fili. Genesis 27. v. 26.

Accessit and osculatus est eum. Genesis 27. v. 27. Statimque ut sensit
vestimentorum illius fragrantiam, benedicens illi, ait, ecce odor filii mei
sicut odor agripteni, cui benedixit Dominus. Genesis 27. v. 27 Det tibi Deus de
rore caeli, and de pinguedine terrae, abundantiam frumenti and vini. Genesis 27.
v. 28.

Et serviant tibi populi, and edorent te Tribus: esto domi^us fratrum tuorum,
and incurventur ante te filii matris tuae: qui matedixerit tibi, sit ille
maledictus, and qui be^^dixcrit tibi benedictionibus repleatur. Genesis 27. v. 29.


and bestow a kiss on thy poor father: Presently Jacob leaps on his neck,
embraces him, huggs him, and lays his eyes, his lips, and mouth on him. I
know not why the Mother did not cast her self between them both as the knot of
so tender and holy an Amity: But perchance she was afraid to interrupt Isaac
who finding himself Surprised by the smell and perfume which exhaled from
Jacobs garments, presently gave him his paternall benediction, saying to him;
Ah well-beloved SOn, the Odor which comes from thee is as sweet as that which
rises from a field full of flowers, and upon which God has powered out his
Benedictions.

Be thou blessed then for all Eternity, my most deer Son, let God bestow on
thee the dew of Heaven, the fat of the Earth, wheat and wine in abundance; Let
all Nations be subject to thee, and let all the Tribes adore thee. Be thou Lord
over thy brethren, let them bow their knees before thee: Let those that give
thee their benediction be blessed; and if any one curse thee let him be also
cursed.

CHAP. IV. Gods design in preferring Jacob.
ALthough we may say that the Earth is a great Labyrinth and a fearful Chaos
where Truth is not seen but in shadow, and where there are no assurances but
amidst the uncertainty of casual accidents; Yet One of the Ancients had reason
to say, That the world was a large well of Darkness, and a deep Sea where we
are exposed to the mercy of Winds and tempests without Sails, without Pilot,
without Stern, and almost without Hope of releif.

Alas! in this estate where is the Haven, where are the Islands, and where is
the means to attain the shore? O God! what Horror when we see a bark split in
pieces, and him that we Lold by the hand carried by the billows, and tempests
into the bottom of the Sea? I see him, I hear him, and I behold him in my
sight dying upon the waves; Why he, and not my self? Why this and not that man?
What have I done? What has he done? And what could he deserve from God even
before his birth?

O night without day! Precipice without bottom! Dreadful uncertainty.
Ocean without shore! O hight of the Wisdom and knowledge of God! Alas how
fearful and horrible are the mysteries of thy secrets! My God! When shall I
know whether thou art for or against me? And who will assure me that I am not
inrould amongst those wretches which must be one day banished out of the land
of Paradise. Lord, I know not where I am, and what will become of me; I doubt
whether after all my races I shall wait at the gate, or whether all my labors
will ever merit any reward.

And truly could Esau have imagined that while he was a hunting his brother had
taken his Benediction?

Ah! A fair subject of Miseries.
it often happens that such as have the greatest advantages of Nature have the
least share of the favors and Graces God is accustomed to impart. Blood,
Spirit, Extraction and Riches are for the most part but a fair object where
Misfortune appears with most deformity. The Sun is wont to make his rarest
productions in the most unknown places, and God never works more miracles than
in the souls of those whom the world uses to Despise, or knows not.

Unhappy Esau! where are the privileges of thy Birth, where is the right of thy
Primogeniture, and the Blessing thou do expect? Who art thou? In vain is it
for thee to say thou art Esau, and the Eldest son of Isaac, Jacob has
supplanted thee, and when thou did hunt he found at home what thou soughtest
abroad. Jacob saying that he was Esau and the Eldest son, knew well enough that
in effect and according to the right of Nature, Mysterious answer.
he was Jacob and the Younger Brother: But he knew also that God had chosen him
for his Eldest Son, and he spoke according to Gods intentions, and in pursuance
of the title and right of Primogeniture which he had purchased, and God had
given him.

As in the eleventh and seventeenth Chapter of St. Matthew the Messiah openly
declares that St. John was Elias; Not that indeed he was Elias, but because he
lived according to the Spirit, as Elias.

So our Lord also has borrowed seeming titles, and God himself has taught the
World many things which had but some marks of his Divinity.

We must note then by the way for the satisfaction of those that read the holy
Scripture;

First, Innocent feignings.
that who ever dissembles the truth does not tell a lie, and though it be a
shameful and detestable thing to tell a lie, yet there be innocent feignings
and prudentiall ways which are sometimes lawful and laudable. Such was (as
some have believed) the address which Abraham used when he caused his Wife to
pass for his Sister in the territories of Pharaoh.

Secondly, it is one thing to lie, and another thing to speak figuratively; And
the words of God himself, though he be the infallible Verity ought not always
to be taken in a rigorous sense: for they have sometimes Enigmaticall meanings
and mysterious relations; and so the number of Abraham's Children was to be like
the Stars, and the Sands of the Sea.

Thirdly when St. A two edged Sword.
John in the I Will of Pathmos saw God carrying in his Mouth a two Edged-Sword, it
was to teach us, that his Words, though Divine, might have two significations:
which was evident, when he spoke unto the Jews concerning the Temple of his
Body, as if it had been the Temple of Jerusalem, albeit he was not ignorant
that their thoughts were very different from what he declared unto them.

Fourthly the greatness of a mystery may without wounding the truth, disguise
the countenance, feign a voice, borrow names, and in a word conceal under some
mystical terms the importance of a secret, A most just Stratagem.
and the designs of God. This was, as I may say, the amiable stratagem of the
Angel Raphael, when he said unto Toby that he was Azarias the Son of the great
Ananias: And this was the Artifice of Jacob, when he answered his father that
he was Esau, and his Eldest Son.

Nevertheless Isaac stood in admiration even to a rapture, and at first he
could hardly imagine, Expavit Isaac stupore vehementi and ultra quam credi
potest admirans, ai^: quis igitur ille est? Genesis 27. v. 33.
that Jacob had deceived him: but at last in the ecstasy of his astonishment,
God showed him as St. Austin believed, his manner of conduct in Jacobs
proceeding. He saw the just intentions of this unmalicious deceiver: And at
length he discerned that the Benediction he had given him was valid.

As well by reason of Gods will, which was such, as in regard his design was to
bless him to whom the Privilege belonged, which Jacob had acquired by the
contract of Sale passed between him and his Brother, and by the Donation of God.

Jacob is then the Elder Brother, Auditis Esau sermonib^ Patr^s irrugiit
clamore magno, and consternatus ait: benedic etiam and mi^i P^^er m^, Cumque
esulatu magn^ fle^et. Genesis 27. v. 34.

Motus Isaac dirit ad eum: in pinguedine terrae, and in rore caeli desu^^^,
Genesis 27. v. 39.

Erit benedictio tua, etc. Genesis 27. v. 40.


and from henceforth his Brethren shall be his Servants. It is in vain for Esau
to tear his Heart with a thousand sighs it is to no purpose for him to lament
and roar like a Lion.

His sorrows and roarings may well excite some pity in his Fathers Soul. But
this poor old Man has no other thing to give him but some drops of the Dew,
and at best but some humid and clammy vapors which fatten the Earth. For as
concerning Heaven, that has already powered forth its favors upon Jacob: where
note, that the benediction which had been given him was very different from
that of Esau: for Jacob had first received Riches and the abundance of the
Goods of the Earth; Secondly an Empire over Nations; Thirdly a Principality
amongst his Brethren; And lastly a particular favor which put him entirely
under the protection of Heaven; whereas Esau, as I said, received for his share
but some Acres of ground fertile indeed, but only in the corruptible goods of
Corn, Rain, and Dew, whereas Jacob had all sorts of benedictions as well in
Earth as in Heaven.

These are presents for Worldly and Earthly Men, drops of Water, Exhalations,
Vapors, and a little smoke. Behold the favors of Esau, behold the height of
his benedictions, and the portion of a Younger Brother who is rejected.

After this let us ask why the most impious persons in the World are sometimes
the richest, the most happy, and the most powerful, or at least in appearance
and to the Eyes of Flesh and Blood. Let us inquire whence comes it that
Atheists are Crowned with Roses, Lillys, and Gilly-flowers, when Christians
walk upon Briars and Thorns, what a shame will it be to see Vice watered with
Nectar, whilst Virtue is beaten with a storm of Hail.

My God! Blessings of this World.
permit me then to expostulate with thee to this purpose; if Esau be rejected,
why do thou bestow on him some Goods in this World? Alas! what can be the
happiness of this Life? A thick Cloud of Rain, Lands smoking with Ordures,
Straw, Hey, Feathers and Wind: whereas the Elect enjoy Peace, Hope, Love,
Pleasure, God, and Paradise for all Eternity.

But who will assure us that we are in the fortunate List of those
predestined Persons whose Elder Brother Jacob is? what Angel will tell us
whether we be not lost Children who have Esau for our Captain?

Ah God! I have bewailed my sins, but I fear my tears have not cleansed my
Heart, I have cast forth cries, sighs, and sobs, but my doubt is I have not
been heard. I know not how far my benediction reaches, and whether somebody
has not supplanted me. In fine, am I Jacob or Esau, shall I be saved or
condemned, Lawful apprehensions.
what will befall me after death? And for what has God ordained me even before
my birth?

O Abyss of Gods Judgments! O the Gulf of horror and darkness! O God, what
precipice for hope? what shadows for faith? and what blindnesses for love?
Surely there would remain nothing for us but a sad despair, if we had not
learnt of the Wise man, Sap. 1.12, 13.11.16. God desires our salvation.
that God for his part wills not the destruction of any, but the salvation of
all. It is then from thee, O Esau, and from thee (O Israel) perdition comes.
For God, Oz^e 13. Timoth. 2.
as the Apostle says, desires that every one should be saved, and adhere unto
the knowledge of truth. Behold the end of his love, of our Creation, and of his
Incarnation.

In the second place, Sufficient Graces.
though God bestows those favors on some which he denies to others, and
though he has showed more of them to Jacob than to Esau, yet he imparts unto
all sufficient grace for salvation, as Saint James affirms.

And truly how can he refuse Graces unto those for whom he has given his
Blood? and why should he not afford assistance unto Man, for whom he has given
up his life, and all his Interests?

In fine, no person either ought, or can despair: Foresight of merits.
For God has predestined the good with foresight of their merits, he has
reprobated the wicked by the prescience of their sins.

Let us hope then my Soul, let us hope in God, Well grounded hopes.
who is good, and would save us. It is enough for us to have him for our
Father, and that he has given us his Son for our Br^^^er; It is sufficient
that our Election depends on his Grace, since he gives it us with all
sufficiency. O God! what assurance? what pledge? and what caution? A Son
toward a Father, a God of God, and who issues not out of God, but to pacify
our troubles, and mediate our salvation. Ah! who will not hope, having a Jesus
for his Savior, whose precious blood runs not but to fill hearts, and to swell
the courage with hope of Paradise? Fair motives of Conscience.
What haven may we not attain, when we are guided by a God, and swim upon his
tears, upon his sweat, and blood? Woe then unto those who will not make use of
these advantages; and woe unto such as shall despair of salvation.

My God, I hope to be one of those who shall behold thee face to face in
Heaven; it is the hope in which I will live, and die. I desire that it may live
even in my Sepulcher, flourish even in my Ashes, and afterward take its flight
on the eternal hills, and on the mountains of Sion.

My God! it is of thy goodness I hope for this grace, it is by the merits of
thy Son, and his intercession. Eternal Father, be thou my Judge, Jesus, be
thou my Advocate and refuge.

This being so, the tragic Judgment of the unhappy lot of Esau does not
affright me. This poor unfortunate, had a Father who was blind, a Mother who
was averse, and a brother who supplanted him: And we have a Father who sees
all, a Mother who wishes us all sorts of blessings, and a Brother who dies
willingly to give us life.

My God, Almost happy abandonment.
I resign then my lot into thy hands, and I expect my fortune from thy
disposure. I expect, my God, thy benediction; give it me then for thy Sons
sake, give it me, O my amiable Jesus, and put me in the rank of those Elect, of
whom thou art King, that I may be under thy Empire for all Eternity.

CHAP. V. Jacobs Ladder.
IT was vanity doubtless which ingraved this stately Elegy upon the Sepulcher
of Phericides the Syrian; A stately Epitaph. (...). Laert.
Here lies Wisdom in its highest perfection. For to say truly, this
Inscription cannot be set but upon the Throne of God, in whose sight the
wisdom of men is but folly. Wisdom is not then to be found in a Tomb, in
the depth of the Earth, nor in the Abysses of the Ocean, nor in the vacuum of
the Air: but above the Clouds, and under the veiles of the Divinity. Jacob. c.
3.
It comes from heaven, as the Apostle St. James affirms, and there its Origin
and Source is to be found, Baruch v. 3.
as the Prophet Baruch assures: It issues out of hearts, and out of the most
intimate secrets of our souls, Diodorus.
as the Sun and light from the obscurest nights; and it was peradventure for
this reason the Egyptians drew the picture of Osiris the Husband of Isis, who
presided over Wisdom, like a Sun, Wisdom like the Sun.
whose rays were as so many eyes which penetrated the darkest obscurities.

In like manner also in the most holy Pictures of the Old Testament, Wisdom
was represented as a good Mother, and as a brave Mistress which kept an
Academy, and changed men into Planets full of brightness. I know not whether
this were not the reason, Artemidorus. lib. 26. c. 36.
as Artemidorus believed, which heretofore moved Fathers and Mothers to call
their children Suns, having no cleerer terms to flatter their wisdom, and the
excellency of their wits.

However it be, divine Wisdom is a Sun which is always in his high Noons, and
at the same instant inlightens the evening and morning, that is to say, the
future and past time, as well as the present. These ways though oblique go
always straight, and soon or late bring us to the Haven. The course of Wisdom.
It was this wise Conducter which lead Abraham in all his Pilgrimages: And it
is she at present, as the Wiseman himself assures us, who takes her Jacob by
the hand, and diverts him insensibly from the Abyss into which Esau's despair
intended to lead him. Haec prosugum irae fratris justum deduxit per vias
rectas, Sap. c. 10.
It was this wisdom says Solomon, which freed an Innocent from the rage and
fury of a Brother who contrived his death.

To this effect it casts some streams of light into Rebeccas soul, who
presently knew the designs which Esan had on Jacob.

Afterward this prudent woman went to find out Isaac, and remonstrated to
him, that it was not time to marry Jacob, but that he must needs permit him to
take a wife out of the Land of Chanaan.

Isaac though blind clearly discerned what his wife pretended; Vocavit itaque
Isaac jacob, and benedixit came, praecepique ei dicens, Genes. 28. v. 1.

Vade and presiciscere in Mese^r tamtam Syriae, ad domum Bath^^l patras matris
tuae, and accipe tibi ind^ uxorem de siliabus La^^an evunculitui. Genesis 28. v. 2.


And then feeling some touches of this wise hand which managed the whole
business, he commanded Jacobs presence, to give him his blessing, and to
express unto him his trouble to see him depart out of his house before his
death: But nevertheless since time pressed him for his Marriage, it was most
convenient to take the way of Mesopotamia to obtain one of Labans daughters for
his wife.

Go then my dear Child, Deus autem omnipoeens benedi^a tibi, etc. Genesis 28. v.
3.

Et det lib. benedic^^anes Abrahae, and semini tuo post te, etc. Genesis 28.5.4.


said this good old man, go, and let the God of Abraham be thy guide, during
thy whole voyage. For my part, I beseech him to augment on thee the
benedictions I have most willingly given thee. Above all I beg of him to
multiply thy offspring, and to put thee in possession of the Country where thou
shall be as a stranger or Pilgrim.

Farewell then my most dear Son, A sensible Separation.
farewell all my Joy, and all the Love of my house; which said, he kisseth him,
he embraces him, he waters him with his tears. Nevertheless Rebecca to whom all
moments were longer than Days, endeavored speedily to draw him thence, that
she might put him in the Equipage of a Traveller, and give him her farewell,
lest Esan should disturb the departure and the design of this voyage. It was
indeed a trial of constancy for this poor Mother, when she must leave this
Son, but at last she had him adieu, and brought him on his way after she had
spoken to him some few words which issued less from her Mouth, than from her
Heart.

I wonder how the Father, Mother and Son did not die upon this sad Separation.
But the Wisdom of God who was as the wheel of all these Motions knew how to
moderate the excess of her grief, by the hopes of that good which would arise
from thence. Nevertheless to speak truth, these combats were very rigorous,
and there needed an Isaac, a Jacob, and a Rebecca to accomplish this
resolution.

In fine, the wise Providence of God expects Jacob at his resting place, and
intends by the favor of the Night visibly to discover the manner of his
conduct, and the model of his government.

Jacob is gone then from Bershabe and travels all alone under the protection of
Heaven, Igitur egressus Jacob de Bersabee, pergebat Hatam. Genesis 28. v. 10.
Cumque venisset ad quendam locum, and vellet in es requiescere post solis
occubitum, tulit de lapidibus qui jacebant, and supponens capiti suo dormivit
in codem Loco. Genesis 28. v. 11.
and with this confidence that God would never abandon him.

But what! Behold Night already founding the retreat, and shuting up all
passages to our Pilgrim, He beheld the Sun stealing from his Eyes, and the Moon
giving no light but to discover to him on the Plains of Bethel a bed of Earth,
and some stones to serve him for a Bolster. Poor Jacob! What Bed? what Bolster?
what Night? and what Inn?

Without doubt, here is the place where long since God appeared unto Abraham,
and it is this so famous Bethel where he saw the Land of Promise. Besides, it
is in the Night God discloseth his lights, The voice of God in silence.
it is amidst silence we hear his voice, and in solitude he uses to reveal
his secrets.

Repose then Jacob, and spend all the Night in security, since God has been
pleased to Assign you this Lodging.

O happy retreat! O pleasing Night! O delicious bed! O divine Repose?

Jacob is fallen a sleep, Viditque in somnis scalam stantem super terram and
cacumine illius tangens caelum: An^^l^s quoque dei asceadentes per eum. Genesis
28. v. 12.

Et Donanum innio um scalae. Genesis 28. v. 13.

Cumque vigilasset Jacob de sumno ai^: v^ e Domi^u^^st in ^oco ^sto, non est
(...) al^us, nist domus D^i, and po. ta caeli.


but God, who always watches, showed him a Prodigious Ladder which touched the
Earth with one end and the Heavens with the other, Angels by turns descended
and ascended this Ladder, and on the top God himself appeared as it were
supported by it.

But behold indeed a strange Spectacle upon a Theater of Sanctity. I am not
astonished if after Jacob had taken his rest he awaked at this vision bearing
God in his Mouth and Heart. He calls Heaven to witness, and protests that
Bethel is the Temple of God where the most glorious rays of his Majesty are
seen. Ah says he, how venerable is this place, and how full of a holy terror,
It is the gate of Heaven! and if Jacob could live a hundred Thousand years, he
would have no other God, than he that appeared to him.

Besides more authentically to seal his confession and promise he powered oil
out of a Bottle which he carried for his provision, Surgens ergo Jacob man^,
tulit lapidem quem supposuerat ^piti suo, and exerit in titulum sundens oleum
desuper.
and anointed therewith the stone which during the Night had served him for a
Pillow.

Behold in truth strange mysteries, but I would willingly have demanded of God
the explication of them, if I had been in Jacobs place.

I know nevertheless that some have thought, that it was a figure of the
Temporal Generation of the Word who descended from Abraham even unto Joseph
and Mary, and who ascends from Joseph and Mary unto Adam and God himself.

It is the Incarnation of the Word whereby God descends on Earth and Me^mount
up to Heaven! A picture of the Incarnation.
As God he is impassible in the bosom of his Father, and mortal in the Womb
of his Mother, Subject to time and death: It is God united unto Man who rests
on this sacred wood, and it is h^ who sends his Angels as his Nuncios and
Ambassadors.

St. Austin frames another sense upon this Enigma, and he conceives that this
Ladder was a draught of the life and death of Jesus Christ. Isaac represents
God the Father, Jacob is the Image of the Son, The image of the life and death
of Jesus. Aug. ser. 79. de temp.
and the Angels which ascend and descend are the Apostles and preachers, who
Elevate themselves unto God by their Thoughts, and stoop even to the grossest
understandings by means of their Words.

These two Explications to speak the truth are most Sublime: But St. Basil
expounding the three and thirty Psalm gives an other explanation, which will be
more profitable. This Ladder, says he, is the Exercise, The description of a
perfect Soul.
or rather the picture of a Soul, which raises her self unto the highest pitch
of Perfection.

First, to the end God may descend into this Soul, The forsaking of Creatures.
and that this Soul may ascend unto God, she must forsake the Earth, and
renounce the World: This is the first step.

Secondly, she ought to make a generous divorce from all Creatures, and even
efface out of her memory all their Footsteps, and all the species of her
dearest affections.

Thirdly, Contempt of the World.
she must have nothing but Contempt and disdain for that which before she
adored.

At the fourth step she must resolve to trample over her Friends and all her
kindred; Estimation of God.
that is to say, she must prefer God before them, and boldly reject their
designs when they are opposite unto the Will of God.

The fifth step passes even unto Death: Extreme Mortification.
for the Soul ought less to esteem Life than her God; and if God suffers her
to live Longer, her life is but a Living Death which finds its Tomb in her
Nothing.

It is for this consideration she remains in a most profound Humility,
Annihilation of o^^ selves.
and in a most inflamed Charity which communicats her flames and zeal not only
to her Friends, but also to her Enemies.

In fine, Union of the soul.
God is present at the top of the Ladder united unto the Soul; and it is upon
her he reposeth, and is united to her, and she to him.

Philo and Origin have yet laid some other touches on this picture; many also
have since labored therein: But having perused all their works, and collected
all their opinions, I think, that Gods design was to manifest unto Jacob in
this vision, the care his Divine providence took of him. The Ladder of Divine
Providence.
Jacobs Ladder then was a most lively draught of the wise conduct of Almighty
God concerning Jacob, and of the Universal Government of the World, which is
in the Hands of the Divinity.

The Bounds and Limits of this Empire are infinite, Huic ex alto cunesa tuenti
nulla terrae mole resistunt. Non nox at^is nulubus obstat. Vno cernit mentis
erictu, quae sint, quae fueriat, quae veniantque. Boet. lib. de cons.
and his Scepter extends it self over the Earth, and over the Heavens where he
absolutely resides, and beholds all the events like a Sun, says Boethius, which
penetrates every where, and guides all Creatures by means of his splendour. The
two sides of the Ladder represent Power and Sweetness, which are as the Hands
of the Divine Providence, which goes mounting and descending from Heaven to
Earth by diverse steps, that is to say, by diverse sweet and admirable walks and
ways through which the World is insensibly guided unto the period and term
proposed to it.

God nevertheless, rests himself on the top of this Ladder, and from thence
deputes his Angels and Ambassadors, which are (as St. Gregory says) the
Ministers of the Divine Providence.

It is then in the Company of these most Heavenly Spirits, that Jacob is on his
way to renew his Journey unto Mesopotamia.

In fine, Ego sum Dominus, su^ Dominus Deus Abraham Patris tui, and Deus Isaac;
terram in qua dormis tibi dabo, and semini tuo. Genesis 28. v. 13 Eritque semen
tuu^ quasi pulvis terrae: Dilat aberis ad occidentem, and orientem and
septentrionem, and meridiem. Genesis 28. v. 14.

Et ero custos tuus quocunque perrexeris, and reducam te in terram hanc, nec
dimittam nisi complevero universa quae dixi. Genesis 28. v. 15.


under the protection of the Divine Providence, Jacob pursues his design, and
this was the promise made him during his Vision. Yeas Jacob, says God, I am
the Lord of thy Progenitors, Abraham, and Isaac; and I will bestow the Land
where thou reposest, on thy self and all thy Children: I will multiply them as
grains of Sand which are upon the Earth; and their Progeny shall extend as far
as the four Corners of the Universe. I my self will be thy Guardian during all
thy voyages, and will bring thee back to thine own House. Thou may be affur'd
of it Jacob, and constantly believe that God speaks unto thee, and that his
Providence will never abandon thee, until he has accomplished his Oath and
promises. O God! what happiness for Jacob, and for all those who live under the
favor of thy Providence? what Peace in a Soul when God is the primum mobile or
first mover of all his Actions? what assurance when we walk in the way his
increated wisdom has marked out to us with his own Hand, and enlightened with
the purest rays of his Eyes?

My Soul! is it true? Ah! if it be so, let us banish these disquiets and
perplexities which ravish from us the confidence we ought to have in God.

My God! my hope is then in thee, and I resign my Life, my Pleasures, my
Designs, my Desires, my Interests and all my Affections into the Bosom of thy
Providence? And besides, I make a vow with Jacob to Live and Dye in the quality
of thy Son; and of thy most humble Creature, who has no Life nor motion but by
thee and for thee. Lord accept this offering, confirm this promise, and in
giving Affections unto my Heart to Love thee, deny not Lights unto my Soul for
the guidance and strengthening of it, against all obstacles which might divert
it from approaching directly to thee, and reaching the top of the Mountain,
where it hopes both to see and enjoy thee for all Eternity.

CHAP. VI. The Constancy of Jacob in the Quest of Rachel.
IT is then the wise Providence of God, which can justly attribute this honor
unto it self as to say, I preside in Councils; And it is by the favor of my
lights Men in the most importune affairs conceive their gravest and most mature
resolutions.

I am, The Works of the increated Wisdom.
says Providence, the End of Gods wonders; by me he Begins his rarest works to
Finish them in me; And I am the Archetype and the project of his most admirable
designs. It is this Providence which had the Model of the Universe, when the
Elements were in confusion, and it was by her disposure the world received its
Laws and all its Orders.

Moreover, in the sequence of Age she took all her choicest delights upon the
vast Globe of the Earth, and her sweetest divertisements amongst men, which
serve as pastimes to her most holy entertainments.

I know not whether the Philosophy of Plato were pure enough to understand
these verities; But he concurred it seems in this opinion, when he said, That
divine Providence sports with men in a way paternally affectionate and full of
miracles. Homo est ludus Deorum. Plato.


Now if this Pastime appeared in the life of Abraham and Isaac, it is no less
visible, me thinks, in that of Jacob. Admirable sports.
First, God sported with him in his Mothers Womb, when he stirred his Hand to
wrestle with his Brother Esau, and to take him by the soal of his Foot that he
might cause him to fall from the right to which he pretended.

Secondly, God sported with Jacob when he disguised him by the intervention of
his Mother to obtain the Benediction of Isaac.

Thirdly the Ladder Jacob saw in a dream was, as we have said, but a Pastime
and spectacle of the Divine Providence, and at present God continues to sport
with him in the rest of his Journey, afterward in the House of Laban, and
finally in a thousand other rencounters, where it will appear that even Gods
Combats with Jacob were but Sports and Artifices wherein God took pleasure to
recreate himself with him.

Jacob being then waked out of this mysterious sleep and Divine rapture,
Profectus ergo Jacob, venit in terram orientalem. Genesis 29. v. 1.

Et vidit puteum in agro, tres queque greges ovium accubantes juxta eum. Genesis
29. v. 2.

Quos interrogans numqaid ait nostis Laban? Genesis 29 v. 5. Et ecce Rachel
ventebat cum ovtbus sui Patris: nam gregem ipsa pascobat. Genesis 29. v. 9.


in which God had kept him for the space of a whole Night on the plains of
Bethel, he took his way toward the East, where a while after near unto a Well,
he met with Flocks of Sheep and Sheepheards, of whom he enquired whether they
were not acquainted with Laban, and whether they knew not his House. Behold, at
the same time a Rachel approaching, the second Daughter of Laban, who kept her
Fathers Sheep, and led them to drink where Jacob stayed.

I know not whether the Day were far advanced: but in some part of its course
where the Sun may be seen, I am well assured that the Eyes of Rachel did cast
forth a thousand Love-Darts and lights into the Soul of Jacob. Rachel was an
Aurora which marches before the Sun, and instantly these two Planets did that
which the Sun and Moon could not effect since their Creation. Jacob kissed
Rachel, Quam cum vidisset Jacob and sciret consobrinam suam, Genesis 29. v. 10.

Osculectus est eam: and elevata voce flevit. Genesis 29. v. 11.

Et indicavit ei quod frater esset patris sui and filius Rebeccae, at illa
festinans nuntiavit patri suo. Genesis 29. v. 12.

Qui cu^ audisset venisse Jacob filium ^ororis suae, cucurrit obvia^ei, etc.
Genesis 29. v. 14.


and knowing that she was his Cousin, he began sweetly to cry out, and presently
his Eyes shed some tears, which expressed the excess of his contentment. Rachel
would have done the same if her Eyes had been longer fixed on Jacob: but she
ran from thence to advertise her Father, that not far from the House she had
happily met with one of her Cosen-germans, the Son of Isaac and Rebecca. Which
Laban hearing, went to meet and bring him to his Lodging, as also to know the
cause of his coming. Jacob freely declared to him what had passed; to which
Laban answered he was very welcome, and that he received him as his dear
Nephew, Di^itei: nam quia frater meuses, gratis serv^es mihi: lic quid mercedis
accipias. Genesis 29. v. 15.
and as a part of himself: But for the rest, although he had a desire to
entertain him as his own Brother, yet he must resolve to serve and merit some
ways by his labors.

Jacob had no mercenary Spirit, nor a Body trained up to labor; Nevertheless
of a Master he must become a Servant, and learn by Serving others, more
prudently to Command hereafter: He made a contract then with his Uncle, Serviam
tibi pro Rachel filta tua mimo^^ septem annos. Genesis 29. v. 18.

Respondit Laban: me^^as est ut tibi eam de quam altere vno. Genesis 29. v. 19.

Sed L^a lip^is erat ocults, Racitel detora fact and venusto aspectu. Genesis 29.
v. 17.


and obliged himself to serve him for the space of seven years, at the end of
which Laban promised to Marry him unto Rachel, the youngest but the fairest of
his Daughters. The Eldest which was called Leah, had a Face of Wax which melted
through her Eyes, and rendered her deformed and blear-Eyed: but the Youngest
had so many beauties and attractives, as the least of her glances had power
enough to render her Mistress of Jacobs affections. It was for her sake and for
the Love he bo^e her, that he became a Servant, and that of a Pilgrim he took
upon him the quality of a Guest, Well regulated affection.
who lodged in his Heart all the duties of a most pure and holy amity.

His Love was not of the nature of those petty Devils which possess lascivious
Souls, it was neither deceitful nor violent, neither indiscreet nor arogant,
neither irregular nor impious, neither variable nor impudent, neither
capricious nor sporting, neither fantastic nor stupid, neither remiss nor
unworthy of a virtuous Man, but sincere, moderate, prudent, humble, stayed,
constant, respectfull, simple, condescending, equal, provident, courageous,
and such as could be desired in a good Man.

There are in the World inchained Captives, Slavery of Love.
and Houses often become Galleys, where we behold slaves rowing against the
Wind and Tide. These are unfortunate Argonautes who go in quest of a Golden
Fleece, which they shall never bring home. The Haven and the shore fly before
them, and there Bark will ever be in the disastrous Hand, where nothing is to
be seen, but refusals disdains and despairs.

Mean while Days and Years pass away in Captivity; where nothing is to be
found but sorrows, furies, envies, aversions, sighs, regrets and tears, for
having courted a painted and plaistered Idol, and for having erected Altars to
it, offering a thousand Vows without ever being able to render it propitious,
and for having expended their Goods in Masks and Feasts, in presents, and a
thousand poor and shifting devices, which served only to swell a Cloud of
storms.

Ah! what blindness, what weakness, Shameful blindness.
what indignity for a Cavalier to be seen at the Feet of some curious and
dainty Dame, where he burns his Heart, where he immolates his Strength and
Courage, where he dryes up his Blood, and where he prostitutes his Body, his
Fortunes, and Honor. In fine, the Life of such kind of men is an unhappy
vassallage, their whole inquest a Martyrdom, and all their pursutes meet with
nothing but shadows, where they find, as in an abyss of miseries, the loss of
their joy and Liberty.

Jacob fell not into these misfortunes: but his Courtships were most just and
holy. He lived like an Angel incarnate amidst the flames and ardors of a most
pure and holy affection; Servivit erge Jacob pro Rachel septem annis, and
videbantur illi pauci dies prae amoris magnitudine.
he excited himself to patience and labor by the sight and upon the hopes of
Rachel; and he did like those who running at Rings, fix only their Eyes on the
prize proposed to them; he found also no weariness at the end of his course,
and saw himself upon the point of enjoying his reward after seven years
service, which scarce seemed unto him to have lasted so many Days.

But what! Et vespere Liam suam introduri^ ad cum. Gea. 29. v. 23.

Ad quam cum ex amore Jacob fuisset ingressus, facto mane vid^t Liam. Genesis 29.
v. 24.


as the Hopes we repose in Men very often deceive us, so after the Wedding
Night, the Day discovered unto Jacob the cheats of Laban, who instead of Rachel
gave him Leah. Never was any man more astonished than Jacob, who expected
nothing less than such a Metamorphosis.

He fayles not to complain unto Laban of this deceit, Et dixit ad sorcerum
suum: Quidest quod facere voluisti? Genesis 29. v. 25.

Respondit Laban: non est in loco nostro consuetudinis, ut minores ante
tradamus ad nuptias. Genesis 29. v. 26. Imple bebdomadam dierum hujus copulae: and
hanc quoque dabo tibi pro opere quo serviturus es miln septem annis aliis. Genesis
29. v. 27.


but for answer they told him, that it was not the custom to marry the younger
Daughter before the Elder; that if he would yet for one week accomplish this
Marriage with Leah, Rachel should be given him for his second wife, provided
that he would again oblige himself to serve for the space of seven years.

Behold a lively image in the person of Laban, of the deceipts and falsehoods of
the world, which give straws for gold, briars for roses, counterfeits for true
Diamonds, chains for liveryes, bondage for rewards, and at last, fables, errors
and lies, which cause us to spend our lives in a detestable blindness.

Notwithstanding, A poor harvest of worldly men.
there are some who have less pure intentions than Jacob, who amuse themselves
to gather up all these straws, and take pleasure to roll themselves upon thorns.

There are weak and ignorant eyes which prefer Glass before Rubies and
Emeralds; some cherish their own follies, some adore their bondage, and some
glory to languish in the Martyrdom of a shameful captivity.

But that which is most to be deplored, some fix their eyes on exterior
attractives, upon Painted faces and Phantasmes of Love, like those Temples of
Egypt, which as Clement Alexandrinus says, Clem. Alex. lib. 3. paedag.
were only set forth with gilded Stones, carved Marbles, and painted beauties,
without life or soul. Nevertheless we there fix our eyes, and fasten our
hearts; we are content with Leah, who was a figure of this life, and think no
more of Rachel who was the Image of Paradise and Eternity.

At least we would willingly gather this immortal purple flower of Love, but
we cannot take the pains to water it with some drop of sweat and blood; We
would gladly catch in our nets this beautiful Bird of heaven, Weakness of
courage.
but we will not take the pains to spread them; We would willingly take this
fish of the Fortunate Islands, but we dare not put our hands into the water, it
is too chil, it is too cold; we neither can nor will do it; seven years of
service are too long to merit a Rachel. It is too great a conflict to gain a
Crown, and we cannot resolve to dye one Moment to live Eternally.

This moves me to cry out Eternity, All is short to him who meditates on
Eternity.
Eternity of joy and felicity, how long art thou Eternity, and how short is the
Moment of pain which may deserve thee? O Moment, moment of this life, how
quickly do thou slip away, and what immense Durations has Eternity.

Ah! Jacob, Jacob, serve then not only seven days, but even seven years
entire, to obtain Rachel. Jacob, it suffices to love her: For in loving, every
thing is animated; every thing lives, every thing prospers, and every thing
passes away most sweetly under the laws of love; and since it is not for a
Man, but for a God, nor for a mortal beauty, but for an immortal happiness
you captivate your self.

It was no trouble unto Jacob to receive this yoke, Acquievit beneplacito, and
bebdomadae transacta, Rachel duxit u^orem. Genesis 29. v. 28.
seeing himself the possessour of his dear Rachel; he resumed the trade he had
so happily begun, and he believed that the shackles of his second service,
would not be less supportable than the former.

Behold him happy to see himself in a Bondage, where he was a servant to Laban,
and the master of Rachel. All his misfortune was only because he contemned Leah
which proceeded from the excessive love be bore unto Rachel.

But God taking pity of Leah rendered her considerable by her fruitfulness, and
by the birth of four Sons, Videns autem Dominus quod despiceret Liam, aperuit
vulvam ejus. Genes. 29. v. 31. Quae conceptum genuit silium, vocavitque nomen
ejus Ruben. Genesis 29. v. 31.

Rursumque concepit, and peperit filium, vocavitque nomen ejus Simeon, etc.
Genes. 29. v. 23.


the first of which was called Ruben, the second Simeon, the third Levi, and
the fourth Judas, which were the four principal causes of Rachels envying Leah.

It is the vice of great souls to be touched with envy, and the effect of an
unworthy melancholy to seek good from another mishap. It is no wonder then, if
women for the most part are subject unto these abominable motions; but I am
astonished at the violence of this passion, when it transports men even unto
despair.

Rachel will dye, Cernens autem Rachel qu^d insoecunda ess^t: ci ma^^to sua, da
miht liberos, etc. Genesis 30. v. 1.

C^i i^a^us respondit Jacob: N^m pro Deo ego sum? etc. Genesis 30. v. 3.

Ingress^ ad se vi^o concepit, and peperit filium. Genesis 30 v. 5.

Et id^i^co apellavit n^m^n esus Dan. Genesis 30. v. 6.

Rursumque Bala concipiens pe^erit alterum. Genesis 30. v. 7.

Vocavitque eum Nephthali. Genesis 30. v. 8.


she says, if no children be given her. What man I beseech you can bestow a
favor which God has reserved to himself? was not this then a means to make
Jacob dye, seeing that his wife asked that which lay not in his power to give
her? It was requisite nevertheless that the goodness of God should aleviate the
grief of this sad Mother; giving unto her handmaid two Sons, one of which was
called Dan and the other Nepthalim.

God immediately after showed the same favor to the Handmaid of Leah who
brought forth Gad and Asser.

After which Leah her self conceived of Jsachar, then of Zebulon, and at last
of a Daughter called Dina.

It was by the means of these generations God began to accomplish the Promise
he had made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; And it was out of these first
springs issued a thousand and a thousand streams of this blood of Patriarcks
which was to overflow the fairest Lands of the Universe. Recordatus quoque
Dominus Rachelis, exatedivit eam, and aperuit vulvam ejus. Genesis 30. v. 22.

Quae concepit and peperit filium. Genesis 30. v. 23.

(...) vocavit nomen ejus Joseph. Genesis 30. v. 24.


At that time Jacob saw the time approaching during which he had tied himself to
serve his Father-in-Law Laban. Rachel nevertheless was troubled at her
barrenness: But at length God heard her prayers, and made her the Mother of a
Son, whose birth effaced all the marks of her shame and dishonor. This Joseph,
this miraculous Infant, was the delight of his parents, the glory of Rachel,
the love of Jacob, the wish and desire of both, the support of his family, the
King of all his brethren, the Savior of his people, and the masterpiece of
the graces and favors of God.

CHAP. VII. The reward Jacob received for his services, and his departure out
of Mesopotamia.
WHen Jacob had finished his fourteen years of service he began to long for
liberty, Nato autem Joseph dixit Jacob socero suc: dimitte me ut revertar in
patriam, and ad terram meam. Genesis 30. v. 25.
and for his own country; where he had never lived under the command of a
Master and Father-in-Law, but under the tuition of a Father and Mother who had
always treated him not as a Servant, but as their Child. He entreated then
Laban to give way unto his retirement. But as interest is the first inciter of
all passions, Laban immediately felt his Heart assaulted with all sorts of
Motions.

In fine, Ait illi Laban: Inveniam gratiam in conspectu tuo, etc. Genesis 30. v.
27.
the hope he had that Jacobs presence would every day increase the blessings
and Graces of Heaven upon his family, he invites Jacob to remain some small
time with him; To which Jacob freely accorded, well foreseeing the trouble he
should have in his journey, being burdened with Women and Children too weak
and young to resist the incommodities of travel.

He condescended then to the desire of Laban, Dixitque Loban: quid tibi da^o?
At ille ait, nibil volo: sed si feceris quod postulo, iterum ^ascam, and
custodiam (...) tua. Genesis 30. v. 31.

Gyraomnes greges tuos, and separa cunctas ves va^ias, and sparso vel^^^e: and
quodcumque f^r^^m and maculosum, varIumque suerit, tam in ovibus quam in capris
erit merces mea. Genesis 30. v. 32.

tollens ergo Jacob virgas populeas virides, and amygdalin as, etc. Genesis 30. v.
37.


upon condition he might have the government of his flocks and Herds, and that
he would distribute them in such sort as from thenceforth all the beasts which
were found spotted, should be his and those which should be of one single
color were to be Labans.

The agreement is made to the Content and liking of both parties: but disunion
and Jealousy arose quickly on Labans part, seeing his own flocks barren, and
on the contrary those of Jacob very fruitful.

This was (as Theodoret believed) a miraculous artifice of divine Providence,
which incited Jacob to place white and green wands before the Eyes of his
flocks when they were in copulation; which caused various impressions and
effects conformable to the desires of Jacob, Posuitque eas in canalibus, ubi
essundebatur aequa, ut cum venissent greges ad bibend^m ante oculos haberent
virgas, and in aspectu earum coreiperent. Genesis 30. v. 38.

Arist. lib. 3. de Hist. anim. Varro in Solino.


and agreeable to the picture which an Angel had represented to him.

I conceive nevertheless, absolutely speaking, that such productions are not
above the power of Nature. It is the opinion of all Philosophers, and amongst
others of Aristotle, who affirms that in Antandria there are two great Rivers,
in one of which the beasts which drink of it grow white, and in the other
become black. In like manner the River Seamander breeds golden colors: And in
the red Sea there is a fountain as Varro observes which changes every thing
into Carnation.

It is then no impossible thing for the imagination to produce like effects,
and to form in Bodies, what the Sun does in the clouds, and Painters in their
pictures. These are draughts of the Soul which in the strict Union she has
with the Body is the source of its Actions and Motions; Portraicts of the Soul.
so that she labors therein as a Workman does upon his Matter, and a Designer
upon the Platform which he contrived. And truly if a Carver can shape upon
Marble and Brass the intelligible form and the Idea which is in his Fancy and
Reason; What disorder can there be, if the Sensitive Soul, the Fancy of Animals
chance to produce their Sensible Images in the matter most capable of these
impressions, when the Heat of Nature incites them to dilate themselves into new
Productions? In fine, but too many events are daily seen in the world which
prove this verity, and demonstrat that the Imagination has a Marvelous command
over Bodies.

This yet hinders not Jacob from following the instincts of a Supernatural
conduct to purchase the Reward his Services deserved.

However it were, Animadvertit quoque faciem Laban quod non effet erga se sicut
heri, and nudiustertius, Genesis 31. v. 2.
Laban grows extraordinary Sad, because his flocks bring him no fruit. For this
purpose he alters the Contract between him and his Son-in-Law. But perceiving
that his unfaithful dealing afforded no better Success, he could no longer
dissemble his thoughts unto Jacob, who presently discovered in his
Father-in-Law's countenance very sensible marks of his indignation.

This was partly then the occasion which made Jacob resolve to return into his
own Country; Maxim dicente (...); Domino revertere in terram patrum tuorum,
etc. Genesis 31. v 3.

Misit and votavit Rachel, and Liam in agrum, vbi pascebat grege^, Genesis 31. v.
4. Dixitque as, vi^eo faciem patris vestri, quod non sit erg^ me sicut heri,
and nudiustertius. Genesis 31. v. 5. Surre^it itaque Jacob, and impositis liberis
suis ac consugibus super Camelos, abiit. Genesis 31. v. 17.

Nuntiatum est Leban die tertin, quod fageret Jacob. Genesis 31. v. 22.

Qui assumptis fratribus suis persecutus est cum, etc. Genesis 31. v. 23.

Vtaitque in somnis dicentem sibi Deum, cave ne quidquam aspere loquaris contra
Jacob. Genesis 31. v. 24.

Et dixit ad Jacob, quare it a egisti. Genesis 31. v. 26. Venierge ut ineamus,
foedus etc. Genesis 31. v. 44. Lahan vero de nocte consurgens, etc. Genesis 31. v.
55. Jacob quoque abiit, itinere quo caeperat, etc. Genesis 32. v. 1.


but since he could not accomplish this design without the consent of his
wifes, he acquainted them with all that had passed. As Soon then as they had
assented thereto, Jacob seeing the time God had ordained for his return, began
his journey in the most secret manner he could with his wifes, Children,
flocks, baggage, and the rest of his family. They marched in great haste, and
had already passed over the River Euphrates, when Laban advertised of this
departure took his brother, his cosins, and the greater number of his Friends,
to pursue these fugitives, whom at last after Seven days travel he
discovered afar off upon Mount Galaad, where Laban reposing a while God
appeared unto him, and enjoined him not to use Jacob ill. He could not yet
contein himself from complaining of this unexpected departure, and principally
for the Idols which Rachel had carried away without acquainting Jacob
therewith, but amongst these reproaches there was a necessity of agreeing, and
after a Mutual accord Laban returned into Mesopotamia, and Jacob pursued his
journey toward the Land of Canaan.

There he immediately discovered those Troops of Angels which came to meet him
as so many Squadro^s, Quos cum vidisset, ait: castra Des sunt haec, and
appellavit nomen loci illius Mabanaim, id est castra. Genesis 32. v. 2.
which God deputed for his safe-guards: This was the cause why Jacob called
that place where these Legions appeared, Mahanaim, which signifies Armies; And
in effect these were Battalians ranked in order, in favor of Jacob. These were
Deputies of Heaven which came to congratulate his Triumphs. These were Angels
of Paradise, Spirits of glory who came with applauses to receive this glorious
Conqueror, this happy Traveller, and this Angel of peace, who brings Love and
contentment unto his Parents, and to his whole Country.

Mean while Esau came with four hundred men, Venimus ad Esau fratrem tuum, and
ecce properat tibi in occursum cum quadringen is viris. Genesis 32. v. 6.

Timuit Jacob valde: and perterritus divisit popubum qui secum erat, greges
queque, and eves, and boves, and Camelos in duas turmas. Genesis 32. v. 7.


and I fear lest his fury may re-inkindle at the sight of his supplanter; I
fear lest the remembrance of his past misfortunes may awake at the noise of
these troops; I fear lest the meekness which is natural unto Jacob, may cast
Oil into the Fire, which Esau had covered for the space of twenty years under
the Ashes of his mischievous disposition.

For the Love of God beware Jacob, and take care of these gracious Pledges, and
of these happy depositaries, you have acquired with so much labor. Divide then
your Flocks, separate all your Soldiers, set aside your Wifes and Children,
and above all expose not Rachel unto Assaults and Danger, and much less her
dear and only Joseph. Jacob did prudently all that any Man could act upon such
an occasion: But God, who manageth Hearts, and boweth the most savage and
rebellious persons, will know how to Order Esau in such sort, as Jacob shall
never receive the least prejudice from him.

It is enough then for Jacob to march under the Standard of Divine Providence,
and follow those Squadrons which the God of Battails has appointed for his
preservation.

The Earth is but a point in comparison of the Heavens, and an Angel of the
lowest order surpasteth in power and virtue all the Creatures which live in
this World: If this be so, what favor did God show unto Jacob, in giving him
so many Angels to guard him under their protection? and what a happiness is it
unto every one to have an Angel for his Guardian?

My God, I render thee most humble thanks for him in the name of all men, and
from henceforth I abandon my self into thy hands, and will live and dye under
the wings of this amiable Guardian, whom thou have given me for the Director of
my Life, for the Guide of my Pilgrimage, for the Pylot of my Navigation, and in
a word for a friend, and for an Angel, which will accompany me even unto my
Tomb.

CHAP. VIII. Jacobs Wrestling with the Angel, and his return into Canaan.
IF continual practice renders a Soldier bold, valiant dexterous and expert,
Men who are amidst perpetual assaults, unexpected surprises, incessant
combats, in a continual Conflict with all Creatures, Life of Man.
ought to be well versed in the exercise of War. Now there is no person
exempted from these Laws, War without truce.
and a Man must be single in the World, and have neither Soul nor Body, to have
no Enemies. St. S. Chrysostom. in Psalm. ^.
Chrysostom was of this opinion, when he said That his Life was continually
amidst assaults: And for this cause it was necessary for him to stand always
upon his Guard. And Seneca, who lived amongst employments, Nobis quoque
militandum est and quidem genere militiae in quo nunquam quies, nunquam otium
datur. Sen. Ep. 51.
where his Studies and Philosophy spoke nothing to him but Peace, will confess
nevertheless that his employment, though very solitary, gave him neither truce
nor repose. We may then truly say that the Sea may for a time enjoy a Calm;
That Music has necessarily some pauses, that the Earth is not still beaten
with Hail and Wind, that the Air has alternatively both Day and Night: But the
Life of Man has War without truce, continual storms, restless complaints, and
obscurities which inviron him at Noon day. Dreadful Monsters.
Hell has powers armed against him; the Earth has furious Monsters, and Men a
thousand times more enraged than Monsters, which pursue him on all sides. The
Sea has tempests which roar under his Feet, the Air tumbleth down whole
quarries upon his Head, Fire inkindles Comets to affright him, and the Sun and
Moon have Eclipses to interre him alive under their shadows. In fine, God and
his Angels often times Arm themselves to wage War against him, and make trial
of his Valor.

Notwithstanding, it would never have been believed, if Gods Bulwarks had been
only in the Heavens, and if from thence it had satisfied him to cast at us some
Darts without our discerning the Hand which had thrown them. He makes himself
then Visible, and will have Earth to be his Field of Battle, where under Humane
and Angelical forms he fights with Men.

Jacob did not expect such a Combat, Misit autem and nuncios ante so ad Esau
fratrem suum. Genesis 32. v. 3.

Et transivit vadum Jaboch. Genesis 32. v. 22 Mansit solus and e^ce vir lucta^atur
cum eo usque ad mane. Genesis 32. v. 24.


when he disposed himself to Pacify his Brother, or at least to repel the
violence of his efforts. But when he had passed the torrent of Jaboch, which is
between the Lands of Gerasa and Philadelphus, scarce was he drawn aside, but
being all alone he perceived a Man wrestling all the Night with him, without
giving him any repose. Alas! what retreat? what combat? what adversary has
incountred Jacob. Is this God? Is this an Angel? Is this a Man? or rather is
not this Esau who waited to take revenge on him? Where is Racbel, where Leah,
where Ruben that they hasten not to his succor? But I know not whether fear
has not taken away even Jacobs speech, when he might have called his people to
his aid: yet it is not probable, since he presently knew (as Rupertus says)
that it was God who assailed him, Rupert. lib. 6. commen. in Genesis
and the more Jacob strove to hold him, the farther he got off his Hands. Where
by the way I observe, that Rupertus believed, that it was God who in his own
Person Wrastled with Jacob. This was also the belief of Theodoret and
Tertullian; Theod. in Genesis Tertul. lib. 2. cont. Marc.
yet it is not the most common opinion, and it is more agreeable unto the terms
of holy Scripture, to say, that it was an Angel Wrastled with Jacob. Ozea in
the twelfth Chapter of his Prophecy has expressed it so clearly, that no Man
can doubt it: And surely it seems that the Greatness and Majesty of God, did
not permit him personally to descend into the List, and to Wrestle with a Man
Body to Body, since an Angel might suffice for this combat.

It is also more probable that this conflict was Corporal and sensible, than
to believe that it was only interior, spiritual and apparent: we have a
strong conjecture of it, by reason it lasted all the Night, and that it was not
performed whilst Jacob slept, Tetigit nervum soemoris ejus, and statim
emarcuit. Genesis 32. v. 25.
but in such sort, as he saw his Adversary, who struck him so roughly on the
thigh, as a Nerve being contracted, he began to feel one of his Legs shorter
than the other. Besides, if this Duel had not been Body to Body, the Latin,
Greek and Hebrew translation, had not made use of terms which denoted a
sensible action, and so corporeal that Symacus spoke not otherwise of it, than
he could have done concerning the combats off the ancient Wrastlers which
fought in Greece before the People, by clasping each other with their Arms and
Hands. This was not a feigned appearance, and an imaginary Duel, as this
Learned Author affirms, but a contest who should throw his Companion on the
ground. In fine, they grapled so lively with each other, Diritque ad eum,
dimitte me: jar^ (...) ascendit aurora: respendit, non dimittam te nisi
benedixe is mihi. Genesis 32. v. 26.

At ille nequaquam, inquit, Jacob appellabitur nomen tuum, sed Israel, etc.
Genesis 32. v. 28.


that Jacob could not almost loose himself from his adversary, although the
Aurora had sounded her retreat, and that the Angel was enforced to give him his
Benediction, after he had changed the name of Jacob into that of Israel: so
that from that time forward he must be called no more Jacob the Supplanter, but
Israel, that is to say, the Emulator of an Angel, and as the vanquisher of God
himself, who fought in the Person of this Angel, who seeing himself constrained
to give him his blessing, assured him of the power and command he should have
over Men, since he had had so much over God. Presently after Jacob losing the
sight of this blessed Spirit, El^vans autem Jacob oculos suos vidit ve nientem
Esau, and cum co quadringentos viros. Genesis 33. v. 1.

E^ip^c progrediens adoravit pronus in terram septies. Genesis 33. v. 3.

Currens itaque Esau obviam fratri suo amplea atus est eum, s^^ngensque collum
ejus, and osculatus flevit. Genesis 33. v. 4.


saw Esau a far off, who came directly toward him with four hundred Men
attending on him. Jacob prostrated himself on the Earth, and adored him seven
times; which Esau seeing he lept on his Neck, embraced him most affectionatly,
and kissed him as his Brother.

So true it is, that there is no Heart so brutish, nor any Soul so fierce, as
yields not unto the attractives of sweetness, and unto the charms of virtue,
then especially when it is not abject and sordid, but magnificent and generous
like that of Jacob, who spared neither Honors, Presents, nor Words to gain
Esau, and to remove out of his mind all the remnants of his fury. This is the
way to quench a great flame with drops of Water; It is the way how to stop a
torrent with a little Sand, and to amuse a Tiger with a little piece of
Crystal: Force and rigor are the Weapons which are to be employed against
Lions and Panthers? A secret to render himself Master of Hearts.
But meekness and humility are the Darts and Arrows with which we must assault
Men, if we desire to acquire command over their Hearrs.

This was the Artifice Jacob used toward Esau; Atille ait: habeo plurima
frater mi, sint tua tibi. Genesis 33. v. 9.
and in effect Esau vanquished by his respects and attractives presently
protested unto Jacob, that all his fortunes were at his service, and that he
offered himself entirely to him. Behold then a secret to mollify stony Hearts,
Empire over Souls.
and to melt in a moment even Eyes of Marble: Behold the entrance into the
Kingdom of Hearts, and the means to raise up unto our selves a Throne amongst
the most barbarous Nations.

Nevertheless in the World there are courages of Steel which cannot be softened,
torrents which cannot be stayed, and flames like those of Hell which cannot be
quenched. In fine, there are some more inflexible than Esau, Inflexible
courages.
and in truth also there are very few who have the qualities of Jacob. For
never any Man understood better than himself, the Art of conquering Hearts and
the managing of Friendship.

He was none of those who are taught the way of Courting, and who Learn the
Laws of the World, like Parrets, which say what they do not: They know some
punctilioes and formalities, but are not versed in the knowledge of a virtuous
Man, A good Man.
who has not only Complements in his Mouth, studied respects, importune
Ceremonies, slight and fantastical compliances; but actions and effects with
most pure and sincere intentions, wherewith he charmeth the flames of Choler,
and stifles the motions of Revenge even in the Soul of his Enemies.

Behold the Weapons Jacob used to reunite himself to his Brother, Reversus est
itaque illo die Esau itinere quo venerat in Seir. Genesis 33. v. 16.
who would I believe never have left him, if he himself had not begged leave to
depart with his Wifes, Children, and Company; which Esau having willingly
granted him, he went directly unto Salem which is upon the territory of
Chanaan.

This was the place where Sichem the Son of Hemor, Quam cum vidisset ^ichem
filius Hemor Hevaei, princeps ter^ae illius, adamavit came, etc. Genesis 34. v. 2.

Auditoque quod acciderat, ^ati sunt valde Genesis 34. v. 7.

Locutus est itaque Hemor ad eos: Sichem fi^^ mei adhaesit anima ^^^tae
vestrae, date eam ^lli uxorem. Genesis 34. v. 8.

^^^nsique sunt omnes co cum^^sis cunctis ma ibus. Genesis 34. v. 24. Et (...) die
tertio, quando gravissimus vulaerum dolor est: arrept is, duo filii Jacob,
Simeon and Levi fiaties Dinae, gladiis, ingressi sunt urbem confidenter,
interfectisque omnibus maseulis. Genesis 34. v. 25. Hemor and Sichem pariter
necaverunt. Genesis 34. v. 26.


Prince of the Sichemites, took the boldness to steal away Dina Jacobs only
Daughter. Her Brothers seeing the injury and affront this infamous person had
done them, resolved to revenge themselves without pity. Notwithstanding Hemor
used his utmost Endeavors to appease Jacob, and to convert this ravishment
into a Marriage. The Contract was passed, and the Articles signed (as I may say)
with the proper blood of Sichem and of all the Sichemites, who submitted unto
Circumcision, to show that they received the Religion of Jacob and of his
Children.

This Sacrament nevertheless served but for an occasion of a more cruel and
abominable Sacrilege: For upon the third Day after this general Circumcision,
Simcon and Levi entered the City, where they first killed all the Male Children,
then they fell upon Hemor and Sichem, and after many Murders, Pillaged, and
ransaked all that was found therein, imagining after the violation of their
Sister, whom they carried away, that there were no Laws neither Humane or
Divine, which they might not now justly infringe.

But I cannot believe that this Zeal was innocent; For in the sequel of his
thorrid Tragedy, Criminal zeal.
they could not be excused from Theft, Sacrilege, perfidiousness, nor
particularly from Impiety toward their Father, when they exposed him to the
hazard of his Life, and who for this reason was constrained immediately to leave
his Country, Interea locutus est Deus ad Jacob, surge and ascend Bethel, etc.
Genesis 35. v. 1.

Dederunt ergo ei omves Deos alienos quos habebant, and inaures quae erant in
auribus little: at ille infodit easubter Terebinthum. Genesis 35. v. 4.

Egressus autem inde venit ad terram, quae ducit Ephratam, in qua cum
parturiret Rachel, Genesis 35. v. 16. Ob disficultatem partus periclitari coepit.
Genesis 35. v. 17.

Egrediente autem anima prae dolor, and imminente jam morte, vocavit nomen
filii sui Benoni, etc. Genesis 35. v. 18.


and to take refuge upon Mount Bethel, where at the Foot of a Terebinth Tree he
burned all the Idols which his Wifes and Servants secretly adored. After which
God appeared the seventh time unto him. I doubt whether this were not
peradventure the means to bring him the first news of his Wifes Death, and to
prepare his mind unto a sharp Divorce. However it were, Jacob descended from
Bethel, into the road leading to Ephrata, that is to say Bethelem.

It was in this sad journey where Rachel after a thousand throws was
constrained to pay the last tribute unto Nature. But before the closing of her
Eyes and Mouth, she had the happiness to see a second Son, and to call him
Benoni, as the fruit of her labor, being born upon her ashes.

Jacob nevertheless lost no courage, but had Faith and Hope enough to believe
that this Child would be the support of his Family and the Staff of his old
age, which was the cause, he changed the fatal name of Benoni into that of
Benjamin, which promises nothing but happiness.

End of the third Book.
THE HOLY HISTORY, FIRST TOME. Joseph and his Brethren.
FOURTH BOOK.
I am confident some will say at the first view of the title of this History,
that this is to give a second touch to a Picture, which has been drawn by the
prime Masters of the World, and to carry a Torch into a Country, where the Sun
is in his Meridian.

Nevertheless I do not doubt but such as shall have framed this judgment, may
condemn their promptitude, when they shall see that it was never my design to
add any draughts unto such accomplished works; But only to take out a most
faithful Copy of them, observing the traces which those skillful Hands have
marked out.

CHAP. I. Joseph sold by his Brethren.
WE cannot discern says Solomon, Solom. Prove. c. 30. v. 18.
the track of a Bird which flies in the Air, the Print of a Serpent which
glideth along upon the Earth, and the paths of a Vessel sailing in a Calm Sea:
But it is yet more difficult to comprehend the motion and course of a Man who
enters into the World like an Eagle, Four things very difficult to comprehend
in the World.
who begins to stir his Wings to take his flight; like an Adder which creeps on
his Belly, and like a Frigot exposed to the Sea and Winds.

None but God alone who giving him his flight, and marking out to him his
ways, sees in weighing Anchor the Region, Period, and Shore, where his
Courses, Voyages, and Navigations must terminate. It is God who bears in his
own Bosom the Card on which his adventures and destinies are marked. The Eyes
of God are the Torches which enlighten him in his deviations; And it is his
Hand which points out his lodging even in the Tomb. Men nevertheless remain
astonished in their own affairs, they are as it were Blind in their proper
Interests, and float in the Uncertainty of Accidents, which make up this whole
Contexture of their lives.

Jacob was ignorant why Heaven had so long differed the Birth of its Joseph;
Joseph cum sexdecim esset annorum pascebat gregem.
And Joseph understood not Gods manner of Conduct, nor that of his Father
Jacob, when he went unto his Brethren who were driving their flocks through the
Meadows of Chanaan, It was there nevertheless where he passed the Apprentiship
of his future Regality: the Sheep-hook, he carried in his Hand, was but the
Image of the power God prepared for him; Accusavitque fiatres sues apud Patrem
crimine pessimo. Genesis 37. v. 2.
and in accusing his Brethren of that crime which must not be named, he
performed an Act of Justice, which testified that his Government should not
only extend to Herds of Beasts, but also unto Men, and all Egypt, where he was
to be Pharao's Lieutenant. But as the most elevated fortunes have usually their
foundations upon Rocks; As the Crowns of Roses appear not but amongst Thorns;
and as before our ascending on a Throne of Honor, Mixture of Fortune.
we must often pass under Abysses, and through most dangerous precipices: so
Joseph shall not take the reigns of Egypt, until he has been tied up like a
Beast, and sold as a slave even by those who will be one Day his Captives; and
he must come forth of a Pit to go unto the Court, where God expects him, to
make a Vice-King of the Person of a Shepherd.

But more narrowly and diligently to observe the courses and ways which led
him unto the Empire, Isiacl autem diligebat Joseph super o^nes silies suos.
Genesis 37. v. 3.
we must presuppose that Jacob loved nothing equal to his little Joseph;
wherein truly he was excusable: for we commonly affect most dearly what we
have long desisired: and it was almost impossible to be the Father of so
accomplished a Son, without having peculiar tendernesses and passions for him.
Fecitque ei tunicam poly^itam. Genesis 37. v. 3.

Videntes autem fratres esus quod a Patre plus cumits diligeretur, oderunt cum,
nec poterant ci quicau^m pacifice loqui. Genesis 37. v. 4.


I know not nevertheless whether his affection was well regulated, when it
caused Joseph to wear his Liveries upon a Garment of several colors, which
wrought such different impressions in the Hearts of his Brethren, as from that
time they bore nothing but hatred and envy toward him.

In vain was it for them to conceal their thoughts: for the fury of a passionat
Soul increases the more we strive to hide it, and either soon or late this
thunderbolt must rend the Clouds, and this fire must break forth through the
ashes wherein it was hid. That which augmented these murdering flames amongst
Joseph's Brethren, was the candor wherewith he opened to them all the accidents
and motions of his Heart.

Amongst other things it one Day happened, Accidit quoque ut visum somnium
referrec fratribus suis: quae causa majoris od^^ ^minarium fuit. Genesis 37. v. 5.

Dixieque ad eos: Audite somnium quod vidi. Genesis 37. v. 6.

Putab. ^n nos ligare manipulos in agro, and qu^si consu^g^re manipulup^ meum,
and stare, vestrosque manipulos circumstan^es adorare manipul^n meum. Genesis 37.
v. 7.


that being in the midst of them, he was so candid, and free, as to relate unto
them what had passed in his sleep. Brethren (says he,) I saw my self, in a
dream, with you in the Fields, and presently me thought that we there bound up
together some sheafs of Corn: But afterward I perceived mine to rise up above
yours, and there was not one which did not adore it. Does not this peradventure
portend, replied his Brethren, that you must be one Day our King and we your
Subjects?

I know not whether Joseph did approve of this Augury, and whether he were not
so innocent as to take this jealousy and rallery for an effect of their Love.
Et ait: vidi per sommum, quasi Solemn and Luaam, and Stellas undccim adorare me.
Genesis 37. v. 9.
For he went on telling them, that during this sleep he found himself in his
Bed as upon a Thront, and that at his Feet, he saw the Sun, Moon, and eleven
Stars, which did Homage to him as unto a God.

Jacob heard this discourse, Quod cum Patri suo, and fratribus retulisset,
increpuit cum Pater suus, and dixi^: Quid sibi vult hoc somnium quod vidisti?
man ego and Matter tua, and fratres tui adorabimus te super terram. Genesis 37. v.
10.
and seeing that all these entertainments, though innocent, did cast a thousand
seeds of Discord and Envy into the Souls of his Brethren, seemed to be
offended, and then addressing himself unto Joseph he says to him. What! my
Son, art thou not ashamed to relate fables and dreams? whereby it seems by your
fancies, and vain imaginations, you pretend that my self, your Mother, and your
Brothers should render you Honor as to our Sovereign. Truly you speak
pleasantly. Now if you be wise speak no more so indiscreetly, or at least in
being awake correct the error of your dreams, and if the Night deceive you, let
the Day discover the falsehood of your illusions.

Jacob mean while took notice of these Dreams as so many Presages of some
truth: Pater vero rem tacitus considerabat.
For he knew that the most part of Nightly imaginations are commonly natural
effects, which proceed either from repletion, emptiness, or the Ideas we have
in the Day time, or else from some illusions of the Devil: yet he was assured
that the Dreams of Joseph were no imaginary figures and confused vapors, nor
phantasms, disordered exhalations, nor the smokes and flames of a preceding
Fire; nor in fine, specters and Idols of a tenebrous power; but Draughts,
Ciphers, and mysterious representations, which God or some Angel had imprinted
in his Soul. It is of this fourth kind of dreams, Philo spoke in anexpress
Treatise, and it is that alone which Chrysippus defined, Chrysip. ex cit. lib.
de divin.
saying, A Dream is a Celestial virtue and a Divine Ray which Heaven has cast
into our Souls, and of which they make use, to penetrate the shadows which are
wont to hide truth from our Eyes. And it is the Hand of God, or the Pencil of
an Intelligence which then renders Images intelligible whose Idea's and
originals reside in the source of Essences, and whose colors are in the
mysterious Ordinances of time and Eternity.

Such was Joseph's vision: But Jacob knowing on the one side, that this
Revelation was but a Copy of the Designs God had on him; And on the other side
seeing that this was but a ground of scandal, hatred, and envy to his
Brethren, he resolved to sever them for a time, to the end by this separation
in their absence, he might smother all these Fires which were inkindled by the
Goodness of the one, and the Malice of the rest.

For this purpose Jacob had no other expedient than to retain Joseph in his
House, Pate
and to send all his Brethren into the Country. Imagining besides, that by
separating Bodies, he might reunite their Minds, and alter their passions. But
this was only to sever a Dove from Vultures, and Sheep from Wolves; it only
whets their natural rage and mortal Antipathy, when they are withheld from
their prey, and when they sent it a far off.

I know that the Fields are innocent. But they cease not for all this to be
retreits for Criminals. The solitariness of Woods and Meadows is the Element of
Meekness and Peace: but we must bring thither tame Hearts, and quiet Souls.

In fine, it is a very sweet and pleasing vocation to guide Sheep and Lambs
upon Hills and Dales: But if Lions be their conductors, they are so far from
being changed, as on the contrary they will find every moment new baits and
allurements to inflame their cruelty.

We must not hope then, that time, place, Cumque fratres illiu^ in pascendis
gregibus Patris morarentur in Sichem, Genesis 37. v. 32. Dixit ad cum Israel:
fratres tui pascunt Oves in Sichem, veni, mittam te ad eos. Genesis 37. v. 15.
and employment can alter these Tigers, which Jacob sends into the plains of
Sichem, to guide his Flocks. Nevertheless after some delay conceiving that
their humors were sweetened, and, that the divertisements of a Country Life had
made them forget what passed in his House, Praesto sum, ait ei, vade and vide
si cuncti prospera sint, etc. Genesis 37. v. 14.
he resolved to send his Joseph to them, who had no sooner taken notice of his
Fathers desire, but at the very instant he began his journey.

This amiable Dove, and this Lamb, went passionatly cralling upon Vultures and
Wolves, when a passenger met him, who told him that his Brethren were in
Dothaim. Invenitque eum vir ^rantem in agro and interrogavit, quid quareret;
Genesis 37. v. 15.

At ille respondit, fratres meos quaero. Genesis 37. v. 16.

Dixitque ei vir: exaudivi eos Aicentes eamus in Dothaim. Genesis 37. v. 17.


Ah poor Child! whether go thou thus abandoned and all alone, straying in
the Deserts, without Father, Friends, and defense? Joseph what seek thou? I
seek says he, my Brethren. Thy Brothers? deceive not thy self; why do thou
seek them? Do thou not know the hatred they bear to thee, and the tragic
design they have upon thy life?

My God! how secure is Innocence, how calm is Virtue, and generally how happy
are Men, when they follow the impulses of God? Assured Innocence.
The Spirit of the World is an unquiet, turbulent, fearful, dissembling,
mutable, fantastic, and outrageous Devil: But that of Heaven is an Angel of
Peace, always equal, without emotion, without terrors, without inconstancy,
without Capriciousness, and free from all Jealousy, as also from all those
shadows which make a tenebrous Chaos of the purest Lights, and place Night in
the midst of Day.

It is no wonder then if Joseph were secure in the midst of dangers; Perrexit
e^go Joseph post fratres suos, and invenit eos in Dothaim. Genesis 37. v. 17.
for God who possessed his Soul freed him from those panique terrors, and those
unquiet fears, which assassinate the wicked: it sufficed him to obey his
Father, and provided he meet with his Brethren, his mind is satisfied.

Mean while these impious Spirits, Qui cum vidissent eum procul, etc. Genesis 37.
v. 18.
which extend their vengeance even to rage, perceived him a far off: but as if
the shadows of their own crimes had cast veyls over their Eyes, or stifled in
their Hearts all sense of Nature, they did not acknowledge him for their
Brother, or at least they would not call him by this, so amiable, so sweet, and
so powerful a name. Et mutuo loquebantur, ecce somniator venit. Genesis 37. v. 19.

Venite occidamus eu, and mittamus in Cysternam veterem, dicemusque fera
pessima devoravit eum. Genesis 37. v. 20.

Audiens autem haec Ruben, niteb^tur liberare eum, etc. Genesis 37. v. 21.

Non interficiatis animam ejus, nec effundatis sanguinem, etc. Genesis 37. v. 22.

Hoc autem dicebat, volens eripere eum de manibus little, etc. Genesis 37. v. 22.

Confestim igitur ut pervenit ad fratres suos, nudaverunt eum tunica talari and
polymita. Genesis 37. v. 23.

Et sedentes ut comederent panem, viderunt Ismaclitas viato es venire de
Galaad, etc. Genesis 37. v. 25.

Dixit ergo Judas fratribus suas: Quid nobis prodest si occiderimus fra^rem
nostr^u, and celaver^^^^s sanguinem ipsius? Genesis 37. v. 26.


Behold this dreamer, say they, who comes unto us, and they looking upon one
another, before he approached any nearer, they resolved to take away his Life,
and to cast him into a Well which was near at Hand; to the end they might say
unto Jacob, that a cruel and ravenous Beast had devoured Joseph. Afterward,
this bloody design would have been accomplished, if Ruben, who was their Elder
Brother, had not opposed it; Remonstrating to them that at least it were much
better to take him aside, and bury him alive in some Pit, than to kill him; and
that by this means, their Hands would not be polluted with his Blood, the
stains whereof are never to be effaced. This was a pretense, and an occasion
the more easily to free and restore him unto his Father. In effect Joseph
having accosted them, Ruben cast himself on his Neck. But the rest immediately
took off his Garment, and then put him into an old Pit where there was no
Water. Mean while they all sat round about the place, in which they had
enclosed this Lamb. At the same time behold some Merchants passing by who were
going into Egypt. Whereupon Judas who feared lest hunger, thirst, nakedness,
cold, and the horrors of a Well might stifle Joseph, took occasion to conjure
his Brethren, to sell him rather unto the Ismaelites than to render themselves
culpable of his death, and become the Authors of a crime which uses to raise
storms of Blood.

These Remonstrances were as so many lightnings which dissipated this Cloud,
and the Thunderbolts, which these cruel Brethren Darted against their
Prisoner, did not ruin him but for a time.

Joseph must be taken out of the Well to be exposed for sale unto the
Merchants: Ex trahentes cum de Cysterna vendiderunt Ismaelitis. Genesis 37. v. 28.
But if Death be sweeter than Captivity, and if a courageous person has less
repugnancy to receive a Stab with a Dagger into his Heart, than to have
manacles on his Hands; This generous Youth was very unhappy to come out of a
Sepulcher to serve unknown Masters, and a sort of people to whom the hope of
profit rendered all things vendible, even liberty it self, which is yet a
thousand times more precious than Life.

Joseph then is set to sale unto any that will give money for him; He is naked,
but resembles not those Birds which are most valued for their feathers. The
Proclamation of Joseph.
He has a tender and delicate Body, but a generous and penetrating Spirit; He
is covered all over with dust, but it is but a Cloud which hides for a time the
Face of the Sun; He speaks not a word, but it is modesty which closes his
Mouth, and renders his silence more eloquent than a long discourse; He is
ashamed, but it is of his Brothers crime; He shakes, but it is for fear lest
Gods designs be not accomplished. Behold Joseph who will. Alas! what
Proclamations? what sale? and what commerce? Judas what are you doing?
Unmercifull Brethren, have you not a horror to sell your own Blood, and to part
with a Brother for a few pieces of Silver? Ah what! Powerful motives to divert
Joseph's Brethren from their wicked designs.
are not these Eyes and looks capable of mollifying your furies? does not this
innocent move you to compassion? Is not this little naked and trembling Body,
an object more worthy of pity than envy? Remember that he is a part of your
selves, the delight of your Father, and the last hope your Family can have. It
is true, that at present he is but a Reed, but he may grow unto a Palm, and
extend his Branches throughout all Judea. It is true, he is Young, but he has
the wit and Spirit of a Man, aged no less than a hundred years. And besides he
may chance one day to change his thraldom into an honorable liberty: But if
the dreams he had, oblige you to fear the event, they come either from God or
not; if of God; Ah surely it is against him you make War: If not, why do you
arm your selves against an Idol of Wind, and a Phantasm of vanity?

All these motives were not powerful enough to divert the current of these
impious and execrable designs: Nevertheless the furies of envy are torrents
which have no bounds nor limits, nothing being able to stop them.

The bargain is then made, Joseph is sold, Qui duxerunt eum in Aegyptum. Genesis
37. v. 28. Reversusque Ruben ad Cysternam, non invenit puerum. Genesis 37. v. 29.
and they that bought him for a slave, bring him into Egypt without bearing any
respect either unto his Youth, beauty, extraction, or all the good qualities
which made him so much amiable. Whilst they were carrying him away behold
Ruben, who not being present at this sale, and knowing nothing of what passed,
went directly unto the Well, and often called upon Joseph.

When he saw he made no answer, he thought him Dead, either naturally or by
violence; whereupon he began to run as one distracted, and fearfully to cry out.

Alas! where is Joseph? where is this poor Youth? The sighs of Ruben.
where have they put him? what have they done with him? And what is become of
him? Joseph where art thou? Ah whither shall I go? and how can I live, Et
scissis vestibus pergens ad fratres suos ait: puer non comparet, and ego quo
ibo? Genesis 27. v. 30.
if thou do live no more? what will my Father say unto me? and on whom will
he lay the blame? Must not I render an account of him as his Elder Brother?
Brethren what answer do you make me? is he alive? is he Dead? if he be Dead
where is his Body, that I may Water it with my tears, to power out part of my
grief by my Eyes? Brethren show me him I beseech you, or some of his relics?
Ah where is his Sepulcher? where is the happy Land which hides this Treasure?
But if he be still living, where is he? and to what place have you sent him? I
will seek, I will seek every where until I find him? It is enough for me if I
may see him, and but once more speak to him; he knows the affection I bear him,
and the confidence he ought to have in me. Ah! where is Joseph then? Ruben
quiet thy self, for Joseph is not Dead, but only sold. Ah! what commerce?
Joseph sold? what rage of envy? what inhumane traffic? what negotiation and
what cruelty? Joseph in fetters and bondage, Joseph sold as a slave, what will
my father say? what stroke of death will this news give him? and how can he
ever live being deprived of all hope to see his Son again?

Notwithstanding all these Remonstrances, Tulerunt autem tunicam ejus and in
sanguine haedi quem occiderunt ^inxerunt. Genesis 37. v. 31.
they resolved to cut the throat of a Kid to steep Joseph's garments in his
blood: which being done, they sent it all bloody unto Jacob, with direction to
those that carried it, to bid him look whether it were not his Sons garment,
Mittentes qui ferrent ad patrem, and dicerent; hunc invenimus, vide utrum
tunica tui filii sit, an non. Genesis 37. v. 32.
and say that they had found it in this sad plight. I know not who was the
Messenger that delivered this dreadful spoil unto Jacob; But Jacob casts his
eyes upon this sad present, and seeing this bloody torn garment, became says
Philo, presently silent, grief wanting words to answer the thoughts of his
mind, and the resentments of his heart. Quam cum agnovisset pater, ait tunica
filii mei est, sera pessima commedit eum, bestia devoravit Joseph. Genes. 37.
v. 33.
His astonished eyes, as also his mouth, were suspended for a time, as to their
function, he saw and heard nothing, but of murdered Ghosts which spoke
confusedly to him. The excess of grief puts arms into his hands against
himself, Seissisque vestibus indutus est cilicio, lugens filium suum multo
tempore. Genesis 37. v. 34.
he tears off his hair, and dilacerates his breast, and all his garments. But
his tears efface not the blood before his eyes. His silence makes him no
answer, and the holy vengeance he exercises on himself does not punish the
Authors of his grief. Congregatis autem curctis liberis ejus, ut lenicent
delorem patris, notuit consolationem accipere, etc. Genes. 37. v. 35.


Meanwhile all Jacobs friends and servants wept bitterly, nothing was heard
throughout the whole house, but cries, sobs, and accusations. Every one strived
to kiss his garment, and Jacob could hardly tear it out of their hands to cry
out, Ah! this is my Sons garment, it is the garment of my Joseph.

Ah my Son! Mournful complaint of Jacob.
my Joseph! it is not so much thy death I deplore, as the loss I procured to my
self, during thy life, by sending thee too soon out of my house; And besides,
by what more strange kind of death could thou be taken from me? At least if I
had been a witness of this sad accident, and if thy body had remained with me,
I should have had this chaste pledge to charm my sadness. If some sickness had
carried thee away in my presence, I should have rendered thee all the duties
which a father cannot deny a son; I should have kissed thy mouth, I should
have closed thine eyes, I should have received thy last words and sighs; I
should possess in a Tomb the ashes of a Phaenix, and I might have erected on
his Sepulcher a Pile and Altar to enlighten my hopes, and entertain my vows.
But I snatched away thy life, before thy death. I lost thee during thy life,
and my excessive compliance has been the cause of it. My son, I have lost
thee, I have slain thee, and I know not where is thy Tomb.

O Heaven! O God! Alas! at least had the toils of his journey left him at the
foot of some Tree, or had he been buried in some corner of the Earth, I should
enjoy the contentment to seek him out, and I should comfort my self in
possessing but a part of my son with the loss of the other. But O the most
disconsolate, and the most unhappy of all fathers! I can have nothing of my
Joseph but this bloody garment, the rest has been devoured by some Tiger or
Lion, and the same sweetness has no other Tomb, but the belly of a wild beast.

Yes surely, it was a wild Beast, and a cruel Monster which devoured my
Joseph. It was the Envy of his Brethren which gave them Talons, Claws and
Teeth. It was this merciless passion which stripped him of his garment, cast him
into the Well, and shamefully sold him.

Behold the Domestic Monster which will never be made tame, behold the bloody
beast which lives only upon the flesh and heart of its like. In fine, it is
envy against which fathers and mothers must be always armed, and which they
ought to banish for ever out of their families, for as much as,

First, it is a Cantharides, The nature and qualities of Envy.
which fastens upon the fairest flowers, and seeks out Milk and Honey to spread
its venom on them.

Secondly, it is less reasonable, by how much it has more of Reason: For
being found only amongst men, it renders them more inhumane than beasts, which
cannot be moved by these tragic instigations.

Thirdly, the furies of Envy are so shameful, as they seek always to pass
under the color of some other passion.

Fourthly, its breath, though stinking, fastens on virtue, but the stings of it
are as honorable to that person who bears them, as infamous to him that
causes them.

Fifthly, it has the eyes of an Owl, which are dazzled at the sight of the
fairest lights, and which cannot endure the splendour of a most luminous day.
Basilius in Homil. de Invid.


Sixthly, it has more cruel tallons and teeth than Tigers and Dragons; for it
spares neither parents, friends, nor benefactors.

Seventhly, its nourishment, repose, and delight, are in bitterness and
acerbity: Hence it proceeds that the mouth and heart of it are still infectious.

Eighthly, it is a Viper which draws death upon it self, in giving life unto
her young, and tears its own belly to produce some venomous Serpent.

Ninthly, it is a Camelion which converts it self into a thousand colors, and
every moment changes its skin least we discern its nature and inclination.

In fine, it is a monstrous Cerberus, which has the heart and head of all the
most dreadful Animals under heaven. It is the Ape which in the time of
Augustus entered the Temple of Ceres; the Owl which flew even over the Altars of
Concord; The Dragon with two heads which devasted part of the Universe, and
which having exhaled his venom upon the Cradle of the world, will never cease
till he has vomited forth the remainder of his rage in the tomb.

CHAP. II. The Combats of Joseph for defense of his Chastity.
IT is true that Envy is a ravenous beast: But yet what ever we may say, its
furies are not to be compared with those of Love when it has once broken the
chains wherewith God and Nature fastened it. It is this Devil which disturbs
Families, arms Provinces, ruins States, desolates Paradise, and peoples Hell.
It is a flaming Torch which inkindles fires even in the midst of water, a
Northern wind which raises a Thousand Tempests, a Lightning which consumes
men's Spirits, and in fine, it is a Passion ever blind, yet covered over with
Eyes, which serve it as gates by which it uses to steal in under perfidious
Baits and enchanting Looks. Deadly shafts.
It was for this reason the profane painted their Loves with darts of death,
which they cast at each other, and which, as a Grecian said, were as so many
glances which they wantonly gave one another, though their Eyes ought to be
veiled. But Love has insolence enough to lift up the Scarf which covers its
Eyes, or at least it sees notwithstanding this veil, and commonly it mingles
shafts and glances to commit Sacrileges and Murders. This homicide lays ten
Thousand Snares, he is always watchful, and there is no Dove this Vulture
assaults not as soon as she appears; and when by mishap he has seized on her,
I know not by what Enchantment, and by what Spells, the heart of this
unfortunate prey is taken: But it seems in an Instant to become a Furnace, and
that the flames inkindled therein issuing through the Eyes, may change the
Earth into a Pyle. Franciseas Valeriota. lib. 2. obser.
These are insulphur'd Vapors, fiery Smoaks, dreadful Exhalations, dark
Shadows, Idols, and unchaste Images, Arist. lib. de somno and vigilia.
at the sight whereof the Eyes are dazeled, and Reason becomes blind.

Then Piety is but Idolatry, Disorders of Love.
all duties become scorns, Complacences Trecheries, Empires Servitudes, Liberty
Bondage, Loves-alurements Snares, Thrones Precipices, and a Chaos where houses
are overthrown, Temples profaned, and all Laws confounded; what horror, what
disorder, what abomination, even women who ought to be a Refuge of honor,
Horrible Chaos.
and a Sanctuary of purity, Mulier amissa pudicicitia, null em flagitii
respui^. Cor. Jac.
often serve as a retreat unto the fondest affections, and there is no faith,
no Sacrament, no modesty, they do not violate, when once their hearts have
escaped through their Eyes.

The wife of Putiphar, Enritque eum Putiphar de manu Ismaelitarum. Genesis 39. v.
1.
to whom Joseph was sold by the Ismaelites, made it sufficiently appear, when
she was so impudent, as to attempt the Chastity of her Servant; This Female
wolf had only Eyes to gaze on this Lamb, Post multos itaque des injecit domina
sua occulos suo^in Joseph. Genesis 39. v. 7.
all her gestures and motions were artifices to entrap him; and she would have
willingly preferred the inthrallment of Joseph before the Command over her
Husband. All her bonds of Marriage were but Chains which kept her in Captivity,
and the most just, and most holy Laws imposed on her, a Yoke which rendered all
the duties of sidelity, which Wives owe unto their Husbands, insupportable to
her. She yet wanted not dexterity to dissemble her Passion in her Husbands
presence; and herein Love is usually most disloyal and deceitful: for though
all its fires be violent, impetuous, sharp and sparckling, yet if the object
which inkindles them be not present, they prove but ashes, coldnesses, and
frozen Nights, under which this Traitor uses to hide his Torch; Pernicious
study.
Then all Actions are studied, all gestures counterfeits, all discourses
falsehoods, and all that appears outwardly seems to have no other design than to
deceive the heart. To this effect we seek out suborned Messengers, retirements
for assigned meetings, blind, dumb, and deaf witnesses, secret Intelligences,
enchanted gifts, invisible pretenses, painted and Sacrilegious devotions,
Nights without days and hours which are only marked out upon shadows; for the
light of the Sun, the noise of a Bell, too apparent impiety, too visible
presents, too violent solicitations, indiscreet confederates, public places,
and Friends, or unfaithful Servants might discover the secret.

It is a strange thing that we can hardly trust our selves, and that the Tongue
dares not speak a word, or at least if she speaks, it is but after she has
pondered all her discourses. Wherefore the Eyes are the first solicitours of
evil, and then their silence has an Eloquent voice, which is yet not heard,
but by those that are Confederates.

It is no wonder then, Qui nequaquam acquiescent operi nesario, dixit, etc.
Genesis 39. v. 9.
if Joseph heard not this unchaste language, when his Mistress spoke to him more
from her Eyes than her Mouth. This Impudent creature cast a thousand glances on
him: But the heart of Joseph was a piece of Marble, which could not be pierced,
all the Flames of this Egyptian woman fell into a dead Sea, and all her
lightnings found nothing but water which instantly quenched them.

We must pass then further, Et ait: dormi mecum. Genesis 39. v. 7.
and see whether the Mouth peradventure will have more powerful persuasions
than the Eyes. This shameless woman is so much enraged as to declare her
design.

O God! what Insolence! what Fury! and what Frenzies! when once the mind is
possessed with Love: but there are two sorts of loves, and that which is Son of
the Earth is very weak, when opposed to that which is born in Heaven.

Courage then Joseph, it is a Woman who assaults and sollicites you! she is
light, be you constant; she has stratagems, be you prudent; she is bold, be
you generous; she runs, fly away; she Flatters, disdain her; she asks, refuse
her. Joseph what do you say?

For my part, says he, Victorious Innocence.
I neither can nor will consent unto a woman's Lascivious desires, nor submit
unto her will, preferring it before that of my Master; and I should not be what
I am, if I forfeited the quality of a faithful Servant, and of a person to
whom the honor and remembrance of the favors I have received from him, is a
thousand times more precious than life. If I have been sold, it was only for
my Innocence, and the chains of my Captivity could never force the constancy an
Hebrew ought to have in the way of virtue. I am Jacobs son, and my actions
shall never belly my birth, I am a Servant, Ecce Dominus meus omnibus mihi
traditis, etc. Genesis 39. v. 8. Nec q^icquam est qued non in mea sit potestate,
vel non tradiderit miht propter te, quomodo trgo possum hoc malum faeere, and
peccare in Deum me^m? Genesis 39. v. 9.
I ought to dye for fidelity: your Husband trusts me with all his Goods, and
with all his Wealth, which the favor of the King, and his own merits have
bestowed on him; he reserved only to himself the soly Enjoying you: It is not
for me then to ravish from him what is his due by so many titles. Command me
with Justice, and I will serve you with sincerity; perform all that you ought,
and I will omit no part of my duty to you. Keep your self within the laws of
Marriage, and leave me in the duties of my condition. I should be ungrateful
if I abused the favors of my Master, I should be a thief if I stole away his
fairest goods, and no death could be cruel enough to punish me, if I should
attempt on that which is more dear to him than life. All your flames can find
in me but a heart of water and ice, and all your ties cannot inthrall the
liberty of my mind, and your rigors will never mollify a soul on which God
has inprinted his love and fear. Know then that I would rather choose to dye
free from blame, than to live a complice in your distoyalty. I prefer my
bondage if it be innocent, before all unjust Powers; and what misfortune soever
befall me, I shall be too happy, if I remain innocent. It was in the power of
my brethren to sell my body, but they could not engage my soul; I may serve
without prostituting my self, and my glory will ever be illustrious enough if I
shall do no dishonorable act, and unworthy of my Extraction. In fine, I adore
a God who has most pure eyes, and should all creatures be blind, it satisfies
me, that he be the witness of my actions; I reverence all his decrees, and if
all the Judges of the world could authorize vice, it would comfort me to have a
God always armed to punish them. How can you wish me then to bring Adultery
into your Family, and to change your bed, Angelical Resolution.
which ought to be the Altar of your glory, into an infamous Pile? No, no
Madam, either leave honor to me with life, or take from me my life, and leave
me my honor.

Is not this ^o speak like and Angel, and to have the sentiments of those
spirits who live in flames without being consumed, and amidest lightnings
without being dazeled? Nevertheless, it is little considerable to assault an
impudent love by bare words, we must have other weapons in our hands to
encounter it; and the victory is never certain, until we have either publicly
decry'd or banished it: We must cry out Murder in like occasions, we must call
for witnesses, use threats, and at least triumph by a generous flight, or by a
prudent retreat.

There are some Passions which fly when they are pursued, Very different
Nature of Passions.
and like shadows never fasten themselves unto bodies. There are some who have
so much modesty as to blush at the bare sight of an object, and others whom the
least denial banisheth for ever; but the loves of the World and Egypt often
find their nourishment and delights in Conversations, looks, and even in the
midst of disdain; and nothing but separations distance them from their desires
and pretensions.

Such was the Devil of this Egyptian Woman, The Devil of Egypt.
who so eagerly pursued Joseph, he was an insolent, importunate and furious
companion. His rage notwithstanding had by fits some relaxation, he knew the
art of dissembling, and to be silent for a time; his Element was solitude, and
the night his refuge, he sighed always after Joseph, and nothing pleased him
when he was absent. In fine, he seems to have the power, to possess this Soul
if she be alone, and if all witnesses be drawn aside.

Be ware then Joseph, what you do; you are alone, you are young, you are
beautiful, and Esteemed. Remember that the eyes of Women dart as many
lightnings as glances; Hususcemodi verbis per singulos dies, and mulier molesta
et al adolescenti, and ille recusabat fluprum. Genesis 39. v. 10.
call to mind that their mouths shed honey and poison, and that their tongues
cast more dangerous darts than Adders: Contemn then what ever this impudent
creature can say unto you.

She will peradventure, Cruel battery.
say she is your Mistress, and that you ought to obey her; And that if she
affect you, you cannot hate her, and if she seek you, you have no reason to
fly from her; she will conjure you to tell her, what in her displeases you.
Since she omits nothing that may content you, and without injustice you cannot
refuse her one single favor she expects from you; Especially she being ready,
on her part, to grant all that you can ask of her. There is no color, she will
not employ to represent unto you her passion; And her eyes though silent, will
swear to you, that they have often enough spoken to you, when her mouth durst
not utter a word: that if it were possible, she would believe that she has by
her words manifested to you all the thoughts of her soul, when they might have
been kept secret: Besides, she will flatter you, saying, you have refused her
that out of prudence, which now you ought to grant her through love and
goodness. Moreover, if you fear any thing, she will assure you that she has
foreseen all that may expose you unto danger.

In fine, she will entreat, that if she has no fortunes in the world, which
are not at your disposure, you would yet receive her respect and affections to
render you more absolute and independent, concluding by all these reasons, that
you must at last satisfy her either by violence, or sweetness, and that she
will have either honor or life, death or consent.

Behold a fierce assault against the chastity of Joseph. His flesh however was
not made of brass, nor his heart of a Diamond: But it may be spoken of him
what Sparta said of a young C^valier, who having a long time passed amongst
Ladies and Conversations, as Planets upon dirt without receiving any stain,
deserved to be called the Sun of his Age.

Joseph had attractives in his eyes, Erat autem Joseph pul^bra fact and
decorus aspectu. Genesis 39. v. 6.
and rays on his face, purer than those of the Sun. He never fell into those
Eclipses which impallidates the most beautiful Planets; and often mix night
and darkness with the most glorious days.

He was an illuminated Sun which pursues his Cariere, and which God alone was
able to stay: In vain was it for Sirens to sing on the shore, and the winds to
whistle on the Sea, and in the world, he looked upon his period at which he
must necessarily arrive.

Mean while let us see I beseech you, Furions temptation.
what strong endeavors are used to stay him. They flatter him, they praise him,
they love him, they honor him, they conjure him, they threaten him, they make
him promises. What will you have, and what more can be done to gain him, and
possess his affections? Entreaties have hitherto received but refusalls,
Alurements disdains, and threats constancy, and neglect.

In fine, E^illa apprehensa lac^nia vestimenti ejus diceret: dormi mecum, qui
relicto in manu e^^s pallio fugit, and egressus est for as. Genesis 39. v. 12.
an attempt must be made on the life of him whose honor she could not wound;
She leaps on his neck, as it were to strangle him, but presently Joseph flies
away, and leaving his garment in her hands, she had but the Feathers of this
bird which she thought to detain in her neasts.

Behold then all her Designs defeated; Joseph is escaped, he is in safety, and
out of the reach of this ravenous she-wolfe, which pursued him. I said not
amiss, that flights and separations are commonly the guardians of Chastity,
Sanctuary of modesty.
and that the purest affections are never so prudent, as when they make a wise
retreat.

In vain is it to say that Virginity has power to erect Altars in Souls, and
to Consecrate them unto God. I know what that glorious and chaste Martyr, who
bore in his breast the purest and most holy of all names said of it. I know
also that a Virgin-soul is a living Temple, and a Sanctuary where those Fires
are always seen, which God alone, and his Angels have inkindled. But if this
Temple be once open to all goers and comers, and this so famous Sentence,
which banisheth from thence all sorts of impuritie, be not engraven on the
gate, immediately we shall see all the Torches extinguished, and impure and
Lascivious Megeraes will be so bold as to take place of the Vestals. We shall
see abominable Idols in the place of a Crucifix, and a Dagon upon the Throne of
Jesus. At the same time the Angels of peace will forsake this Babylon, and
after they have watered with their tears this Infamous Dungeon, it will be no
longer but a receptacle of Devils.

Happy then are those Souls which imitate Joseph, The Image of Chastity.
and fly all occasions and encounters where their honor might be in danger.
Joseph ought to be the Picture which all young men should still place before
their Eyes. This innocent Piece ought to be their Mirror; All his looks will
give them most pure ardours, and all the marks of his Constancy will put a stay
to their most wavering and inconstant humors. Surely it is an irreparable
damage, ^rreparable loss.
and a shameful loss to abandon that which we can never recover when once
lost. Purity is not like those flowers which are gathered in the Summer, and
may be replanted in the Winter. It is a Crystal which cannot be mended if it
chance to be broken; It is that eye of the Soul, whose blindness is incurable,
and the wheel of an Engine which cannot be set right, if it be once out of
frame.

I confess nevertheless, that there is some difficulty in this point, and that
there requires much virtue and courage to walk on the fire, and to resist the
violence of its flames. Persecution of Modesly.
We are in an Age in which it is not usual to see Children in the Furnace of
Babylon, for whom flames are Changed into sweet Western gales and delicious
dewes. Joseph is no more, and yet there are Ladies who seek him, and even
prosecute his Ghost and Image. Joseph is no more, and we may justly say of him
what the Philosophers and Poets have affirmed of Truth, that her Garment and
Veil remains on the Earth, and that her Soul has taken her flight even unto
Heaven.

What disaster for Chastity? and what shame for this Sex, in which Virginity
ought to have her Cradle, her Nurses, her Sisters, her Friends and Companions?
What scandal to see a Lady of quality borrowing Countenances, plaistering Old
Age, painting Deformity, whitening a yellow Skin, discovering her Breasts, a
head laden with sweet Powder and Jewels, and bearing on her body all that she
has of Value? In fine, if all these allurements be not powerful enough, and
if they cannot obtain by sweetness what they desire, they become enraged, and
resolve entirely to destroy an Innocent.

This enraged Woman seeing then that Joseph was fled, and that he had only
left her his Cloak, Cumque vidisset mulier vestem in manibus suis, and se esse
contemptam, Ge^. 39. v. 13
resolved at the instant to revenge this affront, and accuse him whom she knew
to be too pure to excuse himself.

O God! what outrages of passions, what artifices of infirmity, and how true
it is, that there is nothing more deceitful and dangerous than a woman who
loves, hops, hates, or fears some danger.

This Dame cried out first, Vocavit ad se homines domus suae, and ail ad eos:
^n introduxit virum Hebraeum, ut illuderet nobis: Ingressus est ad me ut coiret
mecum: Cumque ego succlamassem, Genesis 39. v. 14. Insolent Artifice.
and the fear she has to be accused, is the occasion she takes those for
Witnesses of her innocence, who could have prevented her. After all, seeing her
Husband at her door, Help says she, to what am I reduced? Ah! who has given
me for a Servant an Importunate Devil, who persecutes me beyond measure? Ah!
my Husband, my Friend, what have you done? And what a perfidious man have you
given me? Is it peradventure to try my Loyalty and Virtue? tell me, I pray,
what is your intention? and whether you keep him in the quality of a Servant or
Companion? For my part I esteem it as a great honor to be your Handmaid, and
yet I conceive not my self obliged to obey your meanest Servant. He has been
nevertheless so presumptuous in your absence to sport with me, Et audisset
vocem meam, reliquit pallium quod tenebam, and fugit for as. Genesis 39. v. 15. His
auditis Dominus, and nimium credulus verbis conjugis, iratus est valde. Genesis
39. v. 19.

Tradiditque Joseph in carcerem. Genesis 39. v. 20.


and take the place you hold in my heart. No, I swear by the respect I owe you,
that I would have strangled him if my strength had been answerable to my will;
but he is escaped, and seeing I called for help, he left his garment in my
hands.

Immediately this man giving too much credit to the discourse of his Wife,
without inquiry, whether what she said was true or false, caused Joseph to be
stayed, and commanded him to be put in Prison.

CHAP. III. The Predictions of Joseph.
I Do not wonder if heretofore the waters of Jordan were so respect full
toward those Priests who carried the Ark of the Testament, because it was a
Figure of the Divinity, the least rays whereof are so powerful in Nature, as
its very shadow cannot be seen without a holy horror. It is for this cause
Virtue has so venerable attractives, and so penetrating Charms, that we cannot
approach it without feeling our selves instantly touched with Love and
Reverence.

The reason is, because God, being as it were obliged to be in a particular
manner present, where Virtue is, we must needs be insensible in the presence of
him who imprints Sense in all beings, if we were not excited toward Virtue and
Sanctity, which resemble those Spirits who incompass the Sanctuary, and those
Souls in whom God is delighted.

Yes, ^e Paradise of the al.
the Soul of a Just man, is the Throne of God, the Theater of his Power, the
List of his Courses, the Field of his Battles, and the Palace in which he
makes his abode. Behold, why the Saints have done so many wonders; and it is
for this reason we have seen Tyrants waxing pale at the sight of Martyrs;
Tigers changing their nature; and all the Elements, though insensible, seeming
reasonable, to obey them. We must not fear then that any ill will befall those
whom God possesses, whom God conducteth, and in whom he lives as the life of
their Souls.

Joseph is in Prison, but he shall there speedily find his Liberty, the
obscurities of his Dungeon will furnish him with light enough to discern what
will happen; and such as have been the authors of his ruin, shall be the
Causers of his happiness.

God never abandons those who love and serve him faithfully. He is in Shackles,
in Misery, Inviolable fidelity.
and in all misfortunes which use to assail his Friends; he followed his Joseph
even into the Pit, even into Egypt, and he is now with him in Prison.

O how sweet is the yoke, when we are fastened to it with God! How pleasing are
the Chains, when he becomes Captive for our sake! and what Paradise of
delights, when a man may say, he has God in his heart!

There was heretofore a Persian, who styled his death, though most rigorous, by
the name of Felicity; by reason in dying he perceived one of his Friends, who
never forsook him, and used his best endeavors to put himself in his place.

Joseph then is most happy, Dominus enim eret cum illo, and omnia opera ejus
dirigebat. Gen 29. v. 23.
since God himself followed him even into his Dungeon; there is was where this
Slave found his Liberty; it is there where he became a Prophet, and began to
find the period of his misery, and the beginning of his happiness.

Behold I beseech you, Qui tradidit in man^ illius universos vincto^ qui in
custodi^ tenebantur, Genesis 3^. v. 22.
how he has already the Keys in his hands, and how all the Kings Prisoners are
under his guard. Can we represent unto our selves a more changing fortune? And
is it not true that God takes pleasure to raise those whom the world indevours
to cast down?

Joseph shall be every where happy, since our Lord is every where with him.
Being then in prison, he so exactly performed all that was commanded him, and
the purity of his intention spread forth so many graces and beauties on his
face, as presently he drew upon himself the eyes and affections of him who had
order to govern the Prisoners: The Empire of Virtue.
Not that (says Philo) compassion is natural to those who have the like
charge; but God and Virtue cause themselves to be so lively felt by those in
whom they reside, as it is almost impossible to behold them without loving them.

By reason of the love this Jailer testified unto Joseph, the rest of the
Prisoners drew near him, and believed that by his favor they might become the
companions of his happiness, as they had been of his misery.

Amongst the rest two of the Kings Eunuchs, His ita gestis, accidit ut
peccarent dao eunuchi, pincerna Regis Agypti, and pistor, domino suo, Iratusque
contra co^ Pharao: nam alter pincernis praecrat, al^er p^st^ibus. Genesis 40. v. 2.

Misit eos in carcerem principis militum, in quo erat vinctus Joseph. Genesis 40.
v. 3.

At custos carceris tradidit eos Joseph, qui and minisirabat eis. Genesis 40. v. 4.


one of which was his Cup Bearer, and the other his chief Baker, being fallen
into disgrace with Pharaoh, and therefore imprisoned, both of them were under
Joseph's charge. I leave unto your thoughts what joy it was unto them in their
affliction to fall under so mild a government, and under the conduct of a
person whose least glance was powerful enough to wipe away all their sorrows.
It seemed to them they saw an Angel when Joseph came to visit them; and thus
both day and night they comforted all their afflictions, by the hope they had
of seeing Joseph, and of being able with assurance to exonerate part of their
griess into his bosom.

One day amongst others, Ad quos cum introisset Joseph-mane, and vidisset eos
tristes, Genesis 40. v. 6.

Seicitatus est eos diceas: Cur triflior est hodie solito facies vestra? Genesis
40. v. 7.

Qui responderunt: somnium vidimus, and non est qui nobis interpretetur. Genesis
40. v. 8.


when Joseph came early in the morning to see them, finding them more sad than
ordinary, he entreated them to inform him what ayled them, and what had
happened to them; to which they answered, that they had been disquieted all the
night by reason of a dream, and that they were extremely sorry to be in such a
condition as they could find no body to explicate it to them.

Truly, says Joseph, Dixitque ad eos Joseph: Numquid non Dei interpretatio
est? referte mihi quid videritis. Genesis 40. v. 8.

Narravit prior, praepositus pincernarum somnium suum: Videbam coram me vitem,
Genesis 40. v. 9.

In qua erant tres propagines, crescere paulatim (...) gemmas, etc. Genesis 40. v.
10.

Calicemque Pharaonis in manu mea: tuli ergo uvas, and expressi in calicem quem
tenebam, and tradidi poculum Pharaoni. Genesis 40. v. 11.


I perceive you are much troubled; well then, God has sent you a Diviner, do
you not believe he can give you the interpretation of it?

Tell me then what you have dreamed, For my part, says the Kings Cup Bearer,
me thought I saw three branches of a Vine covered with large shootes, from
whence, like so many Pearls issued a thousand small blossoms, after which I
saw the great Grapes fully ripe, which I gathered and squeezed them into
Pharaohs Cup when he was ready to drink.

Behold, says Joseph, Respondit Joseph, Haec cit interpretatio somnii: Tres
propagines, tres adhuc dies sunt. Genesis 40. v. 12.

Post quos recordabitur Pharao ministerii tui, etc. Genesis 40 v. 13.

Tantum memento mei, etc. Genesis 40. v. 14.


the interpretation of this Dream. The three branches of the Vine denote unto
thee three days, after which the King will call to mind the good services thou
have done him, and thou may resume the place thou had in his house. I
conjure thee only to have me in remembrance, and when thou shall be in favor,
take pity on a man who is not culpable, but for having been too innocent. My
name is Joseph, I I have been carried away out of Judea by the treachery of my
Brethren, Quia surto sublatus sum de ter a Hebraeorum. Genesis 40.15.
who at last sold me unto certain Merchants of this Country. Speak then I
prithee in my behalf unto Pharaoh; And in exchange of the liberty whereof I
assure thee, obtain the same favor for me. Videns pistorum magister quod
prudenter somnium dissolvisset, aet, etc. Genesis 40. v. 16 Et in uno canistro
qund crat excelsius, corta e^^c omnes cibos qui fiunt art pistoris, averque
comedere ex co. Genesis 40. v. 17.


The other hearing this, hoping for as good, or a better fortune than that of
his Companion, began to relate unto Joseph all he had seen in his sleep. I
imagined, said he, that I had three Baskets on my head, and that in the
uppermost there were all sorts of meats which could be made into Paste, and
upon that Basket I saw certain birds which there rested to feed.

Alas! my dear friend says Joseph, Respondit Josiph: haec est interpretatio
somnii, etc. Genesis 40. v. 18.

Post quos auseret Pharao caput tuum, ac suspendet te in cruce, and lacerabunt
volucres carnes tuas. Genesis 40. v. 19.


these are dreadful presages. It grieves me, that I was chosen to bring thee
such sad news; I could wish that thou had never had this Dream, or that it
had been more happy: but since thou desire to know the truth from my mouth, I
cannot not conceal from thee, that within three days, which are signified by
the three Baskets, Pharaoh will put thee to death, and thy body shall be hanged
on a Gibbet, where thou shall serve as a prey unto the Fowls of the Air. Exinde
dies tertius natalitius Pharaonis erat, etc. Ge^. 40. v. 20 Restituitque
alterum in locum suum, ut porrigeret ei poculum. Genesis 40. v. 21.

Alterum suspendit in patibulo, ut conjectoris veritas probaretur. Genesis 40.22.




In effect the third day which followed, being that on which they used to
celebrate the Feast of Pharaohs birthday, this Prince in the midst of the
Banquet calling to mind his Officers whom he had imprisoned, commanded his
Cup Bearer to come before him, and established him in his former Office, and
gave order at the same time, that the other should be hanged, as Joseph had
foretold.

CHAP. IV. The Releasement of Joseph. Post duos annos vidit Pharao somnium,
putabat se stare super fluvium. Genesis 41. v. 1. De quo ascendeba^t septem boves,
pulchrae and crassae nimis: and pascebantur in locis palustribus. Genesis 41. v. 2
Aliae quoque septem emergebant de flumine. foedae confertaeque macie: and
pascebantur in ipsa amnis ripa, in locis virentibus. Ge^ 41. v. 3.

Devoraveruntque eas, quarum mira species and habitudo corporum erat. Genesis 41.
v. 4.

Ruesum dormivit, and vidit alterum somnium: septem spicae pullalabant in culmo
uno plenae atque formosae. Genesis 41. v. 5.

Aliae quoque totidem spitae tenues, and percussae veredine oriebantur. Genesis
41. v. 6.

Divi antes omnem patorem pul^^itudinem. Genesis 41.7.



JOseph having spent two years in Prison, it chanced that Pharaoh during a
Dream, imagined he was on the bank of a great River, out of which issued seven
goodly and fat Kine, which were going to feed in the Marshes. Presently after,
he thought he saw seven other Ugly and lean Kine, which coming out of the
water passed along the Banks, and fed in the Meadows. But that grass could not
satisfy their hunger, for they devoured the first seven, and what seemed more
strange, after they had filled their bellyes, to see them, one would have
believed that they had swallowed down nothing but wind, so hungry they appeared.

Pharaoh awaking thereupon, and the mystery having appeared to him but in part;
Providence which would manifest it self to him entire, showed him in a second
sleep seven fair Ears Laden with Corn, which grew upon the self-same stalk.
This Dream would have been pleasing, if he had not afterward, seen seven other
Ears shrivel'd, and dried up by the ardors of the Sun, and which spread
themselves in an instant to swallow up the first seven Ears which had appeared
to him.

Pharaoh affrighted at these Dreams, Et sacto pavore perterritus, misit ad
omnes consectores Aegypti, cunctosque sapien e^, Nec erat qui interpretaretur.
Gen 41. v. 8.
was no sooner awaked, but instantly opening his eyes, and seeing himhimself
deceived, commanded all the South-sayers and Wisemen of Egypt to come before
him, that he might know from them the Explanation of these Enigma's which a
hand more than humane had framed in his mind. But as the wisdom of man is
blind, if God does not impart to him some rays of his light, there was not any
one that could unfold these Shadows God had cast in the thoughts of this poor
King.

This was the cause why the Cup Bearer calling to mind Joseph's request, Tune
demum reminiscens pincernarum magister, ait: Confiteor peccatum meum. Genesis 41.
v. 9.
and the favor he had received from this young Prophet, was constrained freely
to acknowledge his own unworthiness, and ingratitude, which are the ordinary
Vices of Courts, and of all that are favored by Fortune. Blindness of Fortune.
Friendships which often are born in Prisons, dye on Thrones. We are no sooner
raised on the top of the Wheel, but we lose the sight of those who are beneath.
Honors have veiles over their Eyes, as well as affections. We have never pity
on those we see not, and the very thought of them we chase away as
unseasonable. Sopater Athe.
A wise Politician had heretofore reason to say, that Grandeurs and Felicities
made daily dumb and blind men: and for my part, I say, that miseries and
necessities are wont to open the Eyes and Ears.

This Eunuch had no care or thought on Joseph so long as he had no need of him,
but as soon as the Interest of the King, upon whom his happiness depended,
began to break forth, it was requisite for him to use such means as might
secure his Fortune, and publish the favors he had received of Joseph.

I remember, says he to Pharaoh, Iratus Rex servis suis, me and magistrum
pistorum, retrudi jussit in ^arcerem principis militum. Genesis 41. v. 10.
that during my disgrace, when your Majesty commanded me to prison, I was
extremely troubled by reason of a Dream, but by good chance I met with a Slave
who foretold me all that should happen unto me. Vbi una nocte uterque vidimus
somnium praesagum suturorum. Genesis 41. v. 11.

Erat ibi pu^^ Hebraeus, cat narrantes somnia, Genesis 41. v. 12.

Audivimus quod postea rei probavit eventus: Ego enim redaitus sum officio meo,
and ille suspensus est in crucc. Genesis 41. v. 13.

Protinus ad Regis imperium eductum de carcere Joseph totonderunt, ac vest
mutata obtuterunt ^i. Genesis 41. v. 14. ^^atontet.


And more; for the person whom I had then for a Companion in my misfortune,
having the same time a Dream, and being as much disquieted thereby as my self,
he heard from the mouth of the same Interpreter, the explication of these
Presages, and time taught us the truth by very different events; for three
days after he was hanged, and your goodness called me again into favor, as it
had been foretold me.

The King hearing this, presently commanded that Joseph should be brought
before him. They set him then at Liberty; they combed his hair, they changed
his apparel, and led him to Pharaoh, who instantly discerned in his face the
disposition of his mind: So true it is, that the Soul has secret Clarities,
lively and Luminous Shadows, which, as Philosophers teach, and experience daily
informs us, use to escape through the Eyes, mouth, and all the pores of the
body, with certain splendours which Nature receives from God.

It was from their first inclinations, Cui ille ait: Vidi somma, nec est qui
^dissera^: quae audivi te sapientissime con^^icerc. Genesis 41. v. 15.
Pharaoh drew a most certain assurance that Joseph was able to satisfy him;
He most infallibly believed that this young man could teach him that which all
the old men of Egypt, and the Sages of the world were not able to do. In
effect, having related all that he had seen, and the confused lights having
united themselves amidst the obscurities of his sleep, and of the Night, to
disturb him, and to frame of those species a strange Picture: Respondit Joseph:
Absque me Deus respondelit prospera Pharamti. Ge. 41. v. 15.

Respondit J^seph: So^mium Regis unum est: quae ^acturus est Dens, osiendit
Pharaoni. Genesis 41. v. 25.

Septem boves pulch^ae, and septem spicae plenae, septem ubertatis anni sunt.
Genesis 41. v. 26.


Joseph had no sooner heard him, but taking occasion to speak, he said to him,
that all his Ideas and Visions made up but one Dream; and besides, that it was
God alone who had taken the Pencill into his hand to shape in his mind the
Figure of the blessings and disasters which were to happen in his Empire.

Yes Sir, says he, the seven Kine which appeared to you so fair, and in so
good plight, as well as the seven Ears laden with Corn, Prognosticate no
other thing then seven fruitful years; Septem quoque boves tenues atque
macilentae, quae ascenderunt post eas, and septem spicae tenues, and vento
urente percussae, septem anni venturae sunt famis, Genesis 41. v. 27.
But those also which appeared to you lean and deformed, as well as the Ears
you saw so small and withered by the blasting of the wind, figure to you seven
years of Extreme Famine.

Now the course thereof will be such, Quae hoc ordine complebuntur. Genesis 41. v.
28.

Ecce septem anni venient fertilitatis magnae, etc. Genesis 41. v. 29.


behold seven years approaching, during which all Egypt shall have plenty of
all sorts of Blessings.

Afterward for seven other years we shall remain in a general Scarcity which
will devast this whole Country. Quos sequuntur septem anni alii tantae
steri^itatis, etc. Genesis 41. v. 30.


It concerns then your Majesty to be watchful, Nunc ergo provideat rex virum
sapientem and industrium, and praeficiat eum terra Aegipti. Genesis 41. v. 33.

Qui constituat praepositos per cunctas regiones, and quintam partem fructuum
per septem annos sertilitatis. Genesis 41. v. 34.

Qui jam nunc futuri sunt, congreget in horrea; and omne frumentum sub
Phara^nis potestate condatur, serveturque in urbibus. Genesis 41. v. 35.


and to make choice of a wise and discreet man who may have a general care and
government over the Land of Egypt, that he may establish Purveyers, and cause
the fifth part of those Fruits which are to be gathered during the seven years
of plenty, to be laid up in Granaries. He must also take care that all the Corn
be kept in such Towns as shall be appointed for that purpose; and besides, that
no person may either take or dispose of it without your express Command. It is
also the duty of all Princes, and of those who are powerful in the world to
provide for the necessities of the poor. Their Eyes ought to be like the rays
of the Sun, which do not open and spread themselves, but for the good of the
Universe. Their arms ought to resemble those of the Sea, and Rivers, which
nourish and water the grounds through which they pass. It belongs then unto
them to watch, like Angels, to divert dangers by a wise Providence, and to be
not only full of Splendour and Majesty; But also Fathers replenished with
Meekness, Clemency and goodness.

CHAP. V. The Government of Joseph in Egypt.
IT is not without reason, Fortune has Wings at her Feet, and that she is
always flying on a little Globe, where Life and Death, Places and Seasons, and
in a word, all the accidents of Nature hinder her from taking any rest. I know
not who has placed a veil over her Eyes lest we should perceive her too
volatile and too haggard looks. Picture of Fortune.
Her Hair is so plated and drawn down upon her forehead, as to behold her, we
would believe the hinder part of her Head were bald, like that of Time. Her
Garment is of changeable Taffety, her Girdle is marked with certain small
Ciphers so confusedly put together, as nothing can be understood by them. This
corresponds with her words and gestures, which are full of mysteries and
ambiguity. In fine, all that she has, all that she does, and all that she
says, is no other than a Chaos of Inconstancy and Disloyalty: whence it comes
to pass that all her attendants lament, and accuse that destiny, which has so
miserably deceived them, and which after many thousand promises, and gifts,
has left them nothing but Wind, Tears, Smoke, Despair, and after all a
precipice or an Abyss of misfortunes.

Behold the destinies of this World, and the Fortunes of Men! on which
nevertheless they are accustomed to fix their hopes.

We are delighted with this Game, Vt in saeculari ludo, nunc huc transeunt,
nunc referuntur illuc. Pius Pontifex. Ep. 4.34.

Res humanae naturalem habent scalae imaginem. Philo. Jud. lib. de somniis.


in which, as a certain Pope has observed, there is nothing but hazard; We
desire to ascend the top of this Ladder, from which we must always descend,
says Philo, after we have ascended; There are some who think themselves happy
to appear on this Theater, though their end for the most part will be Tragical;
It seems that it satisfies many persons, to have a propitious Gale when they
depart out of the Haven, Apud Erasm. Stob. ser. de prud.
though soon after they suffer a sorrowful Shipwreck. These nevertheless, are
the Sports, Exercises, Acts, Courses, and Navigations of Fortune and Destiny,
which Men strive to establish in humane things. We gain thereby to lose, we
rise up to fall, we appear to perish, we imbarque our selves to split on a Rock.

On the contrary, in the Designs God has on Men, all is Constant and fixed, his
Scales are even, his looks loving, his Ciphers eternal, and there is nothing
in his amiable providence, either deceitful or hazardous; The happiness of
Providence.
And if they sport with us it is to enrich us; when they cast us down it is to
raise us up; His Theaters have no funestous Acts, and it suffices that his
Providence guides us into the Haven. This being so, what sweetness? what
assurance? and what happiness to follow this Light? It matters not to meet with
Labyrinths, Precipices, Sepulchers, and Rocks, soon or late we shall be freed
from them.

Well may Joseph have been betrayed, he may have been thrown into the bottom of
a Pit, he may have been divested, and sold as a slave, I mean that he was kept
in Prison for the space of two years; If our Lord be with him, and if the
Providence of God be his Mistress, he is happy, and shall come forth like a
Planet, which Issues more Glorious and with more Luster, out of the midst of
Darkness, and the Eclipses which had obscured it.

The Wisdom of the World, which in the sight of God is but mere folly, would
never yet have believed it, and truly who would have imagined, that Joseph
should have found Lights in the Darkness of a Prison, which were to guide him
even to the Throne of Pharao.

He is yet there, and this King does not believe that there is any person in
the World more capable of being his Lieutenant, and who could more wisely, and
with more dexterity govern the Kingdom of Egypt, then Joseph. It was then
decreed by a secret inspiration of this sage Intelligence, which presides in
Councels, Dixit ergo ad Joseph: quia ostendit tibi Deuteronomy omnia quae locutus es,
numquid sapientiorem, and consimilem tui invenire potero. Genesis 41. v. 39.

Tu eris super domum meam, and ad tui oris imperium cunctus populus obediet:
uno tantum regni solio te praecedam. Genesis 41. v. 40.

Dixitq^e rursus Pharao ad Joseph: Ecce constituite super universam terram
Agypti. Genesis 41. v. 41.


and Governs Empires, that Joseph of a Prisoner and slave should be made the
Vice-King of Egypt.

First Pharao was transported at the sight of this Young Prophet, and quickly
discerned that it was God who spoke by his Mouth.

Secondly he resolved to follow all the orders which Joseph had affirmed to be
necessary for the good of the State. Afterward, addressing himself unto Joseph
with paternall tenderness he said unto him.

Joseph, I will seek no further for a Man to share with me in the cares of my
Empire. Heaven has ordained you for it, and I cannot oppose it. The assurance
I have that this election is very good and prudent, is the goodness and wisdom
I know in you; take then the absolute power over my whole House, Govern my
Empire, and make use of my Authority.

Then Pharao took a Ring from his own Finger, Tulitque annulum de manu sua, and
dedit eum in manuejus, vestivitque eum stola byssina, and collo torquem auream
circumposuit. Genesis 41. v. 42.
and put it on Joseph's, Commanding immediately that he should be Clothed in a
Silken Garment, and that a Chain of Gold should be brought him, which he with
his own Hand put about his Neck.

Behold, the first Favors of Pharao, and the first Splendors of the Divine
Providence, which at last dissipate the Cloud and Darkness in which Joseph was
enclosed; his Chains are those rich Collers given by the King, his Manicles are
his Rings, and a Robe of fine Linen in an instant wipes away all the disasters
of his former Life.

But this is not yet all; he must be known, and Egypt must take notice that he
is the Governor of it.

Joseph ascend this Triumphant Chariot which is prepared for you; Et
praepositum esse scirent universae terrae Egypti, Genesis 41. v. 43.

Fecitque eum ascendere super currum suum. Genesis 41. v. 43.


It is Pharao who commands it, It is Heaven that ordains it, It is God that
guides you; Kings are Gods Ecchos, God speaks by their Mouths, and whoever
disobeys Kings is refractory to his Divine commands; Joseph then acts what
God injoyns, and it is God who is ready to be his guide through all the Lands
of Pharao.

He is led already through the Streets with pomp and triumph worthy of a King.
Clamante praecome ut omnes coram eo genuflecterent.
The Herald who marches before him, trys, out with a loud voice, let every
one bow their Knees. Pharao in the presence of the people consecrates these
honors by his approbation; Vertique nomen ejus, and vocavit eum lingua
Egyptiaca, Salvatorem mundi. Genesis 41. v. 45.
Afterward he confirms unto Joseph the general power he gave him over all
Egypt: to which he added a more magnificent and glorious name than he had
before, for instead of Joseph he gave him the name of the Savior of Egypt, as
a title which could not be due but unto God or to a King. In fine, Deditque
illi uxorem Aseneth, filiam Putipharis Sacerdotu Heliop^leos. Genesis 41. v. 45.

V. Borcard. de terrae sancta. S. Hieron, and Heb.


to fasten Joseph more strongly to himself and Egypt, besides the Egyptian name
Pharao imposed on him, he resolved to Marry him unto Aseneth the Daughter of
Putiphar high Priest and Prince of Heliopolis, that is to say, the City of the
Sun, which was in Egypt.

Joseph then was but thirty years old, and it was in this flower of his age,
Triginta autem annorumerat, quando stetit in conspectu Regis Pharaonis, and
circuivit omnem regionem Aegypti. Genesis 41. v. 46.
in which the Body and Soul use to be most vigorous, he began to visit the
territories of his Government.

This new born Morning went immediately every where casting rays of Joy, Hope,
Peace, Plenty and Charity: It was a golden Age which began to appear, Tantaque
suit abundantia tritici, ut arenae maris coaequaretur, and copia mensuram
excederat. Genesis 41. v. 49.
and followed his steps. Never were seen so many blessings on the Earth as
then; for the grains of Wheat, gathered in the space of seven years, were more
in number than the Sands which are seen on the shoars of the Sea.

Six years were already past in these public felicities, when Joseph had two
Children, Nati sunt antem Joseph filii du^. Genesis 41. v. 50.

Vocavitque nomen primogeniti Manasfes, etc.


the Eldest was called Manasses to testify the graces God had powered upon
Joseph, who after so many troubles and afflictions had at length forgotten his
Fathers House, and all the pains he had endured from the very hour he departed
thence.

The second was called Ephraim, Nomen quoque secundi appellavit Ephraim, etc.
Genesis 41. v. 52
in acknowledgement of the Blessings Joseph had received from God after so many
abandonments of Creatures, and after so many miseries and incommodities, out of
which he was at last delivered. Igitur transactis septem ubertatis annis qui
suerunt in Aegypto, Genesis 41. v. 53.

Coeperunt ventre septem anni in^piae, etc. Gen, 41. v. 54

Qua esuriente, clamavit ad Pharaonem, etc. Genesis 41. v. 55.


The term of seven years beginning then to approach, the Earth which had been
employed in general and continual productions, had no sooner seen this moment
in which she was constrained to shut up her bosom, but she presently became
barren, so that in a short time after, Egypt which had not foreseen this evil,
was enforced to cry out Famine, and to have recourse unto Pharaoh.

But Pharaoh for his part sent the people to Joseph, who during the time of his
prosperity had done like Bees, and those Birds endued with foresight, which
during the Summer store up food for the Winter.

Behold a Draught of the World, The Image of the world.
in which the blind Men and Sages of Egypt have no eyes, but for the time
present. They swim in Rivers of Gold and Silver, they sail in Barks of Pearls,
their Oars are the arms and wings of Fortune, Favor is their Mast, all their
Cordages are of Silk, and their sails of rich Satin which have always the
wind in Poop: But notwithstanding this stately Pomp, and this favorable Lot,
they will perish with hunger, if their Navigation be long, and if good
provision be not made by the Pilot that conducts them. Suppose men walk upon
Roses, suppose their drink be Nectar, suppose all the Stars be propitious, and
that the Harvest be never so fair; yet had not some foreseeing Spirit taken
the Sickle in hand, had he not gathered up these goods, and had he not Vessels
to receive this dew, the Air would dry up its sources, night would come, and
the fields would be but like a desert, where men must even dye with hunger,
thirst, and misery.

But some would peradventure ask what expedient can be found to avert all these
dangers? First it is certain that God for his part will never fail to provide
all necessaries, and having created Man, he is as it were obliged to his
conservation. Secondly, the Planets have their regular courses, and maugre all
their Defections, Ascendents, Retrogradations, Conjunctions, Separations, and
Elevations, they are always constant in working our good, and their nature is
too pure to be covetous of those Treasures which are hid in their Influences.
Thirdly the Fire, the Water, the Air, and the Earth have no enmity amongst
themselves, but for our sakes, and if they be at War, it is but to bring us
Sweetness and Peace.

I demand then again, whence can proceed those evils which befall men, and
which are born even in their Cradles, to die with them. Our Evils come from our
selves.
I fear that the Lieutenants of Egypt did not often imitate Joseph, and that
they slept during the calm, and when Fortune smiled upon them on every side.
Nevertheless this fair weather does not always last, the season of Harvest
passes away, the Tempest rises, and we meet with Shipwreck and Death.

CHAP. VI. The Voyage of Jacobs Children into Egypt, and the entertainment they
there received from Joseph.
INnocence has voices which are heard in Deserts, which speak in Assemblies,
which groan in Prisons, which murmur near the holy Altars, and even complain
under the Throne of God. Truth, although hidden under Abysses, covered with the
shades of a Tomb, and buried in the obscurities of night, has rays which
escape through Rocks, pass under Marble stones, and which cleave all the
Clouds to break forth like lightning, and inkindle fires upon the ashes and
bones which were thought insensible and incapable of complaints for obtaining
revenge. Woe to that Man, says the most wise Jesus the son of Sirach, Omnis
bomo qui transgreditur lectum suum dicit in cord suo quis me videt? tenebrae
circumdant me, and nemo me videt, quid vereor? Eccles. 23.
who not being Satisfied with his own bed, says in his Heart, who is it that
sees me? Night and darkness inviron me on all sides, walls like so many
Dungeons shelter me from those troublesome and Dangerous eyes which might be
witnesses of my actions, what can I then fear?

Ah! blind that thou art, thou see not the Sun which over these shadows marks
out thy sentence of condemnation. Thou see not the Moon and stars which are
the Eyes of Heaven, Nocte quidem sed Luna videt, sed sydera testes, Intendunt
oculos.
and the torches which God makes use of to manifest his will.

Poor man, thou art deaf if thou do not hear it, and if amidst the sighs of
thy conscience thou beleevest that-no body speaks unto thee, but soon or late
thou shall confess that innocence and truth are too dear unto God, and that
one cannot offend them, without Heavens arming it self in their defense.
Nevertheless they are patient enough to suffer them for a time: But they are
too generous to be always silent; and it would be too cruel an indulgence, and
too pernicious unto Virtue if they might dissemble for an Eternity.

God and kings have arms which extend themselves to all places, and if the
world be a great Chain, as Trismegistus heretofore believed, it is to keep men
inchain'd, and to the end they may rest assured that in all times and every
where an officer follows them, Conscience an inseparable guardian.
and holds them fast by the Eyes, by the Hand, and by all the powers of their
Souls.

The profane were of this opinion, saying, That all men, and universally all
Creatures moved in a great Labyrinth, in which the Gods delighted to hold them
by a silken thread, as heretofore Ariadne did, when in her Maze she guided her
dear Theseus, or rather like birdcatchers who tie a thread to the foot of some
bird, that giving him Liberty, they may stay him when they please.

So God has invisible bands, which men cannot break and if they be Criminal,
vengeance which is inexorable will soon or late inflict on them the punishment
they have merited.

Stay then guilty Brethren, come and cast your selves at the Feet of this slave
you have Sold. Come and demand life of him whom you had designed for death.
Come and see on a Thron this Dreamer whoue you threw into a Pit. The Whale has
cast this Prophet into the harbor. This Angel is come safe and sound out of the
furnace. His prison is the Empire of Egypt, his chains are the golden Ornaments
of the King, the whole world adores him, and from henceforth he is goeing to be
the Father, Lord, and Judge of those who have been his Tyrants, persecutors and
executioners.

Three and Twenty years are past since Jofeph left his Fathers House, and since
his brethren exercised on him all sorts of Hostility. These Monsters
Notwithstanding covered themselves with the Robe of this Lamb, and they
hitherto passed for innocents, but God, who pursues the culpable, and Justice
which is less Seperable from Evil than shadows are from bodies, made them
come a foot from their Country to the end they might be punished by his hand,
who served for a Subject to their rage and cruelty. Audicus autem Jacob, quod
alimenta venderentur in Aegipto, dixit filijs suis: qutre negligitis. Genesis 42.
v. 1.

Audivi quod triticum venundetur in Aegipto etc. Genesis 42. v. 2.

Benjamin domi retento a Jacob, qui dixer at fratribus ejus ^ne forte in ^tnere
quidquam patiatur mali. Genesis 42. v. 4.

Ingressi sunt terram Aegipti cum aliis, etc. Genesis 42. v. 5.




It was at that time when Famine devasted the whole world, Jacob having heard
that corn was sold in Egypt resolved to send thither all his Children except
Benjamin, to the end they might buy such provisions as were Necessary to
maintain their Family.

Go my Children, said he, and leave only Benjamin with me, least the same
accident befall him as happened to my poor Joseph.

Ten then of Jacobs Children went down into Egypt, with diverse other persons
who traveled with them upon the same design.

Joseph was absolute Lord in that Country, Et Joseph erat princeps in terra
Aegipti, arque ad ejus scumenta pupulis vendebantur, cumque adorassent eum
fratres sui Genesis 42. v. 6.
and without his orders no body durst either sell or distribute any corn. Which
was the occasion his Brothers, to obtain his leave, were constrained to visit
him, and render him duties as to their sovereign. But what! these poor wretches
knew not him whom they saw over their heads, and whom they would have trodden
under their feet. Yet this Sun appeared too Luminous to cover only the body of
a slave, and all humane reasons were too weak to persuade them that it was
Joseph.

It is he Nevertheless, Et agnovisset eos quasi ad alienos durius, toquebatur,
interrogans, eos unde venistis. Genesis 42. v. 7.

Et ait ad eos: exploratores estis, ut vidiatis infirmiora terrae venistis.
Genesis 42. v. 9.

Omnes silij unius viri sumus: pacifici vivimus, nec quidquam samuli tui
machinantur moli. Genesis 42. v 11.

Quibus ille re^pondit, aliter est, in munita terrae huyus consider are
venistis. Genesis 42. v. 12 At illi: duodecim inquiunt fratres sumus servo tuo,
etc. Genesis 42. v. 13.


who presently knowing them, began to treat them as strangers, saying to them
they were Spies, and that their whole design was to Inform themselves
concerning the weakest parts of the Country: God knows whether they were
astonished, hearing this discourse; but nothing availed them to say that they
all were Ten brothers, and the Children of Jacob, and that for the rest they
sought nothing but peace and the honor to live and die in the quality of his
most humble servants. No: No, said Joseph you are deceivers, and besides your
coming down into this Country was to no other purpose then to Spy out those
places and parts by which Egypt might be the more easily assaulted and
surprised. To this they could not answer the second time, but that they were
twelve Brothers his servants, Children of the same Father who retained but one
with him, and that the other dyed three and Twenty years before.

Did I not say well, Hoe est ait: quod lacutus sum exploratores estis. Genesis 42.
v. 13 Jam nunc experimentum vestri capiam, per salutem Pharaonis non
egrediemini hinc donec veniat frater vester minimus. Genesis 42. v. 16.

Vos autem eritis in vinculis donec probentura quae dixistis. Genesis 42. v. 16.


replied Joseph, that you were all Spies? I shall have immediately certain
proofs thereof; for I swear by the life of Ph^ro, that you shall not depart
hence till the arrival of the youngest of your Brethren. Send then speedily
some one of you to bring him; Mean while you shall be bound and Fettered until I
shall have some assurance touching what you have said unto me. Behold them with
Irons on their feet, Chains on their hands and officers leading them to prison.

This is the place where the justice of God has long since expected them;
there shall they see the Ghoast of his innecent body pursuing Them, then shall
they hear the Ecche of that voice which called them in the Feilds, and cried
out to them from the bottom of the pit. Alas! Tradidit ergo illos custodiae
tribus diebus Genesis 42. v. 17.
Where are my Brethren, and how have they used me? At least they will have the
Leisure for the Space of three days to recall into their minds the dreadful
design they heretofore had to kill their own Brother; They will find the Image
of the pit in the obscurity of a Dungeon; In fine, they can expect nothing but
death, or at least a perpetual Captivity, when they shall remember they sold
their own blood.

The third day Nevertheless Joseph Commanded their release out of prison, Die
autem tertio eductis de carcere ait: sacite quae dixi, and vinetis: Deum enim
timeo. Genesis 42. v. 18.

Frater vester ligetur unus in carcere, etc. Genesis 42. v. 19.

Et fratrem vestrum minimum ad me adducite. Genesis 42. v. 20.


and promised to grant them their lives if they would perform what he had said
unto them. Yes, said he I swear by the great God whom I dread, that you shall
not die if you obey me; and if you show a desire to love the peace which I
seek. It is sufficient then that one of you be kept in prison, the rest may
carry into their Country what they have bought; upon condition that they will
speedily bring hither the youngest of all who remains behind as you have said.

At this demand these poor wretches sighed bitterly and then looking upon one
another they began to say with a lamentable voice.

In truth all these misfortuns have justly befallen us; Et locuti sunt ad
invicem: merito haec patemur, quiae peccavimus in fratrem nostrum, etc. Genesis
42. v. 21.
God is just, and doubtless it is the blood of Joseph which rises up against
us, and earnestly calls upon the rigours of his adorable vengeance. We must
then acknowledge our selves too insensible, and too unnatural toward him, his
tears, his sighs, and the Innocence of his age ought to have mollified us, if
we had not had pitiless hearts, and Souls harder then Marble. Ah God, what
have we done! From whence at one time arrive to us so many Miseries.

During this discourse Joseph seemed not to hear them: Nesciebant autem quod
intelligeret Joseph: ex eo quid per interpretem loqueretur ad eos. Genesis 42. v.
23.

Avertitque se parumper and flevit. Genesis 42. v. 24.


For he only spoke to them by the mouth of an Interpreter. But his eyes had
much ado to dissemble the resentments of his heart. He was even constrained to
turn aside his head to shed some tears, which without doubt were ready to
betray him. But God who would have him pass for the Judge of his brethren did
not permit that clemency should induce him to do any thing unworthy of the
office he exercised.

And truly when Judges are seated on their Throns, they ought to know neither
Parents nor Friends. It is for this respect Justice ought to wear a vail over
her Eyes, least nature, and interests of Blood and affection should dazzle her.
This Canopy which is spread over her bed is of Skie-colour and sodered with
Stars, by reason she took her birth in the Heavens, and to the end she should
act nothing, but by the favor of these most pure lights.

Joseph then must execute what he had begun, if God has ordained him to be the
Judge of his Brethren; and if they be culpable, he ought not to consider them
as Brethren, but as criminals,

This he does, Tollensque Simeon and bigans illis praesentibus. Genesis 42. v. 23.
and without making himself known but in quality of the Vice-King of Egypt, he
stayed Simeon, and Manacled his hands in the prefence of the rest.

Afterward as they were ready to depart, Jussit ministris, ut implerent little
saccos tritico and reponerent pecunias singulorum insaceulis suis datis supra
cibrariis in vi^n. Genesis 42. v. 25.
he secretly commanded his servants speedily to fill all their sacks with
Corn, and in the Mouth of them to leave the Money they had brought, and also
what they might need for the expense of their journey.

This was done without their heeding it; For their minds as well as their eyes
were busied on Simeon, to whom from time to time they adress'd some sighs in
testimony of the regret they had to leave him alone in prison, and for an
hostage.

At last they departed, and having laid the Corn they had bought, upon Asses,
At illi portantes frumenta in asinis suis, prosecti sunt. Genesis 42. v. 26.

Apertoque unus sacco, ut daret jumento pabulum in diversorio, contemplatus
pecumam in ore sacculi, Genesis 42. v. 27.

Dixic fratribus suis: Reddita est mibi picunia, en habetur in sacco. Genesis 42.
v 28.

Et obstupifacts, turbatique mutuo dixerunt, etc. Genesis 42. v. 28.

Venerontque ad Jacob patrem suum in terram Chanaan, etc. Genesis 42 v. 29.

Locutus est nobis Dominus terrae dure, etc. Genesis 42. v. 30.

His aictus oum frumenta effunderent, singult reperierunt in ore saccorum,
ligatas pecunias: exterritisque simut omnibus dixit pater Jacob: Absque lioeru
me esse fecistis, Joseph non est super, Simeon tenetur in vinculis, and
Benjamin auferetis, in me haec omnia mala r^^ederunt.


they presently began their journey, but scarce were they arrived at their
first nights lodging, when one of them having opened his Sack, found there his
Money: he called his Brethren, and told them what had happened to him;
whereupon being all astonished, they said to one another, Alas! what design
has God on us, and whence arrive to us all these adventures?

From thence holding on their journey, they went directly unto Chanaan to find
Jacob, to whom they related what had passed, and how they had been harshly
received by the Governor of Egypt, who notwithstanding all the assurances they
had given him of their designs and innocence, had taken them for Spies; but at
last he permitted them to return, and likewise to carry with them the provision
they had bought, upon condition nevertheless speedily to bring unto him the
youngest amongst them, who as they said was left alone at home to Solace the
discommodities and old age of their Father. Doing this, he promised them that
Simeon should be released, and that they should have liberty to continue their
traffic and commerce in Egypt. Upon this they opened their Sacks, where having
found all their Money, they remained very much astonished, but chiefly Jacob
was as much or more surprised then his Children; Whereupon he could not contein
himself from saying to them; Ah poor wretches that you are! you have reduced me
into such an estate as I am now left without a Child.

Joseph is no more, and if what you say be true. Simeon is detained in prison,
not content with this, you will also take my Benjamin from me. O God, what
calamities all at once! ^las! on what side shall I turn me, and where may I
find some consolation? Joseph is no more, Simeon is a Captive, and you will
carry away my Benjamin, who is the support of my life, and the delight of my
heart. Poor Father that I am; whither shall I go? Famine besieges me, my
Children betray me, the Powers of the world combine against me, old Age
oppresses me, and death pursues me. Cui respondit Ruben: Duos filtos meos
interfice, si non reduxero illum tibi: Trade illum in manu mea, and ego cum
tibi restituam. Genesis 42. v. 37.

At ille, non descendet, inquit, filius meus vobiscum: frater ejus mortuus est,
and ipse solus remansit. Si quid ei adversi acciderit in terra, ad quam
pergit^s, deducetis canos meos cum doloread inferos. Genesis 42. v. 38.


Jacob whither will thou go?

Father, says Ruben, do not afflict your self. For my part I have but two
Children, I leave them with you in Benjamins place, and if I bring him not back
put them to death.

No ( says Jacob) I will never consent that Benjamin shall go with you: for
already his brother is dead, and if by accidents some mishap befall this poor
Child which is left me; I might even dye for grief, and my ashes would for ever
complain of you.

Behold the Picture of man's life in this world, drawn to the life in the person
of Jacob. His birth was in the midst of Combats, his youth has been a Duel
with his own Brothers; Scarce had he attained the age of a Man, when God
himself was pleased to assault him. Afterward his Children proved the
strongest enemies of his old Age, and he saw executioners in his own Family.
Alas! what will he do?

O God, will you have Benjamin also? will you commind Jacob to immolate this
Victim? and must he go into Egypt, and leave his Father who lives only by him.
O world, how disloyal art thou? Fathers and Mothers, what Children have you,
and where do you place all your hopes? all these Eldest Sons whom you breed up
so deliciously will deceive you.

This Joseph whom you Idolatrise, will prove a torment to you, and even in
despite of you, this so beautiful, Perfidiousness of the world.
so sweet, so amiable, and so accomplished Benjamin must leave you first or
last to go amongst the Egyptians.

But what? must Jacob also resolve to leave Benjamin? how will you have him
live, if his heart be taken from him; And is not the removing him from a person
who placed on him all his hopes, and the support of his Life a condemnation
unto Death.

CHAP. VII. Jacob resolves to send Benjamin into Egypt.
IN the world there are inexorable Caves, and fatal necessities which can
hardly be avoided: We must often swim over the arms of the Sea, not to perish
in the midst of the Ocean; Fatal necessities.
and some there are who resolve rather to dye stifled with smoke, than to fall
into a flaming fire.

Nothing is to be preferred before life next unto God and Honor, and we
usually give what we have to preserve it. It is for this reason, with our hands
we keep off the Darts which are thrown at our hearts, and there is no part of
the body which serves not for a Buckler when life is to be saved. In fine, the
fear of Death is a blind passion which knows neither Friends nor Children.
Jacob then must suffer his Benjamin to depart: but it is not without much
grief, and without fighting many battles with a Love so Cordial, and an
affection a Father ought to have for a Child so worthy to be beloved.

He must dye then of Famine, or Benjamin must depart: But it is not enough that
the rest return, and this dear Child remain with his Father. No, Dixit Jacob ad
filios suos: Revertimins, and emitte nobis pauxillum escarum. Genesis 43. v. 2.

Consumptisque cibis quos ex Aegipto detulerant. Genesis 43. v. 2.

Respondit Judas: Denunciavit nobis vir ille attestatione dicens, etc. Genesis 43.
v. 3.

Si ergo vis eum mittere nobiscum, pergemus pariter, and ememus tibi
necessaria. Genesis 43. v. 4.


go then my Children, says Jacob, return into Egypt to buy us something for
our sustenance, for nothing is left of all that you brought us.

Father, replied Judas, you know that we told you, that the Governor of Egypt
has forbidden us to return into his presence, if we do not bring him our
little Brother. If you will permit him then to go thither, we will all
accompany him, and buy all things necessary. We are engaged by promise and oath
to bring him, or never more to come into Egypt.

What promise, and what engagement (Answers Jacob) you have then Conspired to
undo me, Dixit eis Israel: in meam hoc fecistis miseriam. Genesis 43. v. 6. Vt
indicaretis ci and alium vos habere fratrem. Genesis 43. v. 6.
and to heap afflictions on me. O Children void of compassion: Alas! what have
you done? why did you say that you had yet a Brother? does it not satisfy you
to have lost Joseph, and left Simeon a Captive? Must Benjamin leave me, and
must I remain a Father without Children? What death, what punishment to see my
self torn in pieces, and by parcels. What Martyrdom, to give up first his
hands, afterward his arms, then his Eyes, and at last his life! Alas! what
have you done? and who has enforced you to say that I had yet a Child? Whither
shall I go, when I have him no more? with whom shall I entertain my self when
he shall be absent? and who will have care of me when he is departed? At illi
responderunt Interrogavit nos homo per ordinem nostram progeniom: si pater
viveret, etc. Genesis 43. v. 7.

Adducine fratrem vestrum vobiscum. Genesis 43. v. 7.

Judas quoque dixit patri suo: Matte puerum mecum, etc. Genesis 43. v. 9.

Ego suscipio pue^um: de manu mea requi^e illam, etc. Ge^. 43. v. 9.

S^ non intercessisset dilatio, jam vice altera venissemus. Genesis 43. v. 10.

Igitur Israel pater eorum dixit ad eos: Si sit necesse est, facite quod
vultis, sumite de optimis terrae fructibus in vasis vestris. Genesis 43. v. 11.

Pecuniam quoque duplicen ferte vobiscum: and illam, quem invenistis in
saculis, reportate, ne forte errore factum sit. Genesis 43. v. 12.


was there any necessity then to speak of him? and what need was there of
engaging him for my whole Family?

Pardon us answered they: for this man by order of the state, made enquiry
concerning your Family, who you were, whether you were alive, and how many
Children you had? To which we answered conformably to his demands, without
foreseeing that he would afterward command us to bring him our youngest
Brother.

Permit us then said Judas to carry him, lest we all chance to dye for very
hunger, and that our poor Children perish before our eyes: For my part I am
ready to Answer for him, and to engage my life for his, that in case I do not
bring him back, you may take mine, and let me for ever remain culpable of his
death: besides, we should be already upon our return a second time.

Go then, answered Jacob, Since you will have it so, and since it is a
necessity which admits of no remedy, Go then in the name of God, and carry
with you the fairest Fruits, and the most precious Perfumes you can find;
forget not to carry Frankincense, Honey, Mirrh, Terebinth, and Almonds. Take
also twice as much Money as yon need, and above all, add unto that which you
found in your Sacks, lest the same came to you but by mistake. In fine, Sed and
fratrem vestrum tollite, and ite ad virum, Genesis 43. v. 13.

Deus autem meus omnipotens faciat vobis eum placabilem, and remittat vobiscum
siatrem quem tenet, etc. Genesis 43. v. 14.

Tulerunt ergo viri munera, and pecuniam duplicem, and Benjamin:
descenderuntque in Aegyptum. Genesis 43. v. 15.


carry your Brother with you, and go find this man, whom I beseech God, with
my whole heart, to render propitious and favorable to you, to the end he may
speedily send back to me your brother Simeon, with my Benjamin. Mean while I
shall be the most unfortunate of all Fathers, because I shall be without
Children.

They loaded themselves then with Presents to carry into Egypt, and with the
Money which Jacob had appointed them; they took Benjamin by the hand, and after
Jacob had embraced and watered him with some tears, they took him with them.

What separation, and what ravishment! Alas! what can Jacob from henceforth do
all alone, and in the absence of Benjamin? Poor father! whither goes this Son?
through what place will he pass? And with how many dangers will he meet before
his arrival in Egypt? he is young, he is weak, and he is tender; he knows not
what the toil of a journey means; what will he do in a Foreign Country, and
amongst persons who seeing him will be either touched with Love and pity
toward him, or not; and if he please them, and move them unto Compassion, they
will never send him back; on the contrary, they will use him as a Slave, and as
they shall perceive him more Innocent, and more simple than the rest, they will
make a Victim of him which shall satisfy for all the rest.

Why have I then consented to his departure? and why did I not rather go than
he? but I have been enforced to leave him, and I know not who will have the
care of him in my absence. At least if I might have carried him in my arms, or
on my shoulders, and what ever happened, he would have always found safety in me
during his life, and repose after death. I should have been his refuge, Bed,
and Tomb; But now I know not where he is, Benjamin is gone: Ah, where is he!

It is not to be doubted but these were the entertainments, and the most usual
thoughts of Jacob during the whole Journey of his Children. Et steterunt coram
Joseph. Genesis 43. v. 15. Quos cum ille vidisset and Benjamin simul, praecepit
dispensatori domus suae, dicens: Introduc viros domu^, and occide victimas, and
instrue convivium: quoniam mecum sunt comesturi meridie, Genesis 43. v. 16.

Ibique exterriti dixerunt mutuo: propter pecuniam quam retulimus prius in
saccis nostris introducti sumus, ut devolvat in nos calumniam, and violenter
subsiciat servituti, and nos and asinos nostros. Genesis 43. v. 18. Quamobrem in
ipfis foribus accedentes ad dispensatorem domus, Genesis 43. v. 19.

Locuti sunt, Oramus, Domine ut audias nos, Jam ante de scendimus ut emeremus
escas. Genesis 43. v. 20.

Sed and aliud attulimus argentum, ut emamus quae nobis necessaria sunt. Genesis
43. v. 21. At ille respondit, pax vobiscum, nolite timere: Deus vester, and
Deus patris vestri dedit vobis thesauros in saccis vestris: nam pecuniam, quam
dedistis mihi, probatam ego habeo. Genesis 43. v. 23. Eduxitque ad eos Simeon Genesis
43. v. 23. Et introductis domum, attulit aquam, etc. Genesis 43. v. 24.

Illi vero parabant munera, donec ingrederetur Joseph meridie, Genesis 43. v. 25.




Meanwhile, they travel into Egypt, where being arrived, they are brought
unto Joseph, who casting his Eyes on them, and upon Benjamin, caused immediately
Victims to be killed, and commanded the Steward of his house to conduct them
unto his Palace, and to prepare a Feast, by reason about Noon he intended to
dine with them.

It was at this, these poor men were astonished, for since they did not expect
so good a reception, they feared lest the Hall into which they were brought,
might be changed into their Prison, and that the Dinner prepared for them might
prove their last repast; they then whispered in each others ear, that without
doubt they were drawn into danger by reason of the Money which had been found
in their Sacks; and that infallibly there was an intention to make them
undergo the punishment of a crime of which they were no ways guilty. This
said, they run after their Conductor, and having Stayed him at the door, they
related to him what had passed; protesting that they knew not who had designed
them this mischief, and besides, that they had never the least thought of his
Money; in witness whereof they had brought it with the surplusage sum which
was necessary to buy their Commodities. No, no, answered he, you need not fear
any thing, Peace be with you, it is your God, and the Lord of your Father who
has put into your Sacks the Money you found in them. As for that which you
gave me it is very good, and you ought not to disquiet your self concerning it.
This said, Simeon was conducted to them, and then they brought water to wash
their feet. In the interim they prepare their Presents in expectation of
Joseph, who intended to dine with them.

As soon as he came, they immediately cast themselves at his feet, saluting and
presenting him with what they had brought.

Then Joseph saluting them again with all manner of courtesy and goodness,
Obtuleruntque ei munera teuentes in manibus suis and adoraverunt proni
interram. Genesis 43. v. 26.

At ille, clementer resalutatis eis, interrogavit eos dicens, etc. Genesis 43. v.
27.

Qui responderunt: sospes est servus tuus pater noster, adbuc vivit. Et
inclinati adoraverunt eum. Genesis 43. v. 28.

Attolens autem Joseph oculos, vidit Benjamin fratrem suum uterinum, and ait:
iste est frater vester parvulus? and rursum Deus, i^quit, misereatur tui, sili
mi. Genesis 43. v. 29. Festinavitque quia commota fuerant viscera ejus super
fratre suo, and crumpebant lacrimae, and introiens cubiculum, flavit. Genesis 43.
v. 30.


inquired of them how their Father did, and whether he were yet alive.

Yes, answered they, your most humble Servant, and our most honored Father is
yet living, and as we believe, in perfect health. Saying this, they all bowed
down before him, and rendered their duties in the most affectionate manner it
was possible for them to do.

After all these honors Joseph lifting up his eyes, and perceiving Benjamin,
then demanding whether he were not the youngest amongst them whom they had
formerly mentioned, he said unto him; Ah! my Son, I beseech God to have pity
on thee, and to take thee into his holy protection: Now he perceived that his
heart was ready to discharge by his eyes, part of the affection, joy and
compassion wherewith he was touched at the sight of Benjamin: which obliged him
to leave them suddenly, and to retire into his Chamber to weep his fill. The
eyes are not only the gates of light, but also of all passions; Amongst
others, Love and Mercy make their entries and sallies by them. Sometimes also
Joy becoming so excessive, passes through these Crystal gates, and it seems
that these living Mirrours are constrained to melt at the same instant the Soul
has received some darts from the hand of Love, Pity and Joy. The most
generous spirits are commonly most subject unto these sweet tendernesses. The
most unworthy are those which never weep; and surely as they have but Souls of
Ashes, so their eyes are always dry: But on the contrary, a good Spirit being
in the Body as a great River in a bed of Sand, Decent tenderness.
the least wind can hardly rise without breaking down its banks, and escaping
at least by the two Eyes, which are as so many Channels through which the Spirit
disburthens it self.

Now as there may be many causes of this inundation, so we should often fear
that it might happen either in the day, or in public: For there would be some
danger that without Ink and Paper, secrets might be written on our Cheeks with
that water which flows from our eyes; We might often also accuse of weakness,
even the most noble, and most generous Sentiments of our hearts: In fine, there
be seasons, days and places in which we ought not to speak but by silence, and
where the Eyes as well as the Tongue should be dumb.

Joseph could not restrain his tears at the sight of Benjamin; but it was a
most prudent Act to withdraw himself, to pay this tribute unto the goodness of
his mind, and to an object worthy of pity, Joy and affection.

Having then dried his eyes, Rursumque lota facie egressus, continuit se, and
ait: ponite panes, Genesis 43. v. 31.

Quibus appositis, searsum Joseph and scorsum fratribus, Aegyptii quoque qui
vescebantur simul, seorsum (illicitum est enim Aegypti^s comedere cum
Hebraeis.) Genesis 43. v. 32.


and washed his face, he came back to them, and without making show of any
emotion, he commanded that the Table should be presently covered; which being
done, he set himself on one side, and his Brethren by his command were placed
on the other; and since it was prohibited the Jews to eat with the Egyptians,
all those that were with Joseph, and used to take their repast with him, took
their places apart.

All things were well-ordered at this Feast, Joseph's Brethren were seated every
one according to his age; Sederum coram eo, primogenitus juxta primogenita sua,
and minimus juxta aetatem suam. Genesis 43. v. 33. Sumptis partibus quas ab eo
acceperant: Majorque pars venit Benjamin, ita ut quinque partibus excederet.
Genesis 43. v. 34.

Biberuntque and inebriati sunt cum eo. Genesis 43. v. 34.


the Eldest was in the most honorable place, and the youngest sat according
to his degree. Joseph himself took the pains to wait on them.

But the greatest cause of their astonishment was that after they had all
received their portions, it appeared that Benjamin had five times more for his
share than any other.

This nevertheless, did not hinder the Joy and mirth of the Feast, for there
were nothing but acclamations and rejoycings. God knows whether Joseph forgot
the health of the Father of his Guests, and whether he drank that of Benjamin.
However it were, the holy Scripture says in express terms that they were all
drunk. I know not yet whether Joseph and his Brethren were inebriated with
Wine, which being taken in excess, uses to raise dazeling fumes, and confused
vapors in the head. Whence it happens, that the brain being troubled, all the
gestures of the body, and the operation of the Senses are out of order. The
face waxes pale, Plin. lib. 14. c. 22.
the nose grows sharp, the checks swell, the eyes are inflamed, the tongue
falters, the mouth drivels, the hands tremble, the feet interferre, and the
whole body is in a Palpitation. In fine, after this Commotion, Eclips, of
Reason in Wine.
and during this Eclips, the understanding remains in so obscure a night, as it
knows not it self. This Fountain of the day brings forth nothing but
Thunderbolts, its Torch is extinguished, its Lights are confused, and its
lightnings are but stinking Exhalations, which rise from the Lees of Wine. Now
this comes to pass, because Reason, though most pure and spiritual, Arist.
lib. 3 de anim. 19. and lib. 1. de anim. p. 63.
depends on gross and terrestrial Images which reside in the Fancy, and being
disquieted, represent unto the mind nothing but Phantasms and a Picture of
Illusions. Then Man cease to be a man, since he is devoid of Reason. Aug.
Sermon. 23. de vitanda ^^rietate.
He is in a state inferior to Beasts, who satisfy their appetites without
stifling them. It is then more probable that Joseph was not Inebriated at his
Feast, but with the pleasure and joy he had to see himself in the midst of his
Brethren. Without doubt also his Guests were so violently transported with the
honor they received from him, as they became, as it were drunk with it.
Torrente voluptatis tuae potabis eos, psalm. 59.
But the drunkenness of the one and the other, was but an ecstasy, and a
delicious Rapture, near resembling that of the blessed Souls which are in
Heaven, Inebriabuntur ab ubertate domus tuae, psalm. 35.
and swim in an Ocean of glory, and in the torrents of Delights, whereof God
himself is the Fountain, when he goes as it were melting, and distilling
himself into their Chaste breasts, in such sort as they become even Inebriated
with him: Comed^stis and nos estis satiati, bibistis and non estis inebriati.
Agg. 1.
But their drunkenness is but a most holy and just satiating, which shall
endure so long as God is God, that is to say, during all Eternity. O my Soul!
have thou not then a desire to go unto this Sacred Feast? Will thou not break
thy chains, and get loose from thy Captivity to come unto this Joseph? when
shall thou see this Brother? and when shall thou sit at Table with him to drink
by his side, and receive from his most amiable hand the portion of thy Felicity?

O God what inebriation of Love! what excess of delights! I think it long till
I come unto this Banquet where that delitious wine is tasted which uses to
bring forth Virgins, and where our Joseph, or Brother, our Lord, our God, is
seen without veil or Cloud.

CHAP. VIII. Joseph known by his Brethren.
AT Banquets says Aristides it often happens that Water is changed into Wine,
that Wine is mingled with Blood, and that overheated Blood begets
inflammations, Feasts of death.
which are never extinguished but with life. It is with the point of a knife,
and upon plates or Napkins sentences of death and decrees of condemnation are
written. At least it is there where oftentimes, as a Politician has observed,
passions are inkindled, Envy is fed, Treasons are nourished, and liberty takes
all the advantages to do Mischief.

Nevertheless there are feasts where sweetness, Praecepit autem Joseph
dispensatori Dom^s s^^^ etc. Genesis 44. v. 1. Scy hum autem m^um arg^nteum, and
p^^tium quod dedit tri^^ci pon^ in ore facti junior^^ Genesis 44. v. 2.
Theodoretus Quaest. 105 in Genesim.
peace, and the most Innocent pleasures furnish out all the Services. Such
doubtless, was the feast Joseph made for his Brethren; for though it was there
where he resolved to deceive them and to make them believe they were Thieves:
Yet his design was very just, and he had no other intention than by a stratagem
of Love, and by an Artifice of prudence to try the tenderness and inclinations
they had for Benjamin.

However this Amorous dissumulation and this wise experiment much disquieted
them; Iamque urbem exierant, and processerunt paululum: tune Joseph acce^sito
dispensatore domus, Surge, inquit and persequere viros and apprehensis dicite
quare reddidistis malum pro bone? Genesis 44. v 4.

Scyphus quem furat estis ipse est in quo bibit dominus meus and in quo
augurari solet-Gen. 44. v. 5.


and the^ were extremely surprised, when they were accused for Theefes by his
order, who before had treated them as Brethren. Scarce were they gone out of
the City, but Joseph's Steward stayed them by direction from his Master, and
said unto them, Ah! Thieves that you are, are you not ashamed to have rendered
ill to those who have done you good? Where have you then put the Cup you have
Stolen from us, and in which my Master uses to Drink and to foretell what will
happen.

Alas! Answered they, what do you say? Qui responderunt: quare sic loquitur
dominus noster ut servi tui tantum flagitui commiserint? Genesis 44. v. 7.

^^cuniam quam invenimus in summitate saccorum reportavimus ad te, etc. Genesis
44. v. 8.

Apud quemcumque fuerit inventum serv^rum tuorum quem quaeris, mo^iatur. Genesis
44. v. 9.

Qui dexit eis: fiat juxta v^stram fententiam. Genesis 44. v. 10.

Quos serutatus inciptens a maiore usque ad minimum, invenit Scyphnm in sacco
Benjamin. Genesis 44. v. 12.


For what persons do you take us? And in truth, do you believe that we
intended to do you wrong? do you not know how hitherto, we have demen'd our
selves? And that we brought back all the money which was found in our Sacks,
when we returned out of Egypt? How could it possibly happen that at this time
we should robb you? Surely we have nothing else to allege, but only entreat
you that if any of us be found guilty, you would put him to death without other
form of process.

Well then I am content replied this man, let it be done as you desire. Then
fearching them from the highest to the Lowest he met at last with Joseph's Cup
in Benjamins sack. O God! what astonishment and what surprise! Accidents are
sometimes so unexpected, and misfortunes so convincing that Innocence it self
has cause to wax pale, and to have some apprehension. Moreover there are
certain Vices so foul and infamous, as it is enough to be Suspected to render
us miserable; and we pass for Criminals, when we are but accused: What is it
then to be convinced of it and to have the earnest of our Crime in our own
hands? shall we not pass for Homicides when we are found holding a dagger in
our hands and all alone near a deadbody, which swims in his own blood? May we
not also be accused of Theft, and be thought the authors of it, when we are
taken with a purse newly cut, and with goods which have been lost?

The Children of Jacob had then cause enough to be frighted, and their
misfortune was inexcusable. Thus like dispairing men they found no consolation
but in their grief, At illi scissis vestibus, reversi sunt in oppidum. Genesis 44.
v. 13. Primusque Judas cum fratribus ingressus est ad Joseph (necdum enim de
loco abierat) omnesque ante eum pariter in terram corruerunt. Genesis 44. v. 14.

Quibus ille ait: cur sic agere voluistis? an ignoratis, quod non sit similis
mei in augurandi scientia. Genesis 44. v. 15.

Cui Judas: Quid respondebimus, inquit, etc. Genesis 44. v. 16.


and the most present Remedy they had, was to tear their Garments, and speedily
to return unto Joseph.

Having found him in the same place where they had left him, after they had all
cast themselves at his Feet, scarce daring to speak a word, so much were they
confounded, he himself was forced to begin and declare unto them, that it was a
great wonder to him how they durst offer him this injury, since they could not
be ignorant, that he was the most skillful man of Egypt in the Art of
Divination.

Then Judas beginning to speak for them all, freely confesses that they knew
not almost what to say or think; that their misfortune was inexcusable, and for
the rest it was God who had a mind to punish them; as also that they were all
at his mercy, resolving to live and dye in Bondage.

God forbid, Respondit Joseph: absit a me ut sic agam: qui suratus est scyphum
ipse sit servus meus. Genesis 44. v. 17.
Replies Joseph, I should take away liberty from those who are not guilty. As
for the party who has committed the offense, I will detain him for my Slave,
and it is just he should be punished according to his desert.

Behold the Sentence given: Accedens autem propius Judas, confidenter ait, etc.
Genesis 44. v. 18
But Judas appealed unto the Clemency of his Judge, and approaching nearer to
him, he asked his leave to speak unto him with Confidence.

My Lord, says he, as you are next unto the King, the Chief of Egypt, I cast
my self at your Feet as my Judge, and Sovereign: I earnestly call upon your
goodness, not on your Justice. If we be guilty, you can render us innocent. The
eyes of a Prince have looks which efface all stains, and one tear in their
presence can wash away a Thousand sins. It suffices if we may cast our selves
at their knees, to find a Sanctuary, and we need but speak unto them, to be
presently heard. Call to mind then my Lord what we long since said unto you,
Est nobis pater senex, and puer parvulas, qui in senectute illius natus est,
cujus uterinus frater mortuus est, and ipsum solum habet matter sua: pater vero
tenere diligit eum. Genesis 44. v. 20.
remember that we are all Children of one Father, oppressed with old age and
incommodities, and that all his hopes rely on this Innocent, who is found
guilty; you will deprive him of life by robing him of this Jewel. He is the
only child left him by his last wife: For by mishap a beast has devoured the
other which he had of the same bed. It is in obedience we bring him to you, and
it was with a promise speedily to restore him; I am engaged in my person, Ego
proprie servus tuus sim, qui in meam hanc rec^pt fidem, etc. Genesis 44. v. 22.
and in that of my Children: Nevertheless he lives only by the assurance he
has to see him again, all the rest are indifferent to him, and he will rather
choose to die a Thousand times of hunger, than to live in plenty after he has
lost the moity of his heart, and the most precious of his goods. Manebo itaque
servus tuus pro puero in ministerio domini mei. Genesis 44. v. 33.

Non enim possum redire ad patrem absente puero, ne calamitatis, quae
oppressura est patrem meum, testis assistam, Genesis 44. v. 34.


Permit us then, to restore life unto him from whom we have received it. For
my part I will never return without I bring him back: At least take me in his
place, and send him back with his Brethren, lest I be a witness of the grief
which will doubtless kill my Father when he shall know that Benjamin is made a
Captive.

Here it is where Joseph was not Master of his tears, Non se poterat ultra
cobibere Joseph multis coram astantibus: unde praecepit. ut egredientur cuacts
for as, nullusque interesset alienus agnitioni mutuae, Genesis 45. v. 1.

Elevavitque vocem cum fletu: quam audierunt Aegyptii, omnisque domus
Pharaonis. Genesis 4^. v. 2.


and his Heart was ever ready to have sallyed forth by his Eyes; but he first
dismissed those strangers who were with him, and would have none for Witnesses
of his goodness but those who had made him the Subject of their rage. When he
saw himself then alone with his Brethren, Love, which is all fire, meant to
dissolve into tears, and the sad remembrance of all that had passed drew cries
and sighs out of the bottom of his Heart, which were heard through the whole
House.

In fine, he was necessitated to discover himself, and as we must know before
we Love, so Joseph resolved to be known, and to declare what he was. Et dixit
fratribus suis: Ego sum Joseph, adh^c pater meus vivit? non poterant respondere
fratres nimio terrere perteriti. Genesis 45. v. 3.


Brethren says he, I am Joseph, Alas! is my Father yet living? could I be so
happy as to see him before his death!

They were so much Surprised at the bare recital of the name of Joseph, as
they had not the power even to open their Mouths to speak unto him: Afterward
looking one upon another as struck'n from Heaven, is this Joseph, thought they,
Alas! where are we? And from whence may he come?

Yes it is I, Ego sum, ait, frater vester Joseph quem vendidistis in Aegyp tum.
Genesis 45. v. 4.

Nolite pavere, neque vobis durum esse videatu^ quod vendidist^s me in his
regionibus, etc. Genesis 45. v. 5.


says he, who am Joseph, I am the same person whom you have so unworthily
sold. At last do you acknowledge me for your brother? Approach then, come that I
may embrace you, fear nothing, but know that although you have sold me, yet I
have not lost the quality of your Brother. I am Joseph, you have no cause to be
affrighted, time has effaced the ill you have done me, and at present I only
remember that I am your brother. You need no Advocate, since blood and Nature
plead in your behalf. It is enough, that we are all Jacobs Children, I owe
this favor to piety and Love, and I cannot refuse you what is yours even by
the Privilege of Birth. The ties which fasten us are stronger than the Chains
of that Captivity into which you reduced me. Non v^stro confilio, sed Dei
voluntate huc missus sum, qui secit me quasi patrem Pharaonis, and Dominum
universae domus ejus ac principem in omni terra Egypti. Genesis 45. v. 8.
It is God alone who has conducted me unto this place, and who after all my
misfortunes has raised me on the Throne of Pharaoh, to be the chief Ruler of
his Dominions, and to provide for the necessities of his people in Conjunctures
of time, and disasters which desolate the whole Land. I refer my self unto your
selves, who are Eye witnesses thereof, and you know at your own cost what has
passed. You see that I have the absolute Command in Egypt, and that Pharaoh
though elder than my self does me the honor to call me his father. The name of
Savior which I bear, is not a bare Title, but the effects sufficiently
demonstrate, that Heaven has chosen me to preserve the lines of an infinite
number of people, whom Famine would have destroyed. It is not out of any Spirit
of vain glory I open unto you all these Verities; But only to the end you may
know that it is GOD alone who has broken my Chains, and who amidst all the
disasters of a cruel servitude has led me even unto Regality. I adore all the
effects of his amiable Providence, and I can only accuse you, as the
Instruments and Executioners of his Divine Decrees. Do not then apprehend any
thing, but rejoice that you have been the Instruments of God in so important a
matter. For my part, I am confounded, seeing the triumph of my weakness, and
the Haven where, after so many Tempests, I am arrived. I look upon you as the
Winds and Oars whereof God, as a wise Pilot, made use to convey me even in the
midst of Rocks, and amongst so many waves unto the Throne of Egypt: Well then,
my most dear Brethren, it is time to Convert your fears and Sorrows into
Congratulations and applauses. The winds are now appeased, the storm is laid,
Festinate, and ascendite ad patrem m^um, and dicetis ei: haec mandat filius
tuus Joseph: Deus fecit me, Dominum universae terrae Aegypti: Descend ad me,
ne morieris. Genesis 45. v. 9.

Adhuc enim quinque anni residue sunt famis. Genesis 45.11.


and the Sun of Jacob is risen in Egypt. Take a journey then I beseech you, to
visit my Father, and inform him that Joseph is found, that you are sent from
him, that you have both seen, and spoken with him, and that he sent you to
bring him, least some ill might happen to him, and that Death surprise him, as
well in respect of his old age, as by reason of the public miseries, which
will still endure for the space of five years.

After this Commission, Osculatusque est Joseph omnes fratres sues, and
ploravit super singules. Genesis 45. v. 15
Joseph having no other motive which might oblige him to conceal the tenderness
of his affections, his Eyes were enforced to render that tribute unto Love,
which without violence they could not restrain. Lightnings are too hot to
remain enclosed in the Clouds, and Clouds are too cold to endure the rays of
the Sun, without being melted and dissipated. Now the heart of Joseph being
like a Thunder bolt wrapped up in Clouds, What wonder then if this Thunder break
forth, and if all the Forces of his heart, which were weaker than the Clouds,
dissolved into Tears in the presence of this Sun. Thus was Joseph constrained
to shed tears enough upon his Brethren, Cumque ampiexatus recidisset in collum
Benjamin flevit. Genesis 45. v. 14.
to estate the remnants of their terrors; but in the first place he took
Benjamin into his arms, and holding him close to his bosom, Delicious tears.
he kissed him, shedding tears on his mouth, which came from the bottom of his
heart, and he left him not, but to kiss the rest of his Brethren, and to
witness to them by his embraces and tears, the force and tenderness of his
affection, which was not only placed on an Innocent, but also upon Offenders.

Alas! Fair Spectacle.
what spectacle of Love? what Theater of Passions? what kisses? what embraces?
what tears? O God! what excess of goodness in Joseph? who having been
persecuted by his Brethren even to death, will take no other revenge of the
injury he received, than by his Silence, by his Tears, by his Sighs, by his
Kisses, and by all sorts of benefits.

Where are then all those pitiless hearts? Deadly Vengeances.
where are those mortal vengeances? where those tyrants who know not what it
is to pardon when once they are offended? where is Joseph? And where is he who
after a long Contest, imbraceth his adversaries, who kisses them to stifle all
their mischievous designs, and who has tears of Love to quench the fire which
nourished their darkest Passions?

At least there are but few who do like Joseph, that is to say, without
interest, without constraint, without dissimulation, and when they have still
the power of revenge in their hands.

It is said, that a Lion has so discreet and generous furies, as we need but
cast our selves at his Feet to appease him in the height of his rage. But there
are more savage and cruel men, A more than brutish inhumanity.
who cannot temper their wrath, and in what posture soever we set our selves
before them, they still remain inflexible. If wounds be laid open unto them, to
excite them to compassion, they cast new darts to poison them; If a man humble
himself, they trample upon him; if he flatter them, they are exasperated; If
they be entreated, this renders them more obstinate. Above all, they are
inexorable and inflexible, if it lie in their power to do mischief without fear
of receiving any from those that may be their victimes, and the Subjects of
their brutality. And if some Jmage of Pity, Love, or Honor touch their
Hearts, and draw some drop of water from their Eyes, and some kindnesses from
their Hands or Mouths, it is not without vanity and noise. This indulgence must
be published in all places, and it seems that the whole World ought to be
advertised of it, as of an universal Jubilee. Ridiculous ceremon^es.


This pardon then is Shamefully acquired, and there are no Ceremonies in the
Church, and no Formalities at the bar, which are not to be observed for the
confirmation of this reconciliation, and to render this accommodation more
remarkable. On the contrary, Joseph retires, and will have no other Witnesses
of his favors than those who have been the Authors of his misfortunes. He will
discover his goodness, Auditumque est and celib^i sermon vulgatum in aula
Regis: venerunt fratres Joseph. Genesis 45. v. 16.

Et gavisus est Phara^ atque omnis familia ejus. Genesis 45. v. 16.

Dixitque ad Joseph, ut imperaret fratribus suis dicens, enorate sumenta, ite
in terram Chanaan. Genesis 45. v. 17

Et tollite inde patrem vestrum and cognati^n^m and venite ad me and ego dabo
vo^is omnia bona Aegypti, ut comedatis medullam terrae. Genesis 45. v. 18.

Praecipe etiam ut tollent plaustra terra Aegypti ad subvecti^nem parvulorum
suorum accongugum. Genesis 45. v. 19.

Singulis quoque proferri iussit binas stolas: Benjamin vero dedit trecent^s
argenteos cum quinque stolis optimis. Genesis 45. v. 22.


and conceal their malice; his intention is not to confound, but rather to
encourage them.

Nevertheless what ever he did, the whole Court knew immediately that his
Brethren were come. The very noise of it flew even to the Ears of Pharao, who
together with all the Servants of his house expresses an unspeakable joy. But
to the end this joy might be universal, his pleasure was that Joseph should
command his Brethren to return into Canaan, and bring unto him their Father
with his whole Family, that they may live at their ease in the best part of
Egypt. Now to the end this might be done with the most convenience, he ordained
Chariots to be made ready for them, and horses provided for their wives,
Children, and for the most commodious transportation of all the Movables of
their Family.

Joseph forgot nothing which Pharao gave him in Charge. When they were even
ready to depart he commanded that two suits of apparel should be brought for
every one, and over and above five hansome garments for Benjamin, Tantumdem
pecuniae, and vestium mittens patri suo. Genesis 45. v. 23 Dimisit ergo fratres
suos and proficiscentibus ait: Ne irascamini in via. Genesis 45. v. 24
with three hundred pieces of Silver; without omiting Jacob to whom he sent the
like present. After this he sent them back, chiefly recommending unto them
Peace and Love.

O God! what pleasing departure! what amiable Sepuration, when they leave
Joseph to return unto Jacob. Ah! how delicious is it to meet with the Heart of
a Brother in the arms of a judge? And to go directly from a brother unto a
Father, to reunite the Father unto his Son, and to live in so well-united and
holy a community?

O my Joseph, An amiable relation of Joseph to Jesus.
my Jesus, and my Savior, discover unto me that face so full of Majesty, and
those delicious Looks which make the Paradise and felicity of Angels. Ah! my
Jesus, since Joseph was your jmage treat me as he treated his Brethren, and
appear not unto me as an incensed judge who contrives the sentence of my
death, but as a well-beloved Brother. I confess that I have betrayed you; that
I have sold you, and that I sought to deprive you of life: But you are my
Brother, my Joseph, and my Savior. O my Jesus, pardon me. Alas! I am ravished
at the sight of your Grandeurs, and of the glory which invirons you. I should
not hope for the happiness to see your Tomb changed into a Throne, your Cross
serving as an Instrument to raise unto you a Trophy of honor, I did not expect
to see you a Sovereign in the Egypt of the World. But behold me now a Captive
and Criminal at your feet. Behold me wholly confounded and trembling. O my
Jesus, take pity then on me, and say only that it is you that are my Jesus,
and my Brother; afterward I will go from you unto your Father and mine, and
then I will come with him before you to live forever with him and you.

CHAP. IX. Jacob's going down into Egypt, and the honorable entertainment he
there received from Pharaoh.
THere are few Palaces and Houses like that of this enchanted Island which
Fables describe, where the courses of the Planets are always Regular, where
the Air is free from Clouds, Fire from Smoke, the Ocean from Tempests, and the
Earth from Concussions. The Felicity of this World is a great Clock raised upon
many Wheels, and a body formed of diverse members, where there is always some
diforder. Love, hatred, aversions, envy, hope, defires, Felicity subject to
alteration.
terrors, shame, choler, jealousies, despites, and rage, join with the Soul and
Body, with Parents and Friends, with place and seasons, with Elements, and all
natural beings, to keep a poor man always floating, and always wavering like
a Reed, or as a Bark which is in the midst of the Sea at the mercy of winds and
storms. Above all, it is a common saying, says Pythagoras, that grief and
pleasures make the fairest and most deformed faces in the world. These two
Passions are on the Earth, what the Sun and Moon are in the Heavens. They cause
day and night, Spring and Winter; but we have more frequently Snows than Dewes.
And most Men seem to be born under a frightfull Climate, where the night lasts
three and twenty hours, and where the Sun very seldom appears. Besides, it is
often doubtful, whether it be the Sun or Moon we behold. We are so accustomed
to darkness, as we know not whether we take the twylight of the evening for the
Aurora, Blindness of most men.
and day for night. Sorrows and afflictions cast so many clouds over our mind,
as the eyes are dazeled, and the first draughts of pleasure which appear to us
are in appearance but the Idea of some Dream, and a shadowed light in the depth
of the night.

Jacob never believed he should ever see Joseph again, Incredulous Love.
and after a night of three and Twenty years, he had surely no ground to hope
for the return of the Sun; his eyes and spirit were so well acquainted with the
rigours of Death, that he no longer minded the sweets of life. In fine, having
in a manner made him dye so often, he did not expect they would make him revive
in restoring to him his Joseph, who was the life of his heart, and the sight of
his eyes.

Nevertheless, Et nunciaverunt ei, dicentes: filius tuus vivit, and ipse
dominatur in omni terra Aegypti. Quo audito Jacob, quasi de gravi somno
evigilans, tam^n non credebat eis. Genesis 45. v. 26.

Illi e contra referebant omnem ordinem rei. Cumque vidisset plaustra, and
unite sa q^ae mis^rat, revivil spiritus ejus. Genesis 45. v. 27.

Et ait: Sufficit mihi si adhuc Joseph filius meus vivit: vadam and videbo
illum ante quam morior. Genesis 45. v. 28.


his Children return out of Egypt, and assure him that Joseph is alive, and
that he is very powerful in the Land of Pharaoh. Jacob could not believe it,
and as a man who suddenly awaked after a long sleep, he took all that was said
to him for the Image of a Dream.

In fine, when he perceived that they constantly persisted in relating orderly
to him all that had passed; and on the other side, seeing all the Baggage they
had brought, he began to come unto himself, and as if this happy news had
restored him his Speech and life, he began to cry out; It satisfies me, that
Joseph is living. Ah! I will go unto him, and at least see him once more
before I die. O God! what consolation for a good Father to see again a good Son?
he was dead in his thoughts, and behold him risen again; He was lost, and is
found again; a cruel Bear had devoured him, and of all his relics there was
only left him a bloody garment, A strange change.
and behold him on a Throne, and Master of one of the fairest Empires in the
Universe. What alteration? and what Metamorphosis? humane Prudence, what say
thou unto this? Art not thou then ravished at the sight of these Prodigies?
have thou not a desire to submit unto the Laws of this wise Intelligence which
sports with these Counsels, and goes even under the Abysses of misfortune there
to produce Peace, Glory, and immortality as a fair day in the midst of
darkness? Yes truly; but to adore the effects of the Divine Providence, and the
most absolute power it has over our lives and honors, We must follow Jacob,
and go visit Joseph.

Love has wings at his Feet like Fame, Profectusque Israel cum omnibus quae
hab^bat, venit ad puteum juramenti. Genesis 46. v. 1.
he knows not what delay and retardment means. Jacob is on his way to see
Joseph, he is already in Bershabe, near unto that famous Well, where Abraham
heretofore made a solemn agreement with Abimelech, and where both of them swore
an inviolable peace.

There it was where Jacob stayed to offer his Sacrifice unto God upon the Altar
of Abraham. Et mactatis ibi victimis Deo patris sui Isaac. Genesis 46. v. 1.

Audivit cum per visionem noctis vocantem se, and dicentem sibi, Jacob, Jacob,
cui respondit, Ecce adsum.


There having immolated Victimes he resigned into the hands of God, all the
designs of his voyage, he resolves to pass away one night in that place. But
scarce had he closed the eyes of the body, but those of his soul were opened to
see and hear the God of his Father Isaac, who called Jacob, Jacob, to which
Jacob had nothing else to say, but that he heard his voice, and was most ready
to execute his Commands.

Courage then Jacob, Ait illi Deus: Ego sum fortissimus Deus patris tui: noli
timere, descend in Aegyptum, quia in gentem magnam faci^m^te ibi. G^^. 46. v.
4.

Joseph queque ponet manus suos super oculos tuos. Genesis 46. v. 4.


for it is the most powerful God of thy Father Isaac, who calls and appoints
thee to pass into the Land of Egypt: And there it is where he intends to make
thee a Father of many Nations. Yes, says he, I promise thee Jacob, that I will
go with thee, and I assure thee, that Joseph shall close thine eyes with his
own hands. O God! what Sacrifice? what Vision? What Speech, and what Oath?

As for the Sacrifice, in the first place, what Jacob did ought to be an
instruction to all those who leave their Country, and intend to alter the
course of their lives, that before all things they should consult with God, and
take him for their guide, in the Voyages, and designs they take in hand: for it
is unto him we ought first to Sacrifise our hearts, and immolate all our hopes,
otherwise we shall look behind us like that wavering Woman, who for her
inconstancy was turned into a Statue of Salt.

Secondly, the apparition of God which Jacob saw, is a certain token, that his
eye still watches over those who dedicate themselves unto him; and that he is
neither deaf nor dumb to those that speak unto him.

Thirdly, Gods promise is too faithful, and his Love too generous to forsake
those who walk in his ways, and have taken him for their guide.

Fourthly, when God promised Jacob to bring him back out of Egypt, this must be
understood of his Posterity, and of the Israelites, Jacobs Successors, whom God
after Two hundred and Fifteen years, brought back out of Egypt into Chanaan:
Touching Jacob he dyed in Egypt between Joseph's arms, as we are going to see in
the sequel of this History. It suffices for the present to follow him in the
remainder of his voyage.

It was about the morning of the second day that Jacob forsook Bershabe to
pursue his Journey. Surexit autem Jacob a puteo Juramenti, etc. Genesis 46. v. 6.
It was indeed one of the fairest spectacles which ever appeared on the
Confines of Palestine, to see him in the head of his Troops, as a good Father
followed by his Children. But I assure my self it had been most delitious and
profitable to hear them, if the holy Scripture would have given us some brief
relation of their Discourse. Nevertheless, Cunctae animae ingressae sunt cum
Jacob in Aegyptum sexaginta, Genesis 46. v. 26.
it acquaints us with the number of these happy Travelers, which were seventy
in all, comprising therein Joseph, with Manasses, and Ephraim, his two Sons who
were born there. Hence it evidently follows, that when Moses said there went
thither Sixty and six, he did neither put in the list Jacob nor Joseph,
Manasses nor Ephraim: On the contrary, when Saint Luke reckons Seventy and
five, he comprehends in that number, the Sons and Nephews of Joseph, whose
birth happened during the life and residence of this holy Patriark in Egypt.

Meanwhile Jacob pursues his Journey: Misit autem Judam ante se ad Joseph, ut
nunciaret ei; and occurreret in Gessen. Gea. 46. v. 28.
but before his setting foot in Egypt, he sent Judas to find out Joseph, that
he might be advertised of his coming, and go forth to receive him in the Land
of Gessen.

Joseph has no sooner heard this news, Quo cum pervenissent juncto Joseph
curru, ascendit obviam patri ad eundem locum. Genesis 46. v. 29.
but he set forth to meet Jacob. God knows whether the time might seem long
unto him, and whether his heart and mind went not faster than his body. God
knows also the various thoughts Jacob had in Expecting Joseph, saying, Alas!
what pains for one pleasure? what desires for one fruition? what Thorns for one
Rose? what Nights for one Day? and how many Combats, and dangers for one
Triumph?

In fine, behold Joseph in Jacobs bosom, Vidensque eum, irruit super collum
ejus, and inter amplexus flevit, Genesis 46. v. 29.

Dixi^que pater ad Joseph, Jam laetus morior, quia vidi faciem tuam and
superstitem te relinquo, Ge^. 46. v. 30.

At ille locutus est a^ fratres suos, and ad omnem domum patris sui, ascendam
and nunciabo Pharaoni, dicamque ^i: Fratres mei, and domits patris mei qui
erant in terra Chanaan, venerunt ad me. Genesis 46. v. 31.

Cumque vocaverit, and dixerit, quod est opus vestrum? Ge^. 46. v. 33

Respondebitis: viri pastores sumus servi tui, ab infantia nostra usque in
praesens, and nos and patres nostri. Genesis 46. v. 34.


behold the Father in the Arms of his Son. Joseph leaps on his neck, and dearly
embraces him: but he had no other than tears to utter. What then can Jacob
say? Ah! my Son, says he, now that I have seen thy face, I am content, and
after this I shall willingly dye; for it suffices me to leave thee alive.

After this Joseph turning himself toward his Brethren, and toward all those
of Jacobs house, began to say unto them that he was going unto Pharaoh to
advertise him, that his Brethren were arrived with their whole Family, and that
they had brought their Flocks and goods with them; and when Command should be
given them to see the King, if he chanced to ask them of what Trade they were,
they should answer, they had no other than that of mere Sheapheards, and that
all their ^indred, who were, as well as themselves his most humble servants,
and resolved to live and dye in his service, never had any other employment
since their birth.

Behold the instructions Joseph gave to all his Brethren, whilst he conducted
them with his Father to salute Pharaoh. Now it was not out of Complement he put
these words into their Mouths; but upon Design, that the King hearing they were
Sheapheards, and brought up in this Profession, might permit them to live
peaceably together with their Father in the Land of Gessen, Vt habitare positis
in terra Gessen: quia detestantur Aegyptii omnes pastores ovium. Genesis 46. v. 34.
which was nearest unto Chanaan, where there were also lovely Pastures, and
where they should be severed from the Egyptians who mortally hated all the
Sheapheards which were in their Country, by reason they had not the religious
impiety of Egypt, which adored Animals for Gods, and who for that effect durst
not kill them, detesting for that reason all the Sheapheards of other Regions,
who had the care of Feeding their Flocks, to the end they themselves with
others, might be nourished by them.

In fine, Extremos quoque fratrum suorum quinque viros constituit coran Rege.
Genesis 47. v. 2.

Hebraei, Hemerus, Pererius, Oleaster. In optimo loco fac eos habitare, and
trade eis terram Gessen. Genesis 47. v. 6.

Quod si nosti in eis esse viros industrios constitue illos magistros pecorum
meorum. Genesis 47. v. 6.

Post haec introduxit Joseph patrem suum ad Regem, and statuit eum coram co.
Genesis 47. v. 7.

Et benedicto Rege egressus est soras. Genesis 47. v. 10.


the advice of Joseph, and his desire found happy success: For as soon as he was
returned unto the Court, he presented unto Pharaoh five of his Brethren, who in
show promised the least. The King having cast his eyes on them, and knowing
they were Sheapheards, gave them Gessen for their quarter, and Commanded from
that time they should take care of his Flocks.

Not long after Jacob entered, who bore on his brow the Majesty of a King, the
authority of a Patriarch, the wisdom of a Prophet, and the glory of a Father
of Nations. When first he saw the King, he besought Heaven to pour on him and
his Kingdom all sorts of Benedictions.

The holy Scripture has not otherwise declared unto us Jacobs entry into the
presence of Pharaoh; for my part I have often represented him unto my thoughts
at the door, or in the Kings Antichamber, bare-headed, and with hair whiter
than Snow, a beard down to his girdle, and a neck bowed with old age, eyes
watered with tears, and all his whole body somewhat trembling. Me thinks I see
him supported on one side with Joseph, on the other by Benjamin: I even hear
some sighs which issue forth of his mouth to refresh the ardors of his heart;
for notwithstanding all the coldness of his age he always conserved in a
dying body, the sense of a truly generous soul, and of a spirit of fire which
was never out of Motion or Action. I know not what Pharaoh thought, seeing this
good old man: Et interrogatus ab eo quot sunt dies annorum vitae tuae. Genesis 47.
v. 7.

Respondit: Dies peregrinationis meae centum triginta annorum sunt, parvi and
mali, and non pervenerunt usque ad dies patrum meo um quibus peregrinati sunt.
Genesis 47. v 9.

Floscule mane puer, media vir floscule luce, Floscule sub nocte sole cadents
senex. Sic oreris morcrisque uno tu floscule Phoebo, Vno sisque puer, virque
senexque die.


but he asked him how old he was, to which he made answer;

Sir, for the space of a hundred and thirty years I have been a Pilgrim on the
Earth. This journey truly is very short, if you only consider its durance; but
very long, if you cast your eyes on the miseries of my life; Nevertheless, I am
not yet arrived to the Term of my Forefathers.

Few old men will be found in the World who may not say the same: For life is
but a course, in which we go from our Cradle to the Tomb. Days, months years,
and entire Ages are but moments in the sight of God. Man is but but a Flower
which begins to blow at the break of day, to fade about Noon, and to drop away
at night. He is a shadow which passes away, a Feather which flies, a Reed
which breaks, an Image which loses its Luster, a Vapor which is dissipated, a
Beauty which perishes, a breath, a smoke, and a puff of Air, which swells in
the midst of a storm, and appears on the water to dissolve at the same instant.

Nevertheless, we need no longer space to see and feel much misery: For it is
enough to be born of a woman, to be consumed with sorrows, and to serve as a
pitiful Subject to all sorts of Accidents; Vicissitudes of life.
Witness Jacob, who was no sooner come into the World, but he must leave his
Fathers house to go from thence with a staff in his hand into Foreign Countries,
and like a fugitive, to shun the persecution of his Brother. We need but follow
him in this sad journey, and spend with him Twenty years in quality of a
Servant at Labans house; From thence we must depart out of Mesopotamia and
bondage, to expose our selves unto dangers of Death, and to meet with Esau, who
comes to assail him with four hundred men. We must see him in the affrightment
he took, at the Murder his Children committed upon the Sichemites. Had he not
also some cause to die at the death of Rachel, and to expire on her body, which
enclosed the moitie of his life? But who could behold the sorrow which pierced
his heart, when his Children were so impudent, as to bring incest even into his
house? Surely he would have said that his life was but a web of misfortunes, if
we join with it the loss of Joseph, the separation of Benjamin, the captivity
of Simeon, and finally his last departure out of Chanaan; Life both very short
and long.
who will deny he had reason to say, that his life had been very short, if we
only consider the durance thereof, and very long, if we would contemplate the
misfortunes contracted at his birth never to forsake him. But as the setting
Sun uses to dissipate the Clouds which had obscured it in the day, and as
sometimes wind, rain, and a tempest cease in the evening; so Jacob at the end
of his life began to enter into a calm, and to enjoy fair weather.

It was in the City of Heroes, Joseph vero patri and fratribus suis dedit
possessionem in Agypto in optimo terrae loco Ramesses ut p^aeceperat ^harao.
Genesis 47.11.
as the Septuagint have expounded it, or else in Ramasses, which is upon the
Land of Gessen, where Jacob made his last abode, and where he found at last a
haven after all his miseries, as we are going to see.

CHAP. X. The last words of Jacob.
ALas! there is nothing eternal amongst created things, and nothing which
begins not to wax old as soon as it begins to live. Life and Deathare
inseparable companions which follow each other at a near distance, and tread
even upon the same steps. God himself, says Tertullian, Roc stipulata est Dei
vox, hoc spopandit omnt quod nascitur, etc. Tertul. lib. de an. cap. 30.
is as it were engaged thereunto by his word, and all creatures at their birth
are obliged unto it by promise at the very instant they enter into the world.

Life notwithstanding has no regular periods, and though he that made every
thing with weight and measure, has shut up Creatures in the circle of Ages,
yet he has not prescribed them equal limits; but there are some who make
their voyages longer or shorter than others. However in vain is it to stray,
and take bywayes: For we must either in the morning, at noon, or in the evening
arrive at our Lodging, and after a thousand and a thousand windings at our
final resting place. It is there, said Calisthenes, where Fathers and
Children, Calesthenes, M.S.
young and old, wise men and fools, the strong and weak, and even the
Demigods, find themselves confused with Plants and beasts. Death (said a
Favorite of Justinian) pitcheth every where his tents, and we as often hear
mournful Ditties under Velvet Canopies, and in Ballisters of Ivory, as under
Pavillions of coarse Cloth, and Cottages thatched with straw. We see in Town
ditches, and under the dust of Battles, Captains lying amongst Soldiers. We
behold under merciless blades, and amongst Scymiters, people lying with their
Magistrates: And at best there are but some Stones, some Ciphers, and Epitaphs
which distinguish them. Death then is more just and civil than birth. The last
has Complacences for some, and rigours for others; but the first is
indifferent toward all, and we see at her feet, Scepters amongst Scyths, with
this Inscription, The Motto of Death Nemini parco.
I spare no man. Death suffers not its self to be corrupted by favor, it is on
the River of oblivion, and all the bodies he ferries over in his Boat are
naked, not to appear different one from the other. It was for this reason, as
the incomparable Picus of Mirandula said; Most important advice.
Wise men during their lives, and especially upon the approach of death, ought
to perform such actions as their memory might be immortal, to the end if Death
be common to them, the manner of dying might be peculiar. The Phoenix is no
less subject unto death than Owls, but Owls dye in the night, and in a
hollow place of some rotten Tree: Whereas the Phoenix expires in the rays of
the Sun, and upon a pile of Cinnamon and Musk. The Swan is no more exempt from
it than the Raven: But the Raven dies craking upon some carrion, and the Swan
singing upon the bank of some fair River.

Jacob, who as the Father of Nations seemd to have right unto Immortality, was
yet no more immortal than Esau; but their death will be very different. For
Esau dies suddenly like a Raven, and an Owl; but Jacob a far off saw his hours
approaching; like a Phoenix, and as a Swan which sings according to the common
saying, when he is breathing his last.

He was a hundred forty and seven years old when he perceived the arrival of
that moment which was to finish the course of his life. Factique sunt omnes
dies vitae illius Centum quadraginta septem annorum. Genesis 47. v 28.

Cumque appropinquare cerneret diem mortis suae vocavit filium suum Joseph, and
dixit ad eum: Si inveni gratiam in conspectu tuo pone manum tuam sub femo^e
meo, and facies mihi misericordiam and v^ritatem, ut non sepelias me in
Aegypto. Genesis 47. v. 29. Sed dormiam cum patribus meis, and auseras me de terra
hac condasq, in sepulchno majorum meorum. Genesis 47. v. 30. Rupertus hic.


Then this happy Patriark commanding Joseph's presence said unto him;

My Son, it is time for me to dye, there is no appeal. I go whither Abraham
and Isaac are gone before, and you shall come thither after me. Meanwhile I
prithee, if thou love me, put thy hand under my thigh, and assure me that
after my death thou will transport my body out of Egypt into Chanaan, to bury
it in the Sepulcher of my fore Fathers. This is all I ask, and all the favor I
expect from thy love and goodness.

Jacob had reason to desire to be carried into Chanaan, and laid in the
monument of his Ancestors: for this was the Land promised to his Children, and
which was to be one day consecrated by the worship of God, and by the presence
of the Messiah. As for the the Oath to which he obliged Joseph, it did not
proceed from any distrust of his affection and fidelity, Adoravit Is^ael Deum
conversus ad lectuli caput. Genesis 47. v. 31.

Ribera in c. 11. ad Heb. Abulensis, Et alii hic.

His ita transactis nunctatum and Joseph quod aegrotaret pater fuus, qui
assumptis d^oobus filiis Manasse and Ephraim, ire perrexit. Genesis 48. v. 1.


but it was only done to the end, that if Pharaoh should hinder him from
rendering this duty unto his Father, he might answer, he was engaged thereto by
Oath.

After this protestation Jacob adored God, first turning his head toward the
beds side, where Joseph stood, and directly toward the East, because it was in
this place, they were accustomed to offer Sacrifices and erect Altars, or
rather to cast some look toward the Land of promise on which he had already
placed all his hopes and desires.

Afterward Jacob chancing to fall sick, the news of of it was presently
brought unto Joseph, who immediately took with him his two Sons, Manasses and
Ephraim, to see him once more, that they might receive his last Benediction.
Dictumque est Seni: Ecce filius tuns Joseph venit ad te. Qui confortatus sedit
in lectulo. Genesis 48. v. 2.

Et ingresso ad se ait: Deus omnipotens apparuit mihi in Luza, quae est in
terra Chanaan, benedixitque mihi. Genesis 48. v. 3.

Et ait: Ego te ougebo, and multiplicabo, etc. Genesis 48. v. 4.

Duo ergo filti tui, qui nati sunt tibi in terra Aegypti, antequam bue venirem
ad te, mei erunt. Ephraim and Manasses, sicut Ruben and Simeon reputabuntur
mihi. Genesis 48. v. 4.

Reliquos autem quos genueris post eos, tui erunt, and nomine fratrum suorum
vocabuntur in possessionibus suis. Genesis 48. v. 6.




At the report of Joseph's return, Jacob more vigorous than before, raised
himself half up in his bed, and perceiving him entering, he said unto him;

My Son, it is necessary thou should know that the Omnipotent God of my
forefathers appeared unto me in Luz, which is in the Land of Chanaan, to give
me his benediction, and to assure me I shall be the Father of a long posterity,
and that one day my Children shall be heirs of this most blessed Land. I adopt
then thy two Children which were born in Egypt, before I came into these parts,
and I will have them from hence forth reputed no less mine than Ruben and
Simeon.

Thereby Joseph came to know that Manasses and Ephraim should have their Tribes
a part, and their share of succession in Chanaan, as well as Ruben and Simeon,
and his other Children, which was the cause he farther said unto Joseph, that
if he chanced to have other Children, they should be only in such sort esteemed
his, as not to have other Tribe than that of Manasses and Ephraim, and no other
share of the Possessions in Chanaan.

Rachel was not forgotten in his Will, for Jacob having spoken of his Children,
remembered her, and says to Joseph;

My Son, I adopt thy Children: Mibi enim quando venicham de Mesopotamia mortua
est Rechel in terra Chanaan in ipso itinere, and sepelivi eam juxta viam
Euphratae quae alio nomine appellabatur Bethlem. Genesis 48. v. 7 Vatabius hic.
for Rachel by whom I might yet have had more Children dyed too soon for me,
and for the good of my whole Family. It was at my return from Mesopotamia, in
the Land of Chanaan, and very near unto Ephrata, that is Bethelem, where she is
interred.

It is probable, that Jacob might have said more, and that he might have stayed
longer upon the sad memory of his dear Rachel, if at the same time he had not
had a glimpse of Manasses and Ephraim, whom Joseph presented to him, Adduc,
inquit, eorad me, ut benedicam illis. Genesis 48. v. 9.

Oculi enim Israel caligabant p^ae nimia senectute, and cl^^e videre non
poterat. Genesis 48. v. 10.

Applicitosque ad se de osculatus est, and circumplexus eos. Genesis 48. v. 10.


to receive a second time his Benediction.

I know not whether Joseph, and all that were Witnesses of this interview could
restrain their tears: But to speak the truth, it was a spectacle worthy of
compassion to behold Jacob upon his deathbed, striving to see the two Children
of Joseph, who drew near him, and whom he could hardly have known, if Joseph
had not named them, and assured him, that they were his Children. Then both of
them cast themselves gently on his body, which Jacob feeling, he kissed them
one after the other, and then having embraced them, he turned his eyes toward
Joseph, and said unto him.

My Son, Dixit ad filium suum, non sum fraudatus aspectu tuo: insuper ostendit
mihi Deus semen tuum. Genesis 48. v. 11.
what a happiness is it for me to see thee before I dye? Ah! surely I never
could have believed it: But at last he that never forsakes those who serve him,
has hitherto preserved thee, and it is he who at this instant makes me enjoy
the sight of thee, and thy Children.

Jacob notwithstanding, did not suffer Manasses and Ephraim to depart, but held
them still in his arms and on his breast, until Joseph, who feared they might
disease him, Cumque tulisset eos Joseph 'de gremio patris adoravit pronus in
terram. Genesis 48. v. 12.

Et posuit Ephraim ad dexteram suam, id est, ad sinistram Israel, Manassen vero
in sinistra sua ad dextram scilicet patris, applicuitque ambes ad eum. Genesis 48.
v. 13.

Benedicitque Jacob filiis Joseph and ait, Genesis 48. v. 15.


Which being done, he cast himself on his knees near Jacobs bed to adore his
God, and to thank him for the favors his goodness had imparted to him.
Afterward, perceiving that this holy man, by little and little drew near his
end, he set Ephraim at his right side, and Manasses at his left, to place
Manasses on the right hand of Jacob, Ephraim on the left. But Jacob who saw
less with the eyes of the body, than with those of his soul, and who considered
not so much the present as the future, holding his arms across, laid his right
hand on the head of Ephraim, who was the youngest, and his left on Manasses,
who was the eldest, and blessed them both in this manner. Deus in cujus
conpsecta ambulaverunt pitres mei, etc. Genesis 48. v. 15.


I beseech with my whole heart, that God in whose presence my Forefathers,
Abraham and Isaac, have walked, that God who nourished me from my tendrest
youth even to this day, Angelus qui eruit me de cunctis malis, benedicat pueris
istis, and invocetur super eos nomen meum. etc. Genesis 48. v. 16.
that Angel who has guarded me from all evil, to vouchsafe a blessing unto
these two Children. Let my name, and that of my forefathers Abraham and
Jsaack, be earnestly called upon for them, and may they have large increase
upon the earth.

Joseph grew sad, Videns autem Joseph quod posuisset pater suus dexteram manum
super caput Ephraim graviter accepit, etc. Genesis 48. v. 17.
seeing his father laid his right hand on the head of Ephraim, and endeavored
to put it on that of Manasses, advertising Jacob that he had taken the younger
for the elder brother.

But Jacob answered, Qui renuens ait, Scie fili mi, scio, and iste quidem erit
in populos and multiplicabitur: sed frater ejus minor, mayor erit illo, and
semen illius crescet in gentes. Genesis 48. v. 19.

Benedixitque eis in tempore illo dicens: in te benedicetur Israel, atque
dicetur, faciat tibi deus sicut Ephraim and Manasse. constituitque Ephraim ante
Manassen. Genesis 48. v. 20.

Et ait ad Joseph filium suum: En ego morior and erit Deus vobiscum, reducetque
vos ad terram patrum vestrorum. Genesis 48. v. 21.

Do tibi partem unant extra sratres tuos quam tuti de manu Amorrhae^in gladio
and arcu meo. Genesis 48. v. 22.


that he well knew what he did, and that for the rest Manasses should be
powerful in people, and in all sorts of possessions. But that Ephraim though
he were the least and youngest should exceed him, and have a larger posterity
than he.

In effect, he gave them his benediction, and preferring the youngest before
the eldest he finished this Ceremony in saying,

Israel shall be blessed in you, and when Parents shall give their blessings
unto their Children, they shall beseech God to multiply them as he has
Multiplied those of Ephraim and Manasses.

After this Jacob began to turn himself toward Joseph to advertise him that he
was now dying, and that for the rest God would be with him and his Children,
and would bring them all back into the Country of their fore fathers.

In fine, he gave unto Joseph, as a birthright above his Brethren, the Land he
had in Sichem which was one of the fairest parts of his possessions, and which
he particularly affected, as having formerly acquired it by force of arms from
the Amorites.

CHAP. XI. The last Will and Testament of Jacob, containing the benedictions
given unto the twelve Patriarks.
AMongst all the exercises of life there is not any one more necessary and more
important than timely to learn the manner of dying pioussy. Death lays every
where ambushes for us, and only waits for the hour to surprise us: It is a
difficult Art to die well.
But there is scarce any person who can dispose himself to expect it, by reason
the bare thought of it uses to terrify us. Nevertheless we must grow
familiar with this cruel tyrant, and perform very often during life what we
could wish lay in our power to do at the hour of death, otherwise we find
our selves surprised, when this Merciless executioner takes a trumpet in his
hand to sound the last retreat which must be made unto the tomb. Then is it
that the loudest talkers become dumb, and that the boldest are wholly out of
countenance, and many in this state are so far from thinking on others, as they
hardly know themselves.

It is a great comfort nevertheless, Vocavit autem Jacob filios suos, and ait
eis: congregamini ut annuntiem quae ventura sunt vobis in diebus novissimis.
Genesis 49. v. 1.
to have words and blessings in our mouths even to the last gasp, and to be
able to dye like Jacob, who drawing near his passage, called together his
Children, and particularly remonstrated unto each of them in these terms, the
condition and course wherein their affaris should be in ti meto come.

Ruben my Eldest Son, Ruben primogenitus, tu fortitudo mea, and principium
doloris mei: prior in donis, major in imperio. Genesis 49. v. 3.
I gave thee life being in the flower and strength of my age, thou art the
first, for whom I had those cares and disquiets which fathers commonly have in
the education of their Children: Thy advantages and privileges ought to be
greater than those of others, and thy posterity more powerful than that of thy
brethren.

Nature made thee their Chief, and their Prince: Effusus eis sicut aqua, non
crescas: quia ascendisti cubile patris tui, and maculasti stratum cjus. Genesis
49. v. 4.
But the Justice of God who never leaves a Crime unpunished, will revenge that
which thou have committed in staining my bed; And as odours which are tainted,
lose their virtue; so the effusion and prostitution thou have made of thy self
will occasion that thy race and posterity shall never be considerable, either
by Authority, Number, or Riches.

Simeon and Levi, impious Warriors, Simeon and Levi siatres: vasa iniquitatis
bellantia. Genesis 49. v 5.
whom a blind fury has rendered, more like than nature, and blood, you are the
Instruments and Authors of the unjust and bloody slaughter of the Sichemites:
In consilium little non veniat anima mea, etc. Genesis 49. v. 6.
I did not approve the effects of your cruel revenge, when it was executed, I
then condemned it, and shall condemn it now dying, and detest the fury and
brutish perfidiousness which made you surprise and massacre Hemor, Sichem, the
Father and Son with their Subjects; Maledictus suror eorum, quia pertinax, and
indignatio little, quia dura: d^vidam vos in Jacob, and dispergam eos in Israel.
Genesis 49. v. 9.
The disclaim I made of your cruelty shall not be without effect: Because you
have conspired to do mischief, you shall be for ever separated; So obstinate
and inveterate hatred as yours deserves a lasting chastisement, which will take
from you all the power of re-uniting your selves to execute your wicked designs.

Juda, Juda, te laudabunt fratres tui: manus tua in cervicibus inimicorum
tuorum, adorabunt te filii patris tui. Genesis 49. v. 8.
you shall be praised and honored by your Brethren, they shall adore and
acknowledge you for their King, you shall triumph over your enemies, and be
more dreadful than a young Lion whom hunger excites to the rage which is
natural to him; you shall march with your victorious Army, to make the
Usurpers feel that they shall not long enjoy their tyrannical Conquests. The
happiness inseparably fastened to your Arms shall render you formidable, when
you are in peace, and you shall have no neighbor so bold, as to declare war
against you, to regain what you have taken from him.

The Crown shall not depart out of the house of Juda, and it shall give Kings
unto Judea, even till the coming of the Messiah, Non auferetur Sceptrum de
Juda, etc.
who will be the desire and general expectation of all Nations in the World.
This great Prince shall unite the Jews and Gentiles, Donec veniat qui mittendus
est: and ipse erit expectatio gentium. Genesis 49. v. 10.
and these two people shall make but one. It is true that this union shall cost
him dear: for having but one deportment and countenance, to which all people
shall bear respect, and invest him with the power of commanding them as a
Sovereign, his eyes being full of splendor and lightnings, Pulcriores sunt
oculi ejus vino, and dentes ejus lacte candidiores. Genesis 49. v. 12.
He being the most beautiful, and most accomplished of all men, will not rest
satisfied by his incomparable attractives to vanquish hearts, and linck them
fast together; but will mingle an effusion of his Divine blood to perfect this
alliance, Vide Tertul. S. Ambros. ubi de benedictione patriae, c. 4. and S.
Chrysostom.
and will die in blood his sacred body, which as a Robe and precious Mantle shall
cover the wonders of the Divinity personally united to him.

Zabulon shall dwell on the Seashore, Zabulon littore maris babitabit, and in
statione navium pertingens usque ad Sidonem. Genesis 49. v. 13.

Issachar asinus fortis, accubans inter termi nos, Genesis 49 v. 14. Vidit requiem
quod esset bona, and terram quod optima, etc. Genesis 49. v. 15.


and in the Havens which are on the coasts of Palestine, even as far as the
City of Sidon.

Issachar shall make choice of a more happy and quiet life, he shall delight in
Tillage, and the fertile land which shall fall to his lot he shall cultivate
with no less peace than perseverance. His pains shall not be fruitless, and in
the Continent he shall have all the advantages of those Countries which lie
near the Sea, making an exchange with them of its Corn and fruits for those
Merchandises which come from remote Nations: He will impart the riches which
agriculture shall afford him, unto those who shall govern the Republic, and
purchase his repose by the Contributions he shall voluntarily give for the
maintenance of such as bear Arms, so long as he shall live quietly in the heart
of his Possessions. Dan judicabit populum suum, etc. Genesis 49. v. 16.
Dan shall be the Judge of his people, as well as of the other Tribes of
Israel; Dan by surprise shall ruin his enemies, Fiat Dan coluber in via,
cerastes in semite, mordens ungulas equi, ut cadat ascensor ejus retio. Genesis
49. v. 17.
even as Snakes which hide themselves on the sides of highways to destroy
Passengers, who stand not sufficiently on their guard; or as that crafty
Serpent which bites the hoof of a Horse, to make his rider fall, and to infect
him with his venom, when he is thrown on the ground. Notwithstanding the
artifices men may use to defend themselves; I shall never think, that all their
forces, and wiles, can equal the effects of the Protection which the Messiah
will give us: Salutare tuum expectabo do nine. Genesis 49. v. 18.
I shall always expect it, and never believe that there is any assurance
comparable to that which we shall receive from the affection and power of this
great Prince.

Gad having received his share, Gad accinctas praeliabitur ante eum; and ipse
acciugitur retrorssum. Genesis 49. v. 19.
shall march in the head of his Brethren, to establish them in their
Possessions, and returning unto his Territories laden with Booty, he will make
his retreat in so good order, as he shall not be disturbed by his enemies.

Asser shall possess the portion of Palestine which looks toward the Sea; Aser
pinguis panis ejus, and praebebit delicias Regibus. Genesis 49. v. 20.
this Land does produce all things desirable for the entertainment and comfort
of life, both Corn and Fruits are there so excellent, as they will serve for
delicacies unto Kings.

Nephtali will testify his courage, Cervus emissus, and dans eloquia
pulcritudinis. Genesis 49. v. 21.
casting himself into dangers, to defend his Brethren, and shall give them
cause to admire and praise him. He will break all the obstaeles which shall
oppose his generous design, as a wounded Heart, which though timorous by nature,
Vide Caietanum and Lipoman.
breaks yet sometimes through the toyls of Hunters, and from the cruel teeth
of Dogs, to defend that life which they would violently take from him.

The felicity of Joseph shall still increase, Filius accrescens Joseph, and
decorus aspectu, filiae discurrerunt super murum. Genesis 49. v. 22.

Sed exasperaverunt eum, and jurgati sunt, invideruntque Illi habentes jacula.
Genesis 49. v. 23.


his beauty is so extraordinary, as Ladies esteemed themselves happy to see
him, and they placed themselves at Doors and Windows to look on him as he
passed through the streets: Nevertheless, such as ought most to love him, have
conspired his ruin, and transported by a furious passion of envy sought to
hinder the effects of the promises of Heaven. But as the designs of men cannot
alter the decrees and ordinances of God: So Innocence proved stronger than
malice, and the Chains wherewith his unchaste Mistress had laden him, and the
slavery to which his own Brethren had reduced him, were the means whereof
Divine Providence made use to make him King of Egypt, and to secure and
preserve the goods and lives of those who wished his death.

My most dear Son, Deus patris tui erit adjutor tuus. Genesis 49. v. 25.
the God whom thy Father adoreth, will always assist thee; he will replenish
thee with benedictions, and cause the most favorable Dews to fall upon thy
Lands; he will cause streams of living water to flow into their bosom and
bowels, for the refreshing, and inlivening thy Roots, Plants and Trees; Thou
shall have a particular blessing in thy Children, Vide Lyram, Abul. Per.
Rupert. Cajet. Lip.
and their great numbers shall manifest that thou art the object of the dearest
and most exquisite Providence which God declares to have for men.

Thy Father has been more favored than his Ancestors, thou shall enjoy both
their favors and mine, and the blessing I promise thee shall never cease,
until God having given himself unto men in the person of the Messiah, shall no
longer testify his particular affection toward his Friends in giving them
perishable goods. All these graces and favors are due unto thy virtue which
has conserved its self without stain, and has also rendered thee as
considerable amongst thy Brethren, as the Nazarites who peculiarly consecrate
themselves unto the service of the Divine Majesty.

Benjamin as a ravenous Woolf shall in the morning devour his prey, B^njamin
^upus rapax mane comedet praedam, and vesyere divid^ spolia. Genesis 49. v. 27.

Vide Procop. Eusebius. Theodoret. Abul. etc. Er praecepit eis dicens: Ego
congregor ad populum meum, sepelite me cum patribus in spelunca duplici quae
est in agro Ephron Hethaei. Genesis 49. v. 29.


and in the evening share and divide the Spoils.

Behold the Benedictions Jacob by heavens direction gave to each of his
Children. He afterward recommended unto them the Burial of his body in the
Tomb of his Forefathers, and having exhorted them to remain constant in the
service of God, dyed peaceably in his bed.

Can we represent unto our selves an end more sweet and quiet? I well know that
the like deaths are seen in sacred Houses. I have seen such with mine own eyes,
and with my ears I have heard of some Jacobs who have closed their mouths with
Benedictions and Canticles of Victory. I have seen standers by, bathed in
tears, and yet their hearts filled with Joy, receiving the last words and
benedictions of dying men. I know that the like effects are sometimes seen in
the world; and there have bin some Kings and Queens, Fathers and Mothers, Men
and Women, of all states and conditions, who have spoken on their deathbeds
with so much Judgment and force of spirit, as if they had been upon a Throne,
or in a Pulpit. Likewise from thence Edicts, Laws, and Lessons are heard, in
which there can be no deceit nor disguisment. But it will be granted me, that
these examples are very rare amongst those whose lives pass away in noise and
tumult: For Death is an Echo which answers life, and a night which resents the
Calm, or else the Storms of the day which preceded. And truly, what can a dying
man say, who has lived in the intriges of Fortune, in the Labyrinth of
Law-suites, in the incombrances of a Family, in an abyss of passions, and in a
hell of Miseries? after this, what can you expect from these unfortunate
Parents, and from these miserable friends, which cannot say any thing to
themselves, but that they are hopeless? Ah! what farewell? what separation?
and what kind of death?

Children of Saints, predestinate Souls, happy Successors of Jacob, fall not
into these precipices, but follow the way and tracks which are marked out to
you by your forefathers. And thou, my dear Reader, build at least an Oratory
in thy heart, and make a Temple of thy house, and an Altar of thy Bed, where
thou may offer unto God, what thou have, what thou art, and what thou have
been. In fine, have then words in thy mouth for thy self, for thy Children and
Friends, to the end having given thy benediction to those that have deserved
it, thou may obtain the blessing of God, who is thy Father, thy King, thy
Maker, and thy last end.

CHAP. XII. The Lamentations of Joseph for the Death of Jacob.
NAture uses to exact duties which cannot be denied her without Injustice, and
some kind of cruelty. A man must have the soul of a Tiger to be devoyd of grief
and resentment for the miseries of a Parent or friend, then chiefly when he
either hears them related, or is a witness of them. I know there are shameful
defects and misbeseeming a good courage; and sometimes tears and sighs serve
but to vent weaknesses, and to betray the constancy we ought to have: But very
often there are Tributes which must be paid unto love and piety; And such
tears as these (says St. Ipsae dulces lacrimae sunt, ipsi fletus iucundi,
quibus restinguitur ardor animo and quasi relaxatus evaporat affectus. Ambr.
Ambrose) quench the ardors of our Souls, and cause our sincerest and most
tender affections sweetly to evaporate by our eyes. These are generous tears
and impositions unto which the noblest persons are most obliged. For my part I
laugh at certain slight Philosophers who study to show in their Stoicall
countenances, and hold as the Principle of their Academy, That we must be
always equal without distinguishing, That there is a certain equality, more
proper to a marble Statue, than to a reasonable man. The wisest Philosophy has
far better Maxims, and one of her Axioms is, that There are times and
occasions which require sentiments of Joy, and other seasons which demand
expressions of grief. And truly were it a hansome thing to see a Son with a
smiling countenance and dry eyes at the Tomb of his father? It would be a
strange spectacle to see him in the midst of a banquet, and at a Ball, when his
Father is laid in the earth; and I would willingly know amongst what nations,
and in what sect, there are laws which dispense with what is due unto the
sweet memory of the living and dead. Above all, the custom of funerals, and
those ceremonies which, Quod cernens Joseph, ruit super faciem patris flens,
and deosculans eum, Genesis 50. v. 1.

Praecepitque servis suis medicis, ut aromatibus condirent patrem Genesis 50. v. 2.

Flevitque eum Aegyptus septuaginta diebus. Genesis 50. v. 3.

Dixitque ei Pharao: ascend and sepeli patrem tuum sicut adjuratus es. Genesis
50. v. 6.

Quo ascendente ierunt cum coomnes senes domus Pharaonis, cunctique majores
natu terrae Aegypti. Genesis 50. v. 7.

Domus Joseph cum fratribus suis, etc. Genesis 50. v. 8.

Habuit quoque in comitatu currus and equites, etc. Genesis 50. v 9. Absque
parvulis, and gregibus atque armentis quae dereliquerant in terra Gesson. Genesis
50. v 8.

Veneruntque ad aream Atad quae sita est trans Io^danem, etc. Genesis 50. v. 10.

ubi celebrantes exequias planctu magno atque vebementi impleverunt septem
dies. Genesis 50. v. 10.

Reversusque est Joseph in Aegyptum cum fratribus suis. Genesis 50. v. 14.

Quo mortuo timentes sratres ejus, and mutuo colloquentes: ne forte memor sit
injuriae quam passus est, and reddut nobis omne malum quod fecimus. Genesis 50. v.
15.


though very different, have been always observed in like accidents, are so
just and ancient, as we cannot condemn them without accusing the first men in
the World, and those eminent persons who have been the Masters of virtue and
piety.

Witness Joseph, who having received in his bosom, and into his mouth, the
last groans of his father, cast himself on his body, and whilst he watered his
face with tears, procured Physicians to imbalm him according to the custom of
the Egyptians, who spent seaventy days in mourning for Jacob. After which
Joseph asked and obtained leave of Pharaoh to conduct him unto the Monument he
had bought in Canaan, to which he was followed by the old men of Egypt, and by
all the most ancient Officers of the kings house. I find not in what rank
Joseph's brethren went, but they were accompanied thither by a great number of
Chariots and horsemen, which joined together, made up a great Convoy, although
all the Children and troops had been left in the land of Gessen.

In fine, they all ariv'd at a spacious place which was beyond Jordan, which
the Hebrews called Atad, by reason it was covered all over with Thorns, and
which now bears the name of Betagla, which is as much to say, the lodging of
the circle, because the Children of Jacob set themselves there in order to
perform the Ceremonies of the funeral, and to deplore the loss of their
father with the greatest demonstration of sorrow, all which was performed in
the court of Atad, and in this house of tears, for the space of seven entire
days. Afterward Joseph with his brethren, and all the rest of the Convoy,
returned into Egypt, to settle themselves in their usual employments. Now it
was there, where fear which is the inseparable companion of a guilty soul, had
leisure again to agitate these poor wretches, who persuaded themselves that
having lost their Father, there remained nothing for them but a Judge in the
person of their Brother, who had motives powerrull enough to revenge himself of
their disloyalty. Mandaverunt ei dicentes: pater tuus praecepit nobis antequam
moreretur, Genesis 40. v. 16.

Vt haec tibi verbis illius diceremus: obsecro, ut obliviscaris sceleris
fratrum tuorum, etc. Genesis 50. v 17.

Quibus auditis flevit Joseph. Genesis 50. v. 17. Veneruntque ad cum fratres sui,
and proni adorantes in terram, dixerunt, servi tui sumus. Genesis 50. v. 18.

Quibus ille respondit: Nolite timcre; Ego pascam vos and parvulos vestros,
etc. Genesis 50. v. 21.


Some remedy must then be found to oppose the danger which threatened them. To
this effect they chose one amongst them, who should go unto Joseph, and whose
Commission was to inform him, that Jacob their deceased Father of happy memory
had commanded them at his death to tell him, that he desired him to forget what
was past, and they all conjured him in his name to grant this favor.

Which Joseph hearing, he began to weep, and his tears served to assure his
Brethren, who cast themselves at his feet, taking at the same time the boldness
of their own accord to demand that Pardon from him, which they had already
solicited by the means of Benjamin, or some other, who they believed would be
more acceptable to him; adding besides, that they were all his Servants, and
resolved to live and die in that quality: To which Joseph answered, that they
need not fear any thing, that he would take care of them, and of all their
Children, and for the rest he would not be less pitiful toward them than
God, whose example he followed, and who had changed all their evil purposes
into favorable occasions to procure his good, having also rarsed him, as it
were, on a Throne of honor, and power, by the same Arms they had used to
precipitate him into an Abyss of miseries and calamities.

Behold the sense of a noble Soul, and of a generous courage, whose tears did
not resemble those of Crocadiles, nor such kindnesses as are used by Apes which
strangle in flattering, and in shedding feigned tears.

Revenge is only proper unto weak minds, whereas Clemency resides always in a
strong spirit. Cruelty is a Tyranny, and meekness a true Empire: To want the
power of retaining any bad resentment is to be invulnerable; And those souls
also on the contrary, are always covered with Wounds and Ulcers which keep in
their hearts desire of revenge, and cannot grant a Pardon. This is more
deplorable, in respect neither God nor Man have any compassion for those who
cannot afford it unto the miseries of others: And on the contrary, either soon
or late, there are treasures of graces for those on whom good nature or virtue
bestows those amiable inclinations, which are mortal enemies to revenge and
cruelty.

And it was, I assure my self, upon this occasion, and to gratify Joseph for
the good entertainment he had given his Brethren, and the sweet correspondeney
he endeavored to hold with them in despite of all the bad Offices he had
received from them, that all the powers of Heaven and Earth combined to render
him perfectly happy, almost during the whole course of his life, which reached
to one hundred and ten years, Vixitque centum december annis. Genesis 50. v. 22.

Et vidit Ephraim sibios usque ad tertiam generationem. Genesis 50. v. 22.

Et conditus aromatibus, reposi^us est loculo in Aegypto. Genesis 50. v. 25.


at the end of which he saw himself environed by his Children, and by his
Childrens Children, even to the third generation, who at last rendered him all
the same duties which they had done unto Jacob: for being dead, they imbalmed
him, and his bones a long time after were carried into the Land of promise,
according to the desire of this great Patriarch, from whose end, as from that
of his forefathers, we ought to conclude, that it is good to lead a virtuous
life, that we may dye holily. We dye every hour, and our life is a living
death, which consumes of it self: our looks, our vows, our words, our gestures,
and all our motions are steps which conduct us to the Tomb.

THE HOLY HISTORY, FIRST TOME MOSES.
FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. His Birth and Education.
THe prodigious increase of the people of Israel, Filii Israel erevtrunt, and
quasi germinantes multiplicati sunt, ac roborati nimis impleverunt terram.
Exodus 1 v. 7.

Creverunt Hebraei divinitus foecundata eorum multitudine. Aug. lib. 18. de
Civit. c. 7.


in the Land of Egypt, after the decease of Jacob, and of all his Children, was
not only a work of Nature, but a miraculous effect of Divine Providence, which
inkindled the Ashes of these blessed Patriarcks, and intended that their Tombs
should be an unexhaustible Spring of life and immortality.

Egypt nevertheless was too much blinded to penetrate these secrets; Surrexit
interea Rex novus super Aegyptum, qui ignorabat Joseph. Exodus 1. v. 8.

Et ait ad populum suum: Ecce populus filiorum Israel multus, and fortior nobis
est. Exodus 1. v. 9.


And Joseph being dead, he that took the reigns of the Empire not knowing the
services, this wise Minister of State had rendered unto his Predecessors for the
space of fourscore years, seeing that the Israelites went on daily increasing
in forces and men, resolved to humble and suppress them, lest in time they
might chance to join themselves with the enemies of his Kingdom, and form a
Party against the State.

Nevertheless, Venite, sapicuter opprimamus eum, ne forte multiplicetur, and si
ingruerit contra nos bellum, addatur inimicis nostris, expugnatisque nobis
egrediatur de terra. Exodus 1. v. 10.
they were like those Grains which shoot out of the Earth, and bear a thousand
little Ears, which the Wind, Sun, and Rain beat not down, but to make new
productions. But this young Pharaoh who began to Reign, has not eyes quick
enough to discern these mysteries, and his hand, though most powerful, was yet
too weak to destroy this fair Nation.

Jacob is dead, Joseph is deceased, and this illustrious Colony which left
Canaan to come into Egypt, has followed Abraham and Isaac, They are no more,
but the Children of their Children, and their Posterity shall never end.

In vain is it to cast them into servitude, Quanto ^ue opprimebant eos, tan^o
magis multiplicabantur, and crescebant. Exodus 1. v. 12.
to impose on them a yoke a thousand times more cruel than death, and to load
them with Irons like Victims: These punishments, this bondage, and all these
chains serve but to reinforce their Bodies; and me thinks the sweat which drops
from their Foreheads in the midst of their pains, is converted into the Juice
of Life, which renders them marvellously fruitful.

Have you not seen a River which issues imperiously after it had passed
through the midst of Rocks? There are no banks, nor limits, nor any obstacles
which it draws not a long with it; It swells, the more it is restrained, and
commonly its highest elevations grow from its greatest falls. Thus the people
of Israel, little in their Birth, and as a little Rill in its source,
increases, the more it is restrained; and like an impetuous torrent, which
has broken its Banks, Oderuntque filios Israel Aegyptii, and affligebant,
illudentes eis. Exodus 1. v. 13.

Atque ad amaritudinem perducebant vitam eorum, operibus duris luti, lateris,
omnique famulatu, quo in terrae operibus premebantur: Exodus 1. v. 14.


it extends it self in a prodigious manner.

This was the occasion of the mortal hatred the Egyptians conceived against all
this Nation. This was also the cause, why the Amenophits, newly ascended on the
Throne of Pharaoh, fearing to be carried away with his people by this
Inundation, established merciless Officers which used the Hebrews like
Gally-slaves, giving them neither truce nor repose, in their painful and
dishonorable employments, wherein they would have perished with hunger, thirst,
and toil, if God had not preserved and rendered them, as I have said, more
vigorous and strong than before.

This was the cause, Dixit autem Rex Aegypti obstetricibus Hebraeorum, etc.
Exodus 1. v. 15.

Praecipiens eis: Quando obstetricabitis Hebraeas, and tempus p^rtus advenerit,
si masculus suerit, interficite eum, si foemina, reservate. Exodus 1. v. 16.
Timuerunt antem obstetrices Deum, and non fecerunt juxta praeceptum Regis
Aegypti, sed conservabant mares. Exodus 1. v. 17.

Quae responderunt, non sunt Hebraeae sicut Aegyptiae mulieres; ipsae caim
obstetricandi habent scientiam, and priusquam veniamus ad eas, pariunt. Exodus
1. v. 19.


why this young Tyrant resolved to stifle children, issuing forth of their
Mothers Wombs, and to force away Fruits, even in their Bud, because he could
not destroy their Fathers; and since these Trunks were too deeply rooted, to be
plucked up.

To this effect, he caused the Midwives of Egypt to be brought before him, and
commanded them cunningly to kill all the Male-children of the Hebrews, and to
save all the Femals, when they should assist their Mothers at their Labors; but
God did not permit so horrid a cruelty: For these women, no less good than
prudent, detested so execrable and brutish a design; and notwithstanding all
the edicts and threats of Pharaoh, they resolved to preserve the Male-children,
though with the danger of their own lives: Whereupon, being interrogated, they
answered, That the women of Judea were not like the Egyptians, and that they
knew the art of their discharging their Womb, without calling any one to their
aid.

Some other expedient must be found publicly to thunder out a fury which could
not be concealed.

All Passions have degrees and ways to arrive unto excess, and amongst others
Fury is a Ball of Fire, and rises from the bottom of the Water, which is
inkindled in the Cloud, and afterward grown great, it thundreth, it lightneth,
and at length makes a hideous noise, to reduce into ashes all that it
encounters.

There is nothing more furious than a Tyrannical power, which fears some
danger: It is a Lion which casts himself against Javelins; it is a Dragon which
flies into the midst of Flames; a Tiger which seeks his life and prey in the
bosom of Death; and a Comet which apprehends least these shining vapors, and
these beautiful Exhalations which form its Diadem, may find their last
dissolution.

It is no wonder then, if Pharaoh fearing the Israelites, Praecepit ergo Pharao
omni populo suo, dicens: Quidquid masculini sexus natum fuerit, in flumen
proficite, quidquid faeminini reservate. Exodus 1. v. 22.
and failing in his project of stifling them in their Mothers Wombs, resolved,
for the execution of this cruel Design, to make use of the most merciless of
all the Elements, which will one day demand Justice, and complain for having
been the Instrument of so many Cruelties.

The River Nilus will raise her Waves, and her bloody Billows will accuse this
detestable Pharaoh, who commanded his Subjects to drown all the Male-children
which should be born of the Israelites, and suffer the Females to live as
incapable of prejudicing him, and from whom the Egyptians might reap some
benefit. This Decree then is published in all places, and it is executed at the
cost of the lives of these poor Infants. It was indeed a strange spectacle to
see the World drowned under the waters of the deluge; but Husbands at least had
the company of their Wives, Fathers, and Mothers, held their Children by the
hand, Servants of both Sexes followed their Masters and Mistresses, and enjoyed
this consolation, being all Criminals, to receive a common punishment, and not
to survive one another: But here Innocents must be condemned to die, and Nurses
are constrained to drown their Infants, or at least to see them violently taken
from their Bosoms to be swallowed up by the Water, before they had tasted their
Milk, or felt the sweetnesses of Life.

Every where desolate Mothers, and despairing Fathers were heard, who looked
upon Egypt as the Sepulcher of their Families, and of the name of Israel: But
God remembered his promise, and permitted not this Nation, which in number was
to equal the Sands of the Sea, to serve for food unto Fishes, and unto the
Waters of Nilus. This sage Conductor of the people, whom he had taken into his
protection, Egressus est post haec vir de domo Levi, and accepit uxorem stirpis
suae. Exodus 2. v. 1.

Quae concepit, and peperit filium, and videns eum elegantem, abscondit tribus
mensibus. Exodus 2. v. 2.

Cumque jam celare non ^osset, sumpsit fiscellam scirpeam, and linivit eam
bitumine ac pice, posuitque intus infantulum, and exposuit eum in carecto ripae
flumivis. Exodus 2. v. 3.


in despite of Pharaoh's Edicts, raised up a Levite, called Aaron, who took a
wife out of the same Tribe of Levi, who was delivered of a son incomparably
beautiful, and who as a Sun was to pass through the Water without wetting
himself. His Mother hid him for the space of three months, but this springing
Star casts forth so many lights, as at last she conceived her self unable any
longer to conceal them in her house, and feared lest some body might chance to
discover, and extinguish them. Now to the end this disaster might not happen,
she resolved to expose him on the Banks of Nilus, unto the mercy of the Waves,
in a Basket made of Bulrushes which she daubed with Bitumen and Pitch, with all
the affection and industry a Mother could have for a Son.

Behold, Stante procul sorore ejus, and considerante eventum rei, Exodus 2. v. 4.

Ecce descendebat filia Pharaonis, ut lavaretur in flumine, and puellae ejus
gradiebantur per crepidinem alvei, Quae cum vidisset fiscellam in papyrione,
misit unam e samulabus suis, and allatam aperiens cernensque in est parvulum
vagientem, miserta ejus ait: De infantibus Hebraeorum est hic. Exodus 2. v. 5.
and 6.


the trial of Love, and an abandonment which would have appeared inhumane, had
not merciless necessity enforced it; and if this prudent Mother, who with
horror looked on the Tomb of her Son, had not placed her eldest Daughter as a
Sentinel, who with her eyes and spirit, conducted her Brother, who floted in
this little Vessel; when behold, Pharaoh's Daughter coming with some
Attendants, which descending on the Bank of the River, perceived this Cradle
which stopped on some Moorish ground. At the same time an happy curiosity incited
her to send one of her Maids to see what it was. I know not who was this
fortunate Handmaid which had this Commission, but she brought unto her Mistress
the little Vessel, in which was enclosed the Honor and Prosperity of the people
of Israel. Yet at first there only appeared a child weeping, in its swaddling
clothes, and whose bare aspect moved compassion in this good Princess, who
perceived that it was an effect of her Fathers Edicts, C^i soror pueri: Vis,
inquit, ut vadam, and vocem tibi mulierem Hebraeam, etc. Exodus 2. v. 8.
and some remnant of Egypts misfortune.

The Sister then of this found Infant, who expected nothing less than such an
encounter, asked whether they would think it fit for her to bring a Nurse for
him: Respondit: Vade. Perrexit puella, etc. Exodus 2. v. 8.

Ad quam locuta fi^ia Pharaonis: Accipe ait puerum istum, etc. Exodus 2. v. 9.


To which the Princess having willingly condescended, she ran instantly to
find the Mother of the child, who came as unknown to present her self; and to
whom presently the Daughter of Pharaoh gave the charge of nursing up this
Infant.

O God! How profound are thy thoughts, and how impenetrable are they to
ignorant and frantic souls? When will the day come, when thou will withdraw
the veil which hides from us so many secrets? Children of men, poor Egyptians,
blind people! Will you never open your eyes to follow the light of this sage
Intelligence, which governs the World under his Laws?

Is it not the part of a Fool to endeavor to stop the course of this Primum
mobile, which moves the Heavens, and makes all the Elements to quake? Is it not
to oppose Feathers unto the Waves of the Sea, and to the Thunders of the Air?
Is it not to be more brutish, and less sensible than Beasts, which follow the
instinct and conduct of their Creator?

It is then in my Dominion (says this Lord) all Beasts of the Forests abide,
they are all mine, Sovereign Empire.
and it is in my bosom, where I see every year the beauty of the Fields
displaying it self. It is I who bear Riches and Honors in my hands, and who
place Diadems upon the heads of Kings.

All Temples then must be demolished, and all Altars rased, where we adore
casual Destinies and frightful Fortunes, which yield nothing but smoke,
obscurity, dread, and terror.

For my part, Confidence in God.
I had rather float in a Cradle of Bulrushes, and land at a good Haven, having
God for my Pilot, his Providence for my Helm, his Power for my Mast, Hopes for
my Sails, his Love for my Cordages, Faith for my Anchors, his Favor for my
sweet Gales, and good Works for my Oars, than to bury my self alive in the
midst of an Abyss, led by Pharaoh, and followed by an Army, which has neither
Assurance nor Hope, but on the Wings of the Winds, always light and mutable, in
an Element ever perfidious, amongst unskilful men, and a thousand hazards,
which blow in the Sails, and govern the Stern, during the course of so
dangerous a Navigation.

O my Savior! I am but an Orphan abandoned by Father and Mother, forsake me
not, be thou my guide upon the Billows, and in the Tempests of this life, my
Watchtower in the midst of the Night, and my secure Haven during the storm. O
my most sweet and most amiable Redeemer! do not abandon me, since I am thine
both by Nature and Grace; at least place me under the protection of thy Mother,
of thy Daughter, and of the Eldest Sister thou have given me. It is enough for
me to live in the favor of Mary, it suffices me to enjoy the least of her
regards, to be eternally happy.

Let us steer then, O my Soul, Let us steer against the current of the Water.
Pharaoh loses his labor; in despite of Egypts rage, of Hell, and of all the
Infernal Spirits, soon or late thou will land in the fortunate Island, where
thou shall be received into the Arms of the Queen of Heaven.

Yes, Desirable Lot.
my Soul, if thou do dedicate thy self unto thy God, I promise thee a Fortune
as glorious as that of this little Infant, which was exposed on the River
Nilus, and who under the amiable conduct of his Sister Mary, happened to fall
into the lap of a Queen, who adopted him for her Son. Where observe I beseech
you, Quem illa adoptavit in bocum filii, vocavitque nomen ejus Moises, dicens:
Quia de aquis tuli eum. Exodus 2. v. 10.
That it was this Royal Mouth, which for a sign she had prese rved him from the
Waters, gave him this fair name of Moses, and caused him to be educted and
taught at Court, with cares worthy of a wise Princess, and a good Mother. It
was in this Noble School he learnt all the Arts and Sciences which were then
current in Egypt, that is to say, Geometry, Arithmetic, Astronomy, Music, and
the most hidden Mysteries of the Hierogliphick, in which were found all the
rarest Secrets of natural Philosophy, Theology and Policy. Clement
Alexandrinus also believed, that he then learned Physic, and the Civil Law.
Philo adds over and above, that they called thither Masters out of Greece, as
the best versed in the Liberal Sciences, and Chaldeans came by her appointment
to teach him the way how to foretell things to come by the aspect of the
Planets; as also Assyrians to teach him their Ciphers and Characters. In fine,
it is most certain that God poured his most beautiful Lights into his mind,
and it was this great Master, who taught him the Command over Passions, and
chiefly Meekness, Love, Affability, Liberality, greatness of Courage, and all
the Virtues requisite for a person who was to be Governor of the people of
Israel, and the Lieutenant General of the Armies of the Omnipotent God.

CHAP. II. The Zeal of Moses, and his Marriage with the Daughter of the Prince
of Madian.
THe fairest Virtues would be but bodies without a Soul, Planets without light,
Excellency of Zeal and its Source.
and extinguished Torches, if these generous ardors, and those bright
irradiations which we call by the name of Zeal, and will give motion, light,
and splendor unto the most holy Actions, were taken from them. God himself was
pleased to take upon him the name of Zelot; and when he appeared unto the
Prophet under the shape of a man, having one half of his body in a flame of
fire, this was but an Image of the Zeal which inflames him. And it is for this
cause, as I believe, Sophonius said, that the world shall be devoured by the
fire of this Divine Zeal. Now it is out of this Furnace that Angels and Men
have drawn vigorous flames which inkindled in their hearts a Zeal which all the
waters of the Deluge could not have quenched; Viditque afflictionem little and
^^rum Aegyptiacum percutientem quendam de Hebraeis fratribus suis. Exodus 2. v.
11.

Cumque circumspexisset huc atque illuc, and nullum adesse vid^ss^t, percussum
Aegyptium abscondit sabalo. Exodus 2. v. 12.


and doubtless such a one was that of Moses, as he sufficiently manifested,
when seeing an Egyptian who tormented his Brethren, and was a public enemy to
his Nation, he resolved to take a just revenge on this Persecutor. It was God
who put Arms into his hands, and this brave Courage feared no danger in
undertaking a quarrel in which God, Nature, and Reason engaged him. This Zeal
was neither rash, furious, nor interessed, but prudent, and grounded upon
reason, and the public good: It was an Act of Justice by which he began to
exercise the honorable office of a Judge, and Regent over the people of Israel.

This generous and Magnanimous enterprise must not then authorize the liberty
of certain Swordmen, Zeal of Ranters.
who speak only of cutting off arms and legs. These commonly are a sort of
people, as I conceive, who have courage and boldness enough to kill a man, who
has a Scarf over his eyes, and his hands bound behind him: But I am afraid,
that in the scuffle, and in the midst of the Combat, upon a fair occasion, they
will be seen with pale looks, and making more use of their feet than their
hands.

The courage of Moses was never of this temper, and these vaporing and boasting
people draw no more advantage from it, Indiscreet Zeal.
than those who desire to pass for Zelots, and who think, under pretense of
Zeal, that every thing is lawful for them. These are indeed insupportable
Tyrants, and very often all these flaming devotions, and these ardent Zeals,
are but veils of indiscretion, pride, presumption, self-love, and a malignant
humor which seeks to subject the whole world to their will, and to complete
this, they make use of all sorts of weapons.

This is not to be Zealous, but to show ignorance in the nature of that Divine
zeal wherewith Moses was inflamed, to make its Frenzies, Furies, and most
infamous Passions, pass under so fair pretenses, and such specious Bills.

Zeal always goes on four Wheels, that is to say, True Zeal.
Justice, Fortitude, Knowledge, and Charity; and it is the Spirit of God which
moves those Wheels, and is the Conductor of this Chariot.

But you will ask me perchance, Timuit Moises and ait, quomodo palam factum est
verbum istud? Exodus 2. v. 14.

Cumque circumspexit but atque illuc, and nullum adisse vidisset, percussum
Aegyptium abscondit sabulo. Exodus 2. v. 52.


why then does Moses fear, if God puts the Sword into his hand? Why does he fly
after so just and holy an exploit? and why does he bury under the Earth a
Trophy, which he ought to present unto the eyes of Pharaoh, and his whole Court?

His fear is not servile, nor his flight unmanly and indiscreet: but he that
had given the Courage to expose himself unto danger, bestowed on him counsel
and means to avoid it; and besides, as St. Paul has noted, Fide reliquit
Aegyptum, non verilus animositatem Regis. ad. Heb. c. 1^.
it was Faith, and not the fear of Pharaoh's indignation, which obliged Moses
to leave Egypt.

It was a Stratagem of the holy Providence of God, who would leave us this
example for an Image of Courtly and worldly favors, which have their fluxes
and refluxes, like the Sea, and where such an one is adopted to day to hold the
Scepter, who shall be to morrow dis-inherited, and chased away with dishonor:
So that Moses, who after he had been treated as the Son of a Queen, is
constrained to depart out of Egypt, and to leave the Court of Pharaoh, having
no other Companions in his voyage but Miseries, Poverties, Contempts, and even
Ingratitudes from those whom he had obliged.

Behold this Favorite of the King, behold this person, who after his adoption
could expect nothing but a Scepter and Crown, abandoned and unknown in a
foreign Country; behold him a Fugitive in the Land of Madian. Alas! what will
he do? can it possible happen, that after his escape amidst the waves of
Nilus, he should perish on the Earth, and on the brink of a Well? Is there not
still some young Princess, who will take pity on him? and if such an one were
found in Egypt who was pleased to be his Mother, has not Madian some one who
will be his wife and spouse?

Moses tired with traveling, Moratus est in terra Madian, et sedit juxta
puteum. Exodus 2. v. 15 Erant autem sacerdoti Madian septem filiae quae venerunt
ad hauriendam aqueuam, and impletis canalibus adaquare cupiebant greges patris
sui. Exodus 2. v. 16.

Supervenere pastores, and ejecerunt eas, surrexitque Moises, and defensis
puellis adaquavit oves earum. Exodus 2 v. 17.

Quae cum. revertissent ad Raguel patrem suum, etc. Exodus 2. v. 18.
Responderunt, vir Aegyptius liberavit nos de manu pastorum, etc. Exodus 2. v. 19.

At ille, ubiest? inquit, vocate eum ut comedat panem. Exodus 2. v. 20.

Juravit ergo Moises quod habitaret cum co, accepitque Sephoram filiam ejus.
Exodus 2. v. 21.

Quae peperit ei filium quem vocavit Gersan, alterum vero peperit. quem vocavit
Eliezer, etc. Exodus 2. v. 22. Post multum vero temporis mortuus est Rex
Aegypti, etc. Exodus 2. v. 23.

Et audivit gemitum little, ac recordatus est faederis quod pepigit cum Abraham
Isaac and Jacob. Exodus 2. v. 24.


and weary with his journey, knows not whither to go; he is constrained to
repose himself near a well, and expects like a flower scorched by the Sun, some
breath of wind, and some drop of dew from the bosom and hand of him who
nourishes all creatures, and replenisheth all Hearts with benedictions. As he
was in this expectation he perceived seven daughters of Raguel Prince of
Madian, coming to water their flocks.

But when these illustrious Shepheardesses had drawn Water for this end, some
Shepherds, who followed them, were so bold as to attempt the taking some of it
to Water their own.

Then Moses not being able to endure so great an indignity, took upon himself
the just quarrel of these Maids, and having chased away these presumptuous
persons, he himself drew water out of this well, and gave it unto their Sheep,
which was the occasion Raguel, who was presently advertised of what had passed,
sent for him, to espouse unto him one of his daughters named Sephora, by whom
Moses had two Sons, whose names served to leave a Monument of their fathers
fortune unto posterity. For the first was called Gerza, which signified the
abode of Moses in foreign Countries, the other called Eleazar in remembrance of
the favors God had showed him, taking him out of the hands and fury of
Pharaoh, from whom in fine a long time after, death who spares no man, forced
the Crown and scepter of Egypt, which gave liberty unto the people of Israel to
testify at least by their sighs and tears the violence and injustice of the
slavery in which they had lived: for their Clamor having ascended unto heaven,
he that is always propitious to those who earnestly call upon him, showed them
that he had not forgotten the pact and agreement he had made with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob.

CHAP. III. Of the flaming Bush.
THE office of a Shepherd was anciently a noble employment. The Apprentiship
of Empires.
And Philo who has been one of the most faithful Historians of the first
ages, called it in express terms the prelude to an Empire, that is to say, to
the government of men, which ought to be the most humane and most amiable of
all others. This most wise and learned Author passed much further: for he
believed that person could be only perfect in the art of ruling, who was a good
Shepherd, and who governing flocks whose conduct is most facil, had learnt how
a man must behave himself in commanding those whose government is more
difficult and important.

It was then for this cause the first men of the world, The first shepherds of
the world.
and the most illustrious persons of the old Testament had this innocent
employment, as if God would have them pass this apprentiship, to render them
capable of ruling this people, for whom he had a particular care.

It was also for the most part in these employments which have less of Pomp and
splendor than sweetness and repose, that God who delights in humility and
peace, has chosen humble and peaceable souls to give himself unto them, and
make them both see and feel that it was his hand which had guided them in the
fields and out of the noise and tumults, to the end their minds might be better
prepared to hear and receive the laws and precepts which he intended to give
them, and that the night and obscurity of a Country and solitary life, Moises
autem pascebat oves Gethro soceri sui sacerdotis Madian, cumque minasset gregem
ad interiora deserti venit ad montem Dci Horeb. Exodus 3. v. 1.

Apparuit ei Dominus in flimma ignis de medior rubi, and videbat quod rubus
arderet and non conbureretur. Exodus 3. v. 2.


might serve to raise the luster of that glory and dignity to which he had
designed them.

So when Moses went guiding the sheep of Iethro, who was his father-in-Law, one
day as he was in the thickest part of the desert, whether the feeding were
better, or whether, as it is more probable, he had a desire to attend more
sweetly to contemplation; having at length reached the top of Mount Sina called
Horeb, he saw God in a fiery Bush, which nevertheless was not consumed in the
midst of the flames.

This was no illusion of the Understanding, The verity of the Bush.
the figure of a dream, nor any fantastical image which appeared to Moses;
But the second Person of the most holy Trinity, or at least some Angel who
represented him.

This fire likewise was a true and real fire, produced by a Divine breathing,
and by an Angelical hand, which without breaking the Laws of Nature was able
to draw this fire either out of Wood, the Air, or those stones which were about
this sacred Bush. The respect nevertheless the fire bore unto a matter which
it never spares, was not natural, there required a Miracle to stay the course
of its activity; and the rigor of those flames which issued forth of the earth
had not left this Wood unconsum'd, if He whose least glance inlightens the
stars in the heavens, and without whom the Sun and Moon would remain in
darkness, had not suspended for a while this active conjunction, and these
fertile and powerful influences, without which creatures have neither life,
motion, nor action.

Now to understand what this miracle denoted, A fair subject of En^gma.
we must presuppose that Fire has been always a Symbol of the Divinity, not
only amongst the Egyptians, Grecians, Chaldeans, and Romans, but amongst all
other people of the Earth, who have not seen any thing more conformable and
more resembling a most pure, Divine flames.
subtle, simple and luminous Nature, living only in the splendours and flames
which flow from its substance, then a most pure, subtle, simple Element, which
has no life, but amidst Lights and Ardours natural to it. It being so, this
Enigma can have no other literal sense than this.

This fire is the Image of God, and the flaming Bush a figure of the
Israelites, whom these Divine flames kept in a gentle heat, where like gold in
the Furnace, they might be purified, but not consumed.

They that will otherwise explicate this Picture, may say, that this is. God
clothed with our humane nature, and the Aeternall Word, who is all fire, who
cast himself amidst the Thorns and Brambles of a weak and mortal nature, which
could not yet be consumed by the ardours of those flames which incompass it on
all sides.

Others, with Rupertus, Theodoret, and St. Bernard, will believe, that it was a
figure of the blessed Virgin, whose Chastity, as a fiery bush, could not be
violated, although she had brought forth him, who is nothing but Splendor,
Fire, Light and Ardour. However it be, and what ever can be said of it, we must
approach nearer unto it with Moses, and behold with a holy respect this
Stupendous Vision. Cernens autem Dominus quod pergeret ad videndum, vocavit
eum de medio rubi, and ait: Moses, Moses, qui respondit, adsum. Exed. 3. v. 4.

At ill^, ne appropies, inquit, huc, solve calceamentum de ^edibus tuis, locus
enim in quo stas terra sancta est, Exodus 3. v. 5.

Et ait: Ego sum Deus patris tui, Deus Abrabam, Deus Isaac, and Deus Jacob.
Exodus 3. v. 6.

Abscondit Moises faciem sua^, non enim audebat aspicere contra Deum. Exodus 3.
v. 6




I hear already the voice of God, who calls this happy solitary person, and who
in the midst of this flaming Pyle says unto him, Moses, Moses; Lord what is
thy pleasure, answers this amiable Sheapheard, Behold me ready to do all that
thou shall command.

The sight of this Sacred Bush had surprised him, and given him a holy
Curiosity to approach, and see it near at hand: But as he advanced, God said
unto him, that the place where he set his Feet was Holy ground, that he must
put off his shoes, and besides, He that had spoken to him, was the great God
of his Father, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

At these words Moses remained so much astonished, and the sight of this Object
ravished him with so sweet a violence, as he was enforced to veil his Eyes, too
weak to endure the Splendour and Majesty of God, who seeing him so pliable and
obedient, spoke to him as a good Father, who feels his heart touched with
compassion for the miseries of his poor Children.

I have, Cui ait: Vidi afflictionem populi mei in Egypto, etc. Exodus 3. v. 7.

Et sciens dolorem ejus, descendi, ut liberem eum de manibus Aegyptiorum. Exodus
3. v. 8.

Et educam de terra illa in terram bonam, and spatiosam, in terram quae fluit
lacte and melle, ad loca Chananaei, and Hethaei, and Amorrhaei, and pheresaei,
and Hevaei, and Jebusaei. Exodus 3. v. 8.

Sed veni, and mittam te ad Pharaonem, ut educas populum meum, filios Israel,
de Aegypto. Exodus 3. v. 10

Qui dixit ei, ego ero tecum, and hoc habebis signum quod miserim te: cum
eduxeris populum meum de Aegypto, immolabis. Deo super montem istum. Exodus 3.
v. 12.


said he, looked upon with mine Eyes, and heard with my Ears the afflictions,
sighs and groans of my oppressed people in Egypt. This makes me come in Person
to help and deliver them out of the hands of those unmercifull Tyrants, who
have a long time tormented them; I will now bring them into a fruitful and
pleasant Land, into vast and spacious Countries, where they shall every where
see Springs of Milk, and streams of Honey, which will sweeten the rigor of
their past afflictions. In fine, having delivered them out of the hell of
Egypt, I will give them Terrestrial Paradises for their abode, amongst the
Chanaanites, Hethites, Amorites, Phierezites, Hevites, and Jebusites.

For this purpose Moses was chosen to go unto Pharaoh, and God promised to be
with him during the whole course of his Journey, and never to abandon him
amidst all the dangers of so perilous a Commission: In token whereof Moses
engaged himself, that at his return out of Egypt, after the deliverance of the
People of Israel, he would offer unto him a Sacrifice upon Mount Sina.

CHAP. IV. The Commission of Moses touching the deliverance of the people of
Israel.
IF we cannot easily find men who are capable of performing worthily the
command of a King, that of God cannot be done, but by the mouth of him, who is
not only his Word, and Speech, but his proper Substance; At least they ought
to have in them for the Character of this Divine employment, as Clement
Alexandrinus has observed, a lively Image of the Divinity, and to be not only
like him in Speech and expression, but even in thought and heart. They must
have also such a spirit as Moses, of whom it may be justly said, what St.
Gregory of Nice said of the Apostle Saint Paul, to wit, that his spirit was
made for extacies, Gregor. Nys. Orat. de Occur.
and elevated in raptures. Nevertheless this incomparable man excuses
himself, and the high thoughts he conceived of so eminent an employment obliged
him to reply unto the Commandment of God.

Lord what am I? Dixitque Moises ad Deum: quis sum ego ut vadam ad Pharonem,
and educam filios Israel de Aegypto? Exodus 3. v. 11.

Si dixerint mihi, Quod est nomen ejus? Quid dicam eis? Exodus 3. v. 13.


and how will thou have me speak unto thee? I am nothing, and thou art all that
can be imagined, Holy, Great, Good, and Powerful. My Voice is too weak an
Echo to cause thine to be heard, particularly in the midst of a Court, where
scarce any ear is to be found which can endure the noise and breaking forth of
thy Thunder; and then what will thou have me say unto them if they ask me
concerning thy name?

Assure them, God answered Moses, Dixit Deus ad Moisem: Ego sum qui sum ait:
sic dices filiis Israel, qui est misit me ad vos. Exodus 3. v. 14.
that I am he who am, that is to say, Eternal, Infinite, Immutable,
Independent, and absolute over all Creatures.

All that men admire in the World is nothing, and if a name be required for all
that appears with the most Pomp and Splendour, they will acknowledge that it is
to have no Being, and in effect, before the Creation of every thing they were
not, and the day will come, when Greatness whose Being is corruptible shall be
no more; And those whose Nature is not subject unto Corruption may cease, if
God resolve to withdraw his conserving arm, and his hand, which makes them what
they are. In fine, all that is, has so many mutations and vicissitudes, that
it can hardly rest a moment in the same state.

God alone is what he is; And the Gentiles had doubtless learnt the Divinity of
the Hebrews, when they speak of it in so clear and true terms.

Thales being asked upon this subject, made answer, That God had neither end,
nor beginning, and that he was from all eternity. Parmenides held the same
opinion, saying, That all was in an immovable Being; We find almost the very
same in the Timeo of Plato; and this was without doubt the mystery hidden
under the veil of that ancient Statue which bore for Device I am, what is, what
shall be, and what has been, and whose cover no man has taken off.

All the Idols of Egypt, and of the world, are but of Marble, Wood, Iron,
Brass, Copper, and at best but of Gold and Silver, which will find at length
their last dissolution. The true God is, what he is. It is for this reason the
generous Martyr St. Attalus being asked by the Tyrant, what was the name of him
he adored, made answer, That such as were many in number, had need of it, to be
distinguished from one another, but not he that was single.

Moses might say then the same unto Pharaoh, from his God, and that he Who is
has sent him to him. The same God also commanded him to say unto the Children
of Israel, Dixitque iterum Deus ad Moisen, haec dices filiis Israel: Dominus
Deus patrum vestrorum, Deus Abraham, Deus Isaac, and Deus Jacob, misit me ad
vos. etc. Exo. 3. v. 15.

Vade, and congrega seniores Israel, etc Exodus 3. v. 16.

Et audient vocem tuam, ingredierisque tu, and seniores Israel, aod Regem
Aegypti, and dices ad eum, Dominus Deus Hebraeorum vicavit nos: ibimus viam
trium dierum in solitudinem, ut immolemus Domino Deo nostro. Exodus 3. v. 18.


that he was the Lord, and God of their Forefathers, and that if they were the
true Children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, he would never forget those blessed
Patriarchs, to whom he had obliged himself for an Eternity, and that they
themselves were bound to retain him always in their memory. After this, God
again commanded Moses to go as he had appointed him, and to assemble the
Ancients of the People of Israel, and to tell them that God, who had appeared
unto him, was not ignorant of all that had passed in Egypt, that he would
speedily visit and conduct them unto a delicious Country, and abounding in all
sorts of goods and commodities.

The orders of this Commission were as follows; that Moses himself should
present them unto Pharaoh, and advertise him, Sed ego scio quod non dimittat
vos Rex Aegypti, ut eatis, nisi per manum validam. Exodus 3. v. 19.

Extendam enim manum meam and percutiam Aegyptum in cunctis mirabilibus meis,
quae facturus sum in medio little, posi haec dimittet vos. Exodus 3. v. 20.


that the God of the Hebrews had enjoined them to offer sacrifices to him, and
therefore it was his pleasure they should withdraw themselves three day journey
off, for that end.

Mean while God who knew that Pharaoh would not consent thereunto, advertised
Moses of it; and said unto him, that in fine he would force him by rigor and
the power of his arms, to permit them to depart. Now these weapons were no
other than those of the misfortunes which befell this king, and constrained him
to give liberty unto the people of Israel.

CHAP. V. The assured marks of Moses Power.
THere is nothing more charming and more powerful to Captivate men than
speech; Marvelous command of speech.
chiefly when it proceeds from a mouth full of Authority. Nevertheless, there
are some untamable spirits, and rebellious souls, who cannot be vanquished by
these weapons, and to whom all these discourses at most serve but for some time
to lull asleep their fury.

This is sometimes seen in youth, in whom the heat of their Age, and the
boiling of their blood, make so much noise, and stir up such dark tempests,
that reason is there always as it were eclips't. Oftentimes also there are
persons of experience and Authority who adore only some old Error, and admit
of no reason but the course of a long and depraved custom.

It was not without cause that Moses so much feared to speak unto the Elders of
the people, Respondens Moises ait: Non credent mihi, neque audient vocem meam.
Exodus 4. v. 1.
persuading himself they would not believe him, and that they would deride both
himself and his discourse; but God made him see Prodigies which were to be
infallible marks of his power over the minds of the most potent of his Nation.

The first was the Rod he held in his hand which became a Serpent, Dixitque
Dominus, projice eam in terram, prosicit, and versa est in colubrum. Exodus 4.
v. 3.

Daxitque Dominus rursum, mitte manum tuam in sinum tuum, quam cum misisset in
sinum protullt leprosam. Exodus 4. v. 6.

Retrahe, ait, manum tuam in sinum tuum, retraxit, and protulit iterum, and
erat similis carni reliquae. Exodus 4. v. 7.

Quod si nec duobus quidem his signis crediderint, neque audierint vocem tuam,
sum aquam fluminis, and essunde eam super aridam, and quidquid hauseris de
fluvio vertetur in sanguinem. Exodus 4. v. 9.


and afterward reassumed its former Nature.

The second appeared in his hand, which he had no sooner put into his bosom,
but it became Leprous, and afterward returning into the same place, it became
immediately like the rest of his body.

This was done by the command of him who is omnipotent, and who by these
miraculous effects would encourage Moses, and assure him, that those to whom he
was sent would give Credit unto these prodigies.

He said farther to him, that if they were so obstinate as not to believe him,
he was to take water out of the River Nilus, and that it should be infallibly
changed into blood.

Behold strange Metamorphoses, that of the Rod into a Serpent, and of the
Serpent into a Rod, signified three very different states of the people of
Israel in Egypt.

The first was whilst Joseph lived, during whose life they had possession of
the Rod, that is to say, the Scepter and government of Egypt. After that
follows the death of this great Patriark, and from that time all these poor
people were detested by the Egyptians, and like so many Serpents which crawled
on the Earth.

But at length the time will come, when Serpents shall be turned into Rods, and
be powerful in the hand of Moses.

The second Metamorphosis by the hand of Moses signifies only the various
afflictions of the Hebrews, and the different alterations of their fortuns
under the government of this wise conductor.

The third of the waters of Nilus, did foretell the death and swallowing up of
the Egyptians, under the bloody and murdering waves of the Red Sea.

Notwithstanding all this, Moses persists in excusing himself, Alt Moises:
obsecro Domine, non sum eloquens ab heri and nudius tertius: and ex quo locutus
es ad ser vum tuum, impeditioris and tardioris linguae sum. Exodus 4. v. 10.
and uses his best endeavors to discharge himself of an employment, in which
he foresaw so many difficulties, and whereof he esteemed himself so incapable.
He represented unto God the trouble he had to express himself, and how that
since the very hour he had the honor to speak unto him, he could hardly draw
one word out of his mouth.

Lord says he, I am as a Child who can form but a confused sound between his
lips: And my tongue is so heavy, and fat, as I cannot speak a word without
stammering.

Ah what! God answered him, Dixitque Dominus ad eum, quis secit os hominis? aut
quis fabricatus est mutum and surdum, videntem and caecum, non ego Exodus 4. v.
11.
am I not he who has formed men with my own hand, and put words into their
mouths? and is it not I who renders them deaf and dumb at my pleasure?

Yes truly, it is God who discovers thoughts even in the most intricate minds;
It is he, who moves and animates the tongues of Children, and there needs but a
breathing from his mouth to give life, motion, and voice unto the most
insensible bodies.

These virtues are too well known, At ille, obsecro, inquit, Domine mitte quem
missurus es. Exodus 4. v. 13.

Iratus Dominus in Meisem ait: Aaron frater tuus Levites, scio quod cloquens
sit, etc. Exodus 4. v. 14.

Loquere ad eum, and pone versia mea in ore ejus. Exodus 4. v. 15.

Virgam quoquc hanc sum in manu tua. Exodus 4. v. 17.

Abiit Moises, and reversus est ad Iethro Socerum suum, dixitque ei, vadam, and
revertar ad fratres meos in Aegyptum. Exodus 4. v. 18.


and I am astonished at Moses, who persists notwithstanding in his demand, and
who conjures God to send in his place the person whom he is to send: Now it was
doubtless the Messiah, whom he meant, but the happy moment in which he should
be born was not yet arrived; and it had been to break the orders and decrees in
Heaven to desire absolutely at that time the grant of this request. God also
grew angry with Moses, and resolving no more to hear his complaints and
excuses, he was content to say unto him, that his brother Aaron should serve
him for interpreter, to declare his will.

From that time Moses took the Rod in his hand as God had commanded him, and
then he took leave of his father-in-law, to return into Egypt whither he
carried his wife and Children.

It was upon the way God appeared to him the second time, Dixitque ei Dominus
revertenti in Aegyptum; Vide ut omnia ostenta quae posui in manu tua, sacias
coram Phara^ne; ego indurabo cor ejus, and non dimittet populum. Exodus 4. v. 21.

Ecce ego interficiam silium tuum primogenitum, Exodus 4. v. 23.


and where he advertised him of the future obduration of Pharaoh's heart; and
that after so many signs, he should persist in his obstinacy, and in the design
of detaining the Children of Israel. It was also commanded him to carry unto
this unfortunate Prince, the first news of the death of his Eldest Son, which
was to be the last dart of the revenging Justice of God, and that which was to
open the eyes of Pharaoh, and to mollify his heart for some time.

In some part of Moses Journey into Egypt, Cumque esset in itinere, in
d^ersorio, occurrit ei dominus, qui volebat occidere eum. Exodus 4. v. 24.
he was met by an Angel, who offered to kill him with the Sword he held in his
hand.

Rabbi Solomon, who had a wit more inventive for a Romance, than a true one for
a History, would induce credulous minds to believe, That this Angel had
appeared under the shape of a Dragon, and that he had devoured Moses, even to
the place of the Body where Circumcision was wont to be applied.

The two Eusebius's of Caesaria and Emissene, believed, That the cause why God
threatened and afflicted Moses, was for having brought his Wife with him, the
which might vilify his Mission, and render it suspected unto the Hebrews.

But that which followed, renders the conception of St. Isidore of Damietta, of
Rupertus and Cajetan, more probable, who believed, That it was done to punish
the disobedience, and the too long delays of Moses, to whom he had given
command to circumcise his Children: Genesis 17. v. 12. Tulit illico Sephora
acutissimam petram, and circumcidit praeputium silii sui. Exodus 4. v. 25.
For presently his Wife desiring in some sort to repair this fault, and to
withhold the hand of the Angel, took a Knife made of a Stone, to circumcise her
Son: The which being done, she kneeled down, to mitigate the wrath of this
Angel, who vanishing left the Husband and Wife in a sad astonishment; In such
sort, as Moses was not able to speak a word, Vide Cajetanum.
and Sephora beholding his eyes bathed in tears, and his hands red with blood,
could not open her mouth, but to say unto Moses, That in truth he was her
Husband, but a bloody Husband; Et ^it: Sponsus sanguinum tu mihies.
and whom she had, as it were, acquired by shedding the blood of his own
children.

Now from this example, Advice to Parents.
all Fathers of Families should learn to obey the Will of God, and testify
their Zeal and Piety, not only in their own persons, but also in the person of
their Children: Above all, they must take a Knife into their hands to cut off
all that is impure; And if men be therein less manly, that is to say, less
generous than their Wives, it is their part to take up Arms, and as I have
already said upon two or three occasions, not to spare either Fire, Sword, or
Blood; provided, it be done with Prudence, Counsel, and Piety.

CHAP. VI. The Embassy of Moses, and of Aaron into Egypt.
TO the end God may be obeyed, when he commands, Necessary Obedience.
we must march when he sets forth, and we ought not to be silent when he puts
words into our mouths to speak by his order. Kings hold their Scepters from
him, and all their Power is but a flash of light which issues from this Sun;
without which, all Thrones, Empires, and Crowns, would have neither luster,
Post haec ingressi sunt Moises and Aaron, and dixerunt Pharaoni: Haec d^cit
Domirus Deus Israel, dimitte populum meum. Exodus 5. v. 1.

At ille respondit: Quis est Dominus, ut audiam vocem ejus, and dimittam
Israel? Nescio Dominum, and Israel non dimittam. Exodus 5. v. 2.


nor resplendency.

Moses and Aaron then need not fear, to appear in the presence of Pharaoh, and
to say boldly unto him, That he who is their Lord and God, commands him to
restore Liberty unto his people: But who is this God, says he unto Moses and
Aaron, of whom you speak? For my part I know him not, and in despite of him I
will detain this people which you demand of me. He does much more; for he heaps
punishment upon punishment, and orders these poor people to be used with more
rigor than before.

Now as it is the custom of the miserable, Occurreruntque Moisi and Aaron, qui
stabant ex adverso egredientibus a Pharaont; and dixerunt ad eos: Videat
Dominus and judicet, quoniam foetere secistis odorem nostrum coram Pharaone,
etc. Exodus 5. v. 21.
and of those that suffer, to complain of every thing, and oftentimes to make
even those the Authors of their afflictions, who endeavor to procure their
good; so the people of Israel began even to murmr against Aaron and Moses, as
if the design of their coming-in had been to increase their sufferings.

There is nothing more cruel, and less supportable to a good soul, than
Ingratitude: It is the justest occasion can interrupt the current and
continuation of a Benefit, and not wholly to stop it, we must seek constancy in
God, who alone has power and goodness enough to oblige even the most
ungrateful persons. It is also to him Moses addresseth himself, and it is into
his bosom he makes an amiable discharge of all his thoughts. Alas! Reversusque
est Moises ad Dominum, and ait: Domine cur afflixisti populum istum? quare
misisti me? Exodus 5. v. 22.

Ex eo enim quo ingressus sum ad Pharaonem, ut loque^er in nomine tuo, afflixit
populum tuum, and non liberasti ^os. Exodus 5. v. 23.


Lord, says he, why do thou permit the oppressions of thy people? And if I
be not able to bring them relief, why have thou sent me rather to exasperate,
than comfort their Afflictions? After this loving complaint, God discovered
himself fully unto Moses, to give him a more assured mark of his love. Go from
me, says he, and know, that I am that Adonijah whose name is ineffable, and
whom the quickest and most peircing eyes, do not discover but amidst
obscurities.

Yes surely: For it is only under the veils of Faith, and through the clouds
which cover the Sanctuary, God can be known. Blindness of Humane Wisdom.
We must be guided by his obscure Clarities, or God himself must inform us who
he is, otherwise we shall be the Disciples of Aximenes, who will swear, That
God is but Air which spreds it self to an Infinity; others will follow
Democritus, who adored no other god than Fire; or else Anaximander, who had no
other Divinity but the Stars; or Diogenes, who ascribed unto him a Body of
Wind, animated with Reason; or Chrysippus, who fastened him to a cruel destiny;
or Parmenides, who made him to be a Circle to surround the Heavens; or
Stratonicus, who sacrificed all his Loves unto Nature; or Epicurus, who amazed
himself to form a god of Atoms; And in fine, some others would side with Varro,
Cleanthes, and Anaxagoras, or some other Dreamers, who never knew the true God
of Moses; and though his Name be ineffable, and his Essence incomprehensible,
yet we cannot be ignorant of his Power and Goodness.

CHAP. VII. The Obduration of Pharaoh 's Heart.
NAture cannot give unto men, Finite Power of Nature.
but what is within her sphere; and as her power is finite, so she can only
give them finite and limited Presents. God alone, to whom all is possible, can
only bestow Favors on us which are not common, and it belongs only unto him
to convert Glass into Silver, Straws into Gold, and to make Gods of Men, if he
so please.

He did it once by uniting two Natures in one and the same Subject, and making
God, Man, who is God no less than himself. But without speaking of this
Mystery, which is not to be paralleled, was but once done, God has been often
pleased to make men gods, to whom without communicating his Nature, he has
imparted to them his most illustrious qualities, and chiefly the power he has
over all created things, which is properly to make gods on earth, or at least
men, who are Demi gods.

In this manner Saint Basil was the god of the Emperor Valens, Saint Ambrose of
the Empress Justinia, Saint Athanasius, and Saint Hillary of Constantine, and
in the first Ages Elias of King Achab; but this glorious Title was given unto
Moses by a particular privilege^, Dixitque Dominus ad Moisen: Ecce constitui te
Deum Pharaonis, and Aaron frater tuus erit Propheta tuus. Exodus 7. v. 1.

Fecit itaque Moises and Aaron sicut praeceperat Dominus. Exodus 7. v. 6.


when God from his own mouth established him for the God of Pharaoh, and when
at the same time he gave him his Brother for a Prophet.

Presently after, this God, and this Prophet, I mean this Moses, and his
Brother, who were instructed what to do, and concerning what was to happen,
returned unto Pharaoh; and there Moses showed him prodigies which were evident
tokens of the power God had given him.

First; Tulitque Aaron virgam coram Pharaone, and servis ejus, quae versa est
in colubrum. Exodus 7. v. 10.

Vocavit autem Pharao sapientes, and maleficos, and secerunt etiam ipsi per
incantationes Aegyptiacas and arcana quad^m similiter. Exodus 7. v. 11.

Projeceruntque finguli virgas suas, quae versae sunt in dracones. Exodus 7. v.
12.


having cast upon the ground the Rod he carried in his hand, it became spotted
with Scales, and changed into a Serpent, which after a thousand little
windings, extended it self at its full length, and walked in the presence of
Pharaoh, who being surprised therewith, and not knowing the cause of this
prodigious change, assembled the wise men of Egypt, that is to say, the
Inchanters and Magitians, who had a mind to do the same that Moses did: And in
effect, after some Charms, showed Dragons; into whose shape, God had permitted
them to Metamorphise their Wands, that it might appear what Magic could do,
and how it deceives us by its Enchantments; as also to try the Constancy and
Faith of Moses, and the Hebrews, who were present; and to teach us, That the
Devil is but an Ape, who imitates and counterfeits Truth. Sed devoravit virga
Aaron virgas little. Exodus 7. v. 12.
In fine, God permitted it to confound these Magitians; for all their
prodigies, and all their little Serpents, were instantly devoured by that of
Moses.

Such is commonly the end and success of the Inventions and Master-peeces of
the Devil; the beginning is always fair, the appearances have splendour, but
they are but false Stars formed in a Cloud, Ciphers engraven on Sand, and in a
word, Phantasms and Idols, which have nothing real but falsehood, or at least,
what lasts but for a time.

Histories are filled with examples which prove this verily: But to express
what seems to me most important upon this matter, God, as I have said, often
permits prodigious effects unto Cheaters and false Prophets for those reasons I
newly touched. But that which astonisheth me the most, Prodigious effects of
Divine Providence.
is that he often times, and justly, makes use of them to harden hearts, and to
blind certain spirits who are dazeled with the rays of the Sun, and shut their
eyes against the splend ours of this beautiful Planet, to follow the smoke of
a Torch of Sulphur and Rosin, carried by a Diabolical hand, and by some
infernal spirit.

Is it not a strange blindness, Dreadful obstinacy.
and a frightful obstinacy when the voice of a Devil is preferred before that
of an Angel, and when more belief is given unto the illusions of an Inchanter
than unto the words and Actions of a God, and a Prophet? Pharaoh saw Moses, Et
Clevans Virgam percussit aquam Fliminis coram Pharaone, and servis ejus, quae
versa est in sanguinem. Exodus 1. v. 20.

Et pisces qui erant in slumine, mortui sunt. Exodus 7. v. 21.


who changed his Rod into a Serpent, and this Serpent taking the form of a Rod.
He sees the waters of Nilus and Egypt, which being stricken by it, are
converted into blood, and all the Fishes which dye therein: He persists
notwithstanding in his first design, and in stead of humbling himself under the
Omnipotent hand of God, under the Rod of Moses, and at the sight of these
bloody waves which glided along the River Nilus, and had caused the death of
Fishes, as it were, to advertise men of the like disaster; he amuzed himself
with the illusions of some Inchanters, who flattered him by showing him some
Prodigy, or rather some false Mask drawn over these truths.

However it be this miserable wrerch became like a Rock which derides a storm,
Pitiful state of an obdurate heart.
like a Diamond which cannot be broken, and like that famous Buckler which bore
for devise I cannot be pierced; He was an insensible Colossus, who had Eyes
and saw not, Hands and not able to use them, Feet though he could not walk, and
who had a Heart environed with blunted Arrows, and Darts which could make no
breach.

Behold the true picture of Pharaoh's heart, The picture of Pharaoh's heart.
which became so insensible amidst the Thunderbolts which God darted at it,
that at last it remained as cold as Marble, and as hard as Brass, which all
the waters of the Sea could not soften.

This is the Lamentable state of a hardened Soul; where we must observe that God
was the cause of it, as Moses said, not by fastening his heart with the Chains
of a fatal necessity, nor by captivating it under the power of Devils, and of
the Hell it self of this life: But first in permitting this obduration, and
leaving the bridle free to him, who afterward like a wild and unruly Colt had
no other guide, but his own giddiness, fury, and impetuositie.

Secondly, in staying the course of these Victories, and Conquering Graces,
which create an amorous tyranny in us, and only granting him but some
fruitless favors, without which a man would not have the power, either to
undertake, or desire what is necessary for his salvation.

Thirdly, in giving him Possessions, Glory, Empire and forces, which were like
so many Bulwarks, in which this miserable wretch lives in security.

Fourthly, God hardened him by the Miracles wherewith he solicited his faith,
who following the malice of a corrupted and pernicious Will was dazeled at the
sight of them; and by over-slight wounds, which did but tickle the rage and
fury of this resolved spirit, in stead of exciting him unto penance, and
imprinting in him some sense of Love, Obedience, and Respect.

Now from hence spring the frightfull sequences, Frightfull sequence of
obduration.
and the sad appertenances of the obduration of those who become Rebellious to
the Lights of Heaven, first they shut their Eyes, and stop their Ears, not to
see or hear, when it concerns their salvation.

Secondly, they triumph in evil, and iniquities are their most pleasing
delights.

Thirdly, the ordure of their crime cannot be cleansed, Scriptum stylo ferreo
in ungue adamantino Jerem. 17.
and their sin is like that of Judas, engraven with an Iron Pen upon a
Diamantine lamen.

Fourthly, the so are shameless people, Frons meretricis facta est tibi,
noluisti erubescere. Jerem. c. 3.

Considera opera Dei quod nemo possit corrigere quem ille despexerit. Eccles. 7.


and whose foreheads have less sense of modesty, than that of common strumpets.

Fifthly, they are incorrigible, and though God strike them, they yet deride
all his chastisements, and then all the Counsels of men, all the complaints of
their friends, and even the shame which reflects on their Parents and family
cannot move them.

Sixthly, they are full of contempts, disdains, coldnesses, and funestous
railleries.

Seventhly, they reside in the depth of the Abyss, into which they strive to
draw all those that reach out their hands to help them.

Eighthly, all their habits are so inveterate, that we may sooner change the
skin of a Leopard, and the color of a Negro, than the least of their humors.
Whence it comes, that the measure of their iniquities is full, and after these
persons have passed even into the last degree of blindness and impiety, they
abandon themselves unto the desires of their hearts, Cor durum est quod nee
compunctione, scinditur, uec pietate mollitur, nec movetur precibus, nec cedit
minis, quin etiam flagell is duratur magis.

Cor durum est ingratum ad beneficia, ad consilia infidum, ad judicia saevum,
vnverecundum ad turpia, inpavidum ad pericula, inhumanum ad bumana, temerarium
ad divina, praeteritorum obliviscens, praesentium negligens, futurorum
improvidum, etc. Bern. lib. de consider, ad Eugenium.


and their reason becomes a slave to all the motions of their Concupiscence.

In fine, says St. Bernard, if any one will have an Epitomy of all these
miseries, and a picture to the life of an obstinate, inflexible and obdurate
spirit, let him represent unto himself a heart which cannot be divided by the
salutiferous waters of Compunction, nor heated by the flames of a holy Love,
nor touched by the darts of Piety, nor made flexible by the allurements of an
amiable entreaty, nor even affrighted by the horrors of the most dreadful
threats. He is ungrateful for the greatest favors, he derides the Counsels
which are given him, he contemns the Judgments of the best understandings, he
forgets what is past, he neglects present things, and cannot foresee what will
befall him.

This impudent person is never ashamed even in the most infamous Actions; all
dangers which make others tremble, render him more bold; and his insolence
passes yet farther: for he is timerarious even in what concerns God, and has
no more fear of him, than reverence toward men: whence it proceeds, that he
would never cease to sin, if he did not first cease to live, and these terrors
would never end, if Death did not set some bounds thereunto. Alas! what Death,
what Life, what Man, what Devil, or at least what heart of Man and Devil, can
be imagined in so detestable a condition?

My God! give me then rather the heart of a Tiger, than so hard a heart, to the
end if I cannot love thee with the heart of a man, I may take revenge on my
self, with the heart of a beast, and make my heart the prey of my liberality;
But if thy goodness cannot endure such a butchery, give me, O God, of my heart,
a heart the most loving that ever was: Then will I immolate it to thee, and
thou shall be the Master of it for all eternity. At this instant then I
Sacrifice my purest affections to thee; At this instant I will obey thy
commands, and break for this cause with all creatures. This is to provoke, too
long, the wrath of a Judge, to irritate the clemency of a Father, and to heap
together a train of miseries, a treasure of anger and indignation. We must not
then expect till the measure be full, till we be in the bottom of the Abyss,
and covered with the dreadful obscurities of night, in which the torches of
Love are extinguished, and the Lights of hope eternally put out. In fine, my
God, burn, break, and consume my heart, for I choose rather to offer unto thee
the flames and ashes thereof, than to see it insensible and incapable of loving
thee.

CHAP. VIII. The Plagues of Egypt.
THe Law of Grace is not a Law of injustice, where all things are permitted,
and where Vice remains unpunished. Witness the Cities which have been swallowed
up in a night, and where the Elements have, as it were, conspired to consume
places which served for retreats unto all sorts of impurities. Witness the
Inundation of Ashes, the flames of Sulphur which issued forth of Mount
Vesuvius about the year four hundred seventy and seven, in which Europe was
almost absorpt for punishment of the Crimes wherewith it had been polluted,
Vesuvius Campaniae mons exusta evomuit viscera, necturnis que in die tenchris
omnem Europae faciem minuto contexit pulvere.
and whose flames could not be washed away, but by a deluge of fire, a rain of
Ashes, and a Hail-storm of Flints, which was seen, as Salvian relates, to come
out of the bottom of this Mountain, as if it had rent it self, and vomited
forth its bowels, to serve as an instrument unto the Justice of its God*

Witness also that dreadful tempest which shook the whole Kingdom of Naples,
Vide Patriarcham.
and which happened in the year three hundred forty and three, under the
government of Jane, the first of that name.

All these chastisements nevertheless were but light, and rather threats than
punishments, if we compare them with those which in the law of Nature, and in
the written Law laid desolate the whole Universe, or at least the beautifull'st
parts thereof.

Water began, and as it has less respect in its disorders than the rest of
Creatures, it spared but eight persons, who guided into the Ark the relics of
the world.

Afterward Fire, which has a more furious and violent nature than Water; fell
suddenly upon four infamous Cities, where it left nothing but ashes and stench.

Behold the first revenge God took upon sinners, and to speak according to the
opinion of a Learned Divine of the Primitive Church, Jobius mouachus in
Bibliotheca Photii.
These were the first Tremblings of the Earth.

The third was in the strange punishment of Pharaoh, commonly called The
Plagues of Egypt, which happened about the time of that famous deluge which
drowned in a manner all Greece, and those excessive heats which almost consumed
the whole Universe.

The number of these Plagues was Ten; a perfect number, and which denotes, That
the punishment was to pass even unto extremity, since the offense had passed
even unto excess.

As for the place where these Plagues began, Fecit mirabilia in terra Aegypti
in campo Taneos. Psalm. 77.
the City of Taniz, the Metropolitan of Egypt, was first stricken with it; the
disease came first from them, as out of a fatal spring, which afterward spread
it self with dread and terror over the Lands of that Empire.

I know not of whose hands God made use in this strange Ministry; nevertheless
it is most probable, That he employed therein those Spirits of Fires and
Flames, which are the Instruments of his Wrath, and the Executioners of his
severest Vengeances.

I cannot also determine how long they lasted, but following the Narration of
Moses, it is credible, That their course was six or seven and twenty days.

Wherein God manifested his goodness and mercy, in the greatest height of his
Justice; for he might have destroyed all Egypt in an instant, and made a
dreadful Sepulcher of this infamous Kingdom: But he thought good to cast his
Darts one after another, and to show, That he was not only a Judge, but also a
Father; and that he had not only the power and force to punish, but also the
patience and sweetness to expect and mollify those who notwithstanding became
more and more obstinate, as we shall presently see.

CHAP. IX. The Waters of Egypt turned into Blood.
IT is the ordinary course of the vengeances of Heaven, to punish sinners with
the same weapons they use to assault it; And it is for this cause, First
Plague. Quest. 19. in Exodus
(as Theodoret observes) the River Nilus of which Egypt made a Divinity, and
whose Crocodils she also adored, was the first field of battle in which God
gave them the first alarm, with the first combats upon the waves and Billows of
blood which bore the Murtherous colors of so great a number of Innocents as
had been drowned therein. Solinus. c. 35.


It may be said, that then the Angel whom St. Apocalyp. 16.
John saw in his Apocalypse, powered into the waters of Egypt that mortal vial
in which was the bloody water of the wrath and indignation of God.

The River Nilus, says Artabau increased excessively, and its waves seemed to
have so much sense as to complain and call for vengeance against the cruelties
of Pharaoh, as also to recall into his memory, that he had spilt more blood
than needed to make a great River.

Now it was not only of a vermillion color and purpled, Et elevns virgam
percusit aquam fluminis coram Pharaone, and servit ejus, quae versa est in
sanguinem. Exodus 7. v. 21.
with some drops of blood, which had dyed the surface of Rivers and all ponds,
but also all the waters of Egypt were turned into blood, which was the cause
that all fishes dyed therein, not finding themselves any longer in their
natural Element.

This was indeed a Triumph worth of God and of his glory, Dixitque Dominus ad
Moisen: dic Aaron, toll virgam tuam and extend manum tuam super aquas Aegypti
and super fluvios eorum ut vertantur in sanguinem.
to see Moses at his bare word putting the miraculous Rod into Aarons hand, and
who having commanded him by order from his God to hold it over the water, he no
sooner did it but instantly this body, though insensible, began to have sense
in the quarrel of its Master, and testified by a change of Nature, and by a
general corruption, that there is nothing in the World which ought and may not
arm it self against creatures, when it concerns the interest of their Creator.

No man ought then to wonder, if the water of Nilus and of Egypt takes the form
of blood, if this blood putrifies, and if all the Fishes die therein: For God
begins on the water to hold his justice-seat, and his Throne must be exposed
under a bloody Canopy, and infectious vapors must be seen to rise under his
feet, which are as the shadows of those horrors and crimes which have been
committed by this people.

It is said, Et fuit sanguis in tota ter^a Aegypti Exodus 7. v. 21.

Avertitque se, and ingressus est domum suam, nec apposuit coretiam hac vice.
Exodus 7. v. 22.

Feceruntque similiter malefici Aegyptiorum, in cantationibus suis. Exodus 7. v.
22.

Foderunt autem omnes Aegyptii per circuitum fluminis aquam ut biberent. Exodus
7. v. 24 Impletique sunt dies septem post quam percussit Dominus fluvium. Exodus
7. v. 25.


that a Diamond which hardneth under Hammers and Anvils is broken with blood.

The heart of Pharaoh is harder than the diamond, since being in the midst of a
kingdom covered over with blood, it could not be softened; besides, he turned
his Eyes from this verity, and that he might not hear the noise of this
tempest, he retires into his House; there he strives to flatter the wound God
nev^ly gave him, resting satisfied to have seen his inchanters who had done
some such like thing, but instead of changing water into blood they should have
done better to have changed blood into water, to quench the thirst of the
Egyptians, who half dispairing, dug pits about the River Nilus to seek for
water to drink, and who would at least have dyed in this sad affliction, if God
after seven days had not stopped the torrents of his wrath, and stayed the
course of the Rivers of blood which poisoned and choked that miserable people.

CHAP. X. The Frogs of Egypt.
SEven days being slipped away, The second Plague.
the Sky and the Waters of Egypt reassumed their former Nature; But God at the
same time manifested, that there were other weapons to assault the rage and
fury of a man, whom Rivers of blood and slaughter were not able to satiate.

Pharaoh then being obstinate, Et ebulliet fluvius ranas, quae ascendent and
ingredientur domum tuam. Exodus 8. v 3.
and refusing to consent to the deliverance of the people of Israel, though he
saw his whole Kingdom swimming in blood; and although God had advertised him by
the mouth of his Prophet, That he was even ready to besiege him in his House,
even in his own Bed, and at his Table, with an Army of Animals, which would
bear no respect, either to him or any of his subjects.

In fine, Ecce ego percutiam omnes terminos tuos ranit. Exodus 8. v. 2.
All Egypt was in an instant covered with Frogs, which swarmed in so great
numbers, as every drop of water, and every grain of earth, seemed to be changed
into these troublesome Creatures, whose croakings were so piercing and
continual, as they gave neither truce nor repose.

Josephus adds, Meats infacted.
That the waters became again corrupted, and that they fell even amongst their
meats, which were so much infected by them, as men could scarce find wherewith
to eat or drink.

Which makes me believe, that this kind of Frogs was not only of those green
ones which are commonly seen in the water, nor of those which Pliny calls
Calamites engendered in Meddows and Moorish grounds, but that there were others
which are termed BushFrogs, bearling on their heads certain horns, Eccerunt
autem and malesici per incantationes suas similiter, eduxeruntque ranas super
terram Aegypti. Exodus 8. v. 7.
and which are full of venom.

This torment then was very cruel, and almost remediless; For though God
permitted the Inchanters of Pharaoh to imitate this Prodigy, yet all they could
do, served but to increase the noise and multitude of these little Tyrants who
spared no man.

This King who had not spoken one single word to obtain the cure of his first
wound, Vocavit autem Pharach Moisen and Aaron, and dixit eis: Orate Dominum ut
auserat ranas a me and a populo meo, and dimittam populum ut sacrificet Domine.
Exodus 8. v. 8.
now made Supplications; and this proud man, who was so presumptuous and bold,
as to demand the other day, who was this God of whom they spoke unto him, dares
not now speak unto him without an Intercessor, is enforced to address himself
unto Moses and Aaron upon this occasion.

My Friends, says he unto them, take pity, I beseech you, on me and my poor
people, supplicate your God to free us from these troublesome Animals, and then
I assure you, that I will dismiss all his people to offer Sacrifices to him.
Dixitque Moises ad Pharaonem: Constitue mihi quando deprecer pro te, etc. Exodus
8. v. 9.

Qui respondit, eras. Exodus 8. v. 10.

Juxta, inquit, verbum tuum faciam, ut scias, quoniam non est sicut Dominus
Deus noster. Exodus 8. v. 10.

Et recedent ranae a te, and domo tuae, and a servis tuis, and a populo tuo: Et
tantum in flumine remanebunt. Exed. 8. v. 11.

Fecitque Dominus juxta verbum Moisi and mortue sunt vanae, etc. Exodus 8. v. 13.

Congregaveruntque eas in immensos aggeres, and computruit terra. Ezod. 8. v.
14.

Vide^s autem Pharao quod data esset requies, ingravavit cor^suum, and non
audivit eos, sicut praeceperat Domius. Exodus 8. v. 15.




We shall do, said Moses, what you demand; but to the end, you may not believe,
That the promise I am going to make you, is grounded upon any other
consideration than God, upon whom moments and hours depend; appoint the time,
in which you desire I should give you satisfaction, and obtain of him for your
self, and all your Subjects, deliverance from this evil which afflicts you.

Alas! Answers Pharaoh, Let it be to morrow, and no longer deferred.

Well then, says Moses, it shall be done, since you desire it; and to show
you, that there is no power, nor greatness equivalent to that of the Lord, whom
we adore; To morrew these little Devils shall raise their siege from your
Territories, and there shall not any of them be longer seen but in the Water.

In effect, as soon as Moses had offered up his Prayers for this end, all these
legions died, and great heaps were made of them; from which, as Josephus and
Philo assure us, there issued so horrid a stench, that it even poisoned the
whole Country.

But the Senses of Pharaoh were still so stupefied, that, as it is credible, he
understood nothing; for he did not doubt to do as he had done before, and was
not asnamed to falsify the promise he had made unto God and Moses. This is
just the custom of those who make Vows and Promises during their sickness, and
afterward when they are in health, think no more of it; but God derides their
Sacrifices, and all their Prayers serve but to inkindle the fire of his
Indignation.

CHAP. XI. The Flies of Egypt.
Pisidius in his Hexameron is ingenuous, The third Plague.
when he Arms Frogs like resolute Soldiers, and Flies also, as so many Forlorn
Hopes, who go to make war against Pharaoh, and his whole Court, and even in his
Bed, and on his Throne.

In truth, we would not have easily believed, that Heaven had an intention to
triumph over the Pride and Cruelty of a Prince, with squadrons of Flies, and
legions of Frogs, which notwithstanding formed the first Armies of the Great
God of Battles; Et extendit Aaron manum, virgam tenens: percussitque pulverem
terrae, and omnts pulvis terrae versus est in sciniphes per totam terram
Aegypti. Exodus 8. v. 17.
and the force he employed to render himself Master of all Egypt, was also to
fight him every where, and to assault him, not only in the water with a Naval
Army, but also upon the Land, which was no sooner stricken by the miraculous
Rod of Aaron, but presently there appeared a great Army of Flies, which arose
like those Whirlings which are framed in the Air by Wind and Dust.

This Accident might at first seem ridiculous, Ridiculous Appearances.
or at least so unconsiderable, that there would need but one puff to make it
vanish: But these little Hobgoblins multiplied so fast, and they caused their
stings to be felt with so much violence, as it was presently visible, that a
hand more than Humane had ordered these Battalians, and inspired so bloody an
ardor into all these Animals.

Some one will perchance say unto me, what the Fly it self said in the Moral
Discourse of the Slave enfranchised by Augustus, to wit, That they have neither
shame, nor respect; and that they spare neither Men, nor Beasts, nor Princes
more than their Subjects: But these Flies were so troublesome and furious, and
they fed with so much eagerness on Pharaoh, Aben. Sir.
and the Egyptians, that the Hebrews made a Proverb of them, calling all those
who lived in the World on blood and slaughter, The Flies of Egypt. They entered,
says Philo, even into their Noses, into their Eyes, into their Mouths, and it
seemed, as if Hell had vomited them forth as so many Devils.

Nevertheless, Digitus Dei hic est. Exodus 8. v. 19.

Feceruntque similiter malefici incantationibus suis, ut educerent sciniphes,
and non potuerunt. Exodus 8. v. 18.


it was an effect of the right hand of the Omnipotent, and even in the sight of
the Magicians of Egypt: It was the Finger of God which had created them. All
the effects also of their magic could not produce the like, nor shoot such
Arrows and Darts, as Heaven did at Pharach.

O God! How insensible then is this King? and must this Army increase to
heighten his disaster?

This was but the third Plague which I would fold up under the same title with
the fourth, The fourth Plague.
not knowing how to find terms or names peculiar enough, and which may
clearly distinguish the one from the other.

It is sufficient to know that God first assaulted Pharaoh by Rivers of Blood.

Secondly, With Frogs, thirdly and fourthly with Armies of Flies.

But the first which appeared, were, as some have believed, of a particular
Species, and of which, none like them had been ever seen till that time.
Albertus Magnus, (...) lib. 16. de animalibus, It a describit sciniphes.
Albertus the Great, affirms, That these kind of Creatures had Wings and Heads
like Flies, and Bodies like little Worms, with a sting in their mouths, which
they darted like a Javelin, chiefly into the softest, and the most humid parts
of the Nose, to draw and suck thence the most subtle and pure Spirits of the
Head.

Whatever may be said thereof, surely these were Flies of a miraculous kind,
which, as Philo and Origin say, were most offensive and cruel; yet their stings
did not pierce deep enough into the heart of Pharaoh, but it was further
requisite to assail him with new Battalians, to see whether he would yield. It
is true, That God might have raised Bears, Leopards, and Panthers against him,
as well as Flies and Frogs: But it is for men to require great forces to supply
their own weakness, whereas he that can do all of himself, has need of
nothing; and the most vile and meanest Creatures in the World, are able to do
all things with him.

Pharaoh having again then refused to permit the people of Israel to depart,
Induratumque est cor Pharaonis, and non audivit eos, sicut praeceper at
Dominus. Exodus 8. v. 19.

Ecce ego immittam in te omne genus muscarum. Exodus 8. v. 21.

Faciamque mirabilem in die illa terram Gessen, in qua populas meu^ est, ut non
sint ibi muscae. Exodus 8. v. 22.

Vocavitque Pharao Moisen and Aaren, and ait eis: Ite and sacrificate Deo
vestro in terra hac. Exodus 8. v. 25. Et ait Moises, non potest ita fieri:
Abominationes enim Aegyptiorum immolarimus Domino Ded nostro: Quod si
mactaverimus ea quae colunt Aegyptii coram eis, lapidibus nos obruent. Exodus 8.
v. 26.


God besieged him the fourth time with all sorts of Flies; so that Egypt was
full of them, except the Land of Gessen, where those Hebrews lived who were
exempted by a particular privilege from God; who would distinguish his people
from the Egyptians, and evidence unto them both, that their good and bad estate
proceeded from him.

Whereupon Pharaoh commanded Aaron and Moses to come before him, and permitted
them to Sacrifice upon his Territories, That they might appease the wrath of
him, who so prodigiously afflicted him, and by such admirable chastisements;
but they answered him, That they could not accept of this offer, by reason this
were to expose the Hebrews to the hazard of their lives, and to be stoned by
the Egyptians who abhorred the Sacrifices of Beasts, which were nevertheless
the Victims whereof the people of Israel ordinarily made use.

Nevertheless, the fury of these little Soldiers which wasted Egypt without
relaxation, Dixitque Pharao, ego dimitiam vos, ut sacrificetis Domino Deo
vestro in deserto. Exodus 8. v. 28.

Et ait Moises: Egressus a te, orabo Dominum, and recedet musca a Pharaone and
a servis suis: Verumtamen nols ultra sullere, utnon dimittas populum
sacrificare Domino. Exodus 8. v. 29.

Et ingravatum est cor. Pharaonis, ita ut nec hac quidem vice dimitteret
populum. Exodus 8. v. 32.


and chiefly Pharaoh seeing himself assaulted and assassinated by them on all
sides, was at last enforced to give way to Moses going into the Wilderness,
there to pay the duties of his Religion, and earnestly to invoke the goodness
of God on his behalf. To which Moses consented, promising him, that this Cloud
of Enemies, which persecuted him, should be quickly dispersed; upon condition
notwithstanding he would no more deceive him, and retain his people: But the
truce which followed, and the favor which was shown by the Prayers of Moses,
was no other than a new occasion this detestable King took to abuse the
Patience of God.

CHAP. XII. The Plague and Ulcers.
THe Plague is a fatal poison, The fifth Plague.
and pernicious to all Nature, which is engendered in the Body by the disorder
of Humors, and by the mixture of the Air with certain putrified and infected
Atoms, which we draw in and swallow in breathing, and so go directly to the
Heart, which is the Fountain of life, and as the Hearth on which the natural
heat is nourished, which this poison extinguisheth and consumes.

Whence I conclude, Marciline Ficinus in Epidem.
with one of the most learned Physicians, and most subtle Philosophers which
has ever been, That the particular causes of this disease are commonly, either
the Defections of the Planets, and especially of the Sun and Moon, or their
Conjunctions, as of Saturn and Mars, or the Malignant Impressions of Comets and
certain Meteors, which pervert the qualities of the Air, and which by the
sequel of some over hot, and moist Winds, or else by immoderate Rains, or from
some other effects, of which they are the Origin, raise Seeds of Putrefaction
and horrid Vapors, which impoyson the Elements, and all other Bodies, into
which they insinuate themselves.

Moreover, this Contagion may grow from too violent, and too immoderate
excesses, in sleep or watchings, in repose or exercise, feasting or abstinence,
but chiefly from disorder, which begets in the Humors of the Body, the Passions
of the Mind, amongst which Love is a Wilde-fire and Brand of Hell, which
inkindles a thousand Inflammations, a thousand Coals, and a thousand Plagues.

In fine, Particular causes of the Plague.
There are many particular causes of the Plague; and France may boast, That she
has had Hyppocrateses and Galens who have even pierced the source of this
disease; and all generally conclude that amongst all Maladies, this has
something I know not what of Divine: In a word, it is ordinarily the scourge of
Heaven, of which, we must not often seek out other causes than God. And these
were the Arms wherewith he made himself to be felt in Egypt, which became more
insensible by the strokes of Aarons and Moses Rod. Ecce manus mea ibit super
agros tuos: Et super equos, and asinos, and camelos, and boves, and oves,
pestis valde gravis. Exodus 9. v. 3.

Et faciet Dominus mirabile inter poffession^^ Israel. Exodus 9.4.


I will lift up my hand, says he, over the Fields of Egypt, and the Plague
shall choke its Horses, its Oxen, and Sheep. And that which will be more
Prodigious, the Heritages, and the Flocks of the People of Israel shall receive
no damage by it.

In such a case, Remedies are useless, all the Aspects of the Planets are
malignant, the whole Air is contagious, the most solid Meats corrupt, the best
Wine is converted into poison, Purgations made of Saffron, Mirrhe and Aloes
prove mortal, all the Doses of Mithridate serve but to inkindle the fire, and
all the fumigations of Incense, Juniper and Turpentine make but a gross smoke,
which causes blindness to march before death.

In vain then does Pharaoh, Unprofitable Labor.
and his Inchanters strive to quench these Flames, because they are inkindled
by a Hand which can in a moment consume the whole World, and after remake it
just as it is; and it is this Hand which gives virtue unto Herbs, and without
which, all Medicines are converted into poison.

Behold the Hand of God, Mortuaque sunt omnia animantia Aegyptiorum. Exodus 9.
v. 6.
and who ever would know the force and rigor of it, let him see, how in one day
it makes a bloody Butchery of all the Animals which are found in Egypt.

This was the fifth Plague of Pharaoh.

The sixth which followed, The sixth Plague.
happened in the same manner.

God commanded Moses and Aaron to fill their hands with Ashes, Et dixit Dominus
ad Moisen and Aaron: Tollite plenas manus cineris de camino, and steterunt
coram Pharaone, and sparsit illum Moises in coelum, factaque sunt ulcera
vesicarum turgentium in hominibus, and jumentis. Exodus 9.10.

Videbatur unum ulcus a vertice usque ad fines pedis. Philo. Nec poterant
malefici stare coram Moise propter ulcera quae in illis erant. Exodus 9. v. 21.


and then to cast them into the Air, the which Moses had no sooner done, but
presently after there was formed in the Eyes of Pharaoh, and of all Egypt, as
it were, a vast Cloud of Dust, which pouring down it self, and falling on their
Bodies, covered them with certain tumors, and with a general ebolition, which
breaking the Skin, made the whole Body but as one great Ulcer, the smart and
pain was so extreme, that the Magicians of Pharaoh, who had been stricken with
it, could hardly remain in his presence: But notwithstanding all this, neither
they nor their Master became wiser than before.

CHAP. XIII. The Hail, Storms, Lightnings, and Thunders. Hist. Tripart. lib. 7.
v. 22.

THe Ecclesiastical History assures us, That three hundred sixty and nine years
after the Birth of Jesus Christ, The seventh Plague. Lib. 10. c. 20. An. Dom.
406.
there fell in Constantinople a shower of Hailstones, and that a while after
there arose in the same City almost the like storm, which was doubtless a
punishment for the Vices and Impieties, which insensibly rendered this famous
Town a Moscho filled with horrors, and a Seraglio with the most abominable
impurities: A long time after, Lodovic Clavitellius, fol. 260.
the City of Cremona was beaten with Hailstones, which were as great as
Heneggs; and scarce has an Age passed since this dreadful Tempest which fell
in the Country of Bolonia, during which, a great Rain of Blood was seen, with
so frightful a Hail, Idem An. Dom.
that each stone was found to weigh one and twenty pound.

Now it is not to be doubted but such effects, commonly speaking, and as they
usually happen, cannot proceed from any natural cause, but we should speak like
Atheists, in denying, That he who at the end of the World shall cause Hail,
Snow, and Thunder, to march before him as Messengers of his Wrath, did not
before make use of them in several Ages, either to intimidate or punish his
Adversaries; and consequently, that he formed them in an instant as great
Prodigies, which spring from a supernatural source.

Such was then the Hail which fell upon the Land of Egypt, in so great a
quantity, and with so much violence, that all that chanced to be in the Fields
were stricken by it, Pluitque Dominus grandines super terram Aegypti. Exodus 9.
v. 23.

Et percussit grando in omni terra Aegypti cuncta quae fuerunt in agris ab
homine usque ad jumentum. Exodus 9. v. 25.


and there was neither man nor beast which could save themselves from it.

This was the seventh scourge of Egypt, and that wherein God especially began
to cause the rigor of his Arm, and the weight of his Hand to be felt.

Go then again unto Pharaoh, says he unto Moses, and let this inflexible
person learn to bow under my Laws; for I am resolved at his cost to make my
Power and Authority thunder out, to the end, it may be every where known, that
I am his Lord and God.

At the same time, the hour was suspended for punishment.

The next day, at the prefixed time, and in the same moment which had been
appointed, the Air began to melt into so prodigious and thick a Hail, Et
Dominus dedit tonitrua, and grandinem, ac discurrentia fulgura super terram.
Exodus 9. v. 23.

Tantaque fuit magnitudinis, quanta ante nunquam apparuit in universa terra
Aegypti. Exodus 9. v. 24.

Et grando and ignis mista pariter ferebantur. Exodus 9. v. 24.


that Egypt had never seen any thing like it: That which rendered the accident
more dreadful and strange, was the noise of Thunder, and the frightful mixture
of Air, Fire, Lightnings, and Rain, which made throughout this unfortunate
Country an Abyss of horror and misery. I leave you to think what dread and
affrightment must this Prince have, who had inkindled all these fires, and
raised all these storms over his own head, and that of his subjects.

Alas! How frail are the Scepters of this World? how weak is the splendour of
Crowns? and how little resistance have Thrones? since there needs but one
furious clap of Thunder, but one deluge of Rain, one Lightning in the Clouds,
one Wind, one Storm of Hail, one Exhalation, or some Vapor, to ravage, to
destroy, to drown, to bury in a Tomb of Ashes and Flames, all these proud
Colossusses, and those vain Idols which men use to adore.

Nevertheless, Videns autem Pharno quod cessasset plavia, and grando, and
tonitrua, auxit peccatum. Exodus 9. v. 34.

Nec misit filios Israel, ficut praeceperat Dominus per manum Moisis. Exodus 9.
v. 35.


albeit Heaven is always armed with Fires, Flames, Thunders, Lightnings, and
Thunderbolts against Egypt and Pharaoh; yet all these Tempests did only shake
this Rock, but could not overthrow it; for scarce did the calm appear, but
presently this hardened Spirit reassumed his former designs, and, as if nothing
had passed, he continued to retain the people, to whom God nevertheless was
willing to give Liberty.

CHAP. XIV. The Grasshoppers of Egypt.
BEhold, says Rupertus, Rubertus hic.
what are the Armies of the God of Pharaoh, Frogs in the Van, Flies in the
Main-body, and Grasshoppers in the Rere; Fourth Plague.
but to speak truth, all those prodigious Squadrons would have been very weak,
if he that formed them with his own hand, had not marched in the head of all
these Regiments.

Now it was with a Southern hot and stifling wind, Ego ind^cam cra^l custam in
Fines (...) q^ae operiat sup^ crem terrae. Exodus ^ v. 4.
these last battalions were raised, composed of Grasshoppers, in so great
number that Egypt was wholly covered and wasted by them.

I know that entire Provinces and Kingdoms have been infected by such
creatures, and if Pliny speaks truth, some of them have been seen in the Indies
three foot long, and in so great abundance, that the Sun was shadowed by them:
Italy and Africa also have been very often tormented by them, and the Cyreneans
had a Law which obliged them to war thrice every year against Grasshoppers,
first breaking their Eggs, then stifling them when they were disclosed, and in
fine persuing them on all sides, when they were hatched. For the same reason
there was an Ordinance in the I Will of Lemnos, by which every inhabitant was
enjoined to bring every year a certain Number of them, which he was to kill
with his own hands. Deorum ira pestis haec esse intelligitur. P^inius.
However it were, this Author said true, when he calls this sort of Animals, a
Plague and scourge of Heaven: for this was a Mortal wound which Pharaoh felt
no less rigorous than death it self.

And when he saw himself on all sides assailed by them, Corrodat enim omnia
ligna quae germinant in agris. Exodus 10. v. 5.
and that they did gnaw even into the substance of Trees, he conjured Aaron and
Moses to ask in his behalf a deliverance from this mischief, (...) (...) Aaron,
and (...) precavi in (...), and (...). Exodus 10. v. 16.

Seit nunc dimi^te peccatum (...) (...) Domilium (...) ut (...) mo^tem (...).
Exodus 10. v. 17. Cruel perfid ousness.


which he styled death, confessing afterward that he acknowledged his fault,
and most humbly demanded pardon for it.

Alas! how often do we promise to forsake our Errors, and never more to
provoke the wrath of God? how often do we say during Sickness, Health will
afford Remedy to our sins? we weep upon our beds, we beat our breasts, we ask
pardon, we call the Saints of Paradise to our aid. O strange! God, who sees the
heart far from a perfect resentment, and a generous repentance, seems
nevertheless to be moved at the noise of these sighs and tears, and of all
these disimulations; His goodness cannot be wearied, and his clemency
enforces him to hear and grant at last the petitions of a Just man who prays
for some Reprobate.

Behold Moses imploring God for Pharaoh, Egressusque Moises de conspectu
Pharaonis oravit Dominum, Exodus 10. v. 18.

Quo flare fecit ventum ab occidente vehementissimum, and areptam locustam
projecit in mare rubrum. Exodus 10. v. 19.


he knows that the Graces his divine Majesty shall impart unto this impious
person will fall uneffectually into his heart, like dewes upon some Rock, and
that quickly after, this Apostate will return unto his former ways.

It imports not; Moses no sooner raised his Arm, and stretched out his Rod over
Egypt, but instantly a cold, moist, and Western wind happened to blow with so
much violence, that it carried away all the Grasshoppers into the Sea.

CHAP. XV. The Darkness of Egypt.
MY God! Magna sunt enim judicia tua Domine, and menarrabilia verba tua, etc.
Sap. 17. v. 1.
said Solomon, I confess that the depth of thy judgments is incomprehensible,
and that the height of thy thoughts is rather understood by silence than
discourse: It is yet the stone of scandal, and the most fatal Rock on which
Faith is very often seen to suffer a dreadful shipwreck, and reason remains yet
insensible, though it beholds on every side a thousand prodigies, and a
thousand miraculous effects, which might serve as a Watchtower to guide it
into a secure Haven. Nothing seems to be beyond the reach of an incredulous
mind, and Egypt at present can hardly believe what it cannot conceive. This
blind Nation would willingly attribute unto Chance, or at least unto Nature,
the punishments which are laid on them by the Great God of Heaven.

But it is no wonder to see a people following the example of their King. I am
more astonished at this obstinate Prince, who notwithstanding all these still
bleeding wounds, and by which he saw all his Subjects slain, could persuade
himself, That no force was able to constrain him to release these poor people,
which he detained in a most unjust Captivity.

The Thunders and Lightnings of Heaven had but dazzling Clarities, Extenditque
Moises manum in caelum, and factaesunt tenebrae horribiles in universa terra
Aegypti tribus diebus. Exodus 10. v. 22.

Nemo vidit fratrem suum, nec movit se de loco in quo crat. Exodus 10. v. 23.

Vbicumque autem babitabant filii Israel, lax erat. Exodus 10. v. 23.

Digni quidem illi carere luce, and pati carcerem tenebrarum, qui inelusos
custodrebant filios suos, etc. Sap. 18. v. 4.

Nam etsi nihil illos ex monstris perturbabat, transitu animalium and
serpentium sibilatione commoti, tremebundi peribant, etc. Sap. 17. v. 9.


which but slightly struck the eyes of his mind.

It was requisite then to bury him alive in darkness, and make him a Sepulcher
of one night, which lasted the space of three days.

God commanded Moses to lift up his hand toward Heaven, and presently all
Egypt was covered with such a thick and dreadful darkness, that it was even
palpable, and this detestable Kingdom seemed to become a prison full of blind
and paralitick men, who could neither see one another, nor move from the place
in which they had been surprised.

They were all Captives under the rigors of a holy Justice, which casting these
Criminals under shades, furnished the Hebrews with lights, which were to
conduct them unto Liberty.

The Houses of Egypt were obscured with darkness, and resembled Tombs, in which
they were imprisoned. Their punishment, says the Wiseman, was suitable to the
horror of those crimes, where with they were poluted in the obscurity of Caves,
and Subterranean places where they thought to shun the sight of him whose eyes
illuminate the purtest Clarities of the Heavens.

In this dreadful state they were terrified by Specters which flew before their
eyes; they had sometimes the use of their sight to be affrighted by these
tenebrous Phantasms; every where they were in fear, and followed by terrors,
which troubled their guilty Consciences. They also heard dreadful noises, which
made them even die with fear; Cum sit enim timida nequitia, d^t testimoniunt
condemnationis: semper enim praesumit saeva, perturbata conseientia. Sap. 17.
v. 10.

Aliquando monstrorum ^xag^tabantur timore, etc. Sap. 17. v. 14.

Et ignis quidem nulla vis poterat illis lumen praebere, nec siderum limpidae
slammae illaminare poterant illam noctem horrendam. Sap. 17. v. 5.

Apparebat autem illis subitaneus ignis, timore pl^nus; and timore pereulsi
illius, quae non videbatur, faciei, aestimabant deteriora esse quae vid^bantur.
Sap. 17. v. 6.

Et magicae a it is apposici erant derisus, and sapientiae gloriae correptio cum
contumelia. Sap. 17. v. 7.

Illienim qui promittebant timores and perturbationes expellere so ab anima
languente, by cum derisu pleni timore languebant. Sap. 17. v. 8.


and the hideous shapes which were presented to them amongst these dreadful
noises, so lively affrighted them, that for their last remedy, they desired
nothing but Death.

This horrid night could not be dissipated by the Rays of the Sun and Moon,
and notwithstanding the fires which were kindled on all sides, nothing but
black vapors appeared, which were so sensible, that men might even feel them;
but the Lightnings which from time to time withdrew these black veils,
represented to them such strange forms, that they then imagined to see what had
never been. The most Learned were the most confounded, and the Diabolical Art
of Inchanters found real matter for Humiliation.

This infamous and proud Art appeared but mere folly, and the Errors of it
better discovered themselves in that night, than in all the precedent days. The
deceit of the Magicians was never more shamefully decryed; For all the
promises they had made to free Egypt from all sorts of diseases, were changed
into confusion. The prodigious effects whereof they published themselves to be
Masters, appeared chiefly in their astonishment, which was so excessive, that
they scarce knew themselves: And as their eyes saw nothing but Specters and
Phantasms, their ears heard nothing but the cries and roarings of Beasts, which
contributed to their affrightment.

In vain was it for them, to shut their eyes against all these Visions, their
fancies were too full of these sha^^ows, and they were, in a manner, constrained
to see all the objects, wherewith the imagination could be disquieted. ^
Behold the dreadful state wherein these unfortunate people remained, during
the excess of so horrid an obscurity, which lasted for the space of three days;
and that which ought to appear more strange, was, That amongst these tenebrous
Exhalations, and these shadows of Hell, their minds were even darkened, and
their understandings became no less blind than their eyes. Briefly, they
suffer both in Body and Soul such Convulsions and tortures, as cannot be
expressed. Vna enim catena tenebrarum omnes erant colligati; sive spiritus
sibilans, aut vis aquae decurrentis nimium, Sap. 17. v. 17.

Aut sonus volidus praecipitatarum petrarum, etc. Sap. 17. v. 18.


All that were shut up in this Labyrinth, resembled Gally-slaves tied by a
chain of darkness, which held them as fast as if it had been of Iron. In this
slavery, they were tied by invisible enemies, which the Wiseman describes under
the figure of a Whirlwind, which grumbleth in the Air, or of a rapid torrent,
which makes a Sea of the Fields, or of a Rock which cleaves, and is broken into
shivers by the violence of a storm, with a dreadful noise, which continues
until it fall into the bottom of some precipice.

Now all this was but a rough draught, and a sign of the horrors, which after
the expiration of some ages, and revolutions of the Sun and days, were to
produce a night, which shall never enjoy light, and a general eclipse, which
shall endure for all Eternity.

Then all the Evening and Morning Stars shall be veiled, and the Inhabitants of
Egypt, the obstinate Souls, and the hardened Hearts, shall feel nothing but
animated Shafts and killing Darts, which the Eye of a just Vengeance shall cast
in the midst of darkness, to mark out these destroying Ciphers and Characters
with more reason than they were heretofore engraven on the Gates of the Prison
of a certain person, whom a sad and furious despair had transported to kill
himself, after he had exercised all manner of cruelty on his own body. O night
without day! O death without life, evil without remedy, torment without end,
eternal darkness!

But the Israelites, Sanctis autem tuis maxima erat lux, and horum quidem vocem
audiebant, and quia non and ipsi eadem passi erant, magnificabunt te. Sap. 18.
v. 1.
the Children of light, and they that walked amongst the splendours of virtue
and sanctity, shall have no share in this great obscurity; they shall enjoy an
ever-shining brightness, and whilst the Egyptians shall houle like dispairing
men in the Abyss of their darkness, they shall magnify the ineffable
grandures, and the most powerful bounties of him who is able at the same time
to reward the innocent, and punish the guilty, and causes the Sun to rise
under the feet of Saints, whilst he inkindles his lightnings and comets over
the heads of the wicked.

Such will be the great day and night, full of horror and misery, in which
light shall apparently decay, and ashes and dust shall ascend even as high as
the heavens, there to form more beautiful and radiant planets than those which
at present express their Pomp with so much magnificence and splendour.

O my God! be thou then the Sun of my Soul that I may go always increasing
from one light unto an other, and that I may never be invelop'd in this night
with the Egyptians, but that I may without limit, without measure, and without
obstacle, enjoy those blessed aspects, and those luminous glances, which make
the day of days and of eternity.

CHAP. XVI. The Death of the Firstborn of Egypt.
WE must acknowledge that the Philosopher who called Death the Center of
punishments, Timocles.
and the last extremity of all evils, had as just reason, as that Prince, who
after he had sought out all ways to terrify his people, who had taken up
arms against him, resolved at last to have one great Skeleton carried in
triumph, which held a Hand of Justice and a Since, after which, and the sounding
of Trumpets, an Herald was so clothed in black and covered with a large cipres
veil wrought with Thunderbolts and crowned darts who proclaimed that this Queen
was unpittifull, and that she intended speedily to make a horrid Sepulcher of a
great kingdom.

But this funeral pomp was not fully ended, when the most mutinous and most
seditious appeared, who asked pardon, and esteemed themselves more happy to
fall into the hands of a king who might chastise them without depriving them of
life, than of a Queen who cannot punish but with death. It was, I believe, for
the same reason Togaris the Physician of Leon the Armenian cured all the
maladies and pains which extended not unto the dissolution of the body and
soul. In effect, there is nothing so terrible and dreadful as death, and God
himself has never erected more tragic Theaters than when he would cause this
cruel Tyrant to march, which makes all the Catastrophes of life, and after
many combats and actions at last destroys creatures without any possibility of
their foreseeing the place or moment of their destruction.

Hear then it is where after a war of all the Elements, War of all the
Elements.
and a duel of total nature against the Egyptians, these miserable wretches
will find at length a revenging hand, which is ready to cut off the first
fruits of their Marriage, and the most amiable delights of their family.

Methinks I hear the Herald already pronouncing the sentence, and condemning
the firstborn of Egypt unto death: It is Moses who speaks, or rather our Lord
by his mouth; For he is but the Echo of his voice, and the instrument of his
most holy and severest decrees.

To thee Egypt, Media nocte ingrediar in Aegyptum. Exodus 11. v. 4.

Et morietur omne primogenitum in terra Aegyptiorum a primogenito Pharaonis qui
sedet in solio illius, usque ad primogenitum ancillae quae est ad molam, and
omnia primogenita jumentorum. Exodus 11. v. 5.


and to thee Pharaoh, God will manifest by this blow that he is thy God; that
is to say, not only most good, but most just and most powerful; behold the
last of dart of his wrath which is ready to be cast upon thy Palace and upon
thy Empire, and then a sad necessity, and an extreme disafter will oblige thee
to do by constraint what thou oughst to do through sweetness; when all Egypt
shall be buried in a profound sleep, The Angel of God shall go into all houses
and his revenging Sword will have no more respect for him who should one day
ascend a Throne, and bear the Crown of a King, than for the meanest of thy
vassals, or beasts, of which he shall choose the Prince to Sacrifice unto his
indignation.

But who could have ever painted out to us a face covered over with so many
horrors, if after the first colors which have been laid, Moses the most
learned and prudent of men had not been pleased to add some touches of his
pencill unto this dreadful image? Cum enim quietum silentium con incret emnia,
and nox in suo cursu medium iter haberet, Sap. 18. v. 14.

Omnipotens sermo tuus de caelo a regalibus sedibus, durus debellator in mediam
exterminii terram prosiluit, Sap. 18. v. 15.

Gladius acutus insimulatum imperium portans, and stans replevit omnia murte,
and usque ad caelum attingebat stans in ter ram. Sap. 18. v. 16.




It was even in the midst of the Night says Solomon, that this ineffable Word,
to whom all is possible, descended from the height of the Impyreall Heaven, and
thundered over this abominable Land, which was chosen as the Theater on which
the bloody spoils of the rage and obstinacy of Egypt were to be seen.

It carried a two edged-Sword, which transpierced on every side without pity,
and this Sword was no other than this irrevocable decree which was as soon
executed as pronounced in Egypt, filling the whole Country with horrors,
desolations and deaths. The exterminating Angel went from door to door, and
when any one door was found whose Threshold was not sprinkled with the
innocent blood of the Lamb, he entered, and having drawn the curtains, and
searched the beds in which the first born of Egypt reposed, he made upon their
lives a bloody proof of Gods indignation and wrath.

In fine, There was no family in which they deplored not some Infant slain by
this merciless Executioner of Gods Decrees. This punishment was so universal,
Neque enim erat do mus, in qua non faceret mortuus. Exodus 12. v. 30.
that both Lord and Vassal mourned for the same accident, and therein the usage
of the people differed not from that of their King. So that such as remained
alive could not receive consolation from any person, since all had need
thereof, and they could not rest satisfied, even with rendering the last duties
unto their dead, so disconsolate they were; and their own grief joined with
that of their Allies, Friends, and their nearest Kindred did scarce permit them
to be attentive to their own misery. A more general and sensible desolation was
never seen; for all this great and flourishing Empire did swim in tears, and
almost in a moment all its hopes were seen extinguished in blood. Besides, all
these disasters happened for no other cause, than for not having believed what
was denounced to them, and confirmed by so many exemplary and prodigious
Chastisements, wherewith they had been lately afflicted. Vrgebantque Aegy^tis
populum ^exire de terra velociter, dicentes: Omnes moriemur. Exodus 12. v. 33.
It must be granted then, that all these tribulations and punishments were the
inevitable effects of the Finger of God; in this last misfortune, whereby the
Egyptians saw themselves deprived of their Eldest sons, they could not deny,
but that the Israelites were under the Protection of the Almighty, and from
that time they promised to consent unto their departure.

Behold the degrees, Degrees of Vengeance.
by which Vengeance goes ascending even unto the height; we see some marks of
it in the Clouds, which never break in pieces before they cast forth some
Lightnings, which carry the first tidings of the approaching storm. Indications
of a Tempest are also seen upon the Sea, and there is no description in all
Nature, of Gods Justice and Wrath, which has not its peculiar place to arrive
unto excess, and which does not first give some wound, before it gives death:
But also when Threats have proved fruitless, and the Darts thrown by a gentle
hand, served only to invenome the disease, and inflame the wound, Patience and
Mercy, which are the faithful companions of Justice, retire; and instantly, the
Heart, from whence a great stream of Milk was seen to issue, converts it self
into a torrent of Gall; and the Hand which held Palms and Crowns, Darts nothing
but Lightnings and Thunderbolts. Divine Justice resembles that Dragon in the
Indies, which first casts the Darts of his Teeth and Tongue, as so many little
Javelins; afterward he cuts and tears the Skin; and then if a man does not
give way to him, and cast himself at his feet, he kills and eats even to the
bones. We must be then foolish, even unto madness, to oppose God. True Wisdom
consists in rendering our selves so plain unto his commands, that we must never
so much as provoke his mildest Vengeances; otherwise we shall see our selves at
last assaulted by all sorts of enemies. The Air, the Earth, the Sea, Angels,
Men and Beasts, will arm themselves to punish so unworthy a Rebellion. A fair
subject of Meditation.
Alas! My dear Reader, whatever thou be'st, fix then a while thine eyes and
mind upon this Scene, and do not expect till God afflict thee with the last of
his Plagues: If thou art be-nighted, and under the obscurities of a dismal
blindness, pass not even to those mortal darknesses, where the Stars are
extinguished, and where after the death of the firstborn, we our selves must
die and be buried under the Billows of an Ocean, where no calm can ever be, and
where we remain in a flux and reflux of such miseries as will never end.

CHAP. XVII. The Paschal Lamb, and the departure of the Children, of Israel out
of Egypt.
IT was about the beginning of the night, A memorable Feast.
in the midst whereof, there happened a general massacre of the firstborn of
Egypt, that the Hebrews made that famous Feast, whereof the bloody remnants,
and unfortunate spoils, served to mark on the side of their doors, and on their
thresholds, the Safeguard of their whole Nation. It was on the fourteenth day
of the Month, which they called Nisan, when the Moon was directly opposite to
the Sun, and equally shared with him the Empire which they possess in the
Heavens, that they celebrated this admirable Sacrifice, which was one of the
most express and lively Figures of that which Jesus Christ presented unto his
Father upon the Tree of the Cross.

Now to know what order was observed therein, Loquimini ad universum coetum
siliorum Israel, and dicite eis: Decima die mensis hujus tollat unusquisque
agnum per familias and domos suas. Exodus 12. v. 3.

Erit autem agnus absque macula, masculus, annicutus. Exodus 12. v. 5.

Et sument de sanguine ejus, ac po^^nt super utrum que postem, etc. Exodus 12.
v. 7.

Non comedetis ex eo crudum quid, nec coctum agnum, sed tantum assum igni, etc.
Exodus 12. v. 9.

Si quid residuum fuerit, igne comburetis. Exodus 12. v. 10.


and what Ceremonies were used.

First, God had commanded Moses to publish unto all his people, That on the
tenth day of the Moon, of the first Month, every Family should have a Lamb in
his house, and that four days after it was to be Sacrificed without breaking
any part of his bones.

Secondly, It was to be a Male, and not a Female.

Thirdly, It was to be but a year old.

Fourthly, It was to be without blemish or defect.

Afterward, the Thresholds of the Doors and Houses where this Feast had been
kept, were to be dyed with his blood. It was also ordained, That this Lamb
should be eaten, neither Boiled, nor Raw, but only Roasted with Unlevened
Bread, and with Wild Lettice, in such sort, as neither Feet, Entrails, nor
Head must remain, at least, if any were left, it was to be thrown into the fire.

Concerning the Ceremony which they obliged to observe at this Feast, Renes
vestros accingetis, and calceamentu habebitis in pedibus, tenentes baculos in
manibus, and comedetis festinanter. Exodus 12. v. 11.

Erit autem sanguis vobis in signum in aedibus in quibus eritis, and videbo
sanguinem, and transibo vos, etc. Exodus 12. v. 13.


They all ought to be in a posture of taking a journey at their rising from the
Table, and like Travelers to have their Reins girt, shoes on their Feet, and
Staves in their Hands.

The Law also enjoined this repast to be made in haste, and that every one
should be careful to keep the blood of this Lamb, to mark the place where he
lived; to the end, when God should pass about midnight before their doors, to
destroy all the firstborn of Egypt; seeing this blood, he might pass further,
and be touched with Compassion for the Afflictions of his people.

But to what purpose were these marks, and this blood upon the doors? What! Can
there be any thing hidden from him, who beholds in his Word; and in himself all
that is, shall be, and has ever been?

This was then but a Sign, Representions of the Lamb.
and an Image by which the Eternal Father was pleased to manifest, That
whosoever should be marked with the precious blood of this Lamb, ought not to
apprehend any danger. And truly, if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and if the
Ashes of a Red Heifer, which were cast upon those who had contracted some
uncleanness, had the power to absolve offenders, at least before the eyes of
men, and if they put them in a condition to partake of the common Sacrifices
with others; with how much stronger reason ought the Blood of Jesus Christ, who
is the same Innocence, and has been sacrificed for sinners upon the Altar of
Mount Calvary, after he had given his Body for food, and his Blood for drink,
to be more efficacious for cleansing our souls from all sorts of impurities. It
is for this, he has acquired the title of the Mediator of the New Testament;
and in like manner, where the Old Law was confirmed by Ceremonies of Blood, it
was only to prefigure what was to be done in the Mysteries of the New.
Mysteries hidden under the Paschal Lamb.


We must then only understand by the Banquet, and Sacrifice of the Paschal
Lamb, the Sacred Mystery of the Passion, and the Adorable Sacrament of the most
Holy Eucharist, in which the Lamb was masculine and young; that is to say,
Constant and generous, though tender and delicate. He was without spot or
stain, being the Ransom for all sinners, and his Bones were not broken to
testify his strength and courage, which were not overcome by the rigor of
torments. He was roasted in the Ardors of his love, and such only have eaten
him boiled in cold water; who out of mere curiosity, without the flames of
Charity, and the lights of Faith, or without Humility, have eaten him, and
measured his Infinite Grandeurs, by the lownesses of their minds.

Moreover, Septem diebus azymae comedetis; in die primo non erit sermentu^^ in
domibus vestris. Exodus 12. v. 15.
This Lamb ought to be eaten with Azim Bread, without any mixture of Leaven.
Behold an entry into the Feast of the Supper, where he ought to be taken with a
pure Conscience, and a mouth which has been purified by bitter Lettices; that
is to say, With dolourous tears, and waters distilled by the hand of penance.
It is there where we ought to gird our Reins; for otherwise a God of Purity
would abhor to enter into an unclean Habitation, into an unchaste Soul, and
into a Body which serves for a retreat unto the most merciless enemies of
Virtue and Chastity.

We must have Staves in our Hands, and Shoes on our Feet like Pilgrims, which
pass along and seek an abode elsewhere, than in a foreign Country, where we must
quit all we have, or else either soon or late, be forsaken by them.

Let us make haste then, and remember, An excellent thought.
I beseech you, that this very day may be our Paschal, and our passage from
Earth unto Heaven. What stays us in the World? our Parents will pass away, or
else are already gone before.

Our Friends are not here beneath; for the Earth has none but infidel,
perfidious, and envious people. In fine, All that is under Heaven remains in a
continual vicissitude: The face of the Universe changes every moment, and that
which sparkleth the most, has but marks of a vain appearance, which serve
only to dazzle our eyes, and deceive our souls.

Such then, says St. Paul, as have wives, ought to live as if they had none;
that is to say, Without being fastened unto any inordinate affection. Those also
who sigh and groan under the weight of miseries, as if they had attained to the
height of their desires and pretensions; those that are on the top of the
wheel, as if they were under the feet of Fortune, and laden with all
afflictions; those that heap together riches, as if they possessed nothing;
those that are engaged amongst Creatures, and are enforced to make use of them,
as if they were severed from them, or as if the use of those Creatures were
forbidden them.

This concludes, my Brethren, That we must break the Chains which fasten us to
any other thing than God; we must abandon Egypt, and depart out of this
unfortunate Land, where nothing but Plagues, Deaths, and all sorts of horrors
are seen.

Happy are they who follow God and Moses in the thickest part of the desert,
out of these tumults and dangers, Prosc^tique sunt filii Israel de Ramesse in
Socoth, sexcenta fere millia peditum virorum, absque parvulis. Exodus 12. v. 27.
which are so frequent in Cities and Courts. We cannot have more delightful
company than his Elect, who go from Egypt into Ramasses, and from Ramasses into
the Land of Socoth, almost to the number of six hundred thousand footmen,
without reckoning women and little children, nor even the common people which
can hardly be numbered.

I leave you, my dear Reader, to reflect on all that passed in this illustrious
Departure, and during this voyage which was, I believe, the most famous that
has ever been.

Nothing but the echoes of their Songs of Victory, and of the Benedictions they
gave unto their Redeemer, were every where heard, whilst their Tyrants howled
like wolves from whom their prey is taken, or else like Ravens which croak upon
some dead body.

Moreover the convoy of the people of Israel was very rich and sumptuous:
Dominus autem dedit grariam populo coram Aegyptiis, etc.
for they carried with them the most precious movables of Egypt as God had
ordained them. And to this effect he had imprinted on their foreheads and upon
their faces, I know not what marks of sweetness, and so strong and powerful
attractives, or as St. Austin believed, Sed and vulgus promiscuum innumerabile
ascendit cum eis, oves and armenta and animantia diversi generis multa nimis.
Exodus 12. v. 38.

Coxcruntque farinam quam dudum de Aegypto conspersam tulerant and fecerunt sub
cin^ricios panes azimos. Exodus 12. v. 39.

Habitatio autem filiorum Israel qua manserunt in Aegypto fuit. quadringentorum
trigenta annorum. Exodus 12. v. 40.

Hanc observare debent omnes filii Israel ingenerationibus suis. Exodus 12. v.
42.

Dixitque Dominus (...) Moisen and Aaron: haec est Religio, omnis alienigena
non comedit ex eo. Exodus 12. v. 43.

Omnis autem servus emptititus circumcidetur, and sic comedet. Exodus 12. v. 44.

Advena and mercenarius edent etit ex ea. Exodus 12. v. 45.

Omnis caetus filiorum Israel faciet illud. Exodus 12. v. 47.


such secret qualities, as thereby they gained the hearts and friendships of
those who before were their persecutors; So that they desired them to burden
themselves with their spoils, and to depart as it were loaded with the booty
they had gained from their enemies, and pillaged after the victory of a most
just war; which was also due unto them as a just recompense of their labors.
They carried also with them Sheep, Oxen, and all kind of Beasts. Yet had
nothing dressed and fit to eat, wherefore they were feign speedily to set their
hands awork, and cause that which they had brought with them to be baked upon
Ashes.

In fine, This night when God drew them out of the calamities of Egypt, and the
bondage of Pharaoh, was the end of four hundred and Thirty years which they
passed therein, and all the Children of Israel ought to observe it with a
Solemnall worship throughout all generations.

It was also for this cause God said unto Moses and Aaron, that such were the
Ceremonies of the Paschal, and that no stranger, foreign Merchant, nor any
mercenary Servant or bought with money could be admitted unto the banquet of
the Lamb till after the establishment of the Laws for Circumcision; To the end
there might be but one Law both for those of the Country and for strangers
which were mingled with the natural Jews.

All these conditions were most religiously kept and the Israelites omitted
nothing of what God had given in command unto Moses; Feceruntque omnes fibi
Israel sicut praececeper^t dominus Moisi and Aaron. Exodus 12. v. 50.

Et cadem die eduxit Dominus fil^os Israel de terra Aegypti per turmas suas.
Exodus 12. v. 51.


And so on the same day the Lord drew them out of Egypt according to their
Tribes prescribing to them all the laws they were to observe, ordaining them
chiefly Sanctification; that is to say the offering of the first born as well
of men as beasts, to the end by this Sacrifice they should have a living and
animated occasion to recall into their memory the singular favors had been
done them, when during the Murder of the Egyptians all theirs were preserved.

CHAP. XVIII. Pharaoh Swallowed up in the Red Sea.
THE belief of one God, Clemens Allexan. from. 5.
and the Evident demonstration of his justice are so inseparable as it would be
more easy to meet with a spring without Water, a life without a Soul, and stars
without rays, than a Sovereign nature which had not the power to punish
sinners. This then is almost as much as to say, that there is one God and he is
just. We cannot even understand the frightfull terms, and the dreadful
excesses to which his wrath may extend, when he once opens a passage unto those
torrents of gall, and those Whirle-winds of flames which are the sad
messengers, and merciless Executioners of his holy furies. Neverthe less we
must observe with the Wise man, that his most rigorous Vengeances and most
terrible judgments are wont to be Employed against those, who are the most
Potent and Elevated in the World.

The vengeances are eagles which commonly pour not down but upon the biggest
preyes, Exigno enim conceditur meseri cordea, potentes autem potenter tormenta
patientur. Sap. 6.
and Thunderbolts which seem to disdain the Cottages of poor men, to assault
the Towers and Palaces of the greatest Kings. The sweetness of mercy is for the
miserable, A thought able to affright.
and the force of punishments is for the powerful. It is for this cause the
Angels of the day and light were precipitated into eternal nights, and that
Adam, though the first Monarch of the universe, was banished for ever from the
habitation of delights, to live in an Abyss of Miseries and Calamities. It was
for this cause, that proud Babel became the Sepulcher of those Giants who
endeavored to ascend even as high as the clouds; and it is in fine, for a
trial of this self same verity that Pharaoh with all his Egyptian forces is
ready to be swallowed up in the billows of an unexorable Element, Loquere
filiis Israel: reversi castra metentur e regione Phihabiroth, q^ae est inter
Magdalum and mare contra Beel^ophon: in conspectu ejus cast^a p^netis super
mare. Exodus 14. v. 2.

Phihaaroth, ex o^igine, regio tortuosa, Beelsephon canis Aeneus, ex Heb. and
Rab. Solomon. V. And icomium. Magdalum ^ebrai ce sonat turrem. Dicturus est
Phara^ super filiis Israel, coarctati sunt in terra, etc. Exodus 14. v. 3.


which will open its waves to make a dreadful Sepulcher for this cruel and
disastrous Tyrant, about whom the most holy sweetness and the most amiable
patience of Heaven is wearied.

Having then received news that the Israelites were encamped upon the side of
a little hill situated between the Fort of Magdalin and the Red Sea, and very
near Mount Beelsophon, which the Hebrews, and amongst others Rabbi Solomon,
have feigned in their Fables to be agreat brazen Dog: He believed this was the
best way to surround them; and that in fine, these Rocks, dungeons, and Seas,
serve but for a large grave to bury them, and to extinguish for ever the name
and memory of this people, which had occasioned to him so many misfortunes. He
saw them at least in a Condition to die of Hunger and Thirst, after he had
engaged them all in these bad passages, or reduced them to the Necessity of
yielding, and returning unto the same Servitude out of which they thought
themselves delivered: Sovereign conduct.
But nothing being able to resist this wise hand which Levels the most rugged
paths, makes straight all crooked ways, and arms invisible Troops, and the
most powerful squadrons, went on conducting this Miserable Prince directly
into the Abyss, where he intended to precipitate the Israelites; And the
Labyrinth in which he prepares to enclose these fortunate Troops was the
sepulcher of his life, and the unhappy Rock toward which his power and
greatness advanced to be dashed in pieces.

Poor Worldly men, unhappy Egyptians, you who bandy against heaven, and make
war against the Almighty, Tulitque sexcentos currus electos, and quidquid in
Aegypto curruum suit, and duces totius exercitus. Exodus 14. v. 7.
how weak are your designs, and how rash are your enterprises? whither think
you to go with so great a train, with such a convoy, with so much Baggage, and
so much noise? whither think you to conduct all these Instruments of horror
and threats? Are you not afraid that the lightnings of Heaven, and the billows
of the Ocean, will conspire against you? and that at length the same lot will
befall you as unto Pharaoh, who being accompanied with his bravest captains,
and followed by all the chariots of Egypt, went persuing Moses and the Hebrews,
Levantes filii Jsrael oculos v^derunt Aegyptios post se, and timuerunt valde.
Exodus 14. v. 10.
when these poor people no longer knowing on what side to turn themselves, and
with an Eye of pity beholding their conductor, began to say unto him with
weeping and trembling hearts.

Ah Moses! Et dixerunt ad Moisen, forsitan non erant sepulcra in Aegypto, ideo
tulisti nos ut moreremur in solitudine, etc. Exodus 14. v. 11.

Nonne iste est sermo quem loquebamur ad te in Aegypto dicentes, veccde a nobis
ut serviamus Aegyptiis, etc. Exodus 14. v. 12.

Et a^t Moises ad populum, nolite timere: state, and videte magnalia Domini
quae factutus est body, etc. Exodus 14. v. 13.

Dominus pugnabit pro vobis, and vos tacebitis. Exodus 14. v. 14.


why have you brought us into this Solitary place? were there not Tombs enough
in Egypt without coming to seek them in this desert? Alas! where are we? and
did we not tell you, that it were much better to live in the service of the
Egyptians, than to die in these savage places destitute of all humane Succors?

Courage my Friends, answered Moses, you must fear nothing, for God has
determined to make his power appear in your favor, and all these Enemies which
pursue you, are even ready to perish before your Eyes; and when you hold your
arms across, and your mouth is closed, vengeance will Thunder over their heads,
and Justice which has a Thousand armed hands will destroy them in an Instant.

In effect, as soon as Moses had lifted up his Eyes, his Mouth and Hands
toward heaven, his voice and prayers made so loud an Echo, Dixitque Dominus ad
Moysen: Quid clamas ad me? Exodus 14. v. 15.
as God himself asked him, What moved him to such violent Clamours, though he
were not ignorant of it; But he did this to excite him the more, and more
strongly to invite him to pass the Sea.

Where we must note with St. Austin, St. Jerome, Aug. Quaest. 52. Hieronym. in
ps. 5.

Chrysostom. de mul. ere Chanaan.


and St. Chrysostom, that the cries of Moses issued not so much from his lips
and mouth, as from his heart and spirit, which without being intelligible unto
men may be heard by God. Thus then did Moses cry out, speaking unto God, and
his prayer, says Josephus, was in this manner.

O Lord, these Seas, and these Mountains are yours, and ready to obey the least
of your Commands. They may suffer us then to pass; and it rests only in you,
that we take our flight in the air like birds, and find a Sanctuary in every
place where you shall ordain. Tu autem eleva virgam tuam, and extend manum
tuam super mare, and divide illud, ut gradientio fibi Israel in medio mari per
siccum. Exodus 14. v. 16.

Ego autem indurabo cor Aegyptiorum, ut prosequantur vos: Et glorificabor in
Pharame, etc. Exodus 14. v. 17.

Et scient Aegyptii, quia ego sum Dominus, cum glorificatus fuere in Pharaone.
Exodus 14. v. 18.

Tollensque se Angelus Dei, qui praecedeba^ castra Israel, abiit post eos, and
cum co pariter columna nubis, etc. Exodus 14. v. 19.

Stetit inter costra Aegyptiorum, and castra Israel: Et erat nubes tencbrosa,
and illuminans noctem: ita ut ad se invicem toto noctis tempore accedere non
valerent. Exo. 14. v. 20.




No, no, Moses, says God, March in the head of your Troops, and when you
approach near the Sea, lift up your Rod, stretch forth your arm upon the
billows, that you may cut them in two, and cause all your Company to pass over
without wetting their feet. Meanwhile I will harden Pharaoh's heart, who
following you, shall serve as a subject unto my Glory, to raise unto it self an
eternal Trophy upon the sands of this proud Element, which must submit unto my
Laws and Commands. Hence the Egyptians shall learn at their own costs, that I
am an absolute Lord, and that when I please, I can make their Monarch, and
their whole train become the miserable object of an eternal reproach.

At the same time the Angel of God which conducted the people of Israel by a
Pillar of fire during the night, and by a Cloud in the day, went to place
himself between the two Armies, casting forth rays of light, and a pleasing
shadow upon the Israelites, whilst it covered the Egyptians with a tenebrous
night, and a thick darkness, which left them only some glimmering to follow
their enemies, whom nevertheless they could not discern. Where we must observe
with Rupertus, that this two-fac'd Pillar was a sparkling and tenebrous Image
of that Justice which has mortal obscurities for the eyes of the wicked,
though it be most resplendent in the sight of the good. It was also a figure of
the Cross of Jesus, which is a scandal to Atheists, and a reproach unto the
Jews, whereas it is a glory and triumph unto Christians.

In fine, Cumque extendisset Moses manum super mare, abstulit illad Dominus
slante vento vehementi, ac terente tota necte, and vertit in siccum, diviseque
est aqua. Exo. 14. v. 21 Et ingressi sunt filii Israel per medium sicci maris:
Erat enim aqua quasi murus a dextra eorum and leva. Exodus 14. v. 22.
as this Pillar carried Light and Darkness conformable to the orders it had
received, the Spirit which animated this miraculous body, divided the Sea in
two parts, and made a large passage through the Waves, to cause all these
troops to march in safety, which were ushered by a hot and violent wind which
left not one drop of water upon the Sand. This was an admirable prospect, and a
spectacle worthy the eyes and hand of Almighty God. And truly when did we ever
see so many millions of men (without counting their baggage) passing from
midnight till morning between banks of Crystal, and mountains of Water, where
by means of the light and rays of this illuminated Pillar, a man would have
sworn that there had been a thousand little Suns?

But who has ever heard since the time of Moses and Josua, that Seas and
torrents have born any respect unto all those Conquerors who would cut in
pieces even Demigods? Josephus.
I know that some have endeavored to make us believe, that the billows of the
Sea of Pamphylia had shown the like for Alexander, but this is but a Fable,
Strabo, lib. 14.
and according to the relation of Strabo, Fortune was only favorable unto this
Prince, in that he had the good hap to pass over before the arrival of the
flux and reflux of the Sea. I have read also in Socrates, that a certain false
Prophet born in Creet, Socrates lib. 7. hist. 37.
during the reign of Theodosius, endeavored to pass for another Moses,
descended from heaven, and under-took to conduct the Jews dwelling in the
Island of Creet, through the midst of the Sea, even unto the Land of Promise,
but having brought them upon a Promontory, and afterward having almost drowned
them all, he vanished, and made it appear, that he was rather an Angel of the
Abyss, than of heaven, or rather a cheating Devil, than a Moses. Let us leave
him then, and look upon this man, who having ranged his Tribes by companies,
and in order, begins to lift up his hand toward the Sea, which at the same
time made all these liquid bulwarks, and floating arches, it had suspended in
the Air, to roll down, so that all the Egyptians, who had advanced too far, Et
ecce refpiciens Dominus super castra Agyptiorum per columnam ignis and nubis,
interfecit excrcitum little. Exodus 14. v. 24.
were swallowed up, with all their Chariots and baggage. The great God of
Moses, and of the Israelites, having made use of this miraculous elevation of
the Waves, to make for them a deep Abyss, and to erect a trophy for those who
had but the Victims of their fury; It was also through the flames which formed
the Pillar of fire, Et subvertit rotas curruum, ferebanturque in prosundum.
Exodus 14. v. 25.

Dixerunt ergo Aegyptii, fugiamus Israelem Dominus enim pugnat pro eis contra
nos. Exodus 14. v. 25.


that the revenging looks of Justice gave them their last assignations, and
that her hand overthrew their Chariots, and dismounted all their Wheels, to
make a lamentable shipwreck of all this pompous and magnificent preparation
which attended them. In fine, these blind people discerned that God was against
them, and for the Israelites; but too late, Et ait Dominus ad Moysen: Extend
manum tuam super mare, and revertantur aquae ad Aegyptios super currus and
equites eorum. Exodus 14. v. 26.
for when they thought to escape by flight, they perceived that the elements,
and total nature had revolted against them, and that they could have no longer
any refuge or retreit, but under the waves of the Ocean. Behold the end of the
Vanities and Pride of this world; a little noise, and a little splendour, some
threats, very few effects, and after all misfortunes, wounds, deaths, and
particular or general defeats, produce afterward nothing but the grief of
some, Tragical revolution.

Paulas Orosius lib. 1. c. 1.


and the joy of others; and very often the forgetfulness, confusion, and loss
of all. Orosius has noted, that the wheels of Pharaoh's Chariots after this
dreadful accident remained a long time, as it were, imprinted on the Sands of
the Red Sea, as the execrable remnants and bloody marks which may serve for an
example unto Posterity.

Alas! Funcstous Catastrophes.
how many relics of this nature are there in the world? how many Scaffolds
have we seen covered with mourning? how many bodies pierced through with
Swords? how many exiles? and how many fatal events which have often been the
end of a tragical life, and the disgraceful marks of an exemplar death? have
not Caesar's been seen murdered in the midst of the Senate? Nero's massacred by
their rage and despair? a Cyrus beheaded by the command of a woman, and his
head plunged in the blood he had so ardently desired? Has not also an
Alexander been seen passing as lightning, and who for this cause was drawn
after his death by an excellent Painter, under the form of a shining Taper,
which issued out of the womb of a Cloud, to vanish away at the same instant?

Power of men, how weak art thou! Greatness, how little art thou! Ah what! Are
these the bounds, measures, and heights to which all mortals aspire? has
impiety no other periods? And shall Abysses of water be the Monuments of
Pharaoh? In truth, can it possibly happen, that the same Maximian, who sought
to efface for ever the name and memory of Christians, should be strangled in
the City of Marseilles? that Dioclesian who had been his Colleague in the
Empire, and a complice in his designs, should be consumed with putrefaction,
and eaten up with Worms? Is it Bajazet who served for a block to get up a
horseback? Is it not the heart of Julian the Apostate which I see pierced
through with a deadly Arrow? and the body of Valens which burns in flames? and
that of Anastasius, who was as it were precipitated by a Thunderbolt into the
bottom of Hell?

Yea, Dreadful revolutions.
behold the course and dreadful revolutions of all the Successors of Pharaoh:
After this let it be asked where they are, and what is become of all these
triumphant Chariots, these Armies, these People, these Tyrants with all their
power.

Down proud greatness, down these Sacrilegious enterprises, these blind furies,
and these obstinate cruelties, which are more worthy of a Devil than of a man
who has any spark of reason.

In fine, Pharaoh is drowned, this great Dragon is dead, his rage is satiated;
he has heard the voice of Thunder, and Thunder has broken the wheels of his
Chariot; He is no more, or at least is groaning and dispairing in a Pool of
Sulphur, in a Sea of flames, and in an Eternity of Punishments. Moses and the
Israelites on the banks of the shore, and in a Paradise of delights make
Canticles of joy, and Songs of triumph, to render thanks unto God for their
deliverance.

CHAP. XIX. The Canticle of Moses after the death of Pharaoh.
IF the severity of this History did permit me sometimes to mingle with it one
of those Consorts whose Laws and Rules are observed with Measure, Cadence,
Rimes and Pauses, and whose Charms flatter so much the most curious ears, that
with air they nourish and entertain the most Critical minds: I must often make
use of the voices of so many Swans which have taught our French muses the
musical Aires of Judea and Palestine, in lieu of the profane Songs used in
the world, and at Court.

I might often borrow some Harmonies from so many choice spirits which every
day cause that ancient Music to resound in the heart of France, which was
first sung upon the Mountains of Sion, and in the holy Land: And I might at
present make use of the sweet interpretation of those who have procured the
Charming Echo of this famous Canticle to be heard upon the banks of our
Rivers, which was sung by Moses near the Red Sea, after the deliverance of the
people of Israel, and the general defeat of Pharaoh, and his Troops; But since
the nature of the Style, to which I have engaged my self, does not permit me to
use this pleasing mixture, I will content my self with a pure and exact
relation: Nevertheless before hand we must observe,

In the first place, there was never any Quire of Music better ordered, or
more complete. The Holy Ghost was the Master of it, and inspired Moses with all
the Accents and words of this most sacred Consort.

Secondly, Moses first and alone sung a Verse of this admirable Canticle, which
before his time had never been sung: For the Hymns of Orpheus, Linus, and
Musaeus, were not invented till three hundred years after, or thereabouts.

Thirdly, Philo says, that all the people answered the voice of Moses; Author
lib. 1. de Mirab. Scrip.

Apud Aug. c. 21.


where we must take notice, with the Author of the Memorable things of the
holy Scripture, that it was not without miracle, men and Children, and the rest
of the people hearing every verse but once, did yet faithfully repeat the same
after Moses, whose voice could not be heard of all. However it were, they spoke
all with one heart and voice, or rather with millions of voices which came but
from one and the same Source, and from a like Spirit which animated so many
lungs and mouths.

Let us sing, Cantemus Domino: gloriose enim magnificatus est, equum and
ascensorem dejecit in mare. Evod. 15. v. 1.
Let us sing Victory: And let it be every where known, that it is the great God
of Israel who has freed us from Irons, and from the slavery under which we
have so long groaned. He has loosned our fetters, he has broken our Chains,
and thrown both Horses and Riders, Pharaoh and his Troops, Egypt and her
Chariots, into the bottom of the Sea. Let his name be always in our mouths,
his love in our bearts, and the remembrance of his favors in the Center of our
Souls. Dextera tua, Domine, magnificata est in fortitudine, dextera tua,
Domine, percussit inicum. Exodus 15. v. 6.
Now the day of his glory breaks forth in the midst of night, his power has
raised our weakness, and his goodness which he has always showed us, has
triumphed over the malice of those who had designed our ruin. We must never
seek then any other subject for our praises, and for all our songs of Victory,
than this glorious Conqueror, who bears in himself all our hopes and
salvation. He alone is our God, and the God of our forefathers; and for this
cause he alone ought to be the subject of our acknowledgements, and the term of
our Loves. Yes my God! It is thou on whom all our tongues shall be still
employed, all our hearts fixed, The term of love and acknowledgement.
and all minds bent to proclaim, love, and adore nothing but thy Glory, and the
Glory of thy Name, which is no other than that of the omnipotent Lord.

Thou art the great God of Battles, the Conqueror of Conquerours, and thou
have not disdained to arm thy self on our behalf. Thou have also drowned this
potent Army, which plotted our ruin, and thou have given these Tyrants for
food unto Fishes, and the waves of the Sea, who intended to make us the Victims
of their fury. All of us have been witnesses of it, and there is not any one
amongst us, who has not beheld this admirable effect, and this great stroke of
thy arm, which has reduced into ashes and dust, the insupportable boldness of
all our enemies. To this effect thou have caused the astonishing terrors of
thy dreadful wrath to march before thee, Et in multitudine gloriae tuae
deposuisti adversarios tuos: misisti i^am tuam, quae devoravit eos ficut
slipulam. Exodus 15. v. 7. Et in spiritu furoris tui congregatae sunt aquae,
etc. Exodus 15. v. 8.

Flavit spiritus tuus, and operuit eos mare, etc. Exodus 15. v. 10.


thou have raised storms and tempests, as the Messengers of thy indignation,
and the spirit of thy holy furies has suspended the billows, and heaped
torrents upon torrents, to swallow up this insolent Nation. Those waves which
had been a little before volatile and inconstant, were now without motion, and
they all made a dreadful Vacuum to give us passage: But these dungeons of Ice,
when our adversaries were so blinded, and presumptuous as to follow us, melted
on their heads, and when they thought to enclose our Camp, all the waves
tumbled down, and made of them but a horrid shipwreck.

A more strange and Universal Shipwreck was never seen: For all the winds were
dis-inchained, and the Sea being let loose, made but a great Sepulcher, and a
deep Abyss to enclose them.

Art thou also, O my God! this Lord of terrors, and full of Majesty, whom
Angels and men adore, and whom all tongues cannot praise, but by silence, and
whom all understandings are not able to comprehend, but by ecstasy and
astonishment? Subwersi sunt quasi plumbum in aquis vehementibus. Exodus 15. v.
10.


Behold then these proud men in the bottom of the Ocean as leaden bodies,
behold all these murderers who would make us pass through the points of their
Swords, dying stifled in the water, and swimming perchance in their own tears
and blood.

The hand of God, Extendisti manum tuam, and devoravit eos terra. Exodus 15.12.
whose magnificences are holy and terrible, has given them a mortal wound,
and death in the Abysses, has devoured them.

My God! Dux fuisti in misericordia populo quem redemisti, and portasti eum in
fortitudine tua, habitaculum sanctum tuum. Exodus 15. v. 13.
These are thy ineffable bounties, and thy sweet mercies, which have conducted
this distressed people whom thou have delivered, and carried, as it were, upon
thy shoulders, and by the strength of thy arm into this holy Sanctuary, this
Land of Promise, and this Country of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, where one day
Altars and Temples shall be seen built to thine honor.

This then will be a happy passage for us, Irruat super eos formido and pavor,
and in magnitudine brachii tui fiant immobiles quasi lapis, donec pertranseat
populus tuus, Domine. Exo. 15. v. 16
and for other Nations a passage of horror and amazement.

Grant then, O Lord! that at the entry into this desert, our enemies may
conceive such a horror as may render them insensible, and unable to hurt us,
until we are on the Land of Promise, and in our Country, where thou will plant
us as flowers of Paradise, and as so many slips of immortality. Tune conturbati
sunt principes Edom, robustos Moab obtinuit tremor: obriguerunt ^mnes
habitatores Chanaan. Exodus 15. v. 15.
Our Conquerours are already vanquished, and all strangers are affrighted. The
Philistians already groan, all the Princes of Edom are astonished: Fear has
seized on the minds of the most Courageous, and the Inhabitants even of Chanaan
are become as bodies without Soul or resentment.

Fill them then with fear and terror, Dominus regnabit in aeternum, and ultra.
Exodus 15. v. 18.
whilst we shall advance with joy and delight into thy Sanctuary. Meanwhile
reign in the Ages of Ages, and if it may be, even beyond Eternity: For in fine,
Pharaoh is no more, and of all that he ever was, there scarce remains so much
as the memory of it, and none but Mariners shall find some remnants of him upon
the shore, and peradventure some prints of those Chariots, which shall be seen
upon this sand, where he intended to erect his Trophey, his Throne, and his
fairest hopes.

When Moses and the Israelites had made an end of this Canticle, Sumpsit autem
Maria prophetissa, soror Aaron, tympanum in manu sua, egressaeque sunt omnes
mulieres post eam cum tympanis and choris. Exodus 15. v. 20.
Mary the Sister of Aaron appeared like an Aurora which after a Tempestuous
night takes her horn to sound the return of the Sun, and calm, and the retreat
of the Stars, and the storm. This virtuous Dame having heard her Brother and
the Israelites who had ended their Music, began another Consort, in which she
was accompanied by Wifes and Daughters, who answered the accents of her voice.
But such a Feast was never seen; for all of them had certain little Drums at
their girdles, which they beat dancing and singing, according to the manner of
the Hebrews, with a zeal and modesty worthy of this Sex, which has for its
share purity and devotion.

These are the two wheels of their triumphant Chariot, Impiety tamed.
and the two arms which they used to overthrow the impiety and insolence of men
and tyrants. These are the two eyes of their Souls, the Suns of their bodies,
and the two greatest powers they can have even in their weakness. An impudent
and wicked woman has but the name of a woman; she is a monster in nature, and
a spectre which hides under a human skin the Soul of a Maegera: But also when
they have these two illustrious qualities, they are living miracles, and
prodigies of beauty, The portions of Piety and Modesty.
where the Angels themselves abide with a chaste and amorous respect. For piety
gives luster and attractives unto their Souls, and modesty imprints all sorts
of Charms on their faces, then chiefly when these two Virtues are neither
childish, affected, savage, rude, fantastic, light, proud, indiscreet,
feigned, troublesome, babbling, stupid, malicious, nor insolent; but generous,
solid, complacent, sweet, stayed, constant, humble, prudent, real,
condescending, moderate, ingenious, and without any mixture of Gall and Poison.
Then will they be Sirens, from whom nothing ought to be feared, and who may
sing upon the banks of the shore, like Halcions, in the midst of the Sea, they
may be seen in assemblies and meetings, where their hearts and most pure voices
will say with the Sister of Aaron and Moses, and after the defeat of a
lascivious and impious Devil of whom Pharaoh was the figure.

Well then my faithful Companions, Quibus praecinebat, dicens: Cantemus
Domino, gloriose enim magnificatus est, equum and ascensorem ejus dejecit in
mare. Evod. 15. v. 21.
let us sing victory, let us sing together you chaste Virgins of Judea, happy
Daughters of Sion, holy Souls, let us sing Canticles of joy, in honor of him
who is our Redeemer; Lucifer is fallen from his Throne; The Dragon is swallowed
up in the billows of the Sea, and all these Traitors, who intended to drown us,
are overwhelmed with the waves, and where they thought to gather Laurels, and
Palms, they found nothing but an harvest overspread with Cypres, and a vast
Sepulcher in the bottom of the Sea, where they proposed to themselves toerect a
Theater of honor, and a field of Triumph.

This, Cross Fortune.
some will tell me, is a strange turn of Fortune: but to speak more
Christianly, this is an admirable stroke of the Providence and Justice of God,
which frustrates all the projects of the world, and of the wicked, to raise
Theaters unto virtue, and to place Crowns upon the heads of the virtuous, when
they think themselves in a condition to be trampled on by their enemies. Not
that, but sometimes, and very often, Wormwood and Gall are mingled with the
most pleasing waters of their consolations, and with graces, which he is ready
to impart unto them. And not to go farther to seek examples of this verity,
Ambulaveruntque tribus dichus per solitudinem, and non inveniebant aquam. Exodus
15. v. 22.

Et venerunt in Mara, nec poterunt bibere aquas de Mara, eo quod essent amarae:
unde and congruum loco nomen imposuit, vocans illum Mara, id est, amaritudinem.
Exodus 15. v. 23.


let us stay a while in this desert, where the Israelites now are. All their
enemies are drowned in the Sea, and they themselves have marched for the space
of three days in this desolate place, finding nothing but bitter waters; and
if nothing else happen, they will all dye with hunger and thirst; In vain is it
for them to murmur, if Moses worked not here a Miracle, I fear it must appear a
truth, that the Egyptians are dead in the Sea, and that the Israelites will
almost perish near a Sea, or in a place which has nothing but Salt and bitter
Waters, from which it takes its denomination.

Alas! where then is Moses, where is Mary, where is this Star of the Sea, At
ille clamavit ad Dominum qui ostendit ei lignum: Quod cum misisset in aquas, in
dulcedinem versae sunt. Exodus 15. v. 25.
whose sole name is able to cause a thousand Fountains and Rivers to spring in
the midst of Deserts? Courage then, behold thy happy Conductor to whom God has
shown a certain Wood of life and sweetness, which he had scarce put into the
water, but it presently became delicious: Behold a pleasing Metamorphosis! But
we must not wonder at it, since this Wood is no other than the Image of him,
who can change all the torrents and bitternesses of this life into an Ocean of
consolation. It is the Cross which has been steeped in the waters of Mara. O
Cross! O Mara! what sweet rigours, and pleasing bitternesses do all those
find, Venerunt autem in Elim filii Israel, ubi erant duodecim sontes aquarum,
and septuaginta palmae, and castrametatisunt juxta aquas. Exo. 15. v. 27.
who make use of thee to sweeten their sharpest afflictions. Likewise after the
Israelites had steeped this wood in the waters of Mara, and sweetened the bitter
waters of this Desert, they went directly to the Land of Elim, which was
watered with many delightful Fountains, and where under the shades of
Palm Trees, they might sweetly and joyfully repeat their Canticle of Peace and
Victory.

CHAP. XX. The Manna of the Desert.
IT was not without reason God from the beginning of the world took the name of
Elohim, Beneficent Nature of God.
that is to say, a benefactor and obliger. For his Nature is so propense to do
good, as there is no moment in our lives which is not marked with some of his
favors. For this end he has raised the Heavens, the Air, and the Stars over
our heads, as so many treasuries, in which he has enclosed the light and
vital influences, without which the world would be but a confused Mass, and a
dreadful Tomb. He has also peopled the elements, and given to every one what
was convenient and necessary for their infirmities. He himself is a great Ocean
of Essences, and an Abyss of goodness, from whence spring a thousand torrents
of graces, which from Heaven water the Earth, in so great abundance, and with
so general an effusion, that there is no person who may not be satiated
thereby. It seems also that he was, as it were, obliged thereunto, and that if
by some secret of his wise Providence he chance to withdraw his arm and hand,
which fills us with all sorts of benedictions, we may have some cause to
complain and murmur against him. Et murmuravit omnis congregatio filiorum
Israel contra Moysen and Aaron in solitudine. Exodus 16. v. 2.

Dixeruntque filii Israel ad eos: utinam mortui essemus per manum Domini in
terra Aegypti, quando sedebamus super ollas carnium, and comedebamus panem in
saturitate, cur eduxisti nos in desertum istud, ut occideretis omnem
multitadin^m fame? Exodus 16. v. 3.




Behold a while this People, I beseech you, whom a month since he drew out of
Egypt, and freed from the Tyranny of Pharaoh. Behold these good people for whom
he has sweetened the bitterness of Mara, who were scarce gone out of the little
Paradise of Elim, but they presently murmured, because their Meal began to
fail, and as if Moses had been the cause of it, they said unto him, that they
very much wondered at his causing them to depart out of Egypt, and that it had
been better for them to have there dyed amongst their flesh pots and Caldrons,
where they had always something to eat, than to follow him in a desert, where
they were even ready to perish with hunger. Ah wicked and ungrateful men, are
you not ashamed to prefer your bellies before God, and to forget all the
benefits you received in your last necessities?

Nevertheless, this is what all these Apostates and misbelievers did, who
having remained some time under the Palm Trees of Elim, and drunk the waters of
these sweet fountains, being somewhat farther advanced in the desert, and
having met with some wants and difficulties, they presently repented themselves
for having left the fleshpots and dung-hils of Egypt, to enter a wilderness,
into which notwithstanding God had conducted, and freed them from off the
bondage and tyranny of sin.

These gluttons are afraid of abstinence, the Lent has affrighted them, the
just and holy Laws of God and his Church were insupportable to them: They
choose rather to die with Flesh and Blood, upon a dunghill of ordures and
horrors, and near a pile inkindled by the hand of the most infamous passions,
and where there is some sense of Egypt, some flame of Babylon, Lib. 1. c. 7, in
the spoils of envy.
some Spirit of Babel, and some remnant of Cain; than in a place consecrated to
virtue and grace, to repose and joy: this only suits, as I have said elsewhere,
with those future Apostates, and those wicked souls, who soon or late publicly
break their vows without any reasonable cause, and only to content a brutish
appetite, Dixit autem Dominus ad Moisen: Ecce ego vobis pluam panes de caelo:
egrediatur populus, and colligat quae sufficient per fingulos dies ut tentem
eum utrum ambulet in lege mea, an non. Exodus 16. v. 4.

Die autem sexto parent quod inferant and sit dupbum quam colligere solebant
per singulos dies. Exodus 16. v. 5.


which makes them sigh after the fleshpots of Egypt, as this poor people of
Israel did, who thought to turn back after they had passed over the waves of
the Red Sea, and were come to the eighth station of their voyage.

Nevertheless, God was so gracious as to stay them, and to promise Moses, that
Heaven should rain down bread for them in abundance: but they were to make
provision of it for one day only that he might have thereby occasion to try
whether they were constant in his service and in his Law, Dixeruntque Moises
and Aaron ad omnes filios Israel: vespere scietis quod Dominus duxerit vos de
terra Aegypti. Exodus 16. v. 6 Et mane videbitis gloriam Domini: audivit enim
murmur vestrum contra Dominum: Nos vero quid sumus quia mussitastis contra nos.
Exodus 16. v. 7.

Dixit quoque Moises ad Aaron, etc. Cumque loqueretur Aaron ad omnem coetum
filiorum Israel: respexerunt ad solitudinem, and ecce gloria Domini aparuit in
nube. Exodus 16. v. 10.

Factum est ergo vespere, and ascendens coturnix conperuit castra: mane quoque
ros jacuit per circuitum castrorum. Exodus 16. v. 13.

Quod erat quasi semen coriandrialbum. Exodus 16. v. 13.

Nyssenus, Philo, Josephus.

Quod cum vidissent filii Israel dixerunt adinvicem: Manha? quod significat
quid est hoc? ignorabant enim quid esset. Quibus ait Moises, iste est panis
quem Dominus dedit vobis ad. vescendum. Exodus 16. v. 15.

Hic est sermo quem praecepit Dominus, colligat unusquisque ex eo quantum
sufficit ad vescendum. Exodus 16. v. 16.

Feceruntque ita filii Israel and collegerunt, alius plus, alius minu^. Exodus
16. v. 17.


and that besides they might have on the sixth day in a readiness, what they
were to carry away; yet he permitted them to take for that time twice as much
food as before.

Behold then Aaron and Moses, assembling all their Troops, to declare unto
them, that before night, or early in the morning, they should see an evident
mark of the power and providence of him, who had brought them out of Egypt; As
if there Clamor and murmuring had been heard, though this hard dealing had
been used toward them, who were a mere nothing in comparison of God unto whom
they addressed themselves.

God having given such orders unto Aaron as he was to observe in speaking to
this people: Aaron beginning to speak, they saw toward the desert certain rays
of Glory, and of the Majesty of God upon the body of a cloud. After which in
the Evening, as God said unto Moses, the camp of the people of Israel was seen
covered with fat quails, which fell in so great abundance that they might have
enough of them for many days, and the next day the whole desert in which they
resided, was full of dew and Manna, every drop whereof was as a pearl, and like
seeds of Coriander and Crystal, which these poor people seeing, and scarce
knowing what to say, or think, they wholly astonished, looked upon one another,
asking from whence came this pleasing rain, this happy dew, and in fine, what
that might be which they saw and did not know.

Whereupon Moses beginning to speak, answered them, that it was God who sent
them this bread from Heaven to eat, and that for the rest, every one might
gather up as much of it as would be necessary for one day only, which they
did, some notwithstanding took more, others less, but coming afterward to
measure all that they had taken, he that had gathered up the most, found no
more than he that had taken least, Et mensi sunt ad mensuram Gomor, nec qui
plus collegerat habuit amplius, nec qui minus paraverat, reperit minus, etc.
Exodus 16. v. 18.

Dixitque Moises ad eos: nullus relinquet ex eo in mane. Exodus 16. v. 19.

Qui non audierunt eum, sed dimiserunt quidam ex eis usque mane, and scatere
capit vermibus, atque computruit, and iratus est contra eos Moises. Colligebant
autem mane singuli, cumque incaluisset sol liquefiebat. Exodus 16. v. 21.

Indie autem sexta collegerunt cibos duplices, etc. Exodus 16. v. 22.

Requies sabbati sanctificata est Domino cras: quodcunque operandum est facite,
and quae coquenda sunt, coquite. Exodus 16. v. 23.


but every one just as much as was necessary for his present sustenance.

After this Moses commanded that no person should preserve any of it for the
next day, which many having opposed, it happened that all their provision was
found tainted, and converted into worms: whereupon Moses took a just occasion
to be offended with them, and sharply to reprehend their gourmandise and
infidelity.

Thirdly, they were not to make this gathering but by break of day, and early
in the morning, by reason the Sun with his most ardent beams, happening to beat
upon this sweet gelly, it might be disolved.

In the fourth place, this Manna always fell the sixth day, in a double
proportion, to the end the next day, being the Sabbath, might be employed in
the service of God: where we must observe, that this day of repose and rest,
which began six days after the creation of the World, and the feast whereof
had ceased to be kept during the Captivity of Egypt, was then as it were
renewed; for upon that day they ought not to think of what was necessary to
eat, but that from the Eve they were to be provided of it, and to have it
dressed for the Sabbath day. Implegomer ex eo and costediatur in futuras remo
generationes: ut noverint panem que alui ves in solitudine, quando educti estis
de terra Agypti. Exodus 16. v. 32.


Fifthly, God commanded Moses to cause a measure to be filled with it equal to
that of every day, and then to set it in the Tabernacle, that it might be
conserved as an eternal Monument of piety and gratitude, and as an immortal
Testimony of his goodness toward them.

In fine, Filii autem Israel comederunt Mannam quadragint annis, etc. Exodus 16.
v. 35.
during the space of forty years there was no day nor season of the year, in
which all these precepts and miracles had not their courses; It was also a
Figure of the Manna, which would fall in the new Law, and should continue even
unto the last consummation of the world, and of the Church.

It was an Antepast of the Body of Jesus Christ hidden under this adorable
bread, whose species has a particular resemblance with the Manna, and a more
excellent sweetness than that of this bread of the desert. It must not also be
taken until we have abandoned the carnal alurements of Egypt, and the
deceiptfull delights of the world, and sin: This is the food presented by the
hand of Magnificence, and received by those of faith; Whence it comes, that
covetous and unbelieving people find there nothing but worms and putrefaction.

It is also a fruit, and there is no need either of cultivating the Earth, or
sowing any grains or seeds to gather it; But without humane labor it comes
out of the bosom of God its Father, and out of the Bowels of the Virgin, and
amidst the influences and dewes of the holy Ghost, on a Table where souls meet
with their most pleasing repast.

It is little, and enclosed under small appearances of bread. The people are
astonished at it, they ask in this great astonishment, what it is, and how that
could be done which was told them, and what they were to believe concerning it.
Every one might take it, and how little soever it appeared, it was given in
such a proportion, that men received is as great and immense as it is in Heaven.

It will cease on the Great day of Sabbath, and repose after the course of this
life, and when we shall see it with our own Eyes, without veil or figure, in
the Land of promise. There shall we drink large draughts of it, in the torrents
of delight, and in stead of the dew of Manna we shall be satiated in an Ocean
of Nectar and Ambrosia, that is without bounds, measure, limit, or bottom.

Ah! I think the time long till we be out of Egypt, and free from these chains
which linck us to so shameful services, and so unworthy of a Soul ransomed by
the blood and life of a God. Alas! When will this so much desired moment come?
When shall we hear the Canticles of victory, and when shall we go amongst the
daughtes of Sion, to our Country, crying out with a loud voice, that Pharaoh is
swallowed up under the Abysses, and that all those troops of Enemies which
pursue, us have suffered a dismal shipwreck, not only under the waves of the
Red Sea, but under the lakes of fire, Sulphur, blood, and Malediction.

Mean while let us content our selves with the real Manna, whereof our
forefathers have had but the Figure. Let us go unto the Sanctuary, where it is
deposited for us and our generations. Let us eat this bread of Angels, and let
us drink of this wine, which germinats virgins, Let us make use of it according
to the Laws which are prescribed us. Let us go then early in the morning,
that is to say, before the noise and tumult of this great World has stricken
our ears with so many importune, unprofitable, extravagant, and dangerous
discourses, before our Eyes have been surprised by the sight of these Objects
of Vanity, Ambition, Envy, or of some other vice which is yet more infamous;
and finally before the great day be arrived, in which we are commonly so dazzled
by some false splendors, as we can hardly discern the truth.

Above all, since this bread of Heaven has all sorts of Savours, let us not
mix with it any earthly food, or any of all those meats, which the Flesh, the
World, and Hell use to season; for this were to mingle remedies with poison,
and convert a Feast of life into a repast of death; and it had been much better
for them to have remained amongst the Fleshpots, and onyons of Egypt, or at
least to have dyed of famine in some desert, than to have immolated themselves
at the foot of an Altar and Sanctuary as a victime of terror, perfidiousness,
and Execration.

CHAP. XXI. The Fountain of Horeb.
IT is our condition here, In hoc positi sumus. These. 1.3.
says the Apostle, to be tempted on all sides, and it is as natural to man, to
live in the midst of Combats, and assaults, as unto Fishes to Swim in the
water, and Birds to fly in the Air.

It is our profession, our Employment, and one of our most usual exercises, to
be in this conflict, and we must necessarily always attacque or defend. And
often to repulse an assault were to be a Conqueror in this kind of war, and
though sometimes we be almost vanquished, yet we may have the glory of
triumphing, provided we hold out to the last: the reason of this is most
evident, for as much as the assailer being afterward wholly constrained to make
a dishonorable retreat, he that has been so courageous, as strongly to ward
all his blows, and to smile at his threats, remains like a fortress and strong
hold which after a long siedge sees at last the rout of those who had assaulted
it, and where, if the Gates, outworks, Bulwarks and walls had mouths, they
would be heard to cry out victory, and all these breaches would serve only to
say, that even the defenses have overcome.

Now that which causes many to yield at the first approaches, is the little
courage they have to resist, or an overgreat confidence in their own forces,
imagining that they can do what is impossible for them, and that it is easy
long to preserve a place whereof God is not the Govenour. There are also some
who are affrighted at the first difficulty, and presently despair, as if God
were not gracious enough to help them, and powerful enough to furnish them
with what they need. His magnificent hand has been pleased to do us all the
good we have and can expect: Nevertheless we do like the Hebrews, who in the
midst of the raines and dewes of Manna, complain and murmur for want of one
drop of water.

What ingratitude and what cruelty! What would a man say, who after he has
been delivered out of the midst of Slaves and Galleys, or rather out of some
dark prison where he could expect nothing but death, and after he has been
conducted into Palaces and royal Courts, educated and treated as a King,
amidst all the honors and delights which could be invented; should be so
brutish as to complain if once it should happen, that some small attendance
were not soon enough given him: Would not the Prince and Redeemer of this
infamous wretch have just cause to use him according to his desert, and to
change all his favors and bounties into punishments to chastise so horrid an
ingratitude?

God notwithstanding after all the good entertainments he had bestowed on the
people of Israel, Igitur profecta omnie multitudo filiorum Israel de deserto
Sin per mansiones suas, ubi non erat aqua ad bibendum populo, Exodus 17. v. 1.

Et murmuravit contra Moisen dicens: cur fecisti nos exire de Aegypto, ut
occideres nos, and liberos nostros, ac jumenta fiti? Exodus 17. v. 3.


hears the cries they cast forth against him and his Prophet, by reason being
come to the foot of Mount Sina they there found want of water.

Alas! again said they, why have you brought us out of the land of Egypt to
make us die here of thirst, with all our Children and troops; truly, Behold a
brave Conductor. Ah! who has given us this man, who leads us into the deserts,
and into places, where nature is so dry and covetous that she affords us not
one drop of water?

Why do you blame me for it? Says Moses to them, Quibus respondit Moises:
quid jurgamini contra me, cur tentatis Dominum? Exodus 17 v. 2.
and why are you so ungrateful as to forget him, who has conferred so many
benefits on you? Do you think your selves then less considerable to hi^ than
worms and flies, of which he has yet so particular a care? Is it not he, who
gives light unto the Stars, and luster to flowers, and descends without
departing out of himself even into the bottom of Abysses to nourish so many
fishes? His greatness has even vouchsafed to debase it self even into the
bosom of the earth, and on dung hills, there to give Being and life unto
Plants? why do you tempt then this sweet clemency, and which it seems you
would yet constrain to afford you more illustrious proofs of its most
magnificent bounties?

Notwithstanding all this the murmuring increased, and some sedition had
followed, if Moses to divert this danger had not addressed himself unto God,
saying in this manner.

Lord! Clamavit autem Moises ad Dominum dicens,

Quid saciam populo huic, ad huc paululum and lapidabit me. Exodus 17. v. 4.


what to say and do unto this people, I know not; For if I expect any longer,
I fear lest they may be more incensed, and kill me with stones.

The vulgar sort is a great Body covered with eyes and ears, yet very often
deaf and blind. It is an Ocean which has its fluxes and refluxes, and being
once agitated by some storm, spares neither City nor wall, Haven nor bancks,
and is no longer the Ship of which an old Pilot holds the Rudder, than that
whereof some young Mariner governs the stern. It is also likned to the Camelion
which takes all sorts of forms and colors. In fine, That which we find most
changable and dangerous in the world is the picture of a multitude which suffer
themselves to be transported with passions, and what appears therein most
cruel, is that there needs but a rash, and seditious person, or a man who has
nothing to lose, to excite unto the spoil and ruin of all. We must not wonder
then, if Moses fears to be distroyed with stones, and to serve as a prey unto
the fury of those to whom he had been a Redeemer.

But there is a Sun in the world which causes himself to be seen and felt by
blind men, a voice heard by the deafest ears, a Scepter which extends it self
over the waves of the Ocean, which stops the course of unconstancy, and a
spirit of peace which appeaseth the blackest furies. It is the eye, the word,
the scepter, the hand, and the Spirit of God, whose least breath is able every
where to remove trouble, and in a Moment to overthrow all the disturbers of
peace.

March, says he unto Moses, Et ait Dominus ad Moisen antecede populum, and
sum tecum de senioribus Israel: Et virgam qua percussisti fluvium toll in
manu tua and vade. Exodus 17. v. 5.

En ego stabo ibi coram te supra petram Horeb, percutiesque petram and exibit
ex ea aqua ut bibat populus, etc. Exodus 17. v. 5.

M^racul us fountain issuing out of the rock of Horeb. Ex Abulensi.


March in the head of this people, and choose a certain number of the most
ancient; take in thy hand the Rod thou did use to change the water of Nilus
into blood, and I will go as it were before thee; Then being come to Horeb,
thou shall strick a Rock which is at the foot of the Mountain, from whence thou
at the same time shall see water streaming forth, to quench the thirst of all
thy followers.

There are certain Cosmographers, who affirm that this miraculous stone is
still seen, and that a fountain of water continually flows from thence. It
represents unto us, says Theodoret, the fountain of blood and living water,
which issued from the side of him who is the fundamental stone of the Church,
after it had been stricken on the Cross, the sacred liquor whereof has sprung
up even upon our Altars, where at present it still runs through the sacred
channels of the most holy Eucharist. Tertul. lib de Baptis. c. 9.
It was also a lively representation of Baptism, from whence the salutiferous
waters and the most perfect virtue does flow, as it were from the center of the
cross. Some others conceive that this water was a figure of the graces and
gifts of the holy Ghost. And it is to this purpose a Saint, Bern. ser. 67. in
cant. ad illud can^. 2. columba mea in foraminibus petrae, in caverna maceriae,
and.
whose piety is always eloquent, knew well how to observe the chaste Dove of
Sinai, the amiable Shepherdess of Raphidim, the faithful spouse which makes
her abode in the hollow places and holes of the stones of Horch, has found in
this adorable Rock, her resting place, her peace, her repose, her affections,
her strength, her patience, her joy, and all her fairest and most solid hopes:
This is then that which renders her incapable of all fear, and invulnerable to
all strokes, and insensible of all sorrows which cause suffering in others.

Her eyes are bathed in tears, her hands and arms are bruised with torture; And
yet she elevates them unto God to receive some ease, and to testify her
constancy. Her body is torn with scourges, and dilacerated with torments, but
her wounds and ulcers are all as so many mouths, which cry out, Let the great
God live.

Ah! what Theater of Constancy, what prodigy of power, what miracle of Love. O
stones of Horeb, how powerful are you, fountain of Sinai, let thy waters never
dry up: but who ever shall doubt of these wonders whereof Horeb is the source,
let him come, let him be inebriated with these waters of life, miracle, and of
immortality.

CHAP. XXII. The defeat of the Amalekites by the prayers of Moses.
I Know not who said that men were as the arms of God; It is true that they are
not only the Instruments of his mercy, but also the arms of his indignation.
These are sometimes darts which he casts the one against the other, Billows
which mutiny and produce fluxes and refluxes to swallow up each other in a
common Shipwreck, and flames which fasten on a common subject to make there a
funestous Pile, in which they usually invelop themselves even in the same fire.
It is almost impossible that the World can ever enjoy a perfect peace, so long
as there shall be men; for peace it self is very often the mother of war;
repose which gives truce unto the soul raises in it a thousand thoughts and
passions, which arm themselves at the beating of the first Alarm, and advance
into the field upon the first occasion. God himself marches in the head of
battalions, and I know not whether it be not for this cause, he Calls himself
the great God of Hosts, well do I know, that he always presides there, making
use of them to reward some and to punish others; and to the end we may take
notice, that war is one of his scourges, and that there be always invisible
weapons resembling so many torches which he lights and extinguisheth according
to his good pleasure: In fine, it is a most infallible verity, that victory in
war, though wavering and inconstant in its own nature remains in the hand of
God, and it is a Bird which cannot take its flight, but to that part which is
assigned it by his most holy Providence.

The Israelites had a powerful motive to know this verity, in the first war
they were enforced to maintain against the Amalekites after their passage over
the Red Sea. This people had for their King and general the son of Eliphas
called Amaleck, of Esau's race, Venit autem Amalec, and pugnavit contra Jsrael
in Raphidim. Exodus 17. v. 8.
of whom they had as it were inherited an implacable hatred against Jacob, and
the Hebrews who descended from him.

This was the motive of their taking up arms, besides their fear seeing this
great multitude led by Moses, who marched toward the Land of Promise, as if
the happy moment were come, in which the Benediction, which Jacob had in a
manner forced from Esau, was to be accomplished.

Methinks when I cast my eyes upon these mutinous troops, which forraged the
Country, and pursued the Hebrews with so much fury and animosity, I see an army
of hobgoblins, which are commonly called the inciters of Flesh and Blood, which
have no sooner perceived a soul out of the Lands of Egypt and out of the empire
of carnal and mundane pleasures, but they presently take the field to assault
her, and to disturb her entry into the happy Land, which was promised her, and
into some holy retreat.

But we must fear nothing, since we need but lift up our hands to Heaven like
Moses, and implore the assistance of that great Intelligence, who never
abandons those who are inroled under his Standard, and fight valiantly for the
honor of his name. Cumque levaret Moises manus, vincebat Israel, sin autem
paululum remisisset superabat Amalec. Exodus 17. v. 11.
Yes, at the same time that this great Captain lifted up his Arm toward God to
implore his aid, and to give him a sign that he only expected the victory from
him, the people of Israel became Conquerors, but if he chanced never so little
to let down his Hand, these poor people would be lost and overcome by Amaleck.

O God, The efficacy of prayer.
what victory! Kings, Captains, Soldiers, entire Legions are defeated by the
ejaculations, sighs, and prayers of one single man; what efficacy of Prayer! It
is Theater where death finds life, a Throne where weakness takes force and
Majesty, a Field where Laurels and Palms are reaped, a Sea which has always
prosperous gales, and an Air where Graces and Angels incessantly fly. Prayer is
not only, as St. Ephraim says, the monument and Sepulcher of dying men, the
Sanctuary of the Afflicted, the Advocate of Criminals, the Seal and Character
of purity, the Nurse of temperance, the Bridle of impatience, the Conserver of
peace, but the Standard also of War, and the Soul of all our triumphs; who will
wonder then, if the Amalekites be defeated, since Moses, who was the most
devout, ardent, zealous and holy Man upon Earth, made his most humble
supplications unto God for this purpose? Manus autem Moisi erant graves, etc.
Exodus 17. v. 12.

Aaron autem and Hur sustentabant manus eius ex utraque part. Exodus 17. v. 13.


But I fear lest the forces of his Spirit might weaken those of the Body, and
that at last his Arms and Hands stretched out toward Heaven, might suffer
themselves to follow their natural propension toward the Earth. I assure my
self that Hur and Aaron had the same apprehension; for behold them on the top
of a little Hill, Hur on the one side, and Aaron on the other, supporting the
victorious Hands, and the conquering Arms of Moses, Fugavitque Josue Amalec and
populum eius in ore gladii. Exodus 17. v. 13.
whilst Josua pursued, and put to the Sword both Amaleck and his Amalekites,
who discerned in their flight, and by their defeat, that it was more than a
humane Hand which had assailed and vanquished them. Behold then, the victories
of Heaven, and Crowns wrought by the Hand of God, who will have the whole World
to know, that there are for his Soldiers Laurels and Palms in his Hands, and on
the contrary Thunderbolts and Lightnings to dart against his enemies. Non ego o
Imperator victus sum, sed tuipse prodidisti victo^iam qui contra Deum aciem
instruere non desinis, Deum sequitur victoria and ad eos accedet quibus se Deus
dacem praebet. Theo. lib. 4. hist. c. 29.
Trajan was not ignorant of this, when having been sent by Valens to conduct
troops which were defeated under his command, he had the courage to say unto
him at his return, That he had not been vanquished, but rather the person that
sent him, and who was so temerarious as to raise troops against him, whose
steps are always followed by those of victory.

The Emperor Theodorus had the same thoughts, when having received news in a
full Theater, and in the midst of the sports used in the Circus, that a certain
Tyrant his enemy had been overcome, commanded all that were present to follow
him, Niceph. lib. 4. c. 7.
to render thanks unto God, as unto the Author of this prosperous success.

France also knows the glorious victory which Clotarius gained, after a
troublesome and domestique War, Gregorius Turon. lib. 4. c. 16. and. 17.
by the help of prayer.

In fine, not to search further into former ages, and to dis-inter so many
Princes, who have been either Conquerors or Conquered by this kind of Arms, we
need but cast our eyes upon the victories of our incomparable Lewis, and
amongst others on that of the Isle of Ree, where like an other Moses he lifted
up his Hands unto Heaven in the Chapel of Saumeur, and then like Josua he
pursued his enemies even to the destruction of their Ships, and even into the
bosom of the proudest and most rebellious City in the World, where at last he
might justly say unto his France, what God said unto Moses after the
destruction of Amaleck.

Let what passed at this time be written in Annals, Dixit autem Dominus ad
Moisen: scribe hoc ob monimentum in libro and trade auribus Josue delebo erim
memoriam Amalec sub caelo. Exodus 17. v. 14.
and let it be engraven upon all Marbles; Amaleck is vanquished, and men never
shall more speak of him, but to remember his loss and misfortune.

After which Moses erected an Altar for an eternal monument, Edificavitque
Moises altar: and vocavit nomen ejus, Dominus exaltatio mea, dicens, Exodus 17.
v. 15.

Quia manus solii Domini, and bellum Domini erit contra Amalec a generatione
and generationem. Exodus 17. v. 16.


which he consecrated unto God, as unto him who had been a Standard in this
War, and a Trophy after his Combats: Amongst which he had cast down the Throne
of Amaleck, and effaced his name and memory for all eternity.

After this let any one be so rash and senseless as to attaque God and his
servants, to suffer themselves to be transported at the first sight, and at the
first assault of an impudent Love, of a Carnal affection, of a violent
pleasure, of a deceiptfull beauty, of a charmed imagination, of a contagious
desire, of a brutish satisfaction, of a mortal envy, and of so many passions,
which use to pursue those who forsake the World and Egypt, and which like
Amaleck and the Amalekites, are destroyed by the least shafts of courage and
virtue, but chiefly of piety and confidence in God: The which may be easily
acquired and preserved with that Saint, who has made, and does make every Day
so many Saints by this cogitation.

Here on Earth there are momentary pleasures, Sanctus Franciscus. Modica hic
voluptas sed postea poena aeterna, modicus hic labor, sed postea gloria aeterna
multorum vocatio, paucorum electio, omnium retributio; aeternitatem cogita.
and afterward eternal torments: There are afflictions and difficulties in the
World, which end almost as soon as they begin, and in Heaven there is a repose
and glory which shall be immortal. Many are called, but few chosen, and yet
all shall be rewarded according to their deserts;

Think then on Eternity.

CHAP. XXIII. Moses is visited in the Desert, where he Creates Judges and
Magistrates.
SCarce are there any Creatures in this World which are not fastened by some
ties: But amongst others, men are there as it were in a Dungeon or Gally, where
nevertheless some have Irons and Chains about their Necks, Feet and Hands,
Captivity of Creatures.
others have but Bonds of Silk, and very often of blood which detain them like
so many Andromedes upon a Rock, or like ravenous Birds upon a heap of Carrion,
from which they cannot rise to elevate themselves into the Air. Amongst this
number are those who swear not but by their country, and by those little Gods
the Ancients placed near the Chimny Corners, or at the Beds Feet, as their
domestic Tutelaries, and the Genius of a Closet or House. I place also in this
road all those who have servile amities and blind passions for trifling things,
unworthy to be regarded by a generous and courageous Spirit, who nevertheless
you shall very often see amusing themselves in the chase of Flies, handling a
Spindle, or carrying a Distaff like Sardanapalus amongst a few disdainful
Dames, which inslave him by a thousand Childish ^oyes. There are other Chains,
which though lawful, are yet often more dangerous, not to be broken but with
violences, which cannot be practiced upon our selves, without a most particular
grace. Now such are all the ties which nature has woven in our Hearts, and in
our Veins, and which so powerfully fasten a Father and Mother unto their
Children, an only Brother to his Sister, a Servant to his Master, and two
faithful friends to each other, that nature were almost obliged unto a miracle
to require of her this separation.

Nevertheless it is a necessity, which can almost admit of no delay, and from
which a man cannot be exempted, when he resolves to serve God, and obey his
most holy will: He is not yet so rigorous as not to permit the exercise of
those duties which every condition requires, provided it be done with order
and according to the rule of prudence and piety; For in such a case he being
the Author of nature as he is, he is so far from destroying her, as on the
contrary he will preserve her, but above all he will be first served.

And this is what Moses did, when he was commanded to obey God, and to go from
Madian into Egypt to solicit his affairs, and to negotiate for his people
with Pharaoh; For he left his Wife and Children, and what he had most dear in
the world, to go with his brother Aaron: Cumque audisset Jethro, sacerdos
Madian, cognatus Moysi, omnia quae secerat ei D^us, etc. Exodus 18. v. 1.

Tulit Sephoram uxorem Moysi quam remiserat. Exodus 18. v. 2. Et duos filios
esus. Exodus 18 v. 3. Cumque intrasset tabernaculum, Exodus 18. v. 7.

Narravit Moses cognato suo cuncta quae fecerat Dominus Pharaoni, etc. Exodus
18. v. 8.

Laetatusque est Jethro super omnibus bonis quae fecerat Dominus Israeli. Exodus
18. v. 9. Obtulit ergo Jethro cognatus Morsi holocausta and hostias Deo;
veneruntque Aaron, and omnes seniores Israel, ut comederent panem cum eo coram
Deo. Exodus 18. v. 12.

Altera autem die sedit Moses, ut judicaret populum, qui assistebat Moysi a
mane usque ad vesperam. Exodus 18 v. 13.

Quod cum vidisset cognatus ejus, omnia scilicet quae agebat in popul^, ait:
quid est hoc a ^od facis in plebe? etc. Exodus 18. v. 14.


but when his Orders were executed, and when Pharaoh and Egypt, Amaleck and the
Amalekites were exterminated, and the Israelites conducted even unto Mount
Sina, after so many Miracles wrought for their sake, behold Jethro the Priest
of Madian appearing, who brought back Moses Wife, and two Sons whom he had left
behind, when he took his Journey into Egypt. He received him with very great
affection, and having brought him unto his Tent, he related to him all the
particulars of what had passed, and the Prodigies God had wrought by his hand.
Jethro then manifested an unspeakable joy, and immediately rendered thanks unto
God, who had freed them all from the tyranny of Egypt, and the power of
Pharaoh, freely confessing that the God of Israel was the God of Gods, whose
goodness, power, Justice, and Majesty had made themselves to be seen, and felt
by his enemies: In testimony whereof he took from the hand of Moses a Victim
and Sacrifice, which he offered with a most perfect faith, and a most holy
piety. Then the Banquet followed, at which all the Ancients of the people were
present, with an intention to celebrate this Feast in honor of their God.

The next day Moses began to hold his Sessions, to render Justice unto the
people, who from morning till evening stood round about him: The which Jethro
seeing, astonished at the care and pains he took in an employment where he
scarce had any intermission; he asked him why he took singly upon himself so
difficult a charge, and of so great concernment?. To which Moses having given
him this answer, That he could not be quit of this multitude who desired from
his mouth to learn the Laws of God, and to decide their differences.
Cuirespondit Moses: Venit ad me populus, quaerens sententiam Dei. Exodus 18 v.
15.

At ille, non bonam, inquit, rem sacis. Exodus 18. v. 17.

Stulto labor consumeris and tu, and populas, etc. Exodus 18. v. 18.

Provide autem de omni plebe viros potentes, and timentes Deum, in quibas sit
veritas, etc. Exodus 18. v. 21.

Heb. Chald. Septuag. and latina Romana. Et constitue ex eis Tribunos,
Centuriones, and quinquagenarios, and Decanos, Exodus 18. v. 21.

Qui judicent populum omni tempore, quidquid autem majus fuerit, referant ad
te, etc. Exodus 18. v. 22.

Si hoc feceris, implebis imperium Dei, and praecepta ejus poteris sustentare:
and omnis hic populus revertetur ad loca sua cum pace. Exodus 18. v. 23.




Truly says Jethro, you are a good man, and you put your self unprofitably
unto much trouble: Do you not perceive that it is impossible for you to
content, and exactly to satisfy all parties? Rest satisfied then, to teach
them what purely appertains unto the worship of God, and to the Ceremonies they
must observe to lead a holy life in their Religion. As for affairs of less
importance establish Judges and Magistrates, which may be powerful in
Authority, sincere and real in their words, enemies to Avarice, and, above
all, fearing God; to this effect create Tribunes, Centurions, Quinquagenarians,
and Decemviri, which ought to be ready at all times, and if any difficult point
arise, they will address themselves unto you, that their jurisdiction may
extend only to what shall be of less consequence, and so every one having his
office, yours will be more light and easy to bear. If you perform what I say,
you will do what you ought, and what God requires at your hands, and all this
people will return from hence in peace and concord to their own houses.

Moses followed his counsel, and did his best to choose such men as might have
the qualities which Jethro had required; these are also the four Wheels upon
which Justice is to move.

Power goes first, Quibus auditis, Moses fecit omuia quae ille suggesserat.
Exodus 18. v. 24.

Et electis viris strenui^ de cuncto Israel, constituit eos princrpes populi,
etc. Exodus 18. v. 25.


and this is a certain Authority which appears ever on the face, acquired by
the Virtue of courage, by resolution in its enterprises, by constancy in its
decrees, and by I know not what force which cannot be perverted, nor terrified
by all those deceitful and magnificent preparations, and by those thundering
threats which are wont to overthrow Tribunals, and even tear in pieces the
hands of Justice.

Its Companion, and without which all force and power would be but a great
Statue with a fair outside, and deceitful effects, is Sincerity, Girald. Synt.
1.
which the Ancients used to fasten about the necks of their Judges, even after
their death, and to ingrave on their Marbles with so lively eyes, and such
animated looks, as it seemed that it had a mind to revive after their death,
and upon their Tombs. It is also that Virgin whose beauty is immortal, whose
power is invincible, whose attractives and charms are without deceit, whose
birth is noble and illustrious, Epistola ad Philopaemenem, Hipocrates.
and whose eyes, says Hippocrates, are like two Stars, which appear in the
firmament.

Under the third Wheel, Avarice is represented as a Captive, and stifled under
the feet of a Virtue, which has nothing base, nothing sordid, which having
other men's interests in her heart and power, reserves nothing for her self.

In fine, without the Fear of God, this Chariot cannot march; for this Fear is,
as it were the Mother and nurse of all Virtues, without which not only all
Human, but even all Divine Laws either soon or late are violated.

In case these four Wheels be entire, and if Wisdom guide the reigns of this
Chariot, it is not to be doubted but its course will be prosperous, and that in
all Countries where Justice moves, Plenty, Peace, and all the pleasures of life
will be quickly seen following their Mother and Mistress, with Crowns of
Olive-branches on their heads, and Palms in their hands, Songs, Victories and
Triumph in their mouths, to publish every where that their Empire is as great
as can be desired.

CHAP. XXIV. The Sanctification of the people to receive the Law of God upon
Mount Sina.
IN Beasts we very often observe certain instincts, Fair draughts of the
Divinity.
which have something. I know not what, of human; And it seems also that God
has been pleased to cast into their Souls, the seeds of his own Nature, who,
although infinitely elevated above all Beings, yet abaseth himself even unto
the most vile and weak creatures, to give them, as it were, an impression of
their Creator. They may boast to have some marks of the hand which has
produced them, and of the spirit which has inlivened them. The Lion has some
resemblance of his Majesty and Vigilance, the Lamb of his Meekness and
goodness, the Pelican of his Love, the Dove and Ermine of his Purity, the
Phoenix of his Unity, the Eagle of his most wise Providence, and the
affectionate care he has of his. Surely he compares himself to that Royal
Bird which has so often manifested his Zeal and affection, not only toward
those little Eagles, but also toward all sorts of persons, Plinius lib. 10. c.
3. in Sesto.
and namely toward Children. Witness the Bird of the I Will of Sestos, which
having been brought up by a young Virgin, went afterward in pursuit of prey,
to procure her nourishment; not leaving her even in death, but accompanying her
to the flames of her Pile, where she was burnt with her dear nurse; Witness
that Bird which Ptolomy, Suidas in Lage.
the Son of Arsinoe nursed up with the blood of Quails, and which served him
as an Umbrello against the greatest heats, and for a Canopy against the Rain,
chasing away from him all those Birds which would approach him. Pausanias lib.
4.
It is known what Pausanias reports of Aristomenes, whom an Eagle drew out of a
deep Pit, into which he had been thrown: As also what Plutarch has written in
his Parallels of a certain Damsel, who being ready to be immolated, saw an
Eagle stooping near her, which wrested the Sword out of the hand of the
Sacrificer, and laid her upon a Heifers neck; from whence her fellow Citizens
knew, that heaven did not approve of this bloody Sacrifice, Athenaeus ex
Phi^arce.
Athenaeus makes mention also of a young Eagle, which having been brought up by
the hand of a Child, loved him afterward as his brother, assisting him even
during his Maladies, with so strong and violent resentments, as that when this
Child did not eat, this poor Bird abstained also from food, continuing his
amiable tendernesses, even to the flaming Pile, in which they were both buried
under the same Ashes. We have a thousand such examples amongst the Profane,
and more also in our holy Histories, where on the one side St. Medard is seen
in the midst of a field under a great Eagle sheltring him from the Sun; And on
the other side a generous Martry to whom Eagles served for guards unto his
body, even after death; in the same manne^ as those by which the Sacred
relics, and chaste spoils of St. Stanislans, Bishop of Cracovia, were kept
for the space of three whole days, lest they might be devoured by Dogs, or by
some other beast.

After so much love, piety, zeal, and foresight in this Bird, Moses autem
ascendit ad Doum, vocavitque eum Dominus da monte, and ait: haec dicit dominus
Jacob, etc. Exodus 19. v. 3.

Vos ipsi vidistis quae secerim Aegyptiis, quomodo portaverim vos super alas
aquilarum, and assumpserim mihi. Exodus 19, v. 4.


ought we to wonder, if God having conducted his people unto the foot of Mount
Sina, called Moses from the top of this Mountain, commanding him to say from
him, unto the Children of Israel, that they must remember what he had done to
the Egyptians for their sake, and how he had carried them on his wings like an
Eagle, which as Rabbi Solomon very happily observes, uses to bear his young on
his shoulders, whereas other Birds carry them in their talons, or in their
beaks, lest those that fly over their heads may seiz on them: But the Eagle
fears only man, who is under her feet, and therefore she opposes her self as a
buckler against the Darts and Arrows which may be shot at them, preferring much
more the life of her young before her own.

Moses, say then boldly unto this people, that God is an Eagle which carries
them upon his wings, and if they believe this truth, which has been so often
proved, assure them from me, that he will have a most particular care of their
affairs: And although the whole world be dear unto him, Et vos eritis mihi in
regnum Sacerdotale, and gens sancta. Exodus 19. v. 6.
as being his, yet he will have no common tendernesses for them; and that in
fine he will make use of them, as of so many Kings, and Priests to command over
other Nations, and to render unto him the service and worship which is due unto
his regality, V. Chalda. verse.
upon which all the Miters and Crowns of the Universe depend.

It is the same promise which God made unto all those who serve him, and live
according to the rules of Christianity: For they are a chosen people, a holy
Religion, and a Royal Priesthood. They have a power and command which puts a
Scepter into their hands, Venit Moses, and convocatis majoribus natu populi
exposuit omnes sermones quos mandaverat Dominus. Exodus 19. v. 7.

Responditque omnis populus simul: Cuncta quae locutus est Dominus, faciemus.
Exodus 19. v. 8.

Ait ei Dominus: jam nunc veniam ad te in caligine nubis, ut audiat me populus
loquentem ad te, and credat tibi in perpetuum. Exodus 19. v. 9.


and a Diadem of honor, and immortality on their heads.

But to return unto Moses, when he had related unto the Hebrews all that God
had said unto him, and when they all expressed their gratitude for the favors
they had received from him, and were ready to obey such just commands; God
advertised him that he was going to establish their Lawgiver, and to render
this action more glorious, as also to effect that the people which are usually
led more by sense than reason, might have more powerful motives to believe
him, he said that he would appear to them in the form of a Cloud, in which he
would speak unto them aloud, in such a manner, as having heard him, no man
could any longer doubt, but that this most Divine and heavenly law was dictated
by the mouth of a God. And this peradventure moved the Gentiles, the Turks,
Zoroaster, Minos, and Mahomet, Foppery of Idolaters and Turks.
impudently and falsely to boast, that they had spoken unto a God, and received
their Laws from his hand. In like manner also Numa Pompilius made the Romans
believe, that he had been instructed by the Goddess Egeria concerning his
Laws. And Pithagoras for the same purpose had made an Eagle so tame, that she
returning to him after her flight, gave him occasion to lie, in saying that she
brought him his Principles and Maxims from Heaven, which afterward he caused
to pass for so many Oracles: But these were but illustrious falsehoods, and
glorious Impostures, deceitful artifices, and subtle illusions to ruin the
ignorant, whereas the Laws of Moses were Laws of the increated Wisdom,
Decrees of the prime verity, and rules of Salvation for an entire people.

It was requisite then carefully to prepare themselves for so important a
reception, Qui dixit ei: Vade ad populum, and san ctifica illo, hodie, and
eras, laven^que vestimenta sua. Exodus 19. v. 10.
and Moses received command for this effect to advertise all the people, that
they ought to purify themselves for the space of two days, to the end upon
the third they might be ready to receive the Law. Now this preparation was no
other than a general Sanctification, which first consisted in an exterior
neatness, principally in apparel.

Secondly, Et ne appropinquetis uxoribus vestris. Exodus 19.8.

Et sint parati in diem tertium, etc. Exodus 19. v. 11.

Jamque advenerat dies tertius, and mane inclaruerat, and ecce caeperunt audiri
tonitrua, S. Hieronymus ad Fabiolam.

Ac micare fulgura, and nubes densissimae operire montem, clangorque buccinae
vehementius perstrepebat, and timuit populus qui erat in castris. Exodus 19. v.
16.

Totus autem mons Sinai fumabat, eo quod descendisset super eum Dominus in
ignes and ascenderet fumus ex eo quasi de furnace, eratque omnis mons
terribilis. Exodus 19. v. 18.


in abstaining even from lawful pleasures.

Thirdly, in an expectation full of Piety, and respect, in consideration of so
holy and great a favor.

This being then done, as Moses had ordained on Gods part, presently on the
third day, which was that of Pentecost, the siftieth after Easter, and after
the departure out of Egypt, all the Israelites appeared very early in the
morning near Mount Sina, and drawn together in a Ring, and within those limits
which Moses had prescribed them, no person presuming to touch the Mountain,
according to the Prohibition made to that end, Behold a dreadful nose of
Trumpets, accompanied with Thunder and Lightning, which began to send forth
Claps upon Claps, issuing forth of a thick Cloud, wherewith the Mountain was
covered, and which served for a Pavilion unto his Sanctuary, upon which God
intended to show his Majesty, and establish his Laws. These poor people had
never seen so dreadful a storm, never such a flaming Pile, never so stately a
Theater, never so pompous a Throne, and never so magnificent, resplendent, and
terrible a Tribunal. One would have sworn that the Element of fire had fallen
on Mount Sina, and that all the Infernal parts, or rather all the heavens had
darted forth their Flames and Thunderbolts upon this Mountain, out of which
there did rise so horrid a smoke, that it reached even to the Stars; and albeit
the Sun was in the beginning of his course, yet he seems to make a stand, or at
least his light became obscured, to produce on Sina a day of flames, and a
night of horror and darkness, where in fine all the people being assembled,
and with a respect worthy of the place, and of him who had descended to speak
unto Moses, and to dictate unto him all that was to be done, the Ancient Law
was published on the same day that the news of it was divulged, and almost with
the same Circumstances which rendered the Feast more illustrous, and the action
more full of affrightment and veneration.

CHAP. XXV. The Promulgation of the Law upon Mount Sina.
IF we should ask of a man what he is, and. whether in truth he be a man, it
were to deride him; Nevertheless as there are three sorts of Men within us,
whereof one has the life of a Plant, the second the life of a Beast, and the
last a life resembling that of Angels: if any one be found having but the two
first, he would be rather a beast, and an herb, than a man; and what ever may
be said of him; he would have but the name, or at most some exterior form of a
man, which may be counterfeited with plaster or mortar. To be truly a man, he
must have qualities, and perform those functions, which deserve this name. And
in a word, it is requisite to evidence that he has in himself the Source of a
human and reasonable life, which is an intelligent Soul; and the powers of this
Soul, which are memory, will, and understanding, which though the most noble
and excellent, would yet be nevertheless a Sun in Eclips, a Torch without
light, a Star without rays, a Well without water, a silent Mouth, a blind Eye,
an Orchard without Trees, Fruits and Herbs, if it had not the knowledge of good
and evil, of truth and falsehood, and of what is profitable or pernicious to
him; but above all of what God has expressedly commanded him: Wherefore every
man who desires to be a man, and live like a man, ought to understand the
Mysteries which have been revealed to us by God himself, and proposed in the
Church. He must submit thereto his reason with faith, love, and reverence. He
ought to be in the Church, as in the midst of a choice plot of ground watered
with seven beautiful Fountains, which are the Sacraments, and this plot must
not be far distant from Mount Sina, nor the Land of Judea, to the end he may
there learn what concerns his Salvation, and see with his eyes, and hear with
his ears the voice of God, and this Angel which represents his person, and who
by sound of Trumpet, and in the midst of Flames and Fires proclames those Laws
and Commands of which we must not be ignorant, if we be men.

CHAP. XXVI. The subversion of Idols.
I Am, The first Commandment of God.
says he, thy God, and thy Lord, thou shall have no other God than me, and
thou must not make to thy self any Idol, to adore it,

Behold the first Thunderbolt darted against Idolaters, Non habebis Deos a^enos
coram mc. Exodus 20. v. 3.

Non facies tibi sculptile, etc. Exodus 20. v. 4


Magicians, Atheists, Sorcerers, Diviners, and all those, who by a Sacrilegious
worship, by horrid impiety, by abominable Superstitions, or in any manner
whatsoever, adore any other than God, unto whom all the honors which are
rendered unto his Images do relate, whose rays discover, as it were, to our
eyes, what is hidden from them. Whence it evidently follows, that those
Grammarians are ignorant in the terms of the Sacred Bible, who call an Idol any
kind of Image; for we ought not properly to call Idols, but those counterfeit
and Sacrilegious figures, which the wicked will have pass for Divinities.
Otherwise God had not commanded Moses to set up a Serpent in the Desert, and he
had not placed on the side of the Sanctuary the Images of Cherubins, and
therefore the forbidden Idols are those which Superstition, Impiety, or some
inordinate passion will adore, and by this means ravish from God the honor
which is due unto him, as unto the Lord of all things, and who is wont, either
soon or late, to punish all those that prove rebellious unto his most holy
commands. For he is a powerful and zealous God, who visits the iniquities of
Fathers even in the Cradles and Sepulchers of Children, to revenge even unto
the third and fourth generation, but whose mercies are infinite, for all those
that love and honor him as their God.

CHAP. XXVII. An Edict against Blasphemers.
THou shall not take the name of God in vain. The Second Commandment.

Non assumes nomen Domini Dei tui in vanum, etc. Exodus 20. v. 7.


That is to say, thou shall not be so bold as to borrow this most holy name to
authorize thy perjuries, thy false oaths, and thy depraved Customs.

Blasphemers, and you who so easily swear, behold a coal drawn out of the fire
of Mount Sina to burn those accursed tongues which without necessity, without
reverence, and contrary to all truth, impudently riffe the ineffable name of
God, and of his Saints.

This language is execrable in the mouth of a Devil, Criminal in that of an
Atheist, and what will it then be issuing from the heart and lips of a
Christian? Nevertheless it is now an ornament in the discourses of Cavaliers;
they are the threats of Ranters, the Vizards under which the most horrid
treacheries are concealed, the veyles wherewith a disloyal Oath is covered,
and the furious ingredient of the most brutish and blindest passions.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Sanctification of the Sabbath.
REmember to sanctify the Sabbath day. The third Commandment.

Memento ut diem Sabbati sanctifices. Exodus 20. v. 8.




This Sanctification was scarce any other than that with which we are now
obliged to celebrate the Feasts of the Saints, and Sundays. This is then a day
of repose. This was a day of rest, in remembrance of that on which God took
his, Sex enim diebusfecit Dominus caelum and terram, and mare, and omnia quae
in eis sunt, and requievit die septimo, etc. Exodus 20. v. 11.
seven days after the Creaation of the World, and to the end every week we
might have a set time to think on this amiable benefit, and to render thanks
for it unto our Creator. It was done also to the end the Hebrews might have
this day to celebrate that of their departure out of Egypt, and of their
deliverance; and that all men and maidservants might at least have this day to
give some ease unto their labors.

Plutarch was then deceived, who affirms that the Hebrews had Instituted this
Sabbath in honor of Bacchus, as well as the other Gentiles, who believed that
it was done in honor of Saturn; for the ground of this Feast was no other than
what I newly related; And the Order observed in gathering up of the Manna was
but for the same end.

CHAP. XXIX. The duty of Children toward their Parents.
Honor thy Father and Mother, The fourth Commandment.
that thy days may be long upon the earth, which the Lord thy God will give
thee. Honora Patrem tuum and matrem tuam, ut sis longaevus super terram, quam
Dominus Deus dabit tibi. Exodus 20. v. 12.


In truth, it is a very reasonable thing to bear respect and love, to succor
and obey those to whom, next unto God, we owe our lives; and we must be more
insensible and more unnatural than beasts, to refuse these affectionate duties
to our Parents, and to those whom we ought to esteem as Fathers, Mothers, and
Superiors, such as heaven has placed over our heads to rule and govern us,
either concerning temporal or spiritual matters. We must banish then out of
the world, and out of Families, all those little Dragons and domestic Vipers
which have neither teeth, claws, gall, nor poison, but to tear the heart and
bowels in which they have been formed and conceived, and to destroy those of
whom they hold their lives. All houses ought to be Temples consecrated unto
love and piety, as that which was built at Rome in lieu of a Prison, where a
young Lady had nourished her Mother with her own Milk, seeing the Gaolers
hindered her from carrying any food to her. O holy piety! where are now these
Temples and Altars? where do we see such Daughters give suck unto their
Mothers, as this gallant Roman did? or Fathers to have Daughters like this
other of whom Valerius Maximus makes mention, Valor. Max. lib. 5.
who found out the means to nourish her Father in the same manner, and had the
honor to be the Mother of her Father, who rendered his last sighs in her
bosom, sucking a drop of Milk from her breast? Moreover, if I am not deceived,
can there be found more Daughters than Sons, who work the like Miracles? their
Sex is more inclinable to sweetness and piety, and to those amiable
tendernesses which reach even to the highest pitch of generosity. There have
been heretofore Men, who desiring to suffer death for their Fathers, have
rendered themselves immortal. Such a one was that Lock-smith of Toledo, who
exposed himself unto the extremest tortures to free his Father, and to obtain
his life, with his pardon. But the example of Alexius, Son to the Emperor
Isaac, is more illustrious, who in the midst of the Acclamations of Greece,
which saluted him King, had no ears, but to hear the plaints of his Father, no
eyes, but to behold his miseries, and no power, but to replace him on his
Throne, and in the Empire, whereof his Brother had deprived him.

It is not then against this young Prince, nor against his like, that Sina will
shoot poisonous Darts, and deadly Arrows, as against Paricides, but on the
contrary, after a long sequel of years, they shall have lived in this world,
the course of their glory will not find its period, but in Eternity, which can
never have an end.

CHAP. XXX. A sentence of Death against Murderers.
THou shall not kill. The fifth Commandment. Nonoccides. Exodus 20. v. 13.


This Precept does not only forbid those execrable Murderers, whose Swords and
Daggers are plunged into men's bosoms, and those horrid butcheries where fury
is animated against a body to gnaw it as a Vulture would do his prey, or like
a Tiger, to tear and eat it even to the bones, or to consume it with a slow
fire like a Devil, whose torments give death without taking away life. It is
then by this Law, that God prohibits not only Murders, but all sorts of
exterior violences and injuries, which may be offered unto the body and life
of our Neighbor. It is also a Sentence of death pronounced by the mouth of God
against all those who are causers of other men's deaths, and make no more
account of a man's life than of a fly. I would gladly know whether they find in
the Decalogue a Challenge, an assassination, and all those violences which are
practiced upon a man, as upon a beast. I would willingly see them making their
randezvous and assignations upon Mount Sina, where they shall behold a God
thundering and lightning over their heads; but it would be more grateful unto
me to see them performing an honorable penance in this life, and satisfying
Justice and Piety before their deaths, than afterward to expect an Eternity of
punishments and severities.

CHAP. XXXI. The Triumph of Chastity.
THou shall not commit Adultery. The sixth Commandem^^t. Non^^aechaberis. Exodus
20. v. 14.


Honor ought not to be less precious unto men then life, and if both were in
danger, it is certain we should rather abandon the last than the first, and say
as the Ermine, Motto of the Ermine.

Malo mori quam f^^^ari.


I had rather dye than receive a stain. For my part, I admire that Christian
Woman, who in the time of Maxentius, plunged a Dagger in to her heart, to end
her life by eternizing her honor. For indeed it is a glorious Death to find by
a particular inspiration from Heaven a Purple Robe in our blood, and in our
tears a veil of white Satin to cover our purity, which is the soul of our
life, and the glory of the body. This is the Nuptial garment which we must
never put off even in the Sepulcher, and he that is clothed with it, ought to
be so full of respect and circumspection as he must even blush (says
Tertullian) at his own virtue; And if we meet with Souls, which have impudence
enough not to change Countenance, neither in respect of God, who looks upon
them, nor in regard of men, who behold them, they shall one day feel him whom
they have not seen, and such as have been Accomplices or Witnesses of their
Crimes shall be their Executioners.

And then shall all the Lightnings of Hell inkindle Flames to stiffle theirs,
and lascivious hands, wandering and impure eyes, unchaste breasts, Maegera's
heads, Diabolical hearts, and the fruits or abortions of Adultery and
Fornication shall be seen in the same fire.

CHAP. XXXII. Against the unjust usurpation of other men's goods.
THou shall not Steal. The seventh Commandment. Non furtum facies. Exodus 20.
v. 15.


Alas! how many unknown Thieves are there in Country, Houses, and Cities! That
wise Senator who said that Gibbetts and Gallows were only for the miserable,
spoke truth. The spoils made by a Vulture or a Wolf in one hour are greater
than all those petty thefts which a thousand Flies can commit in a year; Yet
more Flies are taken in an hour, than Wolves in many years. There are some
Fishes in the Sea which take and devour others, but are scarce ever taken
themselves; There are others which seize on all, and part with nothing. What
pity would it be if the Planets should draw up all the humors of the Earth
without letting fall one single drop of dew? Motto of the Hook. Capior ut
capiam.
There are some also who bear for their Devise that Motto of the Hook; I suffer
not my self to be taken, but that I may take others; And yet themselves are the
first who cry out thieves. This sport would be passable, if we were not obliged
to restore all that we have taken, detained, or unjustly required. But
restitution is unto theft, what the shadow is to the Body, and a Man must
either restore in this World, if he be able, or be eternally damned; This is a
strange dilemma; let Men think of it what they please.

CHAP. XXXIII. Condemnation of false witnesses and Liars.
THou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor. The eight
Commandment.

Non loqueris contra proximum tuum salsum testimonium.




I have seen certain ancient aenigmaes, where the tongue was painted on a
Throne in the form of a Queen, who carried life and death in her Hand. In
effect, there needs but a good word to save the lives of a thousand Innocents,
and a bad one to render them all culpable. War, Plague, Famine, and the
scourges of Heaven and Earth have never committed so many Murders, and given
so many wounds as this little mischievous two-edged Knife. It is this
Murdering blade with which Brothers and Sisters cut one another Throats. The
Mouth of a Liar, of an Hypocrite, of an Impostor, of a Backbiter, of a False
witness, of a Flatterer, of a Traitor, and a Calumniator, was for this reason
most justly called an Arcenal, out of which all the arms of death, and all the
instruments of misery are taken. It is also a fatal source out of which issue
a thousand poisonous streams, which flow as well over Cities as Villages: The
whole World is subject unto these cruel inundations, which raise tempests in
the midst of Hearts, and drown the most holy amities. There are also dead
waters, which are sometime more dangerous than the most impetuous torrents and
the most Rapid Rivers. There are some who scoff, play the buffoons, and bite
when they smile. We ought to fear nothing so much as those remedies of
Empericks, which have a sugured outside, and a little leaf gold wherewith they
cover a poisoned pill. You shall sometimes see also these kind of people, using
criminal complyances, and flattering the disease when we see them, and
irritating it when they think themselves unknown. But nevertheless God has
mortal hatreds for these little Tyrants, who wage War against the first
verity, and above all he will cause the excess of his anger to be felt by those
who daily set to sale the reputation of others, and to such as will bid the
most. These are certain little Pigmie Spirits, which desire to become Giants by
debasing others. Sunt homicidi interfectores fratrum, and sunt homicidi
detractores eorum. S. Clem. Ep. 1.
And since St. Clement after St. Peter says, that there are two sorts of
Murders, the one by the Hand, and the other by the Tongue, I may style as well
those who commit the last, as well as the first, Murderers, Executioners,
Assassins and Canibals, which cat more raw than roasted flesh, and live only
upon the honors, goods, and lives of other Men: But since God is the same
Verity, it is unto him we ought to remit the sentence and condemnation of these
accursed Tongues for the other World, although it be the most usual course of
his Justice and Providence, to cause, even in this World, truth to shine forth,
and to ingrave it with sensible lights on the foreheads and in the consciences
of Criminals.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Tomb of Concupiscence.
THou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife nor any thing that is his. The two
last Commandments. Non concupisces domum proximi tui: nec desiderabis uxorem
ejus. Exodus 20. v. 17.


Some there are who imagine that it is sufficient to have a vermillion color
upon their Cheeks, and for the rest it little imports what they have upon their
Bodies. These are Sepulchers outwardly white and inwardly inwardly eaten with
Worms; fair and clear waters, but impoisoned; bodies clothed in Satin and
Velvet, but eaten with Cankers and ordures. And such are those who figure to
themselves that it is enough for them to put no man to death, and not publicly
to ravish Maids, to make a prey of their lubricity, but otherwise that it is
lawful to bear a cut throat in their hearts, and to make their souls a retreat
for all sorts of impurity, where like so many Harpees they devour at least by
their unjust desires all that their eyes behold. These are strange Maxims,
whereof the Devils themselves have been the first Authors: but it is a brutish
Ignorance, and a stupid blindness not to discern, that both good and evil
proceeds from the heart, and that our desires are like so many Western gales,
which may cause fair days; and as many Northern Winds which occasion foul and
stormy weather. But a worldly and libertine soul will tell me, that there is
much trouble in it, and that we must be blind, deaf, dumb, and leprous, not to
feel the wounds of those darts which pass suddenly through our senses; and I
will answer her, that we must be Turks and no Christians to give up our selves
for a prey, and for a mark unto all the shafts, which the World, Flesh, and
Hell use to shoot at us. But I confess that it is very difficult never to be
surprised; yet it is sufficient,

First, if it be possible never to give the least occasion thereunto.

Secondly, to avoid dangers, namely, when they are discovered.

Thirdly, we must often replace in our minds a Hell, a death, a life, and a
Jesus, who dyed only to preserve us from them.

Fourthly, we must always remain in a diffidence of our selves, and place all
our hopes on God.

Fifthly, we must have always arms in our hands not to be surprised by this
roaring Lion, who both day and night walks round about us.

Sixthly, the prize we expect, and the victory which shall crown our Combats,
is no mean consolation.

Seventhly, we must play the Philosophers, studying the qualities of our
desires and temptations, to the end, having discovered the Nature of the
disease, we may apply such remedies as are proper for it.

Eighthly, we must withdraw our selves from objects: For these are lights,
which dazzle near at hand, and afar off have scarce any luster at all.

Ninthly, we must dry up the spring of our desires and concupiscences,
mortifying our bodies, and reducing our souls to such a condition, as we might
desire nothing but what is good and honest.

Tenthly, we may sometime discover the error of our desires and fancies, and
contemplate that with horror, which we desire with so much passion; And we
shall perceive as well as Raymundus Lullius, that all is but a Canker, an
Ulcer, an infectious and stinking dunghill covered over with a bit of Taffaty,
or some small piece of fine Holland. In fine, we ought to be well employed, and
to imitate that brave Captain who commanded his Army to march always in
Battell-aray, either in time of Peace or War, and even upon his own lands, that
he might not be surprised.

CHAP. XXXV. An Abridgement of the Law.
THe Law of God and Moses then, both in general, and in particular, forbids
all sorts of persons of what Condition, Sex, Age, or Country they either are,
or may be.

First, all Idolatry, Infidelity, contempt of Sacred things, Magick-Art,
Sorceries, Divinations, Superstious Worships, mistrusts of Gods goodness,
Presumption of their own forces, Languishment, Tepidities, Hypocrisies,
Irreverences, Sacrileges and Impieties.

Secondly, Swearing without necessity, Blasphemies, false Oaths, Execrations,
Derision of holy things and words of Scripture, as also of all that God has
either said, done, or revealed.

Thirdly, on Holy Days, all exercises of labor and Commerce, or any other
employment whatsoever, if it be not of necessity, or if it may divert us from
the holy entertainments of Piety, and the repose we ought to have on those
great days, when surely labor would be yet less Criminal in the sight of
God, than the impieties and Irreverences which are very often used in the most
Sacred places, and during the divine Service, of Almighty God.

Fourthly, Disdains, contempts, abandonments, ingratitudes, hatreds, and
disobedience toward Fathers and Mothers, Kindred, and Superiors: As also the
excessive liberty we give unto our Servants, Children, and Domestiques.

Fifthly, Quarrels, Enmities, Aversions, Wranglings, Violences, Extortions,
Treacheries, Injustices, Vexations, unjust Duels, Mutilations of members,
Poisonings, Murders, Aborsions, Hatreds, Outrages, cruelties toward our
Neighbors, and our selves by some violent passion, which may pass even unto
death, or at least to the desire of it.

Sixthly, Fornications, Adulteries, Incests, Rapes, Deflowrings, Clandestine
Marriages, Sacrileges, Pollutions, the ill use of Marriage, and so many other
abominable things, and unworthy of a man, which make Sepulchers in Houses,
Laystalls in beds, and a great Sodom of the whole World, where without
punishment is seen all that leads unto impudicity, as dishonest thoughts,
impure words, wanton glances, kisses, touchings, Pictures, Statues, Images,
Books, Letters, Plays, Ballads, Satieties, and Feastings, wherewith amidst
good Wine, and good cheer, very often Love-charms and poisons are mingled.

Seventhly, Thefts, Robberies, Plundrings, Correspondency with Thieves;
Counterfeiting of Seals, Keys, Letters, Schedules, Wills, Bonds, deceiptfull
Purchases, false Aequisitions, false Sales, false Money, Frauds, Surprises,
Usurpations of the goods of the Church, Symonie, Usurie, Delays of payment,
crafty devises in Law, Superfluous expenses, Cheats, Extortions, and the
barbarous usage of the Poor.

Eighthly, false Depositions, Calumnies, defamatory Libells, Lies, Impostures,
Perfidiousness, Dissimulations, Flatteries and Treasons.

Ninthly, Enterprises and designs against Marriage, dishonest Plots, which are
done by words, gestures, signs, allurements; by Epistles, with desires more
becoming a Devil than a man.

In fine, the passion of Possessing other men's goods wrongfully, and contrary
to Justice, which seems to be born with men, and to die with them, if it be not
stifled with the ashes of the Sanctuary, and of Sina; otherwise we shall find
inflamed firebrarnds of Hell, which will never be quenched, but punish our sins
for all eternity.

CHAP. XXXVI. The ancient Policies.
AFter God had given unto Moses the Moral Laws which are engraven in hearts
by the finger of Nature, C. 2. q. 104. a. 1.
he added those which according to Saint Thomas, have a certain mutual
relation in order to man, and which of themselves cannot oblige, but only by
reason God has so ordained it. This then, to speak properly, concerns the
Policy and government of people in Commonwealths, or else of servants in
Families, which would be but a Labyrinth of disorders, an Abyss of confusions,
a Tower of Babel, and little Babylonians, if they had no Laws which are as it
were the Mothers of Peace, Mistresses which watch day and night to instruct,
reprehend, and direct those who chance to fail in their duty.

An excellent with heretofore compared them to those little Mercuries which
were placed at the corners of streets; but this is not enough, The excellency
of Laws.
for they are the Soul of the Universe, the spirit of the World, the Eyes of
the Body, the Interpreters of Reason, the Oracles of Justice, the Angels of the
great Council, the Governesses of Cities, silent Voices, Thunders which lowdly
roar against Criminals, the Arms of the Innocent, and the Intelligences which
settle order in Heaven, Aeternitas mundi ex obedientia ad intelligentiam
matricem. Apud Mathiam de Vienna, Philost. l. 1. c. 6.
before they bring it on Earth, as some Disciples of Plato have observed; And
it is peradventure for the same reason that the Babylonians, as Philostratus
affirms, built Palaces where they used to administer Justice in form of a
Heaven, where the stones were no other than Saphires, and the Arches of
immovable Clouds beset with Stars, which would have been taken for those of
the Empyreall Heaven, if they had had as much motion as splendour and light. In
fine, God is the principal Intelligence, who sets all things in order. His
Laws establish order in the World, and this general order which may be
discernd even in the bosom of Nature, Dixit praeterea Dominus ad Moysem: haec
dices filiis Israel, etc. Exodus 20. v. 22.

Responditque omnu populus una voce: Omnia verba Domini, quae locutus est,
faciemus. Exodus 24. v. 3.

Et mane consurgens aedificavit altar ad radices montis, and duodecim titulos
per duodecimtribus Israel. Exodus 24. v. 4.

Misitque Juvenes de filiis Is^ael, and obtulerunt holocausta, immolaveruntque
victimas pacificas, Domino vitulos. Exodus 24. v. 5.

Tulit itaque Moses dimidiam partem^sanguinis, and misit in crateras, partem
autemres^duam fudit super altar. Exodus 24. v. 6.

Assumensque volumen foederis l^git, audiente populo: qui dixerunt, Omnia quae
lacutus est Dominus faciemus, etc. Exodus 24. v. 7.

Ille vero sumptum sanguinem respersit in populum, and ait: hic est. sanguis
foederts quod pepigit Domintes vobiscum, etc. Exodus 24. v. 8.

Moysi autem dixit, aftende ad Dominum tu and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and
septuaginta senes ex Israel. Exodus 24. v. 9.

Lyranus, Cajetanus, Prados in Ezechiele. Et viderunt Deum Israel: and sub
pedibus ejus quasiopus lapidis saphirini, and quasi caelum, cum serenum est.
Exodus 24. v. 10.

Solusque Moses ascendet ad Dominum, and illi non appropinquabunt; nec populus
ascendet cum eo. Exodus 24. v. 2.

Cumque ascendisset Moses, operuit nubes montem. Evo. 24. v. 15

Et habitavit gloria Domini super Sinai, etc. Exodus 24. v. 16. Erat autem
species gloriae Domini quasi ignis audens etc. Exodus 24. v. 17. Et fuit ibi
Moses quadraginta diebus, and quadraginta noctibus. Exodus 24. v. 18.


out of which it never departs, but to guide us first unto God, as unto the
Father of Unions, and unto the Author of Wisdom, who desiring orderly to rule
and govern the whole Universe, was obliged to give Laws and Precepts, on which
Policy ought to move as the Heavens do upon their Poles.

Now, it had not been sufficient to have revealed them unto Moses, but it was
necessary to publish them to all the people, to the end they might be obliged
to observe them after their reception. Moses then declared unto the Hebrews all
that God commanded them, unto which they all consented, crying out unanimously,
that these Laws were just, and that they would willingly keep them. This was
like an oath of fidelity, after which Moses erected an Altar at the foot of the
Mountain, and raised twelve steps in reference to the twelve Tribes for whom he
caused Holocausts to be offered up unto God by the hands of the first born of
Israel which were born Priests in the Law of Nature.

These Sacrifices being made, Moses gathered up in Cups, the one half of the
blood of the Sacrifices, casting the rest upon the Altar; after which he took
the Book of the Law to have it read unto the whole assembly, who having again
accepted it, were sprinkled with the blood of the Victime, in witness of the
Compact and agreement which had been newly made, and which they were inviolably
to observe toward God.

After this Ceremony, Moses went up to the Mountain with Aaron, Nadab, Abihu,
and seventy old men chosen out of the people of Israel, who had the honor to
see God at a nearer distance, in the form of a young Prince surrounded with
rays of glory, who had under his feet, as it were, a large Throne of Saphirs,
whose splendour resembled that which we see in the Skies, when they appear
inameled with Stars sparkling like so many Diamonds. It was in this pomp and
Magnifick State God commanded Moses to draw near him, and to ascend higher,
even to the top of Mount Sina, where being arrived, he was encompassed with a
great Cloud, which covered the whole Mountain, and formed as it were a great
Pavillion of fire and clowd, through which the Majesty of God made it self felt
and known, and where Moses spent forty days, and as many nights, without
either eating or drinking, thereby keeping the first Lent which was ever
celebrated.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Adoration of the golden Calf.
NOthing is so great a blemish unto Paganism, as to see the wisest and most
learned amongst these Idolaters, rendering honors and adorations unto wood,
stone, and living creatures; And even the first of their Gods, who abandons his
Throne, and changes his Thunderbolt and Scepter for a Pencil to paint Goats
and Hippocentaurs upon the Clouds: but it is a more ridiculous, and strange
spectacle, in the time of Christianity, to see men and Demigods, who having
lost all thoughts of Heaven and glory, to which they are ordained, descending
even beneath themselves to adore brutish passions, and to set in the place of
God and piety infamous Idols, Videns autem Populus quod moram faccret
descendendi de monte Moses, etc. Et fecit exeis vitulum conflatilem:
Di^cruntque, hi sunt d^i tui, Israel, qui te eduxerunt de terra Agypti. Exo.
32. v. 17.
imitating Aaron and the Israelites, who seeing that Moses staid long upon the
Mountain, where God detained him, to deliver him the Tables of the Law, were so
stupid and ungrateful, as to make a golden Calf in imitation of the Serapis of
Egypt, and to take it for their God, and Conductor in the remainder of their
voyage. Did we ever hear of a more brutish blindness, and of a more execrable
Idolatry? These Sacrilegious people, who had neither life nor liberty, but by
Moses means, and by the almost continual Miracles which God wrought for their
sake, prefer nevertheless their passions before both of them, and efface out of
their souls all the remembrance of what had passed, to satisfy a foolish
imagination, which made them contemn all manner of piety and gratitude.

But who would have ever believed that Aaron, Dixitque ad eos Aaron: Tollite
inaures aureas, de uxorum filiorumque and filiarum auribus, and afferte ad me.
Exodus 32. v. 2.

Quas cum ille accepisset, formavit opere fusorio, and fecit ex eit vitulum
conflatilem, etc. Exodus 32. v. 4.

Quod cum vidisset Aaron, adificavit altar coram co. Exodus 32. v. 5.


who had been as it were the Interpreter of God and Moses, to work so many
Miracles upon the people, should serve as the most fatal instrument of their
Idolatry, Erecting with his own hands an Altar to this abominable Statue, and
receiving the profane acclamations of all this people, who cried out, Behold,
behold our gods! O God of Gods! What applauses, what congratulations, what
solemnity! I know not whether the Devils have ever celebrated a Sabbath, or the
Gentiles a feast more full of abominations. Methinks, I see Lucifer in the
midst of his troops, when I behold Aaron amongst these people, who should
rather suffer his throat to be cut by these ungrateful wretches, than give way
to their impiety. Et sedit populus manducare and bibere, and surrexerunt
ludere. Exodus 32. v. 6.

Pro vitulo and cum vitulo vitulati sunt. Tertul. lib. de Jes. contra Psych.


The Altar of Aaron is an Altar of Sacrilege, this High Priest is a
prevaricator, their Religion is Idolatry, Perfumes are changed into
Blasphemies, and instead of the ineffable name of Jehovah, the head of a Golden
Calve is seen, about which, they laugh, they leap, they carouse, they eat, and
commit a thousand sorts of impurities. Alas! What Sacrifices, what sports,
Locutus est Dominus ad Maisen, dicens: Vade, descend; peccavit populus tuus,
quem eduxisti de terra Aegypti. Exodus 32. v. 7.
what festivals! Nevertheless, God, whose goodness is infinite, and who was not
resolved to inflict the last punishment on these impious people, nor to destroy
them for ever, but only in case no man should address himself to implore favor
for them, revealed unto Moses what had passed, and knowing, that he could not
forbear earnestly to call upon his clemency for these guilty men, he spoke unto
him, just as if his hands had been tied behind him, and as if he could not
have darted the Thunderbolts of his wrath, until Moses had consented thereunto.

Moses, Dimitte me, ut irascatur furor meus contra eos, etc. Exodus 32. v. 10.
said he, thy people have sinned against me, and their sin cries out for
vengeance; but the prayers thou make for them, keep back my arm, and I cannot
cause my Lightnings to break forth, if thou do not detain those ejaculations
and flames which oppose me, and reinkindle my goodness, even in the bosom of my
severest Justice.

Not that God, St. Hieron. in 5 Da. niel.
says Saint Jerome, is changeable, or that he can change; for his nature is
not subject to mutation, but the order of things may alter according to the
course of his Divine Providence. We must not also imagine that his Decrees can
be changed within himself, for they are eternal, Consilium Deus non mutat,
sedrem, Greg. lib. 20. Moral. 24.
and engraven in his proper Essence; all the change in this case befalls the
souls of sinners, as they are absolved and freed from the pains they had
merited. The which is done, not by any change in God, or in his Decrees, but in
those against whom the sentence of condemnation had been given; and this change
arises either from the goodness of God, or by the Intercession of his Saints.

It is then for Moses sake, Faciamque te in gentem magnam. Exodus 32. v. 10.
God will seem to alter his designs; for notwithstanding all that God said to
him, his zeal passes yet farther, and he refuses all the offers made him,
even of another people, and of a more ample Government, to assist these
ungrateful persons. It seems, says Saint Gregory, Charitas in sancto ejus
pectore ex persecutione ^^nescebat magis. Greg. 27. Mor. 7.
that love and compassion were the more inflamed by the breath of the Injuries
and Affronts which were offered him; just as water which becomes the hotter,
the more cold the air is which incompasseth it; and a fire whose ardors become
more violent, Vt perire malint cum his qui sibi crediti sunt, quam sine illit
salvos esse. Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in cap. 1. S. Joan.

Placatusque est Dominus ne faceret malum, quod locutus fuerat adversus populum
suum. Exodus 32. v. 14.

Et reversus est Morses de monte, portans duas tabulas testimonii in manu sua,
scriptas ex utraque part. Exodus 32. v. 15.

Cumque appropinquasset ad castra, vidit vitulum and choros, iratusque valde,
projecit de manu tabulas, and confregit eas ad radicem montis. Exo. 32. v. 19.

Arripiensque virtulum quem fecerant, combussit, and contrivit usque ad
pulverem, quem sparsit in aquam. Exo. 32.20.

Dixitque ad Aaron, quid tibi fecit hic populus, ut induceres super eum
peccatum maximum? Exodus 32. v. 21.

Cui ille respondit, etc. Exodus 32. v. 22.

Et stans in porta castrorum, ait: Si quis est Domini, jungatur mihi.
Congregatique sunt ad eum omnes fitu Levi. Exodus 32. v. 26.

S. Greg. in 1 Reg. 14. Rupertns and alti passim.

Quibus ait; haec dicit Dominus Deus Israel, ponat vir gladium super femur
suum; Ice, and reddite de porta usque ad portam, etc. Exodus 32. v. 27.


proportionably as the cold which presses it is more forcible. Behold, says
Saint John Chrysostom, the Antiperistasis of perfect Charity, wherein all
hearts which have any charge of souls, ought to find the increase of their
most holy and just ardors. And this is what Moses did in the midst of the
contempts, and persecutions of all his people, for whom, when he had obtained
some easment of pain, and some diminution of the punishments they had deserved,
he descended from the Mountain, carrying between his arms the Tables, in which
the Law was written on both sides, which he thought not yet convenient to give
unto such unworthy people and polluted with the most heinous of all Sacrileges;
but having broken them in pieces, he went directly to cast down the Golden
Calve, and dissolve it into dust, which he afterward threw into the stream of a
torrent, which issued forth of Mount Sina, and passed through the midst of the
Hebrews Camp; to the end, they might swallow down these funestous Relics, and
that no man might ever behold them without horror.

Afterward he blamed Aaron as the Author of this crime, who endeavored to
excuse himself, relating to him in order what had passed, the which did not yet
divert Moses from doing what his zeal inspired him: For, from thence he came to
the entrance of the Camp, where making a stand, he cried out, that all that
were of Gods party, and had not participated of Idolatry, should follow him,
which the Children of Levi hearing, whose Tribe had continued most faithful
unto God, put themselves in a ring about Moses, who following the Sovereign
Power of Life and Death, which he had received from God, commanded them to
betake themselves to their Arms, and lay about them, without sparing any of the
guilty, either Brother, Friend, Neighbor, or any person amongst these impious
men; so that the number of the dead amounted to three and twenty thousand.

Behold, a strange massacre; nevertheless, it is an effect of meekness which
has changed its countenance, and taken that of severity. These are shafts
which issued out of a heart, the fullest of Pity and Clemency which was then in
the world, but shot by the hand of Justice. If such as govern Republics and
States, had nothing but Crowns to recompense their merits, Misericordia and
veritas custodiunt Regein, and roboratur clementia thronus ejus. Exodus 20. v.
28.
and no Thunderbolts to punish the wicked, quickly would Insolences,
Treacheries, Concussions, Robberies, and all the abominations of the Earth be
seen holding the Reigns of Empires; and in fine, Virtue groaning under the feet
of Vice and Impiety. A Prince ought to have the meekness of a Lamb, and the
terror of a Lion, otherwise men abuse him, and his power seems but for a
support unto the blackest dissolutions. The people also ought to love with
fear, otherwise their love degenerates into contempt.

I know that Thrones have no foundation more solid and immovable, than when
they are supported by the hearts of their Subjects; but if Guards be not placed
about them, as so many Pillars, there needs but one storm to overthrow them.

It cannot be doubted, but this kind of mixture is full of difficulty: but as
a body is never in perfect health, but when all its four humors are in an equal
temper; so Kingdoms are never better governed, than when they equally use
meekness and severity.

Choler is the touchstone of Virtue, Rigorous Meekness.
and that person has no soul, who cannot be irritated when occasion is given.
Tyranny has been always insupportable, but powers sweetly rigorous, have never
been but the objects of the most just affections; Cruelty is fit for Devils,
and Justice is apportioned unto men; It is the Rod of God, and the Scepter,
which he was pleased to put into the hands of the Sovereign Magistrate, and of
his Lieutenants, to render men, as it were, partakers of his power, and to
adopt them unto his Empire: We must not wonder then, if Moses, who was as his
Lieutenant over his people, made them sometimes feel the weight of his hand,
which had so often obliged and filled them with his magnificences; but I should
rather remain astonished, how a single man could undertake so great a work, and
compass it with a few selected Children, who enrolled themselves under his
Standard.

Children, says he, let us go; who loves God, A fair saying of a Captain, Who
loves God, let him follow me.

Feceruntque filii Levi juxta sermonem Moisi, cecideruntque in die illa quasi
viginti tria millia hominum. Exodus 32. v. 28.


let him follow me; And presently in the head of some Levites, he assaults, he
defeats, and puts three and twenty thousand men to the sword.

Behold, I beseech you, what a man animated with the Spirit of God is able to
do: Admire also the power and authority of Moses, who is in the midst of his
Troops, as the eye in the head, and the heart in the center of the body, to
watch, to heat, and, as it were, to defend every Levite. Behold, an army of
Stags led by a Lion, which is more dreadful than an army of Lions conducted by
a Stag. So Aaron was but a timorous Stag, when he gave way unto the murmurings
of the people; and Moses a generous Lion, when he himself plunged his Sword
into the bosom of Rebellion and Impiety. It is much easier to find Soldiers,
than a brave Captain: Paul. Aemil. lib. 6. Hist. Franc.
And it was for this cause Heraclius, Patriarck of Jerusalem, coming unto Henry
King of England, to induce him to go in person to the Holy War, this Blessed
Man seeing that nothing but gifts were presented him, answered, That he had not
so much need of money, as of a good Conductor: for one man of Courage,
Authority, and Experience, is worth a world of people. And this was the
occasion that heretofore the Grecians esteemed more Epaminondas, than all the
Commonwealth of Thebes, which never enjoyed Liberty, but under this brave
Governor.

From hence, Advice to Noblemen.
the great ones, the Nobles, and all that are in office, may learn how they
ought to comport themselves in enterprises of importance, since on them usually
the safety of a City, Province, Kingdom, and even Christianity it self depends:
Above all, let them learn the art to mix Honey with Gall, and always to join
Power with Meekness, and never to sever these two sisters which are the
Tutelaries and Mistresses of a good Conduct: And if it should sometimes happen,
that both of them had a mind to be scrupulous, Reason ought to resolve their
doubts, and rather incline a thousand times unto Mercy, than to have the least
shadow of Cruelty.

To this effect, it is fit to set our selves in the place of others, and to
treat them, as we would desire to be treated our selves, if capable thereof: We
may pass farther, if we please, and without breaking the Laws of Piety,
consecrate and offer our selves up for a Victim, and receive, at least, into
our own hearts the blow which was ready to fall on others.

Thus did Moses, Reversusque ad Dominum, ait: Obsecro, pectavit populus iste
peccatum maximum, feceruntque sibi Deos aurtos: Aut dimitte eis hanc noxam.
Exodus 32. v. 31.
who fearing lest a more just and severe hand might strike these poor
Criminals, which were left after so bloody a slaughter, lifted up his yet
bloody hands toward Heaven, to the end, Justice might have at least some cause
to become flexible at the sight of his exploits, and that the mildness of a
Judge might not condemn him of an over indulgent remissness.

Hear then Sovereign Powers, hear this poor Prince, this generous Patriarck,
this incorruptible Judge, this Father of Israel, the Conductor of Gods people,
and the Lieutenant General of his Troops.

Alas! my God, says he, cast a gracious look upon thy people, which are only
mine, as being committed by thee unto my charge; It is a Pledge thou have put
into my hands, to restore it back unto thy self; It is a Flock which thou have
nourished in the desert, of which thou have made me the Shepherd; a Bark which
thou have drawn out of the billows of the Red Sea, over which thou have
established me the Pilot; Slaves which enjoy no liberty, but by thy favor; and
children who can acknowledge no other Father, and King, than thy self: They
have offended thee, I confess, but thy goodness surpasses there iniquity, and
the misery in which they are now involved, is not a subject for thy Justice,
but for thy mercy; all the favors thou have conferred on them, would not have
their last effects, if thou did not continue thy graces to them; and the
desert, which thou have for their sake rendered a Paradise of blessings and
delights, would have been a fair way to lead them into a precipice. It is
sufficiently known, how far thy power extends, and that there needs but one of
thy looks to consume the whole world with lightning, and to cloud all the
lights of Heaven; but thou art also able with one word to repair Nature, and
thy goodness can in a moment raise a thousand Trophies in the midst of thy
severest Justice; and besides, do thou not see blood enough already spilt to
satisfy thy vengeance, and to efface the memory of one crime? This example is
general enough to excite every one in particular; and of all those who are left
alive, there is not one which may not be innocent, and desire to merit favor.

In fine, Aut si non facis, dele me de libro tuo, quem scripsisti. Exodus 32. v.
32.
I humbly, in their behalf, request this favor of thee, and I beseech thee
rather to blot me out of thy Book of Life, than not to grant them pardon; I had
rather become a subject of thy wrath, and that there may be no memory of me,
than it should be said, That I having been their Father and Conductor, did
afterward serve for an executioner in their last punishments. It would be an
eternal regret unto me to survive them, and the glory I have had to have been
their Captain and Judge, would leave me nothing but shame and confusion.

I humbly beseech thee then, yet once more to strike me out of thy Book, and
let me die with them or for them; for I had rather be the Sacrifice, than the
Sacrificer, and my loss will be always less, than that of a whole people.

Behold, Lord, the sum of my desires, and the most ardent Prayers I can offer;
it is my Heart which speaks to thee, it is Piety which makes me thus importune
thee, it is my Duty and Honor which are engaged, and I should not have so often
received thy benefits, if I did not also hope for this. Do not then deny me, O
infinite Goodness, and whatsoever thou shall please to determine, Remember that
I have ever preferred thy people, before my self; and that the love I have for
them, cannot rest satisfied, if it obtain not the favor it hopes, or if it
serve not for an host unto the Sacrifice which is due unto thy most just
indignation.

Was there ever any one heard to speak with a more ardent zeal, a more sincere
love, with a more generous piety, a less interressed heart? Many there are who
would willingly do good, but they would have the power to do it, like the Sea
without trouble and diminution, or like the Sun and Stars, whose treasuries are
not less filled with lights and influences, though we receive them on every
side, or else like a Torch, which lights others, without being it self, either
obscured or extinguished. But when we must lose what we gave, when we must be
impoverished to enrich others, we do like Hedg-hogs and Tortoises, which scarce
dare hold up their heads, and show nothing but Bristles and Shells. There are
others who give, but yet with trouble, and when themselves have no more need of
it, or when they have so much, that the abundance becomes cumbersom: But
Charity is a spring, which never stops, and never cease to run, but when she
has nothing left for her self.

If she be found amongst the Gentiles, as in a Leonidas, in a Fabius Maximus,
in the Tegeates, in the Horatii, in an infinity of others who have sacrificed
their lives for their Country, and for their confederates; These were but
slight draughts compared with those of Moses, who offered not only his body
and life for a time, but even his soul, and the pretensions he had to an Empire
which shall never have end.

He deserved also some alleviation of the punishments which were ordained for
this people; Loquebatur autem Dominus ad Moisen facie ad faciem, sicut solet
loqui homo ad amicum suum. Exodus 33. v. 11. Stabantque ipsi, and ader abant per
fores tabernaculorum suorum. Exodus 33. v. 10.

Tu autem, vade and duc populum istum quo locutus sum tibi: Angelus meus
praecedet te. Exodus 32. v. 34.


and although God at first seems to refuse it, yet either soon or late he will
obtain it. It was likewise in recompense of this zeal, he was so happy as to
speak face to face to his God, who treated with him in the same manner, as one
most intimate friend might do with an other. The people themselves were
witnesses of this Colloquy, and every one standing at the entry of his Tent,
adored God, turning himself toward the Pavillion of Moses, upon which, the
Pillar had made his Station, and gave light enough to manifest this whole
Mystery. In fine, the favor of favors, God showed unto Moses, was in giving him
an Angel for his Conductor, who marked out to him all the ways by which he
should pass.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The re-establishment of the Laws and the Ceremonies of the Old
Testament.
THere are some implacable Spirits in the World which cannot be overcome,
either by force or mildness; which become more obstinate, the more men endeavor
to bend them, and excite them unto pity. Ac deinceps: Praecide, ait, tibi duas
tabulas lapideas instar priorum, and scribam super eas verba quae habuerunt
tabulae quas fregisti. Exodus 34. v. 1.

Quo transeunte coram eo, ait: Dominator Domine Dous, misericors and clemens,
patiens, etc. Exodus 34. v. 6.

Defcendebat columna nubis, and stabat ad ostium, loquebaturque cum Moise.
Exodus 33. v. 9.


But God on the contrary has the Bowels of a Father, and a Heart so full of
goodness and mercy, as he can hardly resolve to punish those injuries which are
done unto him: And even at present for those who have erected Altars against
him, and placed instead of him, a Golden Calf, he re-establisheth Laws as in
testimony of the agreement he makes with them; in acknowledgement whereof, all
the most singular of all the names he received, was that of Meekness, when
Moses called him his Lord, and his Clement and Merciful, his Patient and
Sincere God. This indeed, changed the thoughts of Moses, who did not believe
that his Master had called him to treat him so sweetly. These were the terms he
used in speaking unto God, upon Mount Sina, where this holy Man having
withdrawn himself, God was, as it were, covered with a cloud, which did only
permit him to see the back of him, whom he heard distinctly answering his voice
and desires.

This day was celebrious:

First, Observa cuncta quae body mando tibi, etc. Exodus 34. v. 11.
In respect God himself commanded Moses to observe exactly all that he said
unto him.

Secondly, In regard of the promises he made him for the advantage of his
people.

Thirdly, Fuit ergo ibi cum Demino quadraginta dies and quadraginta noctes,
panem non comedit, and equam non bibit. Exodus 34. v. 28.

Cumque descenderet Moises d^monte Sinai, tenebat duas tabulas testimonii, and
ignorabat quod cornuta esset facies sua, etc. Exodus 34. v. 29.

Videntes autem Aaron and filii Israel cornutam Moysi faciem, timuerunt prope
accedere. Exodus 34. v. 30.

Vocatique ab ^o reversi sunt, etc. Exodus 34. v. 31.

Sex di^bus facietis opus: septimus dies erit vobis sanctus, etc. Exodus 35. v.
6.

Quisqu^s vestrum sapiens est, veniat, and faciat quod Dominus imperavit. Exodus
35. v. 10.

Tabernaculum scilicet, and tectum ejus, etc. Exodus 35. v. 11.


for the Precepts and Laws he vouchsafed to give him, for this end detaining
him forty days days without either eating or drinking, which being passed,
he descended from the Mountain, with ardent eyes, and an inflamed countenance,
and his hair shining like so many rays, which formed on his head certain horns
of light; so that Aaron and the Israelites durst not approach him; but when he
called them, they accosted him as an An Angel come from heaven, and from his
mouth learned all that God had said and commanded.

First, touching the Sanctification of the Sabbath.

Secondly, concerning the Offerings and Sacrifices.

Thirdly, as to the building of the Tabernacle, the Ark, the Candlesticks,
Basins, Altars, and Ornaments of the high Priest.

In fine, as to all that concerned Religion, and the Ceremonies of the Old
Testament.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Ornaments and other Utensils ordained for the Sanctuary,
which were useful in the Ceremonies of the Law of Moses.
IT is not enough to look on the figures of the Old Testament, as we would do
on those Landskips and Pictures which have only draughts to give some
satisfaction to the eyes, and to represent the Ideas of a Painter, who took a
vanity to mingle with his colors the fancies of his mind, and the most
pleasing erro^^ of his imagination. God himself was pleased from the beginning
of this world, and when Nature was only in her rough draught, to take the
Pencill into his hand to form on the most beautiful faces, and on the most
excellent bodies, the features of him who is the Character of his substance,
and the Portrait of his Divinity.

The shadows also of the law of Nature, and of the written Law, have served but
to hide the lights of the New Testament, and we should scarce ever cast our
eyes upon these fair Clouds, but to behold some Suns issuing forth of them.
This was, says Philo, the most usual practice of the faithful who lived in
Alexandria, and made their most holy Meditation upon the most sacred
Scriptures: For they not only tied themselves, says he, to the terms of the
Hebrew letter, but passed even into the most spiritual sense, there to see and
understand the verities which were in a manner veiled. It is fit here then to
observe those which have been the most clearly represented in the Sanctuary,
and under the principal Ornaments of the second Law. Rupertus, Greg. Hom. ult.
in Ezekiel. Cyril. lib. 4. in Joan.
But as I thought it not proper in the precedent Chapter, to relate in
particular all the Laws of the ancient policy, by reason they are for the most
part abrogated in the Law of Grace, and as it would have been contrary to the
design of this book, which ought not to serve so much for curiosity as profit;
So I ought not to stick longer here upon these Ceremonies which are no more in
use, or which are accomplished, as so many figures of the Mysteries we believe,
and daily behold.

CHAP. XL. The Ark of the Old Testament.
THe Ark of the Old Testament, was the figure of the Sacred humanity of Jesus,
and of his holy Mother, who is in Heaven, as the Ark in the Holy of Holyes, S.
Hierom. ad Eust. de Virg. and S. Greger. lib. 7. Regist. Ep. 30.
that is to say in the bosom of God, who is Sanctity it self. It is also the
Image of the Militant and triumphant Church, and of those holy Souls which lead
there a holy life, and shall be one day like the wood of Sittim, that is to
say, incorruptible, after the Resurrection.

Secondly, the Ark had above it the Propitiatory, Fecit and propitiatorium, id
est, oraculum, de auro mundissimo, etc. Exodus 37. v. 6.

Duos citam Cherubim ex auro ductili, etc. Exodus 37. v. 7.


as the Saints in Heaven have their King and Redeemer.

Thirdly, it was encompassed with Cherubims, as the blessed are with Angels,
and its being thus Crowned, only denoted the immortal Crowns which those brave
Champions gained as the prize of their Victory.

Fourthly, the Pot full of Manna, which was kept in the Ark, represented the
remembrance Saints have of the Eucharist, which had been their Bread, their
Manna, and Viaticum during all the Voyages they made in the Desert of this life.

Fifthly, this Manna signified also the admirable goodness of God, as the Rod,
his adorable power, and the Tables of the Law, his wisdom which governs and
guides the whole Universe.

Sixthly, Vestivitque eam auro purissimo intus ac foris. Exodus 37. v. 1.
this precious Sanctuary was adorned with gold, which is the true Symbol of
Love and Charity, which render the Saints both interiourly and exteriourly
resplendent.

Seventhly, Du^s Cherubim in singulis summitatibus propitiatorii, Extendentes
alas, and tegentes propitiatorium, etc. Exodus 37. v. 9.
as for the Cherubims which were in a manner fastened unto this fair Chariot of
Glory and Majesty, and covered with their wings part of the Propitiatory; Who
sees not that these are the glorious troops of the Saints and Angels which
accompany the triumphant Humanity of a Man-God, and are the Ministers of Gods
commands, and his amiable Intelligences.

In fine, the whole Ornament of the Sanctuary, as Vials, Censors, and all the
wonders of this Miraculous fabric bore only the inanimated marks of those who
shall live in eternity.

CHAP. XLI. The Tabernacle.
THe same agreeableness may be found in the Tabernacle, as in the Ark of the
Testament: Nevertheless it was principally the Image of a Christian, 1 Corinthians.
3. ad Ephesians. 3.17. Romans 8.9.
and of a holy soul, who as St. Paul says, is a living and animated Temple, in
which God resides, and where the holy Ghost makes his abode in the midst of
Virtues. In vita illius.
It was for this cause St. Bernard commended a most noble Lord, because he
built Churches and Houses for his Religious, which were Temples eternally
consecrated unto God. If any one will pass further into this Tabernacle, in the
entry he shall find the Bath of Penance, and the Altar of Mortification; And
then advancing into the Sanctuary, he shall see the three most precious
utensils which were in that place, the Candlestick, the Table of Breads, the
Altar of Perfumes and Incense. The Candlestick served only to chase away the
darkness of ignorance. The Table of Breads is the Eucharist, which gives a
perfect satiety. And the Altar of Perfumes, is that where the deliciousness and
sweetness of prayers and ejaculations of the soul is more pleasing than all
odoriferous smoaks.

There was also ten Curtains upon the Tabernacle, Feceruntque omnes cord
sapientes ad explendum opus tabernaculi, cortinas december, etc. Exodus 36. v. 8.

Fecit opertorium tabernaculi de pellibus arietum rubricatis, aliudque desuper
velamentum de pellibus byanthinis, Exodus 36. v. 19.

Sic fecit in omnibus tabernaculi tabulis. Exodus 36. v. 22.


which resembled the ten Precepts of the Law, under the shadow whereof, the
Church and Christian souls sweetly take their repose. As for the skins of hair
wherewith it was covered, we need not doubt also, but they were a Symbol of
Penance. In fine, if the sheeps skins which were of a Red color denoted
Martyrs, the others which were of a Violet color could only signify Virgins.
There remains only the Tables elevated toward the four parts of the world, for
a mark of the faith which was to be dilated throughout all the corners of the
Earth, Ex quibus viginti ad plagam meridianam erant contra Austrum, etc. Exodus
36. v. 23.

Fecit and velum de hyacinthe; and purpura, etc. Exodus 36.31.


and which had only the Apostles for their foundation and Pillar, who
consequently serve as the Basis and support unto these Tables.

I cannot forget the Veil which covered the Sanctuary, informing us, that
between us and Heaven, there are shadows and clouds which hinder us from seeing
God face to face. But let us hope that either soon or late these Curtains,
Veils, and Clouds, will be withdrawn, and that the Angels will one day say unto
us, as to St. Euphraxia: Let us go my dear Daughter, we have lived but too
long, amidst the night, and under the shade of a body; Let us go into the
Sanctuary, the Veil is taken away, and we shall now in peace, and at leisure
enjoy the sight of the Holy of Holies, who is in the Sanctuary.

CHAP. XLII. The Altar of Holocausts.
BEsides the Altar of Perfumes within the Temple, Fecit and altar ho^ocausti
de lignis Sittim, etc. Exodus 38. v. 1.

Craticulamque ejus in modum retis fecit aeneam. Exodus 38. v. ^.


there was that of Holocausts without, by reason of the fire and smoke which
would have soiled the Tabernacle. This Altar was built of the wood of Shittim,
in the midst whereof a kind of Gridiron appeared, which bore the wood, and the
flaming Victim, and under a vacant place, a little hole was made to convey
thence the Ashes; because fire was always to be there preserved evening and
morning, to immolate a Lamb, and the rest of the day some other Victims.

Behold the Altar for the Passion and Cross of Mount Calvary, which shall
never be subject unto corruption, were it only for having been the Altar on
which the incorruptible body of Jesus had been Sacrificed. Cujus cornua de
^^gulis procedebant, etc. Exodus 38. v. 2.


The four horns of the Altar denoted the four corners of the World, where this
Cross was to be preached; and the side-Window showed toward the East the
Terrestrial Paradise, into which sin had cast, as it were, wood, to prepare a
Pile for this amiable Phoenix, on which he was to be burnt by the flames of his
love. The Gridiron represented the torments he was to endure, with an admirable
patience like a Lamb, who had been designed to be sacrificed from the beginning
of the world.

This Altar has also an admirable analogy with the heart of man, who like a
Salamander, was to live in the fire, to immolate every hour his Passion, like
so many Victims, and to be full of God, and devoid of all affection to
creatures, incorruptible also in his desires, elevated by his faith, love and
hopes, And then the very ashes would serve to conserve the memory of his
Masters pains, and both day and night, fires, clarities, lights and victims
would be there seen consecrated and offered unto God, with the spiritual
Perfumes and Incense, which are the prayers of Saints.

CHAP. XLIII. The Vestments of the High Priest.
IT were to repass a Needle into a stuff on which the hand of the increated
Wisdom had wrought, and to which the most learned men of the world have
endeavored to add some colors, If I should touch upon the mysterious garment
of the High Priest of the Old Testament. I may only then relate the number of
them, and observe transitorily what is represented to us under these wonders.

The first Vestment of the High Priest was the Ephod, De byacintho ve o and
purpura, virmiculo, ac bysso, fecit vesses ^uibus indueretur Aaron, etc. Exo.
39. v. 1.
where were engraven in Precious stones the names of the twelve Patriarks of
the people of Israel, who had been the chief of their Race, Ipsique lapides
duodecim sculpti erant nominibus duodecim tribuum Israel, singuli per nomina
singulorum. Exodus 39. v. 14.
and those unto whom God had promised a multiplication. It was also to remember
them, and the twelve Tribes, during the Sacrifice, and to the end the people
reading these names, might be excited to imitate the lives and examples of
those who had so worthily born them.

In fine, it was a mark that the Priest bore, not only the people in his heart,
but also on his shoulders, in testimony of that love which was to be Active and
Passive.

This Ephod also was the figure of the yoke of the Gospel, and of that which
Christians were to bear in imitation of the first High Priest, who is no other
than Jesus Christ, whose obedience having reached even to death, and whose love
having closed his eyes in the midst of torments, was also represented on this
Vestment.

The second Vestment, was the Rational, Fecit and Rationate ^pere polymito,
etc. Exodus 39. v. 8.
which served to advertise the Priest, and Consequently the people of their
duty. It was also as the mouth of Oracles, and the Organ of Gods commands, and
the peoples obligations, who might learn from thence, and contemplate as in a
mirror the purity both of body and soul, and the four Cardinal virtues
distinguished in the four rows of Precious stones, and whereof the mixture
arrives even to perfection amounting to the number of twelve. Fecerunt quoque
tunicam superhumeralis totam hyacinthinam. Exodus 39. v. 20.

D^orsum autem ad pedes mala punica, etc. Exodus 39. v. 22.

Et tintinnabula de auro purissimo quae posuerunt inter malogranata, etc. Exo.
39. v. 23.

Fecerunt and tunicas byssinas opere textili, etc. Exodus 39. v. 25.




The third Vestment of the High Priest, was a large Tunique of a Violet color,
on which he need but cast his eyes to behold and learn the ways of a
Celestial life, most proper for him worthily to bear this Vestment which was
to reach as low as his foot, and to have Pomegranats, and little Bells round
about it, whereof the one, as Rupertus observes, represented the preaching of
the Messiah, and the other his Miracles.

The fourth garment was of fine Linen, which is the true Symbol of Purity,
without which all Priests never ought to approach the Altar, and which they must
never put off; otherwise their Robe though Celestial, would be without
splendour, and all the other Ornaments only serve for the preparation and pomp
of a Sacrifice abominable in the sight of God, who is nothing but purity it
self.

But when a man has once put on all these Vestments, Fecerunt and laminam
sacrae venerationis de auro purissimo, scripseruntque in ea opere gemmario,
Sanctum Domini, Exodus 39. v. 29.
he may boldly set the Myter on his head, which signifies a strict union with
God; and the Plate which was born on his forehead with the Sacred name of
Jehovah, signified him whom we ought to have always imprinted in our minds.

In fine, all the other Pontifical Ornaments of the Old Testament were but
figures of those which our High Priest put on, and which all that follow his
steps are to use, not so much to cloth their bodies, as to put their souls in
a condition of presenting Sacrifices unto God, not only for themselves, but
also for others.

CHAP. XLIIII. The Sacrifices of Aaron consumed by fire from Heaven.
I Know not from whence the Romans, and the Vestals had the fire which they so
charily preserved in their Temple; but that which the Israelites kept in the
Tabernacle was a present they received from Heaven eight days after Moses had
Consecrated Aaron, and enjoined him to offer his first Sacrifices: This was in
testimony that God approved them, and to imprint deeper in the minds of the
people, the honor and reverence they were to bear unto their Highpriests, and
to these public acts of their Religion. Afterward the Gentiles endeavored to
disturb these Mysteries, and often sought to make us believe, that their Gods
kept amorous Thunderbolts, and Sacred flames for the advantage of their
Religion; and for this purpose they had given names unto some, as a mark of the
favors they had received from them, in their Sacrifices, which as they gave
out, had been often inkindled by their hands.

Nevertheless, these are but Fables, and Impiety and Sacrileges afforded no
coals of the Sanctuary, nor any flames of Heaven, like those which fired the
Holocausts, and Victims of Aaron, in the presence of the people, who did
partake of the Sacrifice, Apparuitque gloria Domini omni multitudini. Levit. 9.
v. 23.
as accomplices of that sin for which it was offered. At that time the glory of
our Lord appeared on the Altar, and in the midst of these Ceremonies.

Now this glory was but a visible Fire which surrounded the whole Holocaust, Et
ecce egressus ignis a domino, devor^vit holocausium, and adipet qui erant super
altar, etc. Levit. 9 v. 24.
and consumed it just in the same manner, as the common fire would have done,
although some Hebrews have invented in their usual dreams,

First, That the face of a Lion appeared in the midst of flames.

Secondly, That they could not be quenched, even in water.

Thirdly, That they were to be kept in a Purple Cloth.

But their imagination had more resembled truth, Fair Analogies of fire with
God.
if instead of amusing themselves on these dreams, they had said, That this was
the most ordinary Figure, by which God uses to erect a Throne of Light and
Ardor unto his Love, which is but a most pure fire, without mixture, which
descended from Heaven upon Earth, to cause a general inflagration in all
hearts; which to speak properly, ought to be no other than the Altars of the
most illustrious Sacrifices of Love, Faith, and Religion; concerning which, God
has been pleased to give marks and signs of his particular presence, causing
himself to be seen and felt under the form of Fire, which of Natural bodies,
resembles him the most: So that Moses durst say unto his people, Deuteronomy. 4. v.
21.
That his God was a consuming Fire.

In the first place, because this Element has more resemblance with its
Creator, in regard of the power and command it has received beyond others.

Secondly, because, as there is nothing more amiable, and terrible than fire;
so there is nothing which equals the goodness God expresses to the virtuous,
and the chastisement he implores to take revenge on the wicked.

Thirdly, it is the nature of fire, as well as the property of God, to
enlighten the night, to melt Ice, to warm those that approach it, and to burn
such as will touch it. Moreover, it is the property of them both incessantly
and vigorously to act, and to communicate themselves without loss or
alteration, to be most pure, simple, and subtle, to harden and mollify
substances, and always to ascend.

In fine, the wisdom of God breaks forth in the midst of sparkling fires, his
goodness in its ardors, and his power (to which all is possible), in those
flames which God cannot resist: And as heat and light spring from fire, so the
Son and the Holy Ghost are produced from the Father, as from their Beginning
and Origin.

It is not then without reason, God takes veils of fire to cover his Majesty,
and that he often appears under this shape in Sacrifices; since these fires are
kindled by his own hand, and by the torch of his Love, unto which we must
approach with the same reverence, as to the bush of Moses; Areptisque Nadab and
Abihu filu Aaron th^^ ^^bulis, posuerunt ignem, and incensum desuper,
offerentes co^am Domino ignem alienum: Quod eis praeceptum non erat. Levit. ^0.
v. 1.
otherwise we find nothing there, but our own misfortune amongst devouring
flames, and killing ardors, followed by smoke, tears, and obscurities, which
form the veil of a dismal blindness.

We must chiefly beware of doing like Nadab and Abihu, who were so bold as to
put into their Censor an other fire than that of the Sanctuary; For that is to
mingle Sacrilege with Religion, Heaven with Earth, and Piety with Profanations.

Nevertheless, this is the practice of these persons, who are so presumptuous
as to speak unto God by lips polluted with blasphemies, and to touch his Altars
with impure hands, to kiss his Images with lips withered by wanton kisses, and
to love the Holy Bridegroom with a heart, which they have already sold or
morgaged unto his rival.

God also wants not arms to punish these profane persons, he has killing
Thunderbolts, and amorous Shafts, he has gentle winds to inkindle fires,
Sanctificabor in iis qui appropinquant mihi, and in conspectu omnis populi
glorificabor. Levit. 10. v. 3.
and torrents to quench them: There are Victims which he crowns with flames,
and spoils, which he reduces into Ashes, and oftentimes the Sacrificers, who
ought only to attract Blessings and Dews from Heaven, draw upon themselves a
deluge of pains and punishments. God is the Holy of Holies, and he cannot
breathe but in Sanctity, which is, as it were, his Element, Life, and Paradise.

CHAP. XLV. The Pillar of Fire, and the Cloud.
AMongst all the miracles which God wrought for his people, Adduxit vos
quadraginta annis per desertum, etc. Deuteronomy. 29. v. 5.
and continued for the space of forty years, during their voyage, from their
departure out of Egypt, until their entry into the Land of Promise, the first
was, That amongst three millions of people, there was not any one either sick,
fainting, or weary, during all these wanderings, and amidst the dangers and
incounters, not to be avoided by those that make long journeys.

The second wonder appeared in their Garments, which were not in any sort worn
out, Non sunt attrita vestimenta vestra, nec calceamenta pedum vestrorum
vetustate consumpta sunt. Deuteronomy. 29. v. 5.

Panem non comedislis, vinum and siceram non bibistis, etc. Deuteronomy. 29. v. 6.


as if they had brought them out of their Mothers Bellies, increased with their
Bodies.

They also had no need of Sutlers, nor any of those provisions which are
necessary for livelihood: For there fell every day so well-seasoned Manna, as
they needed only to take and put it into their mouths, to find therein all
sort of gust, and the most delicious taste they could desire.

In fine, Igitur die qua erectum est tabernaculum, operuit illud nubes. A
vespere autem super tentorium erat quasi species ignis usque mane. Number. 9. v.
15.

Sic siebat jugiter: per diem operiebat illud nubes, and per nectem quasi
species ignis. Number. 9. v. 16.


the last prodigy was the Pillar, which served them for a Torch amidst the
obscurities of the night, and for an umbrello to oppose the over-violent ardors
of the day.

It was a Chariot of Fire, and a Cloud conducted by an Intelligence, which held
the Reigns thereof, and guided it according to the will of God; It was a Barque
in the Air, more fortunate than that which heretofore carried in artificial
fire the hopes of Greece. For this Vessel had real Fires, its Pilot marked out,
as some have believed, the seasons of the year, and the hours of the day and
night: It was a Standard, which accompanied and preceded all the Triumphs and
Victories of the Hebrews, and at the same time routed their enemies.

It was the Holy Standard, whose Ciphers were Love-nets, and Draughts of
Clemency; it was a Sun in Eclipse, and a Cloud where the Sun was in his
Meridian. The Morning and Evening Stars saw this Veil hanging over the Camp of
the Israelites, when they were enforced to make a halt, and flying when they
were to march. God himself made sometimes use of it as his Throne, Si fuisset
nubes a vespere usque ad mane, and statim diluculo tabernaculum reliquisset,
proficiscebantur: Et, si post diem and noctem recessisset, dissipabant
tentoria, Number. 9. v. 21.
and these resplendent obscurities, this luminous night, and this day shadowed
with Clouds, served him for a Veil, through which he darted on the people, the
splendors of his glory, and the shafts of his amiable Providence, which gave
the first motion to the Pillar, and conducting Angel.

Is not this a lively Image of the Holy Ghost, who is the Pillar of Saints, and
of the Church, who gives strength unto the feeble, and light unto the blind?
He illuminates during the night of sin, and places us under his Wings, during
the day of Grace. This amiable Pillar goes marking out our Lodgings, during
this whole Pilgrimage, and at last will stop when it must take its resting
place, and make its last retreat under the Canopy of Heaven.

O Israel! Chosen People, lose not then the sight of this Pillar, it is for
thee, it is for all; and if thine eyes cannot endure the splendour of its Rays,
put thy feir at last under its shadow, and never forsake it, until this Divine
Cloud which covers thee, pour down into thy heart, and until without veil or
mixture, thou may receive the clarities, which make the Paradise, and glory
of the Blessed; for the rest thou needst fear nothing: For there is no person
who may not gain a place in Heaven, and break all the obstacles on Earth,
following this most Blessed Guide, and never losing the sight of these pleasing
Lights. The Humble may raise themselves by respect and fear, the Merciful by
the love of Piety, the Courageous by Valor, the Considerate by Counsel, the
Provident by the Prudence of Saints, the most Solid by Wisdom, and such as have
the Gift of Discretion by Knowledge, and by the various Trials they shall have.

CHAP. XLVI. The Brazen Serpent. Quod cum audisset Chananaeus rex Arad, qui
babitabat ad meridiem, venisse scilicet Israel per explorator ^ viam, pugnavit
contra illum, and victor existens, duxit ex eo praedam. Number. 21. v. 1.

A While after the death of Mary and Aaron, when the people pursued their
voyage toward the Holy Land, Arad, King of the Canaanites, had no sooner heard
the news of it, but he instantly took the field to hinder their further
advance. It was upon the same way, that two years after their departure out of
Egypt, the Hebrews had sent their Spies into the Land of Canaan; and this was
the occasion which moved Arad to raise forces in great haste, imagining that
all these Travelers and Strangers had no other intention, than to invade his
Territories, and render themselves masters of his Country.

The first conflicts were very prosperous to this Prince, At Israel voto se
Domino obligans ait: Si tradideris populu^ istu^ in manu mea, delebo urbes
ejus. Number. 21. v. 2.

Exaudivitque Dominus preces Israel, and tradidit Chananaeum, que^ ille
interfecit subversis urbibus ejus: and vocavit nomen illius Horma, id est,
anathema. Number. 21. v. 3. Profecti sunt autem de monte Hor, per viam quae ducit
ad Mare rubrum, ut circumirent terram Edom. Et taedere coepit populum itineris
ac laboris. Number. 21. v. 4.

Locutusque contra Deum and Moisen, ait; Cur eduxisti nos de Aegypto, ut
moreremur in solitudine? Deest panis, non sunt aquae: anima nostra jam nauseat
super cibo isto levissimo. Number. 21. v. 5.


and I am confident he would have defeated his Enemies, if God had not combined
against him, according to the solemn Vow the Israelites made to demolish for
his honor, all the strong holds of this King, and to lay so many Anathemaes on
them, that there might remain nothing, but the execrable footsteps and bloody
marks of the abominations and impieties which reigned in the Land of Canaan.
And this they did after a general victory, from thence pursuing their way
toward the Red Sea, and about the Lands of Idumea.

But in fine, these ungrateful men seeing already their promised Palms, could
not forbear to mingle murmurs with their Songs of Victory; and the vexation
they had to see themselves so long in a Pilgrimage, made them lose the
remembrance of him who had conducted them through the desert, and rendered them
conquerors over their Enemies, after he had in a manner enforced the Elements,
and the most insensible Bodies of Nature to contribute unto their necessities.

Ah! said they, we have too long wandered in this solitary place, sometimes upon
Mountains, and then in Valleys; nevertheless, after a journey of forty years,
we have not hitherto reached the Haven; And even this Manna which fell from
Heaven, and which indeed, has hitherto supplied our most pressing necessities,
is yet but a very slight nourishment, and which affords more distaste than
benefit: Why did we then leave Egypt to come into these deserts and arid
places, where we have neither Water nor Bread?

Can we truly represent unto our selves a more unworthy and blind ingratitude,
than this? But where may we find punishments harsh enough to inflict on this
impious people, and darts sharp enough to cause a resentment of so great a
disloyalty? I could wish, that all the Oaths of these perjured persons had been
numbered, after so many favors and miracles done for their sake; and yet behold
their Sacrifices, their Offerings, their Vows, and all their Gratitude. Why
have you brought us hither, and why have you delivered us out of slavery, to
cause us to die with hunger and thirst in this desert?

Behold, Quamobrem misu Dominus in populum igneos serpents, ad little plagas,
and mortes plurimorum. Number. 21. v. 6.

Venerunt ad Moisen, atque dixetunt: Peccavimus, quia locuti sumus contra
Dominum and te: Ora ut tollat a nobis serpents. Oravitque Moises pro populo.
Number. 21. v. 7.


the complaints and murmurings which even scorched the Sands of Arabia, as with
a breath of fire and flames, which was no other than the Spirit of God, which
immediately produced there an infinite number of Serpents, whose bitings were
so cruel and ardent, that one would have believed they had been so many coals,
or some kind of wilde-fire applied to the flesh of these miserable wretches,
if those Vipers and Scorpions had not been seen, which spared no man, causing
with their Teeth upon these infamous Bodies, such stinging pains, and fiery
wounds, that it brought them even unto despair; And, I believe, it would have
reduced these guilty persons into Ashes, if they had not at least acknowledged
their sin, and obtained some remedy more than humane, by the mediation of Moses.

Now this Remedy was no other than a great Brazen Serpent, which God commanded
Moses to make, Et locutus est Dominus ad cum: Fac serpentem aeneum; and posuit
eum pro signo: auem cum percussi aspicerent, sanabantur, Number. 21. v. 8, 9.
and erect in the desert; upon which they had no sooner cast their eyes, but
they were instantly cured, though it were but a sign and mark of that hand
which had erected this Trophy of his Power, and the Image of his Goodness; to
the end, the Remedy might be the more conformable to the disease, and that such
as had been punished by Serpents, after they had vomitted all the venom out of
their serpentine mouths, might have at least this counter-poison, which was, as
it were, enclosed within this miraculous Serpent. Now all this was but a most
lively figure of Jesus Christ, fastened on the Cross, who bore all the most
bloody marks, and the most shameful appearances of a sinner; although he were
Purity and Innocence it self, which can receive no stain of sin.

The Brass whereof the Serpent was formed, and which amongst all other Metals
has I know not what more solid qualities, and less subject unto corruption,
denoted nothing else but the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and his Eternity.

We may also observe with Saint Austin, upon this Figure, some marks of the
resplendency and glory of the Cross, which carried its light and splendour even
unto the shadows of Gentilism and Idolatry, where its Trophies and Power have
appeared, notwithstanding the rage and fury of the most dreadful Tyrants.

In fine, if this Brazen Serpent bore certain colors of fire, who sees not
that it was a very evident token of Love and Charity, which passed even into
the bosom of a Father to seek a Son, and into the flames of a Sanctuary to seek
a God, to convert him into a man of Fire, which descended not on Earth, but to
inflame him with the amorous ardors of his infinite Charity?

O God! O Love! What goodness, what flames, where has such a prodigy and
miracle of Love been ever seen? A God takes upon him the form of a sinner,
represented by this Serpent, and was pleased by his death, to cure those who
have been the torturers and persecutors of his life.

Alas! my poor heart, Art thou not one of those who have murmured against God?
Have not these languishments and vexations, which thou can not conceal in his
service, provoked him to render thee a prey unto those Vipers, which are
commonly nourished in the fire of concupiscence, and are often born on the
sands of the Desert, and in the retirement of the most pleasing solitudes, to
fly afterward into the greatest Assemblies, and into the heart of the World,
where thou must perish of wounds amongst the dead, unless some Moses, in thy
favor, address himself unto him who has created thee, to save, and not to damn
thee.

O my Jesus! O my Savior! Grant me then this favor, that I may cast mine eyes
upon thy Cross, and on thy Self, to the end, If any deceiptful Serpent has
infected me with his bitings, and inkindled some ardors and flames in my veins,
in beholding you I may burn only with those of thy Holy Love.

CHAP. XLVII. The last Actions of Moses.
TO make a relation of the last Actions performed by Moses, I must imitate
Geographers and Painters, who contract upon their Canvas strokes and lines, to
form an Epitomy of the Heavens, Elements, and the greatest Bodies in nature;
nevertheless, I could not undertake so hard a task, if the design thereof had
not been marked out, even by his hand, of whom I pretend to speak. But since I
must here only work upon the original, and draw some copy of it, it is enough
for me to do like those Apprentices, who study to express, at least, in a rough
draught, the rarest Ideas of their Master.

The Pencil then of Moses must finish this Picture; and there is no person, I
believe, who may not know that his hand and pen have followed the tracts of his
Spirit, and that there was but one Moses, who could worthily describe and
publish the commands of God, whose instincts he so justly followed, as to see
and hear him, it was apparent that God animated his sentiments, who spoke by
his mouth, who wrought by his hands, and who became, as it were, the soul of
his soul, so intimately was he united to him, and all his actions.

This appeared during the whole course of this great Patriarcks life, but
chiefly near his end, and namely, when he saw himself even upon the point of
leaving this beloved people, of whom he had been the Prince, Father, The
Testament of Moses.
Prophet, and Lawgiver: He must resolve then to give them his last words, and
take his last farewell; he must declare all his desires, and draw his last will;
to the end, it might be afterward engraven upon Stones, and that, at least,
every seven years there might be made a general publication thereof; as also,
that Kings might themselves read it before their Election, to learn from thence
the Laws and Precepts, which are, as it were, the souls of Princes, and the
principal wheels of Empires.

Now this Testament was no other than Deuteronomy, Hieronimus in prologo
Galleato. August. Q. 49. Theod. hic Q. 1. Athanas. in Synop. Quadragessimo
anno, undecimo mense, prima die mensis, locutus est Moises ad filios Israel
omnia quae praeceperat illi Dominus, ut disceret eis. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 3. Trans
Jordanem in terra Moab. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 5.
which, as Saint Jerome says, is, as it were the Second Law, or rather
according to the opinion of Theodoret, Saint Austin, and Saint Athanasius, a
repetition of the first, which was published on Mount Sina, and amply set forth
in Exodus, Leviticus, and the Book of Numbers. It was about the fortieth year
after the departure out of Egypt, a little before the Hebrews passed over
Jordan, and in the last of their stations in the fields of Moab, and in a place
surnamed Abelsarim, when this new publication was made, by reason the most
ancient of the people of Israel, who had received this Law upon Mount Sina,
being dead, it was necessary that the young men, who perchance had never heard
of it, might at least be instructed therein by this second promulgation.

Besides, it was convenient that Moses who saw his end approaching, should
declare all his desires unto his beloved people; and that for his last farewell,
he should leave them these speaking Relics and Divine Commandments, which
ought to serve them as domestique masters, for the well-ordering both of their
lives and manners.

We may say, upon the same occasion, An excellent Sermon of Moses.
That Deuteronomy is, as it were, but a continual Preaching, whereof all the
Sentences and Exhortations are animated with Zeal, Ardor, and Piety, as the
most powerful Motives Moses uses to inculcate to all his Auditors, such
important Verities and Laws, as on them all their happiness and salvation
depend. It is also most certain, That we our selves ought to be touched by the
darts of Virtue, and by the shaffs of a Holy Love, if we will warm others, and
elevate their hearts and souls unto God: For otherwise, this were to inkindle a
fire with water and ice, and to believe, that a pile might be fired by an
extinguished Torch. No, no, we ought to be interiorly furnished with qualities
fit to be imparted unto others, and before we lay some touches of a Pencil upon
a Cloth, and some strokes of a Graver upon a Plate of Brass, it is first
necessary to form a rough draught in our minds; otherwise, we shall but
scrible, and a multitude of venturous strokes can never finish a regulated
work: Whence it follows, Advice unto public persons.
that Judges, Masters, and all that speak in public, and are as it were, the
Living Laws of this World, the Oracles of the People, and the Echoes of Gods
Will, ought to be like animated Books which only speak, command, and teach
what they have imprinted within themselves; or rather like Marble, on which it
is necessary beforehand, and with much labor, to engrave what is to be there
read. In fine, they ought at least to imitate the Sun, which has always
eminently, both heat, beauty, and all those Lights, which without truce and
repose, he spreads upon the Earth. Above all, such as God has chosen for such
important employments ought to speak more from the heart than mouth, and never
to say during life, but what they should confirm at the hour of death, to the
end when they shall see themselves at the point of death, they may have no
trouble to retract the errors of their youth, but only repeat the verities they
have always gloried to practice and publish in all places. This is that which
Moses did after the death of Aaron, and very few weeks before his own; When for
a closure of all his actions and labors, he wrote and declared publicly these
Laws unto all his people, Poslquam percussit Sehon Regem Amorrhae orum qui
habitabat in Hesebon: and Og Regem Basan, etc. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 4.

Coepitque Moses explanare legem, and dicere, Deuteronomy. 1. v. 5.

Dominus Deus noster locutus est ad nos in Horcb dicens, etc. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 6.

Ingredimini and pessidete eam super qua juravit Dominus patribus vestris, etc.
Deuteronomy. 1. v. 8.

Profecti autem de Horeb, transivimus per termum terribilem and maximam, quam
vidistis, per viam montis Amorrhaei sicut praeceperat Dominus Deus noster
nobis. Cumque venissemus in Cadisbarne; Deuteronomy. 1. v. 19.

Mittam us vires qui considerent terram: and renuntient per quod iter debeamus
ascendere, and ad quas pergere civitates. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 2.


who after his decease were in a manner to hold his place, and serve for a
bridle unto some, and a torch unto others, or at least for a spirit general
unto all, to inspire them with the duties and obligations they owed unto God.

To this effect, in the first three Chapters of Deuterenomie we need but
repasse over the course of their Pilgrimage, and expose the admirable
adventures of this famous Voyage which lasted forty years, during which they
were like wanderers and vagabonds in the Desert.

It was upon the first day of the eleventh month of the Hebrews, and a while
after the defeat of Sehon the King of the Ammorites; and of Og, King of Basan,
that Moses assembled his troops, and first related to them what had passed on
Mount Horeb, together with a promise of their admission into Chanaan, which was
to be the period of their travels, and the accomplshment of their desires.

In the second place, how after their departure out of the land of Horeb, they
descended into a vast and dreadful Wilderness, from whence they went unto
Cadesbarne, which was the place of their retreat, whilst Spies went from them
to survey the Land unto which they were going.

Now this was the cause of inkindling Gods wrath against them, Cumque audisset
Dominus vocem sermonum vestrorum, iratus, juravit and ait, Deuteronomy. 1. v. 34.

Non videbit quispiam de hominibus generationis hujus pessimae terram bonam,
quam sub juramento pollicitus sum patribus vestris, praeter Coleb filium
Jephone, etc. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 35, 36.

Vos autem revertimini and abite in solitudinem per viam maris rubri, Deuteronomy. 1.
v. 40.


who perceiving that they confided not in his promises, swore that except Caleb
the son of Jephon, and Josua, not a man of this incredulous and perfidious
Nation should be so happy as to enter the Land of Promise. And truly what could
God do, hearing the murmurings, and seeing the Indignities of these fearful
and mercenary Souls, who had no sooner notice of the forces of the Country to
which he conducted them, but at the same instant they persuaded themselves,
notwithstanding all that Josua and Caleb could say unto them for their
encouragement, that these troops were to oppress their weakness, and that
unfallibly the Towers and Bulwarks of Chanaan would be converted into Prisons
for them, as also that all those Giants of whom they had heard so much, were
like so many Tyrants to reduce them again into a more vexatious bondage than
that from which they were delivered.

They would have still wandered in the Deserts, and about the Mountains, often
exposed unto hunger and thirst, if God had not otherwise paternally provided
for them, cleaving Rocks, causing Manna to issue from the Clouds, Parvuli
vestri, de q^ibus dixistis, quod captivi ducerentur, and filii qui hodie boni
ac moli ignorant distantiam, ipse ingredientur, etc. Deu. 1. v. 39.
and preventing all the dangers which accompanied their Voyages. Methinks I
see a Picture of those who go round about the Sanctuary, and never enter into
it: For all these miserable men were shut out of the Land of Promise, and this
favor was reserved for their Children, who notwithstanding were long in
expectation of it. There are some languishing Spirits in the world, and souls
floating about the Ark, these are little Fishes which swim always between two
waters, or else resemble those Birds which can never take their flight upon
elevated places, and never come out of their holes, but when night approaches,
and when scarce any light is to be seen. These are also certain curious persons
who would pry even into the Sun; but the excess of light blinds them. In
matters of Faith, the eyes ought to be shut, and all the reasons of human
policy serve but to dazzle and confound. We ought never to be so presumptuous,
as to measure the grandeurs of the Mysteries of Heaven, with the lowness of
our understanding. It is sufficient to follow the lights of God, to see what
passes in Chanaan, and in the Land of Promise, without sending other Spies
than our most ardent desires, and our purest actions, otherwise the hand, eye,
and mind, which serve us for a guide in this Pilgrimage, will forsake us on the
way, and amidst windings, where we shall see but a far off the end of our
travels, and the shore which we strive to reach by strength of arms and Oars. I
even doubt whether after we have long expected, Cum mihi quoque iratus propter
vos Dominus dixit: nec tu ingredieris illuc, etc. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 37.

Precatusque sum Dominum in tempore illo dicens. Deuteronomy. 3. v. 23.


and demanded the land of Promise with tears in our eyes, and sighs in our
hearts, we shall not be enjoined silence; and surely it would be done with more
reason than unto Moses, who notwithstanding his virtue and merits, was not
heard in the request he made upon this occasion; for after he had made his
prayer in these terms,

My Lord, Domine Deus, tu coepisii estendere servo tuo magnitudinem tuam,
manumque fortis simam, Neque enim est alius Deus vel in caelo, vel in terra,
qui passit facere opera tua, and comparari sortitudini tuae. Deuteronomy. 3. v. 24.

Transibo igitur, and videbo terram hanc optimam trans Jordanem, and montem
istum egregium, and Libanum. Deuteronomy. 3. v. 25.


and my God, thou have begun to withdraw the Veiles which hide from us thy
greatness and power; It is necessary to confess, that neither in the Heavens,
nor upon Earth, there is any power comparable to thine, nor other God, who can
work those miracles, whereof I have been a witness: I hope then that thy
victorious hand, and thy Omnipotent arm will conduct me beyond Jordan, and that
being under this happy Climat, and in these fortunate Lands, for which I have
even sighed the space of forty years, I shall at last ascend the Mountain of
Moria and Liban, where I may kiss the paces, and discern the foutsteps of those
who have been my well-beloved Forefathers, Iratusque est Dominus mihi propter
vos, nec exaudivit me, sed dixit mihi: sufficit tibi, nequaquam ultrae loquaris
de hac re ad me. Deuteronomy. 3. v. 26.
and thy dear Children;

God who can do nothing but with Justice, showed some marks of his Anger, and
most expressly prohibited Moses to importune him any more concerning this
matter. Afterward, he sent him to the top of Mount Phasga, Ascend cacumen
Phasga, and aculos tuos circumser ad occidentem, and ad Aquilonem, Austrumque,
and Orientem, and aspice. Deuteronomy. 3. v. 27.

Sed Josue filius Nun minister tuus, ipse intrabit pro te: hunc exhortare and
robora, and ipse sort terram dividet Israeli. Deuteronomy. 1. v. 38.

Mansimusque in valle contra fanum Phoger. Deuteronomy. 3. v. 29.

Non addetis ad verbu^ quod vobis loquor, nec auseretis ex eo: custodite
mandata Domini Dei vestri, etc. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 2.


from whence having commanded him to look toward the East; the South, the
West, and the North, he charged him only to encourage Josua, who was to succeed
him after his death, in the quality of a Conductor of his people, and to divide
Chanaan and the Land of Promise amongst the Tribes of Israel. I know not the
terms which Moses used in the Establishment of so prudent and worthy a
Successor: For he was content to say, that having received this answer and
commission, he descended into the Valley, where was the Temple of Phogor;
Having in this manner concluded the first Chapter of Deuteronomy; In the eighth
Chapter following, he makes a long discourse, exhorting his people to keep
exactly the Laws and Commandments which were first given upon Mount Sina,
with a Spirit environed with flames, and ardors, which sufficiently testified
the greatness of this mystery, and the importance of the matter.

Beware then, my dear Children, said Moses to them, Remarkable words of Moses.
of violating the Oath of your Forefathers, and if you be sensible of all the
blessings you have received, Dye rather a thousand times, than efface in your
souls the love and gratitude due unto him, who has delivered you out of the
furnaces of Egypt, Cave ne quando obliviscaris pacti Domini tui. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 23.
and whose spirit has secret flames, and devouring fires which will consume
you, if you have been so audacious as to forget him, and despise his commands:
But if you obey him, you shall go into those pleasant Countries, which will
prove a Haven unto all your miseries, and the accomplishment of all your
desires; Et juravit ut non transirem Jordanem, nec ingrederer terram optimam,
quam daturus est vobis. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 21.

Ecce morior in hac humo, non transibo Jordanem: vos transibitis, and
possidebitis terram egregiam. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 22.


There all your Fetters shall be broken, and your selves freed from bondage,
without fear and apprehension you shall enjoy those blessings which were
heretofore promised unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For my part, my
well-beloved, I am at the end of my life, and shall never pass over Jordan, nor
the Land of Chanaan; Go then happily thither, and before you set your foot on
this Country, engrave in the bottom of your souls the Laws and Precepts I
have so often taught you, Haec est enim vestra sapientia and intellectus coram
populis, ut audientes universa praecepta haec, dicant: En populus sapiens and
intelligens, gens magna. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 6.
to the end when another People shall see and hear these Oracles and documents
from your mouths, they may say with astonishment, Behold these wise and learned
men, this great Nation, and these illustrious Tribes, for whom heaven has
always had an extraordinary care, and a particular affection. For the rest, in
case you observe not exactly the Laws I leave you, Testes invoco hodie caelum.
and. terram, cito perituros vos esse de terra, quam transito Jordane poss^ssuri
estis: non habitabitis in ea longo tempore; S^d de lebit vos Dominus. Deuteronomy. 4.
v. 26.

Atque disperget in omnes gentes, etc. Deu. 4. v. 27.

Ibique servietis Diis, qui hominum manu fabrtcati sunt, ligno and lapidi, qui
non vident, nec audiunt, nec comedunt, nec odorantur. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 28.

Cumque quaesieris ibi Dominum Doum tuum invemes eum: si tamen toto cord
quaesieris, and tota tribulatione any mae tuae. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 29.


do not think you shall long enjoy the succession whereof youare going to be
heirs. I attest Heaven and Earth, and all Creatures both visible and invisible,
which are witnesses of what I say unto you, scarce shall you be possessed of
it, but you will be dispersed, some into one place, some into another, and
afterward you will find your selves in Provinces, where you shall be Captives,
and in reward of your perfidiousness, serve false Divinities, which the error
and Idolatry of your Masters shall have formed of wood and stone, where you
shall see mouths, eyes, ears, and the other parts which are the Instruments of
life, and the Organs of your Senses, yet they will be inanimated Statues,
soul-less bodies, and insensible Idols, where nevertheless if you will seek God
with a contrite and loving heart, and fix your eyes and minds not upon
appearances, but on the verity, which is Him, I protest unto you, my friends,
that you will there find him, and that in fine, the power of your Creator will
trample over the weakness of all these little Beings which have been created by
his hand. He then must be the object of your affections, his infinite goodness,
his wise prudence, his Paternall mercy, his beauty without art or mixture,
ought to be the subject of your desires and flames. Woe to all those, who deny
him their affections, and prefer some streams, and little glimmerings of light,
before this Spring of living waters, and this Planet, without which the whole
world would remain in the shades of death and blindness. I know that you will
be first invaded by seven different Nations, which are but the Images of the
seven deadly Sins, and will wage a bloody War against you: But these
Chanaanites will serve but for matter unto your glory, and for a fair Field,
where after many Combats, Septem gentes multo ma^o is numeri quam tues, and
robustiores te. Deuteronomy. 7 v. 1.

Tradid ^^que eas Dominus Deus tuus tibi, percuties eas usque ad internecionem.
Deuteronomy. 7. v. 2.

Et scies, quia Dominus Deus tuus, ipse est Deus sortis and fidelis, Custodiens
pactum and misericordiam diligentibus se, Deuteronomy. 7. v. 9.


and total Victories, you may raise Trophies, and build Altars unto the glory
of this Conqueror, who can effect all that he pleases, from whence you shall
learn, that your God is not only a God whose power is invincible, but whose
fidelity also is inviolable, his promises unalterable, his word infallible, and
his favors without number and measure, provided you offer your hearts, and
consecrate to him your dearest passions; otherwise his favors will be
converted into afflictions, his goodness will give way unto Justice, and his
rewards will be punishments, exiles, slaveries, and almost Universal
destructions, Et reddens odientibus se statim, ita ut disperdat eos, and ultra
non differat, protinus eis restituens quod merentur. Deuteronomy. 7. v. 10.
as when the impiety of your farefathers induced them even to set the
abominable Idol of the Golden Calf, in the place of God; you need but represent
all these frightfull punishments, and exemplar Chastisements, unto your minds,
which in a manner make but a great Sepulcher of your Camps, the murmurings
whereof have a scended even to Heaven; And if you will pass farther, and
interrogate all Ages, to learn what has hitherto been the rigor of Gods
vengeances, when once provoked, go even into the Cradle of the world, into the
Terrestrial Paradise, Signa and opera quae fecit in medio Aegypti Pharaoni
Regi, and universae terrae ejus. Deuteronomy. 11. v. 3.

Omnique exercitui Aegyptiorum, and equis in curribus: quomodo operuerint eos
aquae maris Rubri, cum vos persequerentur. Deuteronomy. 11. v. 5.


under the Billows of the Ocean, and amongst the Ashes of Sodom; In fine,
return into Egypt, and pass again over the Sands of the Red Sea, to behold also
there the prints of those Chariots, and of those enemies which pursued you with
so much fury. Alas! where is now Pharaoh? Where are those Egyptians? and where
is that insolent pride, those unsupportable cruelties, and those dreadful
Tyrannies, which kept you under the yoke, and in the Chains of a very long and
painful captivity? But if you desire to pass even into the Infernal parts, Et
Dathan atque Abiron filii Eliab, qui suit filius Ruben, quos aperto ore sue
terra absorbuit, etc. Deuteronomy. 11. v. 6.
and cause all the Dungeons of the Earth to be opened, you may ask of Core,
Dathan, and Abiron, whether it be good to deride the works of God, and to vomit
forth blasphemies against him, who deserves nothing but thanksgivings and
benedictions. Ah! Surely, if Fire, Earth, Air, and Water, have never refused to
arm themselves in his quarrel, Ponite haec verba mea in cordibus and in animis
vestr is, etc. Deuteronomy. 11. v. 18.

Subvertite omnia loca in quibus coluerunt gentes quas possessuri estis Deos
suos super montes excelsos, etc. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 2.

Non facietis ita Domino Deo vestro. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 4.

Sed ad locum, quem elegerit Dominus Deus vester, etc. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 5.

Utvadant and serviant diis alienis, and adorent eos, solemn, and lunam, and
omnem militiam caeli, quae non praecepi. Deuteronomy. 17. v. 3.

Et lapidibus obruentur. Deuteronomy. 17. v. 5. Hoc erit judicium sacerdotum a populo
and ab iis qui offerunt victimas, sive ovem immolaverint dabunt sacerdoti armum
ac nutrieulum.

Septimo anno facies remissionem. Deuteronomy. 15. v. 1.

Quae hoc ordine celebrabitur, cui debetur aliquid ab amico vel proximo, a
fratre suo repetere non poterit, quia annus remissions est Domini. Deuteronomy. 15. v.
2.

Cum tibi venditus suerit frater tuus Hebraeus aut Hebraea, and sex annis
servierit tibi, in septimo^ anno dimittes cum liberum. Deuteronomy. 15. v. 12.


they will not be less obedient and sensible, when it shall please him to give
them the least sign of his commands. Hear then Israel, all that I say unto
thee, and imprint it in thy mind, to the end, If these chastisements and
threats do not move thee, and beget fear and horror in thee, at least, let the
memory of the Favors conferred on thee, and the hope of a future good incite
thee; let not so many benefits be forgotten, and let the hand from whence they
flow, oblige thee eternally to preserve them in thy remembrance.

Are not these words worthy the zeal of Moses? and these flames, powerful
enough to inkindle love, or to reduce hearts harder than Diamonds into Ashes?
But this Exhortation seemed to them too general, and for this reason, he
descended more to particulars, and commanded,

First, Not to immolate any more their Victims, nor to present their desires in
Woods, and upon Mountains, but in some place which God had chosen and appointed
for this purpose.

Secondly, He made an Edict, in which it was decreed, That they who should be
so bold as to teach and introduce any Foreign and Sacrilegious Worships, should
be presently put to death, and publicly stoned without exception, either of
kindred or friends, in case by mishap they were guilty.

Thirdly, He makes mention of particularities, which concerned the manner which
was to be observed in the common use of these Animals, which might be eaten;
and there he remarks some duties touching the Tenths, to which they were
obliged: From thence, he proceeded to the Jubilee, which was celebrated every
seventh year; after which, the Jews gave mutually a general acquittance of all
the debts they had contracted, and at that time all servants were set free, in
such sort, that their Masters were even obliged to give them a Viaticum, Sed
dabis viaticum de gregibus, etc. Deuteronomy. 15. v. 14.

Tribus vicibus per annum apparebit omne masculinum tuum in conspectu Demini
Dei tui, in leco quem elegerit:, in so^emnitate azymorumin solemnitate
hebdomadarum, and in solemnitate tabernaculorum. Deuteronomy. 16. v. 16.

Veniesque ad sacerdotes Levitici generis, and ad judicem qui suerit illo
tempore, etc. Deuteronomy. 17. v. 9.

Et dixeris: constituam super me regem, sicut habent omnes per circaitu^
nationes. Deuteronomy. 17.14.

Non habebunt sacerdotes and Levitae, and omne qui de eadem, tribu sunt, partem
and haereditatem cum relic Israel, Deuteronomy. 18. v. 1.

Nec incantator, nec qui pychones consultat, and divinos, etc. Deuteronomy. 18. v. 11.

Prophetam suscitabe eos, etc. Deu. 18. v. 18.

Haec erit lex bomicidae fugientis, cujus vita servanda est: Qui percusserit
proximum suam nesciens, etc. Deuteronomy. 19. v. 4.

Si quis autem odio habens proximum suum, etc. Deuteronomy. 19. v. 11.

Mittent seniores civitatis illius and arripient eum de loco effagaii, etc.
Deuteronomy. 19. v. 13.

Non stabit testis unus contra aliquem, etc. Deuteronomy. 19. v. 15.


which was as a general salery due unto the toils of their service.

Fourthly, Having spoken concerning the Offerings which was to be made of the
firstborn, he makes a new publication of the Feast of Easter, of Pentecost,
and of the Tabernacles, which were to be celebrated in a designed place, and
where the Male-children were bound to be present. Presently after he made a
decree of death against Idolaters, and commanded all the people to repair unto
their Priests in Legal matters, and to consult them in their doubts, and
concerning the differences, which had reference to the Law. Then about the end
of the same Chapter, he commanded the people of Israel to choose a King of their
own Nation, and described the Qualities which were requisite for this Dignity.

Fifthly, He ordains by his order, that the Priests and Levites should have
only the Victims, Offerings, and Tenths, for their share in Canaan.
Afterward, he made a Public Act, prohibiting any Consultation with Diviners
and Sorcerers, and promised them a Prophet, who should declare to them all the
Commands of God.

Sixthly, Moses enjoined that three Towns should be designed for Refuge, and
which might serve as a Sanctuary for those who should by mishap kill a man
against their will; that if it were done voluntarily, the Author thereof was to
be banished, and drawn from these Towns, first to be put into the hands of his
adversaries, and afterward punished with exemplary death. As for false
witnesses, whose tongues are as much or more to be feared, than the hand of a
murderer, they were all condemned unto that kind of punishment, which
chasticeth proportionably to the crime, and demands in rigor, life for life,
and such a punishment as punctually suites with the offense of the criminal.

Seventhly, Si exieris ad bellum contra hosts tuos, and videris equitatus and
currus, etc. Deuteronomy. 20. v. 1.
He passes to Laws and Customs which were to be observed in War, and in a
concealed Murder, in which case, the offending-party was bound to make some
expiation of his crime, and receive, at least, some immunity and favor from his
Judges, which consisted particularly in a Public Oath, and in a general
Protestation made before them. As concerning the disobediences of such Children
as were refractory to their Fathers commands, Si genuerit homo filium
contumacem and protervum, qui non audiat patris and matris imperium, and
coercitus obedire contempserit. Deu. 21. v. 18.

Apprehendent eum, and ducent ad seniores civitatis illius, and ad portam
judicii. Deuteronomy. 21. v. 19.


no other punishment was to be inflicted on them than Death, after they had
been first put into the hands of the most Ancient of the people, who having
heard the report, examined the fact, and confronted the witnesses, were obliged
to leave them unto the mercy of the people to stone them to death, which was
also observed concerning Adulterers, who to this end, were led out of the City
with those that were to be stoned.

Eighthly, Ammonites and Moabites ctiam post decimam generationem non intrabunt
ecclestam Domini in aeternum. Deuteronomy. 23. v. 3.
He frames a brief Catalogue of some Ecclesiastical Laws, and chiefly of such
persons as were forbidden entrance into the holy places, amongst which were the
Ammonites, the Idumeans, the Moabites, and the Egyptians, even to the Tenth
Generation.

Ninthly, Si acceperit homo uxorem, and habuerit eam, and non invenerit gratiam
ante oculos ejus propter aliquam soeditatem: scribet lil ellum repudii, and
dabit in manu illius, and dimittet eam de domo sua. Deuteronomy. 24. v. 1.

Non deerunt pauperes in terra habitationis tuae: idcirco ego praecipio tibi,
ut aperias manumfratri tuo egeno and pauperi, qui tecum versatur in terra.
Deuteronomy. 15. v. 11.


Upon just reasons he permitted the Hebrews to separate themselves from their
Wives, and exhibit on this occasion, a Bill of Divorce, in which they set down
the causes of their repudiation.

Tenthly, He prescribed them Laws and Motives, which were to invite them unto
mercy and compassion toward the poor; which certainly is so agreeable unto
Reason, and fastened to Nature, That a man must be more than infensible, not to
be touched with a misfortune, wherein it is a particular favor not to be
inveloped himself, and where, however it happen, the misery of his likeness is
represented before his eyes.

In fine, Albeit men in this point are more worthy of compassion, than other
Creatures, yet Beasts very often deserve pity; and we ought not to be so cruel,
according to the observation of Moses, as to musle the mouth of an Ox who
treads the Corn, as it was anciently practiced, and after his labor, to refuse
him Straw and Hey.

Behold, as it were, an abridgement of the first five and twenty Chapters of
Deuteronomy, and consequently of Leviticus, and the Book of Numbers.

In the six and twentieth Chapter, Tolles de cunctis frugibus tuis primitias,
and pones in cartallo, pergesque ad locum, quem Dominus Deus tuus elegerit, ut
ibi invocetur nomen ejus. Deuteronomy. 26. v. 2.
the Hebrews received a command to offer unto God their first fruits, with a
public acknowledgment of their gratitude, for the blessings they received from
God, and that he alone is the Author of them; to whom they are indispensably
bound, to yield a perfect obedience, and without restriction.

In the seven and twentieth, Hi stabunt adlenedicendum populo super montem
Garizim, Jordane transmisso, etc. Deuteronomy. 27. v. 12.

Et e regione isti stabunt ad maledicendum in monte Hebal, etc. Deuteronomy. 27. v. 13.

Et pronuntiabunt Levitae, dicentque ad omnes viros Israel excelsa voce. Deuteronomy.
27. v. 14.

Maledictus homo qui facit sculptile, etc. Deuteronomy. 27. v. 15.


he prescribes the Form and Ceremonies of the Benediction, which was to be
given upon the Mount Garizim, whereas the Maledictions were thundered out upon
that of Hebal, and where all the Hebrews, men, women, and children, were to
appear, upon condition nevertheless, that the twelve Tribes should be in such a
manner divided, as six only were to be on Garizim, and as many upon Hebal.
Concerning the Priests who carried the Ark of the Covenant, they had their
station between the two Mountains, encompassed by Levites and the Ancients of
the Nation. It was after this preparation, Joshua began to bless all the
people, either by his own mouth, or by the mouth of the Priests; the which
being done, the Law was proclaimed: And as it is probable enough, some Levite
was chosen for this purpose, whose voice might be most intelligible to so great
an Assembly, and then followed the Twelve Formalities, concerning Benedictions
and Maledictions, which were to bo ebserved, when necessity and custom required.

Behold, doubtless the very Soul of the Laws, and, as it were, the Sting of
Justice in the World, and Commonwealths. This mixture of the good we hope for,
and the evil we fear, is, and has been always the Ciment of States and
Empires: And for this reason a spirit of love and fear is necessary in all Laws
and Governments, to the end, when one gives Crowns, Darts and Thunderbolts may
be seen in the hand of the other, which prevents abuse of favors, and the
suffering our selves to be carried away by the attractives of Mercy, with a
general contempt of Justice.

It was not then without reason, the written Law has her Benedictions and
Maledictions; since by the one she bridleth all Vices, and by the other she
excites unto Virtue; and it is for the same cause, Moses who in an eminent
degree possessed all the qualities of a perfect Statesman, and had passed
through all the Offices which render men the Intelligences of Nations, was
resolved in a manner to finish his Testament, by promises for the Good, and
threats for the Wicked. You need but peruse the ensuing Chapters of
Deuteronomy, where even to the thirtieth, you see nothing but Favors and
Benedictions for those that shall keep the Law; and on the contrary, nothing
but Terrors and Maledictions for such as shall infringe it.

I swear unto thee, says he, my poor people, That if thou have heard, and
deeply engraven all the Commandments of God in thy mind; and if thou art
resolved to put them in practice, Si autem audieris vocem Domini Dei tui ut
facias atque cusiodias omnia mandata ejus, quae ego praecipio tibi hodie,
faciet te Dominus Deus tuus excelfiore^ cunctis gentibus, quae versantur in
terra. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 1.

Venientque super te universae benedictiones istae, and apprehendent te; si
tamen praecepta ejus audieris. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 2.


thou shall be filled with all sorts of Benedictions.

I speak it unto thee, with tears in mine eyes, and by the order of him, who is
Verity it self, and whose Mercies and Vengeances are infinite: I speak it unto
thee as being even now ready to die, and if during my life I have concealed
nothing of all that was never so little expedient for thee, I ought not to be
now silent, in so important a matter. Remember then, my dear Chrildren, all
that God has commanded you, and that which I have so often from him announced
unto you; and if you perform it as you ought, you shall be blessed in your own
persons, and in your children, in City and Country; Benedictus tu in civitate,
and benedictus in agro. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 3.

Beuedictus fructus Ventris tui, and fructus terrae tuae, fructusque jumentorum
tuorum, etc. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 4.

Benedictus eris tu ingrediens and egrediens. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 6.

Dabit Dominus inimicos tuos qui consurgunt adversum te, corruente^ in
conspectu tuo, etc. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 7.

Videbuntque omnes terrarum populi quod nonem domini invocatum sit super te,
and timebunt te. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 10.

Quod si audire nolueris vocem Domini Dei tui, ut custodias, and facias omnia
mandata ejus, and ce emonias quas ego praecipio tibi, hodie, venient super te
omnes maledictiones islae, and apprehendent te. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 15.

Percutiat tes Dominus ulcere Aegypti. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 27.

Insuper and universos languores and plagas, quae non sunt scriptae in volumine
legis husus. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 61.

Omnique tempore calumniam sustineas, and opprimaris violentia, nec habeas qui
liberet te. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 29.

Disperget te Dominus in omnes populos, a summitate terrae usque ad terminos
ejus; and servies ibi diis alienis, quos and tu ignoras and patres tui, etc.
Deuteronomy. 28. v. 64.


and to what place soever you shall repair, at your entrance and going forth,
you shall find Benedictions, in such sort, That those who shall see you, will
be enforced freely to confess, That you are that chosen people whom God has
taken into his protection, and for whom the Heavens, the Elements, and Nature,
are Treasures of Benedictions. In fine, you shall see your Enemies under your
feet, and other Nations will not only bear you affection, but also respect;
and on the contrary, if you be so unhappy as to infringe the least of these
Commandments, and contemn these Laws, I have so often declared to you, or those
Ceremo^^es I have so publicly established, your Privileges shall be changed
into punishments, and your Favors into execrations, which will at last make you
the subject of all the Plagues wherewith Egypt has been heretofore so cruelly
afflicted, and you shall even feel some which you never yet heard of, or at
least, whereof you shall not find any mention in this Book.

What pity will it be to see you a reproach and scorn to the most barbarous
Nations in the World, amongst whom you shall nevertheless be dispersed, to
serve their unknown gods and masters, who will give you neither truce nor
repose, no more than your own consciences, which will always carry Vultures and
Vipers, to torment you without pity or intermission. Your hearts will have
disturbing terrors, and your wandering eyes will cast darts, as infallible marks
of the misertes and tyranny you shall undergo. It is also the doleful portion,
and the most usual course of the wicked, to live amidst frights, fears, which
like so many Goalers, both day and night surround an unhappy soul, which sees
nothing but Specters and Phantasms which solicit her ruin; so that you will
be always like Criminals, whose eyes are already veiled, whose necks are laid
down, and hands tied in expectation of the fatal stroke, which will in an
instant sever their heads from their bodies. Scarce shall the Sun be risen,
when you will say with sighs, Dabit enim tibi Dominus ibi cor pavidum, and
deficientes oculos, and animam consumptam moerore. Deuteronomy. 28. v. 65.

Mane dices: Quis wihi det vesperum? and vespere: Quis mihi det mane. Deuteronomy. 28.
v. 67.


Ah! Who will assure me, that I may be secure till night, and in the Evening
some new apprehension will even tear this complaint out of your mouths, Ah! I
know not whether I shall ever see day! Alas, who will give me then some
assurance of it?

Sinners, where are we? Is this to live, to die every moment? and can we call
by the name of life, a train of pains, torments, wounds, terrors, and deaths? O
life, how sweet art thou, when thou do fear and love nothing but God! O
death, how dreadful art thou, when we have followed and loved some other than
God! What Favors and Benedictions, in the life and death of a virtuous man! But
what horrors, Anathemaes, and Maledictions, during the course, and end of the
life of a sinner.

Alas! My dear Reader, reflect a little, I beseech thee, on these Verities, and
if the voice of thy Conscience, and the examples thou see daily before thy
eyes cannot move thee; come then again in spirit with the children of Israel,
and the predestined souls, hear the voice and exhortation of Moses, take a
while his Testament into thy hands; and then casting thy eyes upon every
Article, fix thy thoughts upon that, where he speaks unto all the Tribes, and
where after Moses had addressed himself into all sorts of States and
Conditions, of men and women, which were gathered together about him, he says
unto them, That he spoke not only unto those that were present, but also unto
the absent; and therefore it is unto thee, and to all men of the world, this
discourse must be directed.

Hear then mortal men your Lawgiver, hear your Lord, your Master, and your
Prophet, who conjures you to look back upon the past ages; and when you shall
come to those dreadful days, in which the Sun, and all the Lights of Heaven
shall be obscured by fire, sulphur, and the shameful smokes of those infamous
Cities, which the spirit of the justest furies of God had consumed and reduced
into ashes, Interrogate these frightful Relics, and they will tell you, That
these are the tracts of the Vengeances of Heaven, and the remnants of those,
who have broken with God, that Faith which they owed him.

In fine, to conclude this whole discourse with Moses.

What is more sweet and easy, says this Holy Man, Mandatum hoe quod ego
praecipio tibi body, non supra te est, neque procul positum. Deuteronomy. 30. v. 11.
than to live under the Laws of so holy a Religion, and carefully to observe
all those orders which have been dictated by the mouth of a God, whose rigors
and decrees cannot be but most just. What can there be in all that is commanded
you, which exceeds your forces, and is beyond your capacity, or too far
distanced from your power? Nec in caele situm, ut possis dicere: Quis nostrum
valet ad caelum ascendere, ut deferat illud ad nos, and audiamus atque opere
compleamus? Deuteronomy. 30. v. 12.

Considera quod hodie proposuerim in conspectu tuo vitam and bonum, and e
contraria mortem and malum. Deuteronomy. 30. v. 15.

Testes invoco bodic calum and terram, etc. Deuteronomy. 30. v. 19.

Et diligas Dominum Deum tuum, atque obedias voci ejus, and illi adhaereas
(ipse est enim vita tua, and longitudo dierum tuorum) ut habites in terra, pro
qua juravit Dominus patribus tuis, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, ut daret eam
illis. Deuteronomy. 30. v. 20.


It is not necessary to mount so high as the Heavens, and to pass beyond the
Seas, to learn and perform what is enjoined you; For what is there, you may not
do, and know? and where much trouble is not required to accomplish it. The
words of God refound in your ears, they are near your mouths and hearts;
Ingrave then deeply in your minds, all that I have this day said unto you, and
above all, remember that on the one side I have proposed happiness, and life,
and on the other, misfortune and death. I call Heaven and Earth to witness the
choice I have given you; it is then your part to prefer either good or evil,
and choose rather life than death; to the end, you may live with all your
children, in the peace and obedience you ow unto God, and to fix your minds
and hearts so strongly on him, that you may live only for, and in him; for he
is the soul of your spirits, on him alone depends the course of your life, and
it is his hand which will conduct you into this fortunate Land which he
promised to your forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Israel, it is unto thee Moses speaks, and it is unto you, Christian People,
that the echo of this voice is addressed, and loudly resounds in the Law of
Grace, and of the Messiah. Do not say then, Who shall ascend unto Heaven, who
shall cause Jesus Christ to descend, who shall draw him out of the Sepulcher,
or who can descend into the Abyss? It is not required thou should do these
impossible things, and which are already done, it suffices thou perform what
lies in thy power, and what thou ought, and the rest shall be granted thee.

O my Jesus! How sweet is thy yoke, and how reasonable is thy Will! Anathema to
all those, who refuse obedience to thy most holy commands, whilst these
faithful servants shall enjoy those Favors and Benections, which thou from all
eternity have reserved for thy Elect.

CHAP. XLVIII. The last Canticle of Moses.
WHen once we give up our selves as a prey unto Vices, the longest period of
our lives commonly serves but to weave the largest Web of misery; but also when
years pass away in virtuous actions, they are but miraculous courses, the
moments whereof are illustrious, and their events most happy. And it is for
this cause, I believe, that the Wiseman compared the life of the good to the
Sun, which produces nothing but Beauties and Lights; whereas the life of the
wicked is tenebrous, bringing forth nothing but Lightnings and Obscurities.
Now, if ever the life of any person has been full of glory, prosperity, and
happiness, though daily intermixed with afflictions and disquiets, it was that
of Moses, of whom we may justly say, what heretofore Carthage did of certain
Captains, That all the days of his life, and all his actions had something I
know not of Divine, and transcending the capacity of man: Nevertheless, all the
prodigies and miracles he wrought, would have been but streams which lose
themselves in running, and clarities which vanish after some sparklings, if his
death had not been the Image of his life, and even the moment God chose to
manifest to him the particular care he took of his people, in giving him Josua
for a Successor, and assuring him, that after his death they should enter into
those happy Countries they had so long expected.

To this effect God descended in the Pillar of the Cloud, as on his Throne,
Apparuitque Dominus ibi in Columna nubis, etc. Deuteronomy. 31. v. 15.
and spoke familiarly unto Moses, concealing nothing from him of all that was
to come. Was not this an admirable Colloquy? God alone with Moses and Josua, as
to ratify the choice of the one, and to discharge his heart into the bosom of
the other.

Moses, says he, Dixitque Dominus ad Moysen: Ecce tu darmies cum patribus
tuis, and populus iste consurgens fornicabitur post Deos alienos in terra, ad
quam ingreditur ut habitet in ea, thy derelinquet me, and irritum faciet foedus
quod pepegi cum eo. Deuteronomy. 31. v. 16.

Et irascetur furor meus contra eum in die illo, and derelinquam eum, etc.
Deuteronomy. 31. v. 17.


this people for whom I had so much tenderness and love, and which thou have
conducted with so much labor and zeal, shall shortly enter into the Land I
have so long promised them. But whilst thou shall enjoy the repose of thy
forefathers, these miserable wretches will become fornicators, and adhere unto
Idols, and shamefully break that faith they have so often sworn to me. I shall
be enforced to immolate them unto my severest rigours, and as so many victims
to sacrifice them to my just indignation, to the end in the height of their
miseries, they may know at last, that I have abandoned them; and besides, all
their misfortunes and punishments are but the lamentable effects of their
crimes, and the inevitable darts of that fury they have provoked.

Behold the cause, Nunc itaque scribite vobis Canticum istud, and docete filios
Israel: ut memoriter teueant, and ore decantent, etc. Deuteronomy. 31. v. 19.
why God commanded Moses to compose a Canticle which conteins a description of
the Miracles he had done in favor of the people of Israel, which ever since
the Hebrews have styled an abridgement of the Law, and which, as in effect we
shall immediately see, is a Summary of the rarest wonders God has ever done for
men, and namely for these ingrates unto whom Moses made the first recital
thereof, enjoining all of them to learn the same, and never to forget it.

Stop your course, says he, you beautiful Planets which move in the day over
our heads, and march under our feet, whilst we are at rest, and under the
shade. Sun, who incessantly do run upon this azure, and luminous Chariot,
Audite caeli quae loquor, audiat terra verba oru mei. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 1.
and thou Moon, whose so various revolutions are made in a list of Diamonds and
Saphirs, stand still awhile, and listen to this discourse; Heaven and Earth I
call you for witnesses of my words, and it is unto you I address my voice, to
the end if men do not hear me, you may be more sensible, and frame at least
some Consort to cause this Canticle of honor and praise to resound.

Let my words produce in my mouth, Concrescat ut pluvia doctrina mea, slaat ut
ros clequium meum, quasi imber super herbam, and quas^ stillae super gramina.
Deuteronomy: 32. v. 2.

Quia nomen Domini invocabo: date magnificentiam Deo nostro. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 3.


and in your hearts, what water does in the bosom of the Earth, rain upon
herbs, and dew upon fruits and flowers, to the end Virtue may there spring
again, and that some profit of my discourse may appear in your souls.

Render then unto God the praises you owe him, and exalt his name, whilst I
shall invoke it, and cause the memory of his benefits to resound in all places.

Is it not true that his works are perfect, Dei perfectasunt opera, and omnes
via ejus judicia, Deus fidelis, and absque ullae iniquitate, justus and rectus.
Deuteronomy. 32. v. 4.
and that with weight and measure he has made all that is visible to our eyes?
What can be added unto the most beautiful draughts of his Goodness, Power,
Wisdom and Sanctity; He is most just, most Good, most holy, most Wise, most
Powerful; and all the beauties which have any spelndour, are but the marks and
tracts of such as reside in him, as in their Fountain. Have you never
contemplated his designs, and the effects of his Divine Providence, which has
ordered the Planets in their Orbs, the Elements in their spaces, and all bodies
in their temperaments, and under those Laws which best suit with their
essence. Should not the whole Universe be converted into mouths and tongues to
praise him, into Spirits to admire him, into Hearts to love him? What means
this great preparation, and all this pomp, to which honors and congratulations
are rendered, and to which so many applauses are given, unless to show some
rays of light which have been drawn by his own hand, and formed by his sole
word.

But, O horror and abomination! Peceaverunt ei, and non filii ejus in
sordibus: generatio prava atque perversa. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 5
all these discourses are unprofitable! for his own Children deride his
Paternall goodness, and you your selves, to whom I direct my speech, are so
blind and barbarous as to repay all his benefits with contempt and disloyalty.

Is this then, Jensless people, Haeecine reddis Domino popule slulte and
insipiens? nunquid non ipse est pater tuus, qui pessedit te, and secit, and
cre^vit te? Deuteronomy. 32. v. 6.
the compensation you afford your Creator? and will you at last by your
paricidial Blasphemies, deny that he is your Father, and that he has preserved
you a thousand times from the dangers and miseries which you your self could
not avoid? Unnatural Children, perfidious race, devoid of courage and counsel,
what acknowledgements will you render him for all his favors, and what tribute
have you hitherto paid unto his Magnificence?

Ungrateful people, have you no shame, and when you turn back into the way
from whence you come, and into the bondage out of which he has delivered you,
what thanks-givings do you render unto your Deliverer?

But if you suspect my words, consult your Ancestors, Memento dierum
antiquorum, cogita generationes singulas, interroga patrem tuum, and
annuntiabit tibi, majores tuos, and dicent tibi. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 7.

Quando dividebat altissimus gentes, quande separabat filios Adam, constituit
terminos populorum juxta numerum siliorum Israel. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 8.

Pars autem Domini populus ejus: Jacob famculus haereditatis ejus. Deuteronomy. 32. v.
9.

Invenit eum in terra deserta, in loco horroris, and vastae solitudinis,
circumduxit eum and docuit, and custodivit quasi pupillam oculi sui. Den. 32.
v. 10


and conjure your forefathers, to tell you how often he has preserved them
from the fury and arms of your enemies. Advance yet farther, and ascend even to
the Source of Ages, and of all your generations.

You shall learn that it was his hand which divided the Universe, placed order
even in the Confusion of Babel, and gave limits unto Seas, and bounds unto
every Province, yet in such sort, the Hebrews in this common partition have had
the favor to be advantaged above all Nations, God having chosen these people
for his peculiar inheritance, and reserved them to himself as the fairest and
most assured of his possessions.

All these infortunates gron'd under the C ptivity of Egypt, when his sage
Providence marked out to them habitations in the midst of frightfull Deserts,
and when it forced the Air, the Clouds, and the Earth to work miracles for
them, without which they had perished a thousand times with hunger, thirst, and
horrors. A man would have even sworn, that every one in particular had been
more precious to him, than the Apple of his eye, and this made him during this
whole voyage keep fire, and a Pillar formed of a Cloud, which served them still
for a guide in the midst of so many dangers.

This good father did just as an Eagle, Sicut aquila prevocans ad volandum
pullos suos, and super eos volitans expandit alas and assumpsit eum atque
portavit in humer is suis, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 11.
which seeing her young but newly covered with feathers, intices them out of
the nest, and then sets them on her wings, to teach them gently to fly: for he
placed himself in the head of our troops, and brought us through our enemies,
as on his shoulders, resolving to be himself our Shield, our Defense, and our
Conductor, over the billows of the Sea, and in the darkest Wildernesses, in
despite of all the assaults of our Enemies, against whom he taught us to fight,
overcome, and triumph.

Yes, Dominus solus Dux ejus fuit, and non erat cum eo Deus alienus. Deuteronomy. 32.
v. 12.
my people, it is this victorious arm, and this most powerful hand, which has
drawn thee out of these dreadful Sepulchers, and which under the dry and arrid
sands of a Desert made Fountains of living waters spring up to mix with a
miraculous Bread which his goodness sent thee from Heaven.

Now beheld thee^ on the Confines of a Land, Constituit eum super excelsam
terram: ut comederetfructus agrorum, ut sugeret mel de petra, oleumque de saxo
durissimo. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 13.

Bulyrum de armento, and lae de ovibus cum adipe agnorum, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 14.


the most fertile and pleasant in the world. Thou go into a Paradise of
delights, and into an abode of peace and repose, where the Bees make their
Honey, and the Olive trees bear their fruits even upon Rocks and stones.

There it is where the Air is always calm, and the Stars always Serene, the
very sheep are so fat in the Meadows and Pastures, that in all seasons of the
year Milk and Lambs are there to be found.

Ah! Incrassatus est dilcotus et recalcitravit; incrassatus, inpinguatus,
dilatatus, derecliquit Deum factorem suum, and recessit a Deo salutari suo.
Deuteronomy. 32. v. 15.
ungrateful people, what will thou render for so many benefits, and what
homage will thou do unto him, whom thou can not recompense but by
acknowledgements? What! will thou present Gall and Poison unto God, who gives
thee the most delicious wine in Nature, and after thou shall grow fat,
Provocaverunt eum in dtis alienis, and in abominationibus ad iracundiam
concitaverunt. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 19.
like a wild and untamed Colt, will thou refuse the bit? Art thou so bold, as
to kick against thy Master, and to prefer before his Laws thy own appetites,
capricious humors, and Idolatrous passions which make thee adore the weakness
of some false Divinities in stead of his power.

Is not this to be mad even to rage, and a thousand times more brutish than
beasts, which have no other guide than sense, and yet often bear some respect
to their benefactors.

Alas! do not flatter then this cruel Idolatry, Immolaverunt Daemoniis and
non Deo, diis quos ignorabant: novi recentesque venerunt quos non coluernnt
patres little. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 17.

Deum qui te genuit dereliquisii, and oblitua es Domini Creatoris tui. Deuteronomy.
32. v. 18.

Vidit Dominus, and ad iracundiam concitatus est: quia provocaverunt cum silti
sui and filia. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 19.

Et ait: abscondam faciem meam ab eis, and considerabo novissima eorum,
generatio enim perversa est, and infideles filii. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 20.

Ipsi me provocaverunt in eo qui non crat Deus, and in itaverunt in vanitatibus
suis: Et ego provocabo eos in co qui non est populus, and in gente stulta
irritabo illos. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 21.

Ignis succensus est in furore meo, and ardebit usque ad inferni novissima,
devorabitque terram cum germine suo, and montium sundamenta comburet. Deuteronomy. 32.
v. 22.


and these more than brutish contempts, which inslave you to wood and stones,
tearing out of your hearts that love and respect which you owe unto your God.

You have said, perfidious men as you are, you have said, that you have no
other God than these Idols, or at least you have effaced out of your souls all
the marks of him who alone deserves Altars in quality of your Creator.

But he has piercing eyes, and penetrating looks, which have brought day even
into the night of your foulest treasons, and now all the torches of his wrath
are lighted, and the Spirit of his anger is ready to dart the thunderbolts of
his indignation upon all your Children.

Yes, says he, I will withdraw my self from this perverse and unbelieving
Nation, and in vain shall they call upon me in their miseries, for I will not
vouchsafe to look upon them, or else in seeing them, I will laugh at them; and
all the enemies I have made the miserable subject of their Victories shall
change fortune with them; For my part I will no longer have all those amiable
tendernesses and Paternall affections I had for their Ancestors, and so dearly
conserved for them who are their Children.

In vain then do they seek in me some signs of goodness; for my Justice is
irritated, and the ardours of my wrath have kindled a fire which will never be
quenched, and when they shall go even hiding themselves under the Abysses of
the Earth, I swear unto them, that they shall there find devouring flames, and
merciless Piles, which will reduce the Earth unto Ashes, Congrreabo super eos
mala, and sagittas meas complebo in eis. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 23.

Consumentur fame, and devorabunt eos aves morsu amarissimo: Dentes bestiarum
immittam in eos, cum furore trahentium super terram, atque serpentium. Deuteronomy.
32. v. 24.

Foris vastabit eos gladius, and intus pavor, juvenem simul ac virginem,
lactantem cum homine seen. Deu. 32. v. 25.

Dixi: Ubinam sunt? cessare faciam ex hominibus memoriam eorum. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 26.

Sed propter iram inimicorum distuli ne force superbirent hosts torum, and
dicerent, manus nostra excelsa, and non Dominus, fecit haec omnia. Deuteronomy. 32. v.
27.


and consume all the fruits thereof, and having dried up the Rivers, will
convert the proudest and highest Mountains, into the most frightful and horrid
Sepulchers, so that all my Arrows and Darts will instantly fall upon the
infamous heads of all those Criminals. They shall be seen dying with hunger in
the streets, and their bodies shall serve as a prey unto those cruel birds,
and those pittiless beasts, which live but on blood and slaughter.

Besides, I will make them fall under the edge of my Sword amidst the fields,
and in the heart of Cities, fear and terror shall erect for them a Thousand
Scaffolds to keep them continually in the horrors of death, or in the the
rigours of punishment, without spa^ring either Women or Children, from the
eldest, even to him that hangs on the breast.

Thus will I disperse them, and I will fix shameful reproaches on them, as an
abandoned people, whose name and memory is forgotten amongst Nations.
Nevertheless, I have long with held the darts of my vengeance, to the end all
those enemies which shall make war against them, and shall be the Instruments
of my Justice, might not be so blind and insolent, as proudly to attribute unto
their Forces the ruin of this people, which I will destroy with my own hand in
punishment of their Rebellion and Apostasy. Gens absque confilio est, and fine
prudentia. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 28.
These are impudent men, who are ignorant of my Judgments, and of the course
of my Providence, which most wisely, and with order disposes as well of
punishments as rewards.

Alas! Vtinam saperent and imelligerent, ac novissima providerent. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
why do they not reap benefit of other men's miseries, and why do not the
unhappy examples, which are before their eyes, pass even into their souls, to
render them more prudent, or at least to make them foresee the utmost
extremities of my wrath, and of the miseries which will befall them?

Are these ignorant people so blind, as not to discern this arm which makes
them the reproach of Nations? Quomodo persequatur unus mill, and duo sugent
december millia? nonne ideo quia Deus juus vendidit eos, and conclusit illos.
Deuteronomy. 32. v. 30.
Are they not ashamed to see a thousand of them flying at the sight of one
Enemy, and two men able to rout ten thousand of their Combatants? Is not this
to give them up unto the mercy of their Adversaries, as one would deliver up
Merchandises unto a man who had paid him ready Money?

The Great God also of Israel cannot have Criminal Complacences for sin, like
the Gods of other Nations, Non exim est Deus noster ut dii eorum: and Dominus
inimici nostri sunt judice. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 31.
who have neither rewards nor punishments; but he is always armed against
Crimes. And the Egyptians have had sufficient experience of it, to their Cost,
as well as the Amalekites, the Amorites, and other Countries.

After this, Traitors that you are, will you be so insolent and bold, as to
seek a more gentle usage? In truth, will not this indulgence be blamable, and
will you not have occasion to despise all the Thunderbolts of my Justice, and
to publish every where, that I am either an unjust, or impotent God.

You for whom I had so many cares, De vinea Sodomorum, vinea eorum, and de
suburbanis Gomorrhae: uva little, uva fellis, and botri amarissimi. Deuteronomy. 32. v.
32.

Fell deaconum vinum eorum, and venenum aspidum insenabile. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 33.


and Cultivated as a most beloved Vine, from which I expected delicious Wine,
are changed into a Vine of Sodom, and the Grapes you have given me, are like
those which grow in the Suburbs of Gomorrha; this is but a very bitter Poison,
and the gall of a Dragon or Viper, which poisoneth and stifleth at the instant
it is drunk.

It belongs then unto me to take vengeance on all their disloyalties; Nonne
haec condita sunt apud me and signata in thesauris me^. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 34.

Mea est ultio, and ego retribuam in tempore, ut labatur pes coram, juxta est
dies perditionis, and adesse festinane tempora. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 35.


and do not persuade your selves that I can ever forget them; for I have
treasuries of wrath and indignation, where I reserve the Darts of my Justice,
to cast them according to my good pleasure.

The hour will come when you shall find your selves under the strokes of my
vengeance, and shall fall into the Abyss of misfortunes.

All moments do already press, and you will quickly be surprised with the
blinding obscurity of a day, which shall have no lights, but to make you see
and feel the shafts of my wrath, and the Thunderbolts of my indignation.

This will be the great day of our Lord, Judicabit Dominus populum suum, and in
servis suis missrabitur: videbit quod infirmata sit manus, and clausi quoque
defecerunt, residuique consumpti sunt. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 36.

Et dicet: ubi sunt dii eorum, in quibus habebant fiduciam? Deuteronomy. 32. v. 37.

De quorum victimis Comedebant adipes, and bibebant vinum libaminum: surgant,
and and opitulentur vobis, and in necessitate vos protegant. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 38.

Videte quod ego sim solus, and non sit alius Deus praeter me: Ego occidam, and
ego vivere faciam: percutiam, and ego sanabo, and non est qui de manu mea
possit eruere. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 39.

Levabo ad caelum manum meam, and dicam: Vivo ego in aeternum. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 40.

Si acuero ut fulgur gladium meum, and arripuerit judicium manus mea: reddam
^ltionem hostibus meis, and his qui oderunt me retribuam. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 41.

Inebriabo sagiteas meas sanguine; and gladius meus devorabit carnes de cruore
occisorum, and de captivitate, nudati inimicorum capitis Deuteronomy. 32. v. 42.


and the dreadful period of an irritated patience; Alas what day! what
Tribunal! What Assizes, and what Judgments! This will be the fortunate moment
which mercy has ordained to crown the merits of Virtue, and the frightfull
Instant which Justice has decreed for the punishment of sins.

Then all the force, pride, and power of the Jews shall appear but weakness,
and even those who think to be in Cities, and in their Towers, as in places of
security, shall be miserably oppressed; And then what Answer will these
miserable wretches make unto the voice of God, who will lay a thousand
reproaches on them, and in deriding their Miseries, will say,

Alas! then where are those Gods whom you idolatrize, and in whom you place
your Assurances? where are those who did eat the fat of the Victims which they
have immolated, and drank the Wine of their Sacrifices? Let them now rise up
and succor you in so pressing necessities.

In fine, now acknowledge whether there be another God than my self, who is
able to dispose of life and death, of Evil and the remedy, and whose power is
so absolute as no man can resist it.

It is I, the living God, that I am, who will lift up my hand unto Heaven, and
if I sharpen my Sword, and if I inkindle its Edge, like Lightning, to make you
undergo the rigor of my severest Judgments, the thunder of my vengeances
shall fall on my enemies, and upon all those who shall wage War against me, as
a furious lightning, which shall consume all that it strikes by the breath of
its ardours, and devouring flames; afterward I will steep my merciless darts
and arrows in the blood of Rebels, and I will satiate my justest furies in the
most horrid slaughter of those bodies which have been massacred, sparing
neither Masters nor slaves.

Let the Gentiles learn then, from hence, the praise they ought to give unto
this people, who have a God whose goodnesses are always favorable to those
whom he loves, Laudate gentes populum ejus, quie sanguinem servorum suorum
ulciscetur, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 43.
and whose vengeances are dreadful to his enemies.

Behold, my dear Reader, the end of this famous Canticle, which was first
recited in the presence of all the people of Israel, and which contains a
description of the miracles God wrought to deliver them out of Captivity; It
was likewise a powerful exhortation, which ought to oblige them either by
force or sweetness to remain faithful in the service of so good and powerful
a Master.

But this was to sing in the ears of Tigers, whose fury is the more irritated,
when they hear any Music.

Christians, let us not do the like, but benefit our selves at the expense of
this people; And faithfully keep the Laws and Commandments God has given us,
let us listen once more unto the last words of Moses, and of our Prophet, who
speaks both to them and us.

My dear Children, I have nothing else to say, Et dixit, ad eos: Ponite corda
vestra in omnia verba, quae ego testificor vobis heaie, ut mandetis ea si^^i^
vestris custodire and facere, and implere universa quae scripta sunt legis
hujus. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 46.

Quia non in cass^^ praecepta sunt vobis, sed ut singuli in eis viverent quae
facientes longo perseveretis tempore in terra, ad quam Jordane transmisso,
ingredimini possidendam. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 47.


and ask of you before my death, but that you would seriously consider what I
have delivered to you, and that you would deeply imprint it both in your own
and your Childrens hearts, to the end you may all practice and accomplish it:
for these Laws have not been established in vain, but to the end they may keep
you, if you keep them, and that they may conserve you with bonds of peace and
love in this blessed Land into which you are going, after your passage over
Jordan.

CHAP. XLIX. The Death of Moses at the sight of the holy Land.
IN fine, after forty years of travel, behold us with the people of Israel
upon the Confines of the Land of Promise. All our enemies are vanquished, our
Chains are broken, the Sea has suspended its billows to make us a passage, the
bitternesses of Mara are changed into delights, the Heavens have rained down
nothing but Manna, on our deserts, and total Nature has wrought miracles to
serve us.

But alas we know not what will be the issue of all these happy accidents, and
of these admirable prodigies: for the Aspects of this amiable Intelligence,
which have been as it were our stars, amidst so many obscurities, and these
arms which have been so often lifted up toward Heaven for our safety, after
they had conducted and delivered us amidst so many dangers, are now even ready,
methinks, to languish and decay.

In truth, the Judgments of God are frightfull Abysses, and it were to lose
our selves, to enter into them with other lights, than those of Faith and Love:
All our fairest designs are sometimes, but the draughts and Images of a dream,
where our proudest hopes meet only with a Tomb.

Have we not seen Conquerours, who having measured by their Triumphs the
richest parts of the Universe, banished into some corner of the Earth; and into
the Gates of some Cities, where they scarce found any Sepulcher? Behold the
period of their Combats, the end of their Triumphs, and the Occident of all
these Stars which shined not, but amongst Laurels. Behold them in lamentations,
in blood, and under some Cypress tree, which forms the funestous Crown of
their ambition, and the Tomb of their memory. Is this the fatal end of their
desires, the subject of their tears, and the period of their projects? At least
if their Children were their heirs, and if these doleful issues could open
them a passage, and give them some entrance into the Empires of honor and
immortality, after which they had so long sighed, they would receive this
consolation, that their death had been the life of others, and that in dying,
they had rendered themselves immortal.

But even those who have not born arms, but by express order from God, and have
had no other design in the conduct of their Troops, than to conserve his
Empire, and enlarge the bounds of his Dominions, cannot be freed from paying
tribute unto death. Who could believe, that it durst assault Moses, and that
this great Captain who had hitherto cast terror and dread into the Armies of
his Enemies, and so often preserved the lives of his Party, should be reduced
to the point of being necessitated to undergo the last assaults of Nature? Who
would believe, that he must now be treated like the meanest of persons? but
this usage is very gentle, and these assaults do not affright him, since he
sings in dying, and that these last words are no other than Benedictions for
his people, and Prophecies concerning all that was to happen unto the Children
of Israel.

My children, says he, Haec est benedictio, qua benedixit Moises, bomo Dei,
filiis Israel ance mortem suam. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 1.

Et ait: Dominus d^ Sinai venit, and de Seiortus est nobis: apparuit de monte
Pharan, and cum eo sanctorum millia. In dextera ejus ignea lex. Deuteronomy. 33.


the Lord who came unto us on the top of Mount Sina, to hold his first Sessions
upon a Throne of Fire, and a Tribunal of Flames; This beautiful Sun which rose
about the Mountain of Seir, and whose Rays stifled all those furious Serpents
which persecuted us; This King who appeared to us on the Summit of Mount Paran,
to establish our Judges; This God who is always followed by millions of Angels,
and whose Majesty sufficiently made its self to be felt, when he appeared
holding in his hands the Law which he gave us amidst the Thunders and
Lightnings;

It is he who has wrought these miracles of Love, Dilexit populos, omnes
sancti in manu illius sunt: and qui apprepinquant pedibus ejus, accipient de
doctrina illius. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 3.

Legem praecepit nobis Moises, haereditatem multitudinis Jacob. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 4.


and prodigies of Goodness and Power, in testimony, That you are his
wel-beloved people, and that he has no common cares and tendernesses, for
those who are like your selves more peculiarly consecrated unto him.

The Law which I leave you by his order, is then your Inheritance, and the
fairest possessions, which I even now dying, leave unto all your Successors.

I beseech this great God of our Forefathers, Vivae Ruben, and non moriatur,
and sit parvus in numero. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 6.
that the Posterity of Ruben may extend it self without limits, even beyond
time: But I cannot divert the shafts of his Justice, which will fall on this
guilty Race, and which shall be always small in number, by reason of the incest
which has infected the first of their name. Haec est Judae benedictio: Audi
Domine vocem Judae: Et ad populum suum introduc eum: Manus ejus pugnabunt pro
eo, and adjutor illins contra adversarios ejus erit. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 7. Levi
quoque ait: Perfectio tua, and doctrina tua viro sancto tuo, etc. Deuteronomy. 33. v.
8.


Lord be propitious unto the children of Juda; and when this Prince of the
Tribes shall march in the head of your troops, overthrow all his enemies; and
by the power of the Arm of the great God of Battles, let him enter the Holy
Land.

I expect also from God, that his goodness would conserve in the house of Levi,
the Priesthood of Aaron, with the Ornaments, and other principal qualities,
which are, as it were, the eyes and souls of so holy, and so illustrious a
Dignity. Et Benjamin ait: Ammantissimus Domini habitabit confidenter in eo,
quast in thalamo, tota die morabitur, and inter humeros illius requiescet.
Deuteronomy. 33. v. 12.


I leave unto Benjamin, all that which the power of the world can neither give
nor take away from him: It is the affection of a God who has made choice of
his Territories, there to build his Temple, and ordained his Tribe to extract
thence the Kings of the people of Israel: It is also, as it were, in the bosom,
and on the back of this his Favorite, that the Divinity will take repose, as in
a Bed of Love, and will cause his glory to break forth as on a Throne of Honor.

As for Joseph, Joseph quoque ait: de benedictione Domini terra ejus, de pomis
caeli, and rore, atque abysso subjacente. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 13.

Et super verticem Nazaraei inter fratres sues. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 16.


and his Offspring, the Earth, and the Heavens will make an amorous war
against each other, and will have a secret emulation to fill them with their
benefits; and he that appeared to me in the flaming Bush will descend, as I
promise my self from his mercy, upon the head of this Nazarite, who has
already changed his Prison into a Throne, and to whom the envy of his Brethren
served but to raise him above themselves, and render him the Vicegerent of
Pharaoh.

The happy Line of Zabulon, and Issachar, Et Zabulon ait: Latare Zabulon in
exitu tuo, and Issachar in tabernaculis tuis. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 18.

Populos vocabunt ad montem: ibi immolabunt victimas susti^iae. etc. Deuteronomy. 33.
v. 19.


have no cause to be sad; for they will quietly enjoy all the advantages of the
traffic they shall exercise on their shores: And both of them by words and
examples, shall teach the other Tribes, and invite them to repair unto Mount
Sion, to render unto God in his Temple, the Worship and Honors which are due
unto him.

Lions have not more courage and strength, Et Gad ait: benedictus in latitudine
Gad, quasi leo requievit, cepi^que brachium and verticem. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 20.
than the Children of Gad, and in effect they have already given chase to all
their enemies, and the Amorites have in a manner given them entrance into those
vast Possessions of Canaan, of which they shall be the masters.

Those of Dan also are as so many little Lions, Dan quoque ait: Dan catulus
leonu, fluet largiter de Basan. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 22.
like those of Basan; the Philistims shall one day become their prey, and the
City which bears their name, shall be as the Spring of Jordan, and the
Nursing-mother of other Provinces.

Concerning Naphtali, Et Nepthali dixit: Nepthali abundantia perfruetur, and
plenus erit benedictionibus Domini: mare and meridiem possidebit. Deu. 33. v.
23.

Aser quoque ait: benedictus in filiis Aser, sit placens fratribus suis, etc.
Deuteronomy. 33. v. 24.

Habitabit Israel confidenter and solus, etc. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 28.

Beatus es tu Israel: Quis similis tui popule, qui salvaris in Domino, scutum
auxilii tui, and gladius gleriae tuae; negabunt te inimici tui, and tu little
colla calcabis. Deuteronomy. 33. v. 29.


his portion shall be filled with all sorts of Benedictions, and his Children
under their jurisdiction shall behold Lands, even from West to South.

In fine, Asher shall be blessed in himself, and his generations, which have
received as for their share, the art of gaining hearts, with diverse others
Favors, without which the most illustrious Qualities, and attractive Charms
shall be but a specious subject of Contempt and Misery.

O Israel, chosen people of God, predestined Nation, Children of so many
Saints, are you not then most happy in having a God over your heads, who sees
the Heavens, the Air, and the Clouds rouling under his feet, from whence he
has so often shot Thunderbolts against your enemies?

It is then by the Magnificence, and Power of this thundering Arm, and from
these victorious hands you are going to become masters of Canaan, and so long
as you shall remain faithful to the Lord, who has taken you into his
protection, you shall be in him as in a Sanctuary of Peace, and in a Fort,
before which, all the Arms of the World, and Hell, are but as so many small
pieces of straw, and some breath of wind, and smoke, which vanish in a moment.
It is enough for me to leave you in the arms of so absolute a Monarch, so
merciful a Father, and so prudent a Governor.

Farewell then Israel, farewell my dear Children, farewell my poor people, I go
hence whither this great God calls me. I have lived too long on Earth amongst
men, and in a world which is but a valley of Miseries, and Calamities. Ascendit
ergo Moises de campestribus Moab super montem Nebo, etc. Deuteronomy. 34. v. 1.
Let us approach unto Heaven, where the source of all happiness resides; let us
ascend the Mountain of Abarim, and the top of Nebo, where we shall behold the
Stars at a nearer distance, and where, at least, with our eyes we shall mark
out the period of our desires and hopes.

It is thither God leads Moses, Dixitque Dominus ad eum: baec est terra pro qua
juravi Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, dicens: Semini tuo dabo eam. Vidisti eam
ocubis tuis non transibis ad illam. Deuteronomy. 34. v. 4.

Mortuusque est Moises servus Domini in terra Moab, jubente Domino. Deuteronomy. 34.
v. 5.

Et sepelivit eum in valle terrae Moab contra Phagor, etc. Deuteronomy. 34. v. 6.


and where he shows him in a moment all the Holy Land which he had promised to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for their children. O God, What grief, and pleasure
all at once! What theater of death, and of life! what subject of hope and
despair, and what spectacle unto a good heart, which had so long sighed after
these rewards! Why were then so many prodigies, so many voyages, so many
troubles, and so many combats needful to obtain at last but the sight of those
Palms which he shall never gather?

Moses dies, when he should but begin to live, and scarce had he seen what he
had so much desired, but at the same instant God shuts his eyes, and the gates
of Canaan.

What sweet severity, what amiable rigor, and what sad command! Moses dies, and
this incomparable Prophet, who deserved after his death to be placed amongst
the Stars of the Firmament, is interred near to Mount Phogor, in the Valleys of
Moab, carrying with him no other title, saving that he has been the Servant of
God: But this is sufficient, and all other Epitaphs are, at least, for the most
part, but relics of some vanity.

There are no Ciphers but these, which neither time, nor eternity can efface,
and though a thousand of them should be written and engraven on Marble and
Brass, with the rays of the Sun, and with Iron, and Diamantine Gravers, yet
they will either soon or late lose their luster. Worms bear no respect, the
putrification of Sepulchers devours the fairest bodies, and Time has nights
and shades which impallidate all the Stars of the day.

Let Atheists, Libertines, and Infidels, seek out other Epitaphs where they
please; for my part, it is enough for me to be a servant of so great a God.
After this, Let us go, Children of Saints, let us go with Moses upon Mount
Abarim, in the Valleys of Moab, into the Tomb, and even into the Center of the
infernal parts; we shall find every where life, repose, glory, and
immortality. Never shall we be surprised having this Pasport, and if the Holy
Land of this World by mishap be forbidden us, all the Gates of Sion and
Jerusalem, which is in Heaven, will be opened for us.

O Heaven! O Earth of the living! O Jerusalem, my dear Country, when shall we
be on those high Mountains, where under our feet we shall behold Times and
Seasons, Winter and Summer, Sun and Moon, Air, Sea, and Earth, as well as Life
and Death, with all their train? When shall we be in the Arms and Bosom, or, at
least, at the Feet of this Prince, whom we serve? And when shall we go by the
opening of his Wounds, even into his Heart, which is our Land of Promise?

Courage then Christians, All is sweet to him, who loves, and to serve is
sufficient to gain a Crown.

But it is God alone whom we must love, and in so sweet and delicious a Bondage
we ought to live and die.

O Life, O Death, O Love, O Servitude! To live for God, to die in God, to love
nothing but God, and to serve no other Master; These are the qualities of a
most blessed Soul, and this is to begin on Earth that which shall never end in
Heaven.

Behold, my dear Reader, the end of the Law, and the first courses of our Holy
History. However, our voyage has been long enough to take some little breath,
expecting till we can follow Joshua into the Land of Promise, and pass even to
the Court of David, and of the first Kings of Judea.

Mean while, if by mishap I have never so little gone out of the way, which was
marked out to me by the invisible Lights of Faith, I publicly profess, that my
Pen has betrayed my Heart, and that I submit all my thoughts and words unto
the infallible Sense of the Church, with promise upon the least advertisement I
shall receive from the Wise, freely to disavow all which shall have caused my
deviations.

ERRATA, Emendanda.
Page 3. Line 33. read liveless, p. 5. l 16. r. ardors, p. 142. l. 13. r. now,
l. 14. r. not, p. 204. l. 15. r. pondred. p. 207. l. 1. t. Laws.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the principal Matters contained IN THIS TOME.
A.
AAron his Embassy into Egypt 267 The assurances he gave unto the people of
Israel, that God had heard their clamors 322 His fear whilst Joshua pursued the
Amalekites 332 The Altar he erected unto the Golden Calf 359 The excuse for his
Idolatry 362 Abandonment most happy 140 Abel the Picture of Meekness 27 His
employment in guiding his Fathers flocks ibid. The sacrifice which he offered
unto God 28 His murders by Cain 30 Abraham 52 His vocation 53 The difficulties
of his voyage 60 The agreement he made with his Father-in-law Lot 65 His
Charity toward Pilgrims 78 His martyrdom for three days 107 His discourse to
his son Isaac 109 The advertisement which he gave him, that he was to be the
victim of his sacrifice 110 His farewell to the world 60 Adam and his Creation
10 His fear and shame at the sight of God in the Terrestrial Paradise 21 He
lays the fault on his wife 22 His disaster and banishment 23 Advantage by good
education 128 Advertisement very remarkable of Philip of Macedon 51 Advice to
fathers and mothers 267 Advice to public persons 386 Affections very regular
150 Africa tormented by Grasshoppers 289 Agar chased out of Abraham's house 73
Alexius his affection toward his father 348 Amalekites overcome by the prayers
of Moses 330 St. Ambrose his authority over the Empress Justina 269 Anastasius
the Emperor leaves the Empire of Greece to be religious 58 Animals, their
production 7 Antandria mavelous in her Rivers 156 Apparition of God unto
Moses, and the advertisement he gave him 266 Apprentiship of Empires 257 Lawful
apprehensions 139 Very just apprehensions for worldly men 62 Ark of the Old
Testament 370 Ark of the Testament, a figure of the divinity 186 Insolent
artifice of Putiphers wife 185 Artifice of Rebecca in the preference of Jacob
before Esau 133 Admirable artifices of God, to try the fidelity of Abraham 97
Art of digging very difficult 236 Aurelian and his Crowns of bread 81 Altar of
Holocausts 373 Mysterious answers. 136
B.
St. Basil, the power he had with the Emperor Valens 269 Banishment of Adam and
Eve 19 Banishment of Agar and Ismael 94 Baltilda leaves France, and became a
religious woman 59 Cruel battery of Putiphers wife against the chastity of
Joseph 182 Beauty, its power and tyranny, pleasing, and deadly poison 37
Benediction of God upon all Nations and Generations, in the person of Abraham
57 Deceiptful Benedictions of this world 136 Benediction of the twelve
Patriarks 236 Flaming Bush 257 The reality of fire, which burnt it without
cons^ming it 258 Firstborn of Egypt, their death and destruction 294 Blindness
of Isaac 230 Building of the Ark 40 Supplanting Brethren 125 Bones springs of
the bodies motions 12 Birds, their production. 6
C.
Cain, his affection fastened to the Earth 27 His execrable insolence 30 His
troubles and exiles 32 First Canticle of Moses 313 Second Canticle of Moses 404
Ignominuous captivity of Creatures in the world 335 Charlemain, son of Charles
Martel, leaves France to live out of way, on Mount Soracte 58 Doleful
Catastrophies 312 Ridiculous Ceremonies 221 Ceremonies of the Old Testament 368
Certainty most uncertain 130 Charity her Antiparistasis 361 Chastity, her
victories and triumphs 349 Circumcision, the command thereof 75 Circumcision,
corporal figure of that which is to be in the spirit of Grace ibid.
Circumcision, sign of peace 76 Circumcision, Image of Faith ibid. Mark of
distinction ibid. Sequence of original sin ibid. Clotarius, his victories which
he gained by the means of prayer 333 Combat of Joseph, in defense of his
chastity 177 Combats natural to man 326 Mournful complaint of Jacob 174
Fruitless complements 98 Consort of creatures 8 Condemnation of false witnesses
and liars 351 Divine condescendency 81 Confidence in God 28 Conscience of
sinners, an inseparable Officer. 200 Inflexible courage 162 Courage, the
definition of it according to St. Thomas 59 Course of Wisdom 142 Creation of
the World 4 Cremona beaten by a Hail-storm 287 Cyreneans necessitated to make
war against Grasshoppers 289 Complaint of Rebecca in the pains of childbearing
123 Rigorous clemency. 203
D.
Deliverance of Joseph 190 Deluge, and the time when it happened 41 Devil of
Egypt 181 Disasters of gluttony 129 Disorders of love 178 Design of God in the
preference of Jacob before Esau 134 Disobedience, first misfortune of Adam 21
Disunion the first misfortune of the World 20 Duty of children toward their
parents 347 Diamond, how it is broken 278 Dina carried away by Sichem, Prince
of the Sichemites 163 Dioxipus vanquished by the beauty of a great Lady
Diversity of depositions 27 Duel of grief and love 106 Decrees against the
usurpation of other men's goods 350 Death of Abraham 117 Darkness of Egypt 290
Departure of the people of Israel out of Egypt 299 Decree concerning the
Creation of men 10 Departure of the people of Israel out of Egypt 303 Dreams of
Joseph which he revealed to his brethren 167 Dreams, their destinction
according to Chrysippus. 168
E.
Eclipse of reason in Wine 48 Edict against blasphemers 345 Equality sometimes
dangerous 74 Egypt, the Sepulcher of the name of Israel 249 State Elogy 141
Empire of Love 102 Empire of Souls 162 Sovereign Empire of God 251 Envy, its
desolations 32 Its resemblance with those bloody Birds of prey which are seen
near the North Pole 33 Remedies against it 35 Its nature and qualities 175
Esau, his nature and humor 126 The love he had to hunting 128 He sells his
birthright to his brother Jacob for a mess of pottage 129 He marries against
the will of his Parents 130 Mavelous estate of man 16 Eternity, all is short
to him who meditates on it 153 Eve, her Creation 17 Her disaster and banishment
19 Her discourse to Adam to deceive him 20 Her malediction 23 End of the deluge
44 Epitomy of the Law 354 Eagles, a handsome mark of their affection 339 Ermine,
and her Motto ibid. Extraction of great men is commonly a fair subject of
miseries 135
F.
Fruitfulness of women, the causes which hinder it 121 Felicity subject to
alteration 123 Feasts of death 214 Memorable feast of the Hebrews 299 Fire,
symbol of the Divinity 310 Firmament formed in the midst of waters 5
Enigmatical Figures 136 Inviolable Fidelity 187 Fountain of Horeb 326 Fountain
of the Red Sea which changes every thing into Carnation 156 Firing of Sodom 89
Frogs of Egypt 279 Flies of Egypt 281 Fishes, their production 6 Fopperies of
Idolaters and Turks 341
G.
Government of Joseph in Egypt 194 Graces of God always sufficient 139 Gregory
the thirteenth, the Picture he caused to be made of Peace and Justice 68
Goodness of God toward men 15 Ineffable goodness 85 Golden Calf, the adoration
thereof 359 God, Creator 1 God repents to have made man 39 God hidden under the
habit of the poor 152 God never tempts 97 God has no need of a name, why 261
God sporteth with Jacob 148
H.
Hook, and the motto thereof 350 Heliopolis, City of the Sun in Egypt 197
Heraclius, Patriark of Jerusalem, an excellent answer made by him to Henry,
King of England 364 St. Hilary, his power over the Emperor Constantius 269
Homicides, their sentence of death 348 Homicides of two kinds 352 Honors
rendered to Joseph by the command of Pharaoh 196 Different humors of Jacob and
Esau 126 Happiness of Divine Providence 195 Wel-grounded hopes 139 Hail, plague
of Egypt 286 Wretched Harvest of worldly men 152 Hail-storm in Constantinople
268 Hardness of Pharaohs heart 269 Hardness of heart, a woeful estate 271
Grasshoppers of Egypt. 289
I.
Jacob and Esau 121 Figure of the Christian, and Jewish people 116 Jacob, Esau
's elder brother, and how 137 His agreement with his father-in-law Laban 155
Jacob resolves to send Benjamin into Egypt 207 His descent into Egypt, to see
his son Joseph 223 The answer he made to Pharaoh concerning his age 229 His
death and last words 231 Idols, and their subversion 344 Detestable Idolatry of
amorous persons 39 Jethro, the counsel he gave to Moses to establish Judges,
for deciding differences between the people of Israel 337 Atheistical ignorance
85 Images of Jesus Christ anciently painted in Temples and Houses, in the form
of a Lamb 27 Image of a generous courage 69 Image of Gods judgment 86 Image of
the lives of men 126 Image of the life and death of Jesus Christ 145 Image of
Chastity 184 Image of the World 198 Imagination, the effects and properties
thereof 156 Unnatural impudence of Cham 48 Inconstancy of created things 113
Dreadful incertainty 135 Incarnation, its draught and picture 144 Innocence
secured 170 Innocence victorious 179 Inhumanity more than brutish 220 Joseph
born of Rachel 154 Joseph sold by his brethren 165 Joseph known by his brethren
214 His lamentations for the death of his Father Jacob 242 Joshua, his
victories over the Amalekites 332 Isaac his birth 93 The discourse he held with
his father, asking him where was the victim of his Sacrifice 108 His submission
and obedience 109 His marriage with Rebecca 116 Most exact Justice 83 Judges, a
fair example for them ibid. Judas, the brother of Joseph, made a speech to him
in the name of his brethren 216 Judgments of God incomprehensible 290
Prodigious increase of the people of Israel 247 Jacobs Ladder 141 Jacobs
wrestling with the Angel 159
K.
Kings of France, true successors of Abraham 80
L.
Laban is grieved for the barrenness of his flocks 156 His agreement with
Jacob, and his return unto Mesopotamia 157 Lesson to husbands and wives 17 Leah
considerable for her fruitfulness 154 Dangerous liberty 29 Liberality cannot be
without freedom 79 Liberality, portraict of the Divinity, ibid. Liberty of holy
Souls 80 Liberty of Esau, cause of his misfortune 128 Laws, their excellency
357 Their establishment 368 Lot delivered out of the hands of his enemies, by
the means of Abraham 70 Luxury destruction of souls, and canker of body 64
Love, its effects and properties 3 Love, architect of the world ibid. Gods love
never idle 73 Incredulous love 224 Ladder of divine providence 146 Lots wife
transformed into a pillar of Salt 89 Irreparable loss 184 Life of man, a war
without truce 159 Life and death inseparable companions. 231
M.
Magicians of Pharaoh, and their enchantments 270 Admirable magnificence of God
58 Malediction of parents dangerous 132 Malediction of God on the Serpent 23
Malediction of Noah on his son 48 Malice of an eloquent woman 20 Manna of the
desert 320 The time when it was to be gathered 323 Marriages subject to many
disasters 123 Marriage of Isaac with Rebecca 116 Assured marks of our
disposition 126 Martyrdom of love 103 Mixture of fortune 166 Excellent
meditation 298 Pleasing Metamorphosis 63 Murder of Abel 27 Michael the
Emperor, quits his Empire to enter into a religious life 58 Mirror of Essences,
the motto thereof 29 World, error of some Philosophers touching the beginning
thereof 8 Monarchy of Adam and Eve over the Univers 19 The world is a Theater
116 Extreme mortification 145 Motives which induced God to create the world 1
Motives of Conscience 140 Powerful motives to divert the brethren of Joseph
from wicked designs 172 Moses 246 His birth and education ibid. His learning
252 His zeal, and marriage with the daughter of the Prince of Madian 253 His
fear at the sight of the flaming Bush 257 His Commission concerning the
deliverance of the people of Israel 260 The certain marks of his power 263 He
excuses himself for accepting the Commission which God gave him 265 The
threats God used to him 266 His Embassy into Egypt 267 He is visited in the
desert, where he creates Judges and Magistrates 334 His last Actions 385 His
Testament 386 His last Canticle 402 Mysteries hidden under the Paschal Lamb 300
Man necessary for the world 9 Men eloquent, when it concerns their own praise,
excellent conceptions upon this subject 10 Man the sport of the gods 148 Honest
man, what he is 163
N.
Nature of God beneficent 320 Nature, her power limited 269 Nembrod chief
contriver of the Tower of Babel, his spirit and disposition 49 Noah, his
obedience to the command of God 41 His going out of the Ark, and his sacrifice
on the Hills of Armenia 44 Names, Chariots of Essences 74
O.
Obligation of fathers and mothers 128 Dreadful obstinacy 271 Economy of the
humane body 12 Opinion of Hesiod touching the Creation of the World 8 Original
sin 15 Ornaments of the Sanctuary 369
P.
Peace and Purity, inseparable companions 65 Terrestrial Paradise 16 Paradise
first habitation of man 16 Passions, their different nature 181 Patience very
awful 84 Persecution of modesty 184 Perfidiousness of the world 206 Plague of
Egypt 284 Natural causes of the plague 285 Pharaoh, King of Egypt, makes Joseph
his Lieutenant, by reason of the truth of his predictions 196 Command of
Pharaoh, concerning the murder of all the male-children of the Hebrews 248
Pharaoh swallowed up in the Red Sea 304 Plagues of Egypt 275 Ancient Policy 356
Portraict of the Justice of God 86 Predictions of Joseph 192 Efficacious
prayers 122 Prevision of merits 137 Proclaming of Joseph by his Brethren 172
Promulgation of the Law on Mount Sina 343 Paternal Prudence 169 Punishment of
Adam 14 Shameful pusillanimity 69 Putipher his overgreat credulity 186 The
impudence of his wife, and her attempt upon the chastity of Joseph 178 Paschal
Lamb 299 Planets, the beginning of their courses 5 Pillar of Fire and Clouds
379 Picture of Hell 91 Picture of Fortune 194 Pains of women in childbearing
23 Prayer, the power and effects thereof. 122
R.
Rachel and her sterility 154 Radegond, a despises France to become religious
59 Ramerus, King of Aragon, follows the same destiny ibid. Amiable resemblance
between Joseph and Jesus Christ 222 The recompense of Jacob for his services
155 Pitiful relics of sin 26 Remorse of Conscience 32 Remedies against Envy
35 Reproaches of God to Cain 28 Very just resentments 77 Rosignation of Abraham
101 Angelical resolution of Joseph 181 Rock, and its motto 102 Ruben, his
affection toward his brother Joseph 173 Rivers, their bounds and limits 5
River of Charity 80
S.
Sacrifices very different of Abel and Cain 28 Sacrifices of Aaron consumed by
fire from Heaven 376 Sanctification of the Sabhath 346 Sarah, her death 113 How
long she lived 115 Scamander, i'ts properties and effects 156 Secret, to become
master of hearts 162 Lamentable separation 141 Sephora, the command which was
given her to circumcise her son 266 Diabolical Serpent, which deceived Eve in
the Terrestrial Paradise 20 Brazen Serpent, which God commanded Moses to make
and set up in the Wilderness 381 Sigibertus, leaves England to become religious
58 Signs of the day of Judgment 89 Simeon and Levi, their fury and cruelties
upon the Sichemites 163 Pleasing spectacle 120 Two-edged swords 136 Stratagem
of the Angel Raphael 137 Stratagem of Abraham 61 Statue of Justice amongst the
ancient 86 Soul of a just man is the throne of God 186 Interessed souls 66 Soul
source of beauty and operations 14 Slavery of love 150 Spirit of peace becomes
furious, when it is irritated 69
T.
Tabernacle of the Old Testament 372 Time of man's creation 12 Dreadful tempest
275 Temptations, their natures and diversities 97 Temptation, exercise of Faith
ibid. Furious temptations 183 Discreet tenderness 211 Testament of Jacob 236
Thales, his opinion of God 262 Theodosius leaves the Empire of Greece to become
a religious man 58 The thanksgiving he rendered unto God, for one of his
vanquished enemies 333 Tomb of concupiscence 352 Thunders, plagues of Egypt 286
Tower of Babel 49 Trajan, a gallant answer made by him to the Emperor Valens
333 Warlike tranquillity 68 Triumph of love on the sacrifice of Abraham 96
Trial of love 97 Things difficult to comprehend in the World 166 Tears quench
the ardors of our souls 242 Delicious tears 120
V.
Vengeance and its degrees 297 Vanity of worldly men in buildings 50 Veremond,
King of Castile, becomes a religious man 58 Verity makes a breach every where
199 Vesuvia, the firing of it 275 Vicissitudes of life 168 Union of the souls
145 Vocation of holy soul 57 Voice of God in silence 143 Voyage of Abraham and
Sarah into the Land of Egypt 59 His victories, and the assurances which God
gave him of a flourishing posterity 68 Voyage of the children of Jacob into
Egypt 199 Vestments of the High Priest 374
W.
Waters of Jordan respectful to the Priests, who carried the Ark of the
Testament 186 Waters of Egypt converted into blood 277 Constant women 106
Weakness, worthy of compassion 46 Weakness of courage 152 Eternal war between
the Woman and the Serpent 23 Works of uncreated wisdom 148 Works of the six
days 4 Wisdom resembling the Sun 141 Wine, its unhappy effects. 48
Z.
Zeal, the excellency and source of it 238 Zeal of the Ranters of the world 254
Indiscreet zeal ibid. True zeal. 255
FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
HIs Lordship's being out of Town has occasioned some Errors in the Print,
which the Reader may thus Correct.

Page 3. line 33. read liveless, p. 5. l. 16. r. ardors, p. 9. l. 16. r. to his
love, p. 44. l. 8. add while, p. 55. l. 5. r. Heaven, p. 60. l. 28. r. Castles
for Dungeons, p. 74. l. 30. r. Covenant, p. 98. l. 37. r. love was content, p.
100. l. 3. r. Benedictions, p. 102. l. 15. r. Clarities, p. 108. l. 12. r.
Isaac 's cost, p. 129. l. 4. r. avail me, p. 142. l. 13. r. now time, l. 14. r.
not for needs, p. 173. l. 9. dele much, p. 204. l. 15. r. poudered, p. 207. l.
1. r. Laws, p. 217. l. 22. r. even ready, p. 255. l. 2. r. specious titles, p.
269. l. 3. r. amazed himself, p. 295. l. 6. r. was seen cleathed, p. 300. l. 1.
r. were obliged, p. 301. l. 30. r. by it, p. 307. l. 1. dele to, p. 343. l. 29.
dele nevertheless, p. 379. l. 9. r. he imployes. With other faults of lesser
importance, besides these in the Text, and Marginal Notes.


