THREE PETITIONS THE FIRST, The humble Petition of diverse well-affected
Citizens and Inhabitants in and about the City of LONDON, To the Right
honorable the Lord Major, the Aldermen, and Commons in Common council
assembled.

THE SECOND, The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in
Common Council assembled, To the Right honorable the Lords and Commons in High
Court of Parliament assembled.

THE THIRD, The humble Petition of the aforesaid well-affected Citizens of the
City of London, To the Right honorable the Lords and Commons in High Court of
Parliament assembled.

With the Answer of the Lords and Commons thereunto.

Printed by RICHARD COTES, Printer to the honorable City of London, August 31.
1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Major, the Aldermen, and Commons of the City
of London in Common Council assembled: The humble Petition of diverse
well-affected Citizens and Inhabitants in and about the City of London.
SHOWS,
THe extroardinary imminent dangers threatening distraction to the Parliament,
City, and Kingdom, occasioned by the sad divisions and discontents among those
that have formerly joined together for the safety of Religion, Law and Liberty,
whereby encouragement is given, and advantage taken by the Common enemy to
promote and carry on a second bloody War; Does enforce your Petitioners with
much grief of heart to unfold their apprehension of the sad Causes thereof;
that if there be a blessing yet in store for this miserably divided Kingdom, we
may more earnestly importune the application of these Remedies humbly
represented in the Petition and Paper annexed to the honorable Houses of
Parliament.

Therefore your Petitioners humbly pray, That you would be pleased in your
grave Wisdoms to take into your most serious consideration the said Petition
and Paper annexed, and present the fame to the honorable Houses of Parliament,
that such Remedies may be used for the removing of jealousies and present
distempers, and obtaining a right understanding between Parliament, City, and
Army, and Kingdom, that by the blessing of God a lasting and wel-grounded Peace
with Truth may be attained.

And your Petitioners, etc.
To the Right Honorable the Commons in Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of the Lord Major Aldermen and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled.
Shows
THat your Petitioners sitting in Common Council upon occasions presented by a
Committee of the honorable house of Commons, a Petition was exhibited unto
them by diverse well affected Citizens, with a paper thereunto annexed, and very
many hands subscribed, which they desired might be presented to the honorable
Houses of Parliament, and being read and seriously considered of in the said
Court, they did apprehend the Contents thereof, to be matter of very high
concernment, and thereupon thought it their duty to present the same to the
honorable Houses of Parliament. And whereas there is mention therein made of
some jealousies concerning the City of London, which as they hope cannot be
justly charged upon them; so they shall be ready to vindicate themselves from
the said jealousies when the honorable Houses of Parliament shall think fit
to require the same.

And they shall humbly pray etc.
To the Honorable the Commons assembled in the High Court of Parliament of
England sitting at Westminster.
The humble Petition of diverse well-affected Ministers, Citizens and others of
the City of London, and parts adjacent; together with a Paper annexed of their
humble desires for the allaying and removal of the jealousies and discontents,
the visible causes of our sad divisions and distractions.
Humbly showing,
THat the many treacherous Plots and contrivances working by the Common enemy
in some parts; their open appearing again in other parts of this Kingdom;
their great hopes and high assurances they boast of generally by a second
war, to obtain their wicked ends; the destruction of this Parliament,
together with the ruin of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; and the sad
divisions and distractions which your Petitioners do at the same time (to
their great grief of heart) behold amongst those who formerly have been
engaged with you in one and the same Cause, now weakening their hands and
counsels, alienating their affections; one from another, and fitting them only
to be a prey to the Common enemy; do necessitate your Petitioners, out of
their abundant sense and sorrow for these things, to open and unfold the
visible causes thereof to this Honorable Court in the Paper annexed; together
with those things your Petitioners humbly conceive may be healing Remedies.

Therefore your Petitioners do humbly pray, That this Honorable Court will
take the said Paper annexed into their serious consideration; and that they may
be so understood, as whatsoever is therein prefented is out of the sincerity of
your Petitioners hearts, and their Zeal to the honor and happiness of the
Parliament and Kingdom, and wholly with submission to your Honors wisdom
and determination; and if by what is suggested therein, your Petitioners shall
in the least measure be isntrumental to the healing of those wounds which are
made by the divisions amongst us; as they shall have great cause to bless God,
so they shall for ever acknowledge the wisdom and goodness of this Honorable
Court, and be further encouraged to adhere thereunto with their lives and
estates.

And your Petitioners, etc.

That the present great divisions and jealousies in this Kingdom in reference
both to Church and State, amongst those that have been formerly united and
engaged in the Cause of the Parliament and Kingdom, have given great advantage
to the Malignant party to make their late insurrections, and to lay the
foundation of a second War; and that the jealousies and discontents
throughout the Kingdom, are such as principally concern Parliament, City, and
Army.
Those concerning the Parliament seem to arise from apprehensions and fears.
I. THat the Parliament intend not really to settle Religion according to the
Word of God, and the Solemn League and Covenant, nor the execution of justice
upon Delinquents, but what they do therein, arises more out of the several
exigents they are brought into, then out of a love and liking of the things
themselves, and full resolutions to maintain them.

II. That they intend to alter the ancient and fundamental Government of this
Kingdom by King, Lords, and Commons.

III. That they intend not only the necessary continuance of the Army at
present, and to make use thereof for subduing the Common enemy, and quieting
the distempers of the Kingdom, but to govern the Kingdom by an Army, to be
perpetually maintained to that end, and consequently the ^^^^^nuing of Excise
and Taxations.

IV. That they intend not really to make a Peace with the King, though they
might have it with safety and security to Religion, Law, and liberty.

For Remedy whereof, it is earnestly desired, I. That the Parliament would
please fully and effectually to declare their sincere resolutions to perfect
the work of Reformation, according to the Word of God, and the Solemn League
and Covenant, with execution of justice upon Delinquents, and their resolutions
to remain steadfast and unmovable therein, notwithstanding any pressure of a
Popish and Prelatick party, and the influence of any other party or forces
whatsoever. II. That they publish to the Kingdom their resolutions not to
alter the Government thereof by King, Lords and Commons. III. That the
Parliament will proceed with all cleernesse and possible speed to obtain a
Peace upon terms that are secure for Religion, Law, and Liberty; and for those
that have adventured their lives and estates for the Parliament for that end;
that the Treaty the Houses have resolved upon, at the Isle of Wight, or shall
resolve upon at any other place, may be so managed, that it may be a real
demonstration to the Kingdom, that as the Parliament will not recede from the
grounds of their cause, so there shall be no other just cause given, either by
delay or obstruction, to a safe and well-grounded peace on their parts.


That upon such a settlement, timely care may be taken of easing the people of
the burden of Armies and Taxations, and encouragement given to the advance of
Trade.

Jelousies concerning the City.
I. THat they seem to recede from their former sound Principles upon which
they have engaged with the Parliament, in their earnest pressing the Parliament
for Peace, for a Personal Treaty, and the Kings coming to London, without the
like expressions of their zeal for the reformation of Religion, freedom of
Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject to be provided for in that Treaty, and
secured in the settlement of Peace; whereby they have too much gratified and
strengthened the common enemy in their late destructive designs.

II. That the former readiness of the City to discover the secret plots of the
Malignant Party, and to oppose them when they are discovered, both in the City
and country, seems to be much abated, and that the listing of Horse and Foot,
and preparation of Arms by many in the City and out parts, for the late
insurrections in the Counties adjacent, together with the general with holding
their Contributions to the forces that should oppose them, raises a jealousy
of the Cities affections to the Parliament: and that the late confidence taken
by a private person coming from the Scottish Army into the City, to levy
money upon the faith of the kingdom of Scotland, for their Army invading the
kingdom of England, causes a jealousy that secret compliances are held, and
aides given to that Army by too many in the City.

For remedy whereof it is desired,

The discontents and jealousies of the Army.
I. FRom their aversness to the settlement of Religion in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government according to the Word of God and the solemn League
and Covenant; And their countenancing by their power multitudes of persons of
unsound judgments, and those opposite to such a settlement.

II. Their not submitting formerly to the Parliaments commands, and
intermedling with the transactions of State, and their disaffection to the City
of London, both Ministers and people well-affected, who have been faithful to
the Cause, and stand for Reformation.

III. That if by the assistance of the persons and estates of the well-affected
(who are mutually engaged with them in the public Cause) they should be
enabled to overcome the present Insurrections and Armies raised against it,
they would turn their success to the advancement of their own private power
and ends.

For remedy whereof, London: and that when the Parliament in their wisdom
shall think fit to lessen or disband the Army that they accordingly yield
obedience.

31. August, 1648.
THe Lords have considered of your Petition, and the Petition of diverse
well-affected Ministers, Citizens, and others of the City of London and parts
adjacent, and have commanded me to return Thanks unto you for your good
affection expressed in this particular, and do desire you that you will return
Thanks to those well-affected Ministers, Citizens, and others of the City of
London and parts adjacent, for their good affection which they have expressed
in desiring the removal of all jealousies, and endeavoring a perfect union of
the well-affected, in order to the procuring of a safe and well-grounded Peace.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

