THE TAKING OF Gateshead Hill: And Blocking up of NEWCASTLE*

CERTIFIED, In a Letter from the Commissioners at Sunderland.

ALSO, The perticulers of the Defeat given to the Oxford Forces near Abbington,
Sir Richard Grimes and others slain, and what prisoners and horse were taken.

TOGETHER, With the Lord of Loughboroughs Letter to Colonel Baggot, who is
since slain, the Letter being found in his Pocket; And the perticulers of the
names of the chiefest that were slain and taken Prisoners by Sir John Gels
Forces near Burton.

Published according to Order.

Aug: 10th London, Printed by JANE COE. 1644.

THE EXTRACT OF A Letter from SUNDERLAND the first of August.
THat since the taking of Hartle-Poole, and Stockton the Earl of Calender has
entered Gateshead in the Bishopric of Durham, and is as near New Castle
bridge, as S. Marioveries is to London Bridge, and taht his Lordship has stopped
all passage over the Bridge, and is quartared himself on the top of Gateshead
Hill, and is in hope (if no force come to raise the siege) to give a speedy
Account of Newcastle,

Dated at Sunderland, 1 August, 1644. ON Wednesday last, the Enemy came with a
strong party of horse, from Oxford, and faced Abbington, our men retreated from
the Outworks, and drew a part of the Enemies into the Line, about 20. and then
fell on them, and slew 8. Sir Richard Grimes is slain, and took also 12.
prisoners, and pursued the rest to the very walls of Oxford, and brougt away
60. horse from Oxford to Abbington, not one of our men lost, nor mortally
wounded, some small wounds two or three have received, but no greater loss
praised be God.



The Copy of a Letter from Sir John Gells quarters.
SIR,
IN my last I gave you an account of our laying siege to Winfield Manor, which
has now been continued 12 or 14 days, the Pioners are got very nigh unto the
walls, and by a Boy sent out this day with a Letter in Charrecters: which though
we cannot understand, yet saw it was to Hastings for aid, and that they cannot
hold out many days. Now these 4. or 5. days, Hastings has been rallying his
own, Baggots, Milwoods, Eyres, and some other forces, and has been rambling
about Titbury, Hilton, Marston, and those parts, of which we having notice, our
horse Regiment marched yesternight to the Prioy, and so the rest that were in
town joining, marched on toward Hilton, where the Enemy was not, but removed
to Roston, where our men fell on them about spring day, and took that fled into
the Church 100. lack 3. with two foot Cullers, and 150. Arms, Swords, and
Bandeleres, being Colonel Milwoods, and Colonel Eyeres, upon this they
understanding by the Prisoners, that then was 5 or 600. Quartered at Burton,
Our forelorne hope advanced toward them, having set a guard on the prisoners,
and when they came to Burton, the Enemy being about 400. were drawn into a
body, in the Manor yard, at which our men fired, but the body being not not
come in, they sallyed out, and caused ours to retreat, but the body coming
in, this was the success, after ours drew into a body, and filled one end of
the street and the enemy the other, the Dragoneres fyring freshly, at last it
pleased God to disorder them, and put them wholly to the rout, we pursued there
guards of Muskets, and there is slain, mortally wounded, and taken prisoners at
lest, 100. or 120. Colonel Pate slain for certain, also Major Bate his
Major, with diverse Gentlemen, as the prisoners affirm. Also Collonell Baggot,
is slain, so affirmed, the reasons are these.

1. A Captain of ours shot at him, at three yards distance, and verily thought
hit in his belly. 2. The prisoners were heard to say, that he or his Major are
slain. 3 One of Captain Hardstaffes Soldiers found him dead, took his gold and
money out of his pocket, and letters, amongst which, one all blood, of which is
an enclosed Copy.
Amongst the prisoners taken are known to be, 4. Captains. 1. Captain
Lieutenant. 100. and odd horse.
And our men Good booty of the slain, being supposed to be about 40. but a
great number mortaly wonded, we miss not above six men, in all this, and
whether slain or taken we know not. The Enemies were valiant; Being, Harker.
Bagget. And Pate.
This Pate had two bullets shot into him, thrust through with a Skean, and
after his brains beat out with a Musket, he fought as long as he could stand,
we cannot hear of above two of ours slain.

Cornet John Watts shot through with a musket above the right breast, which I
fear will prove mortal.

Cornet John Hope shot in the foot.

Captain Barton shot with a Musket into the left breast, but his arms were so
good, that it did not enter.

Balat shot through the Legs, also his thumb and one finger shot, and a small
cut under the Chin, but nothing dangerous. Thus God is good to us blessed be
his name; the Lord preserve you, so prays he who is yours, to his power.

Darby, this Wednesday Evening, the last of July 1644.
The Lord Loughboroughs Letter, to Colonel Baggot, found in the Pocket of one
slain, supposed to be Colonel Baggot.
Colonel Baggot,
I S^aid until now in expectation to hear from Newarke, but as yet no body is
come to me. I conceive your soldiers are weary, and therefore would have them
quartered this night at Burton, which they may do safely with reasonable
guards. If you have any Hay ready about Saltersbridg, send out your warrants
for carriages, to fetch it to Liechfield to morrow. Write back to me what you
do, so soon as you receive this; God willing I will be with you this night.

Ashby this Tuesday morning 8. a clock. Your assured loving friend, J.
Loughborough.

FINIS.

