THE Case and Condition OF R. Titchbourn Late Alderman, and now Prisoner in the
Tower of LONDON.

Presented to the Consideration and Compassion of his Fellow Citizens.



LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Printing-Press In St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

THE CONDITION OF ROBERT TITCHBOVRN. Late Alderman, etc.
THere is a difference between bearing and enduring of Misery: The heart of a
man will maintain it self against the sudden violent effects of Fortune, but
who can hold out against endless Calamities? where nothing is left free to a
man but his Thoughts, whose dreadful results present nothing but Death and
Horror, injured Humanity it self could not choose but relent. Nevertheless to
make any Apologies of the crime, or to excuse or extenuate that Guilt under
which he suffers, would be so far from compassionating of him, that it would
add new weight to that burden, which his long contrition and exercise of
Repentance, may in some measure have aleviated. On the other side to aggravate
the Flagitiousnesse of that fact, and insult upon the miseries which he
undergoes, is no English, but some salvage Barbarism, if we shall impartially
consider him throughout and in all his stations, an account whereof you shall
see in this ensuing Paper.

He was born of an honest and gentile Parentage in this City, a Linen Draper,
anciently descended from a worshipful Family, well esteemed and honored, no
picque, blemish, or stain upon them, his Growth and Education advancing him
alike to be soon a man, which put him very early into action. It was then the
untimely fate of the London youths generally to arm themselves in defense of
the pretended Reformation, so Epidemical was that hot feavour of their bloods,
that scarce a House was left untainted -- Dulce Bellum inexpertis. -- Amongst
the rest the aptness and proclivity of this person to the War was soon taken
notice of, and accordingly a Command conferred on him of Captain over a Foot
Company in the Trained Bands. This he discharged abroad with valor and
discretion, and at home, with Courtesy, his Enemies bearing him witness.

During the War he ascended the several steps of Military Honors in order,
made Colonel of a Regiment, and for a Time Lieutenant of the Tower, not taxed
by them whom he served with any baseness or deficiency.

The Objection is not worth the answering, that he took up Arms against the
King. His Grace and Mercy to others as deeply engaged against him, (save in
that matter, with which we meddle not) having refelled and confuted that
Charge: and it might be well added for a plea for mercy, what the most learned
and Right Honorable Lord Chancellor said to the Parliament in pressing the
Act of Oblivion, that there was a general Malignant Influence of the Planets,
which of late years had infected the English Air. Considered therefore in this
Case as a Fellow Citizen, a Gentleman, and a person that behaved himself with
Gallantry, -- Et Caesar in host probat. -- Commiseration may well take up the
room of passion, and ungoverned and blind revenge.

What he did afterward in process of time, and in pursuance of those Commands
to which he had engaged himself by a heedlesse zeal and blood not yet cooled
from the boiling fury of the War, and in an unexperienced youth, misguided by
the fallacious shows of Honor and Greatness, by those who had the Power and
Sword in their hands, he has the sufficient regret thereof.

Ambition is a Vice, most commonly a danger into which men from the brink of
their desire, once out of the bounds of their duty, are frequently
precipitated. And therefore the ordinary fate of aspiring men, and the constant
practices of it used in all Times and Governments, cannot but take off the Envy
of that particular; though it is not denied, but that such Vain glory
Hood-winked him into the destructive business against the King; yet his most
humble Submission and Confession of it at his Trial, referring it in part to
his want of age and Experience, cannot but merit a favorable and charitable
construction at the hands of all men, whose minds (before stirred and provoked)
are now laid by the calm and serenity of His Majesty's Government.

That fatal Business of our late Sovereign, is a String not to be touched
upon; no sooner you strike upon it, but like sympathetical Music, blood must
follow blood. Nothing therefore can be said to him here as to impunity, further
then Christianly to wish, that if it were possible and expedient, the justice
of God and the Kingdom, might be satisfied, and that Guilt expiated, without
the severest inflictions of the Law upon him, as to Life.

We have hitherto seen him at the worst, let us consider him next as a
Magistrate, and that more eminent in the exercise of the Civil power, then
formerly in the Military.

He was made Sheriff in the year 1650. advanced before his Time to that
Dignity, to promote the Interest of the then Free State, into which he had
waded so deep before. No marvel therefore if he so stickled for it, and by so
doing incurred the general hatred of most men; and if we do impartially
consider his actions then as one engaged in a faction to which he had always
adhered, and was embarked in the same, danger and hazzards, it will not much
move any man's Stomach against him.

During his Session and Continuance in the Court of Aldermen, betwixt his
Shrievalty and Maioralty, he performed the office of a good Citizen, to Common
justice. Many can bear him witness of much uprightness and integrity
manifested by him in private businesses, the decision whereof being referred to
Committees of Aldermen (of which very seldom but he was one through the sense
that Court had of his abilities) he always justly and impartially accommodated;
and Envy her self cannot speak less, but Gratitude -- would speak more.

We will take a full view of him, in this his next Dignity, the Supreme
Magistracy of the City, as Lord Mayor of London, and we use to say Magistratus
indicat virum, but here Vir indicat Magistratum, very few persons that arrived
at this Honor, after a full ripeness of years, and digestion of a long
observation of custom and manners, governed the City better, nor revived more
wholesome Laws, and reduced things methodically to their first state; The
severest punisher of Fraud and Injustice, a most rigid exacter of all dues and
rights belonging to the City, keeping a constant Inquisition of all the abuses
and trespasses committed or suffered on its privileges, neither favor or
affection (as we use to say) making him to connive at such unlawful practices.

This indeed were a pleasant Subject to run on with, however some particular
men would put in their Spoakes, and tell us of some narrow concerns of their
own, wherein they complain of injury and injustice done them; but these men
consider not that the strict impartial execution of justice cannot be without
some rigor, and justice being blind, cannot see where it lights. If there had
been any fore-thoughted malice, any grudges or ill will, it were justly
imputable; but on the contrary, good for evil has in some businesses been
rendered by him, and that also when he had power in his hands to do it very
effectually.

To give an instance of this, though somewhat before he came to this
Magistracy. 'Twas a generous act of his in saving the Life of those Two young
men, condemned by the Powers usurping, for the Tumult in London 1647. It is no
kind of lessening that Courtesy, to say they were Traitors that sentenced
them, and that he had been accessory to their Mu^ther if they had dyed, he
being then Sheriff; for then the Stream went strong another way, and no
suspicion or fear in them of his Majesty's most happy Restitution, they
thinking and taking themselves to be fast rooted in the Government.

Many more there were of this nature, and it is without question, that his
private benefits have exceeded his private injuries, though venit ad amissas
nullus amitus opes, and wrongs follow the Doer of them to the Grave: But if you
weigh his public benefactions, in his administration of his Mayoralty against
those petty injuries he did, their Lightness as well as Trivialnesse, will be
so inconsiderable in the Balance, that they will pass for nothing. Having
therefore passed this honorable place with commendation and general applause,
it were but just he should receive some advantage from it, in recompense of
that honor and advantage he did it. Let plundering Isaac Pennington expiate
all the Contumelies done the King and his Government in the last 18
Maioralties; and let Andrews estate make up Isaac's broken Fortunes to the
Exchequer. The Authority once vested in a good Magistrate (though perhaps an
ill man) has a kind of Sacredness and Reverence in it, and the Ancients did
use to offer up their Insignia of Honor at the Temples of the Gods, at the
expiration of their annual offices as Sacred to posterity; it is true, this
crimen laesae Majestatis, has profaned all that respect due to him, but who
knows, if by the unanimous Intercession, and Supplication of this City, whether
gratia placatae Majestatis, the King and his great Council may not be pleased
to pardon that great offense.

Let him at least not fall helpless or friendlesse, as one that had not one
good Action to speak for him. It will be some Sweetning to that bitter Cup to
find some pity showed him, though peradventure it should not avail him. The
justice of the Law has many times been lenified to the Sufferers of it, by the
Humanity and Compassion of the people. It Is a double death to dye unpitied;
it is an aenigmatical sad Fate to be buried in Marble Hearts, and yet have no
Sepulcher. It adds all the horror of death, to see as many Tormentors as
Spectators, and is a desperate prospect of the woeful estate after this Life.

To move you the rather to this Compassion, (though no doubt you cannot be
without some affections to him) view him in the last revolution, and you will
find him no stickler against our present happiness. He that was not against
it, was clearly for it: Even in the amuses of some of those men, our
Deliverance came like a Dream; but his Eyes were wide open, and he plainly
foresaw His Majesty's Return, and stood still, till the wonders of his
Restitution were past. He engaged in no new Designs, counsels or practices, to
retard or withstand that blessed work; but with all Submission and patience,
expected the Results of Providence. There were few of that Temper or
Moderation, in that critical juncture of Time, who yet, were in less danger
then himself; which afterward amounted to a confidence of surrendering himself
according to the Proclamation, and putting himself within the danger of the Law.

What he did as a Member of the late Committee of Safety, was rather of
necessity then choice; neither then was the Kings Interest so discernible.
Questionless had he had that State insight, to which he was neither
capacitated nor experienced, he would have taken hold on occasions Foretop, and
redeemed himself by some signal seasonable Demonstration of Loyalty, as well as
others in the same praedicament. Now he is foris factus, and that opportunity
of retriving himself, quite lost, and has a sad After game to play, and the
Tables almost shut up, without a speedy intervention and interposition betwixt
his sentence and approaching Death.

And in this last view of him we shall see him well worthy of our greatest
Commiseration. How he has behaved himself as to his Imprisonment, (in that
place where he once commanded) with all Humility and fair Carriage; the Noble
Sir John Robinson, and his Warders and Officers, will give him a sufficient and
good Character. At that late strange and rebellious Insurrection in the City by
the Fifth Monarchists, he professed an utter detestation thereof, and not so
much for the Butchery and Murder committed, as that the peace of the Kingdom
was thereby endangered, by such a riotous wicked attempt: the danger and
scandal brought by it on him and his Fellow Sufferers, to the acceleration of
their ends he weighed not so much, being resolved either living or dying to
pray for the prosperity of the Kings Government.

He has continued ever since his first restraint, a most strict austere and
mortified life, without any grudgings or repinings at these his sad
dispensations, bearing with an even mind the loss of a considerable estate,
besides sundry discomforts in his nere relations grieving excessively at his
Condition; and a deeper wound can hardly be given to a man in misery; so falls
it out in the Extremes of Sorrow, that even our friends unvoluntarily shall
contribute to the load of it. And if this condition be not matter of mercy what
distress shall find it?

Report has taken up many things falsely against this person as of his
unsupportable Pride, Covetousness, etc. Raised from his Pageantry Lordship
conferred on him by Oliver, and his several rich places and offices, he went
through all along the Usurpation; but this reducement of him has made it
appear to the Contrary, his wealth not answering the sum required to a Lord
Majors Estate, and his constant affability as well as his present humility
convincing all men of his not being arrogant.

Enough might be said of this in his praise, and questionless be pressed more
home and advantagiously by others who owe him greater kindnesses if such can be
in this his Condition) in his behalf. The Author hereof has only endeavored to
discharge, as far as his Mite would reach, an Obligation to this afflicted:
being willing if he were able (and if it would be taken) to ransom him with
Gold. However you have his Devoir, which he humbly submits to Candid and
Christian Consideration.

Quem paenitet peccasse Paene est innocens.
FINIS.

