October 9. 1645.

THREE LETTERS, Concerning his Majesty's present CONDITION, One from General
Pointz, TO THE COMMITTEE of DERBY.

And the other two From Gentlemen of quality, To Mr. WILLIAM LILEY in LONDON.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons for H. B.

SIR,
I Have here enclosed, sent you a copy of Major Generals Letter to us
concerning the Kings motion, which we received yesterday, and since we are
certainly informed, that he came to Lichfield on Thursday night, to Melborne
on Friday night, and this morning is marched toward Newark, there being in his
company, the Lord Loughborough, Gerhard, Langdale, and Vaughan; his number in
the whole is about 2000. of which there is not above 1500. fighting men,
whereof many of them ill horsed and armed, little ammunition, and no carriages,
all which is confirmed by two Troupers which came this morning to us with their
horses and arms from the Kings Rendezvous; and further say, that Prince
Maurice is gone back to Worcester, and Sir Jacob Ashley to Hereford: that most
of the Kings Army are Irish and Papists, for the Protestants steal away daily;
and so in have, not to Iose this opportunity, do rest,

Your Real Friend. Derby,
October. 4. 1645.
The Copy of Major General POINTZ his Letter.
GENTLEMEN,
SInce the great Victories God gave us near Chester, I have past the River into
Wales, because the King was in Denbighshire, raising that Country; and Prince
Maurice, with Sir Jacob Ashley joined with him; but upon our approach, he fled
upon Sunday last from Denbigh to Cherick Castle; his motion from thence, is the
way to Newark, which gives us to think, he intends to recruit himself there,
that he may fall into these parts again, as the most considerable now to him,
of which I thought fit to give you timely notice; that if any forces draw out
of Newark, you with all speed follow them in the rear, and it shall be my part
to follow the enemy so close, that they may not escape us. Circumspection is
the thing most required of you, and all those parts, in which service, if you
fail not, we shall be able to give a good account of the great trust
committed to us; you may the better do this, because no enemy (if any) not
considerable left behind you For the Kingdoms sake fail not herein, and you
shall hereby oblige

Your Servant, Sed'nham Pointz.
Postscript.
Since the writing of this Letter, I received intelligence, that the King is at
Bridgenorth, and has drawn all his Forces out of Worcester, Hereford, Ludlow
and Bridgenorth, which way he will bend, time will show. I desire you to send
me all the Horse you can spare.

Elsmore, October 2. 1645.


Mr. Lilly,
GOD be praised, we are gotten well and safe to Leicester, and had the grant
of a party of horse to convoy us to Nottingham, but in the very interim news
was brought, that the King was at Dennington with all his body, in number about
2 or 3000. horse, all mutinous and distracted, which for the present will
occasion our stay here, till the ways be cleerer, In the mean time I rest

Your loving Friend.
Leicester, October 4. 1645.
FINIS.

