A Cluster Of Canaans Grapes. BEING Several experimented truths received
through private communion with God by his Spirit, grounded on Scripture, and
presented to open view for public Edification.

By Col. ROBERT TICHBOURN.

1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.

Matthew 5.15. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but
on a candlestick, and it gives light unto all that are in the house.

1 Cor. 1.27 But God has chosen the foolish things of the World to confound
the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty.

December. 25. 1648. Imprimatur Joseph Caryll.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1469.

The Author nothaving leisure to attend and correct the Press, desires the
Reader to be at so much pains as to peruse these Errata, and amend what in some
places are necessary to be observed, to make the sense complete.

ERRATA.

PAge 6. l. 22. leave out and going before blood, p. 7. l. 21. for believer, r.
being for ever. p. 22. l. 5. for: 35. 53. p. 29. l. 38. for out r. our. p. 37.
l. 11. for add, r. and: p. 42. l. 21. for present, r. precept. p: 50. l. 26.
for eive, r. live. p. 58. l. 17. for 35. r. 53. p. 58 l. 20. for sons, r. sun.
p: 69. l: 28. r. such and such p: 83. l: 14. r. I comprehend, and in l. 15. for
but, r. not. p. 84. l. 29. for falsehood, r. fashioned. p. 85. l. 32. for
office, r. olive. p: 95. l: 32. for ceter, r. center: p: 95 l: 36. for he, r.
thee. p: 103. l: 32. for I have told I you, r. I have told you I, p: 103. l:
35. for do distrust me, r. do you distrust me, p: 109. l 25. for inful, r:
sinful, p: 112. l: 34. for receive truth, r. receive this truth: p: 121. l: 34.
for power of their lives, r. power of godliness in their lives, p: 125. l. 23.
for eyes pursuit, r: eager pursuit, p: 128. l: 30. for return, r. return of, p:
131. l: 27. for sin, r. sun, p: 135. l: 19. for the spirit, r. this spirit, p:
146. l. 1 for constrained, r. co^trived, p: 163. l: 25. for Jews, r. Spouse, p.
165. l. 2. for but, r: and, p: 168. l: last, r. the workings or God, p: 182. l:
19. for ceasing, r. crossing, p: 18 2. l: 27. for you, r. he, p: 183. for rip
up, r. cry up, p: 213. l: 10. for sure but, r. sure none but, p: 213. l. 27.
for upod, r. upon, p: 206. l: 5. for fault, r. fall, p: 134. l: 16. for body,
r. other, p. 235. l: 15. for in his, r. or in his, p: 137. l: 14. for give, r.
have, p: 239. l: 27. for would it, r. would if, p: 240. l: 15. for soul ip, r.
soul is.

P. 107. l. 20. left out, where it is said, as those dead bones could not live
before God had united them, covered them with skin, and breathed life into
them: this should be added, no more could they remain dead bones, when God had
so united them, and breathed life into them.

p. 131. l: 7, to he is best satisfied, add, not to eat at all.

To His EXCELLENCY THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, Commander in Chief of all the Land
Forces under the pay of the PARLIAMENT, within the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, and the Islands of GARNSEY and JERSEY.
MY LORD,
I HAVE observed, that Persons engaged by love, have used this way to make
their acknowledgme^ts that when they give their labors to the Worlds view,
they present them to that hand which has by kindness most obliged them; I
judge this practice to arise from ingenuity of spirit, that where men cannot
pay a debt, there they will acknowledge themselves debtors. Now I beseech your
Excellency to give me leave to take up this practice, I am not able to pay the
obligements of your Lord-ships love and kindness to me; nor in this do I
attempt any higher thing, then to acknowledge my self your Lord-ships debtor
for more undeserved favors then any person I know, amongst those many
thousands that are fellow-debters with me. And if your Excellency shall be
pleased to own and accept of this poor acknowledgement, I shall declare it to
be the fruits of your own wonted goodness, and my self not at all the less,
but the more your debtor. I am the more encouraged to Dedicate this to your
Lord-ship from the observation that I have made of your spirit, to be willing
to own truth and honesty in the lowest person and the meanest dress. What I
here present to your hands, I trust will be found truths by the word and
spirit of truth: but I confess unto your Lordship, it is in a very mean attire,
without the ornament of humane learning: And I expect Worldlings should slight
and scorn it upon that account: but if they appear truths, as truth is in
Jesus, I am confident they will be beautiful in your Excellencies eye. I have
had much struglings between my flesh and spirit, whether to bury, or to bring
forth these breathings of God upon my soul. The spirit of God has made them
very sweet to me, and my spirit judged they might be so to others, therefore
was I willing to breath them forth: but then my flesh objected that the style
was low and mean, and that this subject out of my hand would administer matter
of scorn from the World: and if one of a thousand did value it, yet a thousand
for one would slight me and it. Til it pleased God to carry me above scorn, I
could not rise to this resolution, to bring that forth to the World, which God
by his Spirit had brought into my soul: but when I had resolved the world
should have it, I was not long to seek in my self of a hand first to present
it to, but resolved to presume upon your Excellencies exceeding love and
goodness, so as to present it unto your Lordship as the acknowledgement of my
real affections and abundant engagements to your Excellency.

Sir, I bless the Lord I have no base ends in this appearing to the World; for
if the reasonings of my flesh could have prevailed, this had never been an
object for Worldlings scorn. And if the Lord shall give you time to read it, I
hope it will appear to your Excellency, and to every spiritual eye that shall
look into it, that my design is to lift up something above my self, (Namely
God in Christ.)

And finding the same spirit to be in your bosom, I am encouraged to dedicate
this following Treatise to your Lordship, and take that boldness as to
subscribe my self your Excellencies very much engaged, and ever faithful
servant,

ROB: TICHBURN.

To the Readers.
Readers,
IF you know what you look for, I will tell you what you shall find that so
you may either save your labors or attain your ends: You shall have truth in
a mean attire set before your eyes, the truths of, God which to a spiritual
eye carry their own beauty; but you will find them without art, not adorned
with humane learning, and so without beauty to a fleshly eye: I know you will
wonder what I mean to appear in Print, especially in these times, when plain
truths from the most of men, will find nothing else but plain scorn; most
men having sight but on one side, and their stomachs so full of crudities, that
they cannot bear but vomit up with scorn in the face of him that brings them,
even saving truths; besides you will think I cannot be ignorant but to know,
that my name will prejudice these truths unto many that live by fancy more
then Faith; such as will cavil with all truth that comes by a hand they like
not, and have little other grounds for the truth they take up, but that they
come by such hands that they at present fancy: I confess I cannot make my
self so ignorant as not to understand these things, nor is it my design by
appearing in Print to make my felfe public, for I expect by it to be the
derision of most men, nor do I Print because I think the Press wants work,
for I am thoroughly convinced that much evil has over. spread this Land by
those many unsauory Pamphlets, and those rending, dividing principles which
have this way been spread abroad, by which the members of Christ have been
scandalized, rent and divided, and have almost made themselves a pray to the
Wild Boares, and the subtle Foxes, which have no higher ends but to destroy
the tender Vines: The reasons why I choose to render my self to the Worlds
scorn in this matter and manner, are these.

First, In satisfying my conscience in obedience to God in some Scripeures set
upon my spirit by himself I trust, when as my flesh and spirit did contend
about this matter; And the first is this.

Freely ye have received freely give: Though this was spoken first to the
Apostles, yet I think it does not exclude any but include every Saint and
Disciple of Christ to be free in the giving forth of their knowledge,
experience and enjoyment of God in Christ, by his spirit to the World. And this
is my case, What I give I have freely received from the Lord in secret, when no
eye but his did see me. I do acknowledge it is the free grace of God that
makes known any title of truth to me, and if my heart deceive me not, it is
the manifesting of his free grace that is my design in giving forth freely as
I receive: I shall I trust with much more ease bear the reproaches of the
World, then I could a concealment of the love of God in Christ. In another
Scripture I find that light is not to be put under a bushel but to be held
forth that according to its nature it may lighten others, and because what
Saints have, they have received, and every talent is to be improved to the
Masters use, and the standing rule to Gods people; that all things be done to
edification, and that most which may edify most, therefore in obedience to
these Scriptures, God has molded me into his will, and I do freely cast my
self upon his love and power, to bear up my spirit to carry me through good
and evil reports, and I hope shall ever esteem of the Worlds scorns as not
worthy of thoughts in that day when God shall manifest his will and work to me.

A second reason why I thus appear, is, That I might be a Christian Servant to
fellow Saints. God is as free in giving as he is in saving, he gives what he
pleases, how he pleases, when he pleases, and by whom he pleases, this I
have in some measure experimented of God, and think it my duty to be a servant
to God and to fellow Saints, to bring unto them what I have received from him:
When Saints reveal their knowledge and experience of God, they do thereby
confirm, strengthen, and build up one another in their most holy Faith: I know
no higher work that Saints on earth have then this, and were it more in
practice I do verily believe that the beauty of holiness and the power of
godliness would be more transparent, but in stead of serving one another this
way in the spirit of God, we are devouring and destroying one another by an
evil spirit of lying and slaundering, fomenting unchristian and needless
jealousies one of another; this is either in the beginning or the end of most
men's discourses, of their printings; and it has been where I am sure it ought
not to be in men's Preachings; these tares which the evil man has sown
amongst the good seed have exceedingly scandalized the Gospel of Christ, with
the professors thereof; and if God delight in this generation, he will
exceedingly humile us under this very thing; in stead of crucifying Christ in
one another, Saints should be servants to carry Christ to each other; I mean
their light in Christ, and their experiences of the love, faithfulness, and
holiness of God; this would increase love to God and his people in stead of
devouring, beget imbracings into the bosom and arms of love, and
faithfulness, not to belly and scandalize but to honor and vindicate every
child of God.

A third reason that moves in me is this, To stir up those many thousands which
this Land affords that are abundantly more able to take up this necessary
work. Truly it is sad to see how frothy and light things do take up the
spirits of able and godly men, when as this only thing necessary is as it were
quite forgotten, not only dead but buried out of sight, I do believe these
last seven years have brought forth as little of this fruit, as any seven
years before, in which men did complain they durst not send truths abroad,
least so doing should confine them to prisons, had the seven years liberty the
Press has had been improved in this, through the blessing of God, it might
have left such monuments of God in the World as after ages might have blessed
him for: I do believe Satan has hindered much of this work from appearing by
the scandal and reproach of the World which is usually cast upon it; truly I
found it a very hard thing to get over, but when God gave me to understand,
that The good and comfort of one soul was of greater weight then the reproach
of all the World; I was immediately carried above that temptation, and I here
mention it to stir up others to the same work, for doubtless God has many
thousand poor Saints in this Kingdom which will gladly gather up those
pearls of Divine truths, which the Swine of the World trample under their
feet, if but one soul bless God in truth for the revealing of these truths,
though many thousand profane ones should scorn me to my face, yet I shall not
lose my end nor repent for my reproaches, if God be honored by them.

My last reason is this, To give the World a true discovery of my spirit, and
light in those things which I count weighty, and every truth of them to be of
more concernment then a thousand Worlds, I cannot tell the thoughts of men
concerning my self, nor will presume to take the place of God to judge the
thoughts of any; but this I can truly tell that in the following truths I have
clearly opened my heart to the view of every Reader, and have faithfully given
to the World what light God has given to me in those maine truths, and
fundamentalls of salvation, in which my soul lives, and what I can cheerfully
dye in, the next moment.

This is all I shall say, I bless the Lord I am single hearted in this work,
let men judge of me and it according to to their light, I have no other end
then this. That the eternal loving kindness and free grace of God may be
lifted up in the World, and that all his people may know how good a God he is.
I confess these truths of God were in my soul, like new Wine in old Bottles,
my flesh could imprison them no longer, and now they are abroad give me leave
Reader with them to give thee a word of caution.

If thou be spiritual, and understandest these truths of God in the spirit,
and find them sweet, then bless the Lord, let thy heart praise him and thy
eye be singly set on him, overlooke the creature wholly, unless it be to glory
in the Lord that has magnified his free grace to so weak a one as my self
is: I acknowledge the truths to be Gods, and revealed by his spirit of truth,
so that the beauty of them must center no where but in him, but all the
failings and weaknesses from first to last are mine, the fruits of my flesh and
darkness; I beseech you let God have his due glory, though you blame me for my
failings let not my weaknesses prejudice any soul against the precious truths
of God. I trust there is nothing but what are truths of God, though weakly
managed, and if any one amongst those many thousands more descerning eyes then
mine shall find out any thing that is not so, I trust if in a spirit of love
and meekness it be made known to me, I shall bless God for that soul, and
honor his truth by acknowledging my own errors.

And to the scorner I shall only say this, I wish you could singly scorn me
in it and not God, then would your sin be the less, and so would my sorrow
too: for God has carried me above your scorns, and were not your sins
increased by it, the care of either side would be but very small: Let me deal
plainly with you, you wrong your selves, not me, for I can both live and dye
full of joy and rest in the love of God; though you shall please your selves in
scorning and deriding me, and all the return I shall make to this, will be to
pity your darkness, and to pray the Lord to give you the light of his spirit,
by which you may truly know him, and Jesus Christ which he has sent, and then
I know you will be new creatures. I shall hold you no longer in the porch, but
open every door of the house that you may both read and see the truths of God
made known by his spirit, to the weakest, and one as unworthy as any of his
Servants:

Rob: Tichbourne.

The Contents of the several Chapters contained in this Book.
LOVE to all SAINTS shows union with Christ.

By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples if ye love one another
John 13.35. What Christ has borne for Saints they shall never bear themselves.

For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse; for it is
written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law to do them. But that no man is justified by
the law in the sight of God, it is evident, for the just shall live by faith.
And the law is not of faith, but the man that does them shall live in them.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us;
for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. There is neither
Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise, Gal. 3.10, 11, 12, 13.28, 29.

Gods Children have his Spirit to walk and work in.

For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For
ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba-Father. The Spirit it
self bearing witness with our spirit that we are the children of God, Romans
8.14, 15, 16.

Gods love gives Saints to know they shall appear like Christ.

Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us that we should be
called the sons of God. Therefore the world knows us not, because it knew not
him. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we
shall be: but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.1, 2.

Christ is the food of living souls.

I am that bread of life, John 6.48. Christ's reign by his Spirit is the Saints
liberty from bondage.

To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into
your hearts, crying Abba-Father, Gal. 4.5, 6. Saints are complete before God
in their union with Christ.

For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete
in him, Coloss. 2.9. Free Grace in God justifies and redeemeth through Christ.

Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, Romans 3.24. Christ and the new creature are unseparable.

Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Vanity
and vexation of spirit compasses all things under the sun.

I have seen all the works that are done under the Sun, and behold all is
vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.14. A Saints excellency is to have no
will in himself but the will of God.

Saying, Father if thou be willing remove this cup from me, nevertheless not
my will, but thine be done, Luke 22.42. No man exceedes another in excellency
but by received mercies.

For who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou that thou did
not receive? 1 Cor. 4.7. None but God can be a proper subject for a Saint to
glory in.

He that glories, let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. part of the 30. verse.
Saints have victory through Christ over Death, and by faith glory in it.

O Death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? The sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to God which
gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15, 55, 56, 57.


FINIS.
Jan. 25. 1648.
I Have delightfully looked upon these Clusters of Canaans Grapes, and have
helped them to the Press, that they may be Wine for Common drinking: I only
mind the Reader, that these Grapes yield the New Wine of the Gospel; Let him
take heed he puts it not into the Old Bottles of envy or of malice, of
prejudice or of contempt; if he do, His Bottles will break; and though the
Wine (because it is saving Wine) cannot but be safe, yet himself will be a
looser, yea, in danger to be lost; Whereas, his profit and Salvation are (I
believe, on this side the glory of God) the highest end of the Author, in this
publication, as they are of the Licenser,

Joseph Caryl.

A Cluster of Canaans GRAPES.
CHAP. I. Love to all Saints shows union with Christ.
JOHN 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love
one another.


THE foregoing verse holds out a Command from Christ, that all his Disciples,
those which love and follow him, should love oee another: And to this command
our Savior holds forth his love as a pattern and incitation to us to love one
another, That you love one another, says Christ, Verse 34,
as I have loved you. Our Savior spoke these words a little before bis death,
that they might be of the more force, and make the more impression upon the
souls of his Disciples, as if he should say, remember my dying love, and let
it live in your bosoms, as a precept and example for you to love one another.
In this 35. verse our Savior advances love, holy, spiritual love, and makes
it a Beacon of discovery. This love, it is the love of Christ within us, for
without him we can do nothing. Now Christ makes a double discovery by this
love: The first is, he discovers God his Father and our Father, and himself to
us: Secondly, by this love he makes a discovery of Saintt to the world, as they
are in union and communion with him; the latter of these is that which is held
forth in this verse, namely, A Saint manifesting to the world his union with
Christ, by his love to every fellow-member, as bearing Christ's image.

The point that naturally flows from these words, is this: That love to all
Saints is a plain manifestation of our union and communion with Christ.

When I say all Saints, I admit of no distinction but only Saintship, living in
the Spirit up to their interest as Disciples and followers of Christ: Not
Saints of such or such a judgment in point of worship, nor Saints of a higher
or lower growth, nor Saints distinguished by their various forms of
discipsine, but as branches of the true Vine, which in their union with Christ
bring forth the fruits of the beauty of holiness, and the power of godliness,
Christ gives this as a general command to all his Disciples, to love one
another, Joh. 15.17.
our Savior tells us this, As I am in the Father, so are you in me, and this
is a good foundation of love, therefore love one another as I have loved you.
Joh. 15.12.
And in 1 John 4.21. And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves
God loves his brother also; as if the holy Ghost had said, Those that truly
love God, will love his image wherever they find it. Our Savior in John
17.20, 21. prays upon this principle, he prays for all that shall believe in
him, his love is not stinted only unto Apostles or Disciples, persons of
greatest gifts and graces, but it runs as strongly to the weakest believer.
So in the 10. verse of that 17. of John, All mine are thine, and thine are
mine, and I am glorified in them. Christ by an eye of love beholds that union
which the weakest believer has with him, and beholds his glory in that union.
Here we have Christ the purest founntain of love for our pattern, his love
runs to all in union with him, so should our distinguishing love extend to
all that hold the head Christ Jesus, and walk in the light and life of the
Spirit This truth is so clear from the first Text, that it needs not any more
to prove it, though the Scripture be abundant in it, 2 Thessalonians. 4.9.
as that 1 John 4.19, 20, 21. and John 15.12. So take in 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. the
Apostle makes it as it were a needless thing, to write to them their duty in
this, to love their brethren in Christ. For (says he) you your selves are
taught of God to love one (...) another, as if he had said, you know nothing of
God if you know not this duty; if you know your union with Christ, you will
know that that love which made you one with him, has made you so with every of
his members. So in that 1 John 2.10, 11. 1 John 2.10, 11.
the holy Ghost there speaks the same thing with the first Text, and makes
love to the brethren to be a discovering Beam of Christ the Lord of Light and
Glory in us, The Text is plain, He that loves not his brother, abides not in
the light, but is in darkness, and walks in darkness, not knowing whither be
goes, because he is without Christ the light of life, who is the light of that
soul he lives in; which soul loves Christ, and all that is like him. In all
these Scriptures you may observe how the heart of Christ, and all those that
wrote from the Dictates of the holy Ghost, is upon this very thing. God calls
himself the God of Love, and fills his children with his Divine nature by his
Spirit, and would have them bear his Name too, that the world may know, that
the Father of Love has begotten Children of Love in his own likeness.

I am afraid we all live much below this eminent discovery of our interest in
Christ, by our love to all Saints, in that latitude which Christ intends it;
therefore to stir up and engage our hearts more in this glorious and heavenly
duty and privilege, let us in the Spirit of Christ seriously weigh these
Reasons and Considerations following.

First, the Oneness of all Elect believers in the original love of God,
consider if we all have not one Fountain of life, and were not all in the
first Adam involved into one death of transgression? Was there any fallen soul
less guilty in the fall of the first Adam, then another? Or was there any that
God saw more worthiness in, then in another, to move him to choose such a
soul? Surely no: For then that Word of eternal Truth could not stand in
Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace are we saved, not of our selves, it is the gift of God.
Ephesians. 2.8.
Every saved soul is a child of free grace, and its salvation the gift of God:
in the fifth verse of that Chapter, Verre 5.
Even we who were dead in sins, has he quickened us together with Christ: there
is all in one state of death, and all in one state of life; and the original
of this life he brings in a parenthesis (by grace ye are saved) love is in God
the original of it, to all alike, and it never degenerates from this first
principle, till it comes through the muddy hearts of fallen creatures; and we
so much degenerate from God, and from love, Joh. 17.23^ latter part.
as we live below this love in the Original, John 17.23. latter part, our
Savior there prays that the world may know, that God loves Saints as he loves
him: And have loved them (says Christ) as thou have loved me; thus is Christ
and Saints in one original love. And if head and Member, then surely Member
and Member. All true Saints lie in this one womb, the original love of God:
Ephesians 4.4, 5, 6.
And thus all Saints are of one Body, one Calling, have one Lord, one God and
Father of all; the original love of God makes this Oneness in all the Saints,
and speaks very strongly this thing, That there should be a uniting of
affections amongst all Saints upon the interest of Saints.

Secondly, our oneness in union with Christ, the rock from whence we are all
hewn, whom God has chosen to manifest to us his eternal love, and to make us
capable of enjoying the fullness of that love: this union our Savior speaks
to in John 17.23. I in them and they in me, that they might be made perfect in
one, Consider Saints perfection lies in this union, surely their affections
should flow from this union. A Saints compleatnesse is in Christ, Coloss. 2.10.
Union with Christ has all the Arguments of love in it: For there is the
beauty, the fullness, and the compleatnesse of Christ upon such a soul. The
excellency of Christ seems to have but little beauty in such an eye or heart,
as cannot love upon the naked interest of a Saint. Ephesians. 2.5.
If Christ be enough to gain thy love, whole Christ is the interest of every
Saint, every believer is quickened together with Christ, who in all is for
eternal interest alike to all that the Father has given him. His blood equal
redemption, and satisfaction, his righteousness is as complete a robe to all
his members, as to any, where Christ is the Head every Member is complete in
him: Christ is Head to the whole elect believing Body, the Foot has as good an
interest as the Hand, or Eye. God is no respecter of persons, he chooses merely
of his own grace, and that grace fills every soul with the fullness of him that
is the fullness of the Godhead bodily. So that through that free, full grace,
every soul is complete in him; if this union engage not love, it can be no
spiritual object which will do it: for the fullness of the Godhead bodily is
in Christ, and Saints are one with Christ; every beam of the love and glory of
God, shines through Christ. Whence is it then, that union with Christ takes not
all the affections? Surely Christ bath but little love from such a soul, that
finds not this Argument enough to persuade him to love his brother, that is
one with him in Christ, and lives up to his union with Christ, bearing his
Image. Faith works not lower effects then flesh and blood does; refined
affections make stronger and purer motions then the highest piece of simple
Nature can do: Now flesh and blood will act thus high, I must love, he is my
brother, we had one womb to be conceived in; I must love, he is my child, he
bears my Image; surely faith works higher then this, spiritual affections
make stronger and purer motions upon union and relations, then carnal can do;
motion from affection made in the soul by a light of this interest, He is my
brother, one womb of love conceived us both, we are both builded upon one Rock
of Ages; this love out-beats the pulse of carnal affections, though it beats
very strong; love to God and Christ, is in the bottom of this motion, and
carries it strongly on, 1 John 4.20. If a man say, I love God, and hates his
brother, he is a liar: if there be love to God and Christ, there will be love
to every soul that is in communion with Christ.

Thirdly, the oneness of Saints in the engagement of God to all; namely, his
covenant of free grace, in which all his people have equal interest: it is
free from God, and so equally full to all, God freely ingages to be our God,
and that we shall be his people, and that he will freely forgive our iniquity,
and remember our sins no more; God makes this new covenant to all the new
creation, to the whole body of his elect in Christ, which as the holy Ghost
tells us in Ephesians. 2.10. That we are his workmanship ereated in Christ Jesus
unto good works. There is not any soul has any thing to plead for his
eternal life, but mere grace: and this is the free engagement of God to every
soul that he has given to Christ, this is the sure mercies of David; this
that better Covenant, it is made in God, and cannot be broken. And in all this
glorious interest all the Saints are one; there is not a beam of this glory
from God that takes in one Saint and shuts out another: The weakest believing
soul may as truly say, God is my God in his covenant of free grace, as the
strongest believer.

Fourthly consider, the oneness of that way which God and Christ has chosen
to manifest their love and their will to all Saints, namely, the holy Spirt,
John 14.17.26. Hete is a general promise to all Saints, that they shall be
taught all things, and this shall be by the holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth,
whom the Father will send in Christ's Name, and he shall dwell with them, and
shall be in them. What ever truth of God any Saint has learned, in truth, he
has received it from this Spirit of truth; Though God as a free agent gives to
his children as it pleases him; to one more light, to another less, but all
receive of this one Spirit; and this I take to be that one Baptism spoken of
in the 4. Ephesians. 4.5.
Ephefians 5. Jesus Christ administering himself, by this one Spirit, to all
his Children, by which they come baptized into Christ: into his death, and have
put on Christ, Romans 6.3, 4 Romans 8.14.
Romans 6.3, 4. And are led by the Spirit, Romans 8.14. For as many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the sous of God. To be led by the Spirit is the
interest and prerogative of every child of God.

This union runs through all the heirs of heaven, Gal. 5.22.25.
Gal. 5.22.25. Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
all and every of these in any, and in all the Saints is the fruits of this
Spirit, in which every child of God as a child of God walks; all these and
every branch of holiness is wrought by one and the same Spirit in every Saint;
So all gifts and all degrees of gifts flow from one and the same Spirit, 1 Cor.
12.4.
1 Cor. 12.4. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit, so Ephesians.
5.9. For the fruits of the Spirit are in all goodness, and righteousness, and
truth; what ever of these is in any Saint, and in all the Saints of God, it is
the fruits of this holy Spirit; this is that life and blood which runt in the
veins of all the Saints of God, from which all motion and acts of life flows:
Through Christ that strengthens me, says Paul, I can do all things; so must
every Saint say, it is Christ in the Spirit that makes all holy motion in the
soul. This union of the Spirit in Saints in an eternal union, though here
some have a greater degree of it then others; yet in heaven every Saint shall
be filled with the fulness of it; this Spirit is that Spirit which raised
Christ from the dead, that dwells in all the Saints, and shall quicken our
mortal bodies, as members of Christ our head, at that great day when he shall
come to judge the world; this makes a very close relation in all Saints one to
another, and speaks very loud for strong affections.

A fifth Consideration may be this; Phil. 4.4.
That Saints when they joy and glory properly as Saints, then they have all one
joy and glory in this life, namely, the Lord our righteousness; Let him that
glories glory in the Lord, Phil. 4.4. And he that rejoices in the Lord, and
makes him his joy, may rejoice always. This was Paul's spirit, he would glory
in nothing but in Christ, and him crucified. A Saint will acknowledge all his
springs to be in God, so that he has no spring of joy on glory but what flows
from God, which is the fountain of all, the beauty his eyes see: of all the
sweet his soul tastes, and of all the glory his soul makes after, or makes
mention of, God is all in all, and to all his people. Whom have I in Heaven?
but thee, says the Prophet, or whom on Earth, in comparison of thee? Proper
joy and glory in all the Saints has but one proper fountain and object, and
that is God himself: as all the joy and glory of Saints center in God, so
should all their love, and this will soon teach us to love one another.

Lastly, Consider, That Saints shall have all one glorious being to eternity,
John 17.24. Christ will manifest his love to all eternity to his people, he
will have them all as happy as himself. Then shall we know indeed the life of
our union with Christ, and with one another. Mothinkes the discovery of that
love which has made this union, should beget love in all those that are thus
united in the eternal love and glory of God, Colos. 3.4. Christ is the life
and the glory of all his people, and at his appearance they all oppeare in
glory, 1 These. 4.16, 17. This glorious being of the Saints, shall be to a
believer with the Lord; Oh how should this draw forth our love one to another,
that we shall ever be with the Lord of love! if Saints be one in all these, and
that these comprehend the whole of a Saint, then why should we not be one in
affection?

Possibly some may say, we are not all of one judgment,

That (I am verily assured is our own not Gods) is of the flesh, Through
Christ, says Paul, I can due all things; if we look upon one another in
Christ, then we shall find we can love because in Christ. I would ask this
question, Whether is the greatest argument of love; being children ^f one
Father, or being children of equal growth or stature? For I am persuaded this
will comprehend all the differences among the Saints, namely, our state and our
growth as child ren in our Fathers house; the branches in Christ live and grow
because in him: shall we be angry if God who is a free agent gives out more or
less of himself to one brethren then to our selves? Growth is as God
disponses of himself to us; What have you that you have not received, says
the Text? It was the fleshly argument of Joseph's brethren, not to love him
because they thought him dearer to their Father then themselves, and because
God would use and honor him above them. It is the sin and shame of Saints to
make this the rule of love to their brethren, that they are of one judgment,
at one pitch of light in the discoveries of God, and not because he is a
brother, and bears our Fathers image. If God intended to dispense alike to all
his Children, why then has he provided milk for babes, and stronger meat for
stronger Saints? And what is the meaning of God when he equires the strong to
bear with the weak, and to receive them, but not to doubtful disputations? If
a Saint makes oneness of judgment to be the rule of his love to his brother,
he must then make the cause of his dislike to proceed from God, because he
that is free in giving has not given equal light to all. Let us take heed in
this our quarrel we be not found figbters against God. He that makes his
judgment to be the foundation of his love to his brethren, I doubt he lays a
greater weight upon it then the foundation will bear. Saints knowledge in this
life admits of a mixture, we know but in part, and we see but in part, thou
see something of God that another sees not, and another sees something of God
which thou at present see not; and God beholds much of flesh and darkness in
all Saints. Now consider if this glimmering light, this knowing in part, and
this mixture of flesh and spirit, be foundation strong enough to lay the weight
of our love to Saints upon. Spiritual love is of the greatest weight that can
be, this love is God, for God is love, so that no foundation is strong enough
to bear the weight of this love but God himself, 2 Cor. 5.16.
2 Cor. 5.16. In the foregoing verse, Paul looks upon himself and all Saints
as dead and alive with Christ, and therefore he resolves in this 16. verse to
know all Saints as they are in Christ, to know no man after the flesh, no not
Christ himself; he makes God alone the object and the foundation of his love.
And if Saints now did resolve with Paul to know neither Christ nor Saints after
the flesh, I believe our forms and our apprehensions of the ways of God,
which have in the best of them so much mixture of fleshly darkness, would not
be made the foundation and the bounds of our love one to another. I know in
Scripture Language but of two seeds in the world, The seed of the Woman, and
the seed of the Serpent; Saints are all of one seed, though they may differ in
light; some more in the Spirit, and others more in the flesh, yet all have the
seed of eternal life in them, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12, 13. When the Apostle heard of
the contentions that were in the house of Cloe, saying, that some were of Paul,
some of Apollo, and some of Cephas, and some of Christ; his answer is this, Is
Christ divided? As if he had said, it is your fleshly apprehension that divides
you to Paul, Apollo, and Cephas: Did you judge in the Spirit, you would see
your selves to be one in Christ, for Christ is not divided; Christ and his
people are one; as Christ is one with God, so are his people one with him, Joh.
17.10.21.23. All mine are thine, says Christ to his Father and our Father; and
therefore prays for a Spiritof union to fall upon all Saints, as Saints. All
that are thine and mine; Christ's bowels earnes to all his members as members
one with himself and his Father; his heart is not satisfied till they be all
with him in glory: 24 verse, he does not say, Father I will that those which
thou have given me, that have the highest light be with me where I am to behold
my glory, and those of lower light to be kept under the beggarly rudiments of
the World; but his arms of love do incompasse all; that they all may be one,
and those which thou have given me, says Christ: As if Christ bad said, thou
art free in thy self and might choose whom thou please, but those which
thou have chosen, my heart is fired on them all, so that Imust have them all
with me in glory. Thou were free in choosing of them, and art still a free
agent, so that thou may give them light as it pleases thee, but they have my
heart; as they are thy gift, thou have given them me, and I have given my self
for them, and to this end I dyed for them, and live in them, that they all
might be one in me as I am one in thee. Christ's love flows from union in
himself, and not from those apprehensions in Saints, which are mixtures of
flesh and Spirit, he is like his Father, he will not quench smoking flax, or
break the bruised reed, he loves the least of his Fathers image where ever he
sees it. Christ's heart is in the midst of his body, he tenders a foot or a
hand as well as an eye, because it is a member of his body, 1 Cor. 12.13, 14,
15, 26, 27. And gives it us in charge, that as his body we should suffer and
rejoice with every member, which must relate to Saints in general, for says
the 27 verse, you are the body of Chrivt, and members in particular: Every
particular Saint is a member of Christ, and all Saints the body of Christ: to
be a member of the body, a Saint, this draws forth Christ's love: and by this
will it appear that we are Disciples, followers of Christ, if upon interest in
Christ we love one another. By this will all men know that you are my
Disciples, if you love Saints, because of my image, and not because of your
own.

Again, consider this; if that worldlings finding us contending with, and
hardly using of our brethren, fellow Saints that are below or above our light,
shall cruelly entreat us; will they not have a fair plea to God at the last
and great day, when God shall lay it to their charge, that they have persecuted
his Disciples; may they not answer, Lord we did not know them to be thy
Disciples; for thou have told us we shall know thine by loving one another:
but we found these contending among themselves: their unkindness to one
another did demonstrate them to be the children of the World, not heirs of thy
Kingdom, and walking like children of the flesh, and this world; we judged
that we might safely lay our iron rods upon them. If they should answer thus,
sure I am, this would be as good a reason for the worlds cruelty to us, as our
differing apprehensions of the mind of God, will be for our not loving one
another. We have two examples in the Old Testament why love and brethren
should go together. First, Abraham and Lot, let not us fall out, for we are
brethren.

Secondly, Joseph to his brethren in their journey; Fall not out by the way,
for you are brethren. To be children of one Father is an argument of love;
Saints are all in their way to Heaven, and Christ is their way, the way and the
end are both arguments of love. The whole current of the Gospel runs this way,
that which invloves all in one is Christ's command, Love one another as I have
loved you. Christ loved us to give us light and life: so that light could not
be the cause of his love, no more should it be the cause of our love; for we
should love as Christ does, from union with God; Thine they were, and thou
gave them me, that is enough to Christ, if an interest in God, he loves
them. God calls himself the God of love, and Christ is the manifest testimony
of Gods love; now the great testimony that Saints give to the world of their
being in God and Christ, is the life of love to God, and all that bear his
Image, even the meanest of his Disciples. None can love spiritually and truly,
but those that live spiritually and truly in God; for God is love in the
fountain, and what ever is love in the streams, it is the flowings forth of
God into such a soul. And the true reason of our little love to Saints, as
Saints, is this, our living so much in the flesh, and so little in the Spirit:
so much in a form of godliness, and so little in the power of godliness,
laying so much weight upon things that perish, and so little upon the rock of
ages: and surely when God by the fire of his Spirit shall burn up and consume
our fleshly principles, then will the pantings of our souls be pure, like the
Spouse in the Canticles. Tell me (says she) where is he whom my soul
loves: and this he was Christ. So will our souls say, when they seek an
object for their loves, tell me where Christ is: And if we find Christ in such
a soul that is not at our pitch of light, and in matter of form bears not
our image; yet I have found Christ here, and it is he whom my soul loves: so
that now my love must run forth to Christ; In this soul is an object so
drawing, that all fetters are shaken off, and all bolts loosed, so that the
soul of this Saint runs forth to Christ, and every soul in whom Christ lives;
as it is said in another case, the love of Christ constrains; This soul can
imprison his love no longer, the glorious image of Christ has so overcome it,
that it can now no longer argue upon forms, but give it self up to the power
of God that now lives in it by the Spirit. Let this shame us who profess our
selves Saints, in all our frowardness one to another; we can see a moate in
the worlds eye, and not a beam in our own. If the world like it self be
froward to us, we can be soon sensible, and complain of it, when at the same
time, we altogether unlike Saints, are froward, and become thorns in the
sides of our brethren, and can sooner say it is impossible to be otherwise, then
complain of our base hearts. And I may justly fear, that many a soul,
which but few years since would creep into corners with other Saints, to
complain to God of the injustice and unkindnesse of the world to them; yet now
their feet have been out of the stocks, are become the first that lift up
their band against their brethren. I know no cause of it but this, in
afflictions they looked for God in one another, and then love lived in them:
but in prosperity men look for self, and form, and that not being found,
love grows cold. I shall not much question that object to be a stranger to
God, which makes my soul a stranger to love. And truly this very thing has
put a veil upon the glory of all the forms that I have seen uner the Sun;
persecution is such a forreigner to heaven, that I may safely say, what ever
brings it into a person, or a Nation, never came from God: and it will beget a
pale countenance at the day of death, when conscience shall witness that
Saints have done that to Saints, which they judged unjust from the world to
them. If God by his Spirie set this home upon our hearts, it will make us
willing to take shame to our selves, and to give glory to God, and stand
admiring that God should not suffer the world to devour us, when we have been
so ready, and so thirsty to devour one another. Truly I am afraid that there
is a discontented spirit in some, that God has not suffered us to devour one
another. It is a very bad spirit that can be angry at the kindness of God: It
is well for us that Gods ways are not like ours, nor his thoughts like ours:
that his ways should be ways of love to us, when our ways are not love to
him nor his: and that he should have thoughts of kindness toward us, when we
have hard thoughts of his kindnesss, and are ready to call our deliverances our
troubles. It is no kindness but the kindness of God that can save a people
against their will: but this has been Gods way to us, oh that it might
kindly melt our hearts, and form us into his own image, to be love as God is
love, to love God, and all that bear his image, that his kindness might eat
up all our frowardness, and his sweet overcome all our bitter, then shall we
appear his Disciples by our love to one another.

Secondly, to eye all those things wherein we are one, and see if they do not
justly challenge love from us, we are all begotten of one love, all hewed from
one rock, the rock of Ages, all under one Covenant of free grace, all baptized
with one and the same Spirit, and have all one joy and glory in this life, and
to eternity. Now what but flesh and darkness can make such rending, and
willing to rend and devour one another; we see not our proper interest to be
our Fathers love, and darkness in this makes us to fall out by the way home.
The more light we have in God, the more love it begets to God and our brethren.
In the froward fits of our flesh we complain of new lights, as if that were
the cause, when the true cause is our old darkness. That which is borne of
the flesh is flesh, but darkness cannot discern what is borne of the Spirit;
it is only the things of God, or more properly, God in every thing, which can
engage the soul to love. Now the natural man (says the Text) he discerns not
the things of God, and gives the reason of it, because they are spiritually
discerned. God is never seen but in his own light, and when we have
spiritual eyes to discern him, we shall see our interest in him, and love one
another better.

Thirdly, Let our petitions at the throne of grace be for more sensible
enjoyment of our Fathers presence; though our God be always present, and
knows the secrets of our hearts; yet many times we have not eyes to see him;
for surely were we sensible of our Fathers presence, we durst not fall out with
our brethren as we do, whence is it that Saints miscall one another, and then
throw dirt in the faces one of another, and at last scratch till the blood
comes? Is it not from hence, that we discern not the presence of God our
Father. Were we more sensible of the presence of God, we should as Saints see
so much of our relation in God, that our affections would be swallowed up in
God, and in one another; surely if God be lovely to us, his Image will be so
too: and when we see him, and one another in him, then will our affections go
kindly out in the Spirit of God one to another. If we cannot love when we see
the least of Gods image in a Saint, it is much to be doubted we love our own
image better then Gods, 1 John 5.1. And every one that loves him that begot, 1 John 5, 1.
loves him also that is begotten of him. God and Christ is the true object of
a Saints love; it is a cold and frozen love that does not melt and yield, when
God and Christ appears.

Fourthly, Let us study God and the power of godliness more. How full has
Press and Pulpit, and all conference been in contending about Forms, and in
them (I very much doubt) Selfe-interest has been contended for. Now look back
and read the fruits of these labors, has it not been the cooling of
spiritual love, the quanching of those flames among Saints, and the blowing up
of those flames of zeal without knowledge, which has almost consumed the
moisture and vigor both of Christianity and Humanity. If men's apprehensions
differ in a Form, though there be much of God in the man, that is not
discerned, or not esteemed; nay very natural relations upon this account come
to be forgotten. O the hideous effects of these fleshly ways! which destroys
all that is good of outward and inward man.

O that the streams of our contentions might be turned, and our strivings to
exceed, may be built upon a better foundation, then a bare form of godliness,
even upon the power of godliness, let us strive to exceed in holiness and
humility, who shall be most like to our head, and be made most conformable to
the death of Christ. A fine piece of Nature may talk up much of Christ, and
contend much for Gospel-formes, but it is only the workings of the Spirit, by
which a soul does live up much of Christ. Circumcision or uncircumcision it
avails nothing, but the new creature, and it is spiritual worship that God
requires, John 4.24.
John 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and truth. And in Romans Romans 8.14.
8.14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.
This Spirit discovers the mind of God to his people in every form, he would
have them to receive, but it also carries the soul through and above every
form, to live upon God himself, Gal. 5.22, 23.
and in the power of godliness, Gal. 5.22.23. But the fruit of the Spirit is
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness goodness, faith, meeknes,
temperance, and so forth. And in the 25 verse, If you live in the Spirit, also
walk in the Spirit. It is not a bare talking either of Form or Spirit, but a
living up to God in the Spirit, the fruits of which is love, and so forth;
ambition to exceed in these fruits of the Spirit, is that which God will own
and crown; it is safe and sweet diving into these deepes, these be heights,
and breadths, and depths, and lengths indeed, but God is to be found in them
all, so that there is no fear of miscarying: but empty forms without God
become our ruin. I may truly say with the Prophet, that we give our money for
that which is not bread, when we spend the zeal of our spirits in contending
for forms of godliness. I shall ever account best of that which leaves most
of God, and least of self behind it. And truly my experience tells me, that
when my thoughts and affections have traveled most through this pleasant path
of God in the Spirit, and the power of godliness; this has been the effect of
it, God has in a good measure dispossessed the old man in me, and given
possession to the new man the Lord Jesus. Now this experience begets this
advice, that our hearts and affections should be more pitched upon the power of
godliness, and doubtless we shall find that power in it, as to engage our
affections one to another, by which the world will know us to be Christ's
Disciples.

And lastly, this may comfort us when we consider those that hate us purely for
godlinesse-sake; look upon them under this consideration, they are not Christ's
Disciples, nor can they in such a work be owned or helped by him. They may
boast of their horsemen and Chariots, but all their strength is weakness,
for they engage without God; nay they engage against God, and that makes them
lighter then vanity: and Saints in their sufferings are followers of Christ,
and contend in his might. God is his peoples strength, and their portion for
ever; Let us love our brethren then, and not fear our enemies. Love to God and
Saints, and suffering for the spirituality and the power of godliness, are two
undeniable witnesses that we are Disciples and followers of Christ.

CHAP. II. What Christ has born for Saints, they shall never bear themselves.
Gal. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 28, 29. For as many as are of the works of the law are
under the curse; for it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in
all things which are written in the book of the law to do them.

But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident,
for the just shall live by faith.

And the law is not of faith,

Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, for it is written, cursed
is every one that hangs on a tree.

There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free,

And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
promise.


THe general scope of the Apostle in these verses, The scope.
I humbly conceive to be this, namely to empty the creature of all hopes, or
possibility ever to attain a happy and blessed condition in it self out of
Christ; in which work he strips the soul of all external privileges and
dutie^ in point of Justification, and then makes Jesus Christ to be all in all
to every redeemed soul.

The former part of this tenth verse is a positive conclusion, that whoever is
under the works of the law for life, is also under the curse of the law for
death; that is, he which chooses to be approved and justified in the fight of
God from the works of his own hands and heart, The sense.
must also be condemned before God in the failings and imperfections of those
works.

The latter part of this verse is a full proof to the position laid down in
the former part of it. If all things in the book of the Law be not done and
fulfilled, then the curse of the Law attends, and seizes upon every such soul
as would live by the works of the Law, Deutr. 27.26.
Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this law to do
them. That soul which would fetch life from the works of the law, must
perform all, or he loses all he has done, and his eternal soul with his
dying duties. The observations which I have received from hence is this,

That God has not made a separation of the works of the law from the curse of
the law, And if God has not, man cannot; this is that state of bondage spoken
of in Gal. Gal. 4.9.23.30, 31.
4.9.23.30, 31. Those are children of the free woman whom Christ has made
free. (If the Son have made you free, you are free indeed.) And those are
children of the bondwoman that are obliged to any thing that is holy in their
own strength without Christ. There is no soul free from these bonds but those
which are bound up in the arms and cords of Christ's love: and this is the
redemption which Christ made of his elect body, when he was in the flesh made
under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, to the adoption of
Sons, Gal. 4.4, 5. Christ was made under the curse of the law in the 13.
verse of Gal. 3. The curse and the work of the law was not separated to Christ
when he came to satisfy justice, no more is it to any soul.

In the 11. verse is a second position of the Apostle, which is also a
confirmation of the former. The position is this, That no man is justified by
the law in the sight of God; the demonstration of this truth follows in the
end of the same verse, and in the 12. verse, which shows,

First, that God never intended life by the law, Gal. 3.21. If there had been a
law which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the
law; this is plain, it is not Gods meaning, that righteousness should be by
the law, because he has not given such a law out of Christ, which is able to
give life, Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace ye are saved through faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. All salvation is of grace
wholly out of our selves. God had another end in giving the law, then that the
souls of his people should work life from it: and this end is fuller of glory
to his own grace, and of safety to our eternal souls; namely that sin might
become exceeding sinful, and grace to be exceeding riches of grace. The
Apostle tells us he had not known sin but by the law, and had there been no
law, there had been no transgression. If no transgression had been, nor any
sin known, then the glory of free grace had not been lifted up as now it is.
If the law had not discovered sin, the soul had never known the want, nor
the worth of a crucified Jesus, who is the great gift of the free grace of God,
and a perfect eternal Redeemer of a poor lost soul.

Secondly, As God never intended life to fallen man by the works of the law,
Levit. 18.5. Genesis 2.10.
so man can never gain life by the works of the law, Levit. 18.5. Genesis 2.10.
There must be a perfect doing of all the statutes and judgments of the Lord,
by every soul that means to live in them, and have life from them. It is not
a tittle less then keeping the whole law which can advantage any soul that
seeks life from it: So as that soul which in it self cannot keep the whole
law, shall never gain life by the works of the law, Gal. 2.16. Gal. 2.16.
The Apostle there speaks positively twice, that no man is justified by the
works of the law: and that by the works of the law no man shall be justified;
This is such a standing truth, that nothing which either is, or can be done
shall contradict it.

The second observation is this, That the law of works condemns every soul in
the first Adam, but justifies no soul. The law speaks only thus: do and live,
which to fallen man is nothing but the language of death, Romans 7.8, 9. A
righteous law to an unrighteous soul gives life to the sin, but death to the
soul. Observe the Text; When the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed.
By the command sin became exceeding sinful. A soul fallen from God can in
it self make no other use of the knowledge of Gods righteous law, but to sin
against it; consult the Text in this case. But sin taking occasion by the
commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscense. As if he had said,
When once God discovered his holy law, that sinful nature, and unholinesse
that is in me, made use of it by way of opposition, to run into all manner of
concupiscence; though the law of creation justifies a holy Creator, yet it
condemns a fallen unholy creature. By the works of the law shall no man be
justified in his sight: but that soul which lives upon them shall be accursed
and condemned in the want of one tittle; there lies a curse, a condemnation in
the law to fallen man, but no possibility of being justified by it in the sight
of a holy just God.

But now that we may not be as souls without hope, though he strips us here of
all our own righteousness, and leaves us by nature under the curse of the
law; yet in the next verse he shows us a perfect redemption from the curse of
the law by Christ, who was made under the law to bear the curse, and to
fulfill the law for us. And here I shall be a little more large then in what
has gone before; for I have found by experience, that the more clear
knowledge a soul has in this point, the more is the free grace of God with
the comfort and safety of a poor soul advanced. In this 13. verse the Apostle
lays down a third position; namely,

That every elect soul is redeemed from the curse of the law, through or by
Christ's being made a curse for us, Deuteronomy. 21.23. The Text speaks plainly thus,
he that is hanged is accursed; it is a parallel place with the end of this 13.
verse; Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. Thus Christ was made a
curse; now that Christ was thus made a curse for us, for his elect body which
was under the law, Gal. 4.4, 5.
look into that Gal. 4.4, 5. where the Text says, That when the fullness of
time was come, God sent his Son made of a woman, made under the law, to
redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of
sons. None can doubt but that Christ is here meant by the Son of God: and
then the Text speaks plainly, that God in the fullness of his own time sent
Christ in the flesh, made under the law, to redeem his elect body, that were
under the works, and the curse of the law, and to bring them to receive the
adoption of sons: and in this work Christ was made a curse for us.

The first observation from hence is this: That whatever Christ has borne for
a believer, that a believer is fully redeemed from.

It is the Apostles own argument in this place; for says he, Christ being
made a curse for us, we are thereby redeemed from the curse. And the same
Apostle in Romans 8.32, 33, 34. Romans 8.32, 33, 34.
has the same Argument. If God delivered Christ up to death to dye for us,
then we are delivered: and Christ having dyed for us, who shall lay any thing
to our charge: It is God that justifies, and Christ that dyed. Christ had not
dyed, but that God might justify. Christ had not been made a curse for us, but
that God in justice might acquit us from the curse. So in the two first verses
of Romans 8. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. And the law of
the spirit of life in Christ makes the soul free from the law of sin and
death: And in John 8.36. Joh. 8.36.
If the Son therefore shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. This is
our Saviors answer to those Jews which thought themselves not to be under
bondage, because they were Abraham's seed in the flesh; our Savior tells them
this external interest did not make them freemen; For says he,
notwithstanding this, you are under sin: Verse. 34. Who ever commits sin is
the servant of sin, and your fleshly interest in Abraham does not acquit you
from the bonds and servitude of sin, but if the Son have made you free,
then are you free indeed. As if Christ had said, Abraham could not bear your
sins, and the wrath of God due to them for you, and therefore you are in
bondage still: but what the Son bears, he makes them perfectly free from, for
whom he bears it. Christ came to save those that were lost: And he tells us
when he gave up the ghost upon the Cross, that the work was finished. And in
John 17.4. I have glorified thee on earth, Joh. 17.4.
I have finished the work thou gave me to do. Christ tells his Father that
he had lost no glory in sending him upon the work of Redemption; for says he,
I have finished that work thou gave me to do; which was, to work out a
perfect Redemption for his people, Isa. 61.1. To give liberty to the captive,
and to open the prison doors. Isa. 61.1.
If this be a truth, as doubtless it is, that whatever Christ has borne for
a believer, that a believer is fully redeemed from; then it will be worthy a
Saints best and serious consideration in searching the Scriptures, and in the
Spirit giving ear to hear, and heart to consider, what they say Christ has
borne for us.

First, I find by that 2 Cor. 5.21. that Christ has born sin for us. For he
has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. The text speaks in the abstract, He was made
sin for us.

There cannot be a fuller expression; there is the act, God making Christ to be
sin for us, or taking all sin off from us, and laying it upon him, as was
typified under the law in the Scapegoate, which went into the Land of
Forgetfulness. Now the issue and effect of this act follows in the Text,
That we might be made the righteousness of God in him. This expression is as
full as the former, the holy Ghost expresses the sinner for whom Christ was
made sin, to be as fully acquitted from sin as Christ is made sin. Mark
the words: made the righteousness of God in him so perfectly righteous, that
God ownes the soul as one with himself, righteous as being one with Christ,
who is the righteousness of God.

Now the soul that is thus righteous must needs be acquitted from all finne;
the righteousness of God, and the condemnation for sin is as light and
darkness, which cannot be together in one soul. If Christ once come into a
soul, and tells that soul by his Spirit, that he has borne all its sins, and
so makes the soul to believe in the free grace of God, and to rest upon Christ
as his righteousness, that soul is as fully in the fight of God acquitted
from sin, as Christ was by God made sin for it. This soul stands before God
complete in Christ, not having spot nor wrinckle in it: All that can be said,
is said in this, That soul for whom Christ was made sin, is thereby made the
righteousness of God in him: So that Christ having borne the sin, the soul
never more bears that in his own person before God, but does always stand
both before the throne of justice, and the throne of grace, as fully clothed
with Christ his righteousness, as Christ upon the Cross was with his sin,
Isa. 53.6. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. Iniquity is
one with sin here; now then read this truth with an eye and heart of faith,
that what Christ has borne for us, we are fully delivered from, and then will
the glory of free grace be lifted up, and our souls made to rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory in believing.

Secondly, Christ has fulfilled the Law, and borne the curse of it for his
people, Gal. 4.4, 5. Christ was made under the law to redeem his people from
all that in the law which was weight and burden, from the curse of the law,
Gal. 3.13. From the reigning and condemning power of it, he has satisfied, and
keeps the law fully for us. In Gal. 4.5, 6. there Christ has redeemed us to
the liberty of sons: the spirit of adoption reigning in our consciences, and
conversations above the letter of the law: so that in Romans 8.2, 3, 4. There the
Apostle tells us, That by virtue of the law of the spirit of life in his union
with Christ Jesus, he had freedom from the law of sin and death; That law of
commandment by which sin revived, and the soul dyed, he was delivered from
by the spirit of life in Christ Jesus. For says he, what the law could not
enable the soul to do because of the weakness of the flesh, that did God by
sending his Son in the flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh;
that is, condemned our sins, and satisfied his law and justice for them all
in the death of Christ: So that now the righteousness of the law is fulfilled
by Christ for us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. The law
was fulfilled, and had its accomplishment in Christ: that is, the law in the
letter: and the soul now through union with Christ is taken up to live in the
law of the spirit of life; that is, the spirit of God lives in the soul, and
is a law, and a life to it, not only teaching, but leading the soul into all
truth; it is the law of the spirit, and so the law of life; it is the law of
love, and so the law of life. Nay it is God himself displaying his love, and
reigning by his Spirit in the souls and consciences of his people, and so it is
the law of the spirit of life: and all this to the souls of his people in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 5.18. But if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the
law. A soul which lives not, and acts not upon Christ in the Spirit (so far
as as he does not) he is under the law of sin and death in all he does: but
it is a certain deliverance from the law of the flesh in our conversations,
and the law of the letter in our consciences, is to be led by the spirit of
Christ, and to walk in that spirit, Ephesians. 5.8, 9. For ye were sometimes
darkness, Ephesians. 5.8, 9.
but now are ye light in the Lord, walk as children of the light. For the
fruits of the Spirit is in all goodness, etc. They were never without the
letter; yet sometimes dark says the Text, but the light of the Lord, in which
the redeemed of Christ should walk is the light of the Spirit. Now we have all
this freedom, because the Son has made us free, by bearing those burdens for
us: and what Christ has borne for a believer, that a believer is fully
redeemed from.

Thirdly, Christ has borne the punishment due to sin for us; See this in
Isa. Isa. 35, 4, 5.8.10, 11.
35.4, 5.8.10, 11. Observe the Text. Surely he borne our griefs, and carried
our sorrows. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed; For the transgressions of my people was he smitten. It pleased the
Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief, to make his soul an offering for
sin, and he shall see of the travel of his soul, and be satisfied.

I know not how fuller expressions should be made to set out this thing; That
Christ has borne the punishment due to sin for the believer, as fully as he
has the sins themselves.

With his stripes we are healed, that is, the punishment of our sins which he
did bear for us: so that as the wrath of God due to sin, we shall never
bear them again; for what Christ has borne for us, he has delivered us from
the bearing of it in our own persons, otherwise Christ dyed in vain: and this
Text is not made good if we be not healed by his stripes. Now if the punishment
be not taken from the believer, as well as the sin, how is the wounds of that
soul healed by the stripes that Christ bore for it. And if any shall say, God
made Christ to bear the believers sins, but the believer must bear the
punishment due to those sins, though Christ was wounded, bruised, and chastised
for them: Such an affirmation will bear very hard upon the justice of God, and
question that truth of our Savior upon the cross, that he had finished the
work of redemption, part of which is the punishment as well as the sin.

I verily believe when Christ bore the curse of the law, he did bear the
punishment due to all the sins of all his people: and though I do believe
that God chastises every child whom he loves, yet those chastnings are the
fruits of his love, and not of his wrath; Christ has borne all that in being
made a curse for us.

Lastly, Christ has borne death for us as it is the wages of sin, 1 Cor.
15.53. to the end. By which means death is swallowed up of victory. The sting
of death which is sin, and the strength of sin which is the law, have lost
themselves and their strength when they entered into Christ: so that now a
believer can bless God, that through Christ he has victory over death, sin,
hell, law, and grave: and why so? Why, because Christ has gone through, he
has borne and overcome all these for us: and we are more then conquerours
through Christ that strengthens us. We are more, because none of these can
conquer Christ: but he has to all eternity overcome them for us. This sting of
death is swallowed up of victory; for it is buried in the wounds of Christ: but
Christ is risen, and is at the right hand of God, and because he lives, we live
also, John 14.19. Joh. 14.19.


The second observation is this. Whatever the free grace of God has taken off
from his Elect, and laid upon Jesus Christ; that his divine justice neither can
nor will at any time to all eternity lay upon the elect soul again. This is
justice suitable to his covenant of grace, in the 31. of Jer. 34. For I will
forgive their iniquities, Jer. 31.34.
and remember their sins no more.

The faithful God engages himself to remember his peoples sins no more: and
to make it good, he lays them upon Christ, which satisfies his justice, and
carries our sins into the land of Forgetfulness. Do but observe how Gods
justice as well as his mercy is engaged to make good this his own covenant of
grace; For the law of creation (that was do, and live) self could not do,
therefore self must dye. Now surely the law of grace is not stricter then the
law of creation: so that Christ having fulfilled the whole law, and performed
every tittle of his Fathers will for us, the justice of God is engaged to
acquit Christ, who has paid the utmost farthing, and in him to acquit us for
whom he has made this full satisfaction. As it was free grace in God to make
us one with Christ, so it is complete justice that we live in Christ who has
dyed for us: And what ever Christ as the gift of free grace has borne for us,
God in justice will never lay upon his elect in Christ again. Whoever will deny
this, must deny God to be just, and his covenant of less value then the
covenant of a faithful man; his grace neither free nor full grace: Christ not
a complete Savior, and then his death of no effect.

Now look back upon this truth, and you shall behold sin; the curse of the
law, punishment due to sin from the law of creation, and death with its sting
in it, all borne by Christ for his elect body, so that they shall never bear
any of them more in their own persons, then glory in the free grace of God,
and the full redemption of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Observe here the exceeding love that Christ shows to those poor
souls which his Father has given him; That he would take upon himself the
curse of the law, the punishment of sin due to fallen man, and all this to
redeem them which his Father had given him, though they lay under sin, law,
punishment, and death. It had been great love and condiscention in Christ,
being God, only to have taken our nature, though he had never taken any thing
else. But then what love is this, to take our sins, and all that followed sin
upon him? He has borne that weight for us, which would have pressed us to
hell if we had lain under it in our own strength. Romans 5.8.
These are heighths, and breadths, and depths, and lengths of love, Romans 5.8.
This commends love indeed, to choose to bear all evil to deliver the sinner
from it, and by the same act to involve the sinner into all good.

Fourthly, Observe from hence, the glorious condition of a soul in union with
Christ; he is taken up into the glory of God, the bosom of his love, he lives
because Christ lives: and (as Christ) lives above sin, above a condemning,
reigning law, above the punishment of sin, and above death as it is the wages
of sin, above all that is below God. Our fellowship (says the Text) is with
the Father and the Son: and these things we write unto you that your joy may
be full. It is a life in the spirit above the flesh, a feasting upon the fat
things in Gods house, and a resting upon the full love in Gods heart, by which
a Saint is brought with David, Psalm. 57.7.
to profess his heart is fixed; His heart is fixed, and he will sing and give
praise, Psalm 57.7.

The 28. and 29. verses of Gal. 3. runs thus. There is neither Jew nor Greek,
neither bond nor free, neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ
Jesus.

And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
promise.

Here first the Apostle strips them of their National privileges and their
outward endowmens, as he had done before of their legal performances; Ephesians.
2.3.
the same Apostle in Ephesians. 2.3. puts all flesh by nature under one and the
same lost condition. Among whom also we all had our conversations in times
past, and by nature were the children of wrath as well as others, Gal. 3.22.
But the Scripture has concluded all under sin. In these generals we find
no exception for national privileges, or outward endowments: but the 4. and
5. verses of that 2 Ephesians. tells us, that God who is rich in mercy magnified his
great love to us when we were dead in sins, and quickened us together with
Christ: so that it is by grace that we are saved. And that Text in Gal. 3.22.
shows the reason why all is concluded under sin, namely that the promise of
faith in Christ Jesus might be given to them that believed. So that if
salvation be the purchase, nothing of self shall be the price; or if salvation
be the end, nothing but Christ shall be the way. Christ is that rock of Ages
which can bear, and bear up the weight of souls to all eternity.

Secondly, as he empties the soul of all hopes of good in it self, so he
makes Christ to he all good to the soul. If ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abram's seed, and heirs according to the promise, 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are
ye in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.30.
who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. This Text I take to be full to this purpose, the scope and tendency
of it is to hold out Christ to be all to a Believer, as he is made so of God:
So in 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All things are ours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
as we are Christ's. Interest in Christ, is interest in all God; God does not
strip his children naked that they might remain so: but he strips us of our
own righteousness, to cloth us with the perfect robe of Christ's
righteousness; He empties us of our own wisdom, to fill us with Christ our
wisdom.

Though God makes it impossible for us to redeem our selves from his wrath;
yet he freely gives us Christ who is so full a Redeemer, that nothing can be
laid to the charge of those for whom he has dyed, Romans 8.1.33, 34. And though
we are fallen from God, by nature it is impossible for us either to quicken or
maintain the least truth of grace in our own souls. Yet God having made
Christ our sanctification, sin shall not reign in our mortal bodies,
because we are not under the law, but under grace. And whoever is in him, they
are thereby made new creatures; he so waters with his own Spirit, and shines
with his own love, that he makes every branch in him to bring forth fruit.
Christ is a living interest: and though he find souls dead by nature, yet he
makes them alive by grace, so that they are in him as souls alive. From these
observations I shall set down three Gospeltruths as I humbly conceive, which
Christ has made known to my soul.

The first is this. That man out of Christ, considered under what notion you
will, is the most miserable, emptiest, undone piece of the whole creation.

You will grant me this truth when you look on fallen man in this
consideration which the Scripture holds forth, in Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Being led by
Satan to do all his will, and answer all the lusts of the flesh. But then
take him under the most glorious performances of the works of the law, under
the highest external privileges in these days of the Gospel; call them
Church-priviledget, or what you will; or in the fullest enjoyments of the
creatures, till it say, soul take thine ease, as the fool in the Gospel. If
all these, or what ever else can be thought on should meet in one man, yet at
this very instant of time, the absence of Christ writes death upon this soul
with all it has or does. Christ is the life of every soul that truly lives;
it is two deaths in one for a dead soul to enjoy any thing without Christ: It
is nothing more then a dead man wrapped up in his winding-sheete, both dead
alike, so that neither has life, much less can give life each to other; the
whole creation is dead till Christ give it life. Now the more created things we
find without Christ, the more deaths are centered in a soul dead before,
Ephesians. 2.1. This death remains upon the whole creation till Christ quicken it.
When Christ who is our life shall appear, then (and not till then) can any
soul appear in glory.

The second truth is this. That a man united to Jesus Christ, is united to the
love of God, the redemption, the righteousness, purity, and the glory of
Christ, in truth to all that is communicable in God and Christ.

That which has gone before does prove this truth: but I shall offer some more
Texts of Scripture, 1 John 2.1. My little children these things I write unto
you that you sin not. And if any man sin we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Union with Christ makes Christ to plead his
own righteousness for the sinner. The Saint through weakness may fall into
sin, but sin cannot separate from the love of God; for Christ lives for ever to
make intercession, and he as our Advocate pleads his righteousness to be ours,
John 17.10.21, 22, 23. In this Scripture Christ bears witness to a Saints
union with God and himself; All mine are thine, and thine are mine, in the
10th verse: and then in the following verses we see what use he makes of this
union, namely to pray his Father that all his might be made perfect in his
glory, and to manifest to the world that he loves those in union with Christ as
he does Christ himself: so that 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is all to a Saint, and
all Christ's, is a Saints.

In this Text is union with the righteousness, purity, and redemption of
Christ, Colos. 2.10. The text speaks plainly, after the Apostle had told us the
fullness of Christ, he tells us we are complete in him, Romans 8.24. Heirs of
God, and joynt-heires with Christ. God is a Saints inheritance, as the Saint is
united to Christ. If God be our portion, we are Christ's fellow-heirs, who is
the firstborn of many brethren. The end of Gods uniting a soul to Christ is,
that he might always behold that soul in Christ, so as to be ever well
pleased with it, and to delight in it, 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be
sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him. God has made Christ the foundation of his eternal love; when he
beholds the travel of his soul he is well pleased, which he does in every
soul he has united to him.

The third Gospel Truth is this, That a Saint does then only truly and properly
enjoy his life when be lives by faith upon God and Christ in the Spirit.

It is not enough to know the rule of the law in the letter, and some of the
work of the law in our lives to know all the forms of Gods worship under the
law and Gospel; To know and to be under all these is nothing, when ignorant of
the knowledge of God through Christ in the Spirit.

Knowledge in all the former subtracted from the latter, is but to know that
we are under the chains and the power of darkness. Our life consists neither
in circumcision or uncircumcision, but in the new creature, Christ living in
us, and we in Christ, The life that we now live, it is by the faith of the Son
of God; by faith feasting and satisfying our souls upon the love of God in
Christ, the Spirit that teaches and leads the soul into all truth, even the
God of truth, and there the Spirit teaches the soul to read, God to be a God
of love, and so to enjoy him, and live in him through Christ, as a God of
grace, and a faithful God that will keep Covenant with his people, and not
impute sin to that soul for whom Christ has dyed. Our life shall be for
ever with God and in God, enjoying nothing but God, and all of God in heaven;
this is truly our life now as we are one with Christ, only the clouds of
mortality darkens it: and so far as we live upon God through Christ in the
Spirit, so far, and no farther do we truly enjoy life in any condition: and
what we strive for here below, is not our life, nor truly worth our contending
for; all the weary pursutes of the heart of man which center not in Christ,
must wither before they come to their journeyes end, for they have no life to
carry them through. A child of God can find no rest, but the bosom of his
Father, and no way to that rest, but Christ the great gift of his Fathers love:
so that God and Christ is both the way and the end of a Saints rest; that is,
enjoying fullness of bliss in God, who is all in all to all his people. Gospel
truths should be teaching to Gospel-Saints, and these truths accompanied with
the spirit of truth may first teach and inform all Saints where our life and
interest lies, namely in God and Christ; God opening the bosom of his love,
and giving us Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ giving out his blood, his life, and
all that God requires to satisfy justice, and to make a complete redemption,
Christ putting on our flesh, and taking upon him the curse due to us, and all
to this end, to be Mediator, to stand between a displeased God, and a poor
soul, to become sin for us, that we might become righteousness in him.

Our life lies neither in the works of the Law, nor the forms of the Gospel,
but in that love which gave Christ to be made under the Law, to fulfill the Law
for us: and in that Jesus which is the Lord, and the life of the Gospel; the
Gospel is glad tidings, which is Christ crucified. The highest form is but a
dark representation, a cloud without light if Christ which is the light of
life be not in it. It Is God in Christ that is our life. Let us not turn again
to the beggarly rudiments under which we shall be in bondage: but in the Lord
of glory to live only upon God in Christ, who is the true light and life of
Saints; to seek life in any thing else, is to seek the living amongst the
dead.

Again, These Gospel Truths should teach and exhort Gospel-Saints to believe in
God; he is a God of grace, and he is a faithful God, he makes good his
covenant of grace, that our sins and iniquities he will remember no more, to
charge them upon the believer, for he has fully charged them upon Christ, and
has satisfied his justice to the full in Christ. And hence it is, that by way
of comfort our Savior in John 14.1. bids us to believe in God through him. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me; that is, look upon the covenant of God,
and all the promises of God made good in me; believe, that what my Father has
given me to do I have finished it, all the work of your redemption, and what
ever God has laid upon me, shall never more be laid upon you, though it made
me sweat drops of blood, and at last give up the Ghost, yet I have finished the
work, I conquered by yielding, and overcame by dying, and I am risen again to
bear witness of my victory over sin, death, hell, law, and grave for you,
and thus I would have you to believe in me and in God, who gave me out of his
bosom of love to be all this to you. Distrust of these trutths, is to put a
question upon the faithfulness of God, and the fullness of Christ. God
promises to pardon freely, Christ undertakes to satisfy fully; now a doubt of
either is unworthy in him that is an heir of both.

In the next place me-thinkes this calls for much love from Saints to God and
Christ. Oh how should we love God that has freely given us Christ, and with
him all things. The great God of heaven and earth had no greater gift then
Christ to give, and him he has freely given us, and in Christ himself, his
Spirit, his Kingdom, and his glory too.

Who would not love a heart so full of love as Gods heart is? How can we choose
but love a hand so full of love as Gods hand is? What ever may justly command
or invite love, it is in the heart and hand of God, there are mercies free and
full in God; at his right hand is fullness of joy for evermore. Love had its
first conception in the heart of God; we love him because he loved us first;
The glory of his love is the rise of our love, the piece-meales of beauty and
glory which we earnestly seek and pursue after in the creature, they all
center in God; what ever it is that might be taking to oul affections, that is
in its primitive glory as it is in God: and truly did we see God by an eye of
faith as we do things below with an eye of sense, the brightness of his glory
would darken all lower glories, and all the streams of our affections would
run into God, who is the fountain and original of all love and loveliness.

David had great glimmerings of this glory, when he called upon his soul to
bless the Lord, Psalm 103. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within
me bless his holy Name: And so all the Psalm through. He had discerned God
in the glory of his love, and he could do nothing but bless and praise God
because he loved God. When a soul once tastes God in his love, it can relish no
love besides Gods love; If this soul have any blessing and praise in its heart
and lips, he lays them all upon God.

David spends several Psalms upon this subject of blessing and praising God,
about the 103d Psalm, and so forward; now the ground of all this is, he was in
love with God. We know by the temper of our own hearts how apt man is to
praise that he loves; love takes delight to spend it self in setting forth
that it loves. So does David here, he summons up all the strength of his soul
to set forth the beauty and the glorious excellency of that God whom he loved;
love it makes the strongest of all motions; it will not only say much for God,
but it will do and suffer much for God: and truly me-thinkes Gods love may
justly challenge love from his people in all the properties of it; for God has
put forth his love to his people in all its properties as it is the full and
free love of God.

Secondly, O love Christ that has redeemed us out of the hands of all our
enemies, that we might serve him without fear; he that has taken away all
ground of fear may justly command all love. Though Christ has not left fear
to bring souls to serve him; yet love has such a commission from the hands of
Christ; If you love me, keep my Commandments; the love of Christ constrained
him to dye for us.

Oh how should that love constrain us to live to him! there is nothing but God
and Christ worthy of our love: and if they have all our affections, our actions
will soon follow.

My people (says God) is a willing people in the day of my power; that is,
when his love over-powers the heart, it soon commands all the actions. That
soul which loves Christ, makes no dispute who shall command it; Love is cords
to draw, and legs to carry the soul to all the revealed will of Christ. It
is Christ's way to deliver his people from all their enemies, and to lead them
by his own love: And truly these are speaking arguments to Saints to love
Christ. And indeed these Gospel Truths afford much consolation to all the
people of God, why should we not now be always looking upon the original
love of God, and Christ the rock of Ages, who is the great gift of his love,
and so rejoice for ever. Though self be nothing, yet Christ is all: though the
Law condemn us, yet Christ made under the Law saves and acquits us. Now we may
look upon sin and all our enemies drowned in the red Sea of Christ's blood,
and lying upon the shore of his flesh dead, for an eye of faith to behold.

Now we may see death swallowed up of victory, and triumph with the Apostle in
Romans 8. latter end. What shall separate? 1 Cor. 1.31. It Is the word of truth;
He that glories should glory in the Lord. We may now glory in all God, his
justice as well as his grace.

There is nothing in God but what a believing soul may glory in, it may
through Christ come with as much rejoicing to Gods bar of Justice, as to his
Throne of grace; for Christ is our compleatnesse at both; He presents the
soul to God, as that soul which God gave to him, and for whom he has given
himsele, John 17.10.6.23. and so presents the soul perfect in himself. If
Christ be enough, Saints have enough to rejoice in. If his blood satisfy Gods
Justice to the full, as doubtless it does, God is well pleased when he sees
the travail of his soul, Isa. 53.10. then it should quiet our consciences. If
Christ's righteousness be perfect in Gods eye, it should be so in ours, and we
should rest and rejoice in it. If Christ be the way to his and our Fathers
bosom of love, we should bless that love which made him our surer way, and
seek no other way but Christ.

If Christ be Gods way to convey all his loving kindness and glory to our
poor souls, surely then we should rest in Gods wisdom, and rejoice in his
love. This is eternal love, it had no beginning with time, nor can it have any
time to end; it is what God is, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. No
soul can outlive his love, or dye that is in his love; therefore there is a
foundation to that exhortation in Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and
again I say rejoice.

The end of Christ's bearing our sorrows, was, that we might be made partakers
of his joy, he therefore took our flesh, our sins, and was made under the
Law, and the curse of the law for us, that we might be taken up into the
fullness of God and himself to all eternity, to be heirs of God, and
joynt-heires with Christ, Ephesians. 2.6, 7. And has raised us up together with
Christ, and made us to sit together in beavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in
the ages to come, he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. Mark it, therefore has he made us
one with Christ, that to all eternity we might be filled with the exceeding
riches of his grace and kindness to us; that is, that he might fill us with
himself.

Oh what a glorious life is a Saints, when by faith he eyes his interest in God
and Christ, he may then rejoice indeed: A perishing world can neither give to,
nor take from this more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. All our dying
days are in this life, and shall soon have an end; In heaven it will be
always day, there is nor can be neither night nor death where God and Christ
is. Heaven is that home where every one is an heir, and every heir in full
possession, God is all to all, with all, and in all, to all Eternity.

CHAP. III. Gods children have his Spirit to walk and work in.
Romans 8.14, 15, 16. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God,

For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, Abba Father.

The Spirit it self bearing witness with our spirit that we are the children
of God.


IN this whole Chapter we find the Apostle full of assurance of the love of God
in Christ to him, that he is above all condemnation as he is one with Christ:
and from hence he is full of joy and holy boasting, and as full of exhortation
to holy walking with God in the Spirit. And I conceive these three verses,
holds forth the ground and the reason of all these.

First, he fs full of assurance from the testimony of the Spirit of God bearing
witness with his Spirit, as in verse. 16. and from hence he is raised up into
such full joy and holy boastings by receiving the spirit of Adoption, which
delivered him from the spirit of bondage and fear, and enabled him to cry
Abba-Father, as in verse 15.

Now being thus filled, he breaks out into exhortation to holy walking, out of
the flesh and in the Spirit: and in verse 14. makes it the character of the
sons of God to the world, their being led by the Spirit. I may fitly call
this portion of Scripture the lively image of a Saint living in God and to God
in the Spirit; For methods sake I shall set down two heads, upon which I shall
hold forth that which God shall give into me upon the meditation of this
Scripture.

The first is the sealing work of the Spirit of God in a Saint, verse, and the
latter part of the 15th verse.

The second head is this, verse 14. and verse 15.

In this work I shall endeavor to wave all fleshly reasons as a subject above
it, and keep my self only to the testimony of the word of God. And as a
foundation to this building, I judge it very necessary in two or three
Scriptures, to show how we live under the promise, and the powrings forth of
this Spirit in Luke 24.49. Lu. 24.49.
There our Savior promises to send the promise of the Father: so that the
certain coming waas under a double promise. Joh. 15.25.
And in John 15.26. Our Savior explains who he meant by the promise of the
Father. Joh. 16.7.
And in John 16.7. The Lord Christ does fully promise at his going away from
the world by his corporal presence, that he would send the Comforter, which in
the last Scripture mentioned is discovered to be the Spirit. Now that Christ
has made this promise good, take only that one place in Acts 2.1, Acts 2.1, 2,
3, 4.
2, 3, 4. I shall keep you no longer from the heads propounded, but as they are
laid down, so prosecute them.

I begin with the first of them; Namely, the sealing work of the Spirit of God
in a Saint, or a Saint sealed up to the eternal love of God by his Spirit.
These Scriptures first mentioned are as full a proof of this as any in the
book of God; they tell us plainly in so many words, that the spirit of
Adoption being received, bears witness to the spirit of a Saint that he is
the child of God; and in this assurance so satisfies the soul of a believer,
that he cries Abba Father; that this is the office of the Spirit to seal up a
Saints interest in the eternal love of God and his onnnesse with Christ, Ephesians.
4.30.
let us consult that place, Ephesians. 4.30. where the Apostle makes it an argument
a against corrupt or vain worldly discourse in the Saints; That you may not
grieve the holy Spirit of God (says he) whereby you are sealed up to the day
of redemption. As if the Apostle had argued thus; You know (says he) the
Spirit has sealed you up to the love of God in Christ, yea, into all God and
Christ, all the love of God, and all the blood and redemption of Jesus Christ;
all the righteousness of the Son, and the glory of the Father. Now for you
to be corrupt, v^ine, and worldly in your communication, you seem to deny this
seal of the Spirit, or your interest in God, and so you grieve the Spirit,
whose proper work it is to seal you up to God. So in Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18, 19.
Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18, 19.
we find the Apostle praying for the Saints. Now let us consider what he
prays for; First, that they may be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inward man, so as that Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith, and that they
may be rooted and grounded in love, that they might be able to comprehend with
all Saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know
the love of Christ which passes all knowledge, that they might be filled with
all the fullness of God; pray mark it. Here is Christ dwelling in the heart by
faith, and the soul rooted and grounded in the love of God and Christ, from
whence it comes to know in some measure the height, and breadth, and depth, and
length of the love of Christ which passes knowledge, and so comes to be filled
with the fullness of God. But whence arises all this? why look into the 16th
verse; from being strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward man. This
Spirit seals up and bears witness to the soul that it is in the eternal
love of God in Christ: and so in all that satisfaction which Christ has made
to his Fathers justice, and has an interest in all that righteousness which
Christ has as the head. And thus Christ by his Spirit takes possession of the
heart, and dwells in it by faith, so as he turns all into Spirit. The knowledge
is made spiritual, he comes to know heighths, breadths, depths, and lengths of
love. Letter is now turned into Spirit, and the soul now neither knows Christ,
nor any thing of Christ in the flesh but in the spirit; Being thus strengthened
with might by the sealing of the Spirit, the soul is able to unfold the
mysteries of God and Christ in the flesh, and can suck in, and feed on the
spirit of the word, and when it reads the 53. of Isa. 4, 5, 6, 10, 11.
compared with 2 Co. 5. last. It can draw out by the Spirit matter for the soul
to live on to eternity.

I, says a spiritual soul, I now see that God has set Christ in my room,
and that Christ has so really and ^^lly all my sins imputed to him, and all
the punishments due to them laid on him, that he is said to be made sin for
me: and he was so made sin, that God has made him to bear all the
punishments due to my sins.

Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. He was wounded for
our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed; and the Lord has laid
on him the iniquities of us all; yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has
put him to grief, and his soul is made an offering for sin: And he shall
see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied, for he shall bear
their iniquities. I, says the soul, now I see in the Spirit, and believe that
Christ was made sin for me, and so has taken all my sins, and the
punishment due to sin from me: And as he was made sin for me, so am I made
righteousness before God to all eternity in him; he is the full satisfier of
divine justice for me, so that I am completely righteous in the righteousness
of God in him; thus does the Spirit seal, and root, and ground, and establish
a soul by faith in Christ.

And in this assurance it is, that the Saints have access by one Spirit unto
the Father, Ephesians. 2.18.
as in Ephesians. 2.18. In this assurance the soul runs with holy boldness, and
throws it self into the bosom of his Father.

In this spiritual light the soul sees that there is nothing but Christ
between him and his Fathers bosom, and this Christ to be him that has taken
all sin and punishment due to the sins of his people on himself: so that
there is not the least tittle of them to stand between God and the soul,
nothing but Christ between, and this Christ stands only as the way to the
Fathers bosom; not to keep out as the Angel with his sword at the entrance of
the garden: but to carry home, and to present spotless to his Father, so that
God may truly say of us, we have his righteousness in Christ. Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
For further proof, look into that Ephesians. 1.13, 14. There the Apostle having
spoken of the secrets of God, his election and predestination according to his
purpose in Christ, in whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy
Spirit of promise, which (says he,) is the earnest of our inheritance: plainly
making the Spirit to be the seal, and the earnest of a Saints inheritance. It
was from this seal that Job could say, I know that my Redeemer lives, and
that I shall behold him with these eyes. And so the Apostle; I know (says he)
if this earthly tabernacle were dissolved, I should have a building not made
with hands eternal in the Heavens. And thus the soul is carried above all
fears under the spirit of bondage, by living upon God and Christ in the spirit
of Adoption, bearing witness to the soul that it is the child of God, and so
filling the soul with God, that it is quiet add established, and lives
boasting in God, as the Apostle Paul in Romans 8. the latter end. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect? who shall condemn or separate from the
love of God in Christ; nothing, not life, nor death, nor any thing shall be
able to dee this. How knew he this? why he tells you in verse. 16. The Spirit of
God did bear witness of this to his spirit. And thus the soul through the
seal of the Spirit quitely waits for his period in a state of grace, till he
be swallowed up into the fullness of that glory which is by the same Spirit
sealed up for it, as in Gal. 5.5. We through the Spirit wait (says the
Apostle) yea, and not only wait, but wait satisfied; under possession the
soul is satisfied with a fullness of eternal life, as in John 4.14. There is
the Spirit powered forth into a satisfying of the soul, that it thirsts no more
after any thing but God, and is satisfied with God; for it is a well of water
springing up to eternal life. I shall satisfy my self with thus much in the
proof of the first head, namely, the sealing work of the Spirit of God in a
Saint, or a Saint sealed up to the eternal love of God by his Spirit.

By this we should examine our assurance of Gods love, Paul and other Saints.
Now let us ask our souls, does our assurance rise from the witness of the
Spirit of God to our spirit; Truly we shall never be established in our spirit
till we come to this pitch. If we live only upon those graces that flow from
the Spirit, it will be a very uncertain life; for our own hearts can best
witness how many ebbings and flowings of the fruits of the Spirit is within
us. Now if Gods love ebb and flow to us, as our love does to him, how
changeable shall we make God to be? and how unsettled must our spirits needs
be: says God, my love is unchangeable: and to assure you of it, I give you my
Spirit to bear witness with your spirit that ye are the children of my love.
God gives his Spirit, that we may look on himself which is unchangeable; he
loves because he will love: and as we can give no reason of his love, so God
gives no period to his love. And when once the soul of a Believer comes thus
to live on God himself by his spirit, then he is an established soul.

But I hasten to the second head; namely a Saints walking and working in the
Spirit, or the Spirit ruling and reigning in a Saint: and this I gather from
the 14. and 15. verses of John 14.17. There is the spirit of Truth dwelling and
being in a Saint, John 14.17.
and the Saint knowing of this possession. -- Here is a being and abiding; a
possession that leads to a ruling and a reigning. The Spirit in a Saint is
Christ in a Saint; now Christ is a Saints head to rule in him, and reign over
him. And in verse 26. the Spirit puts forth an act of its Sovereignty, teaching
all things; a Saint acting knowingly, acts from the Spirit that teaches. And in
John 16.13, 14. There is a further discovery what the Spirit shall do when it
has possessed a soul; why it makes discoveries of Christ to the soul; for he
shall receive of mine, and show it unto you, and thereby you shall be guided
into all truth. And as a Saint is elected into God and Christ, so the holy
Spirit dwelling in him, he lives in, and to God and Christ, possessing all
fullness in God and Christ: and making all his performances from God and
Christ: And thus he walks and works in the Spirit, Romans 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.9,
10, 11.
and the Spirit rules and reigns in him. This Romans 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10,
11. speaks very exactly of a Saints walking in the Spirit, and the Spirit
reigning in a Saint. They that are in Christ Jesus (says he) walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit. And in verse 2. he tells us, he acts only in
Christ, and lives by the law of the Spirit in Christ Jesus; which has freed
him from the law of sin and death. As if he should say, all my duties and
performances it is Christ living and acting by his Spirit in me. For says he
in the 3d verse, the bare law of Commandment could not raise me up to holy
walking; For flesh which was my own strength, that was weak: but God having
made up that in his Son. Now says he, the righteousness of the law is
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And
shows in the 5th verse, what it is to walk after the flesh, and what after
the spirit: and in the 6. verse tells us flesh and spirit is the way of life
and death: but in the 9th. verse he shows who are in the Spirit, namely those
in whom the spirit of God dwells. And says plainly, that those which have not
the Spirit are none of Christ's. And in the two next verses, shows if Christ
lives in a soul by his Spirit, then the body of sin dies.

There is a reigning power indeed, the whole body of sin killed, by the Spirits
dwelling and reigning in a Saint, and now all the action and motion of such a
soul is from God. The soul now in all its wants can have access to God
through Christ in the spirit, as in Ephesians. 2.18. and in Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18.
Ephesians. 2.18. Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18. John 17.38, 39.
By the spirit in the inward man, the soul is an established soul, and a
knowing soul, and so is enabled to act for God in the Spirit, John 7.38, 39.
There is a promise to believing souls of being so filled with the Spirit, that
there shall be flowings forth. Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water. And this (says the 39th verse) is spoken of the spirit, which they that
believe in him should receive.

Now what is the end of this fullness of the Spirit, but that it should rule
and reign in a Saint, and that a Saint should walk and act in it. In Rom
6.14. There is a promise sin shall not have dominion over the Saints: and the
reason is given; because (says he) you are not under the law, but under grace.
Christ is your sanctification, and his spirit of grace shall deliver you from
the dominion of sin. In 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. There a Saints knowledge is spiritual,
and so dstinguished from the world: and this spiritual knowledge living in
action in a Saint. We shall find in 1 Cor. 12.11. in the former part of the
Chapter, the Apostle speaks of spiritual gifts, acting diversely in several
Saints, but all these workings are from one and the same Spirit: so as it is
the Spirit that does all in the Saints. In 2 Cor. 3.16, 17, 18. There is a
soul made light by having the veil taken from its eyes, and in that light
beholding God (says the Text) is changed into his Image. Now mark it, all
this is by the spirits living in a soul. A soul living upon God in the
spirit, has the veil taken away and lives in a glorious vision of God; by
which the soul is changed into the Image of God, and this is by the Spirit of
the Lord, says the end of the 18. Verse. And so in 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, 16, 17.
There is a new creature made by the love of Christ, which constrained the soul
from the powerful operation of the Spirit; wherefore henceforth says he, we
know no man, no not Christ himself after the flesh; No: How then? Why in the
spirit, that spirit that sheddes the love of Christ in our hearts, and thereby
const^aines us to live in him that died for us, and in whom we are dead to the
flesh, but alive in the spirit; And thus the Spirit acts the new creature. So
in Gal. 5.16, 17, 18, 22, 25. Verses, There is an exhortation to walk in the
spirit; by which a saint is delivered from obedience to the lusts of the flesh;
though the flesh lusts against the spirit, yet says the 18. Verse, If ye be
led by the spirit ye are not under the Law; and in the 22. Verse shows the
fruits of the Spirit: and concludes in the 25. Verse, If you live in the spirit
then walk in the spirit; making all a Saints life and action to be in the
spirit.

I will only touch one particular of the life of a Saint out of this general,
namely, his worship; and show you how all that is in the Spirit, for a Saint
worshipping God in the Spirit, take first John 4.23, 24. Which is our Saviors
Answer to the woman of Samarias Question in the 20 Verse, she as one without
the Spirit questions about the places of worship, going as far as an eye of
nature could carry her to externalls: but the Lord Christ in the 21 Verse tells
her, Woman the hour comes when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem
shall ye worship the father, your light is only in externalls, and you
worship you know not what; and then preaches himself to her, Salvation is of
the Jews, as if he had said, God will have his people only worship him, and
that in the Spirit; for the time comes and now is when the true worshipers
shall worship God in the spirit: and gives the reason of it, (for says he) God
is a spirit; and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.
This truth is very fully confirmed in Phil 3.3. false teachers in the foregoing
Chapter would have brought the Saints under the law of works a gain, and the
yoke of circumcision: but the Apostle in this 3. Verse tell us, those are the
circumcision which worship God in the spirit. As if the Apostle had said, these
false teachers endeavor to bring you under a formal worship; and to make you
debtors to the law of wor^s again: But we are above it, and we are to live in
the Spirit, and to worship in the Spirit; in the 1 Pet. 2.5. There the Apostle
tells you who they be that are sit for communion with God; they be living
stones, alive in the Spir^t and acting in the Spirit, to offer up spiritual
sacrific^ to God by Jesus Christ. I but when is a man a living stone, fit to
offer up the sacrifice? s^e that in 1 John 2.27. But the an^inting which ye
have received of him, abides in you, and the same anointing teaches you all
thin^s, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you ye shall
abide in him. Then is a man a visible Saint, a living stone, fi^ to worship
God, and to have communion with him, when he has received the Unction of the
Spirit; by which he is taught of God to wo^ship in the Spirit, and in truth:
This truth is not taught of man but of God, and therefore it abides in him;
thus you see he that worships God truly, worships him in the Spirit.

What a Spiritual Saint is; What a Saint is not.


First, he is more than a Morall-man, he that is less than a morall-man is a
beast, and he that is at the heigh of a morallman is but merely a man, a fine
civilized piece of clay, loving himself, and therefore does ^ot devoute
another, because another man should not devour him; decked with his own
accomplishments, and glorying in his own Babel; Sarely a spiritual Saint is
more than this.

Yea Secondly, he is more than a Form ^ll or Legal Prof^ss^r; What is a
formal Pro^essor? He is one that lives by s^ns^, and not by faith, that is
only taught of man and not of God, that has all his light from without him,
from the practice of others, and not from the prec^pts or spirit of God within
him. One that can see and practice anything which may please all, or, the most
of men, he is always learning and never learned; because he is always
studying man and never God, he is one which you shall ever find in the croude
where the most are, there you shall be sure to find him. If you meet him and
tell him of a Christ crucified, I but says he, does any of the Pharisees
b^lieve in his name? he is a man much in worship: but the inscription is to the
unknown God; his eyes are in another head, and therefore he is led by another
to act as a blinde-man; no form comes amiss to him, for he is nothing else
but form, he is one so ignorant as that he thinks it a crime for any man to
see more than himself, though he be blind; and if the man that sees will not
deny his light; he will do the best he can to pluck out his eyes, he is so
proud of his chains of darkness that none shall live where he can rule that
will not wear his setters; this soul is mother and nurse both, to that Brate
of hell, Persecution of the Saints; this man of form knows no heights,
bredths, depths, or lengths above himself, and if he snatch a piece of the
Word of God, he only has it in the letter, and so never reaches God in it,
this is a formal Professor. I but what is a legal Professor? he is a man
seemingly nearer Heaven, but if he go on farther no man farther from it, he is
a man full of the word in the letter: but altogether empty of it in the
spirit; he is a man exact in the language of Mount Sinai: but cannot pronounce
a plain syllable of the language of Sion; he can tell you that God is a just
God, and a severe Judge, a revenger of himself upon sinners, but is not able to
pronounce God as a Father, and a reconciled God in Christ; he is exact to tell
you of present duty and transgression, but is not able to unfold the mystery
of godliness, Christ in the flesh; if a word of Christ drop out of his mouth,
it is to tell you what quallifications must fit you for Christ as he thinks;
when he has found a leprous soul of sin, he cannot show it Christ, but
says he; go wash in the tears of repentance and you shall be clean, though
he never show him Christ which must wash his repentance, if he finds a poor
Saint under some affliction, he cannot make up the wound by leading the soul to
the love of God, from whence that affliction came, but says he look into your
self, inquire for that sin the punishment of which you now lie under, God is a
just God, if you will sin you must bear the indignation of the Lord for it;
go fall on your knees, weep and fast, and pray and vow, make God some amends;
this is all the releife he can give, and so he poures oil into the flame of
sorrows; and vinegar into the bleeding wounds of poor Saiuts. This legal
soul lives upon his duties, and not upon the free grace of God, and therefore
he can give no other counsel than he has experience; he never tasted in the
spirit how good God is, and therefore can never speak good to his own soul,
or any other from God; If he speak any good to a soul it is from duties, do
and live the effect of all his language.

I only give this as a word of caution, that we hearken not to the councels of
such men, least we become like those foolish Galatians, which began in the
Spirit, but were like to end in the flesh; Let this be enough in the negative
what a spiritual Saint is not.

But then what is a spiritual Saint? What a Saint is.


Why he is one that lives by faith above sense; one that is all in God, and
nothing in himself; he is taught of God to know him, he is drawn by God to
love him, he is persuaded by God to trust in him, he is silled with God, and
lives upon him, heis satisefid with God, and rejoices in him; he so lives in
God, that he makes his boast of him, as the Apostle, Romans 8. the latter end.
Who shall condemn; nay who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect?
He is one which in the Spirit is able to look from eternity to eternity, and
therein behold that eternal love of God which gave out Christ to manifest his
love to us in him, and has made him one with Christ in all his merits,
righteousness and benefits; he is able to see into that love and eternal
purpose of God that made Christ to be sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. He can see God his Father, and in the spirit of
Adoption call him Father; He can read his salvation written in the Covenant of
grace; He can behold himself one in Christ, as Christ is in God; He assuredly
knows that Christ has born his grief, and that God has wounded Christ for
his transgressions, bruised him for his iniquities, and laid the chastisement
of his peace on him, and all this so fully and really, as that by the stripes
God laid on Christ, his soul is healed; that God has made Christ soul an
offering for the sins of his people: and that he has beheld the travel of
his soul, and is well pleased: so that now this spiritual man draws up this
conclusion. Whatever of sin and punishment was mine, was taken from me, and
made Christ's, and he has fully satisfied for the one, and born the other: so
that now from the justice of God I can conclude this, that neither of them
shall be laid on me again. Christ's righteousness and his glory is so made
mine, that I stand spotless in the one, and shall be perfect in the other to
all eternity.

Thus is a spiritual soul-led up to God, and made to know his great design
from eternity; namely, to make Christ his wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, and that in all these he stands perfect before
God, in the perfection of Christ.

This soul lives in the region of Gods love, and in Christ's righteousness,
and sees himself above all condemnation: and yet the least transgression in him
discovered to him by the love and Spirit of God, melts the poor heart into
nothing. I see says he, I am alive in Christ through the eternal love of God:
and that makes me thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead. I
dyed to sin in Christ, and if now I live, it should not be to my self, but
to Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. And to this the love of Christ constraines me; For
(says he,) This I know, who ever is in Christ is a new creature. Old things
are passed away, and behold all things are become new, verse. 17. And therefore
says he, what ever is sin is the old man: and of this he cries out as the
Apostle in Romans 7. O wretched man that I am; the law of my flesh rebels against
the law of my mind. Sin has less entertainment no where, then where the love
of God by his Spirit dwells; perfect love shuts out fear, (says the Text) and
perfect love kills corruption. Love to Christ kills and buries sin, when legal
fear only lays it in a swound, it lives again, and possibly kills the legal
soul at last: but this spiritual man he keeps nothing to himself, but
carries all to God and Christ; he lives only in God and Christ: and when he
finds corruption in himself, he presently by the spirit lays it down at the
feet of Christ, and tells him, my glory (says he) is to live in thee and what
ever is thine, and thy glory is to live in me, and in the death of my
corruptions.

Oh then be zealous of thy glory; thou have taken the guilt and punishment of
all my corruptions from me: Is it not also for thy glory to take the reign and
the power of them from me too? Yes (says Christ) and I will make my promise
good; Sin shall not have dominion over you; for you are not under the law,
but under grace. True Lord, says the soul, and I believe it, that to live
under grace is the only way to keep sin under me.

Thus a spiritual soul having a sight of his sins, of all men has least
fear in point of condemnation, because this soul is filled with the perfect
love of God which casts out fear: but the in-being of this love of God in a
soul makes as little love to all the profers of sin, as it has fear of the
condemnation of it. Sin in all its temptations has the soonest denial from
such a soul of any, for he answers sin thus. Sin (says he) The love of Christ
constrains me to hate thee; This soul tells sin he will but lose his labor in
tempting him; for (says he) I am not at my own disposing, I have given my
self up to Christ already, and Christ has taken possession of me, and lives
in me by his Spirit, and for thy temptations I shall carry them to Christ: and
sure I am thou can not live in his presence, he has overcome thee for me,
and he will destroy thee in me. Thus the spirit changes a soul from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, and is made to live in this
light, which is the light of Gods reconciled countenance in the face of Christ.
And in this vision of God and Christ, the soul is changed into the image of
Christ from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3d. and last.

This spiritual man as he lives upon God in the spirit, so he worships God in
the Spirit; he knows neither the Mount nor Jerusalem as his place to worship
in; he only knows Christ as the proper medium to worship God in, and he knows
not Christ after the flesh neither, but after the spirit; his feasting is with
God and upon God; he knows no forms or figure, nor externals to make him a
rest of, he can only rest in the bosom of God and Christ; he knows no
fellowship but with the Father and the Son: as he enjoyes God and Christ in
Saints, so he has sweet fellowship with them. God is both the light and the
life of his worship; he makes God his way and his end in his worship. This is a
Dove that can rest no where but in the Arc; Church Fellowship to him without
Christ, is no more then a selected piece of the dark world; the Ordinances (if
Christ be not in them) is to him but as the grave. When Christ was risen, all
his enquiries are, where is he whom my soul loves. Show me Christ in a Saint,
Christ in a Church, and Christ in an Ordinance, and then you show me my life,
and upon this ground I can live and dye with you says he. This soul can
measure all men and things by Christ: but Christ by nothing but himself, that
Spirit of Christ which dwells in him: and thus you have some weak discourses
of a spiritual Saint.

This exhorts Saints to live in the spirit upon God and Christ, and to act from
the endowings of that spirit, as the image of God and Christ. It is very plain
it is the interest and privilege of Gods children to live on himself in the
Spirit, and from that life spiritually to make all its motions.

Oh why will you live out of God! did you ever find any beloved like this
beloved? Did you sinde any thing that is all, but God? Why God is willing you
should live upon all, his all, and be filled with his fullness. O come my
beloved, eat of my banquet of love. Drink, O drink abundantly and be
satisfied (says Christ.)

All our sadness and complainings arise from our living out of God; be it what
ever it can be that is the most like God, yet if it be not naked and clearly
God, the soul will be complaining of wants. It Is not duties,
Church Fellowship, Ordinances, or any thing that we conceive or propose to our
selves, which can of themselves give the soul rest; it is only a living in,
and upon God in the spirit.

Oh let us stand in that liberty with which Christ has made us free; we can
stand in none but in Christ, and that is the freeness of grace, that we should
stand for ever spotless and blameless in the sight of God through him.

Again, This should stir up Saints to act in God; we have no cause now to act
doubtingly: If Christ be our strength, the Spirit will teach us to pray and to
cry Abba-Father, for he is our Father. Is corruption too strong for us? it is
not too strong for Christ, we should lay it at his feet.

And now tell me believing soul, can thou that live in the love of Christ
live in sin? No says the soul, sin is for the love of it slain in me; by
what law? even the law of love living by the Spirit in me.

It is impossible says such a soul that I that am dead to sin should live
unto it. My life (says he) is hid with Christ in God: And it is not I that
live now, but Christ he lives in me. Christ lives, and I dye (says the soul)
I, that is, all I, my righteousness as well as my unrighteousness. If I
mistake not, this is the strongest argument against a Saints living in sin that
can be, why a Saint cannot fin, but it must be without excuse. A carnal man
may sin, I could do no better in my own strength. I, but a Saint cannot plead
so, he has Christ for his strength; why then in the Spirit of God let Saints
consider what a course of sin would be in them; it is little less then
proclaiming Christ a sinner; for a Saint is looked upon to live and act in
Christ, and that Christ does all in him.

Oh then, if the glory and honor of God and Christ be dear to us, how can we
that are delivered from sin live any longer to it. It is impossible that we can
love Christ and sin too, and therefore where Christ lives by his love, he
constrains the death of sin. The exhortation is to Saints to live in the
Spirit, and that is, trampling upon all below God and Christ, and behold our
selves heirs of that glory, and coheirs with Christ in that glory that is God
and Christ to all eternity.

CHAP. IIII. Gods love gives Saints to know, they shall appear like Christ.
1 John 3.1.2. Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us that
we should be called the Sons of God.

Beloved, now are we the sons of God,


GOds love in the manner of it, in making of us his sons, is here by the holy
Ghost set forth with a behold: and truly none but such as have received the
holy Ghost can behold it. It is too bright a glory for any but a spiritual eye
to look on, therefore the world knows not Gods children, the heirs of glory,
because they know not him the Lord of glory. Spiritual objects are only
discerned by spiritual eyes, and such are here called to behold the original
love of God which has made us one with Christ: in him sons of his love and
heirs of his glory.

There lies very much in these two verses; I shall only for methods sake put
them into two general heads, and make observations from them.

The first is this, That at the glorious appearance of Christ will come the
fullness of a Saints glory as he is united to Christ.

The second general head is this, That this fullness will be the fullness of
Christ, for we shall be like him, and see him as he is.

To the first head, That at the glorious appearance of Christ will come the
fullness of a Saints glory as he is united to Christ.

By this glorious appearance of Christ, I understand that appearance when he
shall come to judge the world, when he shall give the damned their full
portion, and his children theirs; for then says the Text, we shall be made
like him, and see him as he is, which is a state of perfection. I shall now
endeavor to prove this first general head.

First, take this parallel Scripture as a proof, Colos. 3 3, 4. For ye are
dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in glory.

Here Christ is said to be a Saints life, there is our union with him, and at
his appearance then we appear in fullness of glory. That soul which is one
with Christ is united to him in his death and in his life. We are dead with
Christ (says one Text) and this Text says, we are alive in Christ. Nay
Christ is our life: so that when Christ manifests his own glory, he manifests
our glory as we are united to him; We may read the will of Christ in this
point of our glory with him in John 17.24. Father I will that they also whom
thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which
thou have given me.

To behold the glory of Christ, is to be swallowed up into the glory of Christ,
yea into Christ himself; for his glory is not to be beheld out of himself,
and then does the fullness of a Saints glory appear when he does come to
behold Christ a^ he is united to him in his fullness of glory. So likewise Rom
8 17. And if children then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ; If
so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.

The Apostles scope is to show, that in our union with Christ we are heirs of
glory, joynt-heirs with Christ, and so have joyntinterest in his glory: so that
when the fullness of Christ's glory appears, then the fullness of our glory
appears.

The holy Ghost does fully cle^^e this point, and shows wherein this glory
lies, in that 1 These. 4.16, 17. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpe of God: and
the dead in Christ shall rise first.

Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

This place speaks of that coming and appearing of Christ which I mentioned
in the beginning: and it clears this point fully, that we shall appear with
Christ in glory (says the Text) and so shall we ever be with the Lord; not
only appear with him in glory, but also abide for ever with him, and so be
filled with the fullness of his glory.

These Scriptures instead of many more which might be produced, will fully
serve to make proof of the first general head.

The second general head proves it self; it has in it a double proof, that
our fullness is the fullness of Christ; For first (says the Text) we shall be
like him: Now nothing but ou^u^ion with Christ can make us like Christ, to be
filled with his fullness. And another Text says, Of his fullness (meaning
Christ's) we received, and grace for grace.

The second proof in the Text is, We shall see him as he is. Now Christ is so
beight a glory, that he can be seen in no light but his own; he is the
express Image of his Father, and the brightness of the glory of God: so that
his brightness darkens all other glories, and is discerned in nothing but
himself.

I shall now make some observations of this Scripture, and these gener^ll
heads. And the first observation shall be this; namely, That a Saints ^oorst
condition is in this world.

When the world shall end, then shall all the clouds of the people of God be
blown over, and the brightness of Christ's appear, and we like him (says the
Text.) I when the little world that we carry about us in this body of sin and
death shall give up the ghost, then shall a harvest of gain come in, as the
holy Ghost tells us in that first Chapter of Paul to the Philippians, verse. 21.
Though to live be Christ, yet to dye is gain. Though the beams of Christ
shines through clouds in this world, and so maintains life in his members; yet
here lies the gain, to be carried above the clouds, and to be lodged in the
bosom of the Lord of glory. As the forenamed Text, To be ever with the Lord:
there lies the gain. Gods word tells us of a time when all tears shall be wiped
from our eyes: but it is not in this world; for our Savior tells us the world
will hate us, and it shall be a place of tribulation: It must not seem hard or
strange to those that shall reign with Christ to suffer with him; all our
sufferings are in, and from the world, but the fullness of our reign is with
Christ in Heaven.

Thus are we made conformable to the image of Christ, in this world we enjoy
least of Christ, and therefore must needs be a Saints worst condition. That is
the darkest day to a Saint in which the least of Christ's presence and glory
appears; therefore is the world a Saints worst state, because it is not able
to bear the fullness of the glory of Christ, which shall be revealed in
Heaven. There will be no need to enquire for him whom our soul loves, for we
shall always be in his presence. When mortality has put on immortality, then
comes in the crown of glory; we may have glimpses of glory in this life, but
the more exceeding and eternal weight of glory is in the life to come. The top
of our life here is of faith: we eive by the faith of the Son of God (says
the Text.) And another Scripture opening the nature of faith, says, It is the
evidence of things not seen: but in Heaven we know as we are known of God; the
eye will then be made suitable to the object, and there will be defect no more on
our part to diminish the glory: So that you see if we set aside all the sour
of the world, and take a Saints sweetest morsels he has below, yet it is short
of the glory shall be revealed. Wherefore the observation stands very clear,
That a Saints worst condition is in this world.

The 2d observation is this; namely, That a Saint has relief from the worst
of the world by faith, waiting for the appearance of Christ: as in the Text. A
Saint by faith looks upon his union with Christ as a Son, and so satisfies
it self with the appearance of God. So the Apostle Paul in Romans 8. the latter
end, he eyes there his union with Christ, and so is carried above tribulation
or distress, or the worst of the world. He concludes there was nothing could
separate him from Christ, and therefore he is at rest; as if he should say,
notwithstanding all these which he named before, as tribulation, and the rest,
yet Christ and I shall be one in glory, and when his fullness of glory
appears, then shall mine. A Saint by faith can argue thus; whatever may seem
best at present to a carnal eye; yet I know when Christ shall appear, that
is, the righteous Judge of quick and dead, then shall my head be lifted up,
for my full redemption draws nigh. When a state of good and evil for eternity
comes, then shall my state and condition appear good. I know whom I have
trusted, Christ will preserve his own glory, and mine with his; my state of
glory shall be that which shall accompany the appearance of Christ: the best
and worst of the world has but a moment, a little time to attend it: but the
glory of Christ has eternity with it, and this is my portion.

Thus has a Saint by faith relief from the worst of the world, waiting for
the appearance of Christ.

A third observation. Love makes the soul quicke-sighted. The soul that loves
Christ, sees by faith his appearance, though afar off, and rejoices in it;
though no affliction but is grievous for the present; yet by faith the soul
sees the appearance of Christ, though at some distance, and in the joy of it is
carried above the present affliction.

Hence it is, that Saints can overcome the world, even their faith (says the
Text) that eyes the appearance of Christ; for if they saw nothing but the
world, the world would overcome them: but it is a higher glory that carries
them above the world.

The believing soul says, he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry,
and so quickens Christ's appearance to the relief of his own soul.

A fourth observation. A Saint values himself according to his interest in
God: and what relief comes in by that interest, he eyes it though afar off,
and satisfies himself with it. Let the world value me at as low a rate as they
will says a Saint; yet I will value my self according to my interest in God.
If they say my wisdom is folly, yet I will say Christ is my wisdom, and so I
have true wisdom. If they say I shall want bread to eat, I can say by
experience I have food to feed on which they know not of: and when they shall
want their husks, I shall find bread enough in my Fat^ers house, and love
enough in my Fathers heart to satisfy and till my eternal soul. I bless the
Lord says such a soul, I value this above ten thousand worlds, my union
with Christ: and know there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus: and that nothing shall be able to separate me from this glorious
interest, Romans 8. I can value this, I am through free grace a child of God, an
heir of glory: and that which the world adores, I in the Spirit of Christ can
trample upon; I know God has freely given me Christ, and with him all things,
the world is an addition and over plus. Christ and glory is my portion, and
when the worldling gluts himself with this present dying world I can rejoice
in my interest in the living God, and eye my g^ory as a son of God, and an
heir wi^h Christ, as ^t shall be revealed at the great and glorious appearance
of the Lord Jesus. My soul shall be satisfied with its interest in God, when
the world and worldlings shall be confounded in their own glory. My life is hid
with Christ in God, and when Christ who is my life shall appear, then I know I
shall appear with him in glory. Through as it is h^d in God, the world cannot
see it, yet through the Spirit of God I can see it, and rejoice in it: and thus
a gracious soul filled with the Spirit, values it self according to ^ts
interest in God and Christ.

The fifth observation is this; namely, That a gracious soul relieves it self
in b^holding Gods love in the original, and the glory of it. He looks upon
Gods love as it elected and chose him to be a son, and he looks on the glory
of that love as it shall be manifested at the glorious appearance of Christ. In
a cloudy day such a soul goes to the Son of Righteousness for relief, and
in a day of death to the fountain of life. This soul goes not to his outward
esteem in the world, not to his external advantages, or endowments of parts
and the like for his relief; he does not boast and rejoice himself in this,
that he is a member of a Church, or is under this or the other Ordinance above
other men, or that his parts are greater, or his esteem with the world more
then other poor Saints: but he fetches his relief from the fount^ine of life,
that original love which made him a son. His eye is with the Apostle in
Ephesians. 2.5. upon that grace which first gave him lif^: Even when we were dead
in sins, has be quickened us together with Christ; by grace ye are saved. He
eyes that grace which made him one with Christ that original love of God: and
from this object the soul draws very high and glorious conclusions in all the
dispensations of God to it. I am now a son, and in all Gods dispensations to
me he is my Father, and I stand as a son in his presence, begotten by his
own original love, and therefore I know all is the kindness of my God and
Father to me in this life: but when Christ shall appear in the fulness of his
glory, then shall all know I am a son, for I shall be like him, and see him as
he is. Thus a child of God fetches his relief from his interest in God, and
an heir of Heaven makes up his glory in his soul by that glory which waits
for him, and shall to all eternity be revealed to him with God and Christ in
Heaven.

The sixth observation is this; namely, That a Saints glory which now is hid
from the world, when it is fully manifested shall destroy the world. When
Christ shall come to judge the world, and to put an end to all corruptible
things, then is it that he will reveal the fullness of his own glory, and so
our glory as we are by free grace united to him.

Original love has more grace and glory in it then the world can b^are, so
that when it shall be fully manifested it will eat up all vanishing dying
things. Should any soul in this life partake of the fullness of the glory of
its interest, as it is one with Christ, that soul would soon break through
the clay walls of the body, it would be like new wine in old bottles, the
bottles would soon break; the heart strings would be like the locks and bolts
of the prison doors, that opened of themselves to the Apostles. The sun in
the Firmament is a type of the Son of Righteousness, and is the glory of the
present world: but when Christ the natural son of God, and the thing
typified appears in his fullness of glory, then all these small brooks of
glory shall run into this fountain.

The worldling then must lose his glory, viz. the world, though he find not a
higher glory, God in the face of Christ: but when the world shall thus be
swallowed up, then shall a Saint be no looser, but shall be carried from narrow
shalow streams, into the Ocean of original life and glory.

A Saint can loose nothing in loosing the world, for he finds all fullness in
God; the type ceases, the thing typified appearing; the life of faith ends, and
the life of vision begins; fullness of glory then arises before his eyes, and
never sets any more.

The seventh observation is this, Though at the glorious appearance of Christ
the world shall be consumed, yet then his own shall be made like him. Vilde
bodies made like his glorious body, and so taken up into an eternal beholding
of God and Christ for ever. For (says the Text) we shall see him as he is.
That glorious appearance of Christ which shall eat up the glory of the world,
and so leave worldlings howling for want of a glory; that I say shall swallow up
Saints into it self, and fix them in singing Halelujah's to all eternity.

The world passes away, that Saints may have entrance into those mansions
prepared for them by original love, where the same love will fully discover it
self to all eternity, and satisfy the soul with those discoveries.

The eighth observation is this, namely, That a Saints glory is a certain
glory. For as our lives are bid with Christ in God, so the fullness of our
glory is in Christ, and appears at his glorious appearance; a Saints fullness
of glory shall as certainly appear as Christ shall come to judge the world. And
this shall be the beginning of glory, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
Kingdom prepared for you; enter into your Masters joy.

Now feed my beloved, and be satisfied to eternity; you shall have no
interruption of the full enjoyment of God for ever; what ever is in God
communicable, you shall have it; you shall know God as you are known of God,
and be filled with the fullness of that glory that flows from the presence of
God, and fills heaven and all the heirs of glory to all eternity. Christ in whom
our life is hid, though he make it an obscure life from the world; yet it is
a certain life to a Saint, the being of it is as sure as Christ's own being.
Because I live, you live also: and the glorious manifestation of it as certain
as the appearance of Christ.

The ninth and last observation is this. That that day which will be most
dreadful to the world, and their entrance into the fullness of all horror to
eternity, even that day shall be a day of fullness of joy to the people of God,
and an entrance into fullness of communion with God and Christ, which as
another Text speaks, is fullness of joy, which is at Gods right hand for
evermore. Yea, that shall be the Coronation day, when the righteous Judge shall
crown us with righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that
day: and not me only, but all them that love his appearing. And then shall
Jesus Christ give up the Kingdom to his Father, and all the floodgates of
glory shall be set open: Love shall then flow from God as it is in God, and the
soul made capable to receive suitable to such a fullness.

These truths may be useful to us in these particulars following;

First, Let this persuade us to be much in beholding our interest as we are the
children of God, and as we are fixed with Christ in the eternal love of God.
It is the exhortation of the holy Ghost in this place. Behold what manner of
love the Father has bestowed on us that we should be called the sons of God.

Herein is the glory of the life of says, that it looks into the love of God,
and our interest in Christ, as coheirs with him in the love and the glory of
God. This is a fountain that always gives forth the water of life, and
refreshes the City of God; namely, to eye God in all his dispensations to us as
a Father of love to his children: does God lay us upon beds of sickness, and
lead us through a wilderness of afflictions in this life; yet behold, now are
we the sons of God, and in all this God is a loving Father, and all his
dispensations are filled and managed to us by and with his love. Now I, even
now from all eternity, and to all eternity, are we the children of God. There
may be many times when it may be truly said, we do not act as the children of
God: but there is no time when it can be truly said, that an elect soul is not
the child of God; for now, even before all time were we sons, though yet we
enjoy not the fullness of our interest as sons.

If you object and say, must I apply this time now when I sin? must I then
look on my self as a child of God?

I answer yes; we must, and no time more needful then that; I shall
demonstrate this truth under these considerations.

First, that according to the law of the Gospel, and the Covenant of
free grace, there is no other way left to restore a soul fallen in sin: but
beholding our interest in the free love of God, and so in Christ the great gift
of his love, that dyed for us, is risen again, and now lives for us, and makes
continual intercession for us at Gods right hand in glory. If sin be the
wound, what shall be the cure but free grace; If self slay self, who shall
make us alive, but Christ as we are united to him in the love of God. Whether
shall we go from the rock of ages to find relief in so sad a state: and how
shall we justify it at the throne of grace, if we fly to duty, (and possibly
under such a notion as this) to fit us for Christ and for mercy: will free
grace approve of this? Is not the law of boasting excluded by the law of faith?
And what advantage (poor soul) will it be to thee, when thou art stung with
sin, that fiery Serpent, to look on thy duties, will one sin cure another? No,
Christ is the balm of Gilead: It is only looking upon thy interest in God and
Christ, that will restore thy soul. It is nothing but looking upon Christ who
was typified by that brazen Serpent in the wilderness, which can fetch out the
sting of the fiery Serpent of sin. If we look to the cause in our hearts,
that keeps us below ous interest, poring upon a duty to relieve us under a
sinning condition. We shall find the cause to be unbelief: and now poor
soul tell me, is not this the top of all sin? Unbelief makes a soul deny
the Lord that bought it; it undervalues the Covenant of free grace; the soul
must have no life till it have something of it self to live upon, if unbelief
may rule: and truly this is the workings of our hearts, when in a sinning state
we do not eye and improve our interest as we are the children of God, by
improving our interest in God as our Father, by the Spirit. The poor soul
that sins, and is within the Covenant of grace, can look upon that love of
God which made Christ to be made sin for us, and we the righteousness of
God in him, 2 Cor. 5 and last.

That soul which eyes its interestin God and Christ, has by virtue of it in
the Spirit, power over sin in all points. Sin shall not condemn, Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. So in the reigning
power of sin; Sin shall not have dominion over you; for you are not under the
law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. But if a soul decline Christ and its interest
in the love of God for its object under a sinning state; go whither it will,
sin will revive, and the soul shall dye.

This is the first demonstration of the truth: That no other object but our
interest in God and Christ is able to restore a sinning soul to life again;
all other objects besides this increases sin in the soul, and there is no
object but this can carry the soul above sin.

A second demonstration why an elect soul should under a sinning state look
on its interest in God and Christ, is this. Because no other object but this
can destroy the sin. Sin will reign till Christ reign: and one Text says,
Christ is made to us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. It is in the great defigne of God to glorify his free grace, that
Christ should sanctify us, not our selves. So the Apostle, Romans 8.10. And if
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin. The power of sin dies only
where Christ lives: So the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be
in Christ he is a new creature; Old things are passed away, all things are
become new.

It is only the presence of Christ that overcomes the old nature in man, and
slayes the old corruptions; go to what poole you will to be cleansed of your
corruptions, they will be all helpelesse in themselves.

If we go to Duties and to Ordinances, we may lie there all our days, and
never have a cure of this evil of sin, till Christ the Angel of the Covenant
come and trouble the waters: I, and he must put them in too, with his own
hand of love, all the cure must lie upon his hand. This is the top of our glory
that we are merely passive: Christ and free grace is only active in all that
concerns the good and welfare of our souls; what cause then has a sinning
soul to look of his interest in God and Christ since there lies all his
relief; it is Satan's counsel we take in so doing: the mind and will of God
is, that we should look upon him whom we have pierced; when we mourn, I deny
not any soul to melt into evangelicall tears over the least sin that lives
and moves in it; only be sure of this, that when thou look on a living sin,
that thou look on it through Christ that dyed for it, and lives for thee.
This will make kindly child-like mourning over sin, and sweet steadfast resting
on the free grace of God. This is the meaning of the holy Ghost in 1 John 1, 2.
And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: And he is the propitiation for our sins. As if the holy Ghost had
said, a sinning soul has no whither to fly for relief, but to his interest
in Christ, and to look up to God through him; (for says the holy Ghost) he is
our only Advocate with the Father, to plead for us in such desperate cases, he
can plead his righteousness to be curs, and the propitation that he has made
for us, and there is no other pleader either at the bar of Justice, or the
throne of grace, but Jesus Christ. There is no other name under heaven by which
men can be saved, but by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Oh then where should poor sinning souls look, but to their interest in
Christ as sons of God, and coheirs with Christ. The Prophet Isaiah in Chap.
35.11. speaking in the verse before of Gods bruising and putting Christ to
grief, making his soul an offering for our sins, says, He shall see the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. God is satisfied with no other
object but his sons; he looks on all his people through him; now we must eye
what God eyes, the travel of Christ as our public person, and in that object
the soul will live, and sin will dye. God has lodged the glory of his grace
here, that all our relief should come in and through the Lord Christ: He came
from the bosom of Gods love upon this design, to be eyes to the blind,
legs to the lame, and to set the captive and those that are bound in fetters
and chains free; Is not Christ then, and the bosom of free grace that gave
him, the only object for a sinning soul to look on for relief: an
experienced soul in these objects will tell you that a glimpes of Gods love in
the face of Christ is the only expeller of the being and the reigning of sin in
it: such experience as this the Apostle speaks of in 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. For the
love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one dyed for all,
then we were all dead. And that he dyed for all, that they which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them, and rose
again. Mark the spirit of the Apostle, he eyed his interest as one with
Christ in death and life: and speaking of sin (says he) love constraines
strains me thus to judge that I am dead to sin, and can live no longer to
it, because Christ is my interest. This is an object indeed able to slay sin
in the soul, to behold our interest in Christ; that love which made this
interest constraines our souls thus to judge, and thus to act as being dead to
sin, because we are alive to Christ: so that I hope it is clearly made out,
that a soul in a sinning condition must eye its interest in God as a Father,
and in Christ as a head and a husband. For no other object besides this can
either raise a soul fallen in sin, or slay that sin which lives in the
soul. Therefore the exhortation stands firm, and should make its impression on
our souls; namely that we should be much in beholding our interest as we are
the children of God, and as we are fixed with Christ in his eternal love. I
may safely say this is our duty as well as our privilege, to be always eyeing
our interest in the love of God; for herein we serve the ends of God in
magnifying his grace to us, and shedding his love abroad in our hearts. This is
fully proved in that Romans 8.14, 15, 16. For as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God.

For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear: but ye have
received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father.

The Spirit it it self bearing witness with our spirits, that we are the
children of God.

Mark it, the Spirit is given to bear witness of our interest: and this is
not a spirit of bondage, but that free spirit in which we behold our interest
as children, and (says the Text) cry out Abba-Father.

If we have received the Spirit, it is our duty as well as our privilege to
improve it to this end, the constant beholding of our interest as the children
of God: and in verse 17. of Romans 8. If children, then heirs, heirs of God, and
joynt-heirs with Christ.

Oh eye this interest; as we love our lives let us eye this interest, this is
our living upon that life which is hid with Christ in God; the perfection of
which shall be a full enjoyment of God and Christ to all eternity.

Again, let this persuade us to prize highly, and thrust heartily for this
most glorious appearance of Christ. If our hearts put that day far from us,
we put our highest glory far from us; for till then we are as heirs under
age, not in full possession; for free grace has given more, and the blood of
Christ has purchased more, and heaven contains more glory for us then the
world can bear to be revealed: but Christ shall come and manifest it all,
which glory shall consume the world, all corruptible things shall dye before it,
and then soul and body both shall be carried above corruption, to be filled
and crowned with immortal glory, though now we are sons; yet many times
there is such clouds of corruptions and afflictions on us, that it hardly
appears what we are, much less what we shall be. Our glory now as children is
more then the world can see: and when Christ thus appears, it shall be more then
the world can bear. Oh let this bear up our spirits the few moments that are
behind: if all in this world be not enough, Christ is hard by, and he will
bring enough with him. Wait cheerfully, as those that believe such an
appearance of Christ at hand, in which we shall appear in our interest and our
union with him.

Again, let this teach us what value to put upon the world: it is too weak a
foundation to bear all our glory, when we come to possess our full
inheritance as coheirs with Christ, the world will be too narrow to contain
it: and if it be so, then surely the world is not worthy of our love, our joy,
nor our fear. That soul which God loves, the world is too little for its
love; God only can and will satisfy that love; he makes us love him, because
he loved us first; the flames of love which he kindles in our bosoms he
satisfies with that fountain of love which is in his own bosom. That soul
which has interest in Christ, and waits for his appearance, the perishing
world is too low a thing for him to rejoice in. But he may always rejoice in
the Lord, for there is a suitable portion: and truly there is no just cause for
a Saint to fear the world, when Christ has undertaken for him at the throne
of grace; the world must hate us because it hates him whose image we bear: but
here is relief enough, Christ that is our interest in heaven, he has overcome
the world for us; we may be encouraged to go to the Father in Christ's name,
to be kept from the evil of the world: but there is no cause why we should
fear that the world shall overcome us; for Christ is able and faithful to
preserve all those the Father has committed to his charge. Were the world as
little in our affections as it is in our interest, we should enjoy it more, and
fear it less: it is our carnality that makes it a King, and sets it on the
Throne, and then we fall down and worship it: but God has made the world our
foote-stoole, as it is Christ's, for he is our interest, and what is his glory
as our head, is our glory as his members: when the world concerning Saints is
mentioned by God it is as an additionall thing: but Christ and his
righteousness is a Saints interest. The holy Ghost gives the world this title,
The meat that perishes: but Christ is that portion which endures for ever;
call not that enough which is not enough for a moment; a frown from God can in
a moment darken all the world, and a smile from God as soon outshine all the
beauty of the world. Oh then Saints, let this teach us toknow our full interest
in God, and the emptiness of this empty perishing world.

Lastly, This calls all Saints to rejoice in the glorious appearance of Christ;
that will be a day of glory that never will have night: the sun that will give
give light unto that day will be the Son of righteousness, and the God of
grace: we shall from that to all eternity never behold nor enjoy less glory
then God himself; God filling us, and all that glorious company above, not
only revealing, but communicating the fullness of his glory to us: so that our
vilde bodies shall be made like unto his glorious body, and the whole soul and
body made capable to receive, and shall be satisfied with the fullness of God,
all the glory of Heaven shall center in our bosoms, and that shall be the
feast which the Lamb and his Wife shall keep to all eternity. Is not this a fit
subject for our joy, if such a day as this be at hand? Oh then rejoice all you
whose interest is in Christ; for every moment in this dying world hastens to
this day; all the clouds we see in this dark world are flying away, that this
Sun of Righteousness may break forth in its full splendour and glory; the
world dies, that we may live; things that now appear, they perish to make way
for this glorious appearance of Christ: and therefore live now upon this, not
only that we are children: but knowing that when he shall appear we shall be
like him, for (says the Text) we shall see him as he is.

CHAP. V. Christ is the food of living souls.
John 6.48. I am that bread of life.
THESE words they are a clear and plain testimony of our Savior concerning
himself. In verse 33. of this Chapter, he tells the Jews, that the bread of
God came down from heaven, Joh. 6.33.
and gives life unto the world. For the bread of God is he which comes down
from heaven, and gives life unto the world: and then in verse. 35. and verse.
48. So that we must consider these words under these two heads.

First, The Lord Jesus Christ to be that bread which came down from heaven.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus Christ to be that bread which gives life to the world.

For proof of this first head, we need go no further then this Chapter, in
which every testimony to this truth is the witness of the Lord of truth, even
Christ himself: to that of the 33. verse, take the 38. verse of this Chapter;
For I came down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him that
sent me. So in verse. 52. I am the living bread which came down from heaven.
And likewise in verse. 58. This is that bread which came down from heaven.

Christ speaking in the verse before this of his Fathers sending him: these
Scriptures prove the truth.

But it will be said, every good and perfect gift comes from above: and wherein
lies the peculiarity of Christ in this more then in other gifts of God.

I answer that in the consideration of the next head, that Christ is the bread
of life, or that bread which gives life to the world: In this I say, the
peculiarity of Christ coming from heaven will appear.

Thus is the marrow and the life of all our Saviors discourse in this Chapter
as it were centered in this 48. verse. I am that bread of life. In verse 33. he
calls himself the bread of God, and the life of the world. And in verse. 38. he
shows how he came to be the life of the world, even by the will of God, sent
by God, and his business the work and the will of God. In this 39. and 40.
verses, he tells us. And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of
all which he has given me I should loose nothing, but should raise it up
again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every
one that sees the son and believes on him may have everlasting life, and I
will raise him up at the last day.

Here our Savior cleares up whom he meant by the world, namely, the elect and
chosen of God, which are given to Christ by his Father, and then declares that
his work is his Fathers will, and tells us what it is; namely, that all which
God his Father had given him, should have everlasting life in him. He tells us
how faithful he will be in this work, so that nothing shall be lost that God
has committed to him: and tells us this is the will of God, Verse 40.
that every soul which he has given to Christ should have a discovery of
him, and believe on him, and that in all this will of God runs the seed of
eternal life. For that part which is capable of lying down in the dust to
sleep, even that part shall not be lost, but shall be raised up at the last
day: that is, the last day of the world, which passes away like a dream in
the night. Now if we lay all this together, must we not needs acknowledge this
truth: That Christ is the bread of God, the bread of life; yea, the God of
life. Our Savior uses this term of bread indulgently to the weakness of our
flesh: but his work is in the Spirit, and if God give us the Spirit with the
letter, we shall discern the glory of Christ as he is our life in his own
light. This appears by our Saviors own words, in verse. 63. of this chapter.
It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: the words that I
speak unto you they are spirit and they are life.

Christ's words are spirit and life, Verse 49.
because himself is our spiritual life. In verse. 49. Christ tells us what he
does mean by this bread of life; Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness
and are dead. As if Christ should say, no externals whatsoever is your life;
you may feed on them all your way in the wilderness, and yet soul and body
dye. But in the two next verses, he speaks plainly what is the bread he meant,
verse. 50. and 51. This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that man
may eat thereof, and not dye.

I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever: And the bread that I will give is my flesh which
I will give for the life of the world.

Here I say Christ demonstrates what is the bread he meant, namely himself in
the flesh, and he becomes this bread of life by giving his life in the flesh
for us. In the 53, 54, 55, 56. verses of this chapter, out Savior shows us
how that interest in him as a crucified Jesus is our life: and that he may
fully clear this out to us, he holds forth himself not only a crucified
Savior, but a living God. In verse 57. As the living Father has sent me, and
I live by the Father: so he that eats me, even he shall live by me.

Our Savior's argument seems to be thus; I live as one in God, and you as
one in me: And thus is Christ that bread of life, or that bread which gives
life to his own in the world. Thus much for proof to the two heads that were
first laid down; I shall now hold out such spiritual observations from what
has gone before, as I have received from Christ.

And the first observation shall be this, namely, That Christ only is a Saints
life.

By this I mean, that every spark of a Saints life lies in Christ, and so in
Christ, that it is in nothing else in which Christ is not all. Christ is so
fully and solely a Saints life, that take all duties, ordinances, privileges,
and external advantages, whatsoever subtracted from Jesus Christ, and they
are all dead things: but like the grave clothes in the Sepulcher, when Christ
was risen. Our Savior himself bears witness to this truth, I am the way,
the truth, and the life. No man comes to the Father but by me. It is a truth so
dear to God and Christ, that Christ speaks to it in this place as fully as
terms can express it, both in the affirmative and the negative. I am the life
(says Christ) that is in the affirmative. And so the life, that no man comes
to my Father the fountain of life, but by me; there in the negative and
affirmative, both in the negative exclusive from Christ, and in the
affirmative, inclusive. If we consult that place in John 16.14. where our
Savior speaks of the office of the Spirit, and the usefulness of it in the
hearts of his people; we shall find it speak to this thing we have in hand,
John 16.14. He shall glorify me, for he shall receiverf mine, and shall show
it unto you.

Mark it, the work of the Spirit is to reveal Christ to us as he is our life,
and so glorify Christ in sh^wing him to be our life. As if Christ had said,
the holy Ghost when he comes, he shall show you your names written in the
book of Life with my blood: all your sins laid on me, and that I have buried
them in my own wounds, so that they shall never rise up in judgment more
against you; my righteousness your robe of glory, perfect glory in the sight
of God; my law of love written in your hearts to be the power that shall slay
sin in your lives. Thus the Spirit shall glorify me in showing you that I am
your life in whole and every part of it; Christ as he is one with God is our
fountain of life, and in all our addresses to God, he is our way, truth, and
life. For further confirmation take the experience of the Apostle. It is not I
(says the Apostle) but Christ that lives in me: and the life that I live it is
by the faith of the Son of God. And in another place; Our lives are bid with
Christ in God. Take this Text for all, 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption.

Mark it, here Christ is made all by God to us; for what can you call life,
that is not bound up in some or all of these. The 29. verse of that Chapter
gives a good and ^ull reason why God made Christ all to his people: namely
this, that no flesh should glory in his presence. This reason is so full, that
the truth stands strong upon it against all gainsayers: grace were nor grace,
if flesh had any thing in it self to glory of in the presence of God; our life
to be only in Christ, preserves as entirely the glory of Gods free grace, as it
does the safety of our souls; for that soul that glories in Christ as his
life, glorifies the free grace of God which gave that life. When the Apostle
speaks of the acts of life in his soul, he makes Christ all; for says he, I
can do all things through Christ that streng thneth me. And the same Apostle
in another place says he, it is merely of grace that I am what I am: so that
you see where Christ is made all, there free grace has the glory of all, and
this is the great design of God to all eternity to glorify his free grace.

Thus much shall suffice for the first observation: That Christ only is a
Saints life.

A second observation is this; If it be thus, Saints should value and esteem
of Christ as their lives.

Saints, what mean these carnal fears? does not Christ live? If the world be
nothing, is not Christ enough? Why fear you so much to loose the meat that
perisbes, when Christ this bread of life lives for ever: cannot you be content
the world should bring forth wants? why there is no other place of want but
that, there is bread enough in your Fathers house. Heaven only is the proper
place of fullness; does it not speak an undervaluing of Christ, that carnal
fear shall possess our spirits of want, when Christ the fullness of the
Godhead bodily is our life and portion: Nay, what mean these stoopings and
bendings of our judgments, affections, and services to the world, and worldly
ends; Is not this the end of it, to live in their love and esteem, so as to
make a portion of perishing things, and friends of the unrighteous Mammon?
Saints, will this stand with an esteem of Christ as our life. A soul that
truly values Christ, it pants thus in spirit: Let me know truths as they are in
Jesus, and obey them in the spirit of Jesus. God has made the world my
foote-stoole, as it is his, and I am one with him; Christ is only my life and
glory: I would trample upon my footstool, and lie down in the bosom of
Christ who is my life and glory; this is a soul that truly values Christ. But
tell me Saints, if we value Christ as our life or portion, and our crown of
glory, our best and truest friend, our faithful brother, and our loving
husband, one that has borne all Gods wrath for us, who has dyed that we might
live, and whose love is so great that he cannot live in heaven without us.
Father I will, that those which thou have given me be with me where I am (says
Christ in John 17.) If we thus look on Christ, and value him, whence is it
that we so easily grieve him.

Ingenuous nature teaches this, to be tender of offending them we value, and
put a price upon their love. Does not grace exceed nature in this? Surely it
does. Oh then let our lives speak our loves to Christ, and our value of him:
this is the language of the Spouse, I charge you O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
that ye stir not up nor awake my love till he please, Cant. 2.7.

Love and value of Christ wrought this frame of spirit in the Spouse: she was
tender of the pleasure of Christ, and improves all her interest among the
daughters, that Christ might rest his pleasure. Is not the Spouse here a type
of a godly soul that has interest in Christ. If so, then sure her spirit
should be ours: if we value Christ, it will make us tender that he rest his
pleasure: it is but equal Christ should have rest in us, for he has
travailed for us, and trod the wine press of his Fathers fury alone.

Now tell me Saints, do you think Christ can rest, and take pleasure in our
bosoms, when they are so full of worldly love, and carnal aims and ends,
with pursuites answerable; do we esteem of Christ when we make him such a bed
to lie in; can we say we love and value him, when we entertain those in our
hearts with him, that crucified him, namely our lusts: Is this entertainment
and company for the Prince of glory? Oh, if we prize and value Christ, that
will be only dear to us which is dear to him; his rest and his pleasure will
be our rest and our joy, and what ever wounds Christ will wound us. That soul
which sees its interest in Christ, and values that, beholds Christ upon the
cross, wounded and bleeding for his sins, and is so affected with that
kindness of Christ, that when ever he sees Christ bleed afresh with any fins
committed by him, the soul is as it were in Christ's room, he is then
crucified, not to satisfy for his sin, for that he sees is fully done by
Christ for him, and could never have been done but by Christ: but the
reflection of love and the value of Christ wounds this soul clean through.
Christ (says such a soul) traveled as low as Hell to redeem me, for there I
was by nature. The first Adam left me there, and the second Adam only plucked
me out: and in this travel he sweat drops of water and blood; he tore his
way through his own bowels to redeem my soul; he puts his own robe of
righteousness on me, and never leaves this pursu it of love till he bring me
into his Fathers and his own glory, and I can never sin against less love
then this. Oh this value of Christ, it makes a gracious soul exceeding tender
of any thing that may displease Christ whom his soul loves. An experienced
soul in the ways of Christ will tell you it is the hardest travel that ever
it went, to step a step in the ways of sin, after it has apprchended the love
of Christ, and been taught by the spirit to value that love: and I believe if
Satan could speak truth, he would confess it to be the hardest work he has
to draw a soul that beholds Christ's love, and values that love in any soul.
Therefore as the only remedy against sin, eye Christ, love and value him. But
Saints, if we thus value Christ as our life and our all, whence is it that in
time of distress we seek relief of broken cisterns, and forsake the fountain
of life? my meaning is this. When under a weak or a wounded state by sin, we
fly to duties for relief, and not to Christ: to renew the graces of Christ in
us, and not to eye our interest in Christ as he is the gift of free grace;
this is an undervaluing of Christ, who in Prove. 3.18. is said to be a tree of
life, those graces you would live on is the fruits of this tree, and are only
fruits of life as they flow from interest and communion with this tree of life;
do but consider the folly of our spirits when we fly from Christ to duties,
and to the stirring up of gifts and graces in us for our relief in such a
state; for fallen man is a creature that can act no grace in himself, and
grace without the breathings of Christ is as dead as man: no grace can act it
self. Take our Saviors testimony to this truth in John 15.4, 5. Abide in me
and I in you: as the branches cannot be are fruit of it self except it abide
in the Vine, no more can ye except you abide in me.

I am the Vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit; for without me you can do nothing.

Our Savior in this maine point thinks it not enough in the comparison he
made to show fully how that all the acts of life in us flows from himself which
is our life. But he concludes in these plain words, without me (says he) you
can do nothing. The Spouse of Christ in Cant. 4. last. she honors Christ in
believing this truth, for she calls for the Spirit of Christ to blow upon her
garden of spices that they may flow forth. The spices here are the graces of a
Saint, and it is the breathings of Christ in the Spirit that gives them all
life: no grace has life in it self, nor can it act it self: but Christ he is
the life and the motion of every grace, as he is the soul it lives in: It is
a mistaking Christ, and an undervaluing of him, when we go to duties that they
may carry us and commend u^ to God; Christ is the only way to God, and it is
he only that carries us as living souls to duties, and through duties, in and
by his own Spirit. The Apostle knew this well enough, when he made that
prayer, Coloss. 1.11. Be ye strengthened with all might according to his
glorious power. In verse 10. he makes this petition. That ye might walk worthy
of the Lord unto all pleasing: being fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the knowledge of God. Hi^ desire was, that the Colossians should
live up to Jesus Christ, and walk worthy of the Lord. Walking is an act of
life, and this he knew was out of themselves, and not in any of their
external privileges or advantages whatsoever, and therefore he seconds it
with this petition; That ye might be strengthened with all might according to
his glorious power. The Apostle here speaks his experience; for in another
place he does acknowledge that he did all things through Christ that strengthened
him: And he prays here for the same strength, because he well knew there was
no other strength sufficient to this glorious work. The same Apostle in Heb.
12.2. sets a high value upon Christ, and makes him all in this work of grace,
and gives it us in direction, to look unto Jesus the author and finisher of
faith; did we thus eye Christ and value him as he is, we should not so often
look below him, and go in our own strength to finish faith, that it might be
the author of Christ; for so we do when we will not close with Christ till we
have qualified our selves, nor think free grace enough in it self, till we
have such such qualification in us which we think to be sit for grace, if not
worthy of grace. Truly I know no worthiness of our own that free grace calls a
sit subject for it to work its own glory out of; I find God mentioning his
grace under this confideration, loving us when we lay in our blood, and no eye
to p^tty u^; grace lives, when all help below is dead. Now such thoughts as
these are exceedingly below Christ, that is our life. Is this a true value of
Christ, who has done, suffered, pardoned and purchased so much for us as he
has. That when we are in streights, to go to duty for rel^ef, and not to the
God of duties who is the life of soul and duties. Is not this matter of reproof
to those foolish Galatians, which began in the spirit and would end in the
flesh.

I think there is not any piece of the old man in Saints that darkens more of
the glory of Gods free grace, and damps more of the comforts of his people then
this does, to go any whether but to Christ in streights, must needs put a
dishonor upon him, and be an undervaluing of him; for does it not imply thus
much; the thing we seek after is not to be had in Christ, or not so soon in
Christ as in duties, or at least that it is not only to be had in Christ, but
it is all one whether we go to him or not; now all these are conceptions of
the old man in us, when through the Spirit we look upon Christ as our life,
we shall see all fullness in him, grace enough to pity, to pardon, and to die
for us: Righteousness enough to cloth us, and to present us spotless to the
pure eyes of his Fathers glory: Power enough to take us out of Satan's hands,
and to defend us from all enemies and all evil: Wisdom enough to make us wise
in him, to guide and to govern us, that our conversations may be like children
of light and heirs of glory: Goodness enough to supply all wants in us, and
to give out fullness of his own grace to us, yea and happiness enough to
satisfy our souls to all eternity, and the soul says Christ is enough; yea,
he is all, and whether should I go but to him, he has the words of eternal
life in him, yea he is my eternal life; this is the frame of such souls as
do truly prize Christ as their life.

A third observation is this, That if Christ be a Saints life, then a Saint
only enjoyes his life as be lives upon Christ in the Spirit.

When I thus mention Christ, I do it as he does it himself, I and my Father
am one (says Christ) and as I am in the Father, so are you in me. We are one
with Christ through the love of God, and enjoy this life through the Spirit of
God. In John 6.63. Christ tells us it is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh
profits nothing. As if he had said, what ever you enjoy of me as your life,
it is through my Spirit, it is not the fruits of your own flesh, it is what comes
from me, that is spirit and life to you; Our Savior cleares up this truth in
his discouse with that woman of Samaria, in John 4.23.24. But the hour
comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him.

God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and
truth. And in another Text, the natural man discernes not the things of God,
nor cannot, because they are spiritually discerned. The Spirit only reveals
the hidden things of God: so the Apostle in Gal. 5.16.18. For we through the
Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith.

This I say then, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh: but if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law.

In the beginning of this Chapter, the Apostle exhorts them to stand fast in
the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free: and in these verses he tells
them what this liberty is, namely to live upon Christ in the Spirit. So
likewise in Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. That he would grant you according to the
riches of his glory to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward
man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with the fullness of God. The
sum of the Apostles prayer is in short this, That they might live upon Christ
as their life, to know his love in all the demonstrations of it, which is above
humane knowledge: but he begins thus in verse 16. That they might be
strengthened with all might by his spirit in the inward man. He lays down
this as the foundation; As if the Apostle had said; Who ever lives on Christ by
faith, knowing and enjoying his love in the breadths, lengths, depths and
heights of it, must do it by his Spirit, that only can make true discoveries
of Christ and our interest in him. This is the proper office of the Spirit, as
he is the comforter promised; we may see this in Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not
the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.

Our interest in Christ as he is all to us, is sealed up to us in the Spirit,
it is not a fleshly, formal, historical knowledge of Christ, in which we can
live on him as our life, but it is to know him and enjoy him in the Spirit,
which is a lively knowledge of Christ, and an enjoying of Christ as our life.

A Fourth Observation may be this; If Christ be a Saints life,

You cannot wound Christ but you wound your own lives; Christ is your life,
and if he look back on thee as he did on Peter when he denied him, thou will
soon reele the wound in thy own bosom; if this truth t^ke place in any
soul, let it then consider how dear every soul is to Christ; he that
touches you (says Christ) touches the Apple of my eye: so dear are Saints
to Christ, and Christ so tender of them; And in another place our Savior
says, who ever offends one of these little ones (his Saints) it were better
that a mal-stone were hanged about their necks, and that they were cast into
the Sea; So dangerous is it to wound Christ in his people* O that this present
age could spiritually receive this truth; that when they wou^^de Christ in his
people, they wound their own lives, the sad experience of persons and nations
which have died of these wounds, might be enough to warn this present age
from wounding the children of God; if God would give them spiritual
understanding. Show me any example where the spiritual people of God were made
the Butt for any Nation, or person to shoot at: but that the arrows flew
back, and wounded the heart that shot them, even unto death; These sad
undertakings has ruined so many Kings, and Kingdoms, this Mountain will
overturne all the World; for worldlings will be always engaging against
spiritual Saints, the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent will be at
variance, till they be parted as fare asunder as heaven and hell; but the seed
of the woman shall prevail. As Christ for a saint, so Christ in a saint shall be
a conqueror; and though thou may wound Christ in a saint, yet if free grace
make not a cure that wound will be thy death; thou art in staken poor soul,
if thou think thou layest all thy blows upon the Saint thou ami'st at; No,
Christ he b^ares the blow, and thou must reckon with him for them. This truth
makes the present age to have a sad and a pale countenance in my eye; I cannot
think they will live long that has so many of these wounds in their souls;
there is not a more deadly path that sinful man travels in than this, when he
wounds deepest he kills himself; sure it is weighty work, Saints should be
doublely careful that Satan lead not them into it, upon any pretenses
whatsoever; Christ will let such know, it is ill requital for his wounds,
that they wound their brethren, and so him in them.

A Fifth and Last observation shall be this; If Christ be only a Saints life,
then here we may observe the sad condition of a Christlesse soul. It is a
dead soul, dead in sins and trespasses, walking according to the course of
the world, and the Prince of the power of the air; and by nature the child of
wrath; as it is in Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.

If Christ be not made sin for thee, thou bear thy own sin, and must
also bear the sting of sin, which is eternal death, and then thou art a
dead soul indeed Joh. 10 9. Christ speaks in these words, I am the door, by
me if any man enter in, he shall be saved. Now that soul which comes not in at
this Door, never comes into the bosom of God, where only is salvation; and
therefore a Christlesse soul must needs be in a miserable condition; for
farther proof to this, take that Job. 3. last. And be that believes not the
Son shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on him. If this makes
not up a condition fully miserable to have the wrath of God abiding on a soul?
I know not what does; and this is the state of every Christlesse soul, though
it may have a name to live, yet in the account of God such a soul is certainly
dead; for as God is the fountain of life, so he has made Christ the way to
this fountain; and if God look upon any soul out of Christ, he looks on it
as a dead soul, and when we come to see things as they are, we shall see them
as God sees them, a Christlesse soul to be a dead soul. This may be useful to
Saints;

First to exhort Saints to eye Christ as their life, Joh. 6.15. I am the living
bread, which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread he shall
live for ever. So our Savior again in Joh. 14.19. Because I live, ye shall
live also. In both places Christ speaks our life to be in interest with him,
and that we should eye this interest, and feed on this bread of life; in 2 Cor.
5. last. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him. So in 1. Cor. 1.30. But of him are
ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness;
and sanctification and redemption. Mark it, how the holy Ghost sets out all our
life in Christ: that we might look on it by faith, our interest in Christ as
he was made sin for us, and we the righteousness of God in him; and as he is
made of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption to us; what
is the end of God in this, thus to hold out our interest in Christ, as our life
in the parts and whole of the it?

But that we should glorify that grace which has made Christ thus to be all
to us, by looking upon Christ as he is our life. The Prophet Isaiah in Chap.
53.5.10, 11. verses, bears witness to this truth, and carries on the same
design in showing Saints the original love of God, in making Christ to be our
interest of life. He holds forth Christ as he was wounded for our
transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace laid
on him, so that with his stripes we are healed. God making Christ's soul an
offering for sin, and in the beholding of the travel of Christ's soul is
fully satisfied. I say Christ is thus held forth in his word that we should so
look upon him in the Spirit. In Gal. 3.13. it is thus written; Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. This is a
precious and safe object thus to look on Christ; what a life of heavenly joy
will come into our souls in beholding Christ thus as our life. Christ has
borne the curse himself, and lays nothing but the blessing upon us. He bears
all the stripes, and clothes us with his own righteousness; he leaves not a
tittle of wrath for an elect soul to bear, for he bears every stripe, and all
the curse himself, till God acknowledge himself fully satisfied with the
travel of his soul, Ephesians. 2.13. But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes
were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. Christ so bears all the
curse, and takes away all the wrath of God, that he by his blood brings the
soul near to God, into the bosom of God, so that such a soul is a happy
soul. In every condition, if it be Christ to live, it is gain to dye, Phil.
1.21. This is an object fit for precious Saints, eternal souls to look on; we
are too earthly in our object when we look below the Lord Jesus. If we make
duties our object, it is too low, they are not our life, but the fruits of life.
A man does not live, because he acts, but he acts because he lives.

The Apostle desires to know nothing but Christ and him crucified: and plainly
speaks this, not to be found in his own righteousness, but in Christ's, Ephesians.
2.8, 9, 10. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God. Not of works least any man should boast; for
we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has before ordained, that we should walk in them.

Mark it, here is works as the fruits of our life, and interest in Christ,
and the reason is given in the first words, namely the great design of God for
his own glory, that all may spring from grace.

Now this is our interest in Christ, and the life and sweet of all this will
fill our souls, when in the Spirit we look on Christ as our life.

This may invite every soul to cast it self on Christ as its life, and rest
on him. Let the soul that is the worst of sinners in its own eye remember
this, it is of grace that we are saved, and Christ is the great gift of Gods
free grace.

The Prodigal when he said there was bread enough in his Fathers house,
doubtless eyed Christ. There is in Gods eye price enough, blood enough,
righteousness pure enough, which makes life full enough, for Christ is all
this, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is
God that justifies? Who is be that condemns, it is Christ that dyed, yea
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us.

The Apostle here makes a challenge, but he does it upon a sure gound, namely
God justifying a soul through its interest with Christ in his death,
resurrection, and intercession.

This treasure is laid up in God for thee poor soul, that say thou have no
worthiness of thy own. It is the will of God that the ends of the earth
should look up to Christ, so that those might have milk and honey freely,
which have no price nor no money of their own. Poor soul, I will give thee
one Text to live upon for ever, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. But God who is rich in mercy,
for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has
quickened us together with Christ. By grace ye are saved.

Make thy condition worse then this if thou can, to be dead in sins: And then
know this, God is rich in mercy, his love is exceeding great, it exceeds the
greatness of thy sins. This love is so great, that it can take souls dead in
sins, and quicken them together with Christ: and if you will know the reason of
all this, it is by grace that we are saved.

What can thou say now, poor doubting soul? All life is without thy self,
it is by grace that thou art saved. If thou can not see thy self worthy, why
yet see God is gracious: It is not Gods design to look out worthy souls, but
to take unworthy souls, and magnify his grace on them. It will be no
presumption but faith and obedience to rest on Christ, to such an end as to
magnify the free grace of God; when we rest on Christ as our life, we do as
much as in us lies justify and magnify that free grace which gave Christ to
be our life. And on the contrary, when we will not rest on Christ wholly as
our life, till we have wrought up some qualifications in our selves; we deny
this gift of God, and our like to be from free grace. The Text speaks plainly,
it is of grace that we are saved.

Oh let God have the glory of his grace, for the life of our souls lies in it;
there is no other way to enjoy interest in Christ, but to lay hands on him as
the gift of grace: and it appears that a Christ-lesse soul is a dead soul.
Is it better to be dead souls, then to have life merely from grace? If not,
oh then honor grace, let Christ be our life; though we are wholly dead in our
selves, yet cast thy self upon Christ as the gift of Gods free grace for thy
life.

But in the last place; If Christ be only a Saints life, and a Saint enjoyes
this as he lives upon Christ in the Spirit; Then let this teach us always at
the throne of grace to be pleading the promise of the Father and the Son to
power out the holy Spirit upon us, and not rest satisfied without the Spirit, in
any or in all externals, not in a bare literal knowledge, no nor a Christ only
in the flesh, but only to know God and Christ, and to live on them in the
Spirit. To know truths as they are in Jesus, is to know them in the Spirit of
Jesus: and this is our Saviors own promise, John 14.26. That when the
Comforter (which is the holy Ghost) comes, he shall teach you all things.

We are therefore seeking something below Christ, and so apt to deifie a form,
because we know so little of Christ in the Spirit. In John 7.38, 39. There is a
glorious promise of the full powrings forth of the Spirit upon believers. He
that believes on me (as the Scripture has said) out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water. But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that
believe on him should receive. I know nothing, but this promise is the interest
of all believers, and it is worth the pleading at the throne of grace. The
Apostle Romans 8. tells us what use Saints make of the Spirit. They walk by it
above the flesh; he calls it the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
which has made us free from the law of sin and death; this is the spirit
that dwells in a Saint, and shall raise him up at the last day. In the 11.
verse, this Spirit is Gospel-administration, and Saints interest under the
Gospel; thus Saints worship God in the Spirit, John 4.23. But the hour
comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth. A Saint is wholly carried up to Christ his life by the
Spirit, and all the acts of his life is the workings of the Spirit in him, Gal.
5.5.16, 17, 18. There the soul waits for the righteousness of Christ by
faith through the Spirit: and when he comes to walk in God, and to live up his
interest in Christ; it is all through the Spirit, and it is only through the
Spirit of God in them that dead creatures are made living Ordinances. The
institution is, do this in remembrance of me; Now it is the Spirit which gives
an ordinance to this life. Our Savior tells us in John 6.63. The flesh
profits nothing, nor the word; it is the Spirit that quickens and makes
alive. The reason is clear, God and Christ is in the Spirit; now to enjoy God
in his original love with Christ in all he is as the fruits of this love;
this is our life, and this can only be in the Spirit. Oh then it concerns us to
plead our interest as children for the spirit of Adoption, as it is in Romans
8.14, 15, 16. It is the breathings of the Spirit which makes dead bones to
live; Ordinances and souls will be both dead without Christ in the Spirit; it
is expedient to go (says Christ) to send the comforter, and it is as needful
that he give the Spirit; without it we can never have fellowship with the
Father nor the Son, in whom only our joy, our life, and our glory will be
full; In this Spirit only can we live upon Christ as he is the bread of life,
and our bread of life.

CHAP. VI. Christ's reign by his Spirit is the Saints liberty from bondage.
Gal. 4.5, 6. To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive
the adoption of sons.

And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into
your hearts, crying Abba-Father.


THE Apostle Paul in almost this whole Epistle, makes it his business and
design to discover to Saints their liberty in Christ: and as it appears by
the Apostles writing to them in the foregoing chapter and in this.

These Saints to which he did more particularly write, lay under legal
principles, and moved with legal spirits; now for a remedy of this to them, and
all Saints after them, in these two verses the Apostle holds forth Christ under
a double capacity; namely, Justification and Sanctification to the Believer.
And in both a perfect freedom from the law, so far as it is freedom, to be
delivered from it.

The first of these two verses holds out Christ justifying of his people in the
redemption of his blood, from what ever the law could accuse them of, or charge
upon them.

The latter verse holds forth the fruits of this redemption, or indeed a part
of this redemption it self; Namely this, That because we are sons, God has
sent forth the spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying Abba Father.

Either of these two parts are worthy a Saints study and admiring for ever; I
shall lay the foundation of what shall follow in this Point, Namely, that it is
part of the Redemption of the blood of Christ to a believer, that no law should
command or, rule in the conscience or spirit of a believer, but the Law of
love; the spirit of Adoption is here given forth to that very end, that in it
the soul may keep its communion close with God, and Christ; and be always
able to cry Abba Father. In the proof of this we must consider the first and
second Adam, as we were in the first Adam we lay under a law of Creation, and
a Covenant of works; as creatures to obey our Creator, and in obeying to have
life; do and live, but transgress and die; In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall die the death. But in the second Adam the Lord Christ, the Covenant
we are under is not of works, but of grace, the law is not in the letter but
in the spirit, not written in Tables of stone, but in the hearts of his people
by his Spirit, as appears clearly where the Covenant of Free Grace is
recorded, as in Jer. 31.33, 34. and in Heb. 8.10. In both places God does not
only covenant to be our God reconciled to us, not imputing sin and iniquity to
his people any more: but also to put his Law in our inward parts, and to write
it in our hearts; so that this way he will teach and rule in the hearts of his
people, under that covenant of which Christ is the Mediator. God is a Spirit
and when he promises to write his law in our hearts, we must understand him
thus, the workings of his spirit in the hearts of his people; Letter shall be
turned into spirit, Christ shall be a King as well as a Savior, and as a
spiritual King, so his law and his government spiritual, that the Lord Christ
and his Father may appear one in this great engagement of teaching, and ruling
in the hearts of his people by the Spirit; let us look into Christ's promise,
Joh. 14.15, 16, 17.26. -- Jo. 16.13, 14. Here the Lord Christ promises to
perform that Office of his intercession to God for us, that he would make good
his own covenant, and give his spirit to comfort, lead, and gu^de, the souls
of his people: Now the making good of Gods covenant, and the efficacy of
Christ's intercession for this spirit to rule in the hearts of his people, every
soul in its own particular can best clear up the faithfulness of God, and
Christ. But the Apostle Paul in the power of the spirit sets it out at large,
in Romans 8.2, 3, 4, 5.9, 10, 11.14, 15.26, 27. Observe the exprestious of the
holy Ghost in the second verse, For the law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and (...) is mention of a double
law, and as distinct each from other as life and death; the law of the spirit
of life in Christ Jesus, and the law of sin and death: I look on these two as
that which depends on the two Covenants, that of Works, and that of Grace, or
as it is elsewhere expressed, the Law of the first and second husband, which
is the first and second Adam; Now whilst the first Adam is alive in the
conscience, the conscience is kept under his law, which is thus the law of sin
and death; as it makes known sin, and the wages of sin which is death, but sin
says the Text is not imputed where there is no law, Romans 5.13. and in Romans
6.23. the wages of sin is death. And then in Romans 7. beginning; the Apostle
says this law has dominion over the conscience so long as the first husband
lives. From these places I judge I am not mistaken in the interpreting the law
of sin and death: but that the holy Ghost clearly means that law of Creation,
do and live, or the bare Letter of command in the conscience. Only let us
consider what is meant by the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus; which
I understand thus, That through that union the soul of a believer has with
Christ it is made spiritual; Christ in his Kingly Office in throned in the
conscience, and the the soul resting in the bosom of Christ as a dutiful
Spouse in the bosom of her beloved husband; and his law is the law of the
spirit of life, that law which is life it self, and turns letter into spirit.
One thing more I would explain my self in, that is how I understand the holy
Ghost in this freedom, that the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has
made to a believer from the law of sin and death by the spirit of life; I
understand Christ in the spirit: Now the freedom the Lord Christ has made for
the souls of believers from this law of Creation, under the Covenant of
works; It is double, Namely, from the condemning power, and the ruling, or
reigning power of the law in the conscience.

Of the first of these, there is the least scruple, and not being so fully
within that I desire to hold to, I shall wave it, and keep only to the latter,
Namely, how Christ has freed the. Believer in his conscience from the ruling
or reigning power of the law of creation in the letter only; For light in this
consider the 4th. verse of Romans 8. and so forward; taking in the latter part of
the 3. verse, and it will appear to be the design of God in sending Christ in
the the flesh, that Christ in the Spirit might rule in the souls. and spirits
of his people. God sending his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, that
the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit; That is, to walk after the rule which is not the
flesh but the Spirit, and so goes on to show the difference between^ flesh and
spirit, making it all along a part of our redemption in Christ to live in the
Spirit, making the Spirit our light and our life, our rule and our strength. In
Romans 8.14. There the Apostle speaks plainly, and makes it a demonstration of
our son ship to be ruled by the Spirit; For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. He speaks in verse 16. following,
of the seal of the Spirit. But here he speaks distinctly of the ruling power
of the Spirit, that has power of a man, to lead the man as it pleases; and
that is the term here, sons of God led by the Spirit of God; that this
Spirit is sufficient to rule the consciences of believers; we may plainly see
in Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you; for you are not under the
law but under grace.

I know not what can be more plain then this; here is a promise, sin shall
not have dominion over us. And the reason given is that part of the redemption
of Christ to the soul of a believer, from the ruling power of the law, to the
ruling power of the spirit of grace. Mark the inference; therefore sin shall
not have dominion over you; because sin shall not find you under the ruling
power of the law in your conscience, which affords no st^ength against it: but
sin shall find you under the law of the spirit of grace, which is in Christ
the law of life to the soul, and death to sin; therefore sin and death
shall be swallowed up of victory in you by the spirit of Christ, as it was for
you in the death of Christ. Sin has its repulse in the soul from the change
of the law that rules, the law of sin and death turned into the law of spirit
and life. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me (says the
Apostle.) I am not delivered from the dominion of sin, because I have the
light of the law of creation to discover sin^ but I am under the law of the
spirit of life and grace, not only to discover, but to destroy sin; Sin has
not dominion, because that which opposes it is Christ, not I.

Thus I have endeavored to let you understand that light God has given mse in
this part of the redemption of his blood, for his Son to deliver us from the
ruling power of any law in our consciences, but the law of love in the spirit
of life.

But that I may be rightly understood, I desire you to remember a clause that I
laid down in the beginning where I endeavored to open these verses; the clause
is this: That the Believer in the blood and spirit of Christ has a perfect
freedom from the law, so far as it is freedom to be delivered. I laid it so
down, that I might have here room to distinguish between the ruling power of
the law, and the matter and substance of the law.

In the first sense, the ruling power of the Law I do really believe from what
has been delivered already, and some further reasons that I shall discover.
That the conscience of a believer is by the law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus made free from the law of sin and death.

But for the second part, the matter or substance of the law, which I take to
be the whole revealed will of God, and is in its utmost power and purity
written in the heart of every believer; Not only the whole revealed will of God
in his word made flesh, and dwelling among us, but made Spirit, and dwelling in
us.

Thus to give you a little light, I shall be more full in what follows; give
me leave to add some further reasons to prove the former thing.

As first, If the law in the letter be the rule in the conscience of a
Believer, then Moses, not Christ must be the King; for says the Text, Moses
was faithful in his house as a servant, but Christ as the son.

Moses may rule till Christ comes: but as Christ had none to help him in the
work of redemption, no more will he in the work of ruling.

Secondly, If Moses be to rule where Christ has redeemed, where is the making
good of Gods Covenant, to write his law in our hearts; what benefit in the
promise of the comforter, that spirit of truth, to lead into all truth.

Thirdly, If the law rule, and Moses be King, the strength must be in our
selves to obey; for neither Moses, nor the law in the letter can give any
strength. If either could, Christ has dyed in vain: and if strength be in our
selves, then Gods design in sending Christ is lost, which is to justify his
people freely by his grace, so as there may be no room for flesh to boast in;
not the law of works, but the law of faith to be pleaded, as appears in that
third chapter to the Romans.

Lastly, If the Law be to rule in the spirits of Gods people, then obedience to
that law must quiet and satisfy the hearts of Gods people. Now as the Apostle
in Gal. 3.2. This only would I learn of you; Received ye the Spirit by the
works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? So say I, and appeal to the
consciences and experience of every Saint, that tastes the joys of life in God;
received it you by the the works of the Law, or in the seal and workings of
the spirit of life, in which you are freed from the law of sin and death.

So I shall come to that second part, the matter and substance of the law;
Under this comprehend the whole revealed will of God in his word: but to
distinguish between that part of Gods word, more distinctly known by the ten
commandments from any other part of the revealed will of God in his word; but
to the eye of a believer, beholding God, and every part of his revealed will in
Christ, all is alike. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God. That
was spoken of Christ; now the Believer always beholding God in Christ, which
is his original word, and the Scripture, only Christ written out in the Spirit
does behold God in his original, and in his written word, in every part of it
one: so that every part is of like beauty and pretiousnesse to the soul of a
believer.

Having opened my self thus far, I shall do it farther, and declare; that
to have any hope left to live as sinful nature pleases, casting the revealed
word of God behind their backs, and under a notion of redemption to deny the
Redeemer; to talk of free grace, and to trample grace under foot; to deny the
Lord that bought them; in walking as do others that know not Christ. This is
so far from entering into my thoughts, from that freedom I have pleaded for all
this time; that if I should name this, and call it darkness, I should call it
Egyptian darkness, so far from freedom, that it is bondage beyond
expression. The second of the Ephesians sets it out best in these terms. The
power of the Prince of the Air ruling in the children of disobedience. But
that freedom I plead for, is the power of the Lord of glory, ruling by his
Spirit in his children of light and life. My aim is not to take away that
holy, just, and good law of God out of the conscience of a believer: but as God
does with his people in the new Covenant, and in Christ the mediator of it,
establish them in a better covenant, Heb. 8. upon better promises: so would I
only hold out the matter of the law taken out of the hand of Moses, which was
but a servant, and established in the heart of Christ, which is the Son, and by
the Son in the spirit of light and life, written in the heart and conversation
of every believing soul: And less then this I think is not in the covenant
of the Almighty, when he convenants to put his law in our inward parts, and to
write it in our hearts. For my authority in this, I shall say as the Apostle
Paul, in the 3d of Romans the last verse. when in the greatest part of the chapter
he has pleaded this very cause that I do, he concludes in these words; Do we
then make void the law through faith? God forbid. Yea we establish the law. So
that it is clear, the law of life that makes us free from the law of sin and
death, which is Christ living by his Spirit in the conscience, is not to make
void, but to establish upon better promises from a law of death to be a law of
life. Thus much in general.

But more particularly I lay down this as my light, that the law is now in the
Spirit, and in the Gospel for a believer to walk by; the law is made Gospel, as
Christ is made flesh; the Gospel is both a perfect law of life, and
righteousness of grace and truth; why should we separate that which God has
in his free grace joined together; namely, Law and Gospel in one, under the
government that is given to the child Jesus. Nor is the holiness or
sanctification that God looks for in his believing Saints, such as is
falsehood by the law, or outward command, but by the preaching of faith, by
which the spirit is given, which renewes and sanctifies a Believer, and makes
him the very law of Commandments in himself and his heart, the very two
Tables of Moses. And though the law be a beam of Christ in substance and
matter, yet we are not to live by the light of one beam; now when the Son of
righteousness is risen himself, that was a fitter light for those who lived
in the regions of the shadow of death; it is with the law now, or light of
righteousness, as it was with the light in the creation; when that which was
scattered was gathered into one body of light. So Christ now being revealed,
holiness and righteousness as well as grace and love is revealed in him, and
and gathered up in him; The word is now flesh, and dwells amongst us, and we
behold his glory as the glory of the only begotten son full of truth as well
as grace; is in substance by the Spirit set down, 2 Cor. 3.16, 17, 18. verses.
There is the veil taken away in turning to the Lord. There is Christ held
forth to be the Spirit, and the spirit of liberty to his people: but observe
the fruits of this liberty, it is from sin not to sin: but we all with open
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, or of the Lord
the spirit: so it is in the margin. Thus is Christ that Sun to us which
warmes us in the very shining upon us; the Believer works, walks, and lives
under the Gospel, as beholding his perfect redemption wrought in Christ, and so
brings forth the power of this redemption and salvation through the spirit of
Adoption, freely working to the praise of his free grace, and freely obeying
from the life of this redemption, doing every thing in love, because of his
love shed abroad in our hearts: and neither taking in judgments, hell, or
damnation; nay, not heaven or glory, to force on the work, or quicken the
duty, but doing all from the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, except when
corruption or temptation hinders the freeness and spiritualnesse in the
duty. A Spirit at this pitch is Christ and his beloved, both met in his garden
of spices: and by feeding on the honey in the honey-combe, Christ fills the
soul with himself, and delights himself in that fullness that is himself.
So the soul in communion with Christ in the Spirit sees it self complete in
Christ, so joys in its Masters joy, always satisfying it self in that love
that is Christ himself, and is able to trumpet out its glory to the world. My
beloved is mine, and I am his; This is Christ and his office, branches setting
about God, always feeding on the banquet of love, and fitting under the benner
of love, God beholding every elect soul in Christ; the soul beholds God in
Christ, and Christ beholds himself and all his in God, and this vision in one
spirit swallows up all into one; God beholds every elect soul as Christ,
Christ beholds every branch in him as of him, beholding us in that glory we
shall have with him when he appears in his fullness of glory, and the
believing soul in the Spirit, beholding its justification, sanctification, and
redemption, and Christ one in eternal love; the soul is in this light
transformed into this love, that is God himself, and so sees nothing of God
but what is all God; such a soul knows no divided Christ, or parted God;
every tittle of revealed truth, which is Christ written out by the Spirit, it
is all God and Christ in one, and this Spirit that reveals Christ to the world
in the word, and to the believer in his soul, this Spirit is God too, that so
all within the soul is God, all about the soul is God, and all comes from the
soul is God: and this is the freedom the believer in his conscience has from
the law in the letter, it is not destroyed, but established; It is taken out of
the hand of Moses the servant, and put into the hand of Christ the Son; it is
not made void, but fulfilled for us and in us, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit.

Now behold the Law in its glory, changed from law to Gospel, from letter to
spirit, from Moses to Christ, from death to life, from an angry God to a loving
Father; as it is Gospel, so it is Spirit, it is Christ, yea it is God himself.
On the glory of that Law which is God, not only declaring the mind and will of
God, but in the spirit of love, filling the soul with strength to obey, from
whence we find Christ in the Gospel calling upon those that love him to keep
his Commandments. God, Christ, and the Spirit being in the Law, it becomes the
law of life, when the law had in it but a naked demonstration; what a Creator
might justly require of a fallen creature, but gave no strength; it is held
forth under the terms of the law of sin and death, by which it had not that
glory to invite a poor soul to look on it, because the soul could see
nothing but its death in it: but as Christ being made under the law to redeem
them that were under the law, has satisfied his, and our Father fully in it
for us: so he has turned this law into his law of love, into Gospel, into
Spirit, into himself and his Father.

Now this law has that beauty which allures and takes every believing soul;
nature turned into grace, it is now meat and drink to a believer to do the
will of God in the Spirit.

First, This will let us truly to understand who they be that be Antinomians;
Those that deny the Law, if I may judge, I should say it is those that would
keep it in the hand of the servant, out of the Son; what can be a greater
denying of it, then to keep it in the Letter out of the Spirit, to rob it of
that glory which is God and Christ in the Spirit.

What soul dare put it self under the Law out of Christ, when in so doing it
makes it self a debtor to the whole law: And as the Apostle in Gal. 3.10, 11.
says; So many as are under the works of the law, are under the curse of the
law, and under that law which can never justify before God.

Now to keep the law in such a state as this is, will make every soul shun
it, not daring to come under it, as seeing nothing but death in it. Satan is
the souls greatest enemy, in darkning it with legal principles, that it sees
not Christ: so are those the greatest enemies to the holy, just, and good law
of God, that would pull that nature of Christ in his Spirit from it, and leave
it still, the law of the letter in the hand of Moses, when God and Christ has
made it Gospel-law, the law of love in the Spirit.

The law may here complain, as the Spouse did of those watchmen that rent her
veil; those that rend Christ from the law, rend the beautiful veil, the
glory of the law from it. These holds forth the law dead, like Lazarus in the
grave, stinking, and those that follow it, weeping. Or as Pharaoh to the
children of Isael, doubling the tale of bricks, and giving no straw, what glory
is there in this. But those that hold out the Law in the Spirit, holds it not
only forth as a law that lives, but a law that gives life, so far from
requiring the tale of brick to be doubled, and give no straw, that in every
duty it brings Christ in, whence we are able to do all things.

This makes it plainly appear who they be which deny the law, and may justly
be distinguished by the name of Antinomians.

Again, this exhorts Saints, that seeing it is part of the redemption of the
blood of Christ; That no law but the law of love, the spirit of life in Christ
should rule or reign in the conscience of a believer: To take the counsel of
the Apostle in Gal. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in that liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. God
has not given, nor Saints received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but
the pirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. This is the life of our
lives, to live in the spirit. It is the great promise of the Gospel to give the
Spirit. This would I know, when does the soul feast, but when God spreads
tables of love, and in the Spirit bids us eat my beloved, eat abundantly, and
be satisfied. Nature teaches the outward man to stand for liberty; oh then what
should grace do, how should this stir us up to stand for that liberty which
is our life; loose this, and loose all your spiritual life in a moment; do
but once look on the law out of Christ, and it will be with us as those in 2
Cor. 3.15. But even to this day when Moses is read, the veil is upon their
hearts. This veil will be a veil of darkness, that the soul shall not see
Christ in propriety in any of his offices, benefits, or merits. If any or all
these be dear, oh then stand fast in this liberty wherewith Christ bath made
us free. This is that freedom the Son has made, which is freedom indeed:
But if the Son make us not free, then are we bond men to eternity. If thy
heart be hard, look on him whom you have piereed, and then shall it be
evangelically melted. If sin sting thy conscience, look on him that is is
lifted up, which the brazen Serpent typified; this is our freedom, and Christ's
prerogative, the government is on his shoulders; he is that King, and his
Spirit that Law, which is only to reign in the conscience of his people.

Why should not our souls count dear of that which is so dear to Christ and
all his people. This is that glory Christ will not give to another; therefore
this is that glory we should only give to Christ. Oh then admire and extol
for ever this glory of the riches of the free grace of God in Christ, that has
freely given this state of grace, this glorious state to us that were by nature
the children of wrath as well as others. It does not yet appear what we shall
be, so that more glory shall be, then is yet revealed: but our souls must
confess, that which does appear is more glory then we can express. Sure
then it is our duty to admire and extol the riches of this free grace, which
has freed us from the law of sin and death, translated us from the power of
darkness to the Kingdom and government of his dear Son, enthroned Christ
in our hearts, and written his holy law there in his Spirit.

Oh let us extol this God in the fruits of the Spirit, which is love, joy,
peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance,
against which there is no law.

Thus I shall conclude; This is our freedom so to live in the Spirit, as to be
led by the Spirit.

CHAP. VII. Saints are complete before God in their union with Christ.
Coloss. 2.9. and part of the 10. verse. For in him dwells all the fullness of
the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him.
THIS portion of Scripture is a part of Paul's Epistile to the Church of God at
Colosse, it is the very center of all those sweet comforts that the holy Ghost
has dropped down in this Epistle. Nay sure I am, it holds forth the
cornerstone of all the building.

A Saints perfection, and the reason of it is the subject matter of this
Scripture.

The reason stands first in reading, as a foundation is laid before a sure
building.

The Apostle holding forth a Saints compleatnesse, sets before it Christ
fullness.

From these drops we may observe these two points.

First, That a Saint has no compleatnesse in the sight of God,

And secondly, That as a Saint is one with Christ,

First, That a Saint has no compleatnesse in the sight of God, but as it is
united to Christ.

To prove this; First observe the scope of the holy Ghost in this Scripture.
For in him, which is Christ, dwells all the fullness of the God head bodily.

Here the holy Ghost takes in the Godhead in all the fullness of it, and
centers it in Christ, and so makes out the Saints perfection in union with him;
As if he had said, all fullness in perfection dwells in Christ as the fountain
or the body, and is so in you as you are in him; he filled for you, you filled
in him; he complete as one with God, you complete as one with him, as Christ
says himself, I in the Father, and you in me. Mark it, till the holy Ghost
had centered all fullness in Christ: he mentions no compleatnesse for a Saint,
which points at this truth, had not Christ been full for us, we had never
been complete; and when he does mention the Saints compleatnesse, he does it
inclusively, complete in him. This is not only full mercy, but also it springs
from pure love, it is free grace that we are complete in him, for free grace
sees no compleatnesse but in him. Thou art my beloved Son (says God,
speaking of Christ) in whom I am well pleased. And in another place, I beheld
the travel of his soul, and am well pleased. I never met with any mention of
God being well pleased and satisfied, but Christ was Alpha and Omega, all in
all in it. This which is already laid down, makes a fair way for such a quere
as this is.

Pray wherein lies the compleatnesse of a Saint; what are the parts or
substance of Saints compleatnesse or fullness?

To this I answer, it will be best discerned by its contrary. The Saints
fullness and compleatenesse before God in Christ will be most transparent, when
we spiritually discern our condition in the first Adam: and that will appear
in Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. The Apostle speaking there of a state of nature, speaks of
a person dead in sins and trespasses, walking according to the course of the
wicked world, and the will of Satan that Prince of the Air, fulfilling the
lusts of the flesh, and so by nature the children of wrath.

This is the state of a natural man under the wrath of God, separated from the
bosom of God, and so dead in sins and trespasses; a vassal to Satan, led by
his will according to the course of the wicked world, fulfilling the lusts of
the flesh, alienated from God and Christ, and from the Commonwealth of Israel,
breaking every holy law of God so often as Satan will; And then (not having
Christ made a curse for him) lies under the curse of the law, and the wrath of
God to all eternity. A soul fully delivered from this state, and completely
stated in the bosom of God, and in glory with Christ, will be acknowledged a
full compleatnesse.

First, observe the state of nature drawn into these heads.

First, the wrath of God. Secondly, vassalage or slavery under Satan, to be
led to the fulfilling of lusts at his will. And lastly, to be dead in sins and
trespasses.

In opposition to these I shall hold out justification, sanctification, and
glorification.

And in these three heads I shall endeavor to show how we are complete in him,
namely, Christ.

First, how Christ is our complete Justification; see this in Romans 3.20. to the
25. Here Justification exclusively and inclusively is set forth. In verse. 20.
By the deeds of the law no flesh is justified in his sight. There the holy
Ghost shows where it is not by deeds of the law, I under stand our best du^^s
the highest performances we can make to the will of God in this, no
justification. But then look into the 24. verse, and there you shall see
Justification lying between, or in these two breasts, that always flow with
eternal life, namely the free grace of God, and the redemption of the blood of
Christ; here is free grace giving Christ to be our redemption, and Christ in
his blood giving satisfaction to his Fathers justice, bringing us to lie down
in the bosom of this freegrace, which gave him out for us; he does this by
being made a curse for us, Gol. 3.13. God and Christ are one in this as in all
things else; for lays the Text, He has made him to become sin for us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Isa. 53.5.11. mark there,
Christ is wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace laid on him. Now mark the issue, with his stripes we
are healed. And God sees the travel of his soul, and is satisfied. Here is
God satisfied, our souls healed, and all this through the wounds of Christ.
The whole book of God his sull of this; take for proof only these two places
more, Coloss. 1.13, 14. and then I think it will stand fair to view, that the
clect S^int stands before God for just fication complete in Christ this is the
part of the compleatnesse we have in Christ, and so delivered from the wrath
of God; for as one Text says, were there no law, there would be no finne; if
no rule, then no transgression; so may I say, the curse being born, and the law
satisfied for us, we are free from all wrath and condemnation: And thus are we
freed and delivered from a first part of the state of nature, the wrath of God;
Christ satisfies, and God justifies, as the Apostle expresses it in Romans 8.
latter end. Who shall condemn (says he) Christ has dyed, and is risen, and
God justifies. So that there he makes a challenge; Who shall condemn? He saw
this his compleatnesse in Christ, and glories in it.

The second thing in a state of nature is vassalage to Satan; to which in
opposition I proposed our sanctification by Christ, as a second part of our
compleatnesse in him. For proof of this, take that known place where the holy
Ghost says, Christ is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption, where Christ is made by God our satisfaction, he is filled for
us, and we filled of his fullness, as that ointment which fell from Aarons head
down to the skirts of his garment: so does the spirit of God descend from
Christ to us, dwelling plentifully in us, and so becomes our sanctification: As
in that 14th of John's Gospel. The Spirit shall lead into all truth; not only
discover truth, but lead into truth. So the 6th and 7th verses of Coloss. 2.
rooted, built up, and walking in Christ. The Apostle in another place
acknowledging his own insufficiency to any good work; yet (says he) through
Christ that strengthens me I can do all things, Coloss. 1.10, 11.

There is fruitfulness in every good work, as we are strengthened according to
the mighty power of Christ: Christ the Vine, and we the branches; a Saint bears
fruit as he is in Christ. Without me you can do nothing (says Christ.) A
Saint has life to live up to the will of God, only as he lies in the bosom
of Christ, and suckes life from him as being one with Christ, so as the
branches do from the Vine, Col. 3.3. A dead man cannot walk, no more can any
man out of Christ walk in the ways of God: but the Saints life is hid with
Christ in God: and therefore says the Apostle, It is not I that live, but
Christ in me.

I might abundantly enlarge in this, but I forbear, for I well know that the
Spirit of God in our souls is more then ten thousand witnesses besides. Thus
is Christ the Saints compleatnesse in point of sanctification, the which I hold
out in opposition to that vassalage that a natural man lies in under Satan.

The third thing that makes up the natural man's bondage is, be is dead in sins
and trespasses. To which I hold forth as our compleatnesse in Christ; the
Saints life and that a life of glory, to prove this, look into Col. 3.4. there
is Christ held out plainly as our life, and says the Text, at his appearing we
shall appear with him in glory, There is life in Christ, and glory in Christ;
Christ our life, and his glory our glory, which agrees with that of our
Savior, because I live you shall live also; and where I am you shall be: As if
the Lord had said, my beloved Saints you are as safe as I am, our lives and our
glory bound up in one, I laid down my life to take up yours, and now I have
laid up your life as sure as my own, both in my father and your fathers
bosom, I in the Father and you in me; My love, my fair one, my undefiled; you
are where I am, this truth sealed on Paul's spirit, by the spirit of Christ made
him triumph in this glorious inheritance, and trample upon all glory below it,
2 Cor. 5.1. He knew his interest in an eternal house, a building of God in
heaven; and in another place the same Apostle Hence forth is laid up for me a
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, Romans 8.30. There is all these
three branches proved, and this glory in the end of all: but it self without
end, etarnall glory. This point needs no more proof it is so clear a truth,
both in word and spirit, proving this I conceive the other is proved also, That
as a Saint is in Christ so he stands complete before God. I shall now give you
some reasons of that which is gone before;

First were there any compleatnesse for a believing soul but in Christ, and
not a full compleatnes for a believing soul in Christ, then God could not be a
just God, which is blasphemy to imagine; for God having made Christ to bear
our sins, and wounded him that we might be healed, this being the decree of
God, if there were any redemption but in Christ, God could not be just to
Christ.

And Secondly, if in his blood there were not a full R^demption, God could not
be just either to Christ that suffered, or us for whom he suffered; I come to
do thy will O Father (says Christ) Now Christ having performed every tittle
of his Fathers will, God in justice must make all redemption to come through
him; and to be to us a complete redemption.

A Third Reason. If it were not thus, then grace were not freegrace, nor full
grace. If there be any compleatnesse out of Christ then it must be our own,
than grace is not free grace; and if that we have in Christ be not complete,
and does not make us complete before God, then Grace is not full: now truly a
hard thought of God in either of these, must run against the whole current of
the word of God, and the experience of the Saints.

In the Spirit Saints may improve these truths by way of direction; if God by
his Spirit show us our own natural deformity, O then fly to Gods own
treasury for perfection and compleatnesse, Namely, to Christ, In whom is all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily and to this very end that Saints might be
complete in him, it is Satan's light that leads us to our duties for
compleatnesse, for the Holy Chost leaves it upon record that compleatnesse is
only in Christ, and surely if that lead the soul it shall be led to Christ for
compleatnesse. Did we believe this Scripture we must needs believe in Gods
compleatnesse, namely, Jesus Christ: The Apostle de^^res to know nothing but
Christ and him crucified, for he saw compleatnesse in him; never to want
compleatnesse in the eyes of God, is to go to him in that compleatnesse that
is God, Namely, Christ; for he is our compleatnesse, as the fullness of the
Godhead is in him.

Secondly, having pirched on Christ for our compleatnesse, let us believe
strongly, be established fully in him not doubting in the least, for our
compleatnesse is a complete God, God makes us complete in himself; God must be
displeased with his own pe^^^^tion if with a Saint in Christ, for a Saints
perfection is Christ, and Christ is the sulnesse of the Godhead. If we summon
in Satan, Law, Divine justice, Conscience, remainder of the old Adam within us,
and what ever can be thought on, yet here is a full answer to all, Christ is
ascended into Heaven as our compleatnesse, and Satan the accuser of the
brethren cast ou^; he was made a curse, and did bare it, and overcame it for
us, and in it satisfied the holy Law, and the just God for us; if the
remainders of the old Adam strugles, and conscience join with it to accuse us,
Christ answers, you are not complear in your own duries, but in me, I am
perfect, you can find no spot nor wrinkle in me, and in my perfection lies
your compleatnesse; So that every believing Saint eyeing his oneness with
Christ, may triumph as Paul in Romans 8. latter end. Who shall condemn? Or what
shall separate? and conclude as he does; Nothing shall be able to do it, for I
am complete in Christ. From all this there runs great consolation to the
children of God; We have here had a view of that perfection and compleatnesse
that God in his free grace has given unto us, and that the eyes of this pure
God will behold us in it to all eternity, which is the fullness of the Godhead
dwelling bodily in Christ, and we in him; he complete as God, we complete in
him, justice can lay no more to our charge then to Christ, for our
compleatnesse of justification is in Christ; the wrath of God can as soon rise
on Christ as on us, for he is our complete discharge from wrath, having borne
the curse for us, sin can no more separate us from God, then Christ from God;
for Christ is our complete atonement, our sins being taken from us, and laid
on Christ. Death can no more separate us from God then it has done Christ; he
bore all the sting of death for us, death is to Saints but a dissolution in the
flesh, that we might come home and possess to eternity that compleatnesse
with him. What can the soul desire for comfort that lies not in this? Christ is
full for us, and we complete in him; If God and Christ be enough for thy
soul, then satisfy it here, here is Gods compleatnesse, yea that
compleatnesse which is God made our compleatnesse; what can our souls judge
will be the end of this love? Truly it will be love without end, that love
which has made us complete in Christ, that love will make us complete with
Christ, not only glorious Heirs, but Heirs in glory; not only decked as the
Kings daughter, but lying for ever in the bosom of Christ as his Spouse, not
only to have visious of the Kingdom, but possession of the Kingdom, mortality
putting on immortality will not be all; but there shall be added to it a crown
of glory. It does not yet appear (says the T^x^) what we shall be: but when
be appears, we shall appear like him. It will be enough surely to be as
Christ is? Oh then here let our souls ceter; no reaching soul can reach after
more then is in Christ, he is complete enough to answer all desires, to quiet
all spirits, to fill all hearts, to cloth all naked souls; he is bread and
bread enough. Let us beg a mature steady eye of faith, always to behold
Christ the fullness of the Godhead bodily for us, and we complete in him;
then may we in life and death lift up our heads with joy unspeakable, and full
of glory in believing: Thus to live will be Christ, and to dye will be gain.
The soul will quietly wait till God loose the body, and rejoice to be
dissolved, knowing it shall be with Christ: the droppings of Heaven will stay
the soul quiet here, knowing that the compleatnesse and fullness of glory that
God and Christ is in shall sw^llow it up to all eternity. And thus it is and
shall be to be complete in Christ.

CHAP. VIII. Free Grace in God justifies and redeemeth through Christ.
Romans 3. verse. 24. Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus.
THe holy Chost does confirm and explain that pofitive truth; he lays down
in this verse by some verses going before and after, as from the 20. to the 28.
In the verse before he tells us all have sinned and come short of the glory of
God, and therefore stand in need to be justified. And in verse. 20. he tells us,
that by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in the sight of
God. Had the holy Ghost stopped here, it had been an addition of misery to a
fallen man: and the sad cries in the soul of man would have been like those
evil spirits to our Savior, that he was come to torment them before their
time. But Gods design is love, and the holy Ghost is to proclaim it, so that
all which goes before is but like the Ministry of John, to prepare the way for
Christ, to break the clouds, that the Sun of Righteousness may appear, and
that Saints may see by an eye of faith that they are no loosers in that the
menstruous rags of their own duties should not be a justifying
righteousness to them in the pure eyes of God: but that full justification is
given of the free grace of God, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

In the words is a birth, the womb that gives it forth when it had conceived
it, and the Midwife from whose hands and sides we receive it; and all these
infinitely holy and glorious, the birth is, Justification to a soul that has
sinned and come short of the glory of God; the womb that conceives and brings
forth this glorious birth it is the Free Grace of God; and the Midwife from
whose hands and sides we receive this, is a Christ crucified. One observation
from these three, which is this; That all the glorious life of an elect soul
delivered from the state of a fallen sinner, and made a redeemed Saint, is from
eternity and to eternity wholely conceived and given forth, in and from the
womb of the free grace of God.

This is demonstrable under these two heads.

First, in considering a soul under a state of nature.

Secondly, under a state of Grace.

Or if you will, in the first and the second Adam, in both which I think the
exceeding glory of that great womb, the eternal jove and free grace of God
will appear, in taking lost creatures out of the first Adam, to make them
glorious Saints in the Lord Christ, that second Adam. I know no other light nor
rule but the word and spirit to make out any thing of God to any soul;
therefore first, search the word what light it gives us to discern our state by
nature, or the natural condition of fallen men and women.

To take this in the beginning of holy writ, let us turn to Genesis 3.6, 7, 8, 9,
10. Here we find the fall of our first Parents, in which we all fell, and the
effects of this fall in them; They fell by difobeying God in eating the
forbidden fruit: but then obferve the effects of this fall when they knew their
nakedness, the only relief they sought was aprones of fig leaves, or as it is
in the Margin, things to gird about them, and here they rest content; they saw
their nakedness a great advantage truly, but having girded themselves with
fig leaves they knew no want of God, for in verse 8. when they heard the voice
of God, and that in the cool of the day, they hid themselves from the presence
of the Lord, amongst the trees of the garden; and when God came so near to
them as they were fallen to confess the reason why they fled from his presence,
they acknowledged they were afraid verse 10. Compare these first appearances of
nature in our first parents after their fall, with the experiences of our own
natural hearts and others, and it will appear in all that is miserable what
exact Images we are by nature of these our first parents.

They were naked, so are all by nature of any righteousness to stand in the
sight of God; they knew they were naked, so does many a desperate finner whose
conscience f^ies in his face: but the remedy they sought was only an apron or
girdle of figleaves. So does our natural hearts lick their wounds whole, and
cover their nakedness, by legal and formal duties and performances, girding
our loins, strengthening our hearts in them, and covering our nakedness so as
the eye of man cannot discern it, and in this posture as our first Parents hid
themselves amongst the trees of the garden from the presence of the Lord, so we
shroud our selves under public external Ordinances after the fashion of the
world, and resting in beggarly rudiments to defend us from the presence of an
angry God, and yet not withstanding all this when God comes close to the soul,
though it has girt it self about with fig leaves, its own righteousness yet
it is not established, but does confess in all the actions under such a state
it was afraid because of its nakedness, and this fear does inflame the misery
of it, and causes it to fly and hide it self from the presence of God, here is
the first buddings of nature, and truly it is an exact miserable condition, for
it is wholely in self, and wholely out of God, the relief this soul finds
is in flying from, and being out of the presence of God; now sure I am, every
Saint experienced of Gods love, will call this state a state completely
miserable, knowing that all its life happiness lies in a close communion with
the bosom of God, and a continual beholding of his face in Christ, yet this
state thus completely miserable is not Adams alone: but all his seed in him,
of which by nature is all the world, as is fully expressed in verse 23. of this
3. Chap. of the Romans, For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God. The misery of this state of nature, may be farther amplified in
co^fidering thar Antipathy that is in all to that holy just and good law of
God, and that impossibility which is in man to perform it; one place says
speaking of the law, it is that which neither we nor our forefathers could
bear, we could not stand under it to justify our selves by it. The Apostle in
Romans 3.9. to verse. 19. speaks plainly this general evil state by nature, and
the fruits of it in many particulats in oppolition to all the laws of a holy
God. And in verse. 19. speaks plainly, that the Law makes all the world guilty,
and so makes his inference in the 20th verse, that none can be justified by the
deeds of the law: and then he gives his reason for it, which is this; For
(says he) by the law is knowledge of sin. Gods pure nature discovers the
impure nature of fallen man, so in the following verses speaks of a blessed and
a justified state for a poor soul under another head: But all this speaks the
miserable, irrecoverable lost state of a natural man in himself, the fruits
of this tree of nature we may see in that 2d of Ephesians. the three first verses.
Though it be a dead tree, yet at beats fruit, but it is the fruit of death,
trespasses and sins, walking in them according to the course of this world, and
the power of the Prince of the Air, that spirit which works in the children
of disobedience, who are by nature the children of wrath.

Any of these particulars rightly understood, and set home upon the spirit of a
man, will make it cry out as the Apostle. O wretched man that I am: and in me
(that is in my flesh) is no good.

But certainly if ever we come to see that sink and mass of sin and
corruption that is in us by nature, and that wages of sin which is death; we
shall then acknowledge if ever God discover his thoughts of eternal love to
us, that it is all free grace.

The second demonstration of the point is; To consider a Saint under a state of
grace in Christ, the second Adam.

To take this in the beginning as it stands in the word, let us turn back to
that 3d of Genesis 15. where Christ is promised in the seed of the woman, and what
to do? to break the head of the Serpent; that is, to kill and overcome him.
The Apostle in 1 Cor. 15.21. says, be must reign till he has put all his
enemies under his feet. And in this conquest over his own, and his peoples
enemies, he does the will of his Father; we have his own word for it, John
4.30. This does exceedingly set forth the free grace of God, that when he found
all man-kinnde in a state of rebellion; so soon as ever he had enquired into
the fault, he makes a promise of the Lord Christ in whom the state of a poor
soul is better then in innocence. As if the Lord had said, Adam though thou
did run from me, and was afraid because thou were naked; yet now establish
thy heart in beholding my fullness which is thy clothing; cast from thee the
works of thy own hands, that fig-leave righteousness thou have begirt thy
self with, and lay hold on the workings forth of my eternal love in this
promise of Christ. The Serpent has been too hard for thee, when he found thee
in thy own strength: but I will give out Christ that great gift of my love, and
he shall as he is one with me from eternity, in my everlasting power and
fullness make war with the Serpent: and in that warfare, though the Serpent
shall bruise his heel, wound his flesh; yet he shall break the head of the
Serpent, and overcome him. This must needs be free grace to make such a promise
to fallen Adam and his posterity that ran from the presence of God, and were
content with fig leaves for a covering of their nakedness; You may see in
nature there is as little desire of Christ and his righteousness, as there can
be of discerning; for here is a flying from the presence of God, and a
satisfying it self with its own righteousness: and certainly this
righteousness is nothing but menstruous rags; that is that state in which God
loves a soul though it lies in its blood, so as no eye but Gods can pity it,
and is not this free grace then? Let us consult with the covenant of grace, and
see if it be not free grace, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. The engagements in it are
from God, and thereupon God freely engages himself to make a man eternally
happy in his love; God engages himself to be our God, and we shall be his
people; that he will forgive our iniquities, and that he will remember our
sins no more, and that he will put his law in our hearts, and write it in our
inward parts.

What soul can discern this in the Spirit, but he must acknowledge God in the
riches of his free grace. In Heb. 7.19. The holy Ghost speaks plainly, that the
law makes nothing perfect but the bringing of a better hope. As if he had said,
it is free grace, not the deeds of the law that perfects any soul. That soul
which is complete before God, it must be in him, namely Christ. And says
another Text; If the Son has made you free, you are free indeed; which
implies there is no freedom or compleatnesse but in Christ. Now Christ says
the Text, is the redemption of the free grace of God, and that the Apostle knew
full well, when he desired to know nothing but Christ and him crucified. In
Romans 8. The Apostle glories in the free grace of God. It is God that justifies
(says he) and Christ that has dyed; Who shall condemn? As if he had said,
free grace has magnified it self to me, in which I am safe, so that none can
condemn, and in this I glory. And the same Apostle in Romans 5.2. makes mention
of the access that Saints have by faith into the grace wherein they stand. If
we look into the 53d. of Isa. we shall there find particulars of much of that
grace of God under which we are; namely, the sufferings of Christ for us. The
Text says plainly, He bore our griefs, and carried our sorrows: and he was
wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, and the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and it is by his stripes that we are
healed, and his soul was made an offering for our sins, and that God beheld
the travel of his soul and was satisfied. This is a state of grace indeed;
for if we compare this with 2 Cor. 5. the last, we shall see there a plain
discovery of the design of Gods free grace; says the Text, he was made sin for
us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. The
Lord which had no sin of his own, had never been made sin, nor had he born
sin with all the punishments due to them, but for this end and design of God,
namely, that fallen sinners in the first Adam might be his righteousness in the
second Adam, the Lord Christ.

Now surely this is a state of grace to be the righteousness of God in Christ,
Romans 10.4. The Apostle tells us, Christ is the end of the law for righteousness
to every one that believes. And this salvation is of the free grace of God;
we have this righteousness freely of his grace, Gal. 2.16. By the works of
the law shall no man be justified, Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the works
of the law are under the curse. But in verse. 13. of that Chapter, Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.

In short, this is the state of grace, Christ made ours, and we his; he made
sin for us, and bearing all punishment due to sin for us, satisfied Gods
justice, and made a redemption to a perfect state of innocence in him.

Thus Christ has taken all that is ours, and given us all that is his; his
blood to cleanse us, his righteousness to perfect us in the sight of God, his
Spirit to guide us, to lead us into all truth, and to do all our works in us,
Gal. 5.16, 17, 18. and at last to resign us up to his Father to enjoy fullness
of glory with him to all eternity.

Now read all this backward and forward, and behold the heights, the
breadths, the depths, and lengths of it, and then you will find it all the
free grace of God: and sure I am, every soul which in the Spirit comes to know
and behold himself thus fully justified, will give God the glory, and
acknowledge it to be freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ.

This gives all to know that Gods way in justifying of his people, is through
Christ the great gift of his free grace; not of works (says the Text) no not
from good meanings, or from good doing; all good in a Saint arises from his
one-nesse with Christ, in whom both persons and duties are justified by the
free grace of God. It is not our externals makes our beauty in the sight of
God, not our getting into fellowship with the Saints, and enjoying Ordinances
and privileges with them, but our fellowship with Christ; I in you, and you in
me (says Christ.) And the Spouse, my beloved is mine, and I am his. I, herein
lies the glory and the interest of a justified one. Christ says to his, Come
ye blessed of my Father: and the Father says ye are complete in him. Here is
God making a soul from all eternity one with Christ, and pronouncing him for
ever justified in the blood and righteousness of Christ.

Oh then, when you have but a thought of standing justified before God, lay
down all but Christ. If you have an eye to duties, look on them as the fruits
of Christ in you, by whom you are justified of the free grace of God; you may
look on duties as the fruits of your Justification, but none but Christ as the
root and foundation of it.

Secondly, It should beget admiration, in considering Gods giving freely such
eternal love, and loveliness to his elect Saints, though by nature they hated
him; Let us ask our soul in the truth of that word, which tells us, God loved
us before we loved him, and that he chose us we did not choose him; what
struglings has our natures made against his love shed abroad in our hearts.

Oh then what vild hearts had we before he dropped love into them; yet to us
God does not only drop drops of love, but he gives us all his love, and to
witness it he gives Christ the son of his love which knew no sin, to be
made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; the
perfection of righteousness.

Oh here is love making loveliness; here is Christ given to a soul, which is
infinite love, and being found in his righteousness is made perfect lovely,
without spot or wrinkle (says the Text) complete in him. Can we consider
this, and not admire it; we can as men admire that we can give no reason for.
Oh then let us admire this love of God, which surpasses all our reason, and can
never be apprehended but by an eye of faith, why any should be vessels of
wrath, and not we, or why we vessels of honor, when others are vessels of
dishonor. If you can give me no reason, then admire this love, this free love,
this full and eternal love! Oh what beloved like our beloved, that could love
such wretches as we, and so love us as to make us one with himself to all
eternity; this is only fit to be admired by Saints.

First, This calls upon Saints to trust God, and to live upon him by faith.

Secondly, To love God and Jesus Christ which has thus loved us.

Lastly, To lie low at the feet of God and the weakest Saints! Oh trust God;
who is like him to be trusted? Which has forgiven us freely, and justified us
freely and fully, when God might have glorified his Justice in our damnation,
but has freely chosen to glorify his grace in our salvation. Oh for a Saint
to distrust God, how unworthy it is of that love and free grace by which we
stand justified in his sight for ever. If God should argue with us thus; what
do you distrust me? Do you think I either am, or will be wrath with you? Why
I have made you one with Christ, and I can as well be in wrath with him as with
you; What should I do: more, I have cleansed you in the blood of my Son, and
clothed you with my own righteousness, and do you think I can now be wrath
with you? Surely then you think me unjust may God say. I have told I you am
satisfied in Christ, and how can I as a just God satisfy my wrath on you
again. Nay I have put my Spirit into your hearts, by which you have come to me
crying Abba-Father, and yet do distrust me! Surely it is your flesh, and not
my Spirit in you, which creates these hard thoughts of me. I say if God should
argue thus with us, who should be able to answer him. God is a gracious God to
us, a God of free grace; oh then live on the free grace of this gracious God;
what though thon can not see those qualifications in thee that would persuade
thee to love thy enemy, were they in him; yet measure not God by thy self, he
is a God of infinite free grace, his ways are past finding out: Now if he tells
and persuades thee by his spirit he loves thee, believe it this love was from
eternity, and shall abide to eternity; enquire no reason, God is above thy
reason, live on him by faith. If God tell thee he has laid thy iniquities on
Christ, and the grief and punishment due to them, and that he stood as the
sinner in thy room, because thou might for ever stand righteous in him. I
say, if God tell a poor soul this in the Gospel those glad tidings of peace,
oh then go not back to Satan and thy own heart to find reason of this love
and qualification suitable to this love, before thou will believe Gods word: but
lie down at the feet of God, and cast thy self at the throne of his
free grace, for there is thy salvation; believe that the reasons is in
himself, and the suitable qualifications shall spring from communion with
himself, and the Lord Christ in the Spirit.

Secondly, Oh love God and Jesus Christ which has and does thus love us; oh
that our hearts did truly say there is no beloved like our beloved. Who will
show us any good (says one Text.) Why soul, will thou not love those that show
thee good? Oh then love God and Christ in whom is all thy life, and all the
good of it bound up, what ever may engage love it is all in God and Christ;
there is the fullness of riches, and glory, and mercy, and beauty, and
pleasures, and honors, and all that the vastest soul can desire to be found
in fellowship with the Father and the Son. If there were no other argument but
this to love him, it were enough, because he loved us, and gave himself for
us. The Father gave him, and he willingly became sin for us: and he tells us
the end; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Oh that now in
the beholding of this love, we might be changed to his Image, to be love as God
is love.

Lastly, Oh lie low at the feet of God, and the weakest Saint, when we look
upon all our glorious inheritance as Heirs, and Coheirs with Christ, yet
remember it is all of free grace. It Is of grace we are saved out of the jaws
of hell; What have thou which thou have not received; you shall find it in the
design of God to exclude boasting: As in Romans 3.27. Let not the wise man glery
in his wisdom, the rich man in his riches, nor the strong man in his strength:
but let him that glories glory in the Lord; For truly a Saint has no glory
but as he is in God and Christ. The Apostle Paul desired to know nothing but
Christ and him crucified, and only to be found in his righteousness; this was
his his glory: and says he, If I boast, I will boast of the Cross of Christ.
He had according to the outward man learning and honor, and much to boast of:
but this is self, and he throws it down at the feet of God, and will only
glory as he is one with Christ. And truly when a soul can say, my beloved is
mine, and I am his, he has spoken all at once, and this glory of the Sun
puts out the light of the Stars, and now all that is self is nothing. I
(says Paul,) in me, that is in my flesh, in all that is my self, there is no
good.

Thus is a Saint living on the free grace of God, nothing in himself, but all
in Christ: and from hence he comes to prize the weakest Saint, he looks on him
as hewed out of the same Rock, as an heir of the same glory, as a soul created
in that free grace that himself is, and so argues thus; he is my brother, and
though he be weak and I strong, yet I must not boast, but bear; not boast
over him, but bear him in my arms. If I have more gifts, they are al for the
edification of the body, and not to discourage the least member, but to help
all, and therefore says he, my bosom shall be a bed for my brother to rest
in. And if he may see further on my shoulders, I will lie down at his feet
that he may get up. If I have gifts, it is to bear the burden of the weak;
Gifts truly sanctified, heithens Christ, but they humble a Saint. Christ
discovers himself by them, and the Saint in beholding Christ's fullness does
see his own emptiness, and so owns and admires God, but abases and denies
himself. The soul argues thus, that justifying grace I have from Christ; it
is for my self, and I rest in it: but my sanctifying grace, those gifts and
fruits of the Spirit, they are in me for the good of others, and therefore
looks on it as his duty, and that he is obliged by the law of Christ shed
abroad in his heart, to become all things lawful to all men, that he may
gain some: Againing and not a destroying work is in his eye, and this makes
him indeed and in truth to lie low at the feet of the weakest Saint, and this
he does from a spiritual consideration, how that he stands justified to all
eternity by the free grace of God through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, for we are justified freely by the grace of God through Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IX. Christ and the new Creature are unseparable.
2 Cor. 5. former part of verse. 17. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature.
THE Apostle does in this Scripture (as in all other) like a good and faithful
servant, make it his whole business and design to advance his Masters glory
(the Lord Jesus Christ.)

A new creature is the most glorious object that the world affords, and the
Apostles care is to hold that forth in all its glory, namely in Christ.

A creature in Christ is a new creature indeed, and a new creature is in Christ
indeed. As if the Apostle had said, there is not any man who is in Christ, what
ever he was before, but by virtue of that union he is made a new creature,
though before a wild Olive; yet so soon as ingrafted into Christ the tree of
life, he brings forth good fruit. As you cannot gather grapes from thorns,
nor figs of thistles, no more can the members of Christ be barren, or bring
forth briers or thistles in stead of the fruits of the Spirit, which is love,
joy, etc. Christ is the Saints fountain that is united to him, out of whom can
flow no bitter water. He that is borne of God sins not, so far as the new
birth is in him, though there be a law in the members, in the flesh of Saints,
which serves the law of sin, yet with the law of their minds they serve the
will of God; so that you shall find Saints in this frame, complaining of
self, and admiring of God, condemning of self, and justifying of God, the
remainder of the old man in me, that is my self, my flesh says a Saint: but
the new creature that is Christ in me the hope of glory, that is, the King of
glory come into my soul, and displaying the glory of his presence there, that
is Christ in me, and I in Christ, in whom I am made a new creature; therefore
if any man be in Christ he is a new creature: and if any man be a new creature
it is Christ in him.

That there may appear Method in what follows take this one general
Observation, Namely;

That being in Christ and the new creature are inseparable, they always gee
together.

If in Christ then a new creature, and if a new creature then in Christ, as it
is impossible to be a new creature before united to Christ; so it is as
impossible to be truly in Christ, and not to be a new creature, as those dead
bones could not live before God had united them, covered them with skin, and
breathed life into them. For testimony to this truth, take in the Apostle Paul
in Romans 8.10. And if Christ be in you the body is dead because of sin, but the
spirit is life because of righteousness. He gives us this truth as it were
upon his experience, as if he had said, I have found this, that ever since I
have bin in union with Christ, the body of sin has bin a dying, and the spirit
of life has carried me forth to the fruits of righteousness, I am dead now to
the commands of sin and flesh, by which I have formerly binned captive, and am
made alive in my spirit to the works of righteousness; and if you ask me a
reason of this, it is Christ in me: And i^ Christ be in you, it will be so with
you too, your bodies will be dead to the commands of sin, and your spirits
alive in the fruits of righteousness, you will find Christ a living Christ,
the second man from heaven heavenly; and as a living Christ, so he makes life
where ever he comes, and the life he brings is heavenly; Christ makes the new
creature, and therefore can never be without the new creature; What has its
being from Christ cannot be without Christ; Now the new creature has its being
from Christ it could not be but in Christ, and by Christ: so that it must needs
follow it is always with Christ; where Christ is there is the new creature
indeed, the new creature is nothing else but Christ possessing himself of a
soul, living in it, and reigning over it by his spirit, as Satan does in the
mere natural man. A Saint he dies with Christ and he lives with Christ;
Christ dies for him and lives in him, and we shall find the Apostle Paul in
Gal. 2.20. making this confession and acknowledgment, I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I but Christ lives in me; and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, who loved
me and gave himself for me. He does acknowledge himself to be dead, crucified
to himself in the death of Christ, and then lays hold of another life, but it
is out of self, by faith in Christ, this is my very life now whilst I am in
the flesh says he, and truly this my life is Christ in me, and it is not I but
Christ that lives in me, that faith which is in me is not self but Christ; as
if he had said, my life is a new life, and that life is the new creature, and
that new creature is Christ in me, I am that Temple which you see Christ lives
in, but Christ is the life of that Temple; Without me (says Christ) you can
do nothing: True Lord says Paul, but through thy strength I can do all
things, as if Christ had said, you cannot be new creatures till you be in me
and I in you; I find that true says Paul, for in me that is in my flesh,
there is no good: But I have also experimented this truth, if once in thee I
can be no longer an old creature, as he tells us in Gal. 1.15, 16. So soon as
ever God had called me by his grace, to reveal his son in me, that I might
preach him among the heathens, immediately, I obeyed and did not stand to
confer with flesh and blood. Not to see by his old eyes, nor to act upon his
old principles, flesh and blood must no longer teach and lead Paul when God had
called him by his grace, and revealed Christ to him, as if Paul should say, I
am now united to the Lord Jesus, and I cannot but be a new creature, the
Kingdom of God is within me, and it will burst out, it is like new wine in old
bottles, as my flesh was not able to act the new creature without Christ, no
more is it able to conceal the new creature now Christ is borne in me; I am
now led by the Spirit and I walk in the Spirit; and the fruits of the Spirit
is, love, joy, peace, etc. And such are they that are in Christ, for they have
crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof. That is Christ in them has
crucified the flesh, and they are dead to it, so that their life is in the
spirit, and they both live and walk in the spirit, because Christ lives in
them, and they live and act merely from Christ: Saints in Christ are branches
in the Vine; And if Christ be the root, then holiness will be the fruit; for
no other fruit can grow from that root.

The demonstration of this truth may be found in the particulars following, the
first demonstration is this;

That it is Gods design from eternity, that such as are united to Christ,
should be made new creatures in Christ, that Christ should work holiness in
Saints, and that Saints should work holily, as created unto holiness in
Christ. For proof to this take that full place of Scripture in Ephe. 2.10. For
we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
before ordained that we should walk in them. In the foregoing verses, he tells
us that we are saved merely of grace, and though God makes faith the hand to
lay hold upon this free grace of his in Christ; yet that faith is the free gift
of God, as well as Christ which faith lays hold on; and so wrappes up all
salvation in free grace, and in verse 9. excludes works wholely upon that
account: But now least the wicked natural heart of man should conclude thus,
my salvation is only upon free grace, good works adds nothing to it,
therefore as my salvation is left to Christ so my conversation is left to my
self, If I believe in Christ for to be saved, I may live as I list. I say to
answer this in full, arguing of our natural hearts, the Holy Ghost tells us
that though holiness and good works are not under the account of
jstuification, yet that the conversation of Saints in truth is as purely out of
their own hands as their just fication is, for says the Text, We are his
workmanship (that is Gods) created in Christ Jesus unto good works; which God
has before ordained that we should walk in them. The holy Ghost speaks
methinkes very fully to this truth in this place, that it is ordained and
decreed by God from all eternity, that such as are saved by Christ should be
sanctified in Christ; as it was the design of God from all eternity to save
souls merely of his grace through Christ, so is it the same design of God to
sanctify every soul whom he saves through Christ, now this is the decree of
God, that if any man be in Christ, and Christ be his justification, that Christ
shall be in him and his sanctification: so that if any man be in Christ, he is
a new creature; for the one is as fully the design and desire of the free grace
of God as the other; holiness it is the work of God, committed (as I may say)
to the hands of Christ. The same Apostle tells us That Christ is made to us of
God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. And God carries
on this decree of his, when he calls a soul to lie in his bosom, and to have
communion with himself through the Lord Christ. The Apostle makes it an
argument in 1 These. 4.7. For God has not called us unto uncleanenesse but unto
holiness. His business in the foregoing verses is to exhort them to
holiness, and to avoid the lusts and concupiscence of the Gentiles, which
says he, knew not God, and makes this the argument to his exhortation; for God
has called us to holiness, God has united us to Christ, and in that union he
has decreed that we shall be sanctified as well as saved, so that to me this
is a full demonstration, that if any man be truly in Christ he is a new
creature; for this is the decree of God from all eternity, and shall abide to
all eternity.

A second demonstration of this truth may be this; That the teachings of Christ
in those that are truly taught by him, is to put off the old man which is
corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts of the flesh, and to put on the new
man, which is to be renewed in the spirit of their minds, after the image of
God in righteousness and true holiness. The proof of this does appear in
Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. But you have not so learned Christ. If so be that
you have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus: That
ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts of the flesh, and be renewed in the spirit of
your minds: and that you put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

By this Scripture it appears, that such souls as have learned Christ, and
truths as they are in Jesus, they are thereby renewed in the spirit of their
minds, so as that the old man which is after the flesh is put off, and the
new man put on, which is after God created in righteousness and true
holiness. Christ teaches with power, and his teachings make a change from
flesh to spirit, and from the carnal conversation of the old man to the image
of God in the Spirit, according to righteousness and holiness. Christ he
renewes the mind and the conversation; when he teaches, his teachings
reaches the internals; the root receives life from him, so that the fruit is
the image of God in righteousness and true holiness; not a bare form all
professed holiness, but a true holiness, that is holiness in truth, which is
in Christ the truth it self: so that the demonstration is full; Christ and the
new creature always go together: but as if the Apostle had said, there may be
many formal, carnal wretches that may profess Christ, and lay claim to him:
but this is a standing truth, they have not been taught truths as they are in
Jesus, and for their formality and carnality, they have that from the old man
what ever they profess of Christ; for sure I am they have not so learned
Christ: his teachings are spiritual, and his renewings are in the mind, which
makes the image of God in righteousness and true holiness in the
conversation; not only a naked professed holiness, for if Christ, then the new
creature.

A third Demonstration may be this: That God is light, and in him is no
darkness, so that whoever has fellowship with God and Christ, walks in the
light as God is light; for proof of this take a Scripture or two, 1 John 1.5,
6. This is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you that
God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have
fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and know not the truth.

This is the message which the holy Ghost brings, that God is infinitely light
and purity in himself, and if any man have union with him, he walks in the
light: and if he walk in the dark, and profess union with God and and
Christ, he lies, and the truth is not in him. Now by light and darkness
often in Scripture Language is meant the old and the new man; the regenerate,
and the unregenerate man. As in that Scripture; The night is far spent, and
the day is at hand, walk as children of the day, or children of the light.
Children of the Gospel, such as Christ by his Spirit has taken possession of;
this Gospel Light the Spirit of God teaching, it teaches to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world. God is this light in himself, and he makes this light
where ever he dwells; that soul which truly has God, has this light, and that
soul which acts from God, acts from this light. Now says the holy Ghost, it
is a lie for you to say you live in God, and God in you, and yet walk carnally
as do others. Says God in the Psalms, I am not such a one as thy self.
Where there is union between God and a soul, God is not brought over to the
soul, but the soul to God. If any soul owneth union with me, says God, know
that I am light, and in me is no darkness: so as I overcome the darkness of
dark souls, which have fellowship with me by my light. I find all souls in
darkness, but I keep no soul in darkness. I find every sinner in his
blood, but I purge as well as pardon. It is true, regeneration is not in every
soul alike for measure and degree: but God leaves no soul as he finds it, his
light is always expelling darkness; the old man dies daily, and so is the
new man renewed, Christ that stronger man so soon as ever he possesses a
soul, sets upon that work of casting out the strong man of sin: and as he
told Paul, so he tells and makes it good to every Saint, my grace shall be
sufficient for you, sin shall not reign in your mortal bodies. Christ's
presence is manifested by his power, where he lives, sin must dye, so that
sin, Satan, and the soul shall know it. You shall know (says Christ) if
you be in me I will make you new creatures. It shall be your meat and drink
to do my will, as it was mine to do my Fathers, and my commands shall be
sweet to you as the honey and the honeycomb; my yoke shall be easy, and my
burden light to you, 1 John 2.29. If you know that he is righteous, you know
that every one that does righteousness is borne of him. This is the effects of
union with God and Christ, God in Christ; to do righteousness, that is, to
walk in the light as he is light, to walk by his light the light of his
Spirit, which does both teach and lead Saints into all the will, work, and
ways of God: So that this Demonstration does farther clear the truth, that
who ever are in Christ they are new creatures. Christ and the new creature are
inseparable, they always go together.

A fourth Demonstration may be this, That such as are truly Saints in union
with Christ, they have all their life from him; their buddings forth is from
the sap which they receive from the Lord Christ; we may receive truth from our
Savior himself in John 15.5. I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without
me you can do nothing. Now if this be truth, which none but the spirit of
untruth can deny, then I argue thus from hence. That if Saints be in union with
Christ, as the branches are in the Vine, and have all their sap and life from
Christ, then the life, and actions of life in Saints, must all bear the image
of Christ: in nature like begets like; that which is begotten, is like that
which does beget, as we see in the bringing forth of all creatures: so is it
with the new creature, Christ he begets it, and the begotten is Christ, so that
the new creature is Christ in the soul, as that Text. Know you not that Christ
is in you, except you be reprobates? And ye are the temple of the holy Ghost.
And if this be granted, we that Christ begets after his own image, then none
with color of reason can deny that who ever is in Christ is a new creature;
for who ever is in Christ is as the branch in the Vine. He is not his own, but
the roots, his life and his fruit is not his own but the roots; for if the
branch be separate from the root, it has neither life nor fruit; well then, if
in union with Christ we are not our own but Christ's, and our fruit not our
own, but the fruit of Christ, then tell me how can any man be in Christ and
not a new creature; is Christ a dead Christ in any soul? No, he is not only a
living Christ in every soul u^i^ed to him, but he is the life, and puts
forth all the effects of life in such souls; then if Christ be all, that all
must be Christ, and whoever is in Christ they are new creatures, so that Christ
and the new creature is unseparable.

Take this 5th and last Demonstration; That where ever Christ is, he is chief
in command, Lord Paramount, he rules and governs what ever soul he lives in.
Now the Scepter of Christ is a Scepter of holiness and righteousness; where
Christ is King, his love makes laws, and his Spirit gives light and life.
Christ subjects they are a willing people in the day of his power. The powrings
forth of his Spirit makes his will their will, so that to all his will they are
a willing people; then surely where the power of Christ over-powers any soul,
that soul acts by the power of Christ in him, and must therefore act according
to the will of Christ who gives the power, and that will and work is the new
creature in such a soul. The power of Christ in souls is suitable to his own
walking on earth. I come to do thy will O Father, says Christ: so when he
overpowers any soul, the effect of his powerful presence is to frame such a
soul in obeisance to the will of God. One Text tells us, he that is borne of God
sins not. So much of the regenerate part that is in any man, so much that man
is above the committing of sin: and we find the Apostle Paul distinguishing
between a law in his members and a law in his mind, and he thanks God through
Jesus Christ, that with the mind he served the law of God, though with the
flesh the law of sin. The Lord Christ he ruled and governed in the mind of
Paul, and he does acknowledge it; for he thanks God through Jesus Christ, he
served the law of God with his mind, and so bears witness to this truth,
that where Christ commands and governes, there Gods law is obeyed. And the same
Apostle in the next chapter, Romans 8.2. For the law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death. As if he had
said, I was in bondage under the law of sin in the condemning and the reigning
power of it, till Christ came to command in my soul by his Spirit, and then I
found deliverance, so that now I can say, It is not I, but Christ that lives in
me. The old man, the law of sin, was in command till Christ came: but now
we that were sometimes darkness are made light in the Lord, and that light is
the light of life: and the love of Christ shed abroad in our hearts is both
root and strength to a new life. So the same Apostle; I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me. Though the new creature be a work too hard
for my flesh, yet it is not too hard for Christ in the Spirit. Nay, it is the
certain, and the constant work of the Lord Jesus to make the new creature;
He is made to us of God Sanctification as truly as Redemption: so this is an
undeniable truth; That if any man be in Christ he is a new creature.

In this meditation there is much to inform us, exceeding useful for a
christians knowledge.

As first, it informs all of the holiness and purity of God; that though his
grace call, pity, and pardon the worst of sinners, yet his purity will
imbosome no soul but in Christ: and in Christ he makes them new creatures. The
Lord Christ himself tells us in one Text, That no man comes to the Father but
by him. And this Text tells us, That if any man be in Christ he is a new
creature: So that such souls as come and lie down in the bosom of God, come
through Christ in whom they are made new creatures, as God in himself is that
perfection to whom there can be no addition; so he is that perfect purity which
cannot have communion with any impure thing; God is that light which discovers
all darkness, and that fire which burns up all dross, so that if filth
approach his presence, his light discovers it, it cannot be hid from him; all
thoughts and things are always naked before his presence, and his fire
consumes it; for God out of Christ is a consuming fire; truly he knows not God
which says in his heart, that God and Belial may live together. Our God is a
God of glory, and the glorious God; he is not a God which has eyes and sees
not, ears and hears not, hands and handles not; exclude sin, and then
there is nothing, he is not; he is the all of all, the first, the fountain,
and the fullness of all, but sin: so that God is so infinitely pure, that he
is all but what is impure; he is pure in the fountain, and the fountain of
purity. Purity flows only from God, and that only returns to God; nothing but
purity can dwell in God, for God is pure.

And if thus, then secondly this informs us of the riches of Gods free grace,
which has not only given us a justifying, but also a sanctifying Jesus. That
Christ should not only deliver his Elect from the condemning power, but also
from the reigning power of sin; not only deliver from the justice of God in
satisfying Justice for them, but so carrying them in his own righteousness,
into the bosom of God, where he bids them all eat my beloved, feed
abundantly and be satisfied. A Saints life is bound up in God, and his
blessedness is to have communion with God. Now considering the purity of God,
and the impurity of fallen man; if free grace had not made Christ our way, and
our Sanctification as our Redemption, we could never have been blessed in
communion with God. If the bosom of God be a place of rest? If the love of God
be the food of eternal life? If that glory at Gods right hand be more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory? Oh then what riches is that riches of
free grace which has given all this freely, and Jesus Christ in whom we have
these and all the fullness of glory, not only freely, but full, and that to all
eternity. If this be the fruit of grace, then surely it must be rich and
glorious grace, the fountain must needs be precious, the streams are so full
of glory. If we be saved, sanctified and glorified merely by grace, then it
must be rich grace that gives forth so richly to all eternity.

Thirdly, this informs us of the sad and miserable condition of profane
carnal wretches; the fruit of such lives tells us plainly that Christ is none of
their root. The fruits of darkness are discovered by the light, but cannot be
the proceeding or issue of the light. The flesh has works as proper to it,
and flows as naturally from it, as any the Spirit has. And the Apostle Paul
in Romans 8.5, 6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 5.8, 9. Gal. 5.17. to the end, does discover both
the roots and the fruits of flesh and Spirit, which are as clearly to be
distinguished between as light and darkness, and is in no nearer union then
the seed of the Serpent and the seed of the woman. If any man be in Christ he
is a new creature, old things are passed away, behold all things are become
new. Truly this is but sad tidings for such poor souls that are yet old
creatures, not yet renewed in the spirit of their minds. It speaks very loud
and plainly to them that they are not yet united to Christ; for were they in
him, he would soon make them new creatures. The Apostle Paul in Ephesians. 4.17,
18, 19. speaking of the Gentiles: Walking in the vanity of their minds, having
their understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance and blindness of their hearts, who being past feeling, had given
themselves over unto all lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. In verse. 20. But ye have not so learned Christ. As if he had
said, such a life as that is the proper fruit of a natural condition, a man
out of Christ, for Christ he teaches no such things: but on the contrary, as
in verse 22, 23, 24. of that Chapter: Christ he teaches; To put off concerning
the former conversation the old man which is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts, and to be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and to put on
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
It is sad indeed for poor souls to gather that which sin and Satan is the
root, and to please it self with that which is sweet only to the pallat, but
bitter in the belly, and carries a curse with it where ever it goes. Now this
is the sad condition of Christlesse souls, such poor wretches as have given
over themselves to work all uncleanness with greediness; these poor souls
walk according to the course of the world, and the power of the Prince of the
Air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, fulfilling
the lusts and the desires of the flesh, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. And if this be not a
miserable condition, I know not what can make up misery. As it is the blessing
of Heaven to live in Christ, and Christ in us: so it is the misery of Hell upon
earth to be fulfilling lusts and the desires of the flesh, in which the poor
soul is ruled by the Prince of the air, led captive by Satan at his will.
This is the sad condition of profane, carnal, Christ-lesse souls, such as
are not new creatures; For if any man be in Christ he is a new creature.

Fourthly, This informs us of the desperate wickedness and hypocrisy of
those wretches, which with their lips lay claim to Christ and free grace, and
yet are not new creatures: but make a profession of Christ to be a protection
and covering of the old man in them; this is the growing and thriving sin of
these last and evil times which we are fallen into. If the single witness of
the lip may be taken, Christ had never more followers then in these our days:
but this is a truth so precious, and of so great a consequence, that it well
deserves two witnesses, I mean the life as well as the lip. Our Savior tells
us at the time of his being upon earth, of many belly, and eye-followers; that
he had such as followed him for the loaves, and to see the miracles that he
did: but for lip followers of Christ, I believe our present age out-strips all
that went before it: and as the Lord Christ did discover the hypocrisy that
was in the former, so do I verily believe he will this general profession of
him in our days. God has gone a great way in this work already, and I verily
believe the earthquake we are in will not cease till God have perfected this
good work he has begun; men deceive themselves when they entitle their
wickedness to Christ, he is too bright a glory to be veiled over, and too
clear a light to be deceived by any darkness; profession cannot dazell the
eyes of perfection. Christ is perfect, and can discern and discover the secret
hypocrisy of the heart; man's eyes may be deceived with a bare profession, but
when Christ is entitled to a lie, as the God of truth; he is engaged to
discharge himself of those branches which are only in him by profession, and
so leave them to a withering state, as being without the sap of life: And that
I think is the meaning of our Savior in Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me (meaning
Christ) that bears not fruit, he (meaning God) takes away. That is, Christ
has many which profess him, and bring not forth the fruit of union with him,
which is the new creature, and them (God to clear up his own power and purity)
takes away, as if the Lord had said, the evil heart of man thinks to hide the
old man of sin under a profession of me: but if you look into the fruits
and lives of such men, you will find them only branches in profession, which in
the fittest time for lifting up the power and purity of God, God will take
away, and Christ will discharge himself of them.

The holy Ghost methinkes is very full to this purpose, in 1 Cor. chap. 3.
verse. 11, 12, 13. For other foundation can no man lay then that is laid, which
is Christ.

Now if any man build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stone, wood,
hay, stubble.

Every man's works shall be made manifest; for the day shall declare it,
because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work
of what sort it is.

Every man would be saved, and there is no foundation which is or can be laid
but Christ; this is a general rule.

Now upon the foundation some lay gold and precious stones, others lay wood,
hay, and stubble; the former have Christ in truth, the latter only in
profession.

But Christ he deals with all alike, he is resolved to make all manifest,
and therefore he brings all to the fire, by which gold appears to be gold,
silver to be silver, and precious stones to be such, because they abide the
fire. And this fire makes wood, hay, and stubble to appear to be such, because
the fire consumes them.

If we understand here by fire, the fire of affliction and persecution, why
under that sense the truth will stand firm, for such as have not learned
truths as they are in Jesus, will deny truths and Jesus too if affliction come.

Unfound profession is soon burnt up in the fire of persecution, it is too hot
a fire for wood, hay, or stubble to contend with. Wood may last longer then
hay, or stubble: but all the time it lasts it consumes; It is not like gold and
silver that is refined and made more pure then it was before it came into the
fire. Not like that seed which had only the shallow rooting of profession,
that withered so soon as the scorching beams of the Sun came upon it.

The Apostle had more then naked profession, Romans Chapter 8. the latter end,
when under this fire of persecution; Killed all the day long, and counted as
sheep for the slaughter. Yet he professed in all his sufferings, He was more
then a Conqueror through Christ that loved him.

He was true gold indeed, that was a gain by this fire: and what ever is but
bare profession will soon consume when it comes to this fire. And truly God
is now shaking not only the Earth but the Heavens also; not only carnal
wretches, but even all professors, and this shaking will shake off all that are
not one with Christ. This shaking is that those which cannot be shaken may
appear to remain.

But I rather think by fire here is meant the fire of the Spirit, those bright
beams of the glorious presence of GOD. As if the LORD should say; You wood,
hay, and stubble, that build by profession upon my Christ, and deceive the
World by your forms, empty of the power of Godliness, you shall know that
Christ is the only and proper foundation for gold, silver, and precious stones
to build upon; And I am resolved to make a discovery of the difference between
them and you. I will power out my Spirit, and that precious fire will inflame
their love and your hatred to Christ, Saints, and truth. That light shall try
and discover your darkness; for till that light appears, your darkness
will be taken for light: but when that light does appear, it will discover
your darkness in hating the light.

Bare formal profession is so true an enemy to nothing as to spiritual
light, and an empty form enraged against nothing more then the power of
godliness, and therefore God makes trial of all professing and professors by
the powrings forth of his Spirit.

Truly if God did not look that such as worship him should worship him in
spirit and truth, he might have worshippers all the world over. If the spirit
and power of godliness were not the distinguishing character between
professors. Christ would have all to follow him, and Saints and truth none to
oppose them: but when the Spirit of truth gathers up Saints into truths as they
are in Jesus, above this or the other naked form, and into the power of
godliness, bringing forth the fruits of holiness; then not only carnal
wretches, but also naked formal professors rise up against them, and thus by
this fire of the Spirit God does discover all professors that build upon this
foundation the Lord Jesus, whether they be gold, silver, and precious stones,
or whether they be wood, hay, or stubble, by their abiding or consuming. Truly,
forms or no forms can give no good testimony to this new creature. I judge of
form and no form, as the Apostle of circumcision and uncircumcision, that they
avail nothing but the new creature: And I believe as the power of godliness
shall increase, the contendings in the world about forms will decrease; that I
am troubled at is this, when men are rigidly zealous for forms; yet then
negligent of the power of godliness in themselves, and opposite to it in
others, especially if they differ in forms, which makes it evidently to
appear, that their form is their God, and they have no God but form.

And on the other side it is as sad, if not more sad, to behold such as pretend
to higher communion with God then others have which walk in the use of forms,
and yet in their lives as loose, as vain, and as empty of God as those which
have nothing but form.

That I contend for is the power of godliness, and I would all the contentions
in the world were swallowed up in this, namely who should live up most of
Christ, to exceed each other in the power of godliness; this contention would
kill none but our lusts; love to Christ, Saints, and truths would live indeed,
and 'twould be our life to live in this love.

But there is another sort of people in the world which this truth informs us
of, that is such as talk much of the grace of God, and yet turn that grace
into wantonness; such wretches did never spiritually understand this Text,
That who ever is in Christ is a new creature. Nor do they consider how they
engage the purity of Christ to discover their impurity. The Apostle Paul in
Romans 6. makes it matter of abhorrency to continue in sin, upon this
consideration, because grace did abound in God, and truly God does more abhor
to own them under a notion of grace; be not deceived, God is not mocked, he
will make his word appear truth against all the wretches in the world, they
shall know that such as are in Christ they are new creatures.

I have heard it reported, that there be some which deny the Scriptures; That
which is understood by the titles of the old and new Testament to be the word
of God. I can say no such thing knowingly: but sure I am, that many thousands
which acknowledge it with their lips, deny it with their lives, and that in
this one Text; That if any man be in Christ he is a new creature; for they
will lay claim to the one, and deny the other; talk of their interest in
saving grace, but deny his sanctifying grace. Such wretches as these bring an
evil report upon the Gospel of Christ, and the Christ of the Gospel. The
Gospel of Christ it is glad tidings, being the proclaiming of Christ crucified,
as the gift of free grace for poor sinners.

Now when such as hate to be reformed talk of the free grace of God, they put
dishonor upon it, and a stumbling-blocke before weak Christians; It makes
them stagger at grace to see grace-lesse men profess it: and grace in truth
has harder thoughts of many, and is less esteemed of because of this false
profession of grace, and I fear me it makes poor legal souls to make a God
of their duties, when they see these vilde creatures to abuse the grace of God.
I know not what is more vilde then this, to live in sin under a profession of
grace; These are seared consciences indeed, that can sin and name it grace,
and then call the God of truth to witness to that lie: nay to make God
himself a liar; for he says who ever is in Christ is a new creature: but they
say they are in Christ, and yet are old creatures. God will unmaske this
hypocrisy, and prove himself the God of truth. Christ has no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness; such as are in Christ, their fellowship is
with the Father and with the Son: such as have fellowship with Christ are those
that live in Christ, and Christ in them, that live by the faith of the Son of
God, and in the spirit of the holy God, so that they are changed into the image
of God. This is the new creature, this is the gracious soul indeed; such as
have the power of their lives. It is not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that knows my Fathers will and does
it (says Christ.) It Is grace in truth and act that consists with union and
communion with Christ; if in Christ then a new creature: and all profession of
grace without the new creature, will appear our own fancy of grace, and not
the grace of God in truth, for that always produces the new man; If any man
be in Christ he is a new creature.

Lastly, This informs Saints indeed of their duty and privilege; for truly it
is both, and it is this; That we live to no other end, but to live up Christ
who is our life: and if Christ be our life, then we are new creatures, and the
life of the new creature is to live up Christ which is its life. Children of
the day should walk as such in the light of the Lord, in the power and might
of his Spirit. It is the Apostles exhortation, in Gal. 5.25. If we live in the
Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. As if he had said, it is not only our
business as Saints to live in the joys of God, but also to live up the God of
our joys; not only to live upon God in the Spirit, but to walk with God in
the Spirit; that is, in the fruits of the Spirit; for that is the Apostles
subject in the verses just before this. Christ is a living Christ, he appear
where ever he is. The Apostle James in his 2d chap. verse. 17. tells us, that
faith without works is dead. That is, I know not that you believe in Christ if
you show not the fruits of faith; for I know Christ is a living Christ, and if
you live in him, then he will appear in your life. It is the life of those
which live in Christ, to declare Christ to be their life in living him up. A
Saints glory lies in this, that Christ is his life, and therefore counts it
his only business to advance the glory of Christ which is his life and his
glory; Whom have I in heaven bus thee says the Prophet David, and I have none
in earth in comparison of thee. So says a Saint in truth, when I come to
heaven God is all my glory, now I am on earth God is all my glory; I have no
other to glory in, and no other glory to lift up but God and Christ, and God in
Christ, the free grace of God making Christ to be wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption to me, to be my all, and all I am to be his;
this is a Saints glory here, and to all eternity, and the declaring this in his
life is all his business upon earth. The Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10. Tells us
this, By the grace of God I am what I am. He had all his life from grace: so it
is with every true believer, grace in God is the fountain of his life, and
that grace shed in his heart makes all the motions and actions of life,
therefore this conclusion flows naturally from it, that it is the only end and
business of a Saints life to live up the free grace of God, and Jesus Christ
the gift of his grace: And the same Apostle in Gal. 2.20. tells us, he is
crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ in me. As if
he had said, I am crucified with Christ to sin, world, and self, and yet I
live (but it is not to that which I am crucified to in Christ, but to Christ)
for he is my life and all my business in the world is to live up him. I am
dead to all but Christ, and what life you see in me, it is not my self, but
Christ in me, not the old, but the new creature. The Apostle in Phil. 1.21.
For me to live is Christ: In all my life my business is to live up Christ.
This is general; what do you mean by living up Christ?

I mean this to be nothing, to do nothing, nor desire any thing, but in all
which the glory of Christ may be lifted up, in the beauty of holiness, and the
power of godliness. 1. That the name of the holy God may plainly appear in
all we be, do, or desire to do; that in all we are, Holiness to the Lord
may be written upon it. But this is yet something in the dark? Why then more
particularly; He that lives up Christ, must be single in his heart to Christ,
the profession of his lips must have its commission from the singleness and
sincerity of his heart. Christ begets his own image; it must be Christ within
which truly makes Christ without. The more Christ is in any soul, the less
self is there, and the less self, the more singelenesse of soul, and it is
the want of this that makes so much profession of godliness, without the power
of it in the world. It is easy to talk and profess up a Christ, but it is
very hard to live up a Christ, and follow him where ever he goes: and the
reason is this, because the soul must be single, it must be an unselfed soul
that will follow Christ.

The young man in the Gospel found this a hard thing to sell all, and to be
unselfed for to follow Christ; truly this singleness of heart is the rarest
thing in the world to be found in these days, and it makes me fear indeed,
that notwithstanding all the large profession of our days, there is but very
little of the power of godliness of this living up the Lord Christ in truth:
and as singleness of heart, so lowliness and meekness. Learn of me (says
Christ) for I am lowly and meek. Who ever lives up a Christ must be lowly and
meek; the proud man GOD abhors, and truly he knows that God abhorres pride in
all, but most in himself, for by knowing GOD he comes to know himself, and
there finds no cause to be lifted up, but to be abased. Self and Christ are
contrarieties, both cannot be lifted up at once, so that the proud man which
lifts up himself, cannot lift up Christ; the proud man's business is to hold
out himself to the world, not Christ.

Pride lifts up it self above all others, and cannot endure that any other
should be lifted up above it; therefore the proud man can never live up Christ,
because he that truly lives up Christ, must not only make him uppermost, but
all. Christ also owns meekness as an Emblem of himself; I am meek (says
Christ) and when any soul is most meek, it is most like me; this is the
constant Associate to a lowly souls meekness, they go hand in hand
together, and Christ goes with them both, and where ever they go they speak
Christ to be present. It is the meek soul that lives up Christ the Lamb of
GOD; Christ had some followers that called for fire from Heaven to ravenge
themselves: But our Savior rebukes them, and tells them they know not what
spirit they were of. As if he had said, you do not in this follow me, my
Spirit is meek, but your spirits evil in this. If you will live like your
Master, and live up your Master, you must be lowly and meek. Christ in this
reproof speaks to the fiery spirits in all ages; what is written is written
for our instruction, the more heat in the flesh, the less of the fire of the
Spirit; the more cruelty, the less Christ. Meekness and Temperance are the
fruits of the Spirit of GOD, Gal. 5.23. And surely that soul lives most of
Christ, that lives most in the spirit.

Again, To live up Christ is to be doing good to the souls and bodies of all
we meet with, as Christ did, and as his word exhorts us, do good to all men.
A Saint should have no eye of revenge to see evil withal: but to render good
for evil; his eye should be to watch over souls and bodies for good, to watch
over souls where and when he may drop in information, exhortation, brotherly
reproof and consolation, when to cut dead flesh, and when to bind up green
wounds, and be ready to all this, to tell forth its experiences of GOD to
others; a Saint should so live up Christ, that where ever he comes, those
souls he meets with may bless GOD for him, and that of GOD which they learn
by him. A Saint should be a living monument of Christ, in whom may be beheld a
Christ crucified in a soul, crucified to sin, self, and world, and a Christ
risen in a soul, risen with Christ; Seeking those things which are above,
where Christ fitteth on the right hand of GOD. Having its affections on things
above, and not on things on the earth, Col. 3.1, 2. As Christ, so Saints in the
world have no other business but to do the will of their Heavenly Father.

Now truly the consideration of this may well put all Saints upon that great
work of selfe-examination: We are apt enough to see a mote in our brothers eye,
when we overlooke the beam that is in our own: But it is the only business
of every Saint to live up Christ; then it is worth the looking into our lives
how much of Christ we can find there, what singleness of soul is in us to
all the ways, will, and work of Christ, whether we follow Christ for love, or
for the loaves? For what he is, or for what he gives? Whether it be his love
that constraines us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; or whether fear of
Hell, shame, or punishment, stops the eyes pursuit, and stops the prractise of
sin? Or whether our profession of godliness, under what form soever, be to
lift up Christ or self? Whether if Heaven and Sin might go together, we
would not rather have sin live in our souls then Christ? Whether that the
profession of godliness which we seem so much to delight in, be not a burden
to us in the power and life of it? Whether that day in which Christ is most,
and self least in our souls, be best to the souls content? Whether it be the
souls desire and petition at the throne of grace to be unselft in every thing,
and that Christ may be all in all? whether the soul does indeed count that a
lost day, hour, or moment, in which he does not in some measure lift up Christ,
and declare the in-dwelling of Christ in his soul, by the outgoings of Christ
in his life. It is worthy a souls examination, how the old man dies, and the
new man is renewed in him day by day, how pride and passion is brought under
the feet of Christ in our souls, how through Christ that loves us, we are
more then conquerours over sin and self by the love of Christ that conquers
them in us, and enableth us by his love to live like conquerours, rejoicing and
glorying in the free grace of our God; the new creature is Christ in truth, and
truths as they are in Jesus; godliness in power, and the power of godliness;
holiness in its beauty, and the beauty of holiness; God in the Spirit, and
the Spirit of God; heavenly mindedness, and a mind in heaven; it is living and
walking in the Spirit; it is a soul united to Christ, Christ in it, and it in
Christ; Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature.

CHAP. X. Vanity and vexation of spirit compasses all things under the sun.
Eccles. Chap. 1. verse. 14. I have seen all the works that are done under the
Sun, and behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit.
THIS Scripture is the testimony of the Wise man, concerning all things under
the Sun, and it is so upon seeing and trying all these things. In the verse
before this he tells us, he gave his heart to seek, and to search out by
wisdom concerning the things that are done under heaven. He has attained the
beholding of what he gave hie heart to seek: so that both seeking and seeing
in wisdom, he finds all to be vanity and vexation of spirit. The vanity of
the whole creation is the subject matter of all his book. He begins it thus in
this first Chap. and 2d verse. Vanity of vanities (says the Preacher) Vanity of
vanities, all is vanity. His heart is so full of the matter, that he doubles
the sentence, and as he begins with it in the general, so in his whole book
he follows the same subject in the particulars of it, and concludes his book
with the same general, in Chap. 13. verse. 8. Vanity of vanities (says the
Preacher) all is vanity. The Psalmist in Psalm 144. verse. 4. Bears witness to
this truth in the top-branch of all the creation: Man (says he) is like to
vanity: and he proves it; for his days are as a shadow that passes away. And
in Psalm 62.9. takes in men of high and low degree in the proof of this
general truth: Surely men of low degrees are vanity, and men of high degrees
are a lie; to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity;
the vanity of the creature is a subject well worthy the study of a wise
christian, and truly none but Christ our wisdom can give us light into this
vanity; for method sake we will draw out one general truth which I think is
visible in this Scripture;

That upon true discovery and knowledge of all things under the Sun, we shall
find them vanity and vexation of spirit. For the proof of this truth let us
search the Scripture and our own experience; the wise man to prove this truth,
begins with man in his labor in his first Chap. verse. 3, 4. What profit has a
man of all his labor under the Sun; for he stays not to keep any fruit of
his labor, but passes away; one generation goes, and another comes. So in
Chap. 2. verse. 22, 23. Man reapeth no content from all his labors under the
sun. They fill him full of sorrow, travel, and grief, and at last he cannot
lie down and rest in them. They are a bed of thorns, unfit for rest; yea when
the poor creature comes to lie down indeed, and sleep that sleep of death, it
find ^s no rest in all its labors under the Sun of what kind soever. So in
Chap. 1.6, 9.17, 18, 19. verses. He tells us man's labor under these vanities is
so great, that he cannot utter it, and that without any satisfaction, though
what is pursued be enjoyed. For though the eye see, yet it is not satisfied
with seeing: and though the ear do he are, yet it is not filled with hearing.
The creature can never give so long, and so much, till that which receives from
it says it has enough; though it give objects to the eye, yet the eye wants
more objects then it can give: and though it offers to fill the ear, yet the
ear is not filled with all that it can give; there is no new thing under the
Sun, but that which has been shall be, and that which is done, is that which
shall be done: So that though I give my heart to know all things, wisdom,
madness, and folly, yet I find nothing new in them. And in stead of content in
all this variety of knowledge, I found vexation of spirit; for I will tell you
the best, and then judge you the rest. In much wisdom is much grief, and he
that increases knowledge increases sorrow. And if this be the best of the
best, who can tell what is the worst of the worst; he comes to particulars in
Chap. 2. verse. 1. he intends to prove his heart with mirth, and the enjoying of
pleasure: and in the proving, his heart does experience those things, and
finds them vanity, and behold! This also is vanity; verse. 2. I said of
laughter that is madness, and of mirth, what does it. 1. It does not satisfy,
therefore it is vanity: So in verse. 4. and so forward, he tells us; That he made
him great works and buildings, planted vineyards, made Gardens and Orchards,
planted trees in them of all kinds of fruits, got him servants and maidens,
servants borne in his house, so that he had great possessions of great and
small Cattle above all that were in Jerusalem before him. He likewise gathered
up silver and gold and got men-singers and women-singers, with the delights of
the sons of men, as musicke-instruments, and that of all sorts, so that he
was greater then all that was before him in Jerusalem. And in verse. 10. He gave
out his heart to take joy in all this, and kept not his eyes from any thing
that they desired. But in verse. 11. he gives in this report of all this
fullness, and his full experience of it. Then I looked on all the works that
my hands had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do: And behold
all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.

I cannot imagine a fuller proof then this Scripture; here is wisdom
possessing and trying all things under the Sun, and finds no profit in any,
or all of them. 1. They yielded no return of benefit to his labors, there was
more sorrow and travel then enjoyment; nay not only no profit, but vanity and
vexation of spirit in all; yet he tells us, He possessed more then all that went
before him, and none that comes after him should exceed him; For (says he)
what can the man do that comes after the King. He may not think to g^^spe
more of the world then I have done? and when he has all, he has but so much
vanity, and with it vexation of spirit. The wise man gives an instance of this
vanity in Chap. 4. verse. 8. There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea,
he has neither child nor brother: yet is there no end of all his labor:
neither is his eye satisfied with riches, neither says he, for whom do I
labor, and bereave my self of good? This is also vanity, yea, it is a sore
travel. As if he had said, I will make you judge of all the labors of man in
the things of the world; for look upon a man that spends all his time in
labor after the world, he increases daily in riches, but not in content; he
is not the more at ease for the more he possesses: but more creature he has,
the more desire and travel increases. Nay (says he) this is a great vanity,
he does all this to increase his labor, of which there is no end; though he
have no satisfaction in his riches, nor any to leave them too, he is like the
barren womb that is never satisfied, nor brings forth any to be satisfied
after it. Man may find creature to love, and vanity enough in the world to
possess: but in all his love shall be lost, and shall not find satisfaction in
any abundance under the Sun, Chapter 5. v. 10. He that loves silver shall not be
satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase; this also
is vanity. And if vain man should gather up a content (as he thinks) in
these vain things: so that with the fool in the Gospel, he bids his soul
take ease, he has goods laid up for many years; yet the Wise man says, joy
and laughter, it shall be as the crackeling of thorns under a pot, this also
is vanity, Chap. 7. verse. 6. So he tells us that in respect of the world, men
and beasts dye alike; Chap. 3. verse. 19, 20. For that which befalls the
sons of men, befalls beasts, even one thing befalls them; as the one
dies, so dies the other, all go unto one place, all are of the dust, and all
return to dust again. So Chap. 2 vert. 16. The wise man and the fool dies
both alike. Thus the wise man has given in his experimental testimony to this
truth, both in the life and death of man; for further proof let us look upon
Job, both in his full and his empty conditions, they were both under the Sun,
and therefore a certainty in neither; he that had so much of every thing, in a
few moments had nothing but his body full of sores, and a pot-sheard to scrape
them with, and this low condition had the uncertainty of the world in it; for
that passes away, and his latter end was greater then his beginning.

I cite it only to this purpose, to demonstrate the vanity of all outward
conditions under the Sun, whether they be full or empty. Jonas had pleasure
in the gourd, but it was short-lived pleasure, for in one night the gourd
withered, and his pleasure turned into anger; This gourd is a true emblem of
the whole world, the momentary delights they give produce nothing else but
anger at their parting.

Jonas said he did well to be angry: so does every poor creature when the
world withers and dies like it self, says it does well to be angry with God,
because it self is no wiser, then to think the ground would last always: This
is the world, and this is vanity and vexation of spirit. The Israelites in the
Wilderness which are Saints in the world, found vanity in every step they
took, their Quails and Manna had vanity in them; nay, the flesh they carried
about had vanity in it. Your Fathers (says Christ) John 6.58. did cate Manna
in the Wilderness and are dead. The world has vanity enough in its own womb
to eat up all its fullness, witness Joseph'e storehouses at the end of the
seven years famine; there is a time for the lean Cattle to devour the fat;
the flourishingst world has a grave in it self to sepulcher it self in,
though here be enough to prove this truth; yet it will not be amiss to add our
own experiences, let health speak for sickness, and sickness for health, the
strong man for the weak, and the weak man for the strong; when they have
changed each others condition, sickness tells health, thus I thought when I was
sick, that if I could but be in health as you are, it would have been a gourd
that I should have had content in: but when I had it I found it wither, and
then I said I did well to be angry. Health tells sickness, I thought I should
never have been in your condition, but now I find there was vanity in my
health, because it withers. The strong man tele the weak, I thought my
strength had been my own, and I could have kept it, but now I am weak as you
are; I find I was vain in my thoughts, and my strength is vanity: so says
the weak man to the strong, I thought if I could have stood upon your legs,
I might have stood strongly, but now I find that strength is weakness, and the
worm of vanity is at the root of that tree which knows it till it dies. Ask
the rich man if a pillow stuffed with gold could make him sleep; nay does not
his bags of gold keep him awake? Ask the great man whether all his greatness
could satisfy his spirit; nay, is not the spirit of Haman there which is
restless if Mordecay bow not his knee; ask him that has conquered all the
World what he wantt, and he will tell you he wants more worlds to conquer.

After asking let us come to offering, set dainty and delicious food in the
abundance of it before a ficke and a lost stomach, and bid it eat to satisfy;
he will tell you he is best satisfied, for in stead of loving, he loathes it;
Then set it before a strong and healthy stomach, and bid him eat and be
satisfied; he eats to satisfy, till he destroys both health and stomach, so
that he which eats not is not satisfied with emptiness, nor he which does
eat made glad by his fullness; for both conditions are under the Sun, and
there is vanity in them; man lives not by bread alone, nor by any thing below
God, for all things under the Sun are vanity. Offer a man that gaspeth for
breath goodly buildings and glorious apparel; no says he, my coffin and my
winding sheet is of nearest relation to my conduion, they must be my apparel
and my dwelling; your offer is vanity, I now find the world to be such: but
vanity will not satisfy my living soul, which is now bidding adieu to my
dying body; the worlds vanities may dazell and deceive a man that lives in
pleasure, but they can never please nor satisfy the eye and heart that is
going to sleep the sleep of death, and lie down in the bed of the grave; the
whele world is but a world of vanity, and therefore to all that rest upon it,
must first or last prove vexation of spirit; the proofs of this truth are a
cloud of witnesses. Every moment of our passing through this wilderness of the
World, brings forth sin. Now because what is written for our instruction, it
will be wisdom in all to make use of this truth which the Wise man holds out
to us upon his own experience, and which all Saints in their experience must
and do bear witness to.

And first we may improve it thus; It gives us a discovery of the fruitless
labors and contentions of all those that labor and cond contend merely for
the World in part or in whole. For if this be truth that all things under the
Sun be vanity, then it must needs be fruitless labor and contention; which
if it attain what it seeks, yet finds nothing but varity, and in it vexation
of spirit. If this were truly set home upon our spirits by the Spirit of God,
Satan would have fewer to worship him upon that temptation which he assaulted
our Savior with, in showing him the World in all its glory. As we come more
to know God in the spirit, so that we by that spirit know the world in its
vanity and emptiness, then shall we labor and contend less for the vanities
of the World, and the World of vanities; then shall we see the vanity of our
laborious contending for that which is but vanity; till then we shall be
laying out our money for that which is not bread, and our spirits for that
which profits not; for till God gather up our spirits by his Spirit to
himself, the World will hold us, and all that while we are but wrapped up in
the arms of vanity, and dandled upon the knees of death; for all things under
the Sun are vanity, all that is below God is too low for a Saint to labor
after, or contend for. This truth not only concerns those worldlings that are
buried alive in the world, but it may make Saints blush; yea the best of
Saints, to consider how they have stretched forth their hands to graspe the
wind, and opened their hearts to let in vanity, and upon this regard have been
ready to conclude, it is good to be here, let us build Tabernacles. And so have
labored to blow up this bladder of vanity with these pleasing imaginations to
our flesh, of honor, profits and pleasures of this world, till God prick the
bladder, and let out this wind, so that then we see it vanity. But truly so
much of this old man as is in Saints makes a very uncomely sight, that heirs of
glory, joynt-heirs with Christ in glory, such as have a more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory prepared for them, and waits to swallow them up to all
eternity, should be pursuing after vanity; it best becomes Saints to be always
upon the wing of faith for heaven, above those vanities; there is no footing in
the World for a Saint, the World is an ocean of uncertain waves, that goes one
way, and the other way, as the wind drives them, so that the Dove can have no
rest for the sole of her foot, till she comes to the Arc from whence she went
out; a Saint shall find rest in nothing but in God his original, it is vanity
in all to pursue vanity, but especially in Saints, for their lives are hid with
Christ in God. It is great folly for an empty stomach to suck in the wind
for its satisfaction, and this title we may give to the wisdom of the wisest
worldling, which makes the Prodigals choice to feed on husks if he could have
had enough of them; this wind may fill, but it can never satisfy: but sure
this is exceeding folly in Saints who have bread enough in their Fathers house,
and their treasure in Heaven, to have their hearts any where but in Heaven
where their treasure is. And it is much to the dishonor of God who is the
glorious and satisfying interest of his people, that they should be running to
empty Cisterns, when he himself is an eternal fountain of love, life, and
exceeding glory to them, and doubtless Saints in truth are very tender of the
glory of God, these children of love are much in love with their Fathers glory,
it grieves their spirits to see profane wretches dishonor him, but it does
exceedingly wound them if they be found actors in such a work themselves: and
if so, then we should be very watchful lest we be under the fruitless
labor and contentions of those that labor and contend for the World in part
or in whole. If this truth were spiritually understood, surely Saints would be
more careless of the worlds frowns, and less solicitous for their smiles and
favors, their best gifts, and their sowrest looks are all comprehended under
this term vanity, and he that has their smiles has no less of vanity then
he that has their frowns, for they are vanity themselves, and the fruit can be
no other then the tree is, and it is the darkness of that flesh which is in
Saints that keeps them from a clear discerning of that truth, and makes them
smile when the world smiles on them, and be sad when the world frowns on them:
Vanity could not unsettle our spirits, if vanity were not in them; It is that
vanity which is in our flesh that puts a value upon the vanity that is in the
world: but truly it is our exceeding shame, that having the Lord to glory in,
we should glory in any thing but the God of our salvation: and having so sure
and abiding glory, that any frowns from vanity should make the least damp upon
our glory; Saints are of an eternal glory and substance, and therefore should
not labor for, nor glory in any thing but what is suitable, that which will
abide for ever, and upon this consideration the whole World, that lump of
vanity is cut off at once, it withers in the using, and certainly dies either
before or with our flesh; it is not able to satisfy either out souls or
bodies, therefore unworthy to be labored or contended for by any, but
especially by Saints, that have God to live and delight in.

Again, the Wise man's discovery is, that all things under the Sun is vanity;
Carries along with it this counsel, that we should use the world as if we used
it not, (i.) value it no higher then vanity, let it be so in our eye and
hearts; let Gods end in creating of the world be our end in using of it. He
made the World to serve man, and man only to serve himself: so may we use all
things not sinful, moderately, and with thankesgiving, making the whose
Creation our servants and our footstool: so that in all and with all we serve
our God, and live in his bosom of love which is so bright a glory, that it
swalloweth up all the glory of the World, and makes that something or nothing
merely as God appears in them, or not in them. God is so perfect a glory, that
he makes the darkest lanthorn of the creature, when he appears in it, to shine
glorious; and when he withdrawes his presence, the Lanthorn is dark again,
suitable to its own nature; this should the world be in a Saints eye; what of
God is in the whole or any part of the creation, embrace that, keep close to
that, lift up his name, his power and his glory in all, so use the world, as to
lift up God above it, My meaning is this, use all power, all place, all honors
and interest among the sons of men, to lift up the Name of God. This is a
precious spirit indeed, that can despise the worlds glory, when Gods glory
goes not with it, and can rejoice in the worlds reproaches, when in that he
may more advance the glory of his God: this is to use the world as if we used
it not, to take it up and lay it down only as it may serve the highest end of
our Being, the lifting up of the glory of our God.

If there were any thing but vanity in the world, I verily persuade my self it
should have been part of the Saints portion; but as it is it is too low a
Region for the Saints to live in. God gives full blessings to his children,
and therefore has given himself to be his peoples inheritance, and has done
them no injury in binding up the whole world under vanity; for it is not their
portion, it is at most but their Wilderness, footstool, Christ is their Rock
of Ages, Heaven their more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: Saints would
soon have low thoughts of the world, if their hearts were lifted up to their
interest, the King and Kingdom of glory, it will then appear that we used it
as if we used it not, that when we have it, it is no part of our life and
glory; so when it is gone we have no want of it: for God is our all, and we
have at all times all in God. It is not the creature, which is vanity, that
makes a Saints joy, but God in the creature, and if that vanity vanish away,
yet the comfort does not, because that is bound up in God, who lives for ever:
God does often vary in his dispensations to his children, but not in his love,
which is their life, though in reference to the world, he leads them through
good and bad reports, through ficknesse and health, high and low, honorable and
dishenorable esteem of the world; yet in all this his eternal love is always
the same, and Saints knowing this, are as full of life and joy in the one
condition as in the other; because God and his love is their life and joy in
all conditions. And hence it comes, that Saints use the world with so much
slightness, because not any of their life and interest is bound up in it; if
the Gourd be green and flourish, yet God and not that, is their life and glory:
if the Gourd wither and die, yet they do not, for they have lost nothing in
the Gourds being nothing; because God who is all, is their all. Oh that the
Spirit did live more in Saints! then should we live more in God, and less in
the world: then should we truly use the world as if we used it not. This truth
does also show us the glorious interest of Saints that have a God to live and
glory in, though there be vanity in all things under the Sun. Sure it could
not but be amazement to that Tyrant, to behold the 3 children in the fiery
furnace, and not consumed. And were it well considered, it would be as great an
amazement to the world, to see Saints full of rest, joy, and peace in their
spirits, though the world be full of changes, and altogether vanity. Put these
together, and we shall find the cause to be one and the same in Daniel 3.
verse 25. The Text tells us, That four men walked in the midst of the fire,
and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. The Text gives us the
reason why the fire could not consume them according to its own nature, because
the presence of God was there; the reason is the same, though the Saints have
their being among the vanities under the Sun, yet they have their real being
and their life in the bosom of God, and his Spirit lives in their bosom, so
that it is his presence which makes that rest, joy and peace that is in their
souls. A Rock that gives forth water in a dry and long Wilderness, has its
double beauty; such is God to his children in this wilderness of vanity; he is
Rock and Water of life both; and such as experiment him, can tell they have
meat to eat such as the world kowes not of, and when the world shall be forced
to confess that their food is buskes, and not enough neither, then can such as
have an interest in God, make this their boastings, that they live upon the
living God, that to them it is Christ to live, and gain to dye, that they want
nothing here, and have this assurance in their bosoms, that there waits to
swallow them up to all eternity, a more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
The vanity of all things urider the Sun, does only make them miserable,
whose lives are so low: but for such as have their interest in God, and live
upon him, they live in the Sun of Righteousness that is above all vanity, and
in the love of God which has not the shadow of change in it; contrarieties
sets forth each other; the misery of that soul which has nothing but a vain
world to live on, sets forth the glory of him which has the God of glory to
his portion; only herein they differ, the world is not so perfect an emptiness
as God is fullness; there is more in God to satisfy then can be in the world
to dissatisfie. If all the vanity and emptiness of the world appear at once,
to disquiet and distract a spirit, yet if at that moment one glimpse of Gods
love do but appear, it stils and quiets all; this shows how glorious an
interest God is to his peopse, that a world of vanities is not able to disquiet
where his love appearer.

The loving kindness of God is better then life; it is all our life, it is
life in death, and above death, it puts the soul upon this triumph; nothing
shall separate me from the love of God and Christ, neither life nor death,
things present or things to come, or any thing, because God is my interest, my
life, and my glory.

That can never come to nothing, which made all things out of nothing; now that
is God, He made all things out of nothing, but can never be made nothing
himself, all powers springs from him, therefore no powers can be above him.
He said, let there be light, and it was so; let the Sun rule the day, and
the Moon the night, and it was so. It is this power and glory that is the
interest of Saints, so that an empty world can neither take from, nor add to
their felicity, because their lives are hid with Christ in God, and when
Christ shall appear, then shall all his appear with him in glory.

Furthermore, It will be the wisdom of Saints to learn from the Wise man's
experience;

First, not to trust in the World or any thing under the Sun, because all is
vanity; he that rests upon a broken reed does not only lose his hopes and his
ends, but is wounded by that which he trusted in. The world is this broken
reed, it makes a show, but can bear no weight; the soul that trusts it must
find it so, because it is vanity, and in the experience of this vanity there is
not only hopes lost, and disappointments in their room, but also vexation of
spirit; 'Twas so with Jonas when the Gourd failed him, he said he did well to
be angry. Disappointments have a mighty weight upon a natural heart; the hopes
of the world do puff up like a bladder, which is filled only with wind, but
the disappointments of the world come like a mil-stone that presses down to
the dust; nay the hopes of the world have so many fears mixed with them, that
it is hard to discover which is most, the hopes or the fears: but when the
disappointment comes, then the former hopes increase the present griefs, and
the complainings then are as the Prophets were. My friend that lay in my bosom
has betrayed me: I neither knew it nor feared it to be a broken reed, till I
had placed my hopes and confidence in it, and that weight discovered it.

Indeed says this poor heart, though I had no mind to think of dying, yet I
could not tell how short my life was, but I well hoped this, that the
pleasures, profits, and honors of the World would not leave me in this life,
therefore I gave out my heart to them, bound up my spirit in them, lay down to
rest by them, and expected they should be a Gourd to shelter me from sun and
storms: but the poor soul which thus trusts in the World, does not see it
vanity, is not knowing of the worm that is at the root of the Gourd to consume
it; his heart says as the fool in the Gospel: Soul take thine ease, thou
have goods laid up for many yoares: but does not hear that voice that says,
thou fool this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. It is a great burden
to be disappointed for the present: but to be disappointed to eternity is more
misery then can be expressed: and thus must every soul be that trusts the
world, and lays out it self upon it. All things under the Sun have their
creation and their being from God, therefore must needs be what God intended
them to be (i.) a created being which must return to its first nothing; The
world is a map of vanity, never intended by its original to be an object of
faith or hope. It is the Earth that must be shaken until it be crumbled to
nothing, therefore very unfit to be trusted or rested in: the vanity under the
Sun will be no better satisfaction to such souls as trust in them, then the
fig leaves were a garment to cover the nakedness of our first Parents, neither
of both can beget confidence enough to come into the presence of God; where the
spirit seals up this truth to any soul, sure there will be no more trusting
of, or in the world, or in any thing under the Sun, because vanity comprehends
it all, Psalm. 61.9. Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a
lie, altogether lighter then vanity. So that trust man or men of what degreee
soever, they must deceive because they are vanity; the man of high degree in
his outside promises more then him of low degree, but he will prove a lie;
there is a worm at his root, he will wither to nothing. Methinkes the
Prophets counsel, Psalm. 2.10. comes in very suitable to this purpose. Be wise
now therefore O ye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the earth; serve
the Lord with fear, and rejoice in him with reverence. Kiss the Son lest he
be angry, and so ye perish from the right way; If his wrath be kindled (yea
but a little) blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

Observe it, and it amounts to thus much; That the highest and greatest amongst
men rest not in themselves or any other piece of vanity, but to close with
Christ and trust in him; For says the Prophet, there will appear a day of
blasting all these lower vanities, and then you will find them to be blessed
that put their trust in him.

On that Kings and Judges, Parliaments and people had learned this heavenly
wisdom, to kiss the Son, to close with Christ, to do his work, to lift up
his Scepter and his glory, to trust under the shadow of his wings, to renounce
self aims and ends, and glory, to be wise for Christ, and not for self, to
use more piety and less policy, to look upon all things under the Sun as
vanity, not to be so vain as to spend their precious time and spirits in going
about to make perishing things permanent, not to build Tabernacles, and think
it is good to be here; for the Tabernacle that they build withal is perishing,
and has but a few moments to be here. Ob therefore be wise, and whilst it is
called to day close with Christ. All things below this Sun is vanity, if you
trust the World you will find it so; The Wise man he tried the World, and found
it so; such as love the World will find it loft love, and those that serve the
World most, will find they serve nothing but vanity, and truly that is a very
ill Master, the latter end of that service will be worse then the beginning; it
is great pity then that the World has so many servants, seeing it is so
unfaithful a Master; how many is there that serve the world as they should
serve God, with all their souls, their spirits, and their strength, improving
their lives, liberties and interests to serve vanity, and to lift up flish,
though in that work they do their utmost to wound Christ in his Members. It is
a sad employment to blow up those flames that shall burn him that blows it
to ashes; This is the evils of that work to serve the interest of the World
against the interest of God, they dig their own graves, they wound
their-owne souls, and heighten the fury of those flames, which will make them
cry out for a drop of water to cool their lungs; this work in the end will not
only make the heart ache, but the conscience roar, this work indeed will prove
vanity and vexation of spirit. To wind up this subject; It is God and Christ
only that is worthy to be trusted, served, loved, and delighted in; there is
vanity in all below God, but no vanity at all in God, we may trust him, for he
is faithful, all that ever have trusted him have found him so; witness the
Israelites at the Red Sea, he bid them by Moses to stand still, to trust in
him, and they should see his salvation, and he proved himself a faithful God:
God is worthy to be served, because he commands that which is worthy the
service of a holy soul, and then he gives strength to perform the service he
requires: He gives his Spirit both to teach and to lead. and his service has
life and glory both in the way and end; he spirits the soul, and then commands
spiritual service, this is a service worthy to be owned and obeyed.

God is also worthy to be loved of all his, because he loved us first, and that
first was when we lay in our blood, and no eye could pity us; He is the
original of our love, therefore worthy to be loved by that which flows from
himself; he has all loveliness in him, and therefore worthy to have all
loves center in him; that which is the fountain of love, may justly claim to
be the object of love.

Saints may well say of God and Christ as the Spouse did of Christ, that there
was no beloved like her beloved for love and loveliness; the best way of
expressing this, is to let God and Christ have all our loves. By this we
plainly tell, that there is no object our eyes can look on so lovely as God
and Christ. Communion and fellowship with the Father and the Son is a place
of delight for the souls of Saints; Love takes delight in God and Christ, for
there is banquets of love, and banners of love, bosoms of love and words of
love, electing love, and redeeming love, justifying, sanctifying, and
glorifying love, these are objects of delight indeed; here we may feed
abundantly and be satisfied, but can never be cloyed. O be wise then, stand
aside perishing world; away with all those vanities under the Sun, there is a
brightness out-shines it, and a glory that swalloweth it up; there is no
beauty below God, nor any excellency out of God, and who ever has a spiritual
knowledge thus of God, will by the same light be able to say as the Wise man; I
have seen all the works under the Sun, and behold all is vanity and
vexation of Spirit.

CHAP. XI. A Saints excellency is to have no will in himself, but the will of
God.
Luke, Chap. 22. verse. 42. Saying, Father if thou be willing remove this cup
from me, nevertheless not my will, but thine be done.
THese are our Saviors words when he was entering into crucifying work; his
flesh would have shrunk, but his Spirit bore it up, and makes this the result
of all the thoughts within him, to have no will but the will of God, and to
desire that no other will should be done and fulfilled but the will of God.

Christ is the head of Saints, and it is the glory of Saints to be made like
their head; this work is too hard for flesh and blood: b^^ as it was not too
hard for Christ, no more will it be for a Saint when Christ is in him; though
it be hard to learn, yet it is very sweet in the attaining, the pains of the
travel will be swallowed up in the birth of this beautiful man-child: The
scope of our Savior in this Scripture, to me, seems to be this; That what
ever his flesh might desire, yet his Spirit leaves all to God, and not any will
to be done but Gods will. Our Savior in this does, and so should every Saint
in conformity to him, resign up the whole soul and body unto the will of God,
to be and to do in all times and things, according to his will, so as that in
every thing his will may be done.

That such as read may the better understand; take these two heads as a
ground-works of the ensuing treaty.

First, That it is the duty of Saints in conformity to Christ their head, to
have no will but the will of God.

Secondly, So far as Christ lives in any soul, it is the desire of such a
soul, that the whole will of God, and no other but the will of God, may be
done in all times and things.

And first to the first of these.

That it is the duty of Saints in conformity to Christ their Head, to have no
will but the will of God.

The first Scripture makes this clear, that the Lord Christ our Head, would
own nor stick to no other will but the will of God: If there be in my flesh any
thing which is not in thy will, let it not be done; for he confesses he came
to do the will of his Father. So in the fourth of John, verse. 34. Christ
tells us, That his meat is to do the will of him that sent him, and to
finish his work. As if the Lord Christ had said, My work and will is bound up
in God, and it is my joy and content to be doing his work, and fulfilling his
will. And in the fifth of John, verse 30. I seek not my own will, but the will
of my Father which has sent me. I pursue the business that I came about, to
perfect the will of him I came from. from, John 6.38. For I came down from
heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me: so that in
all these Scriptures it appears, that Christ owneth nor does no will, but the
will of God.

Now as it was the Lord Christ's work to do the will of God in all things; so is
it Saints duty in conformity to Christ their Head, to be willing and doing no
other will but the will of God. If the Lord Christ will allow in himself no
other will but the will of God, then certainly he will not do it in his
members: it is both the duty and privilege of Saints to be made conformable to
Christ their Head. As the branches in the vine receive that sap which comes
from the root, and brings forth such fruit as that fap produces: so is it
with Saints united to Christ, they have their lise and fruit from union, and he
owneth them to be united to him, that hear the word of God and do it, Luke
8.21. This is so clear a truth, so much of God in it, that I cannot doubt, but
it carries its proof and commission with it into the bosoms of all such as
own God and Christ, so that the improving will be more edifying then the
proving. Therefore confider the second head, namely, That so far as Christ
lives in any soul, it is the desire of such a soul, that the whole will of
God, and no other but the will of God may be done in all times and things. What
Christ is in himself, that he is in his members, he is in himself one with the
will of God; so where Christ lives in any soul, so much Christ, so much
oneness with, and conformity to the will of God. Such a soul speaks in Christ's
strength, and so speaks Christ's language to God, Not my will but thy will be
done. There is in the best of Saints on earth, as in Paul, a double Law, one in
the members, and another in the mind; one of the flesh, and another of the
spirit; but as that Apostle, Romans 7. last. Through Christ he served God with
the mind. Where Christ possesses, there God is obeyed, if he lives and reigns
in any soul, that soul so far knows no will to obey, but the will of God;
and if any part of that man know any other will, it is the fleshly part, which
Christ has not fully subdued to himself: but where Christ lives, there he
suffers no other will, but the will of God to bear rule. And as the fire of
Gods Spirit does consume the lusts of the flesh in Saints, so does the will of
such Saints run more and more into the will of God, they are lost unto
themselves, and found in God, they will and do every day less of Self, and
more of God, they are crucified with Christ to the world, and the world to
them, and the life that they then live, is by the faith of the Son of God in
conformity to the will of God. Christ makes the desires, shapes and forms the
will in such souls as he lives in, to God; and God is sure to have that which
Christ new makes; For it is his business to do his Fathers work. When ever
Christ new makes, or makes the new creature in any soul, his end is to make
for God, and to lift up his own name in lifting up God: for he tells us in
the 17. of John, verse 21, 22. That himself and his Father are one; and as
there is but one will in God and Christ, so there is only that one will in
every soul that Christ powerfully lives in, so far as he does live in it by
his Spirit: For it is the property of the Spirit as fire to burn up, and
consume all but substance, what ever is dross is consumed, where that holy
fire comes: now all flesh and self is dross, both in will and work, and that
the Spirit burns up, and leaves nothing remaining in such a soul where it
lives, so far as it has overcome, but the substantial and holy will of God.
And from hence it is that any soul comes to be changed in its desires, because
it is changed in it self, or more properly out of it self, from flesh to
spirit, from self to Christ, from its own will to the will of God.

But now if any shall object and say, This is a hard saying, who can bear it?
This makes Christianity to be such a burdensome thing as the world reports it
to be, that a man must be always crossing and denying himself of any will or
content of his own, so as by this rate the way to heaven is to have no pleasure
upon earth.

To this I answer, It is ignorance of God and his ways that makes this
objection; this sounds like the answer of Nieodemus to our Savior in the third
of John, verse 4. when Christ had been showing him the necessity of
regeneration, and spoke in the Spirit to him of being born again, he understood
not the Spirit, and as he understood him so answered him in the flesh, How can
a man be born when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his mothers
womb and be born? Christ spoke in the Spirit, but Nicodemus understood him
only in the flesh, and therefore judges it hard, or impossible, that there
should be a regeneration, or new birth, though Christ had told him the
necessity of it. So do all that are ignorant of God and his ways thus
conclude of him as they understand him, so that when he speaks in the Spirit,
and they understand him in the flesh, they conclude according to the light they
are under, that what is impossible with man, is so with God to them, because
they have no other knowledge of God but in the flesh. But let such as are
spiritual consider.

First, God gives what he commands, and then commands what he gives. God that
commands to be worshipped and obeyed in spirit, gives his Spirit to worship and
obey him in. God is no hard master, he takes not up where he lays not down, he
covenants freely and makes it fully good, to put his law in the inner parts of
his people, and to write it in their hearts, Jerem. 31.33. And to give them his
Spirit of truth to dwell with them, and be in them, and to teach them all
things, John 14.17.26. Now none but a fleshly understanding can condemn God
for a hard master, and his will swallowing up our will, to be a joylesse,
comfortless, burdensome thing, when as he gives his Spirit to do that in
us, which he requires of us.

And this the Apostle Paul found when he made that holy boast, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me, I have from God all that I return
to God, God has my will, and I have my will spiritualized by God; Gods Spirit
lives in my will, and I thereby live in the will of God, that which is
impossible with man is not so with God; though of my self I could not give up
my will to God, yet God of himself can give me his Spirit, and by that swallow
up my will into his. When God bid Abrabam leave his Fathers House and go into a
strange Land, the whole frame of the design was against flesh; yet God gave
him a spirit to go through with the work. Nay, when he commanded him to offer
up his son, his only and his beloved son Isaac: against which work flesh
might have found arguments enough, yet to this so exceeding hard work to flesh
and blood, God gave him in such an abundant measure of faith, that he stuck not
at it, his own will was swallowed up into Gods, because God had given him
suitable strength to so hard a work. The Apostle speaking of faith, tells us
it is the gift of God; now if we consult the Scriptures, we shall find Abraham
did all these great works by faith, Hebr. 11.8, 9, 18. so that in one Text he
is called the Father of the Faithful. Now if Saints do the will of God by
faith in his Spirit, and he gives both faith and the spirit; then God is no
hard master, but a gracious God, in commanding what he gives, seeing he gives
what he commands, and it is nothing but ignorance of Gods way and working, that
begets hard thoughts of God and his ways.

Secondly consider, God leads his children, he does not drive them; he wins and
overcomes them by his love, he does not force them but as his love constraines
them, by converting and changing the Old man into the New, God appears in the
soft and mild voice, God makes choice of a meek Moses to be his messenger to
his people, to call them out, and to lead them after him. When God designs, he
uses (if any) the very quintessence of means to effect his design: Now in this
design of Gods, to bring his peoples will over to his, so that they may be dead
to their own will, and alive only to his, he makes his love the means. That
is a notable text to this purpose, where it is said, God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, that is, God was manifesting his love to his
own in the world by Christ, and the appearance of that love reconciles them to
God; that is, makes them to have good thoughts of God, and seeing how he loves
them, it makes them willing to resign themselves wholly up to him. If I would
seek a bosom to take up my rest in, to resign my self over to, so as to be
wholly led and ruled by it, I would above all things else, be sure to choose a
bosom of love, one in whom I was sure of a full interest of love; for then I
could satisfy my self, that what ever was willed for me, or to me, it was the
best that could be for me, because love constrained, willed, and wrought it for
me; and we know the commands of love are easy both in the commander and the
commanded. Now this is Gods way in bringing over his peoples will to his, he
opens his bosom of love to them, he makes known a Christ crucified, and in
him, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, and in all this
his love, nay his love as the ground of all this, he makes known that he
pardons iniquities, transgressions and sins for his own name sake, and he
calls himself the God of love, the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 2.8. That it is by
grace we are saved, that is, original love is all in our salvation. Now by the
discoveries of Gods love to the souls of his people by his Spirit, he
overcomes them; and whereasbefore they were at enmity with God, looking upon
God as an enemy, (as all do that see God only in the flesh) but the Spirit
opening their understandings, now they become reconciled to God, we love him
because he loved us first, and trust in him because we see he loved us from all
eternity, gave Christ and pardon, heaven and glory in this love, and to resign
up our selves into the bosom of God, to be preserved, directed and ruled by
his love. The soul by discerning the love of God in the spirit, is convinced
that what ever it has, flows from this love, and it is ever best in this
love, and therefore resignes up all to the love of God, its whole will and
affections, which makes and rules all its motions. The love of God God himself,
and when this is used as a means, it must needs effect its end, God cannot be
frustrated, but what he wills he works; if he wills his love to conquer the
love and the wills of his people, it shall surely do it; and this is Gods
certain and sweet way of melting his peoples will into his own. My people,
says God, shall be a willing people in the day of my power: when God powers
forth his Spirit upon any soul, and in that Spirit manifests and reveals his
own love to that soul, then is the day of Gods power upon such a soul, and it
becomes a willing soul, it is melted into Gods will, and ownes no will for it
self but the will of God; and upon this foundation of love Christ commands his
Disciples, Joh. 14, 15. If ye love me keep my commandment. And in the 23, 24.
If any man love me he will keep my words. And he that loves me not, keeps not
my sayings, as if he had said, it is my love shed abroad in your hearts that is
your ability to do my will, and this will demonstrates that I have given you my
love, if you obey my words. God ownes no service but what flows from love, and
the fruits of love, as the fruits of God, for God is love. Now I never heard
any complaining of the conquest of love, Where love overcomes, the conquest is
so lovely, that the overcomed admires, but never repines. And sure I am, that
will in man which is overcome by Gods love to deny it self, and only to own God
for its directer and commander, will be always admiring the power and the
glory of that love, but never be found repining that it is captivated by the
loving kindness of God: and this is the way of Gods working upon the souls of
his people; therefore let such as are under the darkness of the flesh, be
silent, and not say, that to have our wills melted into Gods will, is a
burdensome thing, and to be crossing and denying self and flesh, is to make
the way to heaven without joy on earth: for so saying, they only discover
this, that they are in the flesh, and neither discern nor savor the things of
God.

Thirdly, when God brings in the will of his people to his own will, there he
changes the objects and the affections of such souls so that the will chooses
God and his will as its center to rest in. That which the Apostle in the third
to the Colossians, begin. exhorts to, God by his Spirit works in, and enables
the soul to, it is, That such as are risen with Christ, should seek those
things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, that our
affections should be there; because Christ that is our life is there. Now when
Gods Spirit comes, and possesses any soul, it sets upon this work
immediately, carries the soul upward above the world, shows it God and Christ;
the love of God in Christ shows it its glorious union with God and Christ
here, and in glory to all eternity, darkens all the world by revealing but one
glimpse of this more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, and in changing
the object, the affections soon alter. This more exceeding glory carries away
the souls love from the world of perishing glory. When the Prodigal but
considered the fullness of bread in his fathers house, he soon resolved to
leave his empty Trough of Husks, and his swinish company: but surely, when he
had been embraced in his Fathers Arms, and tasted the love in his Fathers
bosom, when he had possession of what he longed for, and was in the vision
of his Fathers kindness and glory, he then quite forgot the Swine, and the
husks, his affections and wishes, did not then run to obtain enough of them,
no, the object was changed, and the affections with it, and having been taken
up into his Fathers glory, he does not choose to go back, and feed with swine
any more, now he chooses to center in God. Thus does God bring in all his
prodigals, when they have tasted the worlds perishing love, then by his Spirit
he makes known his eternal love to them: when they have tried, trusted, and
looked upon the world so long, till they find it empty, then he by his Spirit
shows them his own fullness: when they have had the pleasure of sin for a
season, and the bitterness of sin has seized upon them with the visage of
eternity, then God by the same Spirit makes known himself to be a God of grace,
that pardons freely, nothing to move him but his own love, and how great that
love it, he makes manifest by a crucified JESUS, and now says the soul, I
know where to center, where to sit down, and where to give up my self even
into the bosom of Gods love. This is Gods way of conquering the souls and
wills of his people; He alters the object that alters the affections, and
centres the will in God: the object is according to the eye, if the eye be
flesh, it discernes no object but in the flesh; so if the eye be spiritual, it
spiritualizes every object: the Spirit of God enquires for God in all it sees,
and where God is made the only object, there he is sure to gain the
affections: for he has all love and loveliness in himself; and the
affections being taken, the will goes where ever they go: he that lives in
love, has his will in that he loves, not in himself; so the soul that has
his affections drawn into God by his love made known unto it in the Spirit,
has no will in it self, but in God, in whom it lives by love. Thus God does
sweetly gain and win into himself the will of his people, by revealing the
glory of his grace and love to them in the Spirit, till by that Spirit they
make choice of God to give up their wills unto, and say as Christ their head,
Not my will but thy will be done.

Fourthly, God when he gathers in the will of his people to his own will, he
gives in higher and fuller joys and contentments into their souls then ever
they had at any time, or in all times and things before. The Prophet David in
Psalm 4. latter end, given in light in these truths, verse. 6. There be many
(says he) that say Who will show us any good. Now mark his answer in the same
verse, Lord list thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. As if he had
said, do they enquire for any good? Lord do thou but smile upon us, look
graciously on us, and there is all good in that; nay in verse. 7. he tells us his
experience of it; Thou have put gladness in my heart more then in the time
that their corn and their wine increased. This speaks to the very thing; here
is a time of more fuller joy and gladness in the heart of Gods people, then
under the enjoyments of the World; for I judge the terms of Corn and Wine
comprehends the whole: but observe when is that time? why, when the Lord lifts
up the light of his countenance, when God by his Spirit makes known himself
to be their Father in Christ, then is the soul filled with gladness: but in
the last verse observe the effects of this upon David's soul, I will lay me
down in peace, for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety: As if he had
said, I will now resign all up to thee, and take my peace in thee, and expect
my safety from thee, thou have so filled my soul with thy joys, that I cannot
leave thee, but leave my self with thee; continue but to lift up the light of
thy countenance upon me, and then lead me where thou will, and do with me
what thou will, for I will lay all down before thee, my will and my ways,
thou shall be my peace and my safety.

Observe the working: of the Spirit of God in the Apostle Paul's spirit; when
God had brought over Paul's will to his, to go upon hard and suffering work,
such a work as he was told he should meet with sufferings in, Acts 21. When
he would needs go to Jerusalem, Agabus the Prophetess prophesies to him,
that the Jews should bind him, and deliver him to the hands of the Gentiles.
And in verse. 10, 11, 12. The people besought him not to go up to Jerusalem:
but in verse. 13. he answers them, what mean you to weep and to break my
heart; for I am not only ready to be bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus. As if he had said, you only with a fleshly eye
look at the difficulty of the work, you know not the inwa^d supply of joy in
God that I have to do this and the whole w^ll and work of God; do you think
God is a hard task-master, to command brick, and give no straw? Do you think
the work God gives is more then the strength he gives? If so, you are mistaken,
for I am supplied with joys and in comes of God, not only to go through
binding work, but also dying work for Christ; I go in Gods strength to do
his work, in the light of his countenance, and the g^ory of his love; let me
go whether he will, and into what work he pleases, my strength to perform
all is himself; therefore my will shall be his, his love is my life in his
work, therefore I love only to live in doing his work, and whether his work
for me be to live or dye, God shall choose for me, not I for my self, because
he has given me the joys of his love, in which I am able not to be bound
only, but to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus. So the same Apostle, 2 Cor.
4.7. to the end, tells us of the troubles, persecutions, and afflictions that
himself and the other Disciples with him suffered daily, for owning and
preaching Christ; ye^^n verse. 16. We faint not: but though our outward man
perish, yet the inner man is renewed day by day; For these are light
afflictions, and but for a moment, but the Spirit of God through them carries
up our spirits to live upon a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory. As if he had said, in all this hard and suffering work for God, we have
more comes in from God; then we lay out, we have a full supply of joys in
God, so that it is no hard thing to dye day by day in the outward man; for the
inward man is borne up by a more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, So in
Romans 8. latter end. What shall separate us from the love of Christ: shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword. No says he, this cannot do it, for we suffer all this for the name
of Christ; Nayin all these things we are more then Conquerours through him
that loved us. If we consult with flesh and blood, this will be found very hard
work for to give up our wills to Gods will-ing; but when in the spirit we come
as the Apostle, to understand the love of God, and to live in it, to understand
aright the tribulations of the World; we shall find that in Gods love we are
more then Conquerors, we have more strength then work; we have love enough
from God to overcome more tribulation then the world has: and not all these
tribulations, distresses, persecutions, famines, nakednesses, perils and
swords, nor death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. So that God by his love gives into the souls of his people
greater and fuller joys then they part with in the World, when they give up
their wills to this will. In Phil. 3. the Apostle tells us what value and esteem
he put upon all his external endowments and enjoyments; after God had made
known his love to him in Christ, he tells us, He had as much in the flesh to
glory in as any other, and shows in what: circumciz'd the eight day, and so
forward: but in verse. 7. What I counted gain, I now count loss for Christ;
yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of CHrist Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in
him. Observe it, and we shall find this clearly in the Text; that an enjoyment
of Christ, makes a low esteem of all things below Christ; all his legal
righteousness he counts it dung, and desires never to be found in it, but for
ever to be found in Christ: It proves the thing in hand, that when God makes
known himself to a soul in Christ, and by that brings over its will to his
own will, in that God does not bereave the soul of joys and contentments:
but gives in more in giving himself, then he takes the soul from in taking it
out of the world and it self: and this we see the Saints acknowledge. As Paul
here; after he had known Christ, all but Christ was dross and dung with him.
When God gives to his people, he gives to them as he requires of them; he
gives in the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. The fruits of the Spirit is love and joy. The
spirit reveals the love of God to his people, and seals them up to that love,
and this makes joy in God: so that all his ways are pleasant, and his paths
sweet to such souls; it is not k^lling work to the soul, when God comes to
win over the will to himself. Doubtless Abraham had more joys in God then
in his Fathers house, otherwise he would never have left his Fathers house to
have followed God, nor have given up his will to the will of God, that he
might lead him where he pleased; nor would he have slain his son Isaac, the
son of his love at Gods command, if he had not lived in a higher region, the
bosom of Gods love; and if Gods love had not been in his bosom, if he had not
found more joy and love in God then in Isaac, he would never have slain Isaac
to have pleased God; No man will crucify his highest joy; therefore it is,
till Christ come into a soul the World is never crucified, because till then
the world is the chief and highest joy the soul has: so that if Abraham had
not had a higher joy then Isaac, he could never have been willing to offer up
his will in his son Isaac to the will of God. It is the union of better and
higher joys, that makes a soul forsake its lower joys, and give up it self
and its will to God. The three Childrens choice in choosing Nebuchadnezars fiery
furnace, rather then to worship his golden Image, speaks the truth of this
thing; for if they had not had a better life in God then in the world, they
would not have chosen God rather then the world: Nay they had so much joy and
life in God, that they believed the flames of fire could not destroy it,
therefore they were not careful to answer the King; all their care was to
keep close to God, in whom doubtless they had a more exceeding and eternal
weight of joy and glory, otherwise they could never have given up their wills
to the will of God in the flames of a fiery furnace. So likewise Paul and
Silas, after they had endured many stripes, and were cast into prison, and
their feet fast in the stocks, Acts 16.23, 24, 25. yet for all this, Paul and
Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God: What does this speak, but that the
joys of God in the souls of his people do exceed all their sufferings, and
that though God in conforming the will of his people to his own will, does
bring them into sufferings, yet he gives greater incomes of his love by his
spirit, then the affliction needs: that they are not only able to bear them
all, but to joy in God though under tribulations, this is to be more then
Conquerers. This is the way that our Savior took with his Disciples, when he
was to leave them, so that they could have no more of his fleshly presence, his
design was to comfort them, and give in that which might bear up their
spirits; therefore John 14.1. Let not your hearts be troubled, but believe in
God through me, behold the love of God in sending me, and your interest in that
love; then consider that in my Fathers house are many mansions; fullness of
glory enough for all Saints. And my going from you is but to prepare a place,
to take possession for you as your head: And I will come again and renew you
to my self; for heaven can never part me and my members. And I will pray the
Father that in my absence he shall give you another Comforter; even the Spirit
of truth, which shall dwell with you, and abide with you, and teach you all
things: And if in that spirit you ask any thing in my Name I will do it, I
will effect it for you. And in John 15.9. As the Father has loved me, so have
I loved you, continue in my love. And in John 17. Christ prays for his
Disciples and all his members, telling God, All mine are thine, and thine are
mine, and I am glorifie^ in them. And therefore after he had prayed God to
keep them in the World, and from the evil of the World: In verse. 24. he prays
that they may be with him in glory. Father I will, that all whom thou have
given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have
given me; So that he gives in spiritual joys and comforts to support and
carry them through the fears they were under, and the tribulations they should
find in the world: he gives in the joys of heaven to carry them through the
sorrows on earth, and the joys exceed the sorrows, as Heaven does Earth. If
God deal thus with his people, that when he leads them into suffering and
difficult work, yet then they have a greater income of strength then service,
of joy then sorrow, of rest in God, then trouble from the world: then surely
this way of Gods working the will of his people over to his will, is not a
hard, but a pleasing work, and all these Scriptures makes this good; That God
when he brings over the will of his people to his own will, does not make them
a comfortless, joylesse people, but gives in heights and fuller joys and
contentments into the soul: so that the soul makes choice of God, to delight
it self in, and give it self up too, with this resignation; Not my will, but
thy will be done O Father.

Fifthly, and lastly, When God brings over his peoples will to his own, he
convinces them, and makes them to believe, that their own present, future,
and eternal good is bound up in this will: So that as God works his will upon
his people, it is not so hard a work as the world thinks, for Saints to
surrender up their will unto the will of God; GOd dealt thus by Noah, it was
his will that Noah should build an Arc, to save himself and his Family from
perishing with the old World. God convinces him, and makes him to believe,
that the present and future good of himself and family was in the thing, and
immediately Noah's will was as God's will; for he being warned of God by faith
(says the Text) he builded an Arc, Heb. 11.7. So Peter, though at first he
denied our Savior to wash his feet; yet when Christ told him, that if he
washed him not be had no part in him; nay then says he, not only my feet, but
also my hands and my head, John 13.8, 9. This fully proves the thing in hand,
Peter's will opposed Christ's; now our Savior to bring over Peter's will to
himself, takes this course, shows him and convinces him, that his own good
was in submitting to his will. The Apostle no sooner believes this, but our
Savior has his end; nay then Lord, not my will, but thy will be done; not
only my feet, but also my hands and my head. The Apostle Paul in Phil. 4.12,
13. tells us, he knew both how to be abased, and how to abound, to be full, and
suffer hunger, to abound, and suffer need. I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me. That is, he could in all conditions give up his will to
God: not dispute with any of GOds will, but submit to all. And methinkes the
same Apostle in Romans 8.28. gives us the ground of this sweet and heavenly
frame of spirit in him; For (says he) we know that all things work together
for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his
purpose. That is, the good of Gods Elect is in all the will of God; God wills
nothing, but what shall work together for this good: so that my soul
believing of this, I can give up my whole will to God. I know what ever he
does, my good is in it, therefore whether God in this life make me to want or
abound, I am content in both, and choose his will for my will, because I am
convinced. and do verily believe that my good is in it; I have this faith in
Christ, that my good is in all God does, therefore I can submit to Gods will,
and do all things through Christ that strengthens me. Thus God in Christ
enables his people to give up their wills to him by convincing them and making
them believe that their own good is in his will: So that gather up all these
together, and it will plainly appear, that it is ignorance of God and his ways
in any soul that shall make this objection, that Gods ways upon the souls of
his people are hard and burdensome ways, such as if a man once enters into,
and gives up his will to Gods will, then he must be ever crossing and denying
himself, making the way to heaven without any pleasure or joy on earth. This
is false; for,

First, God gives what he commands, then his commands cannot be hard.

Secondly, He leads his children, he does not drive them, he winnes and
overcomes them by his love, he does not force them.

Thirdly, He changes the objects and affections of the soul, and so overcomes
the will.

Fourthly, He gives in higher and fuller joys and contentments into the souls
of his people when he melts them into his own will, then they had at any
time, or at all times before.

And lastly, God convinces and makes the souls of his people to believe that
their good is bound up in his will. This way of working must needs convince,
that the work, the way, and the end of God is sweet, safe, and pleasant to
the souls of his people when he brings them to this frame of spirit to say in
sincerity; Not my will, but thy will be done, O Father.

Doubtless it will be worthy of our pains to consider the benefits that do
accrue to the souls of Gods people in having their wills involved into the will
of the holy God.

First, This giving up our wills to the will of God, it lifts up, and magnifies
the glory of God in his love, power, and wisdom, upon our own souls, and in
the World.

By this Saints declare to all the World, that they have found more sweetness
in Gods love then in theirs, because they have given themselves from the world,
to be ruled by, and satisfied with his love.

Abraham did this in an eminent manner, when he left his Fathers house to
follow the will and command of God; It speaks plainly this, there is most love
in God, therefore the soul loves always to be with God, and to that end has
given it self wholly up to God, and that it rests upon the power of God to
defend it, and therefore gives up himself and his will to Gods work, and
leaves his protection in all his work to Gods power; Sure Abraham did so, for
the Text tells us, be knew not the place to which be went; then he could not
know the dangers he should meet withal: but he knew whom he had trusted, and
under what protection he was, namely the power of the Almighty God, to whom
he had committed his own will and way; this also does much manifest the glory
and wisdom of God, when his people give up their wills to his, what is it but
adeclaring; Lord, we are folly, but thou art wisdom, swallow us up into thy
self, that we may be wise in thy wisdom; let our foolish wills appear no
more, but thy will and thy wisdom; Let Christ be our wisdom, lift up thy
self in us, the soul gives up it self to God, because it would appear no
more in it self but in God: as Paul, not in his own righteousness which is
of the Law, but in Christ the righteousness of God; Now does not this plainly
appear that the soul judges Gods love better then all other love? His power
above all other power, and Gods wisdom to exceed all his own, and the
wisdom of the World, else why does the soul in its will give up it self to
the will of God. So the Apostle Paul; I through Christ can do all things. He
would not so much as mention himself; I have given my self up to Christ
(says he) and what is done Christ does it in me, I have found his love, his
power, and his wisdom better then my own, or any besides; therefore I have
given my self up to him, and I act in him.

How exceedingly does this frame of Spirit declare the glory of God; this frame
of will to Gods will was in the Disciples, Luke 5.5. When Christ bid them cast
their nett into the Sea again; they told him They had toyled all night and
caught nothing; yet nevertheless at thy word we will let down the nett* How
does this manifest their love to Christ in obeying him contrary to all their
reason and experience of that nights labor, also it magnifies the power of
Christ: As if they had said, we will cast in at thy command, for thou have
power to make our labor successful: so it does the wisdom of Christ, thou
art wiser then all we, therefore we will obey, not dispute thy commands;
mark that clause (yet nevertheless) at thy word we will let down the net.
As if they had said, should we own our wills to be our own, we should find
arguments enough in our flesh to dispute thy commands. Yet nevertheless, that
there be so many fleshly arguments against thy command, yet our wills being
thine we readily obey: this nevertheless gives the more glory to the love,
power, and wisdom of God.

A second Benefit of the will of man given up to the will of God, is this, That
it takes the soul off from vain and needless pursuits and enquiries, and
wholly puts it upon seeking after the will of God: when the soul is brought to
this, to seek and have all its light, life, and strength from God, it then
seeks no where else; so when it has given it self up wholly to be acted and
disposed of by God, then it looks for nothing but God to manifest his will in
what the soul or body should do or suffer. This single object is a mighty
advantage to a believing soul: how miserably are such poor hearts puzzled,
which have more then this single object to look to for rules to act by, such as
when God by his providence brings them to a trial, that they must act or
declare for or against him, own him or deny him before men, then they have
struglings within themselves. First, to know (after the menner of men) which is
the strongest side; and if they find that, yet they fear lest it should not
continue: so they would seemingly own God, but yet dare not let go the arm of
flesh; they know not how to trust Gods power and wisdom above the power and
wisdom of the world, and this makes them say one thing one day, and another
the next: this uncertainty and perplexity in men's spirits, arises from hence,
that God is not their single object, they would do that which cannot be, serve
God and Mammon too, they are ambidous, and would be always uppermost,
therefore they keep their wills in their own hands, that they may as they think,
be able always to gratify the strongest party. But this makes miserable work
in the soul, and altogether unfixes the motions: You shall never tell where to
have that man, that cannot tell where to be himself. He must turn with the
wind; and unless you can tell where and when the wind will change, you shall
never know how to find him. This is misery enough for any man, and it is great
pity that any such man, or men, should have power to make more miserable then
themselves: But the misery of this man sets forth the beauty and the benefit of
that will which is wholly given up to God, and to whom God is the single object
it looks after. When God brings forth the soul to discover it self to the
world, it goes to God and begges of him to discover and manifest his will
concerning its motion: For, says he, Lord thou know I have no will of my
own, my will is in thee, thou must discover thy will, before I can know or do
my duty. Now when the soul is fixed upon this single object, it is free from
all those poor and low distracting considerations; and though he be made to
wait a while to know Gods way, yet he waits patiently, because he knows he
has pitched upon an object that cannot deceive him, and upon a faithful God
that will make known himself to him, so that both waiting and working, has a
setlednesse in it, where God is the single object of any soul, and God is so
when the will of man is brought over to his will, it has then nothing to
enquire after but the will of God, and what ever soul has that singly in his
eye, shall never want a clear object; for God will never hide himself from
that heart which he inclines to enquire after him, much less to such a soul
as has resigned it self wholly up to God, to see with his eyes, to hear with
his ears, and to work with his hands, to know nor do nothing but Gods will in
his Spirit. God can never leave that soul to it self, which has given it
self up to God. And this is the language of such a soul, when as duty,
worship, and service is required of it, Show me the will and command of my God
in what you require, and I shall soon obey, otherwise I must deny what you
require, until I see it be the will of my God, for there is my will bound up;
and truly where God appears not, I must deny my self to you and all flesh:
For I am not my own, but Gods, and cannot act but by the command and in the
strength of my God, it is not my will nor your will, but Gods will that my
spirit can yield obedience to, for God is my single object upon whom I look,
and from whom only I can receive light in what I should do, and strength to
act according to that light. This is a great and glorious benefit which comes
into that soul whose will is given up to the will of God, it enquires for God,
and pursues after the knowledge of his will in all things; for this is the
breathing of his spirit to God, Not my will but thy will be done.

A third Benefit of our wills given up to Gods will, is this, It carries the
soul resolvedly and stedily to its duty, and leaves the issue and success to
God. If God make known his will to this soul, it does not protract its
obedience till God has made known unto him in particular what shall be the
issue of that he requires, but makes this conclusion, The duty is mine, now
God has declared himself in it, and the success is Gods, it is in a safe
hand, and I know in the general it shall be good, because it is in God, and
comes from God; but let God take his own time to declare that, he has at
present made known his will concerning my work, my enquiry is now at an end, and
I will obey. Queen Hester is an eminent example in this, when as God by
Mordecai had showed his will and her duty in that great and weighty business of
her interceding with King Ahasuerus for altering of his decree that was to take
away the life of Mordecai, and all the Jewish Nation, though in the performance
of this work she must go in to the King without his sending for her, which was
not according to the law, and in which she hazarded the loss of her life as
well as her petition; yet duty being made known, she resolves to obey, though
ignorant of the success, she takes up the duty with these words in her mouth,
If I perish, I perish. This is a resolved duty that comes from a stedy soul
which has given it self up to God; as if she had said, If the issue be to
perish, I shall willingly take up that when God declares himself in it; but at
the present God has declared his will that I should go, and that will of God
I shall obey though I perish; she does not stay to know the issue before she
goes, whether perish or not perish, but she obeyes the command, and leaves it
to God in his own time to make known his will in the success as well as the
work, whether it it be perishing or not. It was a precious spirit, yea it was
the spirit of God in her, and it is the same spirit that brings over the will of
Saints to the will of God, and makes them to be stedy and resolved in their
duty. It was thus with Paul, he could not forbear his going to Jerusalem,
though his friends begged him with tears, and he knew bonds should take hold on
him there, yet nevertheless God had declared his will for him to go, and go
he must, his will was as Gods will, and that manifested his obedience is stedy
and resolved. So it is reported of Luther that he should say, he would go and
preach the Gospel, though he met with as many Devils as tiles on the house.
Difficulties cannot hinder duties in such a soul as has given it self and
its will up to God, when God does but declare his will; for that is all which
such souls look after, and when God has declared that, the soul takes it up
resolvedly to obey it: and casts it self and whole work and ways upon God,
that he would own him and his work, so as to carry the soul through it,
according to the glory of his mighty power, whereby he is able to work all
things to himself, and leaves the issue in Gods hand to the same end, the
glory of his Name, saying to God, Not my will, but thy will be done.

A fourth Benefit of our wills being surrendered up to the will of God, is this,
It sanctifies and beautifies the life and conversation of Saints with the image
and presence of God. If the will of God be that fountain which gives life to
all our motion, then surely that motion will be the life of God: that soul
which will take up no practice upon trust, but does try all, and make Gods will
the touchstone to try them, shall be sure never to be deceived with copper in
stead of gold: that soul which will embrace nothing but what God shall first
approve of, is in a sure way of keeping it self pure and undefiled. Now this
is the frame of Spirit which is in such souls as have given up their wills to
Gods will; for their wills being in God, they will be sure to see his will in all
they do, they can take up no practice but what they have his precept for, and
they will give you this for an unanswerable reason, They have no will but what
is in God, therefore can take up nor obey no work, nor will, but what is the
work and will of God. And such as walk by this Rule, says the Apostle, Peace
be to them, and to the Israel of God. God is such a Rule as can produce no
other end, and what ever soul takes it work only from Gods will, must needs be
doing the will of God, which is in a few words, to be holy as God is holy; to
bring forth the fruits of righteousness, because what that soul receives, is
from a righteous God; that soul which has all from God, is always with God,
and the presence of God changes souls into his own image, and that soul which
has its will in God, must needs have God in his will and work, which will
certainly make a holy will and a holy work, because both are made by a holy God.

The new Creature is the most glorious being on earth, for it is God in the
Creature: now this is the will of man swallowed up in the will of God, put forth
in the soul and life of man: And this is the soul that speaks to God truly
in the spirit, Not my will but thy will be done, O Father.

Fifthly and lastly, When our wills are melted into the will of God, it puts the
soul and spirit into a quiet, peaceable, restfull, and serene condition, and
it must needs be so upon this consideration. For what can make it otherwise,
when all things work according to the desires of that soul; every thing
distinct, and all things together, perfects the end that this soul drives at,
and the soul knows it, therefore must needs be at rest: the property of this
soul is, it has its will in God, and desires the fulfilling and
accomplishment of no others will, but the will of God. Now tell me, what can
disturb the peace of this soul? Nothing but what is able to frustrate God of
his will, and that can be no created being, because God that made it, can when
he pleases, make it return to its first nothing: that soul has its peace
above disturbance, which has in it the fulfilling of the will of God: For all
the working in Heaven and Earth, do but fulfill the will of God, and make up
the peace and rest of that soul which is bound up in the will of God. And upon
this consideration our Savior tells his people, That their joy shall no man
take from them, because their joy and rest is in God, above the reach of man or
men: and this is the main reason of that vaste difference that is in the
spirits that live in him, and the men of the World that live in the World, in
regard of the rest and peace that is in the bosoms of the one, and the
perplexing distractions that are in the hearts of the other. Says the Soul
that has given up his will to God, I am at rest, for I know in all the workings
in the world, he is perfecting his own will, and setting up his own glory; and
his will it my will, if Gods will be done, I have all done that my soul desires,
therefore nothing can disturb my rest. But now ask the worldling how is it with
him in point of rest? O (says he) never worse, the world is so unquiet, so
full of trouble, hazards, and change, that a man cannot tell where he is safe,
nor when he is well, nor do we know when it will be better, when some hopes of
rest appear, then new troubles nip that in the bud, so that I am hopeless of
any rest in the world. That is very true, says the the gracious soul, for the
earth that must be shaken, and is ever shaking, was never made for a place of
rest: but did you enjoy God, and live in the fullness of that love which souls
live in that have given themselves up to God, your mournings would be turned
into joys, and your sad complainings into high admirings of the power and
wisdom of God, that makes all things, perfects his ends, and lifts up his
glory. Truly, says this soul, I remember the time when it was with me as with
David, my heart repined to see the wicked fat and flourish; but since my will
has been molded into the will of God, I can repine at nothing, because now I
know all things shall fulfill the will of God. I have known the time when my
spirit has been disturbed if God should seem to set me aside, and use others
in my place to do his work; but truly no such thing disturbs me now, my will is
in Gods will, for it is the will and work of God to be done, that I mind; not the
instrument that does it: nay, Gods will in altering of his instruments,
satisfies me as much as any other part of his will: for it is the doing of his
will that I rest in, and this makes me always at rest, because God is always
accomplishing his own will: therefore, says the Psalmist, in the 45 Psalm, I
will not fear nor be disquieted, though the earth be removed, and the
mountains carried into the midst of the Sea, though the waters thereof roar
and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. No,
why not? What is the reason of it? Why? The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God
of Jacob is our refuge. This is the reason, He lived in the power, love, and
faithfulness of God, and so could not be moved; that which could move the
earth, and carry away the mountains, the great men and powers of it, could not
disquiet him, because not remove him from his God. Our Savior intimates thus
much unto his Disciples, John 14. Let not your hearts be troubled, you believe
in God, believe also in me. (i.) Believe in God, live in God, and rest on God
through me, and your hearts will be at rest. When the will of Man centres in the
will of God, the peace of God centres in the bosom of that man: When God makes
any soul to sit down in his will, he does also make that soul to be at rest in
his will, and his love, till he take it up for ever into the fullness of his
glory.

This is an unparalled benefit which that soul enjoyes that has given up
his will to the will of God. We have an example of this in David, 2 Samuel
12.16. whilst the child was sick, he besought the Lord for it; but when he
knew the child was dead, He arose from the earth, washed and anointed himself,
worshipped God, and went to his own house, are bread, and refreshed himself,
19, 20. And in the 22, 23. verses, he tells us the reason of it, While the child
was living, he besought God for it, he could not tell but it might be his will
that the child should live; but when God had declared his will in the death of
his child, that satisfied David, so that we see clearly, it was the will of God
he looked after, and that being revealed, the heart is at rest; and its only a
heart that is thus bound up in God and his will, that can be at rest. Gods will
is either the rest or the trouble of every soul: where it is the rest, that
soul must needs be at rest, because his will shall always be done: but where it
is the trouble, that soul must ever be in trouble, because his will is ever
fulfilling. Now it cannot but be the rest of that soul which has its will in
God, and disquietments of such wills, as are out of, and contrary to God: that
soul must needs be at rest, which has his will in Gods, because let God strip
it of what he pleases, yet it finds more in God, then it can lose for God,
more love, more life, more joy, more riches, more honors, and more pleasures;
then it must needs follow, more peace and quiet in such spirits. The only way
to be at peace and quiet, is to be out of our selves, and the world in our
wills, and in God. This soul gains its will by losing of it, he has what he
desires, that in all times and things Gods will must be done on Earth as it is
in heaven.

But if our hearts should ask this question, If there be such great benefits
that do accrue to the souls of Gods people, in having their wills molded into
the will of the holy God; then what hinders that this work is not wrought upon
the will of every man?

To this I answer, There be three things especially which hinder.

1. Ignorance of God. 2. Unbelief. 3. Love of the world.
First, It is ignorance of God, in his love, and the working of his love, that
makes the soul long to give up it self and its will to God, and this appears
clearly in what has gone before. The blind man cannot judge of colors, and he
that knows not an excellency, can never close with it: it is all one to a swine
whether he tramples upon pearls or peble-stones, he cannot distinguish. There
is not a greater evidence of ignorance, then in such a question as was put to
the Jews, What is there in thy beloved more then in other beloveds? It is a
sign they were ignorant of her beloved, that should make question what was in
him more then in other beloveds; had they known him as she did, they would have
confessed he had been the fairest among ten thousand, and admired his
excellency, not compared it by a question to poor low empty things. Now from
this ignorance it arises, that men keep their wills to themselves, and do not
surrender them up to God, because they know not God, nor what gainers they
shall be in so doing.

Secondly, Unbelief, and this is the grand cause; for though men may have a
fleshly knowledge of God and Christ, yet if they know not God and Christ in
spirit, there will be no trusting in them, nor believing on them: and there can
never be a resigning the will over to God. All the eminent examples which we
have in Scripture of this giving up the will to Gods will, we shall find it the
fruits of faith, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noab obeyed the will of God, and builded
an Arc, 8, 9 verses. So by faith Abraham gave his will up to God, in leaving
the place he was in, to go to a strange country which he did not know, and
sojourned in the Land of promise as a stranger. And in the 17. verse, when God
tried Abraham in that superlative straight to the flesh, whether he had given
up his will to Gods will in commanding him to offer up his son Isaac, the Text
says, By faith he did it; he had by faith resigned up his own will to Gods, and
did believe Gods will better for him then his own, so by faith he obeyed. verse
23. It was by faith Moses parents hid him three months, that their will was
Gods will, comes from faith. So by faith Moses when he came to years, obeyed
Gods will, and left Pharaohs Court. And by faith the children of Israel gave up
their wills to God, and followed his will through the red sea and the long
wilderness into Canaan. Thus it is belief in God that centers the will in God;
and so consequently unbelief that keeps off the will from centering in God.

Thirdly and lastly, inordinate love to the world keeps off the will of man from
closing with Christ; they are afraid to lose something of the world, if they
give up their wills to Christ. This made the Gaderens to desire Christ to depart
out of their Coast, Mark 5.17. because in the fulfilling of his will when as he
cast the Legions of Devils out of the man, and suffered them to go into the
swine, so that the swine ran into the Sea and were drowned; they desired no
more of his will to be done, if it took away their swine. This worlds love is
swinish love, it loves not that Gods will should be done, if in the fulfilling
of it there be but a cropping of any creature bud. This love puts a great
value upon the things and esteem of the world, and therefore refuses to give
up its will to God, because he sees that the will of God commands the offering
up of an Isaac, and he not being acquainted with the spiritual incoming of God
to his soul, nor believing the love and faithfulness of God, refuses to
resign up his will to God: but as the unjust Steward would make friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, gives up his will to the possessing and esteem of an empty
world, values them more then God, loves them better then God, and therefore
give up their will to the world, and not to God, reading this lesson backward,
and say to God, not thy will, but our will be done.

This truth is full of beauty in its information, but in the application of it,
and the souls closing with it, it makes an exceeding glorious Christian.

First, It informs us whence all trouble and rest both within us and without
us do arise: and that is clearly in this from our wills out of God, and our wills
in God; that will which is not in God, is in opposition to God, and so is God
to it; now hence it is that all troubles arise both within and without the
soul, because God is always fulfilling his own will; and this is a continual
crossing such a will as is out of God, that will that lives in it self is
tortured every moment of selfe-disappointment, which does follow it all its
days, and in all its designs, because it wills and designs contrary to God;
Disappointments are dreadful things to such a man as wills for himself, and
lives in his will, his will being disappointed, in which his life was bound up,
the man must needs be a life-lesse miserable man; this was the grond of
Pharoah's troubles about the children of Israel, his will was in opposition to
Gods will, in their going to worship God in the Wilderness; God in every act
of his providence was fulfilling his will, and this eat up the very bowels of
Pharaoh: and this is the very cause that makes those tyrants over the
consciences of Gods people in these days so restless, because in opposition
to them God is fulfilling his own will; He will have his people free from their
wills to worship him in his Spirit: and though they pursue with all their might
to hinder this will of God in his Saints, yet they imagine but a vain thing,
and shall compass nothing in the conclusion but their own ruin: God may
suffer them so far to have their own wills, as to drive Saints to the Red Sea:
but all that shall fulfill Gods will, not their will; for then will God bring their
greatest disappointment, and certain ruin. This was also proud Hamans case,
his will was to destroy the whole Nation of the Jews, as we may see in Esther
3. But this was not Gods will, Haman he designs according to his will: but it
being without God, observe the fullness of his disappointment, and the Justice
of God returned into his own bosom. In Esther 6. and Esther 7. and verse. 10.
of Chap. 6. The King asks Haman what should be done to the man the King would
honor? Doubtless Haman thought the King meant himself, and therefore makes
him this answer in verse 8. Let the royal apparel be brought which the King
uses to wear, and the horse that the King rides upon, and the Crown royal
which is set upon his head, and let his apparel and horse be delivered to the
hands of one of the Kings most noble Princes, that they may array the man
withal whom the King delights to honor, and bring him on horseback through
the streets of the City, and proclaim before him, thus shall be done to the man
whom the King will honor It appears clear by this counsel, that self was
in his heart: but observe in verse. 10. the miserable disappointment of this
proud selfish man. Then the King said unto Haman, make have, take the Apparel
and the Horse as thou have said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew that
sits at the Kings gate: let nothing fail of all that thou have spoken.

First, Haman is disappointed in that he is not the man.

Secondly, To aggravate his misery, Mordecai whom he hated he is the man: (for
whom he had been inventing death and dishonor) God makes him the instrument
to invent honors, and to complete this miserable disappointment. Haman
himself must be the Kings servant to honor Mordecai whom he hated; we see by
Hamans answers to the King, what proud and selfish men seek after: but their
wills being out of God, the higher they clime, the lower they fall, and the
greater their expectations be, the fuller of misery is their disappointment;
Yet the justice of God left not this proud cruel man, but brought him to be
hanged upon the Gallows of fifty cubits high, which he had in his will
appointed for Mordecay. This is the fruit of having our wills out of Gods will:
So Jonah, his will was the gourd should continue: but that was not Gods will,
therefore dye it must; now how does this disquiet the man, even so much that he
seems to justify his anger; there was no cause of his discontent, but that
his will was not in Gods will.

Secondly, This does inform us whence this rest and quiet that is in the
bosoms of Gods people does arise; namely in this, that their wills are in Gods
will; therefore when God declares his will under any dispensation in the World,
they are at rest; for the appearance of his will makes their rest; all things
besides this brings disquietments upon the spirit: but when the will of God
appears, it silences all disputes, and quiets all thoughts in the heart of him
that has given up his will to Gods will; this soul does not quarrel with, but
kisseth the feet of God: when the will of God lays it there, it is in spirit at
rest upon a sick bed, because of the will of God there. Disappointments in the
outward man do not cease upon this man to disturbance, because the will of God
is in them, and that is his rest; he is best at rest in that wherein he sees
most of Gods will discovered to him, what ever it be in its own nature; this
soul can say with David, when Gods will appears in it: It is good for me I
have been afflicted, and makes this the discovery of the good and evil of all
he meddles with; namely, the will of God. If Gods will appear in it, he
acknowledges it to be good: but if he see not that, he cannot own it as his
good, or any thing for him to rest in; for he rests only in God, and it is
nothing but the appearance of Gods will that makes his Spirit at rest under
every dispensation of God, and from thence this soul has a quiet being.

But again, This truth does inform us as Saints of our duty, to enquire after
Gods will in all we do, or require others to do. The will of Christ was, that
the will of God should be done: so is the will of Saints in conformity to the
will of Christ their head; and if to be done, then surely to be known: Nay,
Saints ought to do nothing before they know the will of God in it. If this rule
were observed, there would not be so much doing and undoing as this uncertain
age affords. If God led men into what they do, he would so own them that
they should not be ashamed of it; this is the true reason why men do and
ondoe, because in what they do they seek their own wills, not Gods will: but
he that has given up his will to Gods will, before he works he will see Gods
will, this is the true reason why the men of this World with all their power and
policy cannot make Saints worship as they do (the unknown God) or at least
wise in such a manner as they know not, whether it be the will of God or no. I
say this is the reason, because they are bound up in the will of God, so that
they cannot worship any unknown God, nor the God they know in any manner, but
what he makes known to them, to be his will that they should worship him in. If
men be truly zealous for the worship of God, it can go no farther then this;
That such as know him and his will, should worship him according to his will made
known to them; for any thing else cannot be the true worship of the true God.
Now such as know God and his will in truth, the spirit of truth, they are a
willing people, to worship God according to his will made known to them by his
Spirit, in which they worship him. If this were seriously considered in the
Spirit of God, it would appear to be the beauty of Saints not to act before
light, to know Gods will, and so to do it, therefore Saints should be teaching
one another in the Spirit, but not to force any where the Spirit has not
taught, then there is no need of forcing; for the Spirit of God that teaches,
does also lead his people into obeying of his truths and will. The Saints in
truth speak thus in the spirit of truth to God: Not my will, nor the will of
any man or men, but thy will be done. Therefore Lord, show me thy will, and it
suffices; he that rules should enquire after the will of God to rule by: and
he that is ruled, for the will of God to be the rule of his obedience. Oh that
our Rulers did enquire after, and find out this rule to rule by; Then would
righteousness flourish in the Land as a green Bay Tree, and the branches of
it would cover the Land, with that much desired peace. It is the want of this
which makes the want of peace: did Governors and governed seek Gods will and
not their own, both they and the Land would soon be at peace in the righteous
will of God. If men did truly enquire after Gods will, that they might loose
their own wills in his, the contending for our own wills would be at an end,
true rest and peace would come into our souls and this Nation; for this is
only true rest to rest in God and his will.

But then how excellent is this in that soul, which does in the Spirit of God
truly apply it, and close with it, that has indeed its will only in the will of
God, and desires nothing to be done for it but the will of God, nor in it, but
Gods will, nor to it but Gods will; that desires to think, speak, nor do
nothing but Gods will; that has but this one single object to look after, the
will of God, and finding that, has found its joy, hope, peace, riches, glory,
aims and ends, with all the good can be named, to that the soul can joy in
the Lord always, have this hope always lively, his peace continually within
him, his riches constantly by him, his glory certain, because above himself
in the will of his God, and his aims and ends certainly accomplished, because
he has all these in God, his will being only in the will of God. The workings
God in the World, which perplexes other men, satisfies this man, because the
will of God is done in them, and by them; this is indeed the very top-branch of
Christianity; this was Christ's lesson when he was going out of the World, and
that soul which learns this lesson is going with Christ out of the World, I
mean not bodily, but spiritually; not the flesh dying in the World, but his
spirit dead to the World, as Paul crucified to the World, and the World to him,
both agreed; he had as little spirit for the World, as the World had
satisfaction for his spirit; his spirit was bound up in God, and that must
needs make an excellent soul, which has its all in God, and from God, its
will so in God, that it can will nothing to be done, but the will of God: Not my
will, but thy will be done.

CHAP. XII. No man exceeds another in excelency but by received mercies.
1 Cor. Chap. 4. part of the 7th verse. For who makes to differ from another:
and what have thou that thou did not receive.
THis Scripture is to my understanding, one of the most humbling pieces to the
flesh, and fleshly pride of all men and women, that the whole Book of God
affords; humility is the general scope of the Apostle in it, and he has very
fitly suited his arguments to his end; the Apostle both argues and proves his
Argument in this Scripture by way of question.

This Scripture may fitly be called a pair of questions, or a twofold
question, and it speaks most properly to a pair of grand lusts and sins,
that are in the hearts of all men and women by nature; Namely, pride and
peevish repining; Now to the finding out, and answering of these two in the
Apostles language, I shall bend my medications.

And first, the proud heart: Now if you ask me a definition of a proud heart,
I shall first answer in general; the tree is known by the fruit, and the
fruits are so many that they cannot be gathered all into so narrow a compass:
but so far as God does enable me, I shall give light into it by these words
following; namely,

A proud heart is a heart lifted up in it self, despising all that are below
it, and envying all that are above it. Pharaoh is a full testimony of this
truth, Exodus 5.2. when Moses and Aaron went in and told Pharaoh; Thus says the
Lord God of Israel, let my people go, that they may hold a feast with me in
the Wilderness. Mark his answer: And Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, that I
should obey his voice to let Israel go: As if he had said; do you tell me
of the Lord? is there any above me that should require this people out of my
hands?

Here is an exact emblem of a man lifted up in himself, and despising of all
below him and above him too: But when God by his judgments had forced him to
let his people go, in which God and his people were above Pharaoh, see then
how full of envy this proud man is to God and his people; that he musters up
all his strength to hinder God in his design, and to destroy his people, so
that Pharaoh is a full proof to all these particulars of a proud heart.

That poor wretch Herod was also lifted up in himself, who when he had made
his Oration, and the people cried out, the voice of God and not of man, he
took it to himself, for that was his end to lift up himself; this is the
foundation principally of all proud hearts.

So Nebuchadnezar in Dan. 8.15. when he had threatened Shadrach, Meshech, and
Abednego, what he would do to them, if they should not at his command fall
down and worship the golden Image which he had set up, that he would cast them
into the fiery furnace, And who is that God that shall deliver you out of my
bands. This is indeed superlative pride, the man in his own thoughts had set
up himself above God. So he that builded Babell tells us his design, that he
might say in the conclusion; Is not this great Babel that I have built. His
proud heart was lifted up in himself, and that made his work suitable to his
heart, to lift up his own name, so as he might call Babel which he had built:
These also are the proper characters of proud Haman, he was so lifted up in
himself, that if poor Mordecai bow not his knee, the man is restless,
despises him, plots his ruin, and with him all the Nation of the Jews; yea
even Esther the Queen that was above him. The proud man to set up self,
despises and envies all below him and above him; a proud heart is boundless in
seeking to set up it self: So proud Goliath despised little David, thought him
fit for nothing but to trample upon. These proofs of Scripture with the
spiritual discoveries of this sin in our selves and others hearts and lives,
will be testimony enough to prove the definition of a proud heart. That a proud
heart is a heart lifted up in it self, despising all below it, and envying all
above it.

It will well become humble Saints to consider how fully the holy Ghost by the
Apostle does answer and silence this proud flesh and spirit in every part of
it, and that by way of questions which can receive no answer but in the
plucking up of pride by the roots. As if the Apostle should say; you that are
lifted up in your selves, and make your boasts of your own wisdom, riches,
strength, power and greatness above others, come you forth and answer me this
question; Who makes thee to differ from another. And what have thou which thou
have not received. Do thou call the wisdom, strength, power, and greatness
that God has bestowed on thee thy own? And is it thy business to lift up thy
name by these? This is thy mistake; thy pride is thy own indeed, thou may
call thy self and the first Adam thy own original for all sin and evil: but
God is only the original of all good; now if thou exceed theirs in evil, it
will be no advantage to lift up thy self by; for the more sinful, the more
miserable thou art: but if thou exceed others in good, as knowledge and the
like, thou have in this little reason to lift up thy self, for thou art not
the original that thou gloriest in. It is what thou have received that makes
thee to differ from another: will thou lift up thy self as if thou were full,
because God is full? I tell thee O proud man, thy difference is from donation;
thou art more then another, because God gives thee more then another, not
because thou art more in thy self, therefore show me a reason why thou art
lifted up in thy self; will thou be proud of thy sins, for thou have nothing
else of thy own? Nay, it is thy sin to be proud of any thing thou have
received: Will thou lift up thy self in that which is another? Rob God of
his glory to cover thy own face with it? Nay, will thou be so wicked as to
make thy self as it were God? His wisdom thine, and thy self the original
of his gifts? Thou forgettest and seem to deny that thou have received that
which makes thee to differ, when as thou go about to set up thy self.

Again, show me thy reason why thou despisest all that are below the^, and
enviest such as are above thee; is the one too low, and the other too high? Why
consider who it is that makes the difference in them, it is the same powerful
God that makes thee to differ, by what thou have received more then those
below thee, and less then such as are above thee. Now thou can neither
despise the one, nor envy the other, but thou do it to God in both; for the
same wonder-working God which makes thee to differ in excellency and glory from
them, makes them also to differ from thee in the same; what thou have thou have
received, so have they; when thou can make one of thy hairs black or white,
thou may have some seeming good to lift up thy self, and expect other
channels to run into thee: but till then be silent, and if thou can not
answer these questions, who makes thee to differ from another, and what have
thou that thou have not received? Then for shame lay down thy self at the
feet of that God from whom thou receivedst all that good and excellency which
makes thee to differ from the lowest degree of sin and misery. This Scripture
to a proud spirit is like those words of our Savior to him that came to the
marriage feast without a wedding garment. Friend (says Christ) how came thou
in hither, not having a wedding garment? And the Text says the man was
speechless: So truly I believe will every proud spirit be, that God puts to
answer these questions, have nothing to say, but lie silent under this
conviction, That God is all good, and himself nothing but a spring of evil.
From whence comes his pride, but in that he differs not from other flesh in a
state of nature: and I wish it could be truly affirmed, that pride were not in
any but such as are in their natural condition: but this I dare affirm, that
so much pride which is in any man or woman, so much of the old Adam is still
remaining in that soul; for pride is a fruit of the flesh, and is that which
God hates, and sets himself against. I may say of pride, it is the original
of the Devil, and there is no sin in the soul of man or woman which gives
the Devil more service then this does.

We have in what has gone before had some weak discoveries of the principles
of it. If the Spirit of God be our light, it will not be lost time nor pains
to look into the practices of those principles in these few following
particulars.

As first, The proud man he seeks to raise up himself, and not in all to lift
up God higher then himself; His work is all climing work, he cannot endure
to have any man above him; this is that he plots for and acts for, namely to
lift up his own name, and his own will. He is very industrious to build
Babell, that he might say, this is great Babell that I have builded. He seeks
to be uppermost, that all law and rule may come from his lips: and if this be
opposed, the man is abundantly enraged, as appears by Nebuchadnezar, when his
visage was changed by his wrath, and be commanded the fiery furnace to be heat
seven times ^^tter then before, and that Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego should
be cast into it, because they disobeyed his commands, and would not fall down
to worship the Image he had set up; this very thing is the practice of all
proud hearts so far as they can reach: God chains up such spirits as he did
Satan from Job: but this is properly their hearts, and so far as their
chain will go, they practice; the proud man makes use of one step to advance
him to another, but not in any to lift up God above himself, for that is a
contradiction to the principles he acts by; where God is lifted up, there the
flesh is thrown down: but the proud man's glory is his flesh, not God, and
that is really his business where ever he is, to lift up himself, and it is
the disquiet meant of his soul when this design does not prosper: but let such
spirits take the Apostles questions to answer; Who makes thee to diffen, and
what have thou that thou have not received. Do thou know thy original, and
by what power thy progress has been made from step to step? Have thou mounted
with thy own wings, and climbed up to what thou art with thy own hands? Or
have thou received that by which thou differest from another? Look upon dead
bones, and tell me if they can live; If you say no, I say it is your ignorance,
they can live by the same power you live, you that were dead clay, live by what
you have received, so can these dead bones. Where the Spirit of God sets home
these questions upon any soul., it will not only silence, but crucify this
principle and practice of pride in it.

Secondly, a proud man's practice is to keep others under him, that he may keep
up himself, to make the comforts of other men, the footstool of his pride, to
trample others into nothing, that he might make himself all. So did proud
Haman in his heart and design against poor Mordecai, and the whole nation of
the Jews. Pride is a lust that burns up others to maintain it self, and
builds upon those ashes, it must either have the knee or the life of all that
stand before it, he that will not bow must break, when a proud man is supreme
in power. For this is the improvement of his power, to keep others under that
he may keep himself up: the proud man is so malicious, that he would have
none happy but himself, and threfore makes the proprieties of other men a
sacrifice to this his lust, and so pleases himself for a few moments, like
those that have the crackling of thorns under a pot for their joy; but the
Apostles question (Who makes thee to differ, and what have thou that thou
did not receive?) will be as hard to the proud man in this practice, as in
the former: for he that only differs by what he receives, will but ill justify
his trampling upon another, that has not received so much as himself. When God
that gives the talents, makes enquiry after the improvement of them, and finds
it to be only so, he will not give the testimony, nor the trust of Well done
good and faithful servant, to such a soul. God makes it his glory to lift up
his people, to make them heirs of himself, joint heirs with Christ in glory.
Therefore the proud man that keeps others under, that he may keep up himself,
has not his precept, principle, practice nor example from God, and therefore
has no reason to expect, that in his way of pride God should either own him,
or prosper him; but that God in lifting up of his own glory, should trample the
proud man under his feet, as he does others for the keeping up of himself.

Thirdly, a Proud man he scorns and slights such as are below him, because he
is above them, he scorns and slights them in their counsels, in their
kindnesses, and in their requests. A proud man scorns that he which has less
power and greatness then himself, should advise him, and from hence slights
the counsel: and if the poor man serve the proud man with kindness, he takes
it as duty, so slights the love, and scorns the man and his service. And if he
make request to him, nay though it be for justice, if he do not admire him, he
must keep off, and know his distance, and he shall be heard at leisure, he is
not of magnitude enough for his consideration, he is above low persons and
things in his thoughts, he cannot look upon any thing below him, with any other
eye then an eye of scorn, as the proud Pharisee upon the poor Publican. This
practice in proud men and women, does better discover it self then any pen can
do it: but to such I shall also give the Apostles two questions, Who makes
thee to differ? and what have thou that thou did not receive? And when they
shall be answered, I believe both the principle and this practice of pride will
be rooted out of the heart, when the soul is made to confess that God makes
it to differ: and it has received all its excellencies from God, it will then
scorn none below it self, but by such an object consider from what God has
raised it, and admire that power and goodness which has bestowed excellencies
upon it, pitying not scorning any below it self.

Fourthly, A proud man when he has any power, will soon be imposing beyond the
just limits of his power. A proud manis in nothing more discovered, then by his
impositions, it is the pride of his heart, puts his power upon imposing; else
says that heart, my power will not be known. Now when pride sets power on
work; it carries it quickly beyond its bounds: pride is a swelling lust, very
hard to be bound; but where it is chief in the heart, and gives rule to the
power which it in the hand, that hand and heart soon forgets it bounds. We have
an example of this in the decree of Darius the King, Daniel 6. his pride,
though his power had nobounds because he was King, therefore he makes a decree,
according to the advice of his wicked Council, which was suitable to his own
proud heart: That whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or Man for thirty
days, save of himself, should be cast into the Lions Den. The ground of this
decree was to make a snare for Daniel, whom they confess (in the fourth verse)
to be faithful to the Kingdom, and that they had no hopes though they sought
to destroy him, but they knew he was as faithful to his God, as to the
Kingdom, so that if a decree were made against his worshipping of God, that
would reach him. I shall forbear to open this Scripture in this place, because
it is not so proper to the thing in hand, though I believe the doing of it
would open the hearts and practices of many men in our days; but only make
use of it thus far, to prove that pride in men of power makes them to impose
beyond their power to set themselves above God, and make decrees against God,
in stead of defending the praiseworthy, to make laws against that which is
praiseworthy, because God has set or suffered them to be in the throne
amongst men, they put forth their power into the throne of God: namely the
conscience of his people, that power which pride sets to work, sticks at no
decrees: if men that would lay snares for the people of God to destoy them,
come and desire this power to make laws and decrees how Gods people shall
worship him, or that they shall not worship him at all; these decrees shall
soon have their hand and seal. The Devil does make power by pride fit and
ready to oppose any thing of God, and to impose any thing upon the people of
God: it is the property of pride to seek the ruin of such at bear the image
of the humble God. Now if nothing can be laid to their charge of
unfaithfulness to the place or people where they live, then a decree
concerning the worshipping of their God must be made to reach them, though such
as make it, go beyond their power, that shall not be stuck at where pride
guides the hand, pride seeks power to make that its servant; that which pride
wills, the power it has, shall work: power in the hand serves pride in the
heart, and therefore keeps not within its bounds, because it is the servant of
pride. But to this also the Apostles questions are very proper, Who makes thee
to differ? And what have thou that thou have not received? Is thy power thy
own, or must thou account for it? When the Lord calls his servants to give an
account of their Talents, do thou differ in this that thou have more power
then others, tell me? Who made thee to differ? Is thy power originally in thy
self, or did thou receive it from God? Thou will not say thou art thy own
original, because thy perishing condition will disprove thee; well then, God
is: now tell me how thou will answer God in going beyond thy received power,
especially when the same hand that gave the power, gave thee also a rule to
bound that power by, That thou should not be a terror to good works, but to
evil: Therefore he that does good, should not be afraid of the power. For the
end of power is from God, to protect and defend those that do good, and walk
praiseworthy. Now that proud heart which puts forth the power that is in its
hands, beyond these bounds, will have a sad appearance before God at the day of
account. His pride that over-acted his power, will not then excuse him, but
condemn him; and it will then be his chains of misery to consider how his
pride has in his power outrun the bounds that God has set him, and exceeded
the latitude of that commission which he had received. But this is the effect
of power when it is in the hands of a proud heart.

Fifthly and lastly, A proud hear is proud of it self, of what it is, amd
what it has, of its gifts, ornaments and qualifications, you shall find some
proud of beauty, that at most is but skin deep, and some so wicked as to
paint their skins, to make a subject for their pride. Such as have their
beauty by nature, without art, must know this, that they have received it, if
in that they differ from others, and that one storm of sickness can blast it,
which their flesh is capable of, and as subject to as any others, and that
there is a certainty of time for pale and grim death to take up its
habitations in those faces, so that they have little reason to be puffed up
with perishing beauty, that which must as certainly fade as the flower in the
field. You shall see another proud of his honorable Titles, as he calls them;
and truly this is the emptiest of all bubbles, it is but a breath, it cost him
but little that gives it, he will spend as much breath upon the lowest subject
that affords him matter of discourse, these Titles are indeed the pleasing
dreams of deluded fancies, if put in one equal balance, and held by a steady
hand, Sir, will weigh as heavy as your Honor. But if honor be given where
honor it due, according to Gods rule in his word, their honor is more then a
title. I but there it will be no subject of pride, but humility: for such as
are honorable in spending, and being spent for God (and other true honor I
know none) such I say do well know they have received all from his fullness,
which makes them to differ from others, and therefore their business is to
lift up God, and not themselves, and if to glory, to glory in the original of
their honor, which is God himself.

Another it may be, is proud of his wealth, which he has, as he thinks, in
his own hands, more glittering clay then his poor neighbors have, and
therefore he thinks himself great, Lord of all, and to be served and observed
by all: he forgets that it is uncertain riches, which make themselves wings and
fly away, he remembers not the case of Job, that was stripped of all his great
possessions in a few moments. Sure I am, such as are proud upon this account,
did never spiritually understand and consider the Apostles questions in this
Scripture, Who makes thee to differ? And what have thou that thou have not
received?

Another man he is proud of his wit, good language, learning, and good
education. I confess these are very good when sanctified to such as attain
them; but exceedingly abused when they are made the subjects of pride; thou
can not deny but these are received gifts and qualifications, where then is
the ground for pride, why do thou glory as if thou had not received them?
Thy wit thus abused, may justly be called home again, and thou left a fool for
thy pains. He that is proud of his wit forfeits his wisdom, and is no better
then a witty Fool in the eye of a humble wise man, who justly counts him a
Fool that is proud of his wit and parts, because he that is truly wise, is
humbled by what he receives, and not made proud by it, This root of pride has
a numberless number of branches, but this one Scripture cuts them all off, and
tells the proud man plainly, You have nothing to be proud of, whatever you have
you have received, and if you differ from others, it is because you have
received more then they. It is reported of the Popish Religion, that they hold
ignorance to be the mother of Devotion, I may truly say, because I can make it
good, that ignorance is the mother of pride. For whosoever is proud, must needs
be ignorant That what they have it is received. Were this truth spiritually
understood, it would pluck the wings of pride, and make the peacockes plume to
fall, to consider that he stands upon another legs, sees with another eyes,
acts by another strength, and is nothing but what he receives from a fountain
which he cannot command (and that is God) who makes of all clay what he
pleases, and gives to all according to his own good pleasure: The proud man is
proud of his sin, for he has nothing else of his own, that which he pretends
to, he is debtor for.

Having thus far looked into the principles, and sum of the practices of
pride, it will become wise Christians to improve what God discovers to us.

And first, Me thinks this should put an odious visage upon pride, in the eyes
of every understanding Christian, and make the sin to be abhorred where ever
it is found, and most of all in our own bosoms and practices: For pride makes
a man a fool what ever he thinks himself; in it he boasts of that which is
not his own, as though it were his own, and so no truly wise man will do. The
folly of a proud man is to set up and advance himself, when himself is
nothing but an empty vessel, to be full or empty as it pleases God.

I know no greater folly under Heaven, then this. The confused Chaos at the
creation, might have pretended to as good a title of glory in it self, as
proud man can do: if God withdraw himself, and his gifts from man, I know not
what title to give that which is left, but a scrap or peecemeale of the first
Chaos, and has no more right to glory, then the lump or heap of Confusion
which it came from.

Pride in the heart does not only make a man to be a foolish man, but it also
makes him a wicked man; if he can but get power to show himself in his own
colors, this man will not stick to crucify the lives, liberties, consciences,
and all that is indeed dear to others, to make a Sacrifice for his lust of
pride; though he has no power but what he has received, yet he has so much
cruelty as to make use of that power, beyond and contrary to that end he
received it for: Otherwise the impositions upon the people of God, in the
matters of their God, and the persecution of them (for not obeying men rather
then God) would find no footing in the World. If pride in men do not make
them act further then they have received Rule and Commission from God, his
people would not complain as they do at the Throne of Grace, for being
persecuted; because the Rule of God is, That every man be fully persuaded in
his own bosom: for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14.5.23. But the
proud man puts forth his power beyond the bounds which God has set him, and is
so cruel that he cannot hear the cries of the poor people of God, which
only plead for Christian forbearance, and do profess in singleness of
heart, as in the presence of God, they are ready to obey their commands to the
utmost, so far as God shall fully enlighten and persuade them it is his will,
so that in what they do, they may not sin through unbelief. And sure I am,
nothing but pride and cruelty can stop an ear to these cries.

How ugly now must pride needs look to the eye of a godly soul? And how does
such a soul observe the folly and cruelty of pride? This should make every
soul exceeding earnest at the Throne of Grace, that the Lord would by the fire
of his own holy Spirit, destroy the lust of pride in them: It is the throne of
the Devil, O beseech the Lord to destroy that throne; it is the very flames of
hell in the soul, O beg of the Lord to quench them, and wholly to extinguish
them by his Spirit. Pride in the Soul is the Devils Banner of defiance against
God, O be earnest with the Lord of Hosts to make himself in thee a Conqueror
over this lust. Where pride reigns, God abhorres; where that is King, Christ
is an enemy, O therefore implore the power of Heaven to keep this under, to
destroy it, and root it out of all its strong holds in the soul: All the
Devils in Hell without the soul, are more easy enemies then pride within the
soul, that man is a perfect slave, which has pride for his Master; and until
the Son and Spirit make a soul free, it will never be free indeed.

We should be therefore often with God, beseeching him that Christ may live in
us by his Spirit, to make us free from the sin and slavery of pride: That
soul which begges of God the death of pride in it self, has a promise
attending its petition: for it is according to the will of God, God having
declared himself an enemy to pride, O that all Saints were like God in this,
open declared enemies to pride in themselves and others, improving all their
interest at the throne of Grace, that God would destroy this piece of Self and
Satan root and branch out of the Soul, that neither Fruit nor Branch may ever
grow upon it more.

Again, From this discovery of a proud man in his principles and practices, I
have learned thus much; That if ever I should be called to put power into the
hands of any man or men, and to entrust all those liberties which I could
commit to trust into such hands, I would make this a general rule, of all men
to avoid a proud man; for I would never trust a fool with power, nor a cruel
man with my liberties, and I am sure a proud man is both these: so that surely
that person or Nation shall never but be miserable that commits power and
trust into such hands, such men as single persons are the burden of a Land:
but put power in their hands, and they will be so far as their power will
reach, the ruin of that Land. Though men as Gods instruments give a proud man
his power, yet he soon forgets that he has received the power, by which he
differs, and so Tyrant like makes use of his power to pluck down them that
set up him, and to sacrifice those rights and liberties which he is entrusted
to preserve, to his own pride; this I am sure he can never be true to me, that
is faulty to God: but a proud man is so, because in substance he denies God to
be the original of his power; for did he acknowledge himself to receive that
by which he differs, he would never be proud of his debt and his duty, nor use
his power contrary to, or beyond the rule of God, who gives both rule and power.

It is the humble heart which only has a hand fit to put power into, and to
entrust any thing that is dear and precious withal, because there is
acknowledgements in receiving that wherein it differs; this man is most like to
be a faithful Steward, to give an account of his trust: for he acknowledges
himself to be a Steward, a Trustee, or indeed a trusted servant, for the good
and happiness of them that have trusted him; the weight of his work sanctified
by the Spirit of God, keeps this man humble; It is this humble man which will
be a blessing to them that trust him. He that God makes humble, is a sit man
to make honorable, and by putting trust in such hands will Nations and
Kingdoms be made happy.

And now I must crave leave to be plain and single hearted with men in power,
only in asking them the Apostles questions. Who makes thee to differ from
another, and what have thou that thou have not received. Have you more power
then others; yet remember you have received that power from God as the
fountain, from men as the streams, and it is only in what you have received,
by which you differ from other men: and pray remember this, your account will
be as great as your power, because your power is received. Let me beg you to
consider what is Gods end and man's end in trusting you, and putting power into
your hands; Gods end is his own glory, that you should lift up his Name in all
you do, defend his people with all your power, to be a defense to all that is
praiseworthy, and a terror only to evil doers, to make his will your work,
not your own wills a law, his Word and Spirit your rule, his single glory your
end, the people of the Covenant of his free grace your beloved ones; that you
should establish righteousness, justice and judgment in the Land, which will
be the firm end and lasting pillars of peace; this is Gods end in giving you
power, and according to these ends will God have from you an account of your
using that power he has committed to you, and that you have received from
him. Man's end in putting power into your hands is their own good, that you
should by that power defend them in all just and righteous ways, maintain to
them their proprieties, and not to diminish, but increase their just liberties,
such in which all just men may be happy, and no sort of men enabled by your
authority to entrench upon, or violate the peaceful rights and liberties of
others. You that are trusted by the whole should have no squint eyes, nor
ceasing of hands when you give forth your blessings, but carry the whole in
your hands heart, and eye; you should be as Melchisedech, without Father and
Mother, related to no party but the whole. This is man's end in committing that
to your trust, which is in their power to commit to trust; now who ever casts
up this account, will find no cause to be proud of his employment or his
power, but to lie low at the feet of God for his continual presence, that you
may have the strength of Christ to discharge this duty and trust received, for
nothing less will carry any soul well through his work. The discharge of this
trust will be judged by an impartial Judge; before whom all things are naked;
such as God shall acquit may walk and lie down in peace: but if God charge any
soul of misusing and abusing this received trust and power, it will be with
such a soul as with Belieshazar, when he perceived the handwriting upon the
wall, his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. Yea
and conscience will be wounded too, that which none can bear, will be the
weight to press down such a miserable soul. I judge no persons, nor shall I
entee into particulars, only profess my sadness to hear so many complain:
some for want of justice, others of injustice; most men say the eye is not
single, it is divided into parties, so that the whole is neglected, all men's
mouths are op^n, and God has at one time or other made them to discover their
hearts: but when they rip up, it is some for Paul, and others for Apollo, and a
third for Cephas, when intruth all should be for Christ; it is this division of
the flesh which divides the Land, and sowes seeds of war to destroy this,
and after Generations, if the Lord prevent not by the powrings forth of his
Spirit, to unite us again in that common root and head of all Saints, the Lord
Jesus Christ. The Magistrates work (as I humbly conceive) to effect this happy
union, is this, singly to eye Christ, so as to give forth their power for
protection to all that in the beauty of holiness and the power of godliness
do live up his Image, leaving Christ his own Throne, the consciences of his
people; this so far as I can see is according to the trust committed both by
God and man, I think the want of peace does arise from the want of this
righteousness, justice, and judgment to run down in the Land, and till God
give this Spirit and practice amongst his people, I shall have but little hopes
of lasting Peace; for sure I am, what ever Peace shall be made upon other
terms, the foundation will be too weak to bear its burden, so that the
building cannot long stand. I think this is the controversy God has with all
the Nations of the Earth at this day, and till God have his will we shall not
have peace. Oh that all which desire peace would take Gods way to establish it.
Peace is the common theme of all men: but this way of God to it is the
practice of very few, if any; this Peace to some, and war to others,
protection to some, and destruction to others of the people of God, is man's
peace, not Gods; for Christ takes care of the whole body, the hand and foot as
well as the eye, and that peace which man makes without God, God can and will
soon destroy, by or without man: and if men should prove false to that trust
they have received from God and man, yet God will never fail his people, nor
be faithless to his Covenant; they shall find him his peoples God, not
protecting part only, but the whole: and when men act according to what they
have received from God they will do so too.

Such as have the present trust have another weighty consideration lies upon
them; seriously, and in the fear of God consider how many times God has given
you your lives, when you have been appointed by men to be a sacrifice to their
lusts, and in the will and end of these designs, the knife has oftentimes
been almost at your very throats, when you have not seen nor known it: but the
All-seeing eye of God has discovered, and his all-powerfull arms prevented
for the most p^rt in the very nicke of time, when cruelty thought to have
effected his ends, to have made glad their hearts with washing their hands in
your blood; These life sav^ng kindnesses of God sure will make deep
impressions upon graciou and n^enuous spirits: but this is not all, you have
yet ^urt^er to consider, how many thousands of those which chose and trusted
you with their lives, temporal liberties and estates, have to maintain you in
being for these ends, spent their estates, denied themselves of their
liberties, and have lost their lives. Oh look upon the cripled limbs, the
bleeding wounds, the Widows and the Fatherless, Rachel weeping for her
children because they are not: I have told you before what is the end of a^l
this both in God and man, many thousands have given you their lives already,
and others go on still in this self denying work: and all they cry for is
this, that the living may have their just rights, liberties and privileges,
for which ends only they have called you, and put power into your hands, and
have obeyed your call to take up arms, in which they have laid down their
lives, and do daily drop away, that you may be preserved to make good these
ends, and in them to be a blessing to this bleeding and distressed Land. You
have had the prayers of Gods people for you at the Throne of grace, take heed
you return them not evil for good; For if these prayers be once turned
against you, they will soon overturne you. I cannot tell what to call this
faithfulness and kindness from God and man to you, it is so great: but sure I
am, where it finds unfaithfulness in any, it will beget a heavy account:
remember this. you act upon received power, and must give an account of your
Steward-ship; the longest day is hard by, in a little time death will close
your eyes, and then you can be no longer Stewards; that by which you differ
now, will leave you then; your bones and dust will not be known in the grave
from others.

But you may remember in the beginning, I told you that this Scripture by its
double question did speak properly to two grand lusts, peevish repining as well
as pride, and I promised to enquire after them both, and to apply the Apostles
questions by way of answer to them; to define a peevish repining heart and
spirit, I shall do it thus. It is that which earnestly desires every thing, but
likes and is pleased with nothing, shapes out its own happiness, and
presently mislikes its own handy work, thinks all things sweet which it
cannot reach, and therefore pines after them: but nothing sweet which it does
enjoy, and therefore is peevish, and not content with what ever it possesses.
This is a foul stomach, that which will nourish another, does annoy and
burden it; he is like a sick man that finds fault with every bed, because his
disease is in his body, and he carries it with him from bed to bed; he repines
that some others have more then himself, but is not content though he have
more then many others; he suckes the sweet out of every thing before he comes
at it by his earnest desire to it, and his over-prizing of it: so that when he
does reach the thing, it reaches not his ends, therefore the heart is always
repining: This eye multiplies things at a distance, but diminishes when near
at hand; this man forgets what he has, and only remembers what he would have;
this repining heart must needs be an unthankefull heart; for such as bless
God do acknowledge that they receive blessings from God: so does not the
repining heart, for he cannot count that a blessing which he repines at; this
is a sore evil among the sons of men, and it arises from this twofold
ignorance of God and our selves.

First, Ignorance of God, that all fullness is in him, and that he is a free
agent to dispense, when, where, and how he pleases.

Secondly, Ignorance of our selves, that in our selves we are mere empty
nothings, and that what ever we have or enjoy, it is received; God makes us
passive to receive what he gives, and that is the top-glory of self. Now to
this heart the Apostles questions comes very close and home: Tell me O peevish
repining heart, Who makes thee to differ from another, and what have thou that
thou have not received. Can thou give me a reason why thou were not created
a worm to crawle upon the earth, a fit subject for every foot to tread upon,
rather then a reasonable and defensable creature. Were thou clay in the Potters
hands, and do thou quarrel at what thou art made? Have thou received a
tongue, and shall it speak against the giver? Does thy heart live by life
received, and yet murmr against the hand that gave thee life? It ill becomes
such as are beholding for every thing, to pine at any thing. It is nothing but
mere mercy, kindness, bounty, goodness, and free grace in God, that makes
thee to differ from the most wickedst wretch on Earth, from the veriest fool
alive, from the miserablest man or woman in the World; yea, that makes thee any
title beyond the lowest and most despisablest piece of the whole Creation, or
not being left in thy first lump of confusion. Now quarrel, if thou can
justify thy self in it, with the dispensations of God to thee; If thou had
made thy self, why did thou not do it to thy own content: but if God have
made thee any thing out of nothing, why do thou quarrel with God; if God be
free in himself, and have freely blessed thee, thou show an ill heart and
spirit, to quarrel with, and repine at the free workings and blessings of his
own grace; Consider man, The whole family in Heaven and Earth is Gods, he
gives thee day by day thy daily bread; thou do wear his clothes, and breath
in his air; thou walk in his strength, and lie down to sleep on his bed;
thou have received all from him, and he gives nothing, so as to put the
propriety out of himself; He that gives all, can take all away when he
pleases, and then murmuring heart thou may know the want of that which thou
did not prize the enjoyment of; thou that repinest must repine at this, that
the will of God is done: Now do but consider the exceeding evil of that
spirit, which can be angry, because God is pleased, when at the same time this
man lives, moves, has his being, and his wel-being from the good pleasure of
this God, God is pleased to do good to him, but he thinks it not good that God
should be pleased, for he is not pleased with the good will of God; he that
repines at the workings of God, does by that imply, he thinks himself wiser
then God, and if he had power, could mend the workings of God in the World.
Thou have nothing but what thou have received; therefore thou can not be
displeased with what thou have, and art, but thou must find fault with the
giver as well as the gift, and art thou not in this an ignorant and
unthankefull wretch? This is not the Apostle Paul's frame of spirit, for he
makes this acknowledgement, It is by the grace of God that I am what I am: And
upon this account we find the same Apostle content in all conditions; he knew
both how to want and abound, and in all estates to be content, for Christ had
taught him. That grace in God dispensed all conditions to him, he knew that
he received all from free grace, and that the free grace of God was in all
that he did receive; and this made his soul to be satisfied, and kept repining
from his heart and lips: Sure if God by his Spirit reveal and set home this
truth upon the hearts of any, though murmurers and repining proud ones before,
yet then they will lay their hands upon their lips, and lie down at Gods
feet, confessing that they are fools, and in this as ignorant as bruit
beasts; that they have not known all this while that they have lived upon
free grace, and spent upon received mercies and kindnesses from God, and then
the stream will be turned, from repining to admiring, as he did: Lord what am
I and my Fathers house. What is man that thou thus regardest him; Nay, what was
I, before thou made me what I am; I have received all from thee, even my
first being. Oh how wonderful is the Lord, and his ways past finding out
(sayen this soul.) Nay, I have had continued to me abused mercies, I have
wronged God with his own mercies, and yet he has continued to be gracious, he
has silled my bosom with those kindnesses that I have unkindely thrown in
his face. Oh now break heart, melt soul, and fall flesh before the everliving
God, whose eternal love thou have lived upon, and abused; thou have resisted
God with his own strength, turned his grace into wantonness, the gifts and
parts thou have received from him, to the opposing of his will, and the abusing
of his members. Blush then, and be ashamed, O proud heart, be silent and
complain not, O repining soul, Find no fault, for thou art a debtor, thou
have been all this while a receiving, and have no cause to make mention of the
returns thou have made; admire thou art not in Hell, that God should not
choose rather to glorify his justice then his grace upon thee. Admire his
goodness, and admire his patience; it was not want of power in God to destroy
thee; which has been thy preservation; for had he but withheld what he has
given, thou had perished in that; thou have lived all this time upon what
thou have received, and have sinned with nothing but received mercies; thy
person, thy parts, thy riches, thy honors, thy power, and thy all, are but thy
receipts, thy trusted talents, not thy inheritance. Thou have all this while
been proud of that which is not thy own, and have repined against free grace;
for nothing else could have borne with thee all this time, and not destroyed
thee. I hope you can make no other use of all this loving kindness but this;
to look upon thy self as preserved to praise the Lord. O tell forth the
fullness of his love, the greatness of his power, and the exceeding riches of
his grace to thy soul and body. Take up David's resolution, all that is within
thee, and all that comes from thee to praise the Lord, because all this thou
receivest first from him. If ever thou be asked this question, who makes thee
to differ from others, acknowledge God: Nay, if thou art not asked it, yet
declare it by thy humble, just, and holy conversation, and by a sweet
contentedness of spirit, with all the dispensations of God; let the World know
from thy lips, that it hangs by the power of God, who can as soon make it
nothing, as he made it what it is; that it is the same power which keeps all
that made all, and that God is always giving, otherwise the whole World would
cease being. Declare this fullness of God, and thy receiving all from him, by
thy full relying on him; let thy trusting him declare to the World that thou
have tried him, and by experience found that thou receivest all from him: and
having so sure a fountain to supply thy wants, which can never be drawn dry,
therefore let thy hopes be always green, and thy faith ever flourishing; thou
live not upon thy own stock, but upon Gods fullness. This Scripture is as
reviving as humbling; for though it throws a man out of himself, yet it
throws him into the kindness, faithfulnessee, goodness, mercy, and grace of
his God. We are no loosers though, neither in spirituals nor temporals; we
cannot live by the works of our own hands, so long as all is bound up in the
grace of God, and from this fountain we receive that wherein we differ, not
only from others, but from being nothing; for it is with us as with Paul, only
by the grace of God that we are what we are: and this is the answer that Saints
have to make to this Scripture: Who makes thee to differ from another, and
what bast thou that thou did not receive. Truly nothing; For by grace are ye
saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians.
2.8. And it is only by the grace of our God that we are what we are.

CHAP. XIII. None but God can be a proper subject for a Saint to glory in.
1 Cor. 1. last clause of the 30th verse. He that glories, let him glory in the
Lord.
THE great and supreme end of God in all things, ought to be the same in all
his people; now the great end of God in all the works and workings of his
eternal love, free grace, mercy, holiness, power, justice and judgment, is
for to manifest, declare, and lift up his own glory, this should also be the
single end of all Gods people in all their works and workings; namely, to
manifest, declare, and lift up the Glory of God, in his eternal love, free
grace, mercy, holiness, power, justice and judgment, to follow all glory to
its original, which is God; then to manifest and declare the glory of the Lord
by glorying in the Lord. The holy Ghost by the Apostle gives us in the
foregoing verses of this chapter, some discoveries of the way of Gods workings
in the World, in the 26, 27, 28. verse. For you see your calling brethren, how
that not many wise men after the flesh: not many mighty, nor many noble are
called. But God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise. And God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things
which are mighty, and base things of the world, and things which are despised,
has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that
are. We see here, when God makes use of instruments to do his will, and to
declare his glory; he does not choose after the manner of men, or according to
the course of the World, the wile, mighty, and noble after theflesh, but the
foolish, weak, and despised of the World does God choose, to confound the wise
and the mighty, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.
The 29. verse gives the reason of it, That no flesh should glory in his
presence. As if the holy Ghost had said, God has wrapped up all glory in
himself, so that no flesh shall glory neither in what they are, nor in what
they do but in him.

So in the 30 verse he strips all flesh from glorying in it self concerning
spirituals; for (sayeshe) Christ as the gift of God, is wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption to us. And then he quotes this
place of Scripture out of the Prophet Jeremy, He that glories let him glory in
the Lord. So that the Apostles premises, and the conclusion he draws from
them, runs all into this one general, That as God makes it his great end in
all he does, to lift up his own glory, so should his people make it their work
and end, only to glory in the Lord.

This Scripture is a directing exhortation, it exhorts to glory, and directs to
the proper subject and center of glory, namely the Lord; as if he had said, you
souls that glory, make the Lord the only subject of your glory, and then glory
on.

For edifications sake, and that the lowest capacity may gather its portion of
Gods Manna in the wilderness of this world, I shall from this Scripture draw
up two general observations, upon which shall depend what follows.

The Observations are these:

First, God is, and ought to be, the subject of all his peoples glory.

Or thus:

That the people of God should glory in none but God.

Secondly, That in God there is fullness of glory for all his people.

Or thus:

That in God is bound up the fullness of his peoples glory.

For proof to the first of these, take notice of the precepts and practices of
the people of God declared in Scripture, as first, the Lord by the Prophet
Jeremiah in his 9. chap. verse 23.24. Thus says the Lord, Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might: let not
the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that glories glory in this, That
he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord which exercise loving
kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth. This Scripture is a full
proof to the thing in hand, both in the Negative and in the Affirmative.

First, in the Negative, not to glory in any thing out of God, or besides God,
not in Wisdom, Power, Riches, or any other thing of that nature, any thing
below God himself, is too low for the people of God to glory in: if you will
glory, here is a subject fit for your glory, namely God, to understand and know
him to be the Lord which exercises loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth: he that truly knows God, may glory in God, who is
the only fit object of glory; God is so glorious, that he makes the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise, weak things the mighty, and despised
things to bring to naught things that are. Therefore wisdom, power, riches,
nobility in the world, are not proper subjects for a Saint to glory in; no, God
is the only and single vubject of his peoples glory, and when you find them
glorying, it is in the Lord, as in the 30. verse of this chapter, the Apostle
glories in this, that through the freegrace of God, Christ is made to his
people, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, his glory is in
God and Christ, Christ as the gift, and God as the giver. Christ made of God,
and so forth. This is my glory, Gods wisdom, righteousness, sanctification
and redemption, Christ is all this to Saints of the free grace of God.
Therefore be that glories let him glory in the Lord. His self is nothing, but
Christ as the gift of God, his All and his Glory. So the same Apostle in Galat.
6.15. God forhid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ. He tells them there be such which make a fair show in the flesh, that
would have them to be circumcised, that they might not suffer persecution. But
(says the Apostle) tell not me of these poor low shifts or glory, for in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision not uncircumcision avails any thing, but a
new creature. And in another place, Christ in us the hope of glory. I can glory
in none of these empty outsides and shadows of things, it is the new Creature
Christ in me, the cross of Christ, the redemption of free grace, the eternal
love of God, that I can glory in, or make the subject of my glory, as in that
most remarkable place, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. For by grace are ye saved through faith,
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works lest any man
should boast. Mark it and we shall find here is a sure provision to keep all
the glory upon Gods head, so that who ever glories must glory in God. Why?
because the whole matter of salvation comes of, by, and from the free grace of
God; yea, even faith, the hand that lays hold of the free grace of God, is
also the gift of Gods free grace; work, self, is wholly excluded, because God
will have no flesh to boast or glory in his sight, or in any thing but
himself. Therefore God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he
has loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with
Christ: therefore it is by grace that we are saved. He loved us when we lay in
our blood, when no eye pitied us: his love is first to us, and from hence he
makes a covenant of free grace to be our God, and that we shall be his people,
that he will put his law in our hearts, and teach his people by his own Spirit.
What does all this prove but thus much, That God alone is and ought to be the
only subject of his peoples glory, and we shall find the Apostle Paul in this
first of the Ephesians, not only in the precept but in the practice of this
thing, blessing of God, and glorying in God in the third verse, Blessed be the
Lord God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. Observe it, he blesses and
glories in God, he mentions nothing to glory in, but God in Christ: God in
himself, when he speaks of choosing, electing, love and glory, he does it in
Christ, verse 4. Chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, and so
forward in the fifth verse, Having predestined us unto the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ, to himself according to the good pleasure of his
will, verse 6. to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us
acceptable in the beloved. And in the seventh verse, according to the riches of
his grace: verse 8. wherein he has abounded toward us in all wisdom and
prudence.

Thus the Apostle spends the whole chapter in declaring the glory of the full
love and free grace of God to his in Christ, he is in a very glorious frame of
spirit, full of glory and blessing, but God is the subject of all his glory and
blessing. So we may find him in his triumphing Chariot. That Romans 8. verse 1.
No condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, and walk after the Spirit,
in which there is freedom from the law of sin and death, 33. Nothing to be
laid to the charge of Gods elect which God justifies, and that nothing can
separate from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Gods love is
the subject the Apostle glories in; it was the love of God, and so everlasting
unchangeable love; it was justification by the free grace of God, therefore
above condemnation. Mark it, God is the subject of his glory, God justifies,
and God loves. So in Romans 11. latter end. O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God; how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out. For of him, and to hins, and through him, are all
things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

The Apostle finds all to be in God, and God the only subject for him to glory
in, and give glory to. What ever God does himself, is the glory of all his
works, and God is a depth of riches, wisdom, and knowledge, he is
unsearchable in his judgments, and his ways are so full of glory, that man
cannot trace them, he is so pure a glory, that he can be discerned by no light
but his own, 2 Cor. 2.14. But the natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. God is so great a glory, that he
darkens all glory besides himself, so that nothing but himself can be a
discovery of himself; and this the Apostle declares as the glory of God, he is
an unsearchable and more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: Therefore
says he in 2 Cor. 4.7. God dispenses his Gospel by earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us. As if he had said, We
bring you the revelation of the free grace of God in the letter, but that is
the furthest that such earthly vessels as we can go, and God intends to use us
no further; that the glorious revelation of of this in the Spirit might appear
to be the excellency of his power exceedingly beyond the power of the weak
iustruments he uses, if you observe it, he is careful in keeping the glory in
the hands of God, so as he might make God the only subject of his glory, 2
Cor. 10.17. But be that glories let him glory in the Lord, and to this end the
Apostle makes his prayers for the Ephesians in the third Chapter, verse 16.
That he would grant them according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might, by his spirit in the inward man. He had preached
Christ to them in the letter, but he knowing that not to be enough, he prays
the Lord to power on them his rich and glorious Spirit, that they might be
filled with his glory, and strengthened in the inward man, according to the
riches of his glory; so that still God himself is the only subject of his
peoples glory. The practice of this is very eminently seen in the Apostle Paul,
Phil. 3.7.8. But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ;
yea doubtless and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ. In the foregoing
verses he tells us what it was that he had counted gain, and gloried in, his
being circumcised the eighthday, of the stock of Israel, and so on: these were
such things as were without God, but when God had once made himself known to
him in Christ, then he had found God only to be a proper subject of glory, and
the Apostle does acknowledge it: For (says he) all that I had before, it was
but as dung, compared with God and Christ for glory, as dung to be abhorred in
the presence of God, though in the 4. verse he tells us, If any other man
thinks he bath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more. And all this
more is but loss and dung where God appears to him in Christ, the scales were
then off his eyes, and he could distinguish of glory in its proper subject,
namely, God in Christ, so that all along we find the Apostle the same, only
glorying in the Lord. To back this, we shall find him of the same Spirit,
Coloss. 2.9, 10. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily,
and ye are complete in him which is the head of all Principalities and Powers.
He sets up the glory of God in Christ before the Colossians, for them to glory
in. As if he had said, your only true glory lies in your union with Christ,
for the fullness of the God head is bodily in him, and that is the only true
subject of glory; for your glory is as you are complete in him, united to him,
then is God your glory, and you have a proper subject to glory in, he is the
head of all principality and power, and this is your glory to glory in this
your head. And in Col. 3.3, 4. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in God: when Christ who is your life shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory. Mark it, he strips them wholly of any glory in
themselves; For ye are dead, that is, without any beauty, glory, or excellency
in your selves, no more then dead persons have, but your life of glory is with
Christ in God, so that when Christ appears in glory, you as in union with him
shall appear with him in glory; therefore you have nothing else to glory in,
or to glory of, but that your life is hid with Christ in God, so that God is
the only subject of your glory. And upon this account the holy Ghost puts a
Behold, a mark of excellency and glory upon the love of God in making us his
sonner, in that first Epistle of John, chap. 3. v. 1. This love of God it is
God himself, the perfeandion of glory, therefore worthy the beholding: Thus we
see al along that the Prophets, Apostles, and all the servants of God, make God
the only subject of their glory; these Texts of Scripture I think make up full
proof to the first general observation, the general scope of all Scripture
comes into this truth; therefore I cannot expect it to be denied by any that
know and acknowledge God and his Word.

The second general observation is this. That in God there is fullness of
glory for all his people:

Or thus;

That in God is bound up all the fullness of his peoples glory; this will be in
word I think denied by none: but indeed it is denied by all such as seek
something else to glory in beside the Lord; Nay many times without and against
the Lord, therefore this truth as the other I shall endeavor to prove from the
nature of God, and the declared experiences of his people.

First, from the nature of God: God is such an infinite glory in himself, that
no flesh can behold his glory and live: Nor bath any seem the Father at any
time but the Son, and those to whom the Son has revealed him. God is too
bright a glory for a created being to see immediately: therefore free grace
made Christ a Mediator, to make known and discover God in his glory to his
people, and through this glass Saints with open face beholding the glory of
the Lord are changed into the same Image, 2 Cor. 3. Iast.

I know not how better to express the nature of God then thus; That he is the
first, the fullness, and the all of all true glory and excellency. If you call
mercy, justice, holiness, righteousness, purity, power, infiniteness and
eternity to be glory; This is God, all this is God, and God is all this, and
more then all that man can comprehend, much less declare; he is the first, and
the fullness, and the all of all this; there is not a glimps of glory, but it
is a beam of God, all vessels of glory receive what they have from him, he is
that fullness which fills all things with himself; the whole created being
speaks nothing more plain then this, the infinite fullness of glory that is
in the Creator. And the holy Ghost by John in his Revel. 21. Chapter 23. verse.
speaking of the glory of the new Jerusalem, has these words: And the City had
no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of
God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. Whether this new
Jerusalem be looked upon in the type or the things typified; yet it holds forth
this, that God is the glory of it, God in Christ the light thereof. Exceeding
much may be written upon this head, but I hope this little will fully satisfy
all but Atheists: That God is the first fullness and all of all glory. But what
advantage this is to Saints how their glory is in God, is next under
consideration. And for this, first consider the prayer of our Savior to his
Father and our Father in John 17.24. Father I will, that those whom thou have
given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have
given me, for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the World. And in verse.
22. The glory which thou gave me I have given them. This is truly the end for
which Christ was given of the Father, that in him, namely Christ, the people of
God might be made partakers of his glory. Christ prays according to the will
of God, that God would perfect in his elect body the work of his Mediatorship;
namely, that God and his people might have full communion in that glory which
Christ had with the Father before the World was, verse. 5. For I conceive that
to be the glory which Christ calls [my glory] that to which he was ascending.
Our Savior seems to make these the grounds of this prayer: I in them, and
thou in me, verse. 23. And the glory which thou gave me I have given them;
therefore let them behold my glory (i.) Let them be filled with thy self, for
thou art my glory; For there is no other way of beholding God the glory of
Christ, but by being made partakers of God, and filled with his fullness. There
is another full Text to this purpose, in Romans 8.17. And if children, then
heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ. Mark it; first every child
of God is an heir. 2. God himself is the inheritance of all his Children,
heirs of God: but how do Saints enjoy this their inheritance? namely God; the
Text tells us, jointly with Christ, we are joyntheirs of God with Christ. So
that God communicates himself in his glory to Saints as to Christ: Saints full
of God as Christ their elder Brother is: This is as full a proof as words can
make, That in God there is fullness of glory for his people, because himself
is the inheritance of his people, which Saints enjoy as fellow heirs with
Christ, having their lives bound up with God in Christ, their glory appears
with Christ in God; the experience of this made the Apostle to glory, in Phil.
1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. The free grace and
eternal love of God in Christ is my life; wherefore to dye to this body will be
my gain; for I am an heir of God with Christ: my glory is with God, and were I
out of the body, I should be fully in God, so againer in glory: but whether to
live or dye, God in Christ is all my glory: And the same Apostle in Phil. 4.4.
gives this exhortation: Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice.
Be glad, and glory in the Lord; surely he had found fullness of glory in God,
otherwise he would never have given such an exhortation as this, to rejoice,
and rejoice always; speak this, that there is always fullness of joy, and
glory in God for his people. The Saints of old living upon God could glory in
tribulation, that is in God, though under tribulations, as Shadrach, Meshech,
and Abednego in the fiery Furnace, Daniel in the Lions Den, Paul and his fellow
prisoner in the Stocks, when as their stripes were sore. And as the same
Apostle in Romans 8. latter end. though under tribulations, distresses,
persecutions, famine, nakedness, peril, sword, and killings all the day long;
yet under all these more then Conquerours through the love of God. So that it
appears clearly a Saints glory is in God, because when he enjoyes God in his
love, he is more then a Conqueror over all afflictions, more because God is
his glory, and that glory is greater then all the trouble of the World: It must
needs be great and communicable glory that can keep the head above water, and
the soul from being overwhelmed by that sea of afflictions which is before
expressed. And thus we see God is fullness of glory for all his people, and I
am confident the experiences of Gods people in these days can produce a
numberless number of testimonies to this truth. I shall add no more, but
leave the Reader to read the makings forth of the glory of God upon his own
soul; the sum of all is this, that in the Lord is all glory; therefore he that
glories, let him glory in the Lord.

But if any shall say, I am not edified by this general theme of glory in
God, for his people to glory in; show me the particulars of this glory, in
which the people of God may and do singly glory in God?

To this I answer; I will tell you what God has showed me, but it is only
himself that can show it you by his Spirit, for his glory is too great to be
beheld in any light but his own: and to such as God gives the light of his
Spirit, it will appear in these particulars following, wherein Saints may and
do in all their glory, glory singly in the Lord.

The first particular is this; The original, full, and eternal love of God to
all his Elect in Christ: A soul that glories in God upon this consideration,
may glory singly in God, and will tell you God is the original of love; for God
is love, he is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. Nay, his love is as
himself, from all eternity, without beginning and without end; this soul will
tell you Gods love is full; for the fullness of all that is lovely proceeds from
it, he is the first of love, for he is the first in love, he loved us first,
and his original love is the womb of our love; we love him because he loved us
first: It is this original love of God which conceived and brought forth
heirs of love; Christ the eldest Brother is the gift of this love: and this
original love is so full, that it makes every child a joint heir with
Christ, and this love so eternal, that the inheritance is as eternal as God
himself; for God in the fullness of his love is his Childrens eternal
inheritance; this soul will tell you all I have and am to all eterninity,
which has life and glory in it, is the effects and workings of this original,
full, and eternal love of God, the state of Innocence, the restoration and
redemption of grace, the beauty of the first Adam before his fall, and the
perfection of the second Adam, all but that proceeds of this original love of
God, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith
he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with
Christ. Mark it, it is love in God, which is the original of life in Saints,
it must needs be full love that should give life to souls dead in sins: and
it must be eternal love, because it gives eternal life, for it quickens
souls together with Christ, to live because he lives, John 14.19. Now says
this soul, I thus glory singly in Christ, which you cannot in any thing
besides. That holy and divine love is originally in God, love in all the
dimentions of it is lovely and full of glory; how full of glory must it then
needs be In the original of it, which is God. The Ocean Sea is the glory of all
waters, so is love in God the original glory of all love: Now says the soul,
give me leave to glory in my God as the God of love, who is the eternal
fountain of love, to whom I never went to in Christ, but I found love: and
this I find, love in God is that which assures me, and carries me to him, and
truly ever since I have known him in Christ, I have found him a God of love,
and his bosom of love a place of rest; it is full love, I never wanted any
thing, when I lay down to rest in it; it is unchangeable love, at no time a
bed of thorns. This love of God is so full of glory in the enjoyment of it,
that it is the glory of all I do enjoy; it is Gods love in every mercy, that
makes it a mercy; where Gods love is not, the glory is departed from that
thing: Love in God is love in the original of it, and there is heights, depths,
breadths, and lengths of love, such heights as none can out-reach; none can
love more then God, for he is the original of love, or is originally love, in
him are breadths of love enough for all souls to spread themselves on to
satisfaction, and yet breadths of love to spare; yea in him are depths of love
as deep as eternity: Original love, no soul can fathom its bottom or
beginning, it is such a deep so firmly fixed, it cannot be shaken to all
eternity. This love of God is not only the rivers of the waters of life, but
also such a deep as can never be drawn dry; I and it is lengths of love too,
love without end; he calls it lengths, because he cannot tell how long, it
exceeds both measure and expression; this is all the account can be given of
the length of it, it is Gods love, and God is love: so that what God is, that
is this love; now he that can measure God may measure love, this is love singly
in God: so in God, as in none besides God, the fruits and effects of this love
will appear in the next particular: but as love is originally, fully, and
eternally in God, so is God the only subject of his peoples glory; wherefore he
that glories of love, let him glory in the Lord.

The next particular is this, The freeness of Gods grace.

That grace is free, none will appear so ignorant as to deny; for the nature of
the thing confirms it, it could nor be grace were it not free: but if that
should not be understood, yet the fruits and workings of Gods grace will
demonstrate it to be free grace in all the operations of it from first to last.

And first, Let us look into predestinating and choosing grace, Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
According as he has chosen us in him in Christ, before the foundation of the
world, having predestined us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

Mark how free grace runs through, and gathers up this whole work,
predestined and chosen, the very terms speaks freeness: but says the Text,
this is in Christ, and this makes it still free grace, for Christ is wholly
without our reach in our selves: but that which puts all out of doubt is this,
the Text speaks plainly, this work is according to the good pleasure of his
will, God does all in and by the freeness of his own grace, nothing to move
him but his own bowels. It is the Apostles argument upon this very question,
Romans 9.18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will
he hardneth. That is as I understand, the scope of the holy Ghost in this
place; God chooses whom he pleases in his free grace to make them vessels of
mercy in union with Christ, and the others he chooses to leave in the first
Adam, dead in sins and trespasses. If you ask me the reason of this, I will
answer you with the Apostles argument in verse. 21. Has not the Potter power
over the clay of the same lump, to make one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor. That I mention it for, is to prove the freeness of Gods choosing
and electing grace, and to that end it is a very full Scripture; for if you
observe one clause in it, it makes God to be as free in the vessels of honor,
as in the vessels of dishonor, that is the same lump, it is out of one and the
same lump of clay that God does both. Now it must needs be free grace that
makes vessels of mercy to be filled with the riches of his glory, out of the
same lump that others remain vessels of dishonor; Thus Gods grace is free in
choosing his own vessels whom he will fill with the fullness of his grace and
glory to all eternity.

Secondly, The grace of God is free in the calling of his chosen vessels out of
themselves into himself. Whom he predestinates before all time, he calls in the
fullness of his own time, and both in his free grace, Ephesians. 2.5. is a full
proof of this: Even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together
with Christ; by grace ye are saved. It is this free grace of God that runs
through the whole matter of salvation; observe but the time of calling, and it
will appear to be free grace in God that calls, even when dead in sins. What
could here move God but his own free grace, the soul is dead; there is no
beauty in a dead soul to allure a living God, nay, dead in sins; can this
move a holy God to call such a soul to lie down in his bosom? No, that which
moves God is in himself, the freeness of his own grace, and the fullness of
his own bowels of love; God can work from himself to man, though there be
nothing in man to invite, but to distaste God, and this is the glory of his free
grace, he calls a Moses out of Pharoah's, Court a Saul out of the Sect of the
Pharisees, even when his heart was posting with his commission to persecute the
Saints: and by this call does not only change his name from Saul to Paul, but
his spirit from a persecuter to a Preacher of Christ crucified: What does this
prove, but that God is free in his calling grace, and that it goes hand in
hand with his choosing; he chooses to call, and calls whom he chooses, and is
free in his grace in all, for nothing moves God in all this but his own
free grace.

Thirdly, God justifies his elect and called by his free grace: See this in
that plain Text, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by is grace. In three or
four of the next foregoing verses the Apostle shows us, how that by the deeds
of the law shall no flesh he justified in the sight of God: and that it is only
Gods righteousness ( which is Christ) that will be found righteous in the pure
eyes of God; for says he in verse. 23. We have all sinned and come short of the
glory of God, therefore our justification is merely of his free grace, not by
any deed or duty under the law, verse. 20. For by the law is the knowledge of
sin. The law condemns, it does not justify any, it is only free grace
justifies. So Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of
the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. And Gal. 3.11. But that no man is
justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident; for the just shall
live by faith. By the law and the works of the law in these Scriptures is
comprehended all the best, holiest, and most exact performance of any soul,
though according to the commands of God, that in none of these, nor all these
together, is any soul justified in the sight of God, for that is only the
work of free grace: but lest any should stumble at this, that faith is so much
mentioned in the matter of Justification; the holy Ghost in Ephesians. 2.8. takes
off all occasion of offense in that; For by grace are ye saved through faith,
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. He binds up the whole
matter of salvation, of which justification is a part in the grace of God; for
by grace are ye saved. Now God has made faith as the hand to lay hold upon
this salvation of his free grace, and that it might appear to be all grace;
this is also the gift of God, the workings of free grace, it is so much the
more free that God gives, both the hand and the gift too: so the Apostle, Romans
8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies. I of his own free grace; God does so fully acquit, that nothing
can be laid to the charge of those whom God does justify; thus freely does God
acquit such as cannot justify themselves by any deeds of the law; though
there be sin in the best duty, yet there is justification in the free grace of
God, though not of the sin, yet of the person. There might be very much writ
of this subject, but I only touch it here, because it is more fully done in
another place.

Fourthly, God is free in his sanctifying grace; his holy Spirit as the wind
blows where it lists; Sanctification must needs be a free work, because it
is the work of a holy God in unholy souls; there is no more in us to move God
to cleanse us from our blood and pollution, then there is to move him to love
us when we lay in our blood, so that no eye but the eye of his grace could
pity us; that power that overcame self, must needs be freely without self;
now this is the sanctifying grace of God in the souls of his people: and the
Apostle Paul speaking of the work of regeneration in his soul, confesses, it
is merely of grace that I am what I am; our state in the kingdom of glory to
be ever with the Lord; that is also the workings of orinall love and free grace
in God, to be heir of God, to possess God, and as joynt-heirs with Christ to
be filled with his glory to all eternity, this is free grace, it is too big
to stand upon any other foundation: but as two undeniable testimonies in the
free grace of God in all these particulars; take Gods covenant of free grace,
and Jesus Christ the gift of his free grace into consideration. First, his
Covenant in Jer. 31.33, 34. What out of God could oblige God to make such a
covenant as this is, God engaging himself, to put his law in our inward parts,
and to write it in our hearts, and that he will be our God, and we shall be his
people; that all shall know his way, and that he will forgive our iniquity, and
remember our sins no more. This may well be called the covenant of
free grace, for it is the grace of God freely engaging himself to do all this
for us and in us; it is too large to open where it is only brought as a proof:
but this I can truly say of it, it is in every part, and in the whole, the
free grace of God, he forgives all iniquity, blots out all sins, writes his
holy law in the hearts and inward parts of his people, teaches them all to
know his way, and all this of his free grace, and to all this freeness of
grace he binds up himself by covenant, not to make himself more faithful,
for he is eternally and infinitely faithful: but to make us more believing,
because by nature we believe in works, not in free grace. But consider the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the great gift of Gods free grace, in whom God fills his
people with grace and glory to all eternity; whom God predestinates to the
adoption of children, he does it by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. Whom he calls and
quickens, he does it together with Christ, Ephesians. 2.5. Whom he justifies
freely of his grace, he does it through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, Romans 3.24. When God in his free grace gives wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, he gives it in Christ, and makes Jesus Christ
to be all this to his people, 1 Cor. 1.30. When God glorifies his people with
himself for ever, he does it as joynt-heirs with Christ. After he had suffered
in the flesh for us, he goes to heaven and glory to prepare mansions for us,
and comes again to receive us to himself. Now upon all these considerations,
tell me whether all the salvation in part or whole of the people of God be not
the only workings and design of the eternal love and free grace of God, I hope
none will be so graceless as to deny it: and to such as acknowledge it, to them
I say, this is a general full of particulers, for such as glory to glory in
the Lord. A believing soul will tell you this, he can glory in his election,
through the free grace of God in Jesus Christ, that none is, or shall ever be
able to pluck him out of Gods hands; and he will tell you that he is called
into union with Christ, by that eternal free grace of God which will surely
keep him, that he can never fall totally away; Christ must have his whole body
complete in heaven, not lose one member; he will also glory through the
free grace of God in this, that Christ is made his Righteousness and
Justification, so that he stands complete before God in him: Free Grace made
Christ sin for me says this soul, that I might be made the righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. last.

Jesus Christ in the design of Gods free grace has borne sin, death, hell,
law, and curse for me; that I am for ever acquitted from the condemning,
reigning, or devouring power of any, or of all these. Now says this soul, tell
me you that understand; Is nor this God of free grace the only subject of a
Saints glory? Nay, I will tell you more, God himself is the fullness of his
peoples glory to all eternity; he lets the Worldlings for a little time to
glut themselves with the World, but himself is the free, the full, and eternal
glory of his people in the Ages to come, even to all eternity; he is filling
his people with the exceeding riches of his grace and kindness in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 2.7. God does to all eternity set open his bosom; and not give to
such as are heirs of himself, flagons, but oceans of love and glory: It must
needs be glory if it be Gods love. Now this, I and more then this, more then
eternity can tell is the free grace of God, therefore let him that glories
glory in the Lord, for he is God, the only fountain and fullness of free grace.

But if any should object and say, if grace be thus free in God, to elect,
call, justify, sanctify, and glorify his people merely of his free grace;
why then did Christ take flesh, and in the flesh satisfy the utmost of Gods
justice for the sins of his people: It seems to appear that God was
satisfied in his justice, he had the debt paid, how then do you make it grace?

To this I answer, that in its proper place I shall make use of this argument to
clear up the glory of God in the exactness of his justice, but it does no ways
diminish the freeness of his grace to us; for it is free grace that made Christ
to be the satisfaction of divine justice for our sins, and that God satisfies
his own justice in himself, does no more make his grace not to be free, then
the making his Covenant in himself could keep that from being free, that
justice is satisfied makes it full redemption to us, but that God does it in
Christ, which is wholly out of our selves, keeps it very exactly to be the
redemption of free grace. We are justified freely by his grace through the
redemption that is in Christ, Romans 3.24. That God does satisfy his justice in
Christ, it is that through him we might be made partake is of the redemption of
his grace, it is grace redeemes and just fies by Christ: but Christ the gift of
Gods grace cannot diminish his grace; that which God gives his people through
Christ, though he satisfies his justice in the way, yet he magnifies the
freeness of his grace in the work.

A third particular is this:

The riches of Gods mercy. The Apostle Paul glories in God upon this very
consideration in Ephesians. 2.4. But God who is rich in mercy for his great love
wherewith he loved us, and so forwards. God to manifest his great love
wherewith he loved his people, bestows on them the riches of his mercy, namely
his eternal love, his free grace, his beloved Son, and in him election,
calling, justification, sanctification, and glorification, and his holy spirit
in these, now this will be acknowledged to be rich mercy; many do pretend to
be givers, though they have nothing but what they first receive: but none I am
sure but blasphemers can pretend to be givers of such rich mercies as these.
God is the only fountain and giver of these more exceeding and eternal
weights of glory. Nay, that which Worldlings make their God (namely the World)
it was created by him and for him: and though it be a curse to them that know
no other God, yet every piece and parcel of it sanctified is a blessing, and a
rich mercy of God to his chosen people; love makes all conditions to be rich
mercy of God to them. It was a rich mercy to a dark world, to say, let there
be light, and it was so: but then how rich is God in mercy, when he makes known
his eternal love, and shines through the wounds of Christ by his own spirit
into a dark soul, and bids the soul be of good cheer, its sins are
forgiven; It stands complete in Christ, and is an heir of God, a joynt-heire
with Christ; however men may slight the riches of these spiritual mercies
whilst they are glutting their souls with the World, yet let them remember the
time is not far off, when death shall close their eyes, and their souls sit
upod their trembling lips, and then a glimpse of a reconciled God in Christ
will be found a rich mercy. The Apostle calls the love of God heights and
breadths, depths and lengths of love: He takes in all that he could reckon up
to show the exceeding riches of it; God is the fullness of glory and the
fountain of mercy, therefore his mercies must needs be rich and full of glory:
So then as riches of mercy is a subject of glory, let him that glories glory
in the Lord.

In the next place, Consider the faithfulness of God in making good of his
promises. God is a free God in all his promises, he only ingages himself, no
soul can engage God; for to receive all from God, and yet to oblige God, is a
contradiction: the first is a truth of God, what the latter is, I leave the
Reader to judge. But as God is free in all his promises, the whole workings of
God in the world is an ample testimony to this truth and faithfulness of God;
but yet for more particular proof take two or three Scriptures, First, Gods
promises at the fault of the first Adam, to give the Lord Jesus Christ the
second Adam, in Genesis 3.15. That the Seed of the Woman (namely Christ) should
bruise the Serpents head.

This Serpent is the Devil. Now to the making good of this promise, the whole
word of God, and the salvation of his people is a full testimony. For another
great promise, take that of Gods giving his Spirit to his people to teach them,
and to lead them into all truth, and by which he does write his Law in the
hearts and inward parts of his people, Jer. 31.33. John 14.26. Now how God does
make good this promise, such as be truly spiritual can give in their
testimony, and I doubt not but God has many thousand such witnesses in the
world, though such as know him not, do blaspheme and scoff at him, in scoffing
at his Spirit in his people, yet Saints in truth will tell you, that they in
themselves are darkness, and God is only light, and it is the Spirit of God
in them that is their light, that they know no truths of Jesus but by the
Spirit, nor did they ever truly worship, or know how to worship God in truth,
but in and by the Spirit; and until they received this light, they worshipped
the unknown God. Though Gods will be free in the manner, and measure, and time
of his dispensations, yet he is certainly faithful to the matter of his
promises, so that all his people shall bear him witness, that he is a
faithful God in making good his free promises. In a case more particular, take
Gods promises to Abraham concerning Isaac, how fully did God make that promise
good, though from dead loins, and a dead womb, yet nothing can hinder the
living God from being faithful to his promises; nay, though God commanded
Abraham to sacrifice this son of promise, and to suffer the knife to be
almost at his throat, yet God makes good his promise, and does all this but to
try Abraham's faith, not to break the least tittle of his own faithfulness. The
wicked that know not God, and despise him, shall find him a faithful God in
making good all his judgments upon them. Now says the believing soul, Here
is another particular, the faithfulness of God in making good all his
promises, therefore let him that glories glory in the Lord.

A fifth particular is this, namely, The exactness of Gods Justice.

That one example of our Savior Christ, will stop the mouths of all
gainsayers to this particular, when Christ did in the flesh hang upon the
Cross, bearing all the sin of his people upon him, and having the whole debt
to satisfy, he did then finish his satisfaction before he came down from his
suffering, our Savior tells us himself that the work was finished. So the
Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 10. v. 14. For by one offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified. Christ by this one offering of himself did
make a perfect satisfaction to divine Justice, otherwise such as he died for,
could not be made perfect, nor could that of the Apostle be a truth, That there
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Nay God himself by the
Prophet Isaiah in Chap. 53.11. does acknowledge satisfactions in the sufferings
of Christ, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied.
God in Christ does behold his divine justice fully satisfied for the sin of
his people: for that is the whole drift of the Prophet in that chapter, to show
forth the sufferings and satisfaction of Christ to Gods justice; so that we see
the exactness of Gods justice, that his beloved Son, when once made a
propitiation for sin, must pay the utmost of the debt, so that he does
perfectly discharge. There is exceeding much in this for beleevere to glory in
God, but I shall forbear inlargements. I am sure it is a full proof to that
which I produce it for. Pharaoh and all his Host in the red Sea, is another
remarkable testimony of the exactness of Gods justice; so were those murmurers
and idolaters in the wilderness, and Gods dealing with that King which cut off
the great toes and thumbs of so many Kings, so that we see God is exact in his
justice, and exceeding glorious in it: so in this particular, he that glories
let him glory in the Lord.

In the sixth place, Consider God in the perfection of his holiness,
righteousness, and purity; so if you can either find spot or wrinkle in him,
nay he will not leave either spot or wrinkle in any he takes into union with
himself, he makes himself to be his peoples inheritance, that so they may be
holy in his holiness, righteous in his righteousness, and pure in his purity.
God is so perfect in holiness, that he abhorres every unholy thing; so exact
in righteousness, that the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees is no
better then dross and dung when Christ the righteousness of God appears. God
is so full of purity, that he is nothing else, and yet he is all, but he is all
pure in all he is, so that in this consideration also, such as will glory let
them glory in the Lord.

Again, Consider the infiniteness of the power of Gods wisdom. Heaven and
earth is full of this glory; by his power he makes and preserves, gives being
and maintains being to all things. Heaven is his throne, and Earth is his
footstool, Monarkes are but worms under his feet. Isaiah 40.15. So are the
Nations of the earth as the drop of a Bucket, and counted but as the small dust
of the Balance, when they are counted to God, they are less then nothing and
vanity.

If all created Beings were sum'd up in one, they are all but vanity, and make
nothing to be compared with the infinite power of God which created them, God
is not only infinitely full of power to do what he will, but he is infinitely
wise to know what to do, how to do, and when to do for his own glory. To
this of the wisdom of God, I think I shall offer one proof, will be either
convincing or silencing all that do acknowledge God, and that is namely this,
The mystery of godliness, Christ in the flesh. It is a mystery above any
wisdom but Gods to reveal; Oh then how great is that wisdom which could make
such a mystery; this mystery may be admired by Saints on Earth, but it will
never be fully understood till we come to Heaven. The reason is, it is so
great a mystery, then surely it must be infinite wisdom that is the fountain
of this mystery; the depths of God are deep indeed, infinitely deep. My
meaning is not to enlarge in these particulars, only to give a taste of things
wherein God only will appear the proper subject of his peoples glory: so that
such as glory may glory in the Lord.

The last particular I shall mention is this, the eternity of God; that God is
eternal in all he is, the Lord tells us in one Scripture, I am God that changes
not, he waxes not old as does a garment, he dwells in eternity, God is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Now this is a fit subject for Saints to
glory in, not only a glorious God, but the God of eternal glory, and a God
that is eternally glorious.

Now give me leave to sum up all the former, and to add this to them, and then
see what we can say for this glory, and for this God the subject of our glory,
who is

First, the God of original and eternal love.

Secondly, the God of free grace, and eternally so.

Thirdly, a God rich in mercy, and that to all eternity.

Fourthly, a God faithful, in making good all his promises, and in this also
he is an eternal God.

Fifthly, God is exact in his justice, and this to all eternity.

Sixthly, God is a God perfect in holiness, righteousness, and purity. And in
all these God is eternal.

Lastly, a God infinite in power, and wisdom; and in these eeternall, his
power is eternal power, and his wisdom eternal wisdom.

Now tell me if the first Scripture be not a weighty exhortation, He that
glories let him glory in the Lord. Take this as a foundation, and carry it all
along in your eye, That purely what God is in himself, is the only matter and
subject of his peoples glory. For that is the exhortation, He that glories
let him glory in the Lord. And I desire to carry souls home to God himself,
that our souls may drink the water of life at the fountain of life, there it
is eternally the same. A soul that does truly and purely glory in God
himself, will tell you that it finds God to be a God of original, eternal
love and free grace. And therefore says this soul, Blessed be this God, I
believe all my iniquities are pardoned, and my sins blotted out by the blood
of Christ, so they shall never more be remembered, or charged against me; for
the original love and free grace of God has laid them all on Christ, and he
has given exact satisfaction to the Divine Justice of God, so that through
eternal love and free grace, I am acquitted and just fied in the fight of the
eternal, holy, righteous, and pure God; and in this eternal love and free
grace of God, I am united to Christ, so that Christ the Wisdom,
Sanctification, and Redemption of God, is mine, and I am his, Christ made sin
for me, and I made the righteousness of God in him, so that when I glory in my
redemption, I glory in God, in his original love and free grace. When I say
the Law of God cannot condemn me, I do not affirm that I have kept the Law
in my self, and so glory in the righteousness of the Law, which is of works;
but I glory in the original eternal love of God, and his free grace, that has
made Christ my righteousness, who has fulfilled the Law for me, and is daily
doing it in me by the power of his grace, Romans 6.14. And give me leave to glory
then, says this soul, though it be great things that I glory of, so long as
God himself is the subject of my glory; no Legalist can hinder God of the
Sovereignty of his original love, and free grace, so that when God assures any
soul of this his salvation, and the soul glories in it, this soul glories in
the Lord. Come and see, says this soul, the glory of the Lord, I am saved
merely by the free grace of God, his original and eternal love has plucked me
out of sin, self, eternal death, hell, law, grav, the power of Satan. and
eternal condemnation, and made me one with Christ, and heir of himself, a
joint heir with Christ in eternal glory. This is my God, says the soul, all
this is the fruits of his love, and free grace, riches of mercy, and
faithfulness in his covenant and promises, the exactness of his justice upon
Christ, is perfection of justification to my soul in union with Christ; the
perfection of his holiness, righteousness and purity, is the glory of my
soul, whose life is hid with Christ in God; the baptizing of his holy Spirit,
in which the elect in Christ are buried with him to sin, makes the
resurrection of Christ, and the new creature in me, says this soul. And all
this is God, merely what God is in himself, saving, justifying, and
sanctifying glorifying grace, all is Gods grace, all this is free grace, and
all this free grace is my God, says the believing soul: therefore (says this
soul) come O man, and taste how good the Lord is, Here is Milk and honey freely
without price, and without money, Isai. Chap. 55.1. If this soul meets with a
believing heart, it presently holds forth a bleeding Christ; and if a soul
that argues against its own salvation, why says this soul, consider grace is
free, your salvation has no other foundation but the original love and free
grace of God. God concluded all under sin, that salvation might he of grace.
No soul since the fall of Adam could ever plead it self before God: the whole
frame of salvation stands upon the free grace of God; now you have nothing to
argue against but free grace, your not being worthy can never make God not to
be gracious: you see nothing lovely in your selves that cannot hinder, for God
is the original of love, you can in no measure keep the Law, the Law it was to
convince of sin, not to justify any soul; but Christ the gift of free
grace, he has satisfied and fulfilled the Law for all his elect, say what you
can, I will answer you, says this soul with God, that is with eternal love
and free grace.

If God should suffer Self, says this soul, to have share in salvation, I
were as miserable as any soul alive; for I am as much under sin in my self,
as any other soul, but the glory of my salvation is my God, this I believe by
his Spirit, that himself is my salvation, his own eternal Being is my eternal
life, his original love and his free grace which is of himself, is the
everlasting salvation of my eternal soul. And says this soul, upon this
assurance I am able to go to God himself through Christ, by his Spirit, to
plead my interest in him, to plead my salvation to be eternal, because it is
the salvation of his own original love and free grace; so that it can never
fail and come to nothing, because in the eternal God: and when Satan would
shake me out of my assurance, I carry him to my God and let Satan know, that my
salvation stands not upon my own legs, but is the work of the eternal
original love and free grace of my God, which is above the reach of Satan,
because in the very Being of God; for God is love and free grace.

Thus a believing soul makes God the only subject of his glory: and from this
foundation such a soul can never want a proper subject to glory in. Saints
would be glad to find loving kindness, mercy, faithfulness, justice,
holiness, righteousness, and purity amongst men: and truly these beams of
God in his people, makes them very glorious; and the want of these is not only
a shame, but the misery of this our present age. These sparks of God make men
truly Noble, and the going out of these is the innobility of the times we live
in; but nevertheless Gods people are not at a loss for a subject of glory:
For God is this, all this, and eternally this, in the infinite fullness and
glory of it. Therefore what remains but to press home, and to take up the
Apostles exhortation, He that glories let him glory in the Lord, in the God of
Grace, and that our names are written in the book of life, with the blood of
Christ, the gift of his grace, that we have our inheritance in the New
Jerusalem, so that if these earthly tabernacles were dissolved, we have a
building with God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, 2
Cor. 5.1.

This will be lasting glory, when as the longest day the worldlings glory lives,
is but till the earthly tabernacles be dissolved: their joy and glory amounts
to no more then the crackling of thorns under a pot, it is certainly
perishing, because it is not God himself. It were well if Saints did not suck
in too much of this perishing glory. But there is another glory which Saints
too often sit down in, and too much make their boasts of, which is short of the
true subject of glory; even GOD himself. And that is Circumcision and
Uncircumcision; Paul, Apollo, and Cephas, externals, forms, outsides,
somethings in the way of God, when they should only glory in the end, God
himself; a soul that truly lives in God, submits to all the will of God, and
walks in all the ways of God, revealed to it by the Spirit, but looks upon
them all as below his rest. He can fix and glory in none but God himself; it
pleases God through mean things to make known himself to his people, and to
have communion with his people in: but he contrives and makes up the
salvation, the life, rest, and glory of his people in his own eternal love and
free grace, and would not have his people lie down in the streams, but pass
through them into the Ocean of his own bosom of love and free grace; it will
be a small advantage when Christ comes to make up his jewels, for any soul to
say, I was of this Church; or of that, known by this name or the other:
Circumcised or not circumcised availes not at that day; Christ looks for the
new creature, his own image, the work of the eternal love and free grace of
God in every soul: The glory of that day will be, God is mine and I am his:
His freegrace is my salvation, and my salvation is the work and fruits of his
own eternal love and free grace. Therefore says the Apostle in 1 Cor. 3.22,
23. Let no man glory in man, for all things are Gods; whether Paul, or Apollo,
or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to
come, all are Gods, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Glory not in man, nor any thing comes by man, all these are yours in that
great gift the Lord Jesus Christ; glory in him, then you have a right subject
for your glory, namely God. Paul and Apollo is yours to use, but not to glory
in: Christ, and God in Christ is the only center for a Saint to rest and glory
in. Oh then away with any lower glory then the Lord himself, he is a never
failing glory, at his right hand are glories for evermore. In the 21. of Revel.
23. The glory of God is the light of the new Jerusalem, and the Lamb is the
light thereof. It is only God in Christ that is the glory of heavenly souls,
therefore let such souls glory in nothing else. It is very unbecoming the
heirs of Canaan to take up their glory in the Wilderness provision, much
less to hunger after the Onyons of Egypt. It is not husks with Swine, but
bread in our Fathers house that is our portion as children, then surely our
glory should be in God and in Christ the bread of life; all lower glories are
the sin and shame of Saints: and when Gods people do take up lower glories, it
pleases the Lord in much mercy to take away those dung glories that his people
may be ashamed to glory in any thing but himself, who is the everlasting God,
in as much as the riches of the eternal love and free grace of God has made
himself the inheritance of his people and their glory. It is not presumption,
but true interest and duty for every Saint in point of glory to overlooke al of
this side God himself, and not to rest but in the eternal, original love and
free grace of God. I shall conclude with this cordial truth to all the people
of God: Your real and proper glory can never be taken from you, because it is
God himself; the World may hate and persecute Saints because of this, but they
shall never be able to strippe us of our glory; it may be they think to do it
when they shall scatter Churches and Saints from one another: but this is their
darkness, they know not Saints proper glory, God himself is their glory, he
is the glory of all Church Fellowship and communion with Saints. Worldlings are
mistaken if thy think to put out this glory, though God does many times make
use of mean^s in which he makes known himself, yet he is not bound up to
means. If the men of the World could so scatter Saints, as they should never
see the faces one of another more, yet by this they cannot hinder them from
seeing the face of God in Christ, and this is Saints glory: It is an
unexpressable glory, that our glory is in God, and that God himself is his
peoples glory; though the malice of men seems to be boundless, yet certainly
their power is bounded, they are in fetters and chains before they come to
their own home; though they may perfectly envy, yet they cannot in the least
disappoint or destroy Saints in their glory; God can in a moment unpower and
destroy them, but they can never un-God him, they cannot diminish his original
eternal love and free grace, and rich mercy, they cannot make him unjust or
unfaithful, (nay they shall feel that he is both.) They cannot strip God of his
holiness, righteousness, purity, power, perfection, infiniteness, and
eternity; therefore they cannot strippe Saints of their glory, because God in
all this, and all he is, is his peoples glory. Saints have this glory above a
dying World, therefore above the reach of dying men. Oh then Saints rejoice in
the Lord always, glory in God who is fullness of glory; let the World see we
have meat to eat which they know not of, and a God to glory in which they can
never hinder us of. Let them see that we are already risen with Christ into
his glory, and do know that if these earthly Tabernacles were dissolved,
nothing could hinder us of the full enjoyment of our God in glory, who is our
God and our glory: so that the Spirit of God has imprinted in our hearts and
lives this precious exhortation; He that gloryeth let him glory in the Lord.

CHAP. XIIII. Saints have victory through Christ over Death, and by faith glory
in it.
1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. verses. 55. O Death where is thy sting? O grave where is
thy victory?

56. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law.

57. But thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.


THE subject matter of this whole Chapter is Death, and the Resurrection from
the Dead. The general scope of these three verses is Death, and that under a
twofold consideration: Death in its strength with its sting, and Death under
victory bereaved of its sting.

Death is a general subject, it concerns all flesh, for it reaches and puts
a period to all flesh: and truly as this and other Scriptures holds it forth,
it is a very weighty subject, and is worthy of the most serious meditations and
considerations of all dying flesh that is in this life but clay walls and
prisons to immortal souls; such frail buildings. Death shall certainly
crack, and leave in the grave til they be crumbled to dust, from whence they
were taken: but the weight of Death lies not barely in this, as it puts a
period to the being and breathing of all flesh, but in the sting of death which
is sin, and the strength of sin which is the law, and under these
considerations the Apostle takes it in this Scripture, and in verse. 55. puts a
holy triumphing question: O Death where is thy sting. Not that he was ignorant
what was the sting of Death; for in the very next verse he tells us what is the
sting of Death, and the strength of that sting: but he puts the question, to
let Death know, that in the free grace of God through Jesus Christ he had
victory over him: As if he had said, Death I know that sin is thy sting, and
the law is the strength of sin: but this I know in the Spirit of God, that
Christ has born my sins, fulfilled the law, and satisfied divine justice for
my soul, so that now Death thou have no sting in thee for me; Christ in taking
sin from me, has taken thy sting from thee: so that now Thanks be to God which
gives me victory through my Lord Jesus Christ. I can with glory put this
question to thee; O Death where is thy sting! Death shall certainly sit in the
bosom, look in the face, and close the eyes of all flesh: but whether in this
presence Death appears a friend or an enemy; whether with, or without his
sting, this is the great maine thing to be enquired after; to be resolved in
this, the soul must look up to Christ, behold Death first in him. To be more
distinct upon this weighty subject, take some particular heads and observations
from the words.

First, That union with Christ gives Death to sin, gives satisfaction to the
law and victory over Death.

The Apostle does acknowledge that sin is the sting of Death, and that the law
is the strength of sin: but notwithstanding he blesses God for victory over
Death through our Lord Jesus Christ: so as that which gives victory over Death
must be the death of sin, and the satisfaction of the law: and that is says
the Text, our Lord Jesus Christ, union with, propriety and interest in Christ;
Christ by dying for his elect body, did not only save them from their sins,
in being made sin for them, 2 Cor. 5. last. and redeemed them from the curse
of the law, being made a curse for them, Gal. 3.13. But did thereby give us
victory over Death; Christ by taking away sin, bereaves Death of his sting, by
which Christ conquers Death; for all that have union with him, and interest in
him: so that through Christ that loved us we are conquerours over Death. Death
where it has no sting, can have no victory, but the death of sin is victory
over Death. Christ he overcomes sin and Death by dying, he dies for his
people, and his conquest over Death was for them for whom he dyed, so that a
believing soul looking upon Death through Christ, does triumph as the Apostle
here: O death where is thy sting! And does with Christ reign over Death, as an
enemy destroyed, and put under his feet, verse. 25, 26. The believing soul in
its union with Christ is above Death, as Christ is above it; not but that the
bodies of Saints shall for a time sleep in the grave: but Death being without
its sting, is in that but a servant, to put Gods children to bed for a time;
till corruption shall have put on incorruption, and mortality has put on
immortality: and then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written:
Death is swallowed up in victory.

The 2d. Observation is this: That such as dye not in union with Christ, they
dye under the sting and victory of Death.

Death is as I may say, death only in the sting; when the sting appears in
Death, then and then only has death a grim countenance, it is sin that puts
the terror into Death: but when the sting of sin was taken away, the Apostle
could glory in, and over Death: but to Christ less souls Death comes in its
full power; It is appointed for all men once to dye, and after death to come to
judgment. Now to a Christ-lesse soul death and sin appears together, and the
sting of Death which is sin will go along with the soul to judgment; this
makes death to be dreadful to such poor souls: and here Death is not a
servant to lay the body to sleep, but a Jayler to bring soul and body in
sin before the just and righteous Judge; to a soul out of Christ, it is
death to think of appearing before a righteous and holy God: but when Death
comes, and the soul must certainly appear before this tribunal, this is
death indeed, a thousand deaths in one; to such a soul it is death to live,
because the sentence will be, go you cursed; this shall be your curse, you
shall live for ever out of the presence and glorious enjoyment of the
everliving, holy, and glorious God; the sting of death is sin. Where death
and sin meets in one soul, there death stings to death, and then it is truly
death, because it has its sting, and there sin has its strength, the law of
God to accuse, and the curse of that law to condemn to all eternity; thus is
Death in strength to Christ-lesse souls, souls not in union with Christ.

I intend not in this meditation to take in all the parts of this subject, for
then I should be very large. Nor shall I in this place take into consideration
how Christ has delivered his people from sin and the curse of the law,
though both are proper to this Scripture, because I have done it in some other
parts of this book; I shall take that for granted, and confine my meditations
to that which I judge to be chief upon the Apostles spirit in this Scripture,
which is namely this;

The glory and excellency of Saints, as we may glory in and triumph over Death
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

First, a Saint through Christ may glory over death in the very nature of it.
Death here is no death, the sting being taken away, it has as it were lost its
nature, it is changed, it is not what it was at first; it is the nature of
Death to devour and destroy, that appears by the sting which is sin: but
through Christ Death is bereaved of this power, having lost its sting, in stead
of a destroyer, it becomes a servant, not only to God, but to Saints also.
Death is through Christ a servant to all Saints, to wait on them till they
have finished their work on Earth in the will of God, and then lays them to
rest in the dust; It waits till all the work be done, and then does its work
in the appointment of God, resting the weary body from its labors, cracking
the clay walls, that the thirsting soul may meet its Beloved in perfection of
glory: so meet, as never to part more, but to be for ever with the Lord, to
behold the love of God in glory, and be for ever swallowed up in the glory of
that love. Death, which in it self is grim and frightfull, is through Christ
to a Saint welcome and pleasing, because it comes without a sting, and has no
other business but to serve Gods end, in freeing both soul and body, sets the
foul free from the body of death, and the body from a weary and toilesome
life; Death is but a sleep in which the body lies, till at the glorious
appearance of Christ it rises incorruptible; the nature of death is through
Christ, but to be our Fathers messenger to bring us home, that we may see his
reconciled face in glory, and enjoy the mansions prepared for us; that we may
taste the love of his heart, know him in himself, reap the full harvest of all
our hopes, possessing glory above the life of faith; our feasting in heaven
will be fruitions, not a crown of glory in promise only, but in possession, the
joys, the hopes, the desires of a gracious soul in all his life, is by death
brought in at once; the joy of this soul is, that the day draws nigh, in
which the body shall be dissolved, and it shall be with Christ: It hopes to
meet its beloved in perfect glory, and never part more, it desires to be
absent from the body, and present with the Lord: and in all, this death is
through Christ a servant to a Saints death, has all its poison in its sting:
and Christ taking away the sting from death, has quite changed the nature of
it: Death with its sting kills where it conquers, but Death without its sting
only changes the body of Saints from worms to cold clay. So Job, he waited
all the days of his appointed time till his change came; by death Saints
change their place, but not their company, whereas before they lived in God,
now they live with God. Saints on earth have communion with God and Christ in
the Spirit, and Saints in heaven have the same company, but in greater glory.
Death changes our place of communion, but not those we have communion with:
Saints on Earth live upon love tokens from God and Christ sent to them by the
Spirit; but in Heaven upon the original and fullness of all that love: here by
the Spirit we read the love and kindness of God and Christ in a Covenant of
free grace, and many gracious promises: but in heaven we taste of love in the
fountain, in the very bosom of God and Christ to all eternity: here we glory
that glory waits for us in heaven, there our glory is to be swallowed up into
glory, and to be made glorious in the fullness of that glory. In this Saints
glory over the nature of death, it does not kill them, but change them from a
cloudy, to a more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: And as for the bodies
of Saints, it may be said of them as Christ did of the Rulers daughter, she is
not dead but sleeps. Death changes them in this, their sleep is something
longer then at other times, yet they are not dead, but sleep, for Christ is
the life of Saints And because Christ lives, they live also, John 14.19. Their
clay is colder in this sleep then in others, and by degrees crumbles into
dust; here is a change indeed, and it is no more; for this corruptible must put
on incorruptible, and this mortality must put on immortality, and then it will
fully appear that death is swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 53, 54. The nature
of Death is changed by Christ's taking the sting away, from being the King of
terrors; it becomes the messenger of glad tidings: Death is now so free from
terrors, that it brings tidings of the greatest joy to Saints, it tells the
Spouse of Christ she shall go and be for ever in her beloveds arms. Your
wilderness days are accomplished, in which you went many times to the Watchmen
to enquire for your Beloved, and you found them in the dark as well as your
self: but now you shall find your Beloved, and be filled with his love, and
live in the light of the Lord for ever. Death tells the children of God he is
come to fetch them home to their Fathers house; yea, to their Fathers Kingdom,
in which they shall all reign with him. They shall be as children under-age no
longer, they shall now possess the mansions prepared from eternity to
eternity; not only have all tears wiped from their eyes, but to live for ever
in the beholding and enjoying perfection of glory. Death brings glad tidings
both to body and soul; it tells the body, head you shall ache no more, stomach
you shall be sick no more, heart you shall tremble and be afraid no more,
flesh you shall bleed and smart no more; I am come to put an end to all these
fears and troubles, God will look you up in the cabinet of the earth, that
you may there sleep in peace till Christ raise you incorruptible, and carry you
into glory. And to the soul says Death, you shall have no more time for sin
and vanity; perfect holiness to eternity shall now swallow you up, I come only
to put an end to sinning days; you shall now groan under sin no more, that
body which held you, and was subject to temptations, shall now go to sleep in
the dust till the tempter be chained up in eternal darkness; in stead of
mourning under sin, you shall now for ever glory over sin, your fears shall
end, so shall your faith; for in stead of the evidence of things not seen, you
shall both see and enjoy the heighths, breadths, depths, and lengths of the
love, grace, kindness, faithfulness, and glory of that God you have believed
in. Fear not me says Death, I come from your Father, so as you may be sure I
have no commission to hurt you: Christ your beloved Hu^band, Brother, Head, and
Redeemer took care that I should not be able to hurt you, for he took my
sting from me before I should come unto you: I am come without a sting to tell
you God and Christ loves you: but that is not all my errand, they love you so
well, that they can suffer you no longer to be out of the full enjoyment of
their love, and I am sent to crack the clay walls which is your prison, that
you may fly home, and be at rest; there your rest shall be as high as heaven,
and filled with God, where no troubles can ever reach you, nor no power be able
to unrest you; this is the true nature of death to Saints, Christ having taken
sin from them, which is the sting of death: so that in all this, and
exceedingly more may believing Saints glory in the very nature of death.

Secondly, a Saint through Christ may glory over Death in the time of it,
though it be uncertain in the time of its coming, yet that hinders not a
Saints glory. For a believing Saint knows when ever death comes, it shall be
without a sting; and this made the Apostle to glory, in Phil. 1.21. For me to
live, is Christ; and to dye, is gain. If death stay longer before it comes,
yet I can glory in the length of time: For to me to live, is Christ; and in the
strength of Christ I can wait patiently all the days of my appointed time,
till in the will of God my change shall come. And if death be at hand, and settle
it self in my bosom the next moment, yet herein I have glory, For to die is
gain.

A believing Saint can tell Death he has his time as well as his work appointed
him: you have both your time and your power given you by my Father, and though
to me it is a secret when your time shall be, yet in the Spirit of God this is
revealed to me, when ever you come, the love of God my Father comes with you,
and your work shall be to have me home, that I may feed upon the bankets of love
for ever. Therefore says such a soul, I fear not the time of your coming,
but wait patiently for it in the will and Spirit of God; yet in all that time,
thirst earnestly to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

The uncertain time of death may justly be sad and amazing to such as have
their good things, and their portion of good only in this world, and that by
term of life: for here Death crops all in a moment, and they are left empty,
though their barnes be full as the fool in the Gospel: But to such a foul,
whose lise is hid with Christ in God; and when Christ who is its life shall
appear, we shall then appear with him in glory. Here the uncertain time of
death can be no disadvantage, because Christ to this soul is eternal life, so
that it lives certainly and eternally with Christ in God, Gol. 2.3, 4. it has
a certain life, and therefore can glory in it, and over the uncertain time of
death, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens. Though we know not the time of dissolution to this
earthly Tabernacle, yet this we know, when it shall be, it will be a time of
advantage; for we leave a tabernacle that may and must be dissolved, to
possess a building of God, an eternal Mansion house in heaven. Therefore says
a believing soul, Death I can glory in thy time Christ has made thee my
friend by taking my sins, which was thy sting, away from thee, and now I long
and earnestly desire to see thy face; O death my friend: If I must wait yet a
few days or years before the appointed time shall come for thee to lay my
weary body asleep in the dust, yet I do see the beauty of my Fathers will in
that, but if thou be at hand thou art truly welcome, if the next moment be
thine for me, it is a blessed moment, the moment of my first entrance into the
full fruition of blessedness, this thy time is the time of wiping all tears
from my eyes, and revealing all glory to my soul; of putting an end to all
misery, and the beginning of joys without end, thy time is my triumphing, my
waited, hoped, longed for moment: I did tell the World that scorned me that I
was an heir of glory, had mansions and a crown prepared and waited for me in
my Fathers glory; and art thou now come O death to fetch me home, to bring me
to Christ my head, with whom I shall for ever possess that glorious
inheritance, which I have gloried in, this is a blessed time and moment, in
which I be held thy face, thou art not come before thou art welcome, I have
nothing to stay me here, I have waited long for thee, my God and Father is in
Heaven, so is Christ my beloved there, perfection, purity is only there, my
treasure is there, so is my heart also, and art thou now come to set me clear
of this corrupt empty perishing World, that I may be only there, and for ever
there; O blessed be the Lord that thou art come, thy time is a welcome time, a
time of deliverance from sinning in the body, and the body of sin, thy moment
puts an end to all hours of temptation; and though the men of the World may
trample over my clay, yet my soul shall triumph in real glory, above this
imaginary glory; thus may a believing soul glory over death in the time of it.

Thirdly, A believing Saint through Christ may glory over the fears of death.

What ever fears there be in death they are only to Christlesse souls, for
souls in Christ may glory over them all, because to them death has no sting,
as first the grand fear in death is this that it may prove eternal, the
haling of soul and body out of the World, to come before the righteous Judge
of quick and dead, where it shall receive this sentence: Go you cursed into
eternal fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels for ever. This is more
then a fear, for it is really so to Christ less souls; where death comes
with his sting in him; but when the sting is gone this fear is gone too, and
the believing soul in Christ may glory over death as it is bereaved of his
sting, and so over death in this great fear, the Scripture tells us, It is
appointed for all men once to dye, and after death to come to judgment: That
is, to come before the righteous Judge, but the description which the Word of
G^d gives us of that day, is, that there shall be a right hand and a left to
distinguish between the Sheep and the Goats on his left hand, Depart from me
you cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, so to
the Sheep on his right hand he will say, Come you blessed of my Father inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World: 25. Mat. latter
end: The fear in death is a sear of judgment, but the judgment day is a
blessed day to all the members of Christ; it is that day when soul and body
shall meet again to be blessed for ever, in inheriting of the kingdom
prepared for them, it is the day of the bodies full redemption and eternal
nuptial with the soul, this day is so far from administering fear in death
to souls in Christ, that it is the comfort in which those earthly tabernacles
go to the dust; believing That what is sown in corruption shall be raised in
incorruption, what is sown in dishonor shall be raised in glory, and what in
weakness shall be raised in power, and though it be sown a noturall body yet
it shall be raised a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. So that the fear
of eternal death and judgment is wholly taken away from this natural death,
where Christ has taken away away the sting. But secondly, The men of the World
will tell you, they are afraid of death because it cuts them off from their
Worldly delights, they can find no other fault with the World but that it
perishes, coold they enjoy it for ever though there be many briars in this
Wilderness, yet they could make their Canaan in it, so that they might never
be stripped of it; but they know when death shall once close their eyes, they
must bid adue to all their Worldly delights never to see or enjoy them more,
and upon this consideration as well as the former, death is the King of fears
and (...) unto them.

But it is quite contrary with the soul in Christ, he concludes if his hopes
and comfort were only in the World, he were of all men most miserable, he
blesses God for every wilderness mercy, but he lives only in God himself,
it is his joy to look upon the World as perishing and his body a decaying, for
the top of his glory and the expectation of his soul, is to be dissolved and
to be with Christ; he counts the worldlings choice of mercy to be the greatest
misery, To be ever in the World would be worse then ten thousand thousands of
deaths to his body; his pantings are to be absent from the body, that he might
be fully present with the Lord, he does acknowledge God to be glorious in his
footstool but as an heir of God, he thirsts to be in the glory of his throne,
if you tell him of pleasure and delights in the World, his answer is that
communion with God is full of pleasure and delight where ever it be, but says
he, the World cloudeth these joys, and eclipseth this communion, therefore O
that I were stripped of this dying flesh that I might have full communion and
fellowship with God in the spirit that I might drink freely of the waters of
life in the fountain; this soul reckons all the delights and pleasures of the
world to be amongst the wise man's vanities, and having tasted Christ the bread
of life in his Fathers house, and in him the love of his Fathers heart can
neither feed upon nor delight in the empty buskes of this perishing World, if
any ambitious worldling tells him it is very good to be honorable: I says
he, If you mean that honor which flows from being precious in the sight of
God, and having an interest in his love: 43 Isay 4. He gives this one answer to
the worldling in all his proposals, of pleasure and beauty in this life; says
he, God is the beauty of the whole creation as the original fullness of it, so
that it wholly depends upon his will, and that which is our glory is God
himself, who is the glory of Heaven and earth, though the World withers yet he
is for ever glorious and he is his peoples glory; therefore the worldlings
fear in death upon this account is not a Saints fear, for his glory is out of
the World even in God, and his delight and affections are in things above not
in things on the earth, and that because He is risen with Christ; his
affections are risen before his body is dead, the delight of his heart is in
Heaven, though the flesh of it be in his body, 3 Col. 1, 2. this soul is
crucified with Christ to the World and the World to him, 6 Gal. 14. so that
neither his joys nor his fears are with the worldling, if death can only
strip him of the World, he has no cause to fear death, nay death comes too
late in that, for he through Christ is dead to the World whilst he lives and
is above all the fears of death, because his life is hid with Christ in God: I
but says the worldling I am afraid of death because it takes me from all my
sweet relations here on earth.

I must dye to them and they to me, it is true indeed; but herein the believing
soul is no looser, he leaves the drops of corrupted creatures love to be
swallowed up into the Ocean of Gods power and eternal love; he leaves those
broken Cisterns of love, which in a little time would leave him, and is taken
up into the Father, and fountain of love in the glory of love and free grace
for ever; he now comes to taste love in the original, and reads it as it was
in the heart of God to him from eternity, and shall be to eternity in the
fullness of Gods love, so full that there will not be the want of any sweet or
relation for all will be made up in God, there is no complaining in the streets
of the new Jerusalem, no want of relations, God will be a Father, Christ will
be a husband, Saints glorified our brethren Sisters and asociates to all
eternity, we shall want no relations in Heaven, nor shall any relations there
want perfection, for all there shall be complete in Christ and filled with the
fullness of God, we leave a World of wants, and it is to possess a Heaven of
fullness and glory: I but says a tender hearted Father or Mother, will not my
Children my little babes want me? Truly no, for your work in the decree of
Heaven is done before God suffers death to cut your thread of life, and it is our
unbelief that tells us it were better either for us or ours that we had more
work in the World then God has appointed us, had we more days we could not in
them make a hair black or white, we could not in our selves add that little to
our little ones, Our Fathers kindness will be our Childrens comfort; and he
lives when we are dead to them and alive with him, the presence of God with
our children will be their blessed portion though we be absent to believe in
this his love and faithfulness will be a blessed rest to us and ours, we shall
leave them well in leaving them with God; and need not fear the leaving them
when we are going to God, death in taking us from our children, to carry us
home to our Father will advantage us and not disadvantage ours, for though he
fills us with all fullness of love and glory in Heaven, yet he is
nevertheless full, but can also fill our children on earth, and such as taste
of his love and grace have no cause to doubt of the freeness and fullness
thereof. I but says the flesh, it may be of a Saint, I am afraid of the pains
of death in dying; truly this is a fear of our own creating, for how many
thousands go out of the World when standers by can scarce tell whether they
sleep or dye; but grant it that the pains of death be strong upon thy flesh,
yet take this with thee, it is all the pains that ever thy flesh shall bear,
men to live a dying life are oftentimes content to have their limes cut from
their bodies which I believe is far more pain to the body then when death
cracks it to let out the soul, but the gain far exceeds, thus is soul
and body at ease both, when the body is but the dying of one limb a little
before the rest of the body, it is but the deferring of death and it may be
many deaths assaults the body in that time, this is but a bugbeare in the
fancy to fright children, not worth the nameing among Saints, let God break
what he will, when he will, and how he will, he makes all good again to his
people in himself, it was Christ's end in taking the sting from death not to
leave any ground of fear for his people, so that believing Saints through
Christ may truly glory in and over death, in all the fears of it.

Fourthly, Believing Saints through Christ may glory over death in the manner
of it.

Whether it be according to the terms we use for distinction, either natural
or violent death, yet to a Saint through Christ it is in both but death without
a sting, and that which our flesh calls the worst of these, the violent death,
God has and does make to be the portion of many of his dear Saints; the
Prophets, Apostles, and those glorious primitive Christians did many (if not
most of them) drink of this cup, and did it with so much joy in God, that the
Tyrants of those times were more unable to invent cruel deaths, then they were
to undergo them: and the reason is visible; for though these deaths had the
cruelty of man in them, yet there was also the kindness of God in them, Christ
had taken away the sting of death, which was sin: and though men might add to
their cruelty, yet they could put no sting into death. The Martyrs of late
times as Histories tells us, have gone leaping and rejoicing to the stake, being
joyful in the embracing of flames: and as one said to his fellow Martyr, Be of
good cheer; though our breakfast be sour, yet our supper will be sweet in
Heaven: As if he had said; though these flames brings smarts with them, yet
they will put an end to all sm^rts, this is all the sting that is in death, and
it will soon have an end; we shall sup with our beloved Jesus, and abide in
that love for ever; it is sin in death that makes it bitter, what ever the
manner be; but if finne be taken away, there is no sting in death, let the
manner be what it will, it is all one to a Saint where he meets with Death
whether in the field or at home in his bed, whether it takes him in his
greatest strength, with his bones full of marow, in his d^c^ying state, when his
eyes grow dim, and his other faculties fail: he minds not the manner of
dying, but the matter of death, death is without a sting: so that where, when,
or how death comes into his bosom, that is of little value with him; he on
(...) this to find death a friend without its sting, and then through Christ he
glories in and over both matter and manner of death.

Fifthly, A believing Saint through Christ may glory over death in the ends of
it.

There is two maine ends in Death which is proper to Saints.

The first is, to put an end to a dying life, to finish that work which begins
so soon as we begin to live in these bodies of clay; man begins to dye, so
soon as he begin^ to liv^, because the whole life is but a progress of death,
or a dying life; all the time we live we dye invisible, and when we dye indeed,
it is but v^sible death; that which we carry about with us in the world, then
appears to carry us out of the world; that which sleeps with us many a short
sleep, now casts us into one ^^ng sleep, this is properly the end of death
in Saints, to put an end to all dying; for it is a real truth, though a
mystery to the world, that Saints dye whilst they live, and live when they dye:
So that this end of death is a Saints glory, not his grief, not what he
fears, but what he hopes for, counting himself most miserable of all men, if
Deaths end were not to put an end to his dying life.

The other maine end in death is; To pluck up the flowers of heaven that
grows in the earth by the roots, that they may be planted in their own
kingdom, and flourish there for ever. I mean those precious sou^es of Saints
which are here enclosed in those earthly m^ulds of our bodies, by which the
beauty of those heavenly fl^wers are exceedingly short of that glory they shall
have with Christ above, and do many times taste and savor of the earth they
grow in; Christ is the proper root of those branches, and Heaven the only
place for them to grow and flourish in: Now death comes only to transplant them
from Earth to Heaven, to crrumble that clay into dust which holds these flowers
of heaven so fast, that they cannot get home into their own kingdom. Now a
Saint may well glory over this end of Death, for Death is herein the souls
servant to have it home to glory, and to unprison it from all the bonds it lies
under:

But lastly, A believing Saint through Christ may glory over Death in its
victory.

My meaning is, the victory which Saints have over death; death in the will of
God lays Saints to sleep in their corruptible bodies: But Saints through their
union with Christ rise again, and that in incorruption; though it go to the
dust corrupt and noisome clay, in dishonor and in weakness like a natural
body, yet Christ will raise it again a spiritual body, full of power and
glory: There is no loss to Saints in dying, no not to their corruptible flesh,
for that has an interest in Christ, and Christ having conquered death for his
people, though their bodies shall by death be sown in incorruption, yet they
shall not lie there for ever; the grave shall have no v^ctory, but shall give
up its dead, and such as rise in Christ, shall rise as Christ, spiritual
bodies; though the Earth shall have leave to root the corruption of the body
of Saints, yet Christ will preserve his interest, and raise it as the fruit of
his redemption and resurrection, even a spiritual body. Death has its office,
and the grave its proper work: but Christ has the command of both; when death
has laid the bodies of Saints in the dust, there is the end of his office, and
when the grave has swallowed up the corruption of those bodies, then its work
is done too: but then Christ has an eternal woe ke in his hands, to raise it a
spiritual body, that the fullness of his redemption may be made up, so as that
soul and body, both may be filled with the fullness of his redemption: and in
this work Christ commands both death and grave to give up their dead bodies,
and then he spirits his own, suitable to that eternal life which they are to
possess. The Scripture tells us, That Christ is risen from the dead, and become
the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. That is, Christ is first in
the resurrection, but so as he is the first fruits, a testimony of
resurrection to all that sleep: and in Romans 8.11. the Apostle tells us, That
the same power which raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken our
mortal bodies by his Spirit. So in 1 These. 4.16. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with
the trumpe of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first.

I mention these Scriptures to show the victory that Saints have in Christ over
death and grave, and to me they give full satisfaction and ample proof in them
to the thing in hand, that neither death can hurt, nor grave hold so much as
the body of a Saint in Christ: but on the contrary, that the very bodies of
Saints have victory over death in dying, and that Saints have exceeding cause
to glory over death under this consideration as well as all or any of the
former.

I shall next take into consideration in some few particulars the benefits and
advantages that believing Saints through Christ have by death both in our
souls and bodies; I will begin with the bodies.

First, Death freeth us from all the natural infirmities and diseases of our
bodies.

One complains that wind makes a torturing tumult all his body over; the
bowels and the body full, and they fill the head, so that there is no free part.

Another he complains that flux of water has filled his veins, chil'd his
blood, and num'd his joints, so that aches are in all his bones.

A third complains that gravel lies in his reins, tears his kidneyes, and
stops his bladder, so that his whole life is as it were upon the torturing
rack; there be many more complainers besides these which go from man to man
to make their moan, and beg their help for a little ease, though but for a
little time; which sometimes they find, but often return from
fellow creatures as miserable as they came: but when Death comes without his
sting, he makes a perfect cure of all sorrows and pain for ever; among
creatures we seek ease with tears, but death he brings full and lasting
ease, and wipes away all tears from our eyes: Death puts an end to hunger and
thirst, to cold and nakedness, to labor and weariness; in short, to all
wants, and to all woes, the grave is quiet, it is the only piece of quiet earth
that man can meet withal; though a little above the grave on the earth there
be cryings out, and complainings, yet the grave is quiet, nothing can disturb
the rest and quiet of that bed, it is not capable of disturbance, therefore
exceeding useful to rest in, this I assure you is a greater benefit then all
the living World enjoyes beside. Crowns have their crosses, States their
crackes, all persons and things their wants, every person, state, condition,
and thing under the sin wrapped up in vanity; all wants are buried no where
but in the grave of death: The body of man never bids adieu to all want til it
be embraced in the arms of death, and laid to rest in that quiet center of the
earth: but when death comes without its sting, it brings this certain benefit
and advantage with it.

A second benefit and advantage of the body of Saints in death without its
sting, is this, It takes from the worlds scorn and cruelty.

When the bodies of Saints are in the grave, Worldlings must seek some other
object for their slander, scorn, or cruelty; they will find no sap or moisture
in the dust of Saints to feed these lusts withal; the derision and
persecution of Gods dear Saints on Earth, is the pastime and practice of
sinning souls; like the fly that sports it self about the candle till she
have burnt her wings: but God has his time to ease his people of this burden,
and if not before, yet certainly and fully when death comes, is this work
effected. Saints whilst they live in the body, are with their spirits above
the worlds scorns and cruelties: but when death comes, then the body gets
beyond them too; so that here is another benefit in death, it freeth them from
the scorns of fools, and the cruelty of cruel men. The wicked worldlings
counts a Saint to be the only troubler of the people and place wherein he
lives: but when death comes to a Saint, he is very willing to leave the world,
their portion, and their elbow-roome, he is not desirous to trouble them any
longer; all he desires is a little earth to lie down to sleep in, and that
the world is content withal, wishing that all the rest were there too, this is
a benefit which a Saint with submission to the will of God desires many an hour
before it comes, he is as willing to be at home in his own inheritance as the
worldling is to have him out of his, now death crowns these longing in Saints,
and brings in the harvest of many prayers which the spirit has made for this
very thing, so that in these and many more particulers is death beneficial and
advantageous to the body of Saints. But I shall mention two generals in which
death without its sting is through Christ exceeding advantageous and benificous
to the souls of believing Saints.

First, It delivers them from a body of sin, a place of temptations and
darkness which is the whole complaint of Saints, whilst they are in the flesh;
the Apostle Paul complains of the Law in his members, which rebelled against
the Law of his mind and of the body of death, how often does the Prophet David
pray to be kept from temptations, and to be enlightened in his darkness, that
God would show him the way he should walk in, and make his paths straight.
Saints desire to be uncloathed of the body of flesh because they are capable of
sinning in that body, any it is a body which tempts to sin, and in which the
soul is under much darkness, And therefore groans within our selves waiting
for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body, 8. Romans 23. It is very
sweet to be delivered from temptations that they get not the upper hand, so as
to lead the soul captive at their will, but to be above the reach of all
temptations where we can never possible be tempted more, how exceeding precious
and glorious is this; a Saint would if it were in his power give the whole
World so that he might never sin more, it must hten needs be of great
advantage to him to be carried above the reach of any temptation to sin, you
shall never meet a Saint at the throne of grace but his breathings are, Lord
inlighten me in thy will, make thy mind clearer and clearer out unto me by thy
spirit, leave me not in the darkness of my own flesh; now then how precious
must it needs be to this soul to be taken out of all clouds, to have all
clouds even the clouds of the flesh done away; so that not the least shadow of
darkness does remain.

Why all this and much more is the advantage of a Saints soul in the death of
its body, for this death without the sting of sin is death to the body of
sin that it can be no more a body to sin in, it separates light and
darkness, the soul and body, that both might go to their proper place, and
then the soul complains no more of darkness, it is dark clay that hinders
the souls light, when it is quit of that it is perfect in light, and this
makes Saints so thirsting to shake off the rags of flesh, their clouds of
darkness, their places of temptation, and their sinning body, now when death
comes he satisfies all these thirstings, fills up all these desires, and
accomplisheth the present design of God concerning the fleshly body, in which
the precious souls of believing Saints are through Christ abundantly
benifited and advantaged, but this is not all the benefit and advantage which
death without its sting through Christ brings to the souls of believers:
There is another general, which is this.

The soul ip now taken us into the perfection of Gods eternal love, free
grace, full glory, everlasting purity, and thus to be for ever with the Lord.

When I say this comes in with death, I mean it is then so perfected as it
could be never so before, for the bodies of Saints must be sown in corruption
before they can rise in incorruption, and the soul is never perfect till it be
quit of the corruptible body and this evil World, but this being once
accomplished, Then the soul in God and God in the soul makes up perfection to
all eternity; the soul has now no let to full enjoyment of his Masters joy,
it is now a child of full age, nothing can hinder him in possessing his full
inheritance in his Fathers love and glory. The mansions prepared from all
eternity are now possessed to all eternity, the love which lay hidd in our
Fathers heart, and was too great to be revealed in the World, is now spread open
to the soul, and the soul is bid eat my beloved; O drink abundantly and be
satisfied, this feast of love will hold out for ever, eternity cannot exhaust
it, it is the love of God, this is the supper of the Lamb slain before the
foundation of the World in the design of Gods free grace, this mystery is now
revealed and the souls of Saints filled with the glory of it; Saints in Heaven
are in the light of the Lord and all filled with the Lord their Light,
perfection is there the portion of every soul; Christ has given up the
Kingdom to his Father, and God is the perfection and fullness of all his
Children; this perfection of glory is Gods end in redeeming his elect that we
might be heirs of God, fellow-heires with Christ in his eternal love, full
glory, and everlasting purity, never to know sin or sorrow more, to be above
the breathings of any defilement or the buddings of any vanity, what we shall
then possess will be nothing but all God, it will be all God and always God,
God will be the light of our eyes, the life of our souls, the excellency of
our glory, the sweet of our sweets and the perfection of our purity in Heaven;
Heaven is the presence of God, the full, perfect, glorious, and the eternal
presence of God will be our Heaven, when death has laid our dying bodies
asleep, when the corruptible sleeps away its corruption, the incorruptible
soul possesses a crown incorruptible and full of glory, so that the time of
death without its sting is through Christ to a Believer of great benefit and
advantage, both in soul and body: Saints in Christ ought to improve the joys
and consolations which comes from the free grace of God to their souls,
amongst which I am sure this truth is very eminent and therefore ought to be
well improved, and first this calls upon believing Saints, (to whom through
Christ, death when ever it comes will be without the sting of sin) that they
should not have sadd or hard thoughts of death; we should not make fear in our
flesh or spirits to be the associate of the thoughts of death, there is no
cause for it the sting being taken away, by this needless and unbeleeving
fear of death in Saints we do prejudice our selves and bring an evil report
upon our friend; First we prejudice our selves, for through a fearful fancy
of evil and danger in death, we many times do what we should not, and leave
that undone which we ought to do, how many stretch their consciences to do
that which they have no rule for and otherwise would not do but that they
fear it may cost them their lives if they should not, and how much duty is
neglected upon this very consideration, upon a fear in doing to lose or
endanger life, the fear indeed is to meet with death in doing, therefore choose
rather to omit duty, but it is safe and blessed through Christ to meet death in
duty, sad and hard thoughts of death I verily believe do much prejudice Saints
in their straight and even walking with God through this wilderness: it were
happy if in reading we could read our own hearts.

But secondly, These fleshly fears of Saints bring an evil report upon death,
which through Christ is our real friend; it is very imbecomming Saints to
scandalize any, out that we should do this to death who is so real a friend to
us, and the messenger of such glad tidings as what has gone before proves him
to be, this is very disingenious; if Saints look upon him with a fearful eye
he will then be taken for an enemy to all the World, for to others he comes
with his sting, so as they have just cause to fear, but to Saints death is a
reconciled friend in Christ, and we do him injury when ever we look upon him
as other, nay truly we dishonor Christ to fear death after he has conquered
him, the redemption of Christ for his people is so full that they may and ought
to serve him without fear, the victory over death is part of the redemption of
Christ, so that now, fear of death is no less then diffidence of that
Redemption, therefore Saints should be very watchful that they harbor no sad
nor hard thoughts of death, because in so doing we dishonor a true friend,
nay Christ that made death thus to be our friend.

In the next place this calls upon Saints that when death comes to sit in our
bosoms, we should bid him truly welcome, and give him the entertainment of a
friend, that is, be truly joyful to see him, let him find by the joy of our
hearts that he is welcome to our besomes, let his countenance be pleasing to
us, for though he be pale death to our flesh yet that flesh shall be a gainer
by its palenesse, and find nothing in death but a quiet rest til it shall put
on incorruption: But to the spirit death is a messenger from God and Christ of
glad tidings, and the feet of those which bring glad tidings should be beatiful
to us, let death when he comes find he is a long looked for friend, that he is
not come before he is welcome, but should have been welcome if he had come
much sooner; that thou take him for so good and so real a friend that thou
art heartily willing to go with him and to leave all thy friends in the flesh,
that thou have kept them company but til he comes, and now art willing to leave
them all to go with him, Saints may well bid death welcome as a friend for
Christ is in him and the love of Christ; when Christ took sin from Saints
which was the sting of death, he gave them love in the room of sin, so as
before we had sin in all, now we have love in all, and though death to Saints
have not the sting of sin, yet it has the love of Christ, and is worthy to
be bidd welcome and entertained with gladness, when he comes.

But in the next place: This calls loud to Saints that they believe strongly
in that love of Christ who has taken away the sting of death, which is sin,
and thereby made death that was an original enemy to be a true and constant
friend, the Scripture teleth us, 1 Cor. 15.26. The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death. Now death as an enemy to Saints is destroyed in the death
of Christ, for his sting which is his enmity is taken away by Christ; that I
infer is this, Saints have much cause to believe strongly in that love, the
strength of which has overcome all enemies for us, Christ has overcome death
the last of enemies, why should we ever then fear the fading of that love
which has left no enemies to make us afraid; Saints fears are of their own
creating, for what ever might have been a true cause of fear has been under
Christ's destroying for he has destroyed all enemies and where no enemy is,
there is no true ground of fear; what remains then? Why nothing but a firm
and lasting foundation of faith, the love of Christ is a strong foundation for
a Saint to believe strongly in, what should we fear, death is our friend the
love of Christ has made him so, the breakings forth of this love is ground
sufficient to banish all fears, if death be no enemy then there is no enmity
between death and us, for death is the last destroyed enemy, and the love of
Christ has destroyed that enmity.

Saints have many that hate them but none that can hurt them, take this for
proof, death is a Saints friend, there can be no greater testimony of love
then the destroying of enemies, for no man will destroy the enemies of him that
he is an enemy to himself, enmity would make enemies; it is only love that
destroys them, and this love is Christ to his people, his love is so great
that he will leave us no enemy; that is, no person, persons, or things shall
ever be able to destroy a Saint, then surely Saints may and ought to believe
strongly in the love of Christ, let worldlings know their nails are too short
to scratch out this love, their strength too weak to shake this eternal
foundation if they suck our bloods they may choke themselves, but do us no
hurt, for through the love of Christ Saints are conquerers over death; Saints
may believe strongly on the love of Christ, for a worse enemy then the World
shall never be able to destroy them; even sin; for Christ has destroyed sin,
and in that death, for all that believe in him, so as a Saint triumphs over
death in the want of its sting, is in the love of Christ which has taken away
sin, and this is that love which the souls of Saints should believe in, and
rest strongly upon. Saints need not fear, they cannot lay more upon this love
then Christ is able and willing to bear, nay then he has born already: for he
has borne all the transgressions, iniquities, sins, griefs, sorrows,
stripes and chastisements of his people, Is^. 53. So that he has redeemed his
from the whole of sin: and believing Saints may not fear to venture their
souls in all upon the love of Christ; nay doubtless it is the duty of Saints
to live, believing strongly in the love of Christ, which has put Death to
death, and overcome all enemies for them.

But in the fourth place Saints should make this improvement of these truths to
wait upon God patiently in believing. Death will assuredly come and deliver
them from all their troubles in the flesh. Faith made Job to wait patiently
all the days of his appointed time till his change did come. There is an
appointed time in which the change shall come, and beyond that time it shall
not stay: There can be no loss of faith in this thing; for death waits upon our
Fathers will, and shall certainly come at his appointed time. I confess it is
hard for Saints that are heirs of heaven, and know it, willingly to stay
longer out of heaven and their Fathers imbracings, and in that time to be in a
body of sin, and a sinful world, to bear the infirmities of the body, with the
scorns, slanders, and persecutions of the World; yet remember that this is the
fulfilling of the will of our God, and all this time death our friend is a
coming; every moment brings this longed for blessing nearer and nearer, and
we cannot tell but it may be at the door, that death may be in the next moment
is the worlds fear; let it be a Saints joy, and serve to quench immoderate
thirst; here is this to answer all fears, it will certainly come, and cannot
be far off, Christ longs more for us, then we do or can do for him: and
though we think him long, yet he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. Remember the body is made of brittle earth, it will be soon cracked, or
moulder away, it cannot by its constitution last long; the word of truth
calls him a fool that counted upon many years when he was in clay; the
flower soon fades, the grass is soon withered, the shadow soon gone, and
the Weavers shuttle passes swift away, and this is the time of our flesh in
Scripture account. Consider again, the waiting is but a moment, compared with
the time of enjoying; the next moment may end the one, but the other is
eternal without end, and the first entrance into our Fathers glory will take
quite away the remembrance of all sorrows and sufferings here below; nay the
very beholding of Death-without his sting will make full amends for all our
waiting. Now surely Saints have great reason to wait for Gods time patiently
and believingly; though we be at present in the Wilderness, yet Canaan cannot
be far off, and Christ will go with us all the Wilderness way till he bring
us into Canaan; he is faithful which has promised never to leave not forsake
his people, the waiting time shall not be wholly without him: but when that
time is accomplished, then we shall be fully and for ever with him, therefore
our waiting should be in faith and patience on the will of God, all the days
of his appointed time for us.

And lastly, The whole life of Saints should be a life of holy joy in God, and
a glorying through Christ over Sin, Death, and Grave, believing Saints should
live up those joys which accompany Death without the sting of sin; they should
glory in the grace of God and the God of grace. They should glory in the
redemption of Gods free grace: and as the Apostle here makes a holy triumph
over Death without its sting of sin, and over the grave, which has no
victory, but must give up those bodies which are sown in corruption to be
raised in incorruption; we should let the World know how kind a God we have,
that will not leave any sting in death, or victory in the grave, but puts an
end to sin, and thereby an end to all sorrow, which makes death the worldlings
fear, to be our friend, and the time of stripping us from the worlds dying
beauty, to be the time of filling us with his own glory. Saints may well glory
over Death; that have God and Christ for their life: Saints may safely question
with Death about his sting; when Christ has taken it away for us, we may
safely glory in the times of Deaths approach, and the hour of his coming; when
as Christ has taken away his sting from him, we may truly say, there is no God
like our God, no beloved like our beloved; for none but such as have an
interest in the love of God and redemption of Christ, can glory over Death; for
to all others Death has his sting, and when ever he comes, comes with his
sting; the fear of such hearts to see the face of death, speaks very much of
the glory of Gods eternal love in Christ to all that believe on him, in taking
away the sting out of Death, by which means they can glory in, and over death,
look death in the face with joy and rejoicing; where death comes with his
sting, there is a thousand deaths in one: but to a Saint death is no death,
only a change, or a dissolving to be with Christ; then let us proclaim this to
the world, and so glory in our God, that they may know their perishing idols
are no ways to be compared with our real interest in God; the day of death
that is at hand will fully prove the truth of this, therefore we may boldly say
thus, we shall make it good both living and dying. The glory of a believing
Saints death does abundantly exceed the Worldings life, nay indeed his own
life; for though to him it be Christ to live, yet it is gain to dye. It is
more Christ to dye then live: In life Saints glory in Christ as he dyed for
them: but in death they glory in Christ as they live with him, the first is the
glory of purchase; but the latter of possession. In the first we glory that
the inheritance is given, but in the latter that it is received, which makes
up perfection of glory. And to Saints this is the next step to death without
its sting, so that they may herein glory and triumph as the Apostle: O death
where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God which gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.

