Killing Noe Murder. Briefly Discourst in Three Quaestions.
By WILLIAM ALLEN.
And all the people of the Land rejoiced: and the City was quiet, after that
they had slain Athaliah with the Sword.

2. Chro. 23.21. Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following
the Lord, they made a Conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to
Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there.

2. Chro. 25.27.
To his Highness, OLIVER CROMWELL,
May it please your Highness:
HOw I have spent some hours of the leisure your Highness has been pleased to
give me, this following Paper will give your Highness an account. How you will
please to interpret it I can not tell, but I can with confidence say, my
intention in it is, to procure your Highness that justice no body yet does you
and to let the people see, the longer they deferr it the greater injury they
do both themselves and you: To your Highness justly belongs the honor of dying
for the people, and it cannot choose but be an unspeakable consolation to you
in the last moments of your life, to consider, with how much benefit to the
world you are like to leave it. It Is then only (my Lord) the titles you now
usurp will be truly yours, you will then be indeed the deliverer of your
Country, and free it from a Bondage little inferior to that from which Moses
delivered his. You will then be that true Reformer, which you would now be
thought. Religion shall be then restored, Liberty asserted and Parliaments have
those Privileges they have fought for We shall then hope that other Laws will
have place besides those of the Sword and that Justice shall be otherwise defind
then the will and pleasure of the strongest, and we shall then hope men will keep
oaths again, and not have the necessity of being false, and Perfidious to
preserve themselves and be like their Rulers. All this we hope from your
Highness happy expirat on, who are the true Father of your Country for while
you live we can call nothing ours, and it is from your death that we hope for
our inheritances. Let this consideration arm and fortify your Highnesses
mind against the fears of death, and the terrors of your evil Conscience,
that the good you will do by your death, will something balance the evils of
your life. And if in the Black Catalogue of High Malefactors, few can be found
that have lived more to the affliction and disturbance of mankind, then your
Highness has done yet your greatest enemies will not deny but there are likewise
as few that have expired more to the universal ben fit of mankind then your
Highn: is like to do. To hasten this great good is the chief end of my writing
this Paper and if it have the effects, I hope it will your Highness will quickly
be out of the reach of men's malice and your enemies will only be able to wound
you in your memory, which strokes you will not feel. That your Highness may be
speedily in this security is the universal wishes of your grateful Country.
This is the desires and prayers of the good and of the bad and it may be if the
only thing wherein al Sects, and factions do agree in their devotions, and is
our only common prayer. But amongst all that put in their Requests and
supplications for your Highnesses speedy deliverance from al earthly troubles,
none is more assiduous, nor more fervent then he, that with the rest of the
Nation has the Honor to be

May it please your Highness: Your Highness present Slave and Vassal. W. A.

To all those Officers and Soldiers of the Army, that Remember their
engagements, and dare be honest.
I Heartily wish for Englands sake, that your number may be far greater then
I fear it is; and that his Highness his frequent pargations may have left any
amongst you that by these Characters are concerned in this Dedication. That I
and all men have reason to make this a doubt, your own actions, as well as your
tame sufferings do but too plainly manifest. For you that were the Champions of
our Liberty, and to that purpose were raised, are not you become the
instruments of our Slavery? and your hands that the people employed to take off
the yoke from of our necks, are not those the very hands that now do put it
on? Do you remember that you were raised to defend the Privileges of
Parliament, and have sworn to do it; and will you be employed to force
Elections, and dissolve Parlements, because they will not establish the Tyrants
iniquity, and our slavery by a Law? I beseech you think upon what you have
promised and what you do, and give not Posterity as well as your own
Generation the occasion to mention you with infamy, and to curse that
unfortunate valor, and success of yours, that only has gained victories (as
you use them) against the commonwealth. Could ever England have thought to
have seen that Army that was never mentioned without the titles of Religious,
Zealous, Faithful, Conragious, the fence of her liberty at home, the Terror
of her enemies abroad; Become her Gaolers? not her Guard, but her oppressors?
not her Soldiers, but a Tyrants executioners, drawing to blocks and gibbets
all that dare be honester then themselves? This you do, and this you are; nor
can you ever redeem your own honor, the trust and love of your Country, the
estimation of brave men, or the prayers of good; If you let not speedily the
world see you have been deceived; which they will only then believe, when
they see your vengeance upon his Faithless head that did it. This if you
deferr too long to do, you will find too late to attempt, and your Repentance
will neither vindicate you, nor help us. To let you see you may do this as a
lawful action, and to persuade you to it as a Glorious one, is the principal
intent of this following Paper: Which, what ever effects it has upon you, I
shall not absolutely fail of my ends; for if it excites not your virtue and
Courage, it will yet exprobrate your Cowardice and Baseness. This is from one
that was once one amongst you, and will be so again when you dare be as you
were.

IT is not any Ambition to be in Print, when so few spare Paper and the Press,
nor any instigations of private revenge or malice (though sew that dare be
honest now want their causes) that have prevailed with me to make my sel^ the
Author of a Pamplet, and to disturb that Quiet which at present I enjoy, by
his Highness great favor and injustice. Nor am I ignorant to how little purpose
I shall employ that time and pains, which I shall bestow upon this Paper. For
to thinck that any reasons or persuasions of mine, or convictions of their own,
shall draw men from any thing wherein they see profit or security, or to any
thing wherein they fear loss, or see danger, is to have a better opinion both
of my self and them, then either of us both deserve.

Besides, the subject it self is of that nature, that I am not only to expect
danger from ill men, but censure and disallowance from many that are good; for
these opinions only looked upon, not looked into (which all have not eyes for)
will appear bloody and cruel; and these compellations I must expect from those
that have a zeal, but not according to knowledge: If therefore I had considered
my self, I had spared what ever this is of pains, and not distasted so many,
to please so few, as are in mankind, (the honest and the wise.) But at such a
time as this, when God is not only exercising us with a usual and common
calamity, of letting us fall into slavery, that used our liberty so ill; but
is pleased so far to blind our understandings, and to debase our spirits, as
to suffer us to court our bondage, and to place it amongst the requests we put
up to him; Indignation makes a man break that silence that prudence would
persuade him to use; if not to work upon other men's minds, yet to ease his own.

A late Pamphlet tells us of a great design discovered against the person of
his Highness and of the Parlements coming (for so does that junto prosane that
name) to congratulate with his Highness, his happy deliverance from that wicked
and bloody attempt. Besides this that they have Ordered that God Almighty
shall be mocked with a day of thanksgiving (as I thinck the world is with the
plot) and that the people shall give public thanks for the public calamity,
that God is yet pleased to continue his judgments upon them, and to frustrate
all means that are used for their deliverance: Certainly none will now deny
that the English are a very thankful people. But I thinck if we had read in
Scripture that the Israelites had cried unto the Lord, not for their own
deliverance, but the preservation of their Task masters, and that they had
thanked God with Solemnity that Pharaoh was yet living, and that there was
still great hopes of the daily increase of the number of their Bricks: Though
that people did so many things not only impiously and profanely, but
ridiculously and absurdly, yet certainly they did nothing we should more have
wondered at, then to have found them Ceremoniously thankful to God for
plagues, that were commonly so brutishly unthankful for mercies; And we should
have thought that Moses had done them a great deal of wrong, if he had not
suffered them to enjoy their slavery and left them to their Tasks and Garlic.

I can with justice say my principal intention in this Paper is not to declaim
against my L. Protector or his Accompl^es, for were it not more to justify
others then to accuse them, I should think their own actions ^^d that work
sufficiently, and I should not take pains to tell the world what they know
before. My design is to examine whether if there has been such a plott as we
hear of; and that it was contrived by Mr. Sindercombe against my L.
Protector, and not by my L Protector against Mr. Sindercombe (which is
doubtful) whether it deserves those Epithites Mr. Speaker is pleased to give
it, of bloody wicked, and proceeding from the Prince of darkness. I know very
well how incapable the vulger are of considering what is extraordinary and
singular in every case, and that they judge of things, and name them by their
exterior appearances, without penetrating at all into their causes or natures.
And without doubt when they hear the Protector was to be killed, they straight
conclude a man was to be murdered, not a malefactor punished: for they think
the formalities do always make the thing themselves, and that it is the Judge
and the Crier that makes the justice, and the Goal the Criminal: And therefore
when they read in the Pamplet Mr. Speakers speech, they certainly think he
gives these Plotters their right titles; and, as readily as a High-court of
Justice, they condemn them, without ever examining whether they would have
killed a Magistrate, or destroyed a Tyrant, over whom every man is naturally a
Judge and an Exe^^tioner; and whom the laws of God, of nature, and of nations
expose, like Beasts of prey, (...) be destroyed ^s they are met.

That I may be as plain as I can, I shall first make it a question (which
indeed is none) whether my Lord Protector be a Tyrant or not? Secondly, if he
be. Whether it is lawful to do justice upon him without Solemnity, that is,
to Kill him? Thirdly, if it be lawful, Whether (...) is like to prove
profitable or noxious to the Commonwealth?

The (...) makes Tyrants of two sorts. Tirannus sine Titulo and Tirannus
Exercitio. The one is called a Tyrant because he has no right to govern,
First. Quastion
the other because he governs Tyrannically. We will very briefly discourse of
them both, and see whether the Protector may not with great Justice put in his
claim to both Titles.

We shall fussiciently demonstrate who they are that have not a right to govern,
if we show who they are that have; and what it is that makes the power just,
which those that rule, have over the natural liberty of other men. To Fathers
within their private Families nature has given a Supreme power. Every man,
says Aristotle, Pol. l. 1 c. ^
of Right governs his wife and children, and this power was necessarily
exercised Genesis (...). 24
every where, whilst families lived dispersed, Arist. ibid.
before the constitutions of Commonwealths; and in many places it continued
after, as appears by the laws of Solon, and the most Ancient of those of
Rome. And indeed as by the laws of God 1. Tim. 5.8.
and nature, the care, defense, and support of the family lies upon every man
whose it is; so by the same law there is due unto every man from his Family a
subjection and obedience, in compensation of that support. But several
Families uniting themselves together to make up one body of a Commonwealth,
and being Independent one of another, without any natural Superiority or
obligation, nothing can introduce amongst them a disparitie of Rule and
subjection, but some power that is over them; which power none can pretend to
have but God and themselves. Wherefore al power which is lawfully exercised
over such a society of men (which from the end of its institution we call a
Common wealth) must necessarily be derived either from the appointment of God
Almighty, Vid: Hooker Eccles. Pol. lib 1. c. 10.
who is supreme Lord of all and every part; or from the consent of the Society
it self, who have the next power to his, of disposing of their own liberty, as
they shall think fit for their own good. This power God has given to societies
of men, as well as he gave it to particular Ex. 21.5.
persons, and when he interposes not his own authority and appoints not himself
who shall be his Vicegerents and rule under him; he leaves it to none but the
people themselves to make the election, whose benefit is the end of all
government. Nay when he himself has been pleased to appoint rulers for that
people, which he was pleased peculiarly to own, He many times made the choice,
but left the Confirmation and Ratification of that choice to the people
themselves. So Saul 1. Sam. 10.1.
was chosen by God, and anointed King by his Prophet, but made King by all the
people at Gilgal. 1 Samuel 12.2.
David was anointed King ^. Sam 16.14.
by the same Prophet but was afterward, after Saul's death, confirmed by the
people of Juda, 2. Sam. 2.4
and 7. years after by the Elders of 2. Sam. 5.3
Israel, the peoples deputies, at Chebron. And it is observable, that though
they knew that David was appointed King by God and anointed by his prophet, yet
they likewise knew that God allowed to themselves not only his confirmation,
but likewise the limitation of his power, for before his Inauguration they made
a league 2 Samuel 5.^
with him; that is, obliged him by compact to the performance of such
conditions as they thought necessary for the securing their Liberty. Nor is
it less remarkable, that when God gives directions to his people concerning
their government, he plainly leaves the Form to themselves: for he says not,
when thou shall have come into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee,
Statues super to Regem, But, Si Deuteronomy. 17.14.
Dixeris statuam. God says not, thou shall appoint a King over thee, But if
thou shall say, I will appoint; leaving it to their choice whether they would
say so or no. And it is plain in that place that God gives the people the
choice of their King, for he there instructs them whom they shall choose, Emedio
fratrum tuorum, one out of the midst of thy brethren; much more might we say,
if it were a less manifest Truth, that all just power of government is founded
upon these two bases, of Gods immediate command, or the Peoples consent. And
therefore whosoever arrogates to himself that power, or any part of it, that
cannot produce one of those two titles, is not a Ruler, but an Invader, and
those that are subject to that power, are not governed, but opp^est.

This being considered have not the people of England much reason to ask the
Protector this Question; Quis constunit te virum Principem and judicem super
nos? Who made thee a Prince and a Judge over us? If God made thee, make it
manifest to us. If the people, where did we meet to do it? Who took our
Subscriptions? To whom deputed we our authority? And when and where did those
Deputies make the choice? Sure these interrogations are very natural, and I
believe would much trouble his Highness his Council, and his Junto to answer.
In a word, that I may not tire my reader (who will not want proofs for what I
say, if he wants not memory;) If to change the government without the peoples
consent: If to dissolve their Representatives by sorce, and disanull their
Acts: If to give the name of the Peoples Representatives to consederates of his
own, that he may establish iniquity by a law: If to take away men's lives out
of all course of law, by certain Murderers of his own appointment, whom he
names, A High Court of Justice. If to decimate men's estates, and by his own
power to impose upon the people what Taxes he pleases: And to maintain all
this by force of Arms: If I say all this does make a Tyrant, his own
impudence cannot deny but he is as complete a one as ever has been since
there have been Societies of Men. He that has done, and does all this, is the
person for whose preservation the people of England must pray; but certainly if
they do, it is for the same Reason that the old woman of Syracuse prayed for the
long life of the Tyrant Dyonisius, least the Devil should come next.

Now if instead of Gods command or the peoples consent his Highness has no
other Title but force and fraud, which is to want all Title: And if to violate
all laws and propose none to Rule by, but those of his own will, Be to
exercise that Tyranie he has usurped, and to make his Administration
conformable to his claim: Then the first Question we proposed is a Question no
Longer.

But before we come to the second, being thnigs are more Easily perceived and
found by the description of their Exterior Accidents, and Qualities, then the
defining their Essences: It will not be Amiss to see, whether his Highness
has not as well the outward Marks and Characters by which Tyrants are Known
as he has their Nature and Essential properties: Whether he has not the
Skin of the Lion and Tail of the Fox, as well as he has the Violence of the
one and Deceit of the other. Now in this Delineation which I intend to make of
a Tyrant, all the Lineaments, all the Colors, will be found so Naturally to
correspond with the life, that it cannot but be doubted, whether his Highness be
the Original or the Copy. Whether I have in drawing the Tyrant Represented
him: or in Representing him Expressed a Tyrant. And therefore least I should be
suspected to deal un-sinceerly with his Highness and not to have Applied These
follownig Characters, but made them, I shall not give you any of my own
Stamping but such as I find in Plato, Aristotle, Tacitus, and his Highness own
Evangelist, Machiavell.

1. Almost all Tyrants have been first Captains and Generals for the people:
The Marks of a Tyrant. Arist. pol. lib. 5 c. 10. vid. match. Discor. lib. 1
cap. 40.
under pretenses of vindicating, or defending their Liberties. Vt Imperium
evertant Libertatem praeserunt; cum perverterunt, ipsam aggrediuntur; says
Tacitus An lib. 1. Idem alibi. Caterum libertas and Speciosa nomina pra.
texuntur, nec quisquam alunam servitium. and Demina ionem, sibi^^^cupivil, ut
non eadem ista vocabula us^^paret. Match. Discors. l. 2. c 13.
to subvert the present Government, they pretend Liberty for the people, when
the Government is down, they then Invade that liberty them selves, this needs
no Application.

2. Tyrants accomplshs their ends much more by fraud then force. Neither virtue
nor force (says Machiavell) il princ. cap. 9.
are so necessary, to that purpose as una Astutia fortunata, a Luckie craft:
which says he Disc. lib. 2. c 13.
without force has been often found sufficient, but never force without that.
And in another place Princ. c. 18.
he tells us their way is Aggirare I cervelli de gli huo. mini con Astutia etc.
With cunning plausible pretenses to impose upon men's understandings and in the
end they master those that had so little wit as to rely upon their faith and
integrity.

It Is but unnecessary to say, that had not his Highness had a faculty to be
fluent in his tears, and eloquent in his execrations: Had he not had spungie
eyes, and a supple conscience; and besides to do with a people of great faith,
but little wit: his courage and the rest of his Moral uertues, with the help
of his Janizaties, had never been able so sarr to advance him out of the reach
of justice, that we should have need to call for any other hand to remove him,
but that of the Hangman.

3. They abase all excellent persons and rid out of the way all that have noble
minds Et Terrae filios extollunt; and advance Sons of the Earth.

To put A ristotle into other words, they purge both Parliament and army til
they leave few or none there, that have either honor or conscience, either wit,
Interest, or Courage to oppose their designs. And in these Purgations (Says
Plato) (e) Tyrants do quite contrary to Physicians; for they purge us of our
humors, but Tyrants of our Spirits.

4. They dare suffer noe Assemblies. Not so much as Horse-races.

5. In all places they have their Spies and Dilators, that is, they have
their Fleetwoods, their Broughalls, their St. John's (besides innumerable
sinalle spies) to appear discontented and not to side with them; that under
that disguise they may get trust, and make discover^ers. They likewise have
their Emissaties to send with forged letters. Arist Pub. l. 5. cap. ^^. Plato
de Repub. l. 8. Ibid.
If any doubt this let him send to Major general Brown, and he will Satisfy
Him.

6. They Stir not without a guarde, nor his Highness without his life guarde.

7. They impoverish the people, that they may want the power, if they have the
will to attempt any thing against them. His Highness way is by taxes, Excise,
Decimations etc.

8. They make war to divert and busy the people: Arist. Ibid. Arist. Ibid.
Id Ibid. and Plato de Repub. lib. 2.
And besides to have a pretense to raise ^oneys and to make new Leavies, if
they either distrust their old forces or think them not ^fficient. The war
with Spain serves his Highness to this purpose, and upon noe other (...) was it
began at first, or is still continued. lawful, and furnish him with Title: his
Highness will likewise be then content to understand Scripture in their favor
and furnish them with Tithes.

10. Michiev. Pr. cap. 19. Machiavel ads And do grateful things themselves.
But that I omit; for I really am unprovided of an instance for his Highness, for
I have not yet heard of any good he has done himself. Arist. Ibid. Plato de
Repub. lib. 8. Id. and Plut. passim.
Things that are odious and distasteful they make others executioners of, and
when the people are discontented, they appease them with Sacrifi^ing those
Ministers they employ: I leave it to his Highness his Major generals to
ruminate a little upon this point.

11. In all things they pretend to be wonderful careful of the Public: to
give general accounts of the money they receive, which they pretend to be
leavied for the maintenance of the State, and the prosecuting of the war. His
Highness made an excellent Comment upon this place of Aristotle in his speech to
this Parliament.

12. All things set aside for Religious uses they set to sale; that while those
things last, they may exact the less of the people. The Cavaliers would
interpret this of the Dean and Chapters Lands.

13. They pretend inspirations from Gods, and responces from Oracles to
Authorize what they do, his Highness has been ever an Enthusiast. And as Hugh
Capet, in taking the Crown, pretended to be admonish't to it in a dream by St.
Valery, and St. Richard: so I believe will his Highness do the same, at the
instigation of St. Henry and St. Richard his two Sons.

14. Lastly, Above all things they pretend a love to God and Religion. This
Aristotle calls Artuae Tyrannic^rae potissimam; the surest and best of all the
Arts of Tyrants, and we al know his Highness has found it so by experience.
Histor. of Franc. Ibid. lib. 5. c. 11.
He has found indeed that in godliness there is great gain; and that
preaching and praying, well managed; will obtain other kingdoms as well as
that of Heaven. His indeed have been pious Arms, for he has conquered most by
those of the Church, by prayers and Preces and Lacrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae.
tears. But the truth is, were it nor for our honor to be governed by one
that can manage both the spiritual and temporal sword, and Roman like, to
have our Emperor our High Priest: We might have had preaching at a much
cheaper rate, and it would have cost us but our Tithes, which now costs us all.

Other marks and rules there are mentioned by Aristotle to know Tyrants by:
but they being unsuitable to his Hig^nes Actions, and impracticable by his
temper, I insist not on them. As among other things Pol. lib. 5. c. 11.
Aristotle would not have a Tyrant insolent in his behavior, nor strike people
But his Highness is naturally chollerique, and most call men Rogues, and go to
Cuffes. At last he concludes he should so fashion his manners, as neither to be
really good, nor absolutely bad, but half one, half the other. Now this half good
is too great a proportion for his Highness, and much more then his temper will
bear.

But to speak truths more seriously, and to conclude this first question.
Certainly what ever these characters make any man, it cannot be denied but his
Highness is, and then if he be not a Tyrant, we must confess we have no
definition nor description of a Tyrant left us; and may well imagine there is
no such thing in nature, and that it is only a notion and a name. But if there
be such a Beast, and we do at all believe what we see and feel; let us now
enquire, according to the method we proposed, whether this be a Beast of game
that we are to give law to, or a Beast of Prey to destroy with all means are
allowable and fair?

In deciding this question authors very much differ, Whether it be lawful to
kill a Tyrant?.
as far as at concerns supteame Magistrates, who degenerate into Tyrants. Some
think they are to be born with as bad Ames Parentem si aquns est; si non, seras.
Parents; and place them in the number of those misc. iess Sicut sterilitatem,
aut nimios imbres etc. Tacit.
that have no other cure but our patience. Others think they may be questioned
by that supreme law of the peoples safety; and that they are answerable to the
peoples Representatives for the bre cho their trust. But none, of sober sense,
makes private persons judges of their actions; which were indeed to subvert all
government. But on the other side, I find none, that have not been frighted or
corrupted out of their reason, that have been so great enemies to common
justice, and the Liberty of mankind; as to give any kind of indemnity to a
Usurper, who can pretend no title, but that of being stronger; nor challenge
the peoples obedience upon any other obligation but that of their necessity,
and fear. Such a person, as one out of all bounds of humane protection, all men
make the Ishmael, Genesis 16.12.
against whom is every man's hand, as his is against every man. To him they give
no more security then Cain, his fellow-murtherer and oppressor, promised to
himself, to be destroyed by him that found him first.

The reason why a Tyrants case is particular, and why in that every man has
that vengance given him, which in other cases is res^rved to God and the
Magistrate, cannot be obscure, if we rightly consider what a Tyrant is, what
his crimes are, and in what state he stands with the Common wealth, and with
every member of it. And certainly if we find him an enemy to al humane society,
and a subverter of all laws, and one that by the greatness of his villainies,
(...) of justice: we shall not at all think it strongs if then he have no
benefit from humane society, no protection from the law, and if, in his case,
justice dispenses with her forms. We are therefore to consider that the end,
for which men enter into society, is not barely to live, which they may do
dispersed, as other Animals: but to live happily; and a Life answerable to the
dignity and excellency of their kind. Out of Society, this happiness is not
to be had, for singly we are impotent, and desective, unable to procure those
things that are either of necessity, or ornament for our lives; and as unable
to desend and keep them when they are acquired. To Remedy these defects, we
Associate together that what we can neither enjoy nor keep, singly, by mutual
benesits and assistances, one of another, We may be able to do both. We cannot
possibly accomplish these ends, if we submit not our passions and appetites to
the laws of reason and justice. For the depravitie of man's will makes him as
unfit to live in Society, as his necessity makes him unable to live out of it.
And if that perverseness be not regulated by laws, men's appetites to the same
things; their avarice, their lust, their ambition would quickly make Society as
unsafe, or more, then Solitude it self, and we should associate only to be
nearer our misery and our ruin. That therefore by which we accomplish the
ends of a Sociable life, is our subjection, and submission to laws, these are
the Nerves and Sinews of every Society or Commonwealth; Without which they
must necessarily dissolve and fall asunder. De Civit. Dei.
And indeed (as Augustine says) those Societies where law and justice is not,
are not Commonwealths or Kingdoms, but Magna Latrocinia, Great Confederacies
of Thieves and Robbers. Those therefore that submit to no law are not to be
reputed in the Society of mankind, which cannot consist without a law.
Therefore Aristotle Pol. lib. 3. c. 12.
says, Tyranny is against the law of nature, that is, the law of humane
Society, in which humane nature is preserved. For this reason they deny a
Tyrant to be Partem Civitatis; for every part is subject to the whole: and a
Citizen (says the same author, Lib. 3. c. 8.
is he who is as well obliged to the duty of obeying, as he is capable of the
power of commanding. And indeed he does obey whilit he does command, that is,
be obeys the laws, which (says Tully) Macistratibus praesunt, ut Magistratus
praesunt Populo, are above the Magistrates, as the Magistrates are above the
people. And therefore a Tyrant that submits to no law; but his will and lust
are the law, by which he governs himself and others, is no Magistrate, no
Citizen or member of any Society, but an Ulcer and a disease that detroyes it,
and if it be rightly considered, a Commonwealth by falling into a Tyranny al
solutely looses that name, and is actually an other thing: Non est civitas quae
unius est viri (says Sophocles) that which is one man's, is no city. For there
is no longer King and People, or Parliament and people, but those names are
changed (at least their natures) into Masters and Servants, Lord and Slaves:
And Servorum non Civitas erit sed magna Familia (says Grotius) de jur. bell. l.
3. c. 8.
where all are Slaves, it is not a City but a great Family. And the truth is, we
are all members of Whithall, and when our master pleases, he May send for us
thither, and there bore through our Ears at the door posts. But to conclude, a
Tyrant, as we have said, being no part of a Commonwealth, nor submitting to
the laws of it, but making himself above al law: There is no reason he should
have the protection that is due to a member of a Commonwealth, nor any defense
from laws, that does acknowledge none. He is therefore in all reason to be
reckoned in the number of those Savage Beasts, that full not with others into
any heard: that have no other defense but their own strength; making a prey of
all that's weaker, and, by the same justice, being a prey to all that's stronger
then themselves.

In the next place, let it be considered, that a Tyrant making himself above
all law, and defending his injustice by a strength which no power of
Magistrates is able to appose: he becoms above all punishment, above all other
justice, then that he receives from the stroke of some generous hand. And
certainly the safety of mankind were but ill provided for, if there were no
kind of justice to reach great villainies, but Tyrants should be Immanitate
Scelerum tuti, secured by the greatness of their crimes. Our laws would be
then but Cobwebs indeed, made only to catch Flies; but not to hold Wasps or
Hornets: And it might be then said of all commonwealths, what was said of
Athens, That there only small Thieves were hanged, but the great ones were
free, and condemned the rest. But he that will secure himself of all hands,
must know he secures himself from none: He that flies justice in the Court,
must expect to find it in the street: and he that goes armed against every
man; arms every man against himself. Bellum est in eos, Qui judiciis Coerceri
non possunt (says Cicero) We have war with those against whom we can have no
law. The same Author, Cum duo sint decertandi genera, etc. There being two
ways of deciding differences, the one by judgment and Arbitration, the other
by Force: the one proper to men, the other to beasts. We must have recourse to
the latter, when the former cannot be obtained. And cerrainly by the law of
nature, Grot. de jur Bell. l. 1. c. 8.
ubi cessat Iudici^m, when no justice can be had, every man may be his own
Magistrate, and do justice for himself. Ibid.
For the law (says Grotius) that forbids me to pursue my right but by a course
of law: Certainly supposes, Vbi copia est Iudicii, where law and justice is to
be had: otherwise that law were a defense for injuries, not one against them:
and quite contrary to the nature of all laws; would become the protection of
the guilty against the innocent, not of the innocent against the guilty. Deuteronomy.
17.
Now as it is contrary to the laws of God and nature, that men, who are partial
to themselves, and therefore unjust to others, should be their own judges,
where others are to be had: so is it as contrary to the law of nature, and the
common safety of mankind, that when the law can have no place, men should be
forbidden to repel force by force, and so be left without all defense and
remedy against injuries. God himself left not the slave without remedy
against the cruel Master: And what Analogy can it hold with reason, that the
slave that is but his Masters money; and but part of his Household Stuff, should
find redress against the Injuries, and insolences of an imperious Master, and
a free people, who have no superior but their God, should have none at all
against the injustice and oppression of a Barbarous Tyrant? And were not the
incongruity fully as great, that the law of God permitting every man to kill a
thief, if he took him breaking open his house in the night: because then it
might be supposed he could not bring him to justice; But a Tyrant, that is the
common Robber of mankind, and whom no law can take hold on, his person should
be, Sacrosanct, cui nihil Sacrum aut Sanctum, to whom nothing is Sacred,
nothing Inviolable? But the vulger judge ridiculously like themselves. The
glister of things dazles their eyes, and they judge of them by their
appearances; and the colors that are put on them. For what can be more absurd
in nature, and contrary to all common sense, then to call him thief and Kill
him, that comes alone, or with a few to Robb me: And to call him Lord
Protector and obey him, that robbes me with Regiments and Troops? Ex. 21.
As if to rove with two or three Ships were to be a Pirate, but with fifty an
Admiral? But if it be the number of adherents only, not the cause, that makes
the difference between a Robber and a Protector: I wish that number were
defined, that we might know where the Thief ends, and the Prince beginns. And
be able to distinguish between a Robbery and a Tax. But sure no English man can
be ignorant, that it is his Birthright to be master of his own Estate; and
that none can command any part of it but by his own grant and consent, either
made expressly by himself, or Virtually by a Parliament. All other ways are
mere Robberies in other names: Auferre, Trucidare, Rapere, falsis nominibus
imperium, Ex. 22.2.
atque ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem apellant: To Rob, to extort, to murder
Tyrants falsely called to Govern, and to make desolation, they call to settle
peace: in every asseasement we are Robbed, the Excise is Robbery, the Custoumes
Robbery, and without doubt, when ever us prudent, it is always lawful, to kill
the thieves, whom we can bring to no other justice. Tacit. in Vid. Agric.
And not only lawful, and to do our selves right, but Glorious, and to
deserve of mankind, to free the World of that common robber, that universal
Pirat, under whom, and for whom, the lesser beasts prey. This Firebrand I would
have any way extinguished: This Ulcer I would have any hand to lance. And I
cannot doubt but God will suddenly sanctify some hand to do it, and bring down
that bloody and deceitful man, who lives not only to the misery, but the
infamy of our nation.

I should have reason to be much less confident of the justice of this
opinion, if it were new, and only grounded upon Collections and Interpretations
of my own. But herein if I am deceived, I shall however have the excuse to have
been drawn into that error, by the examples that are lest us by the greatest
and most virtuous, and the opinions of the wisest and gravest men, that have
lest their memories to posterity. Out of the great plenty of confirmations I
could bring for this opinion, from examples and authorities; I shall select a
very few; for manifest truths have not need of those supports; and I have as
little mind to tire my self as my Reader. de in Bell: l b 1. c. 4.


First therefore a Usurper that by only force posseseth himself of government,
and by force only keeps it, is yet in the State of war with every man, says
the learned Grotius: and therefore every thing is lawful against him, that is
lawful against an open enemy, whom every private man has a right to kill.
Luc. l b. 2.
Hostis hostem occidere volui says Scaevola to Porsena; when he was taken,
after he had failed in his attempt to kill him; I am an enemy and an enemy I
would have killed; which every man has a right to do.

Contra publicos hosts, and Majestatis Reos, omnis homo miles est (says
Tertullian,) Against common enemies, and those that are Traitors to the common
wealth, every man is a Soldier. This opinion the most Celebrated nations have
approved both by their laws and practices. The Grecians (as Zeaophon tells us)
who suffered not Murderers to come into their Templs, in those very Temples
they erected Statutes to those that killed Tyrants, thinking it fit to place
their deliverers amongst their Gods. Cicero was an eye witness of the honors
that were done such men, Graeci hominet etc. Pro milont
The Greeks (says he) attribute the honors of the Gods to those that killed
Tyrants: What have I seen in Athens and Other Cities of Greece! What Religion
Paid to such men! What songs! What Elogies! Plut. in Solon.
By which they are Consecrated to Immortallity, and almost Deified! In Athens,
by Solons Law, Death was not only decreed for the Tyrant that oppressed the
State, but for all those that took any Charge, Let his Highness junto market
this. De Repub. lib 8. In Public.
or did beat any office while the Tyranny remained. And Plato tells us the
ordinary Course they took with Tyrants in Greece. If (says he) the Tyrant can
not be expuls't by Accusing him to the Citizens; then by secret practices they
dispatch him.

Amongst the Romans the Valerean law was, si quis injussu populi etc. Whosoever took Magistracy upon him, without the command of the people it was
lawful for any man to kill him. Plutarch makes this law more Severe, ut
Injudicatum occidere eum liceret. Qui Dominatum concupisceret. That it was
lawful by that law, before any judgment past, to kill him that but Aspired to
Tyranny. Likewise the Consular law which was made after the suppression of the
Tyranny of the Decemvirate, made it lawful to kill any man that went about to
Create Magistrates, sine Provocatione etc. Without reference and Appeal to the
people. By these laws and Innumerable testimonies of Authors, it appears;
that the Romans, with the rest of their Philosophy, had learned from the
Grecians what was the natural Remedy against a lyrant: nor did they honor
these less that durst apply it. Who as Polybius Says (Speaking of
Conspiracies against Tyrants) were not, Hist. lib. 6.
Deterrimi Civium, sed Generosisiimi Quique, and Maximi Auimi; not the worst
and meanest of the Citizens, but the most Generous, and these of Greatest
virtue. So were most of these that conspired against Julius Caesar. He himself
thought Brutus worthy to succeed him in the Empire of the world: And Cicero,
who had the title of Pater Patriae; if he were not conscious of the design,
Yet he at least affected the honor of being thought so. Quae enim Res unquam
etc. What Act (says he) o Jupiter more glorious! Philip. 2.
more worthy of Eternal memory, has been done not only in this City, but
in the whole world! In this design, as the Troyan Horse, I willingly suffer my
self to be Included with the Princes. In the same place he tells us what all
virtuous Romans thought of the fact as well as he. Omnes Boni, Quantum in ipsis
fuit, Caesarem occiderunt: aliis consilium: aliis animus: aliis occasio defuit,
Voluntas nemini, All Good men (Says he) as much as lay in them killed Caesat:
Some wanted Capacity: some Courage: Others opportunity: But none the will to
do it. But yet we have not declared the extent of their severity against a
Tyrant. They exposed him to fraud, as well as force, and left him no security
in Oaths, and compacts: that neither law nor Religion might defend him, that
violated Both. Cum Tyranno Romany nulla fides, nulla jurisjurandi Religio,
Says Brutus in Appian: Appian. lib. 7. de Benef.
with a Tyrant the Romans think no faith to be kept, observe no Religion of an
Oath. Seneca gives the Reason; Quia quicquid erat, quo mihi cohaereret etc. For
what ever there was of mutual obligation betwixt us; his destroying the laws
of humane society, has dissolud: Sin.
so these that thought, that there was in hostem nefas, that a villainy might
be committed against an enemy: these that profes't, non minus just quam
fortiter arma gerere, Id.
to manage their arms with justice as well as Courage: these that thought
faith was to be kept even with the perfidious, Saul of
Regulus Qui longum semper same etc. Senec. in exerc. 4.7. Mich. Ephesians ad 5.
Nich.
yet they thought a Tyrant Could receive no injustice, but to be let live; and
that the most lawful way to destroy him was the Readiest. No matter wether by
force or fraud; for against Beasts of Prey, men use the toil and the net as
well as the spear and the lance. But so great was their detestation of a
Tyrant that it made some take their opinions from their passions; and vent
things which they could but ill justify to their morality they thought a
Tyrant had so absolutety forfeited all title to humanity, and all kind of
Protection they could give him or his: that they left his wife without any
other Guard for her chastity but age and deformity; and thought it not adultery
what was committed with her. Many mote testimonies might I bring; for it is
harder to make choice then to find plenty. But I shall conclude with
Authorities that are much more Authentic; and examples we may much more
sately Imitate.

The law of God it self decreed Certain Vtique morietur vir ille Deuteronomy. 17.12.
death to that man that would do presumptuously, and submit to no Decision of
Justice. Who can Read this and think a Tyrant ought to live? But Certainly
neither that, nor any other law were to any effect, if there were no way to put
it in execution. But in a Tyrants Case Process and Citation have no place, and
if we will only have Formal Remedies against him, we ave sure to have none.
Theres' small hopes of Justice where the Malefactor has a power to condemn
the Judge. All remedy therefore against a Tyrant is Ehuds dagger, without which
all our laws were fruitless, and we helpless. This is that high Court of
justice where Moses brought the Egyptian: whether Ehud brought Eglon: Samson
the Phililtins: Samuel Agag: and Jehoiada the she Tyrant Athaliah.

Let us a little consider in particular these several examples, and see
whether they may be proportioned to our purpose.

First as to the case of Moses and the Egiptian: Ex. 2.11.12
certainly every Englishman has as much call as Moses, and more cause then he,
to slay this Egiptian that is always laying on burdens and always smiting
both our brethren and our selves. For as to his call, he had no other that we
read of, but the necessity his brother stood in of his help. He looked on his
brethrens burdens, and seeing an Egiptian smiting an Hebrew, knowing he was out
of the reach of all other kind of justice, he slew him. Certainly this was and
is as lawful for any man to do, as it was for Moses, who was then but a
private man, and had no authority for what he did, but what the law of nature
gives every man; to oppose force to force, and to make justice where he finds
none. As to the cause of that action, we have much more to say then Moses had:
He saw one Hebrew smitten, we many Englishmen murderd; He saw his brethrens
burdens, and their blows, we our brethrens burdens, imprisonments and deaths.
Now sure if it were lawful for Moses to kill that Egiptian that oppressed one
man, being there was no way to procure an ordinary course of justice agains
him: It cannot be but absurd to think it unlawful to kill him vid. Et.
Governador Christiano. c. 8. p 40. Qualquiera ciudadano me de repeter la fuerta
etc.
that oppresses a whole nation, and one that justice as little reaches as it
defends.

The example of Ehud shows us the natural and almost the only remedy against
a Tyrant, and the way to free an oppressed people from the slavery of an
insulting Moabite, it is done by prayers and tears, with the help of a Dagger,
by (b) crying to the Lord, and the left hand of an Ehud. Devotion and action
go well together; for believe it, a Tyrant is not of that kind of Devil that
is to be cast out by only fasting and prayer: And here the Scripture shows us
what the Lord thought a fit message to send a Tyrant from himself: Judge. c. 3.
v. 11.19.20. v. 15.
A Dagger of a cubit in his Belly, and every worthy man that desires to be an
Ehud, a deliverer of his Country, will strive to be the messenger.

We may here likewise observe in this and many places of judges, that when the
Israelites fell to Idolatry, v. 20.
which of all Siunes certainly is one of the greatest: God Allrighty to
proportion the punishment and the offense, still delivered them into the hands
of Tyrants; which sure is one of the greatest of all plagues.

In the story of Samson it is manifest, Judge. 15.
that the denying him his wife, and after the burning her and her father, which
though they were great, yet were but private injuries, he took for sufficient
grounds to make war upon the Philistians, being himself but a private man,
and not only not assisted, but opposed (a) by his servile country men. He
knew what the law of nature allowed him; where other laws have no place, and
thought it a sufficient justification for smiting the Philistines hip and thigh
to answer for himself, v. 11.
that as they did unto him, so had be done unto them.

Now that which was lawful for Samson to do against many oppressors, why is
it unlawful for us to do against one? are our injuries less? out Friends and
Relations are daily murdered before our faces. Have we otherwise for
reparation? let them be named and I am silenced. But if we have none, the
firebrarnds, or the jawbone, the first weapons our just fury can lay hold on,
may certainly be lawfully employed against that uncircumcised Philistin. that
oppresses us. v. 14.
We have too the opposition and discouragements that Samson had, and therefore
have the more need of his courage and resolution. As he had the men of Judah,
so we have the men of Levi, crying to us out of the Pulpit, as from the top of
the Rock Etam, know you not that the Philistin is a Ruler over you? The truth
is, they would fain make him so, and bind us with Samson in new cords, but we
hope they will become as Flax, and that they will either loose from our hands,
or we shall have the courage to cut them.

Upon the same grounds of Retatiation did Samuel do justice with his own hand
upon the Tyrant Agag. 1. Sam. 15.33.
As thy sword (says the Prophet) has made Women childlesse, so shall thy
mother be childlesse amongst Women, nor is there any law more natural and more
just.

How many mothers has our Agag, for his own ambition, made childlesse? how many
children Fatherless? how many have this reason to hew this Amalakite in pieces
before the Lord? And let his own relations, and all theirs that are
confederates with him, beware, least men come at last to revenge their own
relations in them. in Discors.
They make many a woman husbanlesse, many a father childlesse. Their wives may
come at last to know what it is to want a husband, and themselves to loose their
children. Let them remember what their great Apostle Machiavell tells them;
that in contestations for the preserving their liberty, people many times use
moderation; but when they come to vindicate it, their rigor exceeds all mean,
like beasts that have been kept up, and are afterward let loose, they always
are more fierce and cruel.

To conclude with the example Jehoiada has left us. 2. Kings. cap. 11. 2.
Chron. 23
Six years he hid the right Heir of the Crown in the house of the Lord, and
without all doubt, amongst the rest of Gods services there he was all that time
contriving the destruction of the Tyrant, that had aspired to the Crown by the
destruction of those that had the right to it. Jehoiada had no pretense to
authorice this action; but the equity and Justice of the act it self. He
pretended no immediate command from God for what he did, nor any authority from
the Sanedrym, and therefore any man might have done what Jehoiada did as
lawfully, that could have done it as effectually as he. Now what citation was
given to Athaliah, what appearance was she called to before any court of
justice: Chron. 23.14.
her fact was her trial, she was without any expostulation taken forth of the
Ranges and onley let live till she got out of the Temple, that that Holy place
might not be defiled by the blood of a Tyrant, which was fitter to be shed on a
dunghill, and so they slew her at the Hors-gate. And by the Kings house, the
very White Hall, where she had caused the Blood-Royall to be spilt, and which
her self had so long anjustly possessed, there by Providence did she receive her
punishment where she had acted so great a part of her crimes. How the people
approved of this Glorious action of de^^roying a Tyrant, this Chapter tells us
at the last verse. And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the City was
quiet, after that they had slain Athalian with the sword. 2 Chronicles. 23.14. 2.
Chron. 24.16.
And that it may appear they no less honored the Authors of such actions,
then other Nations did; as in his lifetime they obeyed Jehoiada as a King, so
after his death, for the good he had done in Israel (says the Scripture) they
likewise buried him amongst the Kings.

I (...) conclude this story without observing that Jehoiada commanded, Mr.
Sirdercombs judge and jury may likewise consider of this point.
that whosoever followed Athaliah should be put to death Letting us see what
they deserve that are Confederates with Tyrants and will side with them, and
but appear to defend them, or allow them, his Highness his Counsel, his Junto,
and the Agaes of his Janissaries, may, if they, lease, take notice of this and
repent, least they likewise perish. And likewise his Highness his Chaplains, and
Tryers who are to admit none into the ministry that will preach liberty with
the Gospel; may if they think fit, observe, that with the Tyrant sell Mattan
the Priest of Baal. And indeed none but Baals prie^^s will preach for Tyrants.
And certainly those priests that Sacrifice to out Baal, our Idol of a
Magistrate, deserves as well to be hanged before their Pulpits, 2 Chronicles. 23.17.
as ever Matian did to fall before his Altars.

I should think now I had said much more then enough to the second question,
and should com to the third and last I proposed in my method: but I meet with
two objections lying in my way.

Job. 1.


To the first I answer with learned Milton, that if God commanded these things,
it is a sign they were lawful and are commendable. But secondly, as I observed
in the relations of the examples themselves; Neither Samson nor Samuel alleged
any other cause or reason for what they did, but retaliation, and the apparent
justice of the actions themselves. Nor had God appeared to Moses in the Bush
when he slew the Egyptian; nor did Jehoiada alleadg any Prophetical authority
or other call to do what he did, but that common call which all men have, to
do all actions of justice that are within their power, when the ordinary
course of justice ceases.

Third Question.


Having showed what a Tyrant is, his marks and practices: I can scarce persuade
my self to (...) prove of Advantage to the Common wealth or not? for methinkes
it is to enquire whether it is better the man die or the Impostume be lanc't, or
the Gangragen'd limb be cut off? But yet there be some whose Cowardice and
Avarice furnish them with some Arguments to the contrary; and they would feign
make the world believe, that to be base and degenerate, is to be Cautious and
prudent: and what is in truth a servile fear, they falsely call a Christian
patience. It will not be therefore a miss to make appear that there is indeed
that necessity, which we think there is, of saving the vineyard of the Common
wealth if possible, by destroying the wild boar that is broke into it. We have
already showed that it is lawful, and now we shall see whether it is expedient.
First I hae already told you that, to be under a Tyrant is not to be a common
wealth; but a great Family, consisting of master and Slaves. Vir bone servorum
nulla est usquam civitas says an old Poet a nember of Slaves makes not a
City. So that whilst this Monster lives we are not members of a common
wealth, but only his living tools and Instruments, which he may employ to what
use he pleases. Servi tua est fortuna Ratio ad te nihil says an other; thy
condition is a slaves; thou art not to enquire a Reason, not must we think we
can continue long in the condition of slaves, and not degenerate into the
habits and temper that is natural to that condition: our minds will grow low
with our fortune, and by benig accoustumed to live like slaves, we shall become
unfitt to be any thing Else Etiam fera animalia si clausa teneas virtutis
obliviscuntur says Tacitus Hist. lib. 4.
the fiercest creatures by long constraint, loose their courage. And says Sr.
Francis Bacon, the blessing of Issachar and that of Judah falls not upon one
people, to be Asses crouching under Burdens, and to have the Spirit of Lions.
And with their courage it is no wonder (...) they loose their fortune as the
Effect with the cause, and Act as Ignominiously abroad, as they suffer at home.
It Is Machiavells Discors lib. 1. c. 24.
observation that the Roman Armies that were all ways victorious under
confulls, All the while they were under the slavery of the Decemviri never
prospered. And certainly people have Reason to fight but faintly where they
are to gain the victory against themselves; when every success shall be a
confirmation of their slavery, and a new link to their chain.

But we shall not only loose out Courage which is a useless and an unsafe
virtue under a Tyrant, but by degrees we shall, after the example of our Master,
All turn perfidious, Deceitful Irreligious, flatterers, and what ever else is
villainous and Infamous in Mankind. See but to what a degree we are come to
already: can there any Oath be found so fortifyed by all Religious Ties; which
we easily sinde not a Distinction to break, when either profitt or Danger
persuades us to it? Do we Remember any Engagements; or if we do, have we any
shame to break them? Can any Man think with patience upon what we have
profes't, when he sees what we vildly do, and Tamely Suffer? what have we of
nobillity among'st us but the name; the luxury and the vices of It? poor
wretches these that now carry that title, are so far from having any of the
virtues, that should grace and indeed give them their titles, Docter Locker
Docter Owen Mr. lenkins etc.
that they have not so much as the generous vices that attend greatness, they
have lost all Ambition and Indignation. As for our Ministers; what have they,
or indeed desire they, of their Calling, but the Tithes? How do these horrid
prevaricators search for distinctions to piece contrary Oaths? How do they
Rake Scriptures for flatteries? And Impudently Apply them to his monstrous
Highness? what is the City but a Great Tame Beast, that eats and Carries and
cares not who Rides it? what is the thing called a Parliament but a Mock? Composed
of a people that are only suffered to sit there because they are known to
have no verute, After the Exclution of all others that were but suspected to
have Any? What are they but pimpes of Tyranny, who are only Employed to draw In
the people to prostitut their Liberty? What will not the army fight for? what
will they not fight against! What are they but Janissaries, slaves themselves;
and making all others so? what are the people in General but Knaves, Fools,
and Cowards; principled for Ease, vice and Slavery? This is our temper, this
Tyranny has brought us to already; and if it continus, the little virtue that
is yet left to stock the Nation, Disc. lib. 3. cap. 3.
must totally extinguish, and then his Highness has completed his work of
Reformation. And the truth is till then his Highness can not be secure. He must
not endure virtue, for that will not endure him. He that will maintain Tyranny
must kill Brutus says Machiavell. A Tyrant says Plato (c) must dispatch all
virtuous persons or he can not be safe de Repub. lib. 8.
so that he is brought to that un happy necessity, either to live amongst Base
and wicked persons, or not to live at all.

Nor must we expect any Cure from our patience Inganno si gli huomini, Disc.
lib. 2. cap. 14.
says Machiavell (a) credendo con la humilit a vincere la superbia. Men
deceive themselves that think t0 (...) weak, it is in the winter of his fortune
when this Serpent bites not: we must not therefore suffer our selves to be
couzened with hopes of his amendment: for Nemo unquam Tacit. Hist. lib. 1.
Imperium flagitio quaesitum bonis artibus exercuit; never did any man manage
the Government with justice that got it by villainy. The longer the Tyrant lives
the more the Tirannicall humor increases in him, says Plato, de Repub. lib.
like those beasts that grow more cursed as they grow old. New occasions daily
happen, that necessitate them to new mischiefs, and he must defend one villainy
with another.

But suppose the contrary of all this, and that his Highness were vi
Dominationis convulsus, and mutatus, changed to the better by great fortune (of
which he yet gives no symptoms) what notwithstanding could be more miserable
then to have no other security for our liberty, no other law for our saftie,
then the will of a man, though the most just living? Cic. Phil. 4.
we have all our beast within us, and whosoever (says Aristotle) Pol. lib. 3.
c. 12.
is Governed by a man without a law, is governed by a man and by a beast. Etiam
si non sit molestus (a) Dominus; tamen est miserrimum posse si velit, says
Tully, Though a master does not Tyrannize yet it is a most miserable thing that
it is in his power to do so if he will. If he be good, so was Nero for five
years, and how shall we be secure that he will not change? Besides the power
that is allowed to a good man, we may be sure will be claimed and taken by an
ill. And therefore it has been the coustume of good princes Lycurgus.
Theopomp. plut. in Lycurg.
to abridge their own power, it may be distrusting themselves, but certainly
fearing their Successors, to the chance of whose being virtuous; they would not
hazard the welfare of their people. An unlimited power therefore is to be
trusted to none, which if it does not find a Tyrant, commonly makes one: or if
one uses it modestly it is no argument that others will, and therefore Augustus
Caesar must have no greater power given him, then you would have Tiberius take.
And (c) Ciceroes moderation is to be trusted with a consideration, that there
are others to be consuls as well as he. Vid Orat. Caesaris in Sallust. consp.
cat.


But before I press this business farther, if it needs be any farther pressed,
that we should endeavor to rescue the honor, the virtue and liberty of our
nation I shall answer to some few objections that have occurred to me. This I
shall do very briefly.

Some I find of a strange opinion, that it were a generous and a noble action
to kill his Highness in the field; but to do it privately they think it
unlawful, but know not why. As if it were not generous to apprehend a thief
till his sword were drawn and he in a posture to defend himself and kill me.
But these people do not consider that whosoever is poslest of power any time,
will be sure to engage so many either in guilt or profit, or both, that to go
about to throw him out by open force, will very much hazard the total ruin of
the Commonwealth. A Tyrant is a Devil that tears the body in the exorcising,
Sueton. in vit. Caleg.
and they are all of Caligulas temper, that if they could, they would have the
whole frame of Nature fall with them. It Is an opinion that deserves no other
refutation then the manifest absurdity of it self; that it should be lawful
for me to destroy a Ti^ant with hazard, blood, and confusion, but not without.

An other objection and more common is the fear of what may succeed if his
Highness were removed, one would think the World were bewitched. I am fallen
into a ditch where I shall certainly perish if I lie, but I refuse to be helped
out for fear of falling into another, I suffer a certain misery for fear of a
contingent one, and let the disease kill me because there is hazard in the
cure. Is not this that ridiculous policy, Ne moriare, mori. To die for fear
of dying. Sure it is frenzy not to desire a change when we are sure we cannot be
worse. Et non incurrere in pericula, ubi quies centi paria metnuntur, Seneca.
and not then to hazard, when the danger and the mischiefs are the same in
lying still.

Hitherto I have spoken in general to all Englishmen, now I adresse my
discourse particularly to those that certainly best deserve that name, our
selves, that have fought, however unfortunately, for our Liberties under this
Tyrant; and in the end couzened by his oaths, and tears, have purchased
nothing but our slavery with the price of our blood. To us particularly it
belongs to bring this Monster to justice, whom he has made the instruments of
his Villainy, and sharers in the Curse and Detestation that is due to himself
from all good men. Others only have their Liberty to vindicate, we our Liberty
and our honor: We engaged to the people with him, and to the people for him,
and from our hands they may justly expect a satisfaction of punishment, being
they cannot have that of performance. What the people at present endure, and
posterity shall suffer, will be all laid at our doors: for only we under God
have the power to pull down this Dagon which we have set up. And if we do it
not, all mankind will repute us Approovers of all the Villanyes he has done:
and authors of all to come. Shall we that would not endure a king attempting
Tyranme, shall we suffer a professed Tyrant? We that resisted the Lion assailing
us, Cic. in Epist. ad Octav.
shall we submit to the Woolf tearing us? If there be no remedy to be found, we
have great reason to exclaim, Vtinam te potius (Carole) retinuissemus quam
hunc habuissemus, non quod ulla sit optanda servitus, sed quod exdignitate
Domini minus turpis est conditio servi. We wish we had rather endured thee (o
Charles) then have been condemned to this mean Tyrant, not that we desire any
kind of slavery, but that the quality of the Master something graces the
condition of the slave.

But if we consider it rightly what our duty, our engagements, and our honor
exact from us, both our safety and our interest oblige us to, And it is as
unanswerable, in us, to discretion as it is to virtue, to let this viper live.
For first he knows very well it is only we that have the power to hurt him, and
therefore of us he will take any course to secure himself: he is conscious to
himself how falsely and perfidiously he has dealt with us, and therefore he
will always fear that from our revenge, which he knows he has so well
deserved.

Lastly he knows our principles, how directly contrary they are to that
Arbitrarie power he must govern by, and therefore he may reasonably suspect,
that we that have already ventured our lives against Tirannie, will always
have the Will, when we have the opportunity, to do the same again.

These considerations will easily persuade him to secure himself of us, if we
prevent him not, and secure our selves of him. He reads in his Practice of
Piety (a) the Diviene Padron, Match. pr. c. 5
etc. He that makes himself master of a city, that has been accoustumed to
Liberty, if he destroies it not, he must expect to be destroyed by it. And we
may read too in the same Author, and believe him, that Ibid. c. 3
those that are the occasion that one becomes powerful; alvvaies ruin, that
is, if they want the wit and courage to secure themselves.

Now as to our interest, we must never expect that he will ever trust those,
that he has provoked and fears: He will be sure to keep us down least we
should pluck down him. It Is the rule that Tirants observe, when they are in
power never to make much use of those that heipt them to it, and indeed it is
their interest and security not to do it: for those that have been the
authors of their greatness being conscious of their own merit, they are bold
with the Tirant and less industrious to please him. They think all he can do
for them is their due, and still they expect more: and when they fail in their
expectations, (as it is impossible to satisfy them) their disappointments make
them discontented, and their discontents dangerous. Therefore all Tirants
follovv the example of Dionysius, who was said to use his friends, as he did
his Bottles, when he had use for them ^e kept them by him, when he had none,
that they should not trouble him and lie in his way, he hung them up.

But to conclude, This already overlong Paper, let every man to whom God has
given the Spirit of Wisdom and Courage, be persuaded by his Honor, his
Safety, his own good and his Countries, and indeed the duty he ovves to his
Generation, and to Mankind, to endeavor by all Rational means to free the
World of this Pest. Let not other nations have the occasion to think so
meanly of us, as if we resolved to sit still and have our Ears bored: or
that any discouragement or disappointments can ever make us desist from
attempting our Liberty till we nave purchased it, either by this Monsters
death or by our own. Our nation is not yet so barren of virtue, that we want
noble examples to follow amongst our selves. The brave Sindercombe has showed
as great a mind, as any old Rome could boast of, and had he lived there, his
name had been registered with Brutus, and Cato; and he had had his Statues as
well as they.

But I will not have so sinister an opinion of our selves (as little
generositie as Slaverie has left us) as to think so great a virtue can want
its Monuments even amongst us. Certainly in every virtuous mind he e^re
Statues reared to Sindercombe. When ever we read the Elogies of those that
have died for their Country: when we admire those great examples of
magnanimity, that have tired Tirants cruelties: When we extol their
constancy, whom neither bribes nor terrors could make betray their Friends:
It Is then we erect Sindercombe Statues, and grave him Monuments; Where all that
can be said of a great and noble mind, we justly make an Epitaph for him. And
though the Tirant caused him to be Smothered, least the people should hinder an
open murder; yet he will never be able either to smother his memory, or his
own Villainy. His poison was but a poor and common device to impose only on
those that understood not Tirants practices, and are unacquainted (if any be)
with his cruelties and falsehoods. He may therefore if he please take away the
Stake from Sindercombs Grave; and if he have a mind it should be known how he
died, let him send thither the Pillowes and Feather-bedds with which Barkstead
and his Hangman smothered him. But to conclude, ^et not this Monster think
himself the more secure that he has suppressed one great Spirit, and what may,
Clccil and Toop expect for their Treachery an perjury?
he may be confident that, Longus post illum sequitur or do idem petentium
decus.

There Is a great Roll behind, even of those that are in his own muster-Rowles,
that are ambitious of the name of the Deliverers of their Country: and they
know what the action is that will purchase it. His bed, his table is not
secure, and he stands in need of other Guards to defend him against his own.
Death and destruction pursues him where ever he goes: they follow him every
where, Job. 20.
like his fellow-travellers, and at last they will come upon him like armed
men. Darkness is hid in his secret places, a Fire not blown shall consume
him; Whitehall. Hampton Court. etc.
it shall go ill with him that is left in his Tabernacle. He shall flee from
the Iron weapon, and a bow of Steel shall strike him through. Because he has
oppressed, and forsaken the poor; because he has violently taken away a House
(a) which he builded not: We may be confident, and so may be, that ere long, v.
5.
all this will be accomplished: For the Triumphing of the wicked is but short,
and the joy of the Hypocrite but for a moment. Though his Excellency He has
now left that title for Highness; and will shortly leave that for King.
mount up to the Heavens, and his Head reaches unto the Clouds, yet he shall
perish for ever like his own dung. They that have seen Him shall say, where is
He.

POSCRIPT.
Courteous Reader, Expect another Sheet or two of Paper of this Subject, if I
escape the Tyrants hands, although he gets (in the interim) the Crown upon his
Head, which he has (underhand) put his Confederates on to petition his
acceptance thereof.


