Pray be not Angry: OR, THE WOMEN'S NEW LAW: WITH Their several Votes, Orders,
Rules, and Precepts, to the London-Prentices, both in Cheap Side,
Lumbard-street, Fish-street, Gracious-street, Broad-street, Fleet Street,
Newgate-market, the Strand, Covent Garden; and all other places whatsoever, in
and about the City of LONDON, or Parts adjacent. LIKEWISE, Their Rare
Presidents and Instructions, both to young men and old, for the choosing of a
good Wife, or virtuous Mistress; and how they shall know and distinguish an
honest Woman from an enticing, and dissembling Whore.

Printed according to Order; Being pleasant for Young Men, profitable for
Old-men, and hurtful to none.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1656.

To the READER.
MUsing with my self, in a time of sadness, and having little pleasure to pass
the time withal, being lately exasperated and interwoven in the Thrids of
Choler against some Wasps of the Female Sex, (or certain Lavia, Flora, and
Lais Curtizans, three notorious Strumpets,) retained a Resolution, (so soon as
I had brake and violated their Sting and Engine) to take Pen in hand, and
charactarize the Qualities of such deceitful and inflaming Angels or Devils, as
Plato says, for so he terms all such Women, who imitate and tread the steps
of Semiramis of Babylon, that both and after her husbands death, she waxed so
unsatiable in carnal lust, that two men at one time could not satisfy her
desire; and so by her unsatiableness, at length all Persia grew full of Whores.
But before I proceed further, give me leave to whispher one word in your ear,
viz. Whatever you think privately, I wish you to conceal it with silence, left
in starting up to find fault, you prove your selves guilty of these monstrous
accusations, which are here following against such lascivious Theodora's; and
those which spurn, if they feel themselves touched, prove themselves stark
fools, in bewraying their galled backs to the world; for we intend not to
reflect on any, but such as when they hear it, will go about to reprove it: And
as I intend not to speak much of those that are good, so shall I speak too
little of those that are naught; but yet I will not altogether condemn the bad,
(unless they be perfect Jezabels) desiring rather to better the one, by
paralleling the other: for there is no woman so good, but may amend, knowing
that the cleerest River that is has some dirt in the bottom; and as Gold is
not all of one Picture, no more are women all of one disposition: But if this
sauce prove too sharp for some, and the flowers too strong for others, I desire
you with patience to hear the rest; for indeed the best is behind: And far more
rarer things, (than either Iceland Dogs, or Venice Glasses) you may expect from
him, who assures himself

Yours in the way of Honesty, G. Thorowgood.

Pray be not angry: Or, The Women's new Law.
THE Philosophers which lived in the old time, their Opinions were so hard of
Marriage, that they never delighted therein: for one of them being asked, why
he married not? he answered it was too soon: And afterward when he was old,
being asked the same question, he then replied, It was too late. And as another
well said, Many are the troubles which come galloping at the heels of a woman,
which many young men before hand do not think of. The world is not all made of
Oatemeal; nor all is not Gold that glisters; nor a smiling countenance is no
certain testimonial of a merry heart; nor the way to Heaven is not strewed with
Rushes; no more is the Cradle of ease in a woman's lap. For know; it is an old
saying, That he which has a fair wife, and a white horse, shall never be
without troubles: for commonly a woman that has a fair face, is ever matched
with a cruel heart, and their modest countenance with merciless minds: she can
both smooth and sooth, and is so cunning in the art of flattery, as if she had
been bound Prentice twice seven years to the Trade: They have Sirens tongue to
allure thee, and Circes cunning to inchant thee: They bear two tongues in one
mouth like Judas, and two hearts in one breast like Magus; the one full of
smiles; the other, full of frowns: they can with the Satyr, out of one mouth,
blow hot and cold. And what of all this? truly nothing, but to tell thee, That
an unconstant and unchaste woman is better lost than found, better forsaken,
then taken; but a constant, chaste, and virtuous woman, does far excel the most
purest and refinest gold.

A lewd and froward woman is compared to a Pumice-stone; for which way way
soever you turn it, it is full of holes: Even so is such a ones heart, for if
she retains love at one hole, she excludes it at another. O they have delicate
tongues, which will ravish and tickle the ears of giddy-headed young men; so
foolish, that they think themselves happy, if they can but kiss the Dazie
whereon their Love did tread: who if the frown, then he descends presently into
hell; but if she smile, then he is carried with Wings up into heaven. Is there
not an old saying, That when a Dog wags his tail, he loves his Master? So many
think, that if a woman smile on them, she is presently over head and ears in
love: one must wear her Glove, another her Garter, another her colors of
delight, and another shall spend and live on the spoil which the gets from
all the rest: Know therefore, If thou will give thy body to the Chyrurgeon, and
thy soul to the Devil, such Sirens are for thy diet.

It is strange to see the mad feats of such Girls; they will now be merry, then
again sad; now laugh, then weep; now sick, then presently whole: all things
which like not them, are naught; and if it be never so bad, if it like them, it
is excellent. O it is death for women to be denied the thing which they demand,
and yet they will despise things given unasked! When a woman wants any thing,
she will flatter and speak fair; not much unlike the flattering Butcher, who
gently claweth the Ox, when he intends to knock him on the head. Nay more,
they are called Night-Crows, for that commonly in their Chamber they will make
request for such toys, as comes in their heads in the day. Women know their
time to work their craft; for in the night they will work a man like Wax, and
draw him like as the Adamant does the Iron: and having once brought him to the
bent of her Bow, then she makes request for a Gown of the new fashion stuff,
for a Petticoat of the finest Stammel, or for a Hat of the newest fashion: and
will never be quiet, if her mind be set upon a thing, till she have it. So that
if her husband put her off with delays, then her forehead will butt full of
frowns, as if she threatened to make Clubs Trump, and he (poor soul) never a
black Card in's hand: For with her cruel tongue she will ring him such a peal,
that one would think the Devil were come from hell, calling of him Rogue,
Rascal, Wittal, Sot, etc. saying, she could live without such a faggot-fac'd
hornifi'd Coxcomb, as he, with a wannion to him.

Sure I am, men may live without women, but women cannot live without men: For
Venus, whose beauty was excellent fair, yet when she needed a man's help, she
took Vulcan, a club-footed Smith. And therefore if a woman face glister, and
her gesture pierce the Marble Wall; or if her Tongue be so smooth as Oil, and
so soft as silk, and her words so sweet as honey; or if she were a very Ape,
for wit, or a baggage of Gold for wealth; or if her personage have stolen away
all that Nature can afford, and she be decked up in gorgeous apparel, then a
thousand to one but she will love to walk where she may get acquaintance, and
acquaintance brings familiarity, and familiarity sets all follies abroach;
and twenty to one, that if a woman love gadding, but that she will pawn her
honesty to please her fantasy.

Alas, alas! Man must be at all the cost, and yet live by the loss; a man must
take all the pains, and women spend all the gains; a man must watch and till,
and look what he gets in seven years, a Wanton Gill will spread it abroad
with a fork in one year, and yet little enough to serve her turn, but a great
deal too little to get her good will.

What shall I say more, but as they were by God created, and by Nature formed,
and therefore by policy and wisdom to be avoided; for good things abused, are
to be refused, or else for a months pleasure, she may hap to make thee go
stark naked: she will give the rost-meat, but she will beat thee with the spit:
If thou have Crowns in thy purse, she will be thy hearts gold, until she leave
not a whit of white money: they are like Summer-birds, for they will abide no
storm, but flock about thee in the pride of thy glory, and fly from thee in the
storms of affliction; for they aim more at thy wealth then at thy person, and
esteem more thy money, then virtuous qualities.

In a word, they esteem of a man without money, as a horse does of a fair
stable without meat.

These things being wisely considered, who would submit unto their alluring
Angles, and bow at their becks? and who would impoverish himself, to enrich
such Harlots, to make them swim in their silks, and make Gill a Gentlewoman,
insomuch that she cares not a penny for the finest, nor a fig for the proudest:
she is as good as the best, although she have hardly as much honesty as will
serve her own turn, suffering every man's fingers as deep in the dish, as thine
are in the platter, and every man to angle where thou castest thy hook, holding
up to all that come, not much ^^like a Barbers Chair, that so soon as one Knave
is out, another is in, a common hackney for every one that will ride, a boat
for every one to row in.

Now if thy wealth do begin to fail, then she bids thee farewell, and gives
thee the adieu in the Devils name: not much unlike the Knavish Porters in
Bristow, who will cry A new Master, a new; and hang up the Old.

To ma^e thee strongest therefore, to strive against these Serpents, it is the
Law and Precept of sundry modest women, to all men whatsoever, To beware of six
ki^ds of women, and to take heed that they match not themselves to any one of
them; that is to say, If a woman be never so comely, beautiful of body, sober
of countenance, sober of countenance, eloquence in speech, and adorned with
virtue, yet they have one ill quality or other, which overthrows all the rest.

Beware also how thou matchest unto a Jezabel widow, for she will be the cause
of a thousand woes: if rich, then she will govern: if poor, then thou art
plagued both with beggary and bondage: If thou show thy self sparing, she will
say, thou shall not pinch her of that which is her own; and if thou do any
thing contrary to her mind, she will say, her other husband was more kind: If
thou chance to dine from home, she will bid thee go sup with thy harlots
abroad: If thou go abroad, and spend any thing before thou come home, she
will say, A beggar I found thee, and a beggar thou meanest to leave me. If thou
stay always at home, she will say, Thou art happy thou have gotten a wife that
is able to maintain thee idle. If thou carve her the best morsel on the Table,
though she take it, yet she will take it scornfully, and say, She once had a
husband that would let her cut where she liked her self. And if thou come in
well disposed, thinking to be merry, and entreating her with fair words, she
will call thee dissembling hypocrite, saying, Thou speak me fair with thy
tongue, but thy heart is on thy Minions abroad. Besides this, she will not
trust thee with a handsome Maid in thy house, but must have a brended slut,
like a Hell-hag, with a pair of paps like a pair of dung-pots; so that if upon
just occasion thou throwest the platters at thy Maids head, seeing thy meat
brought in by such a slut, and so sluttishly dressed, then will thy Widow take
pepper in the nose, and stamp, and stare, and look so sour, as if she had come
but even then from eating of Crabs, saying, If thou had not married with me,
thou would have been glad of the worst morsel that is here, thou Cornuted
Beast thou.

Lo here is a life, but it is as wearisome as Hell; for if they kiss in the
morning, being friends, yet ere Noon are ready to throw the house out at
window. A sad life, and a mad life! For note, that one having married with a
Widow, being one day at a Sermon, heard the Preacher say, Whosoever will be
saved, let him take up his Cross and follow me. This mad fellow after Sermon
was ended; took his wife upon his back, and came to the Minister, saying, Here
is my Cross, I am ready to follow thee whither thou will.

Another merry companion having married with a Widow, and carried her over Sea
into France, there suddenly arose a great storm, insomuch that they were all in
danger of drowning; the Master of the ship called unto the Mariners, and bad
them take and throw overboard all the heaviest goods in the ships: This
married man hearing him say so, he took his Widow, and threw her over: and
being asked the reason why he did so, he said, That he neverfelt any thing in
all his life that was so heavy to him as she had been.

Another having married with a widow, and within a while after they were
married, she went out into the garden, and there finding her husbands shirt
hang close on the edge by her Maids smock, she went presently and hanged her
self, upon a jealous conceit that she took: and a merry fellow asking the cause
why she hanged her self, and being told that it was for jealousy, I would,
said he, that all Trees did bear such fruit.

In a word, there is no woman but either she has a long tongue, or a longing
tooth, and they are two ill Neighbors, if they dwell together; for the one
will lighten the purse, if it be still pleased, and the other will waken thee
from thy sleep, if it be not charmed.

It is strange of what kind of metal a woman's tongue is made, that neither
correction can chasten, nor fair means quiet? For there is a kind of venom in
it, that neither by fair means nor soul they are to be ruled. All Beast by men
are made tame, but a woman's tongue will never be tame: it is but a small thing
and seldom seen, but is often heard, to the terror and confusion of many a
man.

Some with sweet words undermine their husband, as Dalilah did Sampson, and
some with chiding and brawling are made weary of the world, as Socrates and
others. Socrates when his wife did chide and brawl, would go out of the house
till all were quiet again: but because he would not scould with her again, it
grieved her the more; for on a time she watched his going out, and threw a
Chamber Pot out of a window on his head, Ha, ha, quoth he, I thought after all
this thunder there would come rain.

Therefore as a sharp Bit curbs a froward Horse, even so a cursed woman must be
roughly used; but if women could hold their tongues, three to one but men would
hold their hands. As the best metled blades are mixed with Iron, even so the
best woman that is, is not free from faults; the goodliest Gardens are not free
from Weeds, no more is the best nor fairest woman from ill deeds.

For who was adorned with more beauty then fair Venise in Cyprus, and Rodepe in
Egypt? yet both notorious Strumpets.

It is said, that the gods themselves did change their shapes, for the love of
such women they lusted after: Jupiter transformed himself into a Bull, Neptune
into a Horse, and Mercury into a Goat. Nay, Sampson and Hercules, for all their
great strength and conquest of Giants and Monsters, yet the one yielded his
Club at Delanira's foot, and the other revealed his strength to Dalilah, and
paid his life for his folly. Was not wise Solomon, and holy David overcome by
the sweet enticements of women? And the great Captain Holofernes, whose sight
made many thousands to quake, yet he lost his life, and was slain by a woman.
Wherefore, to avoid the sight many times is the best Razor to cut off the
occasion of the evil which comes by women; for had not Holofernes seen the
beauty of Judeth, and marked the fineness of her foot, he had not lost his head
by her. If Herod had not seen Herodias daughter dance, he had not so rashly
granted her St. John Baptists head. Had not Eve seen the Apple, and so was
tempted with the beauty of the Serpent, who (as Schoolmen write) showed
himself like a fair young man; but had not she seen it, I say she had not eaten
thereof, to her own grief, and many more.

So that consequently, he that lays his Net to catch a fair Woman, he may
chance to fall into the sprindge which was laid for a Woodcock: therefore I do
admonish young men, and advise old men; and I counsel simple men, and I warn
all men, that they fly a wicked woman, as from the pestilence, or else she
will make thee fly in the end.

FINIS.

