TRVTH FROM IRELAND. Expressed in two Letters.

The one from the City of Dublin, the other from Tredah, to a Gentleman of good
Quality in the City of LONDON.

Relating the condition of Dublin, Vlster, Wexford, and Waterford.

LONDON: April 22. Printed for John Wright, in the Old-Bailey. 1643.

From DUBLIN, March 27. 1643.
SIR,
THis day our Army is returned with a most glorious Victory, which God (beyond
man's expectation) did give them in the County of Wexford upon the 18. of this
month, which though my self and others had a particular loss in it, by the
death of my Cozen Alexander Burrowes, who since dyed of some wounds then
received, yet (in the general) was the most considerablest day that we had in
this Province since the Rebellion. Our design being at first to take in
Wexford, and Rosse, my Lord Marquess did martch forth hence, with 3000. Foot,
and about 1000. Horse, 7. pieces of Ordnance, whereof two were for Battery, and
took in by the way some garrisons manned by the Rebels, as Castle-martin,
Kildare, Tully, Moon, Colbinstowne, and Ballynourg^, which were delivered up
upon quarter (but their Arms) which we had in every place; And also Tynollin
which we got perforce, wherein were 510. persons put to the Sword, whereof
there were 14. Gentlemen of the Archboulds; Our men having martch'd safely to
the County of Wexford, they came before Rosse. Upon the 11. of this month, at
which time there were not above 200. within to man the Town, but before Monday
night there were above 2000. put in, which by reason of the open Bay toward
Waterford and Kilkenny, and for want of Shipping or Boats, we could not
prevent. And upon monday our Ordnance made a large breach on the Walls, that
twenty might martch in front, and our men having entered, were (to give the
Devil his due) manfully repulsed, and beaten back twice, to the loss of 16.
of our common Soldiers, in which attempt two of our (...) Majors were hurt,
but not mortally, by name Morris and Hamond: from Monday until Friday they
continued the Siege, expecting hourly a supply of Ammunition, and Victuals,
that was to come to them from hence by Sea; which failing them, by reason of
the contrary winds, they were enforced to raise their Siege, and to martch
homewards, and that night encamped within three miles of Rosse, and the next
day being Saturday, the 18, the Enemy gave us Battle, at a place called
Ball^^aggy, where we had the vantage of the Sun, and the wind, yet they being
over confident by reason of their numbers, which were gathered from all parts
of the Kingdom, amounting to 8000, Foot, and 700. Horse, admirably well armed,
and mounted, being their most resolute and best, men did set upon us in that
place, thinking to cut off every mothers son of us, and to give quarter to none
except my Lord Marquess himself, and so to march to Dublin, and to make an end
of these Wars, as some of their own Prisoners have since confessed, and to
say truly of them, it is confessed of all sides, that upon the first charge,
their Horses put ours to the worst, but our Foot wherein my Lord Marquess
himself was in the head, and our Ordnance did perform their parts so
gallantly, that after half an hours fight (during which time the day was very
doubtful) the Rebels were routed and put to flight, there General Preston
with most of his men made all the speed he could, to a wooden bridge near Sir
Edward Butlers house, where having got over, broke down the Bridge, fearing
that ours would follow him to Kilkenny, but it is most certain, that he lost
300. of his best and eminentest Commanders which were stain or taken
Prisoners, besides a great number of others that had no command, (together with
16. Barrels of Powder, and great store of Bullet and March) insomuch that some
who saw them dead and knew them well, do affirm that none of any quality in
the Counties of Kilkenny, Wexford, Wickle, or C^^lo^, but have lost either a
son or a brother, and for such as I could inform my self of, I have sent you
a List of their Names: Thus you see how God does still miraculously preserve
us, I pray Heaven to make us truly thankful unto him: much more might be
done, if we had but more men to make good them places that would be gotten in,
which now we cannot do for fear of weakening of our Army.

So I rest, yours G. T.

Prisoners taken.
Lieutenant General Cullen. Sergeant Major Butler. Capt. Butler, brother to
the said Major. Capt. Walter Butler. Capt. Gerr. Fitz Gerrald. Capt. Nugent.
Capt. Edward Butler. Capt. Edward M^sterson. Capt. Anthony Kavenagh. Capt. John
Rooth. Capt. Synnot.
Officers Slain.
Sir Morgan Kavenagh. Capt. Bryan. Capt. Fitz Gerrald. Lieutenant Colonel
Brown of Malrankan. Capt. Tibbot Butler. Colonel Edward Butlerson to Sir
Richard Butler. Capt. Edward Butler of Tullo. Capt. Skurlocke. Sergeant Major
Bagnall. Capt. Beverly Britten. Capt. Donagh O Brive. Capt. Barry. Capt. Hugh
oge O Bryan of the Duffery.
From TREDAH, April, 8. 1643.
Sir,
ABout three weeks since, the Lord Moore, and Sir Henry Titchborne, marched
from Tredah, with one thousand foot, and one hundred and fifty Horse, (some of
either being borrowed from Dundalk, and other garrisons) into the County of
Cavon, in that Town they met with no manner of opposition, but found great
plenty of provisions, all the Rebels having forsaken it, from thence they
martched to Belturbat, and in their way thither, they were to pass two
streights, or paces, which were appointed by the Rebels to be manned with
four hundred in either, in one of them they fought with them, but our Army
beat them out of their Trenches, and Works, and took Prisoners one of the
prime of the O Rel^es* who commanded in chief when we lost our six hundred
Men, and Arms, at the first going to Tredah, the said O Relyes Son, and
diverse of that name, and sect, and others taken prisoners, and killed.

In the prime O Relyes pocket, was found a letter written by the Lord of
Gormonston, (during the time of the late Treaty of Trim) directed to Owen Roe,
O Neale, General of the Vlster Forces, and to this O Rely, wherein he advised
them to make all the strength they possible could for the taking in of all the
English Garrisons, presuming that they were very much weakened, by my Lord
Marquess of Ormonds going abroad with so great an Army.

In an Island belonging to Verginia in the County of Gavan, they found the
Earl of Tingalls eldest Son, and Daughter, and brought them, and other
Prisoners away with them.

They took about three thousand Cows, but they were so weak, that they could
bring with them to Tredath but seven or eight hundred.

In their return to Tredah, Owen Roe, O Neale, advanced with three thousand
men, and came within seven miles of them, but came no nearer, so as all our men
returned safe home and O Neale and his Forces, gone back into the North.

Yours E. W.

FINIS.

