The Rest of Faith: THAT IS, Souls fixed and established in God by believing on
him through the Lord JESUS CHRIST. With the grounds of this Faith from
sanctified Reason, the benefits of Faith, and the evils of unbelief. Proved by
Gods Word, and presented to open view,

By Coll. ROBERT TICHBORNE.

Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot
be removed, but abides for ever.

John 6.47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me has
everlasting life.

Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of
his servant, that walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons at the gilded Lion in Aldersgate-streete, 1649.

TO THE HONORABLE, Lieftenant General CROMWELL.
Honorable Sir,
GOD having first pitched my meditations upon the study after an establishment
in this perishing World, and shaking times in which we live, and in this study
more emminently then before, made known himself in the Lord Jesus Christ to
be that Rock of Ages which never fails such as trust in him, he did then draw
forth my heart upon a principle of common good (...) hold that forth to the
World which he had made known to me, that so if God would bless it to the end
I intended it every soul might be as happy in a fixed state as my self; this
is truly my end in publishing that to others, which God did in secret imprint
upon my heart: Now in the publishing of this, I take boldness to Dedicate it to
your self, but if any ask why I do so, I shall render them these two Reasons.

First, it is proper for me to tender respects to one from whom I have received
so many, I shall be short in this and say no more, but that I remain your
Debtor.

My second reason is this, Though the subject be of general tendency to the
wants of all Gods people, yet such as God puts most work upon have most need
of this support, such as fight and contend with the enemies of God either
within them or without them, will find faith in God to be their best weapon;
that God has emminently called and used you in such a weighty work I need
produce no proofs to the World, God himself has done it; what God has
further for you to do I know not, but this I know that faith in him will be
your greatest strength in doing, and a certain rest what ever your work
maybe; for this reason also I present this to your hands, the scope and
substance of which I believe has strengthened your heart and hand in all that
concerns you here and for ever. Your enemies say you have done much, but I
believe the voice of your own heart is, that God has done all himself,
wherein he has used you as an instrument; What is yet behind for you to do or
suffer God only knows: This I dare boldly affirm, faith in God will be your
best companion and your surest rest in all conditions; therefore Sir, in
sincere love I present my service and this Treatise of the rest of Faith to
your hands, the Lord go with it to your heart, and make himself your rest
here and forever, which is the real desire of him that truly loves you, and
in love will be ready to serve you in the work of the Lord, whilst I remain,

ROBERT TICHBORNE:

To the READER.
READER,
I Observe in nature that the strongest liquors are of most use when the
spirits are weakest, as strong waters to a fainting man, and when the seas are
most boisterous, then does the Mariner cast forth his Anchor. The
dispensations of God in these latter days of the world in which we live, has
made both Sea and ^and full of troubles, by reason whereof much fainting of
spirit, and trembling of heart has overspread the Nation. These out goings of
God has drawn forth my heart to follow that tracke of his Word in the light
and strength of his spirit which leads to himself, that so I might find in him
reviving to my fainting spirit, and a rest for my weary soul, God having been
so gracious in manifesting himself to be my all here and for ever and given me
a heart to rest upon him, by which I am in full and lasting rest: It was set
upon my heart that I should not be unthankful to him, and unchristian to
others. If I should have only sed upon this bread of life in spirit, and not
tell forth to the glory of his grace, and the good of others, how sure a resting
place his bosom of love is, and how firmly all such shall be established that
believe on him, one drop of his love wll raise the lowest spirit, and that
soul which stays it self upon God by faith will be at rest, though the storms
of the world be never so great. If this be true, which I am confident many
thousand souls besides my own can bear the witness of to God, then I am apt to
believe the following Treatise will have acceptance with such as God has made
sensible, that he is now shaking not only the earth, but the heavens also.
Most complain of the earthquakes which the Land and world is full of, but some
complain of heart-quakes; to these complaints give me leave to speak in the
Prophets language: Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established.
Believe in God as your God, so will your hearts be fixed, when as God shall
write vanity upon all the world. God is now staining all glories besides his own
but such as live and glory in God through believing, will have a living glory in
a dying world, and a bed of rest what ever troubles the world be^ full of.
Therefore Reader, if you would feign rest, you must live on God by faith: and
if in this work God shall use the following Treatise for your good, I shall
bless him for your soul as for my own; truly this is the highest end of your
servant in the Lord,

Robert Tichborne.

Believing in God does advantage a Saint with an established heart.
2 CHRO: 20. later part 20. Verse. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you
be established.


THE Lord tells us in his Word, Heb. 12.26.
of a time when as he will not only shal^e the Earth, but the Heavens also:
Shake all that may be shaken, so as that which cannot be shaken may remain and
appear, this is his faithful Word; and truly his great and glorious workinge
in these our days does seem to point out that time to be near at hand; when
God himself does shake the whole Earth and heavens, though they be vast
bodies, yet they must fall before the breath of the Almighty power which made
them by a word; this shaking truth, and times, has with more solicitousnesse
drawn forth my heart to seek after establishment: I found encouragement to
this work in that very text which holds forth the shaking both of Earth and
Heavens also, for it seems to hold out thus much, that the end of Gods so
shaking is to manifest that which cannot be shaken by its remaining, in which
God taught me this truth, that the establishment of his people lay in that
which should remain steadfast to eternity, even when himself should shake not
only the earth, but the heavens also; by Earth here I understand the whole
Earth, in its frame and fashion, beauty, and glory, power, and government, the
time is coming when God will shake all this into its first nothing, so that
the establishment of an eternal being lies not in this: By Heavens I
understand, not only the material Heavens, as Son, Moon, Stars, and
Firmament; but also the Law of Heaven and earth; namely, the Ordinances and
worship of God here, the Churches, and government of Christ on earth; truly
these are very glorious as they are in God, and God in them, so that they may
well be called the heavens, but even these as they come from God have their
time and their end; these are the top and exceeding glory of all one
wilderness mercies, but all these are to be shaken, their end will cease, and
so must they too, these are as the pillars of cloud by day, and of fire by
night, to the body of Christ whilst it, or any member of it remains in the
Wilderness, but Christ our head is ascended whom will draw his whole body
after him, and then the end of this will cease, and their shaking time will be
accomplished to the full, so that though this be the glory of the World, yet
they cannot make up establishment to eternal souls, because they are to be
shaken.

Now by this I am further taught where to begin in seeking establishment,
namely, not in the whole Earth; no not in any part or appearance of Heaven that
may be shaken, not in the ordinances or worship of God, but in God himself:
not in the Churches or government of Christ, but in Christ himself. So that
good King Jehoshaphats counsel to his people in their day of straights and
shakings, will lead me and all the people of God to a sure center of
establishment: Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established.

These are the words of Jehoshaphat the King, to Judah and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, at that time when they were under much fear, and doubts concerning
their condition, by reason of a numerous and potent enemy which was come up
against them; to an eye of fleshly reason they were a lost people and nation,
but this good man had a better and more seeing eye to behold withal, namely
the eye of faith; for in the 14, 15, 16, 17, verses of this Chapter we shall
find that Jahaziel the Prophet, having the spirit of the Lord come upon him in
the midst of the Congregation, when all the people were gathered together to
seek the Lord, did Prophecy and told the King, and all Judah, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, that they should not be afraid nor dismayed by
reason of the great a multitude which come against them, for the battle, says
he, is not yours, but Gods: He gives further direction when to go down
against them, and what to do; he tells them they shall not needs to fight,
only to stand still and see the salvation of the Lord; he bids them again not
to fear, for the Lord would be with them.

Now upon this was Jehoshaphats eye of faith, he did believe in the Lord, and
his word declared by his Prophet, and in this twentieth verse, tells the
people where his establishment was; namely, in God; and if they also should
believe in God as their God, and in his Word declared by his Prophet, that they
should thereby be established; Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be
established.

My intentions are to take this Scripture in the largest sense, and to make use
of it in the carrying on a Treatise of Faith, as faith, and belief in God does
settle and establish believers.

The plain and visible truth which lies in this Scripture, and upon which I
shall carry on what follows, is this; That Saints are established, by
believing in God, as their God.

This is the sense, and almost the very words of the Scripture; and for its
proof, it has the concurrance of the scope, if not the letter of the whole
Word of God, the Prophet Isaiah in his seventh Chapter, and ninth verse,
prooves this by its contrary, when in the former verses he had told them what
God would do for them, he tells them in this verse, If you will not believe
surely ye shall not be established: As if he had said, it is not my bare
narrative, or the history of God in his power, greatness, and goodness, that
will establish you, if you do not believe; it is faith, trust, and belief in
God, as your God which is only able to establish you, if you believe not, your
foundation will always be tottering, so that surely you will not be
established; where belief is not, establishment cannot be; the reason is
obvious and plain, for it is God alone that can and does establish the hearts
of his people: now faith and believing in God, is the only discovery of union
with God, in which souls come to be established, the soul by faith receives
in God to it self, and involveth it self into God, and God in the soul makes
it an established soul: 2 Ephesians. 17. Christ dwells in the heart of believers by
faith: This was Abraham's condition, who is called the Father of the faithful;
the Text says, Romans 3.19, 20.
when God made him the promise of an heir out of his own loyner, that he was
not weak in faith, nor did he stagger at the promise through unbelief,
notwithstanding his own great age, and the deadness of Sarahs womb, yet he
believed the word and promise of the Lord and was established; by believing
this Father of the faithful gave himself up to God, he lost his own fleshly
reasoning, in believing the faithful word of God; God had said, that he should
have a Child of Sarahs womb, he gives himself over to God by believing, so
that there is no staggering, says takes in the promise and the soul is
established, but where there is not faith to take in the promise of God, or
rather God in the promise, there the soul is not nor cannot be established;
staggering is as properly the fruit of unbelief, as stability is of faith; and
they demonstrate each other as white does black, and black white; that
Scripture which says, If you believe not you shall not be established, does
give proof to that Text which says, Believe in the Lord your God, so shall
you be established: So likewise on the contrary, our Savior gives in ample
proof to this truth, that Saints are established by believing in God as their
God; in that John 6.47. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes in
me, has everlasting life. To believe in Christ, is to believe in God as our
God, and the effects of this is eternal life, here is full establishment
indeed, here is life for ever; eternity cannot shake this believing soul, it
is so established by believing in God as its God in Christ.

I intend to take this fundamental establishing truth into particulars; the
which will give further light into what I aim at, and clearer testimony to the
general truth, That Saints are established by believing in God as their God; I
mean an applicatory, apropriating faith and belief in God.

By believing in God, as our God, by which we come to be established, I mean
this:

First, To believe in God in what he is in himself.

Secondly, To believe God in what he does; namely in all his works.

Thirdly, To believe God in what he says, in his whole Word.

And in all these so far as God is communicable to believe him to be our God.

Believing thus in the Lord our God we shall certainly be established.

First, To believe in God in what he is in himself. God in his Essence is
incomprehensible, and inexpressible; so Exodus 3.14. When Moses asked God what
he should tell the Children of Israel his Name was if they asked him; Gods
answer to Moses is, I am that I am, and so tell the children of Israel, I am
has sen^ me unto you, that is, I am so what I am; that I cannot be fully
expressed, I am God, Jehovah, I am all God, and nothing but God: but this pure
and eternal Essence is pleased so far as is either fit or needful for his
people to know him, to make known himself by his Attributes: and in his word,
works and miracles, for the strengthening of his peoples faith, and
establishing them in himself. And in this work I shall take up Gods method,
and first look into the Attributes of God, for some discoveries of his
Essence, wherein he does make known himself to his people, that they may
believe in him, in what he is in himself; you must not expect I should be so
large in this as to express all the Attributes of God, that is a work too
large for a dying life, or a dying man, the fullness of that will fill
eternity; all that may be attributed to God, which can be attributed to none
but God, and that all is exceeding large, I shall only mention some precious
corner-stones, for believers to build upon, so that they may certainly be
established.

As first, God is the only, true, and perfect God, true, Attribute of God.
so as there is no true God besides him: and perfect, so that all perfection is
in him, and nothing but perfection in him, so in God as in none but God, and
therefore only to be attributed to God. I shall in this and all I write of
God, produce his word for my authority, Isa. 46.9. I am God, and there is none
else, I am God, Isa. 46.9.
and there is none like me. God in this Scripture speaks positively; in the
verse before this, the people worshipped and bowed down to false Gods, to
images of God; the Lord complains of this in verse. 5. To whom will ye liken
me, and make me equal, Verse 5.
and compare me, that we may be like. As if God had said, you can liken me to
nothing; for there is nothing like me, I am God, and there is none else (the
true God) your false Gods cannot be like me. So in Isa. Isa. 45.33.
45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, for I am
God, and there is none else. Mark the Scripture, salvation in in me, says
God, I am the God of salvation. If the ends of the Earth be saved, they must
look unto me, for I am God, and there is none else; That is, there is no other
true God, no God that can save but me. God proves himself to be the only true
God, by being the only saving God; God in truth is the God of salvation: That
God which can save must needs be the true God, and so there is no other God but
our God, he is the true God, and a God of truth, all God, and all truth; this
is a proper attribute of God, for it can be attributed to none but God.

Again, God is perfect, he is a perfect God, he is all perfection in himself,
and all that is perfect is from him, he is that perfection to which there can
be no addition, he gives life and breath to all things, Acts 17.25.
Acts 17.25. Neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any
thing, seeing he gives to all life, and breath, and all things. God is
perfect, he needs nothing, he knows no want; he is the fullness of all
things, and fills all with himself; he is the fountain and giver of all
life, and breath, and all things. All that makes up perfection is always in
God, and goes forth from God into all things, life and breath, which
comprehends the whole; they are in the whole creation the breathings forth of
Gods perfection; God bounds all, but none can bound him. Perfection only lives
in God: he gives bounds to all things else, but can receive bounds from none:
to the creature God says, what have you that you have not received. But as for
God himself, he is simply and absolutely perfect, simply purely perfect; 1
John 1.5.
nothing but perfection, altogether perfect, 1 John 1.5. God is light, and in
him is no darkness at all: So perfectly light, that there is not the least
shadow of darkness in him; what is God, is perfectly light, or the light of
God is perfect; for God is altogether perfect, nothing can be said to be
perfect but God, and God cannot be said to be any thing but perfection; light,
and to darkness at all, is perfect light, and this is God, for GOD is perfect.

Another attribute of GOD, God the first, without all cause.
which proves the former, is this;

That God is the first being without all cause, this is truly an attribute of
God, which can be attributed to none but God, for he is the first, the only,
and without cause, and the only cause of all things else; not any thing gave
God a being, but God gives being to all things, Revel. 1.8.
Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord,
which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

Mark it, I am the first, you cannot produce any thing as the cause of my
being; for a cause must be before an effect, and if (...) be the effect of any
cause, then I cannot be Alpha, the beginning, but the proceed of some other
first: but this I am not, for I am Alpha and Omega, both first and lust; I am
first in my self, without all cause, and I am the first of all causes, for I
cause all to be. I am the Almighty which gives first being, and all beings to
all things, says the Lord. The Apostle Paul does acknowledge this truth in
Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, Romans 11.36.
and to him, are all things. All things are of God, as God is the first cause
of all: all things are through God, as they proceed of his will, power, and
Majesty: all things are to him, to the glory of God, that is in himself
without cause, Isa. 41.4.
and the cause of all as he is God, Isa. 41.4. Who has wrought and done it,
calling the generations from the beginning, I the Lord the first, and with the
last, I am he. It is frequent in Scripture with God when he mentions any works
or beings, and the beginning of any thing, to declare himself to be the first,
that he might be known to be in himself without all cause, and the cause of
all things else. Isa. 43.10.
I the Lord am he that is the first. So in Isa. 43.10. Before me there was no
God formed, neither shall there be after me. I am so the first in my self,
that I am the first of all, and nothing shall be after me. God in himself is
without cause and end, Isa. 44.6. Thus says the Lord the King of Israel, and
his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 44.6.
I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. I am the
first, and besides me there is no God; that is, there is no God besides me,
for I am the only one, that is first without all cause of being: For were
there a first cause of my being, then I could not be God; but I am God, and
therefore there can be no first cause of my being. So the Lord Christ according
to his Godhead is said to be the beginning of the Creation of God, Rev. 3.14.
Rev. 3.14. The faithful and true witnesses the beginning of the Creation of
God. The Godhead is the first of all beings, and the beginning of the whole
Creation. Many more Scriptures join in this truth, as Isa. 48.12. Rev. 1.17.
Rev. 22.13. But I leave them to the Reader.

A third Attribute of God is his immutability; Creation mutable and changeable,
which does demonstrate that himself is only God, Number. 23.19.
who is unchangeable. Numb. 23.19. God is not a man, that he should lie,
neither the son of man that he should repent? Has he said, and shall he not
do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? What God says, that
he will do, and what he has spoken, he will make good; for he is an
unchangeable God, he is not like man to lie, or repent as the sons of men:
but he is God immutable, and unchangeable in all he is, not one tittle shall
fail of all that the Lord has spoken: For I am the Lord, I change not, Mal.
3.6. God makes this an argument to prove himself God, that he changes not: As
if he had said, there is change and alteration in all but my self, and I am
the unchangeable God; I am the Lord, I change not. As if he should say, if I
were changeable, I were not God: but being God, I am unchangeable. If
mutability dwelt in me, I could not be the foundation and fullness of all
things both in Heaven and Earth: James 1.17.
but so I am, therefore I am the unchangeable, immutable God. This is fully
proved in James 1.17. Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above,
and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning. This is a full description of, and testimony to an
immutable God, in him says the Text, there is no variableness nor shadow of
turning. Not the least shadow of change in God, the perfect God is an immutable
God, and his immutability is perfect, for he is God in both; there can be no
change in God, because there is no imperfection in him: where there is change
and mutability, there must be the annihilating of something. Now it is
impossible this should be in God, for he is an entire Essence, which can admit
of no annihilating, therefore not any shadow of change. God is purely and
simply what he is, without all compounds; he is one most pure and entire
Essence, nothing in him but God: God is a Spirit, John 4.24.

A fourth Attribute of God is this; Isa. 465.
that nothing can be like him, Isa. 46.5. To whom will ye liken me, and make
me equal, and compare me, that we may be like. As if God had said, do you
creatures think you have any thing amongst you that is infinite, that you go
about to make the likeness of me, I am an infinite God, finite creatures
cannot be compared to me; or if you do, there will be no more likeness and
similitude then between finite and infinite. So Isa. 40.15, 16, 17. Behold, the
Nations are as a drop of a bucket, Isa. 40.15, 16, 17.
and are counted as the small dust of the balance. Lebanon and the beasts
thereof, are not sufficient for a burnt-offering. All Nations before God are
nothing, compared to him less then nothing, and vanity. This proves the
infiniteness of God, that all besides him cannot be compared to him, because
God is infinite, and so is none but God, and it is the infiniteness of God
that makes all things before him, and compared to him, to be so empty a vanity.
This infiniteness of God does further appear in the greatness and Majesty
of his works. The Prophet David had great experience of God in his great and
glorious workings, and we shall see what ample testimony he gives to it, in
Psalm 86.8. Psalm 86.8.
Among the Gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord) neither are there any
works like unto thy works. As if the Prophet had said, there is no infinite
God besides thy self; and it appears in thy workings, for there is no works
full of Majesty and power like thine: Psalm 135.5.
So in Psalm 135.5. For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is
above all Gods. The Prophet makes this an argument to stir them up to praise
God: the declaring of his greatness, he is great above all Gods: He is
infinite in power and Majesty, and this makes him in his works great above
all Gods. The Prophet is in the same frame of spirit in Psalm 145.3. Great is
the Lord, Psalm 145.3.
and greatly to be praised: and his greatness is unsearchable. Mark the
Scripture, his greatness is unsearchable: As if he had said, God is
infinitely great, and none is infinite but God, so that his greatness is
unsearchable; for finite creatures can never search or find out the
infiniteness of an it finite God. So in Psalm 147.5. Psalm 147.5.
Great is our Lord, and of great power, and his understanding is infinite. God
is infinitely great, he is so in power, in understanding, in working, in all he
is: that is, God is infinitely what he is, he is finite in nothing, nor can he
be confined by any thing, because Lee is the infinite God, of whom all things
are; his infinite power gives bounds to all things, but can be bounded by
nothing, Jer. 23.24. Jer. 23.24.
Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says the
Lord? Do not I fill heaven and earth says the Lord? God is infinitely great
in knowledge as well as power; what can be hid from the al-seeing eye of an
infinite God. Our God is infinitely full, he fills heaven and earth, he
fills all with his infinite power and greatness. The vastness of Heaven and
Earth can make no dimention to the infinite fullness and greatness of God:
Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his Foote-stoole, and all filled with the
infinite fullness of his power and greatness.

Fifthly, Isa. 41.4.
Isa. 41.4. Who has wrought and done it, calling the generations from the
beginning, I the Lord the first, and with the last, I am he. The Lord himself
tells us, that he called the generations, that he was first, before all
beginning of beings, and that he abides for ever, and is with the last: that
is, Isa. 43.10.
as if God had said, I am the eternal God. So in Isa. 43.10. God calls the
people to be his witnesses, that before him there was no God formed, nor shall
there be any after him. Ye are my witnesses says the Lord, and my servants
whom I have chosen, that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am
he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.

God confirms the former Scripture by this, that he is first and last; that
is, he is eternal, he is before all beings, and all other beings depends on
him, so that nothing can be after him; If he should cease to be, there could be
no beings, because all have their beings from him, therefore God must needs be
eternal, that is the first and preserver of all beings: Isa. 44.6
So likewise in Isa. 44.6. Thus says the Lord, the King of Israel, and his
Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me
there is no God, As if the Lord had said, there is none that is first and last
but me, and therefore no God, but I: it is only the attribute of God to be
eternal, and that am I. I am first and last, I am eternal; that is, I am God,
there is no God besides me, therefore none eternal, none is first and last
besides me, I am only the eternal God, and I am truly so, for I am the first
and last: God only is that high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, Isa.
57.15. There is no everlasting but God, and he is the everlasting God: Moses
does acknowledge God to be so, Psalm. 90. beg.
in Psalm 90. beg. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had
formed the earth, and the world; even from everlasting to everlasting thou art
God: That is, thou art the everlasting God, that were before the World was,
thou did bring forth the mountains, thou have formed the earth, and the
whole World: Thou were everlasting before the World was, and it was thy
everlasting power that made the World, and thou art the same God still, and
remainest what thou art; From everlasting to everlasting thou art God. So the
Prophet in the 102 Psalm. 12, 27. But thou O Lord, Psa. 102.12, 27
shall endure for ever, and they remembrance unto all generations, but thou art
the same and thy years shall have no end; thou art the everlasting Lord, the
same for ever, thou art what thou art without end, there is no end of thy being
God; for thou art the everlasting God; Of old has God laid the foundation of
the earth, Psalm. 102.25, 26.
and the heavens are the work of his hand, and though they perish and wax old
as a garment, yet the Lord he endures for ever: he is from everlasting; for he
must needs be before that which is made by him, and he is to everlasting, for
he indureth when the heavens and the earth wax old, as God had nothing to make
him God, so there can be nothing to ungod him, he is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever, he is the eternal God, he made all things of nothing, but
not any thing can make him nothing, or less then he is, for he is the eternal
God; and so the Apostle Paul sets him forth in the 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the
King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory
for ever and ever. Amongst other Attributes the Apostle gives God this, the
King or God eternal, to whom is glory due for ever and ever; as he is the
everlasting and eternal God, for this is an Attribute and a glory only due to
God.

Sixthly, God is an omnipotent, Almighty, alsufficient God, Let there be light
and there was light; Genesis 1.3.
the whole creation has its form, light, and being from the will and word of
this Almighty, Omnipotent, and alsufficient God, there needs no more then a
word from God to make day, and night, heaven and firmament, morning and
evening, to gather the waters together, and to make dry land, to cause the
earth to bring forth after its kind, to make Sun, Moon, and Stars, to
rule in the Heavens, and to give light in their courses, to cause the waters to
bring forth abundantly of moving creatures after their kind, and the earth to
bring forth living creatures after his kind; Cattle and creeping things, and
beasts of the earth, I, the powerful word of this omnipotent God made man
after his own Image, and gave him dominion over the fish of the Sea, the
fowls of the air, over the Cattle, over the earth, and over every thing that
creeps upon the earth; all this power flows from the Word of an omnipotent
God: God said, let it be so, and it was so to all this: 1 Genesis In this faith
Isaac blesses Jacob, in the 28 Genesis 3. And God Almighty bless thee, and make
thee fruitful: As if he should say, if the Almighty God say but the word, thou
art blessed, for he is the Almighty God, his Word is a Law, where he blesses
none can hinder blessing, all things are at his command, they were so in their
first being, and they have their being to be what he will have them, there is
nothing hard or impossible with God, so our Savior tells his Disciples in
the 19. Matthew 26. But Jesus beheld them and said unto them, Mat. 19.26.
with men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible. It is a
full Scripture to what I bring it, the omnipotency of God, al things are
possible to him, it is not possible that any thing should be impossible to the
almighty, omnipotent God. When the Angel in the 1. Luke 36. Luke 1.36, 37.
brings tidings to the Virgin Mary of her cozen Elizabeth being with Child in
her old age, and that it was then the sixth month with her, gives this for
the reason in the 3^. verse: For with God nothing shall be impossible: That is
to say, God is Omnipotent, Almighty, nothing can be hard to him, he does what
he will do, nothing is impossible to him, nor can any thing hinder what he
will have done: In the 11. Numbers 21. Number. 11.21, 23.
Moses questions with God about making good his word to give flesh to all the
people: the footmen amongst them being six hundred thousand; in the 23. verse
God answer Moses: And the Lord said unto Moses is the Lords hand waxed short:
As if the Lord had said, this I have spoken seems impossible to thee, but I
will do it my self; I will make it good, and I am the Almighty omnipotent
God, think you that my hand waxes short, no it is an omnipotent, almighty
hand, for I am such a God, can the Lords hand wax short; can alsufficiency,
almightinesse, and omnipotency be lessened, no it cannot, and the Apostle Paul
blesses God upon this very consideration; in the 3. Ephesians. Ephe. 3.20, 21.
20. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
can ask or think, unto him be glory 21. verse: that is, the Apostle glories
in God as an an omnipotent God, he is able to do exceeding abundantly above
all that we can ask or think: the vastness of our thoughts or wants, are too
short to measure out the omnipotency of God, he is exceedingly more then we
can ask, want, or think, for he is Almighty, to him be glory whom is thus
glorious, almighty, alsufficient, and omnipotent God, this is the glory of God,
for God is only this, and none but God.

This, all this, and infinitely more then this, is God in himself, and such
souls as be established by believing in God as their God, do believe God to be
this in himself.

But I shall mention some few Attributes more of God, in which he makes
himself more visably known to his people.

As first, God is a God of free grace; we may call our God the gracious God, or
the God of mercy and grace, we may safely look upon God thus, for God looks
upon us in his free grace; witness his Covenant of free grace: Jer. 31.31. so
forward, God does there engage himself to put his Law in our inward parts, and
to write it in the bearts of his people, that he will be our God, and that we
shall be his people, that his people shall all know him from the least to the
greatest of them; that he will forgive all our iniquity, and remember our sin
no more; God in this Covenant does clearly speak himself to be a God of free
grace, for the Covenant is all grace, it is pardoning and purging grace,
justifying and sanctifying grace, and as it is all grace, so it in all God; for
God only ingageth himself, and this makes it to be all free grace: As God is
gracious in his Covenant that it is a Covenant of free grace, so he is in his
works to his people; they are all works of grace, and he is a God of free
grace in all.

As in his first work of choosing and electing his people: 1. Ephesians. beginning.
Ephesians. beginning, Chosen and predestined us in Christ, unto the adoption of
children, according to the good pleasure of his will, To the praise of the
glory of his grace. God is free, he chooses according to his own will, and
that any are chosen and predestined in Christ, it is the glorious workings of
his free grace, he chooses according to his own good pleasure, and to the
glory of his grace; God is engaged to none, he is free in his choice, nay all
have sinned and come short of the glory of God; and therefore wh^^ ever God
chooses he takes into grace, for it is free grace tha^ chooses, it is only
of grace, says the Apostle, that I am what I am as I am an elect vessel,
that is of grace, God has chosen (...) in Christ to the glory of his grace, so
that God in his electing work is a God of free grace.

Secondly, in his work of Salvation he is altogether 2 God of free grace, 2.
Ephesians. 4, 5. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith be
loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with
Christ (by grace ye are saved.) The Apostle here tells us positively that
salvation is the work of grace, I, and proves it; for says he, God who is
rich in mercy, loved (...) even when we were dead in sins, and has
quickened us together with Christ, so that it must needs be by grace that we
are saved; i^ can be nothing but free grace in a holy God that can love souls
dead in sin, and the salvation and quickening of such souls in Christ, must
needs be the work of his rich love, and free grace, so in the 8. verse, For by
grace are ye saved through faith, though faith be the hand to receive the
salvation of God; yet it is free gr^^ in God, that gives this salvation; free
grace gives both salvation, and the hand to receive it withal, all the works
of God to poor sinners is the workings of his free grace, the whole work of
Salvation, and redemption in God, must needs be the workings of his grace, both
by reason of the subject and the time, he saves sinners, the worst of sinners;
and then even when we are dead in sins and trespasses: Ephesians. 2.1. This rich
love of God breaks forth to us even when we lie in our blood and no eye to
pity us; what but free grace would choose such a subject to pitch eternal
unchangable love upon, and such a time when no eye besides could so much as
pity; the reason is plain, none has an eye of free grace but God, and no
other eye besides that could pity, and pardon poor sinners when they lie in
their blood, in their filth and pollution of sin; now for souls to be
justified and acquitted of all polution in the eyes of a holy pure God, what
can this be but free grace: Romans 3.23, 24. For all have sinned, and come short
of the glory of God; Being justified freely by his grace: As if the holy Ghost
should say, You justified souls, you have sinned and come short of the glory
of God. It is not your own justification which you stand before God in; but
the justification of his free grace, it is the free grace of God that does
acquit you, and make you righteous in his own presence, God gives the beauty
he delights in, his free grace gives a complete righteousness to poor
sinners, and justifies them in the righteousness of his own free grace, thus
is God a God of free grace; yea, in all his gifts he is the same, a God of free
grace; it is his free grace that gives Christ, in whom, and with whom, he
gives all things to his people as a God of grace in his rich love; it is of
Gods grace that Christ is made, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification
and redemption to his people, 1. Cor. 1.30, We did not purchase Christ, but
Christ did purchase us, and redeemed us, and to this work he is the gift of
Gods free grace, and all that more exceeding and eternal weight of glory that
our poor souls have with, and by Christ; all is the gift of Gods free grace,
the Lord proclaims his free grace by his Prophet, in the 55. Isa. 55. x.
of Isa. Ho, every one that this steth, come ye to the water^, he that has no
money shall have Wine and Milk without money, and without price. Here the Lord
proclaims to wanting, thirsting souls, that he is a God of free grace, in
all his gifts; as if the Lord had said, though you be full of wants and
unworthinesses, yet let not this hinder your coming to me, for I am a God of
free grace; all my gifts are free, I give my Wine and Milk without money and
without price, I never turned any back which came to satisfy their thirst in
me, because they had no money to buy; I satisfy all that comes to me, I am
free and full in my grace, and with that I satisfy all souls that thirst
after me: God is a giving God, not a selling God; it is his free grace that
gives all things out of himself needful to his people, for life and
godliness, for grace and glory: So in the 7, Matthew. 7. our Savior bids us to
Ask and it shall be given to us: He does not bid us to buy, but to beg; he
knew God to be a God of free grace, and therefore puts (...) upon the grace of
God, for God is the God of free grace in all his works, and in all his gifts
to his own people, he elects and chooses to salvation in his free grace, and
saves all his Elect by his free grace; God gives Christ as the great gift of
his grace, and in Christ he gives the fullness and f^e^nesse of his grace to
his people; so that it is truly the Attribute of God to call him the God of
free grace, in this Attribute God makes known himself to his people; and in
this a believing soul looks up to God, and is established by believing in God,
as a God of free grace to be his God.

Another Attribute of God in which he makes himself known to his people is
this; Namely,

That God is a faithful God.

Not a tittle which he has spoken to his people shall fall, what God speaks
to his people he would have them believe, now he never did nor will fail his
people that believe his word, Number. 23.19. God is not a man that he should lie,
neither the son of man that he should repent; Number. 23.19.
has he said and shall be not do it, or both he spoken and shall he not
make it good, what, can there be falsehood or failing in God? shall he repent,
and not make good what he has spoken? no he is a faithful God, Heaven and
Earth may pass away, but not one tittle of his Word shall fail: Yea, though
the making good of his word desolve Heaven and Earth; both shall consume, Number.
11.23.
but not a tittle of his word shall fail; for he i^ the faithful God, Numb.
11.23. Thou shall see whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or not.
Moses made a question how all that people should eat flesh which the Lord had
said should eat^ flesh; well, says God, I am God still, my arm is not
shortened, nor does my faithfulness fail, for thou shall surely see my word
come to pass, it is my word Moses, and I am the faithful God; though thy
faith be weak, yet my faithfulness is strong and sure; it is the Word of God
and it shall not fail, thou shall surely see it come to pass: The Psalmist
does acknowledge the testimonies of God to be very sure; in the 93 Psalm. 5.
He had found that what ever God promised he made it good, and always proved
himself a faithful God, His testimonies were ever sure; so the 119 Psalm. 65.
Thou have dealt well with thy Servant, O Lord, according to thy Word: Thou have
not deceived them, but thou have made good all thy word and promises to them:
As if he had said, Thou art a faithful God, thou make good all thy word; so
in the 89 and 90 verses of that Psalm, For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in
Heaven. Thy faithfulness is unto all Generations: That is, thou art for ever a
faithful God, thy word is as fixed and sure as Heaven, there can nothing fail
of all that the Lord has spoken: Take some few instances of Gods fulfiling his
word to his people as a faithful God, consider the first promise God made of
Christ in the flesh, Genesis 3.15. That the seed of the Woman should break the
head of the Serpent: And how faithful God has been in making good his word,
Christ in the flesh, and Christ Crucified, the whole current of Scripture is
proof ^o it.

When God promises Abraham that he shall have a Son from Sarahs womb, though
the womb be dead, yet the promise lives, it is the word of a faithful God,
and must be made good; now Isaac the Child of promise comes from this dead
womb to manifest God to be a faithful God. God sends Moses to Pharaoh and
tells him that he shall lead the Children of Israel out of Egypt and from
under their bondage and slavery to serve the Lord their God in the Wilderness;
Moses goes upon the word of God: Now notwithstanding the hardness of Pharoahs
heart, and the power of his hand, yet God makes good every tittle of his word
to them, though he make their way thorough the deep waters, yet all must obey
to fulfill the faithful word of God, and in that Divine story we may see with
how many miracles and wonders God makes good all his faithful word to them.
God is a faithful God, he could not else be God, and I may truly say all these
Scriptures which proves him God, do prove him to be the faithful God, for
unfaithfulness and God are inconfistant; they can no more be together then
light and darkness, in truth, there is no comparison to be made of the
vastness of their disagreement; God and truth are one, for God is the God of
truth, he is a faithful God: There is exceedingly more of the glorious
Attributes of God which would abundantly take up the Meditation of a spiritual
soul, but I intended only a short touch of some of them, which might lead to,
and carry on the design I drive at, which is the establishment of souls by
believing in God; in this God assisting, you may have some small help to the
understanding of what God is in himself, the improvement of it for
establishment, I intend in the conclusion; this for the opening part of it
shall be all to the first of the three things I proposed in the beginning of
the Book: namely, To believe in God in what he is in himself.

For the other two: To believe in what God does, and in what God says, as the
word and works of God wraps up the salvation of his people in them, I shall
here put them both together, under this consideration.

Namely, a brief collection with its proofs, of the whole design and work
of God in the salvation of his people. And it is this;

To manifest the glory of his free grace in the full redemption of his people
through Christ, and in their receiving and applying it to themselves by
believing.

First, The great design of God in his saving work to his people, is to
glorify, or to manifest and declare the glory of his own eternal, original
free grace and rich love.

The free grace and rich love of God is God himself, that God which is an
incomprehensible and inexpressible Essence, the true and perfect God, who is
first without all cause of being, an immutable God, and of infinite great
Majesty; an Eternal, Omnipotent, and Almighty God: This is the God of
Free Grace; now the design of this God in the salvation of sinners, which is
the worst and most miserablest piece of the whole creation in it self to all
eternity, is to glorify, or to manifest the glory of his own free grace. For
this, take the testimony of the holy Ghost by the Apostle Paul, in Romans 3.23.
That he might make known the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mereie.
The holy Ghost in the former part of that Chapter, pleads the sovereignty of
God; not any piece of clay could find fault with the Potter what ever he made
it, nor any creature with God. Now in this verse he tells us, if any be made
vessels of honor, and heirs of glory, it is that God might make known the
riches of his glory its his mercy and free grace. As if the holy Ghost had
said, God accounts of his grace and mercy to be the riches and excellency of
his glory: Now to make it known that this is his great design, God silleth
heaven and earth with this his glory, the redeemed in Heaven, and the redeemed
in Earth shall be one in Heaven at last, and therein ages to come, even to all
eternity, be swallowed up into the exceeding riches and glory of his grace,
Ephesians. 2.7. And the holy Ghost in this, and the verse before it, tells us,
that is Gods end and design, in raising us up together, and making us to sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: That in the Ages to come he might
show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us through
Christ Jesus. If we observe this Scripture, it holds forth this; that all the
kindness we receive from God, it is his grace in Christ, and Gods design in
the manifesting of this his free grace in Christ, is to show forth the
exceeding riches and glory of it; the whole work of salvation will clear up
this truth; for if we consider all the subjects of salvation, we shall find no
object for any thing of God but his free grace and rich love, the pollution of
feign man in his natural condition could not be an object of preservation to
the holy, just, and pure eyes of an omnipotent God, nothing but free grace and
rich love in God could look the looks of life to souls dead in sins and
trespasses: And if thus, then it plainly appears, that Gods great design in
the salvation of sinners is namely to glorify, or to manifest the glory of his
own eternal rich love and free grace. God will have souls live by his grace,
that he might manifest the life and glory of his grace; that grace which
gives life, appears in the life it gives, so that every saved soul is a
monument of the riches and glory of the love and grace of God, and the wise God
laid his design sure when he made choice of the salvation of sinners, to
manifest the glory of his free grace by.

In the next place, I shall hold forth how God does accomplish this great end
and design of his: Namely, by making the whole frame and work of salvation to
flow from, and to depend upon his own free grace, so as there is nothing in
the whole work of salvation from first to last, but the free grace of God,
Ephesians. 2.5.8. Even when we were dead in sins, bath quickened us together with
Christ. (By grace are ye saved.) The time speaks grace, when dead in sins;
this is a season only for grace, and that the grace of God too, appearing, when
not only in sin, but dead in sin, past all recovery, as from self, if doing
could prevail; yet here is no life to do withal; this is only a time for a
living love in God to act free grace in: If ever salvation comes to souls dead
in sin, it must be by grace, the grace of God saves of it self, without any
cause out of it self, and this is the true salvation of souls dead in sin,
(by grace ye are saved) to be saved by grace, that is, to be saved in the
salvation of God, the whole work to be of his free grace, not any tittle of it
of our salves, Romans 3.23, 24. For all have sinned and come short of the glory
of God: Being justified freely by his grace. Mark it, there is all self under
sin: but saved, justified, and acquitted souls from sin, are the fruits of
Gods free grace; though self come short of the glory of God, yet free grace
makes perfection that justifies, this is the salvation of God, to justify
freely by his grace, Romans 5.21. That as sin has reigned unto death, even so
might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ.
Here sin and self has its reign, but it is to death: but all the parts of
salvation is the work of Gods free grace: grace reigns through righteousness
in Jesus Christ. The righteousness of Christ to saved souls, or Christ made
righteousness to such souls, what is it but the reign of Gods free grace; that
is, grace is supreme, the grace is all in the whole work of salvation; this
truth will be made more clear in proving the parts of this great work the
salvation of GODS free grace.

But now consider that God lays this work, the salvation of his free grace
sure, in the full satisfaction of his own divine justice, that so the saved of
his grace might stand spotless before him to all eternity.

And herein is the mystery of salvation, that Gods justice is fully satisfied,
and yet that his grace in saving his people should be perfectly free: but both
these does plainly appear in the salvation of God to his people; the work of
his free grace.

Now the way of grace in God to satisfy Divine justice to the full, and yet to
keep it self entire free grace to all that are saved, is this:

Namely, to choose out, appoint, and to send Christ in the flesh (God-man) to
satisfy the Divine justice of God for man, in whom the wisdom of God gives
full satisfaction to his own Justice, and perfect salvation to his people all
of free grace: In this glorious mystery, free grace in God is the fountain,
full satisfaction to Divine Justice the way, but perfect salvation and
rdemption to all his elect body in Christ the end.

I shall now come more particularly to the parts of this great work of God,
the salvation of his own free grace.

And first of Gods electing grace.

That it is free grace in God which elects to salvation; that I shall first
prove by the subjects of Gods salvation, which is fallen sinners, Ephesians. 2.1.
Dead in trespasses and sins. A lump of finners dead in trespasses and sins,
has God to choose out as subjects for his love, vessels of honor, and heirs
of glory. If grace in God make not the choice, surely the whole lump of fallen
sinners would be left to remain dead in sins and trespasses: but the Apostle
in Romans 9.18, 23. tells us that God has mercy on whom he will have mercy:
That is, God is full of mercy: but he is free in it, his mercy lies in his own
will, he chooses his own vessels of mercy, That he might make known the
riches of his own glory. He chooses where he pleases, that it might appear
he chooses according to his own will and pleasure; that is, that all his
mercy and grace is free, and that the first work, or part of the work of
salvation, his Election, is of and from his own free grace: So Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy and without blame before him. Having predestined us unto
the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will. That is, God chooses from all eternity, such as he will
make his children, and heirs of glory by Christ, and this he does according to
the good pleasure of his own will: all fell alike in the first Adam, nothing in
one more then in another to move God to love, for all were dead in sins: but
the whole work in God, is the work of his grace, it is all begun and finished
according to the good pleasure of his own will, all is the work of his free
grace.

But secondly, whom God thus chooses by his grace, he chooses in Christ,
Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has choosen us in him (that is in Christ) so that
all along grace is free in God, and the whole work of salvation only of his
free grace, Romans 5.15. What ever is in Christ is the gift of grace: so that
Christ being the way by which God works satisfaction to his own justice, and
salvation to his people, it is all of grace; the reign of life in Saints by
Christ, is the reign of grace in God to Saints through Christ, verse. 17. Shall
reign in life by one Christ. God in Christ does reign over souls in
righteousness, as the God of life and salvation; it is God in Christ, a God of
free grace.

But in the carrying on this work of Gods grace, in the salvation of his
people through Christ, it is needful that Christ take flesh, according to that
promise in Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the
Serpent. And this is accomplished in the fullness of Gods time, Isa. 9.6. For
unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given. The child which is borne,
is the son which is given, Christ in the flesh; the son of God is the gift
of his free grace, this child Jesus is the gift of Gods grace, (...) Covenant
of the people, for a light of the Gentiles: To open the blind eyes, to bring
the prisoners from the prison, and them that fit in darkness out of the
prisonhouse, Isa. 42.6, 7. So that as grace gives him, so his work in the
flesh, is that work of grace in all the parts of it: Thus far we have Saints
in Christ, and Christ in the flesh, and the free grace of God in all.

This which follows will appear to be as purely grace in God as what has
gone before, though now God comes to have actual and full satisfaction to his
justice.

Now the elect are in Christ, and Christ for us in the flesh; now the holy law,
and Divine Justice of God comes for fulfilling and satisfaction.

But to whom? why to Christ, so that when justice is fully satisfied, yet that
the whole of salvation might be a work of Gods free grace.

Quest. But why should Justice come to Christ for satisfaction? had he sinned?

Answ. I answer, no: but in the great design of Gods grace, to redeem his
people in Christ, Christ was willingly made sin for us, and took our nature
that he might stand before Gods Justice in our room as the sinner. The holy
Ghost cleares this truth in that 2 Cor. 5. last. For he has made him to be
sin for us who knew no sin. The verse before cleares up this (he) in the
Text to be meant of God. Be ye reconciled to God; for (he) has made him
sin: and this (him) in the Text must needs be meant of Christ, for it is
said of this (him) that he knew no sin; that is, he had no sin of his own;
he was that spotless lamb without sin, so was never any in flesh, since the
fall from innocence but Christ: so that the Scripture is plain, That God made
Christ is be sin for his elect body; that is, not to be guilty of any finne
in himself, but to be the surety, the debtor, and paymaster to the justice of
God for all the sins past, present, and to come, of all his elect body, so that
divine justice goes only to Christ for satisfaction, and in Christ divine
justice has full satisfaction, so that justice and grace in God, are both pure
in the salvation of sinners through Christ that is thus made sin for us. Here
we have Christ made both sin and flesh by God, and now in the flesh we
shall sinde Christ making full satisfaction to the justice of God; for all
those whom he is made sin for; as Christ came in the flesh to take up the
debt of sin for his people, and to lie under the wages of sin, which is
death; so in the flesh and in his death he gives such full satisfaction to
Almighty God, that God does acknowledge himself fully pleased in the travel
of his soul, Isa. 53.11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: That is, God does behold that satisfaction which Christ has made
to his justice for the sins of his people, and in it does acknowledge
himself fully satisfied, and for ever well pleased with his Elect in him; that
whole Chapter is a proving of Christ in the flesh, being made by God an
offering for sin, verse 10. to be wounded for the transgression of his
people, and bruised for our iniquities, having the chastisement of our peace
put upon him, so that by his stripes we are healed, it having pleased the Lord
to lay on him the iniquities of us all, 5, 6. verses.

So that here is not only Christ in the flesh, but Christ made sin for his
people; that is, has all the iniquities of his people laid on him by God, with
all the wounds, bruises, and chastisements due to them; that is, all the
punishment due to sin from Gods justice; and this Christ undergoeth to the
utmost, so that by his stripes we are heoled: that is, by his suffering and
satisfaction, his Elect are in the justice of God, wholly acquitted and
discharged, for God chose Christ to fatisfie his justice for sin, and having
laid the debt with all the weight of it upon him, and Christ having discharged
this debt to the full, Gods justice cannot but discharge it where ever it was
due; otherwise as one Text speaks, Christ had dyed in vain, and the design of
Gods free grace to poor sioners could never be accomplished: So the Apostle in
the 3. Gal. 13. tells us, that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us.

Christ as our suerty and public Redeemer, took sin with all its weight
and curse upon himself, and what he has taken from us, he has fully
delivered us from; so that in his satisfaction he does fully acquit his elect
body; the first debtor, from the whole debt and danger of sin, either in curse
or punishment: And the Apostle Paul argues out his triumph in the 8. Romans
latter end, upon this very consideration, Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of Gods Elect, it is God that justifies, who is be that condemns; it is
Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again: As if the Apostle had said;
God does justify his elect body as he is a just God: For Christ has dyed and
is risen again: That is, Christ is risen as the satisfier of Gods justice in
his death, for had not Christ's death satisfied Gods justice when as the sins,
curse, and punishment of sin, for all his Elect body was laid on him, he
could never have risen again, but now his is risen, and risen as the justifier
of his people, and the satisfier of Gods justice: Now if any shall charge the
Elect of God with what Christ has borne and satisfied for them; Even the
justice of God, or the just God will acquit them, and if God acquit who can
condemn, and therefore he glories: So the same Apostle in the 4. Romans 25
speaking of Christ as being risen from the dead, says thus, Who was delivered
for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification: That is, it was
the sins of his Elect that crucified him, and it is the justification of his
Elect for whom he dyed, that he is risen; and as nothing could have crucified
him but our sins, so now nothing can condemn those for whom he dyed, he being
risen, his resurrection pleades to all justice, satisfaction in his death: And
Christ was therefore delivered up to death for our offenses, that in his
resurrection we might be justified from all offenses, Gods great aim and
design of grace: Run thorough the former to the latter of these: Romans 10.4.
the holy Ghost tells us there, That Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes: As if he had said, The believing
soul shall find that Christ has fulfilled, and does fully keep the whole
Law for him, and so is an end to it for righteousness; that is, Christ is now
the souls righteousness not the Law; the Law is kept and fulfilled by Christ
for a believer, so that it cannot charge any soul in Christ to condemnation,
but the righteousness and justification of the soul in the sight of God is
Christ, not the Law; if any soul could keep the whole Law in it self, the
Law might have been for righteousness to that soul, but all having sinned and
come short; now the Law is an accuser not a justifier, but Christ for his
people, he fully satisfies and keeps the Law; so that Christ is the
righteousness of his people and an end to the Law for righteousness: This is
a faithful saying, 1 The. X. 15:
and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ came into the World to save
sinners: 1 Timothy 1.15. It was the end of Gods giving Christ, and of Christ
coming to save sinners from sin, Law, death, Hell, and what ever would
destroy them, and this end is effected, for Christ did not only dye but is
risen, did not only take sin but has satisfied for sin, and all this is the
work of grace, which appears in this, it is the work of God in Christ; the
Apostle Paul does acknowledge and confirm this truth in Romans 3.24, Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.
The Apostle here says it is redemption through Christ, but that does not
hinder our being justified by free grace in God; though God works through
Christ, yet it is all the work of his free grace, it is through Christ, and
Christ is through grace, there is not any tittle of redemption, or
justification through self, it is all through Christ and by grace, which is no
more but grace working through Christ; the great gift of Gods free grace, what
ever God does in Christ can no ways deminish his free grace, for Christ is the
Mediator or middle person between God and Man; in whom God magnifies his grace
to Man, and gives to his people the riches and greatness of his love
wherewith he loves them through him: This indeed does manifest the wisdom
and justice of God to redeem his people through Christ, but it no ways
lesseneth the freeness of his grace, nay it makes it more glorious grace, for
that justice is fully satisfied, makes mercy the greater mercy, and the
justified is nothing in himself all this while but a sinner; now that God
should make Christ his way to satisfy his Divine justice by, and to save
sinners; this must needs magnify the grace of God, because the saved and the
justified are nothing in the work themselves, only sinners and the worst of
sinners, saved only of grace by grace, it is grace in God and grace in Christ,
the grace of God through Christ, that makes such as are dead in sins to be
quickened together with Christ; and from this the holy Ghost tells us, that
(by grace we are saved:) Ephesians. 2.5. Christ came from Heaven to do his
Fathers will; that was, to save all which his Father had given him, not to
loose any but to raise them up at the last day, John 6.38, 39. God chooses
Christ a body, John 6.38, 39
of which h^ makes him head and Savior, and send him into the World that he
might rederme his body by satisfying justice, so that he might save the whole,
and raise them up at the last day at his redeemed body; and all this the work
of Gods free grace through Christ, for Christ does acknowledge that his work
of redemption was his Fathers will, and his word was to perfect the design of
his Fathers grace, that all God had given him might be redeemed through him,
and justified by his Fathers grace; in the death of Christ God commends his
love and grace to ^e, Romans 5.8. But God commends his love to us in that
whilst we were sinners Christ dyed for us: Mark it, the satisfaction that
Christ gave to the justice of God for sinners, was so far from being any
diminution to Gods grace, that it is a commendation of it, or an exaltation and
glory of it, for it exceedingly commends the glory of Gods love and grace, that
Christ should dye because we were sinners; there lies the emminency of Gods
love, it is Christ the gift of his grace dying for sinners, this makes all the
work grace, grace in God sends Christ to dye for sinners, whom otherwise must
dye eternally in sin; can there be any thing but grace in this; in the
Apostles account Christ's dying for us when when we were sinners, does much
demonstrate the love and grace of God, and surely so it does. Thus does God
save his people by grace, and satisfy his justice in Christ: Now Christ having
satisfied his Fathers justice, fulfilled and kept the Law to the utmost for all
his elect body, he brings them to the throne of his fathers justice, as well
as the throne of his grace, and there God as a just God does justify head and
members, Col. 2.9, 10. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily: And yet are complete in him. As if God should say, Christ has
satisfied my justice as God, Man, and though my justice were the justice of a
God; yet him in whom the fullness of the God head dwells bodily, has fully
satisfied it, and all his members are complete in him, I have received full
satisfaction for them in him, and in him do sully acquit and discharge them of
all guilt and unrighteousness, before me to all eternity, for ye are
complete in him: That i^, complete in his compleatnesse, For he was made
sin for you which knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5. last.
that you might be made the righteousness of God in him. Mark it, the end of
Christ being made sin was, that in him his elect body might be made the
righteousness of God; that is, that Christ might be our righteousness as the
gift of God, so that Christ being our righteousness we might be righteous in
the righteousness of God, and so complete in him, namely Christ, as Christ is
the righteousness of God to his people. So are they all complete in him; and
in this the righteousness of God, Saints are justified at the throne of Gods
justice, and taken up into his bosom of grace, for in union with Christ there
can be no condemnation, Romans 8. Thus does free grace in God accomplish and
finish its work of salvation for all his elect through Christ, God does this
work in Christ that it might be all free grace, and that he might take off all
boasting in the creature by the Law of faith, Romans 3.27. whom he chooses from
all eternity to be heirs of glory; he chooses them in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.
whom he calls out of nature into his grace he calls in Christ, Romans 8.
latter end: Such as he redeemeth he redeemeth through Christ, and makes him to
be redemption to them: 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 3.24. Them which God justifies and
makes righteous, he justifies and makes righteous in Christ, Romans 4.25. 1
Cor. 1.30. Romans 10.3, 4. Romans 4.25. Gal. 5.4. So Christ he is made
sanctification to his people, 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 8.10.
8.10. And when Saints are taken up into their fullness of glory, then they
reap the fullness of their union with Christ, John 17. latter end, John 14.19.
Romans 8.17. So that this whole salvation is the work and gift, of Gods free
grace wrought in Christ.

Now that it might be free grace in God, and only free grace, which begins,
carries on, and perfects this work of Salvation in all the parts and degrees
of it; this is the will of God, That the hand which takes, receives,
applies, and oppropriateth thi^ free gift of Gods grace to the souls of his
Elect body, should be the hand fo says; so that as it reigns in the souls
of believers, Romans 3, 24, 37. 1 John 3.23.
it might appear to be of grace and not of works, Romans 3.^ (...) 27. 1 John.
3.23, And this is his Commandment, that (...) should believe on the name of
his Son Jesus Christ: The will of God appears in his Commandment, and that
is to believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, to believe in Jesus as a
Savior and a Redeemer, to save and redeem his people from their sins: Matthew
1.21. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his name Jesus;
for he shall save his people from their sins. This is to believe in the name
of Jesus, to believe in Jesus, as the Savior of his people from their sins;
this is the will and commandment of God; in this sense in Scripture, Romans 3.1.
we are often said to be justified by faith, Romans 5.1. Therefore being
justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: That
is, not by faith as a meritorious grace to merit justification, for then it
were of works which would destroy the nature of faith, and the design of Gods
free grace, but by faith as an appropriating and applying hand to lay hold on
the salvation of Gods free grace through Christ, in believing of Gods Word and
work of Salvation, by his free grace through Christ, so as to cast the
salvation of our eternal souls, Romans 5.1.
upon Gods free grace, in the satisfaction and redemption of Christ; therefore
Justified by faith, we have (...) with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ:
That is, by faith laying hold on Jesus Christ as our Lord Jesus Christ, so the
soul comes to be at peace with God, and to find God to be reconciled to it,
and is thus justified in its own bosom by believing in Christ, that is, the
soul does now believe all that God has said concerning Christ, and what
Christ has done and suffered for finners, 2 Cor. 5. last.
and does by faith apply, and appropriate this to it self, my Lord Jesus
Christ, says a believing soul, whom God made to his sin for me, Isa. 53.
that I might be the righteousness of God in him, upon whom God has laid all
my iniquities, and the chastisements due to my sins, Col. 2.19.
and by whose stripes my soul is bealed; So that now I stand complete before
God in him: Thus by believing and appropriating Christ to our own souls, we
come to be justified in our own spirits, and to be at peace with God, in
believing God to be as peace with us, we come to be at peace with him; that
is, all hard thoughts of God they are gone with unbelief, now the soul
believes in God through Christ, it finds God to be a gracious loving,
reconciled Father, and is now at peace with God, or at peace in God, full of
peace by believing in God through Christ, this is the justification that faith
gives the soul, it lives upon the peace of God in Jesus Christ, and quiets
the soul in this, that God is at peace with it through Jesus Christ, and in
this sense through the whole Book of God, we must understand those Scriptures
wherein it is said we are justified by faith, Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is
not justified by the works of the Law, Gal. 2.16.
but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ: That
is, knowing that God does justify all through Christ by his free grace in
believing, and not any by works; we do believe in his free grace through
Christ, and are thereby justified, not of works; no, not by faith as a grace,
for then by works, but of his grace through Christ, laid hold on and apply by
faith; the Apostle Paul in Romans 3.22. Even the righteousness of God, which is
by faith of Jesus Christ unto all that believe, the righteousness of God is
the grace of God in Christ, or the grace of God making Christ our
righteousness, which righteousness of God by Jesus Christ we apply to our
selves by believing in the grace of God which has made Christ our
righteousness, and in Christ as he is made righteousness to us,
righteousness is the gift of grace, but if faith as an act in us could
justify us, then righteousness and justification would not be of grace, but
as faith is only a hand to lay hold on Christ the righteousness of Gods free
grace, and this faith the gift of God, not of our selves, Ephesians. 2.8. So it
has its place and work in the great design of God, the Salvation of his free
grace: So in Romans 10.4. For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes. Romans 10.4.
The holy Ghost does not there say, that by believing which is a work of grace
in the soul, the soul does put an end to the Law; that is, satisfy it, and
make it self righteous; no, for then righteousness would be of the Law, but
Christ he has put an end to the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes; that is, by believing in Christ as our righteousness, there is an
end put to the Law, the Law is no righteousness, but Christ is righteousness,
and the fulfiller of the Law for all that thus believe on him; faith is only
the hand to lay hold of, and to appropriate and apply Christ to the soul whom
is Gods righteousness, and the sulfiller of this Law for all that so believe
on him: Believers should be exceeding tender of preserving the glory of Gods
grace, for it is by grace that we are saved, and only of grace that we are
what we are; and for this very cause was faith made the hand to lay hold on
grace; grace in God has not made a hand to destroy it self, we must be very
watchful in this thing, and make the grace of God to be the trial of faith,
for that faith cannot be true which does not advance the free grace of God;
the highest pitch of faith in which it is very glorious, is to apply the grace
of God to the soul, and to cast the soul upon the free grace of God, to
unselfe the creature, to trample its best works under feet as dross and dung,
and resting full in the grace of God through Christ, desiring only to be found
in him, Not having our own righteousness which is of the Law; Phil. 3.8, 9.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith, Phil. 3.8, 9. True faith, it lifts up free grace in God, by
seeking his righteousness by faith; it aims no higher but to be a hand to
receive the gift of grace (Gods righteousness, the Lord Jesus Christ.)

The true work of faith in the soul is to bring in Christ, and cast out the
Law as that Schoolmasters which keep^ the soul under fears till Christ came,
and to acquaint the soul that it is a Child of God through Christ Jesus, Gal.
3.25, 26. John 6.40, 47
Gal. 3.25, 26. and that in Christ it has everlasting life, John 6.40.47. Thus
believing in Christ the soul is strengthened in the inward man, Christ
dwelling in the heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.16, 17.
Ephesians. 3.16, 17. and establishing the soul in its union with Christ, that
soul which believes in Christ as the gift of Gods free grace, in whom God
gives eternal life, 1 John 5.10, 11.
has the witness in himself; 1 John. 5.10, 11. He is sealed up to the love
of God, in believing the record of God, that says he loves it freely and has
given Christ for it, now the soul believes this word of God, and rests upon
it, take Gods word for its eternal salvation; this is the true office of faith
in the foul to lay hold of the Salvation of Gods free grace in Christ,
declared by his word, and to apply and appropriate (...) to it self, so as to
rest and depend wholly upon it for Saivation, and herein the soul comes to have
the witness within its self, by believing thus on the Son of God: That it
might appear^ to be the will of God, that all which are saved of his free grace
by Christ, should be made partakers of this Salvation in themselves by
believing in him, and the salvation of his grace. I shall of at two things to
consideration:

First, The Covenant of Gods free grace.

And secondly, The promulgation and spreading abroad of the Gospel.

First, Gods Covenant of free grace in Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. and Heb. 8.8, 9,
10, 11, 12. In which God does freely engage himself, To be our God, and that
we shall be his people, to put his Low in our inward parts, and write it in
our hearts, that all his people shall know him from the least to the greatest,
and that he will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sins no more: In
this Covenant God wraps up all the parts of the salvation of his free grace,
and does fully oblige himself to them all: Now what is the reason that God
does thus oblige himself by Covenant, is it because of himself, that he might
not go back from his design of grace to his people?

No, he is God that changes not, an immutable God, Numb. Number. 23.19. Psalm. 90.2.
23.19. God from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 90.2. But God makes this
Covenant for our sake, that we might believe in him as a God of grace, and a
faithful God; the holy Ghost argues thus, he tells us that a faithful man
will keep his Covenant, much more God; as if he had said, The faithful God
has made his Covenant of grace, that you might believe he will make good his
Covenant, as he is a faithful God; God obliges his own faithfulness in a
Covenant of grace, that his people might have both his grace and his
faithfulness for a foundation of their faith, God will be believed by his
people, and therefore he ingageth himself as a faithful gracious God: to the
faith of his people, says God, I will pardon your sins and remember them no
more, I will put my Law in your hearts, the Law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people; believe all this,
for I will do it says God, I the faithful, the gracious and omnipotent God;
I that am omnipotent, who can hinder me, I that am gracious, so that your
sins can be no bar; nay, I that am faithful and cannot lie nor repent, I
have spoken it and I will make it good, what is the meaning of all this? but
that we should believe the faithful word of our faithful and gracious God; he
will oblige his own faithfulness by way of Covenant, that we might believe
in the free salvation of his own grace made out in that Covenant.

Secondly, Consider what is Gods end in the promulgation, and spreading abroad
of the Gospel.

It is not that his people should believe in the salvation of his own grace,
why is Christ pleased to be the way of Gods salvation to his people of his own
free grace, so that whom ever believes thus on him, has everlasting life,
John 6.47. But that they might believe and be saved by him, 29. verse, This is
the work of God that ye believe on him that he has sent: This is the end of
the Gospel, for it is the effect of it, where it works savingly, this is Gods
work, or the work of his spirit in the Gospel, to make souls believe in
Jesus Christ whom he has sent; when Christ sent forth his Disciples to preach
the Gospel, he directs them to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and
bids them to Preach this, Mat. 10.6, 7.
that the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand, Mat. 10.6, 7.
Matthew. 10.6, 7. That is, go to poor lost souls in themselves, and tell them
that the Salvation of Gods free grace i^ at hand, it is near to them, it
seeks them, and saves them freely; but what is the end of this, only that
the history of Christ might come to these lost souls; no sure, that is not
enough for lost sheep, but that they might believe in the salvation of Gods
free grace and be saved, and for this end has God preserved his Gospel in
the World, and made it to prosper, against all the power and malice of Satan
and his instruments, that thereby his people might hear the glad tidings of
salvation by free grace in Christ, and in the believing of it be saved and
established, John 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which s^tt^ the Son and believes on him may have everlasting life: It is not
only a bare hearing or seeing of Christ in the flesh, but believing on him,
that makes Christ to be everlasting life to the soul; and this is the end of
God in the Gospel, that souls might haw everlasting life, through believing
in Christ; it is faith in the souls of his people that God intends both by
giving the Gospel to the World, and preserving it in the World: So that for
these two reasons, which might have bin exceedingly more enlarged, is does
appear, That this is the will of God in keeping his salvation to be wholly the
work of his greece; that the hand which received and applies it should be a
hand of faith, which is the work of his own free grace in the soul.

Thus far I have held forth matter for faith in the souls of believers to
rest on for establishment in the point of salvation, by showing, in some of
Gods Attributes what he is in himself, and what the design of his free grace
is, in the salvation of sinners.

My intention is to hold out more matter for faith to take in, before I give
the arguments for Faith, or motives to Faith.

Now I find this by my self, and others; that fears and doubtings in the
soul, next to its own salvation, is about the Church and people of God on
earth, how it will fare with them, and therefore I shall in the next place take
that into consideration.

You shall hear poor souls that love Christ and his people, b^t are weak in
faith, make these sad complaints; O the poor Church and people of Christ, what
will become of them; the multitudes of the World they hate them, so that they
use all their power and policy to ruin and destroy them; Princes off the Earth
join themselves together and take counsel against them, if any in power own
them, it is but a little number, and they but for a little time, we find them
men subject to temptations, many times when as by fair promises and some
sinall beginnings men in power beget a confidence in Gods people concerning
them, till fairer advantages are offered by Satan in a temptation to their
flesh, and then they prove false to former promises and undo all their
beginnings of good, by setting open the Floodgates of evil and tyranny upon
the Church and people of God; Satan shows them the World, they are taken with
the temptation, fall down and worship him; and if Gods people will not do so
too, then the furnace must be hear seven times hotter then before; and if
they desire to go into the Wilderness to worship the Lord their God, then they
are idle, the Taskmasters must increase their work; so that truly says this
poor bleeding heart, if a man have any thing more then a naked profession of
Religion, in such a form that will be turned by every blaft of power from men,
he is then taken for a Sectary, an Heritique, and an enemy to Caesar; So that
not only the ignorant multitude, but even Authority it self, which should
protect them, is set against them: Now help Lord, says these afflicted
Spirits, Psalm. 12.
good and goodly men they cease, for the faithful fall among the children of
men: They speak vanity every one with his neighbor; with flattering lips and
with a double heart do they speak: So that all worldly men, who are much the
greater number, are either open or private enemies to the Church and people of
God; therefore words are but the fleshly policy of their false hearts, the
mischief lies at the root; so that what ever the Serpent brewed, prove^, their
businesle is to bruise the heel of the Woman, Christ in his Church and people;
So that indeed, the condition of Gods Church and people in the World is very
sadd, they are a Lilly amongst Thorns, enemies either open or private round
about them.

Is it so poor heart? Why then look up with an eye of faith, are all men
false, yet God is true; will not the powers on earth bea kind to Zion, do
they neglect their duty to protect the praiseworthy; Yet fear not, God will
he kinds and faithful too, he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, all the
powers is Heaven and Earth must obey him, for thy encouragement, and matter for
thy faith to build on to the establishments of thy ^^^rit, take into thy
bosom, and seriously consider what follows.

First, Isa. 43.1.
confider Gods interest in his people; Isa. 43.1. (...) now thus says the Lord
that created thee, O Jacob, and he that ^^^med thee O Israel; fear not, for I
have redeemed thee, I have ^^led thee by my Name, thou art mine. Observe the
end of God is this Scripture is to keep up his peoples hearts above fear, and
the way God takes is this, to let them know his interests is them; why says
God, I have not only created these, but I have redeemed thee also, thou have
not only my first but also my second creation upon thee, the new creature;
thou are my redeemed one, my image, so that thou bear my name, thy (...)
myee look upon thee as the redeemed of the Lord, thou beare^ my Name, and thou
art mine, my interest, thou art Jacob my servant, Isa. 44.^.
and Israel whom I have chosen: Mark the Scriptures, Th^^ art my chosen
interest, my redeemed interest, my new crea^^^ interest, my servant whom I have
chosen to bear my names the^ are thou mine, Now why should thou fear?
Do thou think I will let my name be blotted out? I am God not Men, I cannot
Iyes I cannot he changable; if I choose thee to love thee, to make thee my
redeemed one, upon whom I will ingrave my Nature, as a holy God in the new
creature, and so proclaim thee to the World to be mine; I will never cast thee
off again, nor out of my love and care; thou art mine, and I am thine, my love
thine, I am thine as I am a God of free grace in Christ, I am thine, my power
is thine; that is, it is all for thee, as I am (...) Omnipotent, Almighty,
alsufficient, and Eternal God, so (...) I thy God, therefore fear not; none
can pluck the^ out of my hand: Z^^h. 2.12.
Gods Church and people are his inheritance, Zach. 2.12. And the Lord shall
inherit Judah his portion in the holy L^^^ Gods people are his inheritance in
that Land where they are, God so accounte of them, that is, though Heaven and
Earth be the Lord, yes he counts his people his inheritance, that which he
most loves and priseth; so that he will never cast them off nor destroy them:
God uses these terms mee^ely to speak ^o our capacity, that he might tell
us we are to him, that which (...) count most dear to us, so as never to part
with them, but to use our utmost power to preserve and keep them, as our Name,
and our Inheritance, we are exceeding tender of these, and do our utmost to
preserve them; so says God, my Church and people are to me exceeding dear,
as tender as the apple of my eye, all my power shall preserve them, they are my
Name and my Heritage; nay the Church and people of God is Gods habitation and
his dwelling place, not as a confined God, but as a glorious God and loving
Father, Ezekiel 37.26, 27, 28. Ezekiel. 37.26, 27, 28.
God Covenants to set his Sanctuary and his Tabernacle in the midst of his
people for evermore: That is, I will dwell amongst you for ever, you shall be
my delight, and my habitation for evermore. I will walk among you, says God,
and will be your God, and you shall be my people, Levit. 26.12. I am your God
you are my interest, Lev. 26.12.
I will live in you and walk amongst you, as in my Heritage, and the people
which I have chosen to bear my Name; so the Apostle Paul writing to the Church
of God at Corinth, 2 Cor. 6.16. 2 Cor. 6.16.
tells them that they are the Temple of the living God, the people whom God
had chosen to dwell in, and to walk in them as their God, and they as his
people: We see then this is the Churches interest in God, they are his people
whom he ownes for his, dwells in them, sets his Sanctuary and his Tabernacle
in the midst of them, walks with them, puts his Name upon them, makes them his
own Inheritance, and is as tender of them as of the apple of his eye; and this
God declares to his Church and people that they should not fear, for he has
power enough to preserve his own interest, and love enough to answer all their
wants; Gods people they are the sheep of his pasture, Psalm. 100. Psalm. 100.
He feeds and keeps them, as his own peculier interest, the children of
Zion find bread enough in their Fathera house, Psalm. 134. last. Psalm. 134.
last.
The Lord that made Heaven and Eerth bless thee out of Zion: As if the
Psalmist had said, God as a God of blessngs dwells in Zion, that is his
heritage, his throne where he sits and blesses; So in the 146 Psalm. last. The
Lord that reigns for ever, Psalm. 146. last.
even the God of Zion: and the 147 Psalm. 12. Praise thy God O Zion: Psalm.
147.12.
The Lord is for ever thy God: O Zion, therefore praise him; this i^ Gods
interest, he is the God of Zion, and so he re^gties forever, there he wraps up
the glory of (...) grace, and there he right in his power and greatness for
over: This doubtless is ground of great establishment to our souls concerning
the Church and people of God though in the wilderness, amongst ravenous
beasts, and subtle foxes that seeks to destroy the tender vines; ye^ eve^ here
they are Gods interest, his inheritance, his chosen and redeemed ones, in whom
he dwells, and amongst these golden Candlesticks he walks, so that his
Church and people are certainly safe as they are thus his interest.

But as if this were not enough to our doubting unbelieving hearts, see how God
has engaged his faithfulness to his Church and people by way of Covenant,
besides the first making of his Covenant of grace in the 31. Jer. 31. Hebr. 8.
Isa. 59.20, 21.
Jer. and Hebr. 8. Observe how he follows it, Isa. 59.20, 21. And the
Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in
Jacob says the Lord. As for me this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord;
My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord from henceforth and for ever. This is
Gods Covenant of giving Christ and his Spirit to his Church and people, that so
he might preserve his interest in them for ever; he makes his Covenant in
Christ, that it might be an everlasting Covenant, Fsahn 89.34, 35, 36.
and that believers might plead his own Covenant before him in Christ. So in
Psalm 89.34, 35, 36. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie
unto David. His seed shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before
me. By David here is meant Christ; God makes a Covenant and an Oath in Christ,
that his seed, his Elect, Gods Interest, his Church and people, shall endure
and stand before him for ever: God makes his Covenant to strengthen faith in
his Church and people, that we might argue thus, God is an infinite, pure,
faithful, and unchangeable God: so that what her covenants and swears to,
must certainly be, not one tittle of his word can fail, because he is a
faithful God, and his faithfulness he has freely engaged to his Church and
people by Covenant, for the establishment of their souls.

In the next place, consider Gods care of his Church and people, and his
promises to them, in which he declares his interest in them. Isa. 43.2, 3.
In Isa. 43.2, 3. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the rivers, they shall not everflow thee. When thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I
am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel, they Savior.

Observe Gods care of his Church, they shall not go without him: and then the
effect of his presence, though they go through dangers, yet in Gods care and
presence they shall be preserved from all danger and ruin: God preferveth them
as his own interest; though they go through deep waters, even rivers, yet
they shall not overflow them; God keeps their heads above water, he will not
let his own interest sincke; though they walk through the fire; yet God
preserves his interest from burning and consuming: This care over his Church
and people God does engage himself to by promise; thus God engages his
faithfulness, that he will preserve his own interest in the World, his Church
and faithful people; both which, his interest, and his faithfulness are
strong arguments to faith, and God makes this use of them. Fear not (says
God) I am with thee, verse. 5. So in the next Chapter, beg. Fear not O Jacob my
servant, Isa. 44. beg.
and Jesurun whom I have chosen, for I will give you water when you thirst, and
pour my Spirit upon your seed. And so goes on, making promises to his people
and comforting them in their interest in him; I am your God, and your Redeemer,
the holy one of Israel, besides me there is no God. If I say I will preserve
you, none can hurt you, for besides me there is no God: I that am your God, am
the only God, and I that am this will preserve you in all dangers as my own
interest, I will not leave you in fire or water; that is, not in any danger: so
God speaks comfortably to Zion, in Isa. 51.3. He says, Isa. 51.3.
he will comfort all her wast places, and he will make her wilderness like
Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be
found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody. God for his Churches
comfort does engage himself to make her fruitful in her most bar^en places,
and it shall be the fruit of joy and gladness: She shall be fruitful as the
garden of the Lord, and in the Spirit of the Lord, and the fruits of that
Spirit shall be thankfulness and a voice of melody to the Lord. Here is God
still maintaining his own interest in his people, in all his care over his
Church and people, and in his promises to them, therefore fear not, for the
interest of God has God for its interest. So in Ezekiel. 34.20. to the end; Ezekiel.
34.20. to the end.
there God makes many a precious promise to his people, and expresses much of
his care over them, and what a defense he will be to them: Says God, I will be
judge between Cattle and Cattle, I will save my own flock, they shall us more
be a prey to those proud cattle which thrust with the side and shoulder: But
says God, I will set a shepherd over them, my servant D^vid (which is Christ)
and he shall feed them, he shall be their shapheard, and I will be their God;
yea, Christ shall be a Prince among them, I the Lord have spoken it. And I will
make a Covenant of peace with the beasts of the field, so that they shall dwell
safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods, and all about them shall be
a blessing to them; Thus shall they know that I am with them, and that they are
my people and the flock of my pasture says the Lord God.

Here is a bundle of promises, all full of mercies, goodness, care, and
providence from God; what is the reason of all this? why says God, they are my
people: My interest is in them, they are the sheep of my pasture, therefore
Christ shall be their sh^pheard and their Prince, he shall take care of them,
and rule over them with righteousness: Do you think that I am careless of
my people, my interest in the world, for I have given them a Prince of power
and righteousness to rule over them, and to take care of them, even Jesus
Christ, who shall feed them and preserve them as the sheep of my pasture. Isa:
4.5, 6.
So likewise in Isa. 4.5.6. God promises to be a defense about all the glory of
Zion, to be to them as a pillar of cloud by day, and of fire by night; to be a
tabernacle, a refuge, and a covering to them from heat and storms. This is
the fruits of the Kingdom of Christ, it was Gods care in making him King over
his Church; that they might not only be governed in righteousness, but also
preserved by his power, and in him have a defense about all their glory, Hosea
14.4. God promises to heal the backe-sliding of his people, and to love them
freely. This is a precious promise indeed, that Gods free love will heal the
back slidings of his people; it is a sign he will keep his interest in them,
if he loves them freely, and that free love does sanctify them, and heal
their backslidings; nay God does promise to do it, so the this people may
plead his promise to them when they find their own wants. See what care God
takes of his Church and people whom he loves freely, Isai 27.3.
Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment lest any hurt
it, I will keep it day and night. See what care God taken of his Vineyard, to
keep it day and night, so that none can hurt it, and to water it every moment,
that it may be very fruitful in the spirit: God will make his Vinyard holy, it
is his own, he will manifest his interest in making it like him, and then he
will preserve it as his own, never leave nor forsake them, keep them day and
night safe in his free love and protection, so that not any shall have power to
hurt them. Wicked men, though very industrious, cannot be so watchful to harm
the people of God, as God is to keep them from harm; he is a God that neither
slumbers nor sleeps, he takes care of his people day and night, yea, every
moment; there is no fear that he will loose his interest for want of care, nor
can he loose them for want of power, for he is an infinite omnipotent God, and
there is no God besides him, therefore care and power in God is sure defense to
all his peoples glory, who are his interest, Isa. 30.18. The Lord waits to be
graclous to his people. As if he had said, God stays for opportunities to do
his people good in, his heart and hand is full of mercies, and he waits to
show forth the riches of his grace to them: God there exalts himself to show
mercy to his people: And the Prophet David makes this ground to exhort Princes
to give glory to God, by reason of his power and protection to his people, in
Ps. Psalm 29.10.11.
29.10, 11. The Lord sits upon the flood (says he) yea, the Lord sets
King for ever, the Lord will give strength to his people, the Lord will bless
his people with peace. It is the Lord that is King, it is he that reigns, and
only can bless with peace: and whom will he thus bless, why, his people, his
inheritance in the world, therefore Princes and earthly powers commit folly to
think they can curse where he will bless; for the Lord sits King for ever,
and all earthly powers are made by him, and for to be his fo^tstoole, so that
he can kick them down when he pleases: and if they meddle with his
anointed chosen heritage, he will reprove Kings for their sakes; That is, as
they are his foote-stool, so he will trample them to dust, if they touch the
apple of his eye, God will preserve his interest, his people, when as he shall
turn the world to its first lump of darkness, and were it not for this his
interest that is in the world, the world would soon have a period. And in Psalm.
112.6. Psalus 112.6.
Surely (says David) a good man he shall not be moved for ever, the righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance. It is the righteous man that is Gods
interest, whom he has in everlasting remembrance of mercy. Psalm 125.1.
So in Psalm 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which
cannot be moved, but abides for ever. Mount Zion, that is, the Church and
people of God, which is Gods interest, it cannot be moved; this mountain can
never be overturned, it is fixed in God, he takes care of it as that whereon
he has placed his Name, to abide for ever. So in Psalm. 133. last. Upon the
mountains of Zion, there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for
evermore. Zion is the place where God commands his blessings and life for
evermore to dwell; God dwells in Zion as a God of blessings, and the life of his
Church and people for evermore, Psalm 147.2, 3.
Psalm 147.2, 3. The Lord does build up Jerusalem, he gathers together the
outcasts of Israel. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their
wounds. This is Gods care over his inheritance in the World, his chosen people,
he builds them up, and gathers them together, he heals the
brokenhearted, and binds up the wounded; that is, he makes them what they
are, and supplyeth all their wants, he makes them his people, and takes care of
them as his people: and upon this his interest he does expostulate the case
with his people, how they should think that he should forget them, Isa. 49.14,
15, 16. But Zion says the Lord, has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten
me. Why says God, can my people argue this thing with me? Can a mother forget
her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold I have graven
thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. Mark it,
God puts the case as home as possible creature-affections could carry it; can a
tender mother forget the son of her womb, and the child of her breast? yea it
is possible, for she is a creature: but what then, I am God, I will not forget
my people; why says God, you are my people, my interest, I cannot forget you,
I have graven you upon the palms of my hands: you are continually before me,
you are engraven in my hands, and my heart too, my eternal love has done it,
and eternity cannot wipe it out; you are ever before me as my interest, I can
never forget you, my thoughts are ever upon you for good, and my care is ever
over you for protection; my right hand is over you, and my left hand is under
you, my loving kindness does embrace you for ever, you are the jewels I have
chosen to glorify my free grace on to all eternity; you perhaps have found
man false, what i^ that to me; though they seek to serve their corrupt ends on
you, yet my end is pure, to preserve my glory in you as my interest, you must
not judge me by men, the World is their interest, but you are mine: And when
they slight and trample you under foot to close with the World, then will I
slight and trample them under soot in the preservation of you that are my
peculiar interest, I will not give up my people whilst I keep my being; and I
am God from everlasting to everlasting, and there is no God besides me: I will
keep my people as my being, for it is the design of my eternal love and free
grace that my people shall have their being in me and with me for ever, you are
graven upon the palms of my hands for evermore; you are my people in Covenant,
the elect and chosen of my grace, to be my inheritance and dwelling place for
ever, I cannot forget you, you are ever before me, you lie in the wounds of my
Son Jesus Christ, and you are righteous in my own righteousness; so that to
forget you, were to forget my self and Jesus Christ; I am a full treasury of
mercy and grace, and you are the only vessels whom I have chosen to fill with
my mercy and grace to all eternity, think you that I can forget you, as you are
my inheritance; so I have made my self your inheritance, Romans 8.17.
and you are fellow heirs with Christ, is it possible I can forget you to whom
I have given my self for an inheritance; no, I have you in remembrance as my
beloved ones for ever, my own grace has begotten you, my heart of love is to
you, and my outstretched arm of power and Majesty is for you, you shall know
I have not forgotten you.

I, and so shall your enemies too, they shall know that you are my interest,
and my care is over you as my chosen Inheritance, whom I will preserve; in the
utter ruin and destruction of your enemies. Bloody hard-hearted Pharaoh and
all his Host overthrown in the Red Sea, does proclaym^ this to the World; so
those that cast the three emminent Children of God into the fiery Furnace, they
were consumed with the blast of the Furnace, when the Saints of God walked
harmless in the fire; in the 33 Isa. beginning, Isa. 33. beg.
there is a w^^ pronounced against those that made waste and spoils of Gods
people, and dealt treacherously with them; the righteous God will be sure to
spoil all treacherous wretches which deal treacherously with his people: I,
says God, do you think that I have forgotten my people, and that you shall
prosper in your treachery? Surely to, I have set my King upon my holy hill of
Zion, Psalm. 2.
and he shall break the enemies of my Inheritance, my Church and people, with
an Iron Rod, he shall dash them in pieces like a porters vessel: Observe the
Scripture, it is the power of Christ that is the defense of his Church, and the
ruining of their enemies, and he does it with an Iron Rod; Christ reigns over
them in his indignation, he dasheth them in pieces very easily, as a Potter
does a brickle piece of clay, and when they are thus broken they are quite
destroyed, never to be made whole again, no more th^n a broken Pot; the
enemies of Christ and his people, they rage, take counsel together, and set
themselves against the Lord Christ and his anointed people, but the Lord he
fitteth in Heaven and laugheth them to scorn; what says God, you think to
bring your ends about, and your designs to pass, you think your counsels
very deep they cannot be found out, and your power so great that it cannot be
shaken; and nothing will satisfy your lusts but to destroy my interest from
off the face of the Earth; I tell you says God, you imagine a vain thing, and
you are all this while inventing your own ruins, you engage your selves to
certain destruction when you set your selves against my people, be you what
you will, Kings or Counsels, you shall surely be crushed to pieces in the
undermining my interest, it is your folly to look upon them in themselves, so
they seem a poor despisable people which does harden your hearts, but did you
see them as they are in me, my interest, you would then see your folly; what
are you, or all the Nations of the Earth to me, no more then the drop of a
bucket, or the small dust of the balance, I will speak to you in my wrath,
and vex you in my sore displeasure, if once you touch my people the apple of
mine eye; therefore says he, be wise O ye Kings, and be instructed you Judges
of the Earth, you that make Laws, and you that rule and reign, take heed, be
wise, meddle not with my Inheritance, I am only King and Lawmakers there, i^
will be your wisdom to kiss the Son, and to serve him with fear and
trembling; but if you entrench upon his Kingdom and offend one of his little
ones, I assure you he will be angry, he is zealous over them and his own
glory, he will have no sharere in his Kingdom, nor will he suffer any to rend
his Flock, but he will be angry, and then O Kings and Counselors, you shall
all perish from the way, you shall never bring your designs to effect, God
will bring his design to perfection, which is your ruin and your end, when
Christ is entrenched upon in his glory and his jewels, then is his wrath
kindled very hot, and then he shows himself what he is in his victory over
his enemies; in the 63. of Isa. Then he comes from Edom with dyed garments,
stained all over in the blood of his enemies, this is the day of his vengeance,
now he treads down his enemies in his anger, makes them drunk in his fury,
and brings down their strength to the earth, thus does Christ destroy the
enemies of his people, For he has an interest in them as God has: in this 2
Psalm 6. Christ is King of his Church, Psalm. 2. Isa. 9.6. Cant. 4.8, 1. Reve.
19.7. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Mat. 12.49, 50
the government is upon his shoulder, Isaiah 9.6. The Church is Christ Spouse,
Cant. 4.8. his Love, 1. She is the Lambs Wife, Rev. 19.7. The body of which
Christ is the head, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. And Christ owneth his Saints and people to
be his Brethren, and Sisters, Mat. 12.49, 50.

Now what do all these relations speak, but union with Christ: Cant. 2.16. My
beloved is mine and I am his, Cant. 2, 16.
and Christ's interest in his people, which he will preserve as his glory and
delight; he will not spoil his Kingdom, nor suffer others to do it, he rules
in the midst of his Kingdom, in the hearts of his people with a golden
Septre, even his own spirit, he binds them to his commands by his words of
love, and he protecte them from ruining by their enemies with his Rod of Iron,
he will be sure to preserve his Kingdom at his glory, this his glory he will
not give to another; and his Spouse he will keep as his delight, she is the
Wife of his bosom, his love, his fair one, one whom he has made fair by his
love, and lovely in his loveliness, complete in him, he has washed her
clean in his own blood, and has made it life blood to her, so that she
lives to the glory of his grace, that streams in his blood; Christ has made
his Church so clean in his blood, that it becomes his own body, and he the
head of it; Christ having purified a body for himself, will never be a head
without a body; for he is (...) head as can both purify and preserve his body;
yea, he is such a head as is sensible of the sufferings of his body, as Christ
has taken his people into all the relations of love, so they shall surely
find the fullness of his love in all those relations; Christ will be a King of
love to his Kingdom, a Husband of love to his Spouse, a loving head to his
body; and all his Brethren and Sisters shall find him a Brother of love; Nay
he is a loving Redeemer, so full of love that he became sin for us to make us
righteous, so full of love that he would bear all the stripes due to our
sins, so that we might be healed in his stripes: What do you argue from
hence?

Why that he will never cease to love his people, nor will he ever lose his
interest in them, or be failing of his love in any relation to them: he will
certainly preserve them alive for whom he has dyed, to give live: Because I
live, says Christ, you live also, John 14.19.
John 14.19. You are my body I am your head, I have life in my self and give
life to my body; for I cannot be a head to a dead body, what life is in me is
your life, for that is your interest in me, and this is my glory and the glory
of my Fathers grace through me, That whom ever believes in me has
everlasting life, John 6.47. John 6.47. John 14.1.
Now says Christ, let not your hearts be troubled, you believe in God,
believe also in me, John 14.1. Believe in God through me, I have an interest
in you as God has, and I will be very tender of it, for I dyed to purchase it,
and I live to maintain and preserve it, and assure your selves as certain as
I live you live, I live that in me you might have eternal life, and that God
in me may fulfill all those promises which he has made unto you of my
peaceful Kingdom, and of the righteousness of my reign in you and over you;
therefore consider them, they are Gods promises made in me, not one tittle of
them shall fail, they are your portion, your peculiar interest; take them and
live upon God in them, for he will make them all good in me; you are Gods
interest and mine, and these are your interest in God through me, Fear not
little flock it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, the
Kingdom of grace and of glory, of righteousness and peace, where none shall
be able to disturb or distroy you.

I intend here to gather up some Scriptures together which holds forth this
righteous and peaceful, Kingdom of Christ in the Earth.

A^ first, Jer. 23.5, 6.
Jer. 23.5, 6. Behold, the day is come says the Lord, that I will raise unto
David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall
execute judgment and justice in the Earth.

In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is
his Name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

This is a promise of the righteous and peaceable Kingdom of Christ, this
righteous branch and King in the Text is meant of Christ, for this is his Name,
The Lord our Righteousness, which is Christ, whom is a God made righteousness
to us; now behold Christ our King and righteousness, his day is come says the
Lord, when he shall reign in righteousness amongst his people, and shall
execute judgment and justice in the Earth, and in his days Judah shall be
saved and Israel shall dwell safely, it shall be a Kingdom of peace and
safety, for the Lord our righteousness shall reign; a righteous reign must
needs produce a peaceful Kingdom, therefore Christ the righteous is called
the Prince of peace, when he shall execute his judgment then will justice be
done in the Earth; then Judah shall be saved from the hands of the spoyler, and
Israel shall be kept in safety: I, this will make a Kingdom of peace indeed,
and this is the peace that Christ our righteousness will bring in the days of
his glorious reign amongst his people in the Earth; so in the 11. of Isaiah,
Isa. 11.1. to the 10.
from the 1. to the 10. verse: There is a Prophecy of the peaceable Kingdom,
of the Branch out of the Root of Jesse, which branch is Christ; it is said the
spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, and it shall be a spirit of Counsel,
and might, and knowledge, and the fear of the Lord; so that he shall judge the
poor with righteousness, and reprove with equity, for the meek of the Earth:
That righteousness shall be his girdle, and faithfulness the girdle of his
reins: Now observe what is the fruit of the reign of this righteous King,
why it is peace in all the holy Mountain, neither Wolf nor Leopard, Lion or
Bear, Aspe nor Cockatrice, shall hurt or destroy in any part of it, but this
King of righteousness will make the Wolf and the Lamb dwell together, the
Leopard to lie down with the Kid, and the Calfe and young Lion together, and a
little child to lead them; the Cow and the Bear with their young ones to feed
and lie downs together, and the sucking child to play at the hole of the Aspe,
and the weaned child to put his hand into the Cockatrices Den. What is the
meaning of all this? Why it is a description of that glorious change which the
righteousness of Christ in his reign over the Earth, shall have upon the
natures of his and his peoples Enemies those Beasts of prey; though they
remain Wolfe^ and Leopards, Lions and Bears, Aspe^ and Cockatrices, yet the
righteousness of his reign shall be so glorious that it shall chiane up their
devouring nature and take off their strength to mischief, his righteous
government shall over awe them, and be as a hook in their nostrills, so that a
young child, a little strength shall lead them, for the earth shall be full of
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea; God shall be knowns to
reign over all the Earth; it shall be covered with the brightness of his
glory, his enemies shall know and tremble, and his people shall know and
rejoice: Isa. 42. beg.
So the same Prophet in the 42. Isa. beginning, speaking of Christ, says of
him, A bruised reed shall be not break, and smoking Flax shall he not
quench: for he shall bring forth judgment unto truth, he shall judge and give
judgment in truth, he shall set judgment in the Earth, and the Isles shall
wait for his Law.

He shall reign and command the whole earth, they shall all wait for his Law,
and then shall the whole Earth be filled with judgment when the righteous
child Jesus shall reign: So the Prophet David speaking of the reign of
Christ, under Solom^n his Type, in the 72. Psalm 7. so on: In his days shall
the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace so long as the Sun and Moon
endures; he shall have dominion from Sea to Sea, unto the ends of the Earth,
those that dwell in the Wilderness, the Beasts of prey, shall bow down to
him, and his enemies shall lick the dust; Kings shall come in with their
presents, and offer gifts to him; yea all Kings shall fall down before him,
all Nations shall serve him, and he shall deliver the needy and poor, he shall
redeem their souls from deceit, his Name shall endure for ever; men shall be
blessed in him, and all Nations shall call him blessed, the whole earth shall
be filled with his glory.

Thus will Christ reign in righteousness, and all the Kings of the Earth
shall tremble for their unrighteous reigns, they shall all come in and offer
up their Crowns and Sceptres to this King of righteousness, bow down before
him and lay all their power at his feet, and wait upon him for his Law, then
shall the Earth rejoice that the Lord reigns, and then shall the righteous be
glad that the King of Zion rule^ in the whole Earth, then shall the Land be a
Land of peace; when righteousness reigns then will peace flourish like the
Tree planted by the river side, that is always green and flourishes: When
Christ comes to reign thus in the Earth, it must needs be peace, for then all
his people will be one, they will all have but one Name, the Lords people and
his name written upon them; Zachariah 14.9. And the Lord shall be King over
all the Earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his Name one. When the
Lord thus reigns over the whole Earth, his people will be one, then Names
shall not divide his people, for they shall all be known by his Name, and he
their King; a holy King and a holy People, he shall be known by his holiness
and righteousness, so shall his people; his holy Name shall be written upon
them, and that shall be a defense about all their glory: Take one Scripture
more which is exceeding full to this purpose, in the 2. Isaiah beginning: Isa.
^. beg. Micha 4. beg.
And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted
above the Hills: and all Nations shall flow into it, and many people shall go
and say, Come ye and let us go to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of
the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: For out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem; and he shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke my people;
and they shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning-hookes; Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more.

First, this Scripture tells us the time of Christ's reigning thus in
righteousness, it shall be in the last days the latter end of the World.

Secondly, How this thing shall be, that Christ shall be lifted up above all
Hills and Mountains, above all powers and greatness in the World; he shall
then take all power and government into his own hands, all the Mountains
shall flow into him; the Mountain of the Lord shall swallow them all up, there
shall in those days go forth no Law but what goes forth of Zion, Christ
shall reign amongst his people, and the Earth shall be filled with the peace
of his reigning in righteousness, when the Law goes forth of Zion, then the
spirit for War shall be rebuked, and the Sword of Gods spirit shall turn the
Sword of the flesh into Plow-shares, and the Spears into Pruninghooks, so that
Nation shall never war against Nation more, all Wars shall be hush't and gone,
righteousness shall reign, and peace which is the fruits thereof; for War
is the fruit of unrighteous reigning and governing, nothing but righteousness,
justice, and judgment, can bring lasting peace into the World, or any part of
it, and I wish all that love peace did love righteousness as well, and embrace
peace for righteousness sake; all such as do so, Christ will satisfy them,
for behold he comes with healing under his wings, he brings righteousness and
peace with him, his righteousness brings peace; he is the righteous King and
the Prince of peace, and he that shall come will come and will not tarry.

But if any shall ask what I intend in all this:

My answer is, To gather up matter for faith to live upon, to the establishment
of my own soul and others, By believing in the Lord our God: And I trust I
shall not lose my end; it appears to me to be precious matter, for Faith to
live upon God, and Christ, to the establishment of souls: That the Church and
people of God on Earth, are Gods interest and Christ's interest, Gods
Inheritance and Christ's Kingdom, over whom he does reign in righteousness;
his jewels, the purchase of his blood, and the throne of his glory; those whom
God has chosen from all eternity to be the redeemed of his free grace, to
unbosome his love, and reveal his glory too, to all eternity; those to whom he
has given Christ and in him all things, to whom God is a God in Covenant, and
that of free grace, for whom God has satisfied his own justice through his
grace in Christ, and made them complete, even his own righteousness in him;
for whose sake God reproves Kings, overthrowes unrighteous powers, dashing them
in pieces like a Potters vessel with his Iron Rod, and amongst whom Christ
shall reign King for ever, in peace and righteousness.

This is to me abundant ground of faith, to believe in, and to cast my precious
eternal soul with all my comforts and concernments, upon Gods eternal love and
free grace in Christ, salvation in all the parts of it to Gods Elect in Christ,
is the fruits of eternal love and free grace in God; this is a sure foundation
to build on, it bears a great weight its true, but it will never shrink or
fail, it has been tried from eternity; free grace is the foundation, and
Christ the corner stone of this eternal building, so that it will abide to
eternity.

Upon these very considerations we shall find the Church of God in the 46, 47,
and 48. Psalms living upon God by faith, 46, 47 and 48. Psalms.
and praising him through believing.

God is our refuge and strength: a very present help in time of trouble, says
the Church: That is, God is our God, and we are his interest, so that he is
presently at our help, he waits to be gradous to us, he cannot forget us we
are so dear to him; well, what use does the Church make of this; why to
establish her self upon God by believing; Therefore will not we fear though
the earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of
the Sea; and so goes on in her confidence in God, what is it makes the Church
so confident? Why this, that she was Gods interest in the World, and therefore
though he should confound the whole frame and power and glory of the earth,
carry all the mountains into the midst of the Sea, as Pharaoh and his Host;
yet that he will preserve his Church and people, as his own interest: There is
a River of Free grace in God, Psalm. 46.4.
that streams for ever to make glad the City of God; his people are the
Children of his infinite womb of love, and the preservation of these, is the
proper act of his Almighty power; this City of God is Gods interest, and
inheritance, his dwelling place: Psalm 46.6.
God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved, he uttered his voice,
the earth melted; but this City remains, for it is his interest, and God is
her refuge.

Therefore says God to the Church, live upon me as your Refuge, and your
present help in time of need, do not doubt or fear, but be still and quiet
in your spirits: Be still, Psalm. 46, 8, 9, 10.
and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the Heathens, I will be
exalted in the Earth, I will cease Wars, I will break Bow and Spear, and
burn the Chariots with fire: I will do all this for you that are my interest;
I will make good all my promises to you, of the peaceful and righteous reign
of my Son Christ over you; I will be exalted in the Earth. The Church believes
God in this and she is at rest, she is still and quiet knowing that God is
God, and that she is his interest; The Church answers th^^ in verse 11. The
Lord of Host is with us, Psalm. 46.11.
the God of Jacob is our God. Therefore will we not fear, but rejoice in God
as our God, our strength and our refuge, and we his interest: O clap your hands
(all ye people) and rejoice in God with triumph, for God is King of all the
Earth. Psalm. 47.1, 7.
God reigns over the Heathens: God sits upon the throne of his bolinesse:
then sets forth his judgments on his peoples enemies, and the fear that comes
upon the Kings of the Earth; According to thy Name O God, so is thy praise unto
the ends of the Earth, thy right hand is full of righteousness: Psalm. 48.10.
Mark the Scripture, According to thy Name thou art righteous and that is thy
praise; thou art called a God of righteousness and we so trust in thee, and
thou art according to thy Name; this is thy praise, thou art^ righteous God;
Psalm. 48.11.
observe the conclusion that is made of these promises: Let Mount Sion rejoice,
let the Daughters of Judah (...) glad, because of thy judgments: That is, let
them that have an interest in thee, and who is thy interest in the World,
rejoice and be glad that thou art according to thy Name, a God of judgment and
righteousness, for this makes it certain that thou will preserve thine own
interest, and them that thou causest to trust in thy name as a righteous God;
come, says the Church, see what God has done for us, and then you will say as
well as we, that God is according to his Name a righteous God.

Walk about Sion, Psalm. 48.12, 13.
and go round about her; tell the Towers thereof: Mark ye well her
Bulwarks, consider her Palaces, that you may tell is to the Generations
following: Mark well and consider how the righteous God defends his interest
in the World, those that trust in his Name, his mercy, his providence, his
Almighty power, greatness, and majesty; these be the Towers and Bulwarks of
Sion, his b^some of love, and his Temple of holiness, that is her Palace of
delight, she has her delight in God, and her defense in God; Mark and
consider it well, that you may tell is the Generations following, that they may
fall down at the feet of this righteous God, which will ever be according to
his Name, and not dare to grieve a member of Sion, or to wound the interest of
God; For, says the Church, this God is our God for ever and ever, Psalm. 4^.14.
he will is our guide even unto death: He in our God, and he is ever so; we are
his interest and he will preserve us so for ever, he will guide us to death,
carry us safe through all the Wilderness, till we come into Heaven. Thus is
the Church of God established by believing in God as her God, and a God that
will ever be according to his Name, a faithful, righteous, gracious, and
glorious God to all that trust in him: Thus also do the Saints of God triumph
in God as their God, and as they are his interest in the World: So the Prophet
David, Psalm. 92.4. Psalm 92.4.
Thou Lord have made me glad, I will triumph in thee: Thou art my joy and thou
shall be my glory, this is my joy that thou art mine, Psalm. 95.3, 4.
and I will glory as I am thy interest; So in Psalm. 95.3, 4. He glories in the
greatness, power and majesty of God, because he did believe that God was his
God, and that he was part of Gods interest in the World; and in Psalm. 96.10.
Psalm. 96.10. Psalm. 97.1.
I said among the Heathens that the Lord reigns: And Psalm. 97.1. The Lord
reigns, let the earth rejoice: Psalm. 98.8, 9. Let there be joy, says he,
Psalm. 98.8, 9.
for the Lord comes to judge the Earth, with righteousness shall be judge
the World, and his people with equity: So Psalm. 99.1, 2. Psalm. 99, 1, 2.
The Lord reigns, let the people tremble: The Lord is great in Zion he is
bigh above all people. What does the Prophet mean by all this? Why he tells
us in the 121. Psalm, I will fix my eye upon God, says he, my help comes
from the Lord, the Lord is my keeper and shield: And so goes on to declare his
faith in God, that God which he had before so extolled: why says he, this is
the God I will live upon, it is faith in God that makes my heart glad: I
believe he reigns over all the Earth in his power and greatness, he is my
God, I am his interest, and he reigns over me in righteousness; by all this
it does appear that the Church and people of God, have been and are
established by believing in God as their God, taking his Word of truth for
truth, and believing God in it, resting upon God according to his Name,
believing in him as the God of free grace; taking the counsel of good King
Jehoshaphat, Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established.

But me thinks I hear some ready to Object,

To this I answer, Ephesians. 2.8. But take this with it, this God is a God of free
grace, which gives Salvation to his people, and the hand of faith to lay hold
on his salvation, all in his own grace; and therefore I tell my own soul and
others of believing in God, because he is a God of free grace, I know faith is
the work of Divine power, it is not of our selves; therefore I say again God
is a God of free grace; stay not in self, lie at the throne of grace as that
poor man in the Gospel: Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief: Me-thinkes
he speaks thus, Lord I believe that thou can help me against my unbelief;
that thou can destroy the unbelief that is in me, and make me to believe
upon thee, to establishment; and I think this is the language of the
Objection, which says, Faith is the gift of God; is it not the same with this?
Lord thou can make me believe in thee, it is thy work to destroy my
unbelief, and to help my soul against it.

This is all I say, God is a God of free grace, and faith is the gift of his
grace; he waits to be gracious to give his free grace and all the gifts of it
freely to those that need it, nothing in creature but want, makes it an object
for Gods grace; for he gives all freely without price, and without money: Now
if faith be the gift of God, as thou do acknowledge, then lie at the throne
of his grace, if thou want, know all he has is for those that want; wait
on him, and tell him he can help thee against thy unbelief.

But you demand whether faith were not above the reach of humane reason and
understanding?

I acknowledge, Yes; when it is under its natural darkness; so that the soul
it lives in nothing but nature as it fell from the first Adam: So The natural
Man descernes not the things of God, neither can be, because they are
spiritually discerned. But when God comes to work the work of his grace in
any soul, he does not destroy his own first and pure work of nature in the
man, the fall from grace corrupted the reason and understanding of man, as it
did the whole man; so the restoration to grace does restore the first image of
God in the reason and understanding of men; though faith as it leads to God,
and pitcheth the soul upon God, be above the light or reach of reason in it
self, yet when God works faith in the soul, and so takes the soul up to
himself, to live in him and to rest on him, God does not thereby destroy
reason and understanding in the man, that were to make him a Beast: No God does
inlighten and convince the soul in its reason and judgment, though when it was
in its corrupted nature, it could not discern the things of God, nor
understand the work of his salvation of free grace in Christ through
believing, so as to choose God for a portion, and to rest on the salvation of
his free grace; yet when God shall inlighten the reason and judgment of a man
by his own spirit, so that now it is spiritual reason and judgment, then by
the spirit of God in it, it comes to apprehend and to close with the salvation
of Gods free grace in Christ through believing; it is now reason and judgment
sanctified, and made light in the Lord: so that now it sees a beauty in the
grace of God, and Christ the gift of his grace; now it is no more its own
under its corruption, but Gods in his renewing grace, by which in Christ he has
redeemed it, out of the power of Satan and the region of darkness into his
own marvelous light, though ^t first it may only fee men walk as trees, yet
God will not leave it, till he makes it see plainly, God is light, and in him
is no darkness at all.

So that as God comes into the reason and judgments of his people, they have
light in the Lord, the work is nevertheless but the more a work of grace in
God, that he does thus sanctify and inlighten the reason and judgments of his
people, carrying on the work of his salvation in the soul; God is not bound
to work thus, for the whole work of his salvation is free, but that he
chooses to work thus, I think is the experience of all Saints that ever had
reason and judgment, in which Saints have much joy, and by which doubtless
the glory of Gods free grace is much manifested and declared; and therefore I
shall in the next place hold forth some grounds and reasons, to the sanctified
reason and judgments of Saints why to believe in God, why to take his word,
and to rest upon the salvation of his free grace.

Grounds for faith from reason.

First, Because there is truth in none but God and his Word; by God here I
mean Father, Son, and Spirit; all truth is in this Fountain, and what ever
truth is in the creature, it is a stream from this fountain: so much of
truth, so much a beama of God in any soul; It is one of Gods Attributes which
we have mentioned to be a God of truth, which is the true God: I shall add
little to the proof of it, only a Scripture or two, Psalm. 18.30. As for God,
Psalm 18.30.
his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried, be is a buckler to all
those that trust in him. As if the Prophet had said, I have tried God, by
trusting him, and I find him true and perfect in all his words and ways, his
word is perfectly true; if her say he will be a buckler to you, you may trust
him, he is a tried God of truth, he never deceived any foul that trusted in
him, his truth reaches to the clouds, Psalm 57.10.
says the Prophet, Psalm 57.10. It is boundless truth, it is the truth of
God, whom is all truth. So Psalm 117.2. The truth of the Lord endures for
ever. That is, God is for ever a God of truth, he is nothing but truth, not
does he speak any thing but truth; not any soul can be decalved by believing
what he says, he means what he says, for he is the God of truth.

Now I would argue with reason, and ask it whether it would choose truth or
untruth to believe in: Doubtless this will be the answer of a rational man, I
do choose truth; for this it my misery, I know not what to believe, there is
so much untruth is the world, nor can I find any man, or sort of men to trust,
all men are so false: If men's words, promises, or engagements were any safety,
we have had enough of them: but men forget their words as wind, there is no
truth in them, so that as a reasonable creature I am at a loss what to
believe, of when to believe any thing that man shall say; Is it so Reason?
Would you believe truth if you could find it? why then look up to God, ponder
his word; if you find any promise that answers your wants, believe in him, he
will make all good that he has said, you dare not trust men, because they have
so often deceived you; let me return the argument back upon you, therefore
trust God because he never deceived you, nor any that ever trusted in him; take
his word into thy arms of faith as fulfilled already, for not a tittle of all
that he has spoken shall fail; what God promises to give his people, is as
really theirs, as though they had it in possession, and they may build upon it,
he will not deceive them; nay he cannot, for he is God, and cannot lie; this is
one argument to reason; the truth of God, because it is an act of reason to put
trust in truth, and to choose truth to trust in.

A second argument to reason, is the Almighty, omnipotent, and infinite power
of God; and me thinks this should be a strong argument with reason, because
reason is so apt and prone to trust in power: Dark and corrupted reason makes
the powers of the world to be an argument against faith, when faith would have
the soul trust upon God, and to walk in the ways of holiness and
righteousness. Why says this sinful reason, all the powers of the earth will
be against us, and come as a flood upon us and devour us if we should do so.
Well, if power bear so much sway in reason, then to sanctified reason it will
be a good argument to beget trust in God, to plead the power of God, Isa.
40.15. and so on, Isa. 40.15. so on.
there you may read of the power of God, That it is so full and great, that all
the Nations of the earth are but as the drop of a bucket, and the small dust of
the balance: all power compared to God is vanity, and less then nothing.

Now sanctified reason, here is power for thee to trust in, that power which is
all power, and command all powers; that fountain which gives forth all
power, and can draw all into himself again when he pleases; that power that
does in heaven and earth what ever pleases him; That power with whom all
things are possible, Matthew. 19.26. It is not possible for thee to trust in this
power for any thing which is, or can be impossible to him: could corrupted
reason but find a glimpse of this amongst men, it would adore it, and make a
god of it; Oh then let sanctified reason admire this God and rest upon him, who
is really that power with whom all things are possible. God has an infinite
power, he can do for us exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or
think, Ephesians. 3.20. What think you of this, Ephesians. 3.20.
Reason? you think your thoughts are very vast, and that you can ask very
much; yet in all this you are exceeding abundantly below, what the Almighty,
Omnipotent, and Infinite power of God can do: We can want but as finite
creatures, but he can give as an infinite God; the flesh we fear, is finite
flesh, the God we trust is an infinite God. If power can sinck^ the scale with
reason then when God appears to it, all flesh will prove lighter then vanity,
less then nothing. Job mentions some of the acts of Gods power, in Job 12.7.
so on, and 26.5. so on. Job 12.7. so on. Job 26.5. so on.
How he rules in his whole creation, the Beasts, the Earth, the Fowls; that in
his hands is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind.
That with him is strength and wisdom, that he loses the bond of Kings, he
leads Princes away spoiled. Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no
covering: The pillars of heaven trouble, and are astonished at his reproof. So
goes on to set forth Gods power and greatness: and in the last verse of Chap.
26. L^^ these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is heard of him:
but the thunder of his power who can understand. When he had spoken all what he
said before, these, says he, are but part of the ways of the insinite great
God, and a very little part of that omnipotent power that is in him, it is but
a very little that we can conceive of God, the great thunder of his power
cannot be understood by us, it is too great for us; he is the great God, and
infinitely great in power. Psalm. 24.8, 10.
So the Prophet David in Psalm 24.8, 10. Who i^ the King of glory, the Lord
strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. The Lord of Hosts is the King of
glory. This is his glory, he is Lord of Host, the strong and mighty God,
infinite in power. And in Psalm 29.4, 8, Psalm. 29.4, 8, 9, 10.
9, 10. He shows what power God has in his voice, how full of Majesty it is,
That it shakes the Wilderness; that is, the Whole world, and that he is King
for ever. This is the King of glory, this is our God of power: Now here is
power for sanctified reason to live upon, and it is the power of the God of
truth, which will for ever be as truly power, as he is truly God: so that if
either truth or power may be arguments with Reason, here is both in God, which
if believed on, will for ever prove powerful truth, and truth in power,
because it is God in both.

The third argument for faith which I shall offer to sanctified Reason, is the
eternity and immutability of God; That his truth is eternal truth, and his
power is unchangeable and immutable power, you shall never find him less then
God, and that is insinite all, more then can be conceived or expressed. Reason
will choose a tocke to build upon, because it is a sure foundation, and will
abide; why now let me tell the best of reason that this is God, he is the
eternal Rock of Ages from everlasting, and will abide to everlasting; there
is no shaking this foundation, nor destroying what is built upon it: time did
not make it, nor can time make it less then it is. Reason, what can you ask
for perpetuity that is beyond eternity: Eternity is God, and what God is, is
eternal, every thing besides God changes, but nothing can change God, Psalm.
41.13.
he is the God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm 41.13. Israel's
God is an eternal God, always God, Psalm. 48.14. Psalm. 48.14.
For this God is our God for ever and ever. There it no end of (...) being God,
and that his people sindes and confesses, Psalm. 93.1, 2. Psalm. 102.12.
and so shall every soul that trusts in him. The Prophet Isaiah in his 26.
Chap. ver. 4. calls upon Gods people to trust in him upon this very
consideration: Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jebovah is
everlasting strength. As if he had said, when you trust in God, trust in him
as an everlasting God: Do not doubt the Lord Jeh^vah, as though he should
fail you at any time, for he is everlasting strength, and everlasting God, he
is Jehovah, so that he can never sail, and therefore trust in him. So Job says
of God in his 23d Chapter ver. 13. Job 23.13. Mal. 3.6.
That he is of one mind, and who can turn him. And God says of himself in
Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye forms of Jacob are not
consumed. God is unchangeable in his eternal purposes of love and free grace
to his people, therefore they are not confirmed; therefore trust in him,
because his love is unchangeable. Let me ask sanctified Reason now, if it have
any thing to object against trusting soul and body, and all that is, or can be
dear upon the eternal love and free grace of the eternal, immutable, and
unchangeable God: Nay, does it not come with authority upon Reason, that
eternal free grace should be trusted with eternal lost souls, which have
nothing to plead for their salvation but his everlasting grace. If my eternal
grace be your argument for salvation, says God, then let it be your rest, rest
upon it, it shall be your salvation, you shall find it so to all eternity: As
I am eternally God, and God from everlasting to everlasting, unchangeable in my
love, so shall the salvation be of all such souls as thus rest upon me for
salvation, for I can no more change in my love, then cease to be God: Souls
that rest on my love for their salvation, shall find me eternally God, and my
love their eternal salvation.

The 4th consideration which I shall offer to sanctified Reason as an argument
why to live fingly upon God by faith, is our own, and other Saints experiences
of God in his grace and goodness, in his power and faithfulness, and the
glorious workings of that fulness that is in himself for the good of his people;
this is a large field I have to walk in, it is a most glorious subject, more
fit for a large treatise then an argument: but I shall in this only use it as an
argument, and in it confine my self to as (...) a compass as possible I can
in so large a subject; I shall first gather from holy writ such experiences, as
Saint of old have reco^^^ which they did doubelesse to manifest Gods glory, and
to establish the hearts of Saints in after Ages, and then I shall wish a
remembrance of those many wonderful miraculous experience that this present
age has had of the glorious workings of God in his power, wisdom, Majesty,
and mercy, to and for his poor hated and desplied people that rust in him.

First, the experiences o^ Saints in former ages; I shall beg^^ with that of
Mordecai, Queen Esther, and the whole Nation of the Jewer^; the Book of
Esther does at large set forth the wicked and bloody design of proud and
wicked Ha^^an against all these, and to what ripeness he had brought his
work, (...) to the Kings feale and authority, for him to let forth the flood
gates of his malice and mischief up in them, and how ready thi^ wretch was to
put in execution the power he had obtained, for he had prepared a gallows for
Merdecai: (...) reading that History, we sha^ find how in every part of the
design of that bloody man he is disappointed, how he falls himself into the
pit which he had dug for others, and is hanged himself upon that gallows
which he in the pride and malice of his (...) did prepare for Mordecai: I sh^l
leave the Readers to that History in Scripture for further light, and only
make refiral of the close of it in Esther 8.15, Esther 8, 15, 16.
16. And Mordecai went out from the presence of the King in royal apparel, of
blew and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a garment of fine
linen, and people, and the City of Shushan rejoiced and was glad. The Jews
had light and gladness, and Joy, and honor.

Observe the experience that these poor hearts had of the power, the mercy,
and the wisdom of God, that when H^mans malice had conjoined it self with the
Kings power, so th^^ all things were ready, and the time oppointed to make a
find end at once of Gods interest amongst them; the whole Nation of the Jonas
must be sacrificed to Haman's lust: Then God appear, and (...) known his
design, and changes the whole faced things as they did then appear; the Kings
heart, that is changed, and Merdecel, whom represented the whole Nation of the
Jones, (...) must be by the same hand that decreed him, recalled from the
gallows, to be honored in wearing before the people the Kings royal
apparel, and a crowns of gold; That is, Mordecai and the whole Nation of the
Jews, which to all humane understanding, were past all hopes of being any
thing but (...) and undone people, and now made a people of safety, honor, and
glory in the Land: This is an experience of God, that his works of mercy and
grace for his people, they are sure and secret; though God hides his workings
for his people from the world till his own time of ruling comes, yet these
works of God are sure, though secret; the works of God are like Ezekiel's
vision of the wheel within the wheels, he works his own ends in giving a
long life to wicked men to run in after their ends, and makes the wicked do
his work, when as they think they are doing their own; it was Gods design
that Haman should prepare his own gallows, which he did, when he thought he
had been working his own ends in making it for Mordecai, so God made Haman to
dictate to the King what Mordecai's honor should be, when as he thought he had
been preparing honors for himself: the ways of God are past finding on^: but
doubtless such experiences as these calls very loud for trusting in him, and
depending on him, this is one great experience of God. The Prophet David in a
day of calamity calls to mind the experiences that our Fathers of old had of
God, Psol. 22.4, 5. Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them,
Psalm. 22.4, 5.
they cried unto thee, and were not confounded. That is, they had experience of
thee to be a gracious, faithful, powerful God; and upon this account he
blesses God, in Psalm. 18. to last. Psa. 18. to last.
as having had experience of him in his great workings for his people, in
setting up the Throne of Christ, and preserving his seed for evermore. And in
Psalm 23. the Prophet makes mention of the experiences that he had of God, as a
ground of his resting on him, and assurance that God would never fail him, he
makes this declaration of his faith in the first verse, I shall not want; this
is strong faith. What is the reasen of this (...) in the (...)? why he tells
us it is his interestion (...) that he had of him: my reason, say (...), is
this; (...) my Shepherd, therefore I shall not want. But why are (...) fident?
may not you want though the Lord be (...) why says the Prophet, I am confident
up (...) makes me to lie down in green pastures, he leads me b^side the
still waters, he restores my soul, he leads me in the paths of
right^^^snesse for his Names sake. These are the experiences that I have had of
God, and do you ask me now why I am so confide^t? Why says he, I have not
only received all this mercy and grace from God, but God he is the fountain
of all the mercies I receive, and it is his own bowels that moves him, he does
a this to me for his own Name sake, not because of any worthiness in me; I
could not then be confident, but he leads me into, and cloatheth me with his
own righeousnesse, and all for his name sake, to the glory of his grace: This
is the experience that I have of the Lord who is my Shepherd, and upon this I
am so established i^ God, that though I walk through the valley of the shad^^
of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me: And I have had such
often and ample experiences of thy mercy, power, faithfulness, and goodness,
that though the way I walk in be as dark as death, that my flesh can see no
way out of it, yet I will trust in thy power and mercy to deliver me, upon the
former experiences I have had of thee. This I know, it is thy free grace that
has chosen me to be an heir of glory from all eternity, and all the
experiences I have had of thee, has proved thee to be a God of free grace, and
that this love and grace shall, as it is thy self, abide for ever; so that
this is a ground of assurance to me, my experience of thee, that I shall be for
ever with thee; for so he says, that he shall dwell with the Lord for ever.
This Prophet had a great stock of experience in God, and in this place he
makes the right use of them, that for which I shall here gather them up
together; the Prophet David he acts for his own soul, and does counsel other
souls upon the experiences he had of God, in Psalm 31.5. He commits his spirit
into Gods hand: That is, casts himself wholly upon God, and in verse. 7. gives
the reason of it, because he had experimented God in his adversities, that God
had not shut him up in the hands of his enemies, but set his feet in a large
room. This experience of God make^ him commit his spirit to God, thus he acts
for his own soul upon experiences of God: and in the 2. last verses of that
Psalm he counsels Saints to love God, and to trust in him, upon this
consideration, the experiences that he had of him as a faithful God, who
preserves his faithful ones, and plentifully rewards the proud do^r:
Therefore says he, be of good courage, fear not, trust in God, he shall
strengthen your hearts, all ye that hope in him; as if he should say, I have
had such experience of God, that I dare assure you if you trust in him he will
not fail you: So in Psalm. 32.10. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, Psalm.
32.10.
but be that trusts in the Lord, mercyshall compass him about: I speak this
says the Prophet upon experience that I have of God, and when you know God
experimentally as I do, you will say as I say: Therefore in the 34. Psalm. 8.
he calls upon Saints to taste, and then they should experimentally know that God
is good; so good, so kind, so gracious, so faithful, and so omnipotent, that
the man is certainly blessed that trusts in him; he cannot but be a blessed
man for he trusts in God, whom can never fail him; God i^ an experimented
God for truth and faithfulness by all his people, as in the 19. verse, Many
are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of all,
and so goes on, showing the goodness and faithfulness of God to his people;
I, says he, upon the experiences that I have had of God, I can boldly affirm
that they are blessed that trust in him; Therefore he gives this counsel in
Psalm 55.22. Psalm. 55.22.
Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and be shall sustain thee: be shall never
suffer the righteous to be moved.

The Prophet gives this counsel to his own soul and to other souls, why
says he, we have had expecience of God, how faithful he is in preserving his
righteous one, those that put their trust in him, they shall never be moved:
Therefore why should we distrust, and through unbelief take the burden upon
our selves; as we have experimented God so let us trust him, and he does so
indeed, for in Psalm. 61.3. he flies to God upon his former experience that he
had of him, For thou have been a shelter for me, and a strange tower from the
enemy. I have had this experience of thee, therefore in all streights and in
all conditions, I will trust in the covert of thy wings; and in the next Psalm.
7, 8. verses, he professes that all the resuge he had was in God; and says
he, I have experimented God, he is a sure resuge to his people, He is my
salvation, my glory, and the reck of my strength; the Prophet tells us what God
is from the experience that he had of him, Psalm. 145.17, 18. The Lord is
righteout in all his ways and holy in all his works: The Lord is nigh to all
them that call upon him in truth: This is God upon experience, and abundantly
more then this does that Man of much experience in God set him forth to be.

Again, consider the most glorious experiences of God, th^^ those three
emminent servants of his, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego had, which is
recorded in the third of Daniel, we may read in that Scripture upon what
consideration the Fun^ac^ was heat seven times hotter then before, for these
three faithful ones to be cast into it; and in the 17. verse, how they cast
themselves upon God for their deliverance: Our God, say they, is able to
deliver us from thy burning fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy
hands O King: Well, mark the issue, they deny Nehuchadnez^ar and trust in God;
this inrages the Kings fury, and into the sire they are cast bound hand and
foot: Now God gives them to know by experience what it is to trust in him for
deliverance, He makes them to walk in the fire, loosed from their bonds,
without the least harm, and a fourth to be with them, whose form wat like
the Son of God; This presence and appearance of God did astonish the King, so
that he called them to come forth, and when they came out of the fiery Furnace,
they were so far from any harm, That a hair of their heads was not singed,
mither had the smell of fire passed on them: What a most glorious experience of
the power, faithfulness, and goodness of God is here, the Kings fury was so
hot, that the Furnace must be heat seven times hotter then before; and it was
made furious in heat indeed, for the flames which came forth from it, slew them
which cast in Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, to the fiery Furnace; but
notwithstanding all his fury, God preserves those that trust in him, he is
with them according to his promise, when as they pass through the fire; and as
the Winds and Seas, so the flames of fire obey him, for they finge not so much
as the clothes of these faithful ones, nor leave so much as the smell of fire
upon their Garments: O the infinite power and faithfulness of God; fire shall
lose its nature and cease to burn, rather then such as trust in him shall be
consumed by it; God has power enough to preserve his own interest those that
trust in him, even in the eaging flames of consuming fire, no flames nor fury
can destroy that which the power and mercy of God will preserve, and now here
is a full experience of God, he will preserve that which his people commits to
him, and trusts to him for the preservation of it; these precious souls God
had brought to this glorious pitch, that they slighted the Kings power and
fury, by belee^ing in the power and faithfulness of himself; And now, says
God, it shall he known what I am, and what it is to trust in me; God could
either have turned the heart of Nebuchadnezzar, or have crushed his power that
he should never have been able to have cast them into the fiery Fumace, but in
this also God works as the wheel within the wheels, he let the furious man
go on, that he might have the fitter opportunity to manifest the glory of his
grace, power, and faithfulness in their deliverance, and that his people might
have greater experience of their safety in trusting him, God lets them go into
the fire that they might have experience of his love in going with them, and of
his power in preserving them, and bringing them forth again to the
astonishment of all beholders, and that it might remain on Record to after
Ages, that Generations to come might say this is God, and this will God be for
ever to his people.

Should I enlarge according to the matter and worth of these experiences, I
should swell into a great bulk which I se^ke to avoid, and therefore shall
upon the matter only make resitall^, and leave inlargements to the Spirit of
God upon the hearts of the Readers.

We shall find in this Book, another glorious experience of God which the
Prophet Daniel himself had; in the sixth of Daniel we shall find a decree to
cast the Prophet into the Den of Lions was deceitfully gotten, and the cause
was his making of petitions to God; the Prophet knew of the decree which wa^,
as of the Meades and Per^^ans not to be altered, and yet he alters not his
course of calling upon God by Prayer, he opens his mouth to God, and trusts God
to stop the Lions mouths, he lifts up his hands and heart to God, and trust^
God to ke^pe down the Lions paws; well, God will not deceive his trust, but
yet he will let him be cast into the Lions Den, Daniel 6.16. Though the King
was sorry, yet he commanded Daniel to be cast into the Lions Den; and there
Daniel is as safe as amongst Lambs, the Angel of God had shut the Lions
mouths, that though they remained Lions still, yet to Daniel they had no more
harm in them then so many quiet Lambet, and when the King comen early in the
morning with dread in his spirit lest the Lions should have feasted themselves
upon that precious piece; Hecryes out, O Daniel servant of the living God, is
thy God whom thou servest continually able to deliver thee from the Lions,
Verse. 20.
verse. 20. In the 22. verse. Daniel answers him, My God has sent his Angel and
shut the Lions mouths, that they have not burt me: In the 23. verse. Then was
the King exceeding glad, and commanded to take Daniel out of the Den; so he
was, and not any manner of (...) found upon him: But in the 24. verse. when his
accusers were cast into the Lions, They brake their bones before ever they came
to the bottom of the Den.

The Lions were raging Lions in themselves, though their mouths were stopped
by God in the preserving of Daniel, that put his trust in him; O the power of
God, fire cannot burn, nor Lions bite where God forbids, he that made all for
his own glory, can change the nature of what he has made, when in so doing he
may magnify the glory of his grace and faithfulness to his people; does not
these experiences say that God is only to be trusted and feared; he shuts
where no man opens, and opens where no man shuts; Daniel had experience of Gods
love and power in this; that those very Lions that lay like Lambs by him,
should devour his enemies before his face; none can bound the holy one of
Israel, but he can lock up the Lions mouths and open them at his pleasure; sure
it is good to trust in so good a gracious and powerful God, one that gives
such full experience to his people that trust in him of what he is; a God
infinite in power, mercy, and goodness; there is a spirituallity in all these
experiences of God, which if God give in, in the reading it will make them
exceeding sweet, and apt to that end I quote them for; namely, to beget faith
in God, and a holy dependency on him.

Amongst these holy witnesses, let the Prophet Jonah be admitted to bring in
his experiences of God, and we shall find them to be very glorious; the
Prophet does at large declare how he came to be cast into the Sea in a great
tempest; here is nothing appears to fleshly reason but destruction, and
doubtless those that cast him out of the Ship expected nothing else, but that
the Sea should be a grave to his dead body, therefore they prayed that God
would not lay his blood to their charge, in the 14. verse: But in the 17.
verse. Now the Lord prepared a great Fish to swallow up Jonah; Jonah 1.17.
and Jonah was in the belly of the Fish three days and three nights: Well, and
is this a likely way of preservation; is there not as much death in the belly
of the Fish, as in the belly of the Sea: Lay aside fleshly reasonings for a
little, and observe the end of Gods work: In the 2. Chap. verse. 10. And the
Lord spoke unto the Fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land.

Now comes in the experience, God intended to preserve Jonah, and though he
chooses an unlikely place to reason to keep him alive in, yet all persons and
places shall serve his end how unlikely soever it may seem to reason, the fish
which naturally opens its mouth to take in its nourishment, and to live upon
what it takes in, shall now open his mouth to take in Jonah that he might be
kept alive in the chest of that body; that power which preserves Daniel by
shutting the Lions mouths, does preserve Jonah by opening the fishes mouth;
his power fille Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that therein is; if God will
pr^serve Jonah, he shall go from death to death, and all that is but Gods way
of life, from deaths in the Sea, to deaths in the fish; and all this is that
God might experiment himself to him, in making this Fish to bring him from the
raging Sea, and set him upon dry Land; there is much spirituality in this
dealing of God with Jonah, he is a Type of Christ in the grave; very much might
be observed from it to a spiritual use, but I shall here only use it as a
very great experience which the Prophet had of the power and wisdom of God;
the power of God made the Lions to be as Lambs to Daniel, and here it makes
very death to be life to Jonah, the Sea shall cover and not kill when God
commands it so to do, and the Fish take into its belly but not destroy, if God
appoint that a place for Jonahs safety, it shall be so, and in Gods time as a
Vessel unload himself of the Prophet and set him upon dry land; thus we see
neither fire nor water, beasts on earth, nor fish by Sea, can destroy what God
will preserve; nay, the wisdom of God to magnify the glory of his own
grace, and the infiniteness of his power, chooses these ways to preserve his
Children by, which are most certain ways of ruin to an eye of reason, that
so his people may upon enperience of what he is learn to trust in him, and to
know that his power did make, and does command all other powers, he that
inhabits eternity rules, in Heaven and Earth; Jonah which disturbed the Ship
has safety in the fishes belly.

Again, faithful Noah and his whole Family had great exp^rience of the
faithfulness of God, and what safety there is in believing the Word of God,
and obeying his will: The frath and seventh Chapters of Genesis does at large
set forth Gods command to him to make an Arc for himself and his Family, with
two of each kind of all the creatures of the Earth, that they might be
preserved alive, for the Lord toulde him he would drown the whole World; Noah
believed God in all that he had said, Genesis 6.22.
which appears by his obedience, Genesis 6, 22. Thus did N^ah according to all
that God had commanded him, so did he: Well, and what is the effect of it? Why
Noah and his whole Family, with all in the Arc are preserved alive in all that
deluge of water which destroys the whole World besides; Genesis 7.23.
Genesis 7.23. Neah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the Arc.
N^ak prepared the Arc in faith believing God, but now he has experimented the
power and faithfulness of that God which he believed in, for now he found by
experience that God could make his word good, both in drowning the whole World,
besides them in the Arc, and in saving alive all those in the Arc according
to his promise; this is a living experience indeed, that he and his Family
should be the only living upon the whole Earth; Noah can say upon experience,
that it is not in vain to trust the Lord, his power can kill and keep alive;
the faithfulness of God was Noah's Arc, otherwise he had been drowned with
the rest of the World: Notwithstanding his floating house he made the Arc in
obedience to God, but God was his safety, not the Arc, and he found him so by
experience, thus God (...) one experience to another that his people might
learn to trust in him as an experimented God, as the insinite power and
faithfulness which has been found to be so upon great and often experiences.

So Joseph he had many and great experiences of God, as we may read in the
latter Chapters of the Book of Genesis; As when his brethren did unnaturally,
first cast into a Pit to murder him, and as last sold him into Egypt,
thinking to bereave him of all his Friends; yet God was a father to him, when
he was from his Fathers house, and when his own brethren proved cruel and
unnatural to him, yea God gave him favor with a stranger even Potiphar, there
Josaph began to experiment God in a strange Land; but God had a great work to
do, in which he would yet give him greater experiments of himself, so through
the wickedness and foolishness of his Mistres, Joseph loses his favor with
Potiphar, and he is cast into the Prison; all this serves to carry on Gods
design, and to bring in more experiments of God to Joseph; for here God gave
Joseph favor with the Keeper of the Prison, that in stead of being a Prisoner,
a suspected person, he had all trust committed to him: Well, through many more
experiences of the power and goodness of God, Joseph is at last brought to
Pharoahs, made the second person in the Land, and has all trust and power
committed to him; his brethren that sell him, God brings to him to buy corn to
keep them alive, though they thought to have put an end to his life, yet God
preserves him that he might, as God^ instrument, to preserve their lives; his
Father that mourned for him as dead, lives to see Joseph alive, and sent to
Egypt before to preserve the lives of his kind Father, and un^inde Brethren;
here is a rich treasury of experiences, most glorious manifestations of the
wisdom and power of God, here is the wheel within the wheels:

Again, God working his own ends by letting men perfect those works which
they intend to an end contrary to God, by the issue we see which was Gods end
in letting Joseph be sold to Egypt, and there cast in prison, it was every step
of it in his way to that advancement by Pharaoh, which he came to in the end;
his Brethrens end was to muther him, or at least never to hear more of him;
his Mistres her end was to dishonor him, it is no matter what they intend, God
will accomplish his end by their works, though in them they have a contrary
end; God will let his Children experiment this of him, that he works his own
glory and his peoples good, even through the evil worken that are in the
hearts and hands of his, and his peoples ^^emies* God can bring meat for his
Children out of the Eater, he in all good, and does bring good to his people
out of the evil that i^ in the hearts of their enemies; Joseph's experien^es of
God, ^^sides many Saints more does declare this upon the house top, and tells
the ages to come so long as the Sun and Mo^^^ end^reth that God is a
faithful, gracious, and omnipotent God, upon experience had of him.

For the next witness to this, let us call in Moses, and consider that
progress of experiences which he had of God from his Cradle to his grave; I,
from his birth we shall find in the beginning of his Book of Exodus, that
there was a Decree passed for his death before he had life, in that command
that the Midwives had from Pharaoh to murder every male Child of the
Israelites in the birth, of which Moses was one, but God tied up their hands
and gave him favor in their sight, that they obeyed not the command of
Pharaoh; there is his first experience of God, and when he could be hid no
longer in his Mothers house, then God taught her as he did Noah, to make an
Arc to preserve her Son Moses from drowning, and that Arc or Cradle of
Bulrushes does preserve this precious Infant till God brings other hands to
take care of him, in which work of God there is much experience of his power,
and wisdom, that Pharoahs Daughter should preserve tht a which her Father had
appointed to dye, and that his Mother which brought him forth should be the
Pape which does give him suck, this act of Gods providence brings double mercy
with it, both to Mother and Babe, it joys her heart to have her Child in her
arms; she says as Jacob, my son Moses yet lives; God had special work
for him to do, therefore he commits him to special care in bringing him up,
even the bosom of his tender Mother; truly these are very great experiences
of God, yet he had more then these, God does not leave him that he had thus
preserved, but takes care of him in his Mothers house, and in Pharoahs Court,
and when God comes to use him in that work for which he had preserved him, he
then finds God to be all in him; he went to the people of Israel upon Gods
message, and in the name of God to lead them out of Egypt into the Wilderness
to serve him, and as he went in Gods name, so all along he had great
experiences of God.

God made Moses his messenger to Pharaoh, and in this also he had great
experience of God, in his judgments upon Pharaoh his household and the whole
Land, you may read them at large; but when God had by Moses brought the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, then Pharaoh in the hardness and malice of
his heart with a potent Army follows them to the Red Sea, then the people
murmured against Moses, he goes to God and opens their condition before him,
and comes back to the people upon the experiences he had of God, and bids them
from God, to stand still and be quiet, they should see his Salvation, and how
full salvation that was, they all had experience of, it was wonderful
salvation wrought in wonders, which does upon experience declare God to be a
God of salvations, and a wonder-working God, a faithful God; that made every
tittle good which he had promised, they had full deliverance, and did see their
enemies no more alive.

Here Moses had exceeding full experience of God in his power and
faithfulness, that as God did employ him, so he went along with him and made
the Sea dry land for him and the people he led, to pass through death from
death, into the Wilderness, where God gave him and his company many and great
experiences of himself.

Now I shall join Moses and the Children of Israel together in their
experiences, and here they had a Pillar of cloud by day, and of fire by night,
in which they did experiment God to be a safe guide though in a Wilderness,
and an untrodden path, they thirst, I, and murmr too for water, God by Moses
gives them water from the Rook, Exodus 17.6.
here they experiment that the barren Wilderness, Exodus 16.4.
and the stony Rock does bring forth water at the command of God, nothing can
be too hard for the omnipotent power of God to melt into his own will: Well,
Exodus 15.25.
they want food, Moses cries to God, he gives them Quails and Manna, by which
they have further experience that no place can straiten God in giving to his
people what he pleases, and for Shooe^, and clothing, though their Journey
last forty years, yet these ware not out, but last as long; by which they do
again experiment, that the eternal God does give continuance to what he
pleases, and as long as he pleases: Thus I have pointed at some of those many
years experiences that Moses and the Children of Israel had of God, from which
we may gather thus much tha^ God is an experimented God by his people of Old,
to be aglorious, gracious, wise, faithful, omnipotent, and wonderworking God.

Again, Joshuah which succeeded Moses in this work of God, had great
experience of God going along with him in the work; I shall mention only in
one particular, that is in Josh. 6.20. In the besieging of Jericho, when the
Priests blew the Trompets, and the people shouted, the Text says the wall fell
down flat, so that the people went up into the City, every man str^ight
before him, and they took the City. This is such an experiment of the power of
God, as for clay to open the blind man's eyes, the one as likely means as the
other, but GOD was all in both.

Like unto this was Gideons experience of God, when as with three hundred men
he overthrew the whole host of the Midianites, Judges 7.
Judges 7. We shall find in this Chapter, that God commanded Gideon to lessen
his Army of two and thirty thousand, to bring them to three hundred; God
assures him victory with these few, and gives him this reason why he would
have no more men, that the victory might appear to be hie; Gideon obeyes Gods
will, and God makes good his word; Gideon did believe God could save as well by
few, as by many, that the victory would be Gods, not man's: and God makes him to
experiment that of him which he did believe: Here is an experience of a full
God amongst empty creatures, when they engage against full creatures empty of
God. God makes the victory his own, and the slaughter of his enemies, for they
kill one another; it is all one to God how weak soever the means be he
uses, whether his Army be Flies, as in Egypt, or three hundred men, as here,
the strength is his own, and that will certainly occomplish what it intends to
do, all these experiences do plainly speak it.

So that widow in 2 Kings 4. in that great increase of her cruse of oil, had
ample experience of the fullness of God, there is nothing too little for God to
make enough; that is plain in this experience, this little oil God makes it
enough to pay all her debts, and answer all her wants; God is all himself,
therefore it is no straight to him to make the less to be enough, his own
experience does the work, because he is all in himself; what God appoints to
give out satisfaction to his people by, shall never cease to give forth, till
his people confess they have enough: This fountain of life gives living
streams which always flow and refresh the City of God, this is God upon
experience.

Our Savior Christ in Matthew. 8.26. shows his power as he was God, in
rebuking the winds and the Sea, when there was a great tempest, so that his
Disciples in the ship with him were greatly afraid: Christ there checkes their
unbelief, and gives them an experience of his power by stilling the winds and
Sea at his rebuke, so that the Text says, there was a great calm. The calm
was an act of Christ's power, as the fear was of the Disciples flesh, so that
in this they had double experience of their own fleshly fear, and Christ's
almighty power.

The Apostle Paul, both when he was Saul and Paul, had great experiences of
God; as first, in his conversion, when he was Saul, and breathed out
threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord, Acts 9. beg. How
wonderful was his conversion, what glorious experiences of Gods free grace and
his power is there in that work; they were so great, that the Apostle does
acknowledge them all his life following, when he is brought before Judges and
Councels for preaching of Christ crucified, and salvation by free grace through
Christ: he tells them of Gods wonderful work in his conversion, what
experience he had of his grace and power, and mayes his experiences of God as a
ground of resting o^ him for strength to carry on the work of his Apostleship,
which God so in raculously had called him too. We may find all the w^i^ings of
this holy man spread with his experiences of God, as in his voyage where the
ship was cast away, and yet not the life of one man lost: in that venomous
beast upon his hand, which did him no hurt: in his often bonds and stripes, and
his comfortable going t^rough all conditions with joy and establishment in God,
1 Cor. 6.
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. Here was very great
experience of God, what ever he had, God was the all of that, and what ever he
wanted of the creature, yet God was all to him, to that he wanted nothing, but
in God possessed full satisfaction; God was strength to him in all his
sufferings; through Christ that strengthened him he could do all things. God
was safety to him from all perils, and upon this experience he was true to the
service of God, not fearing any danger that should befall him.

So in Acts 5. There we may read of the same experiences that Peter and the
rest of the Apostles had of God, when as they were brought before the Council,
and imprisoned for preaching in the name of Christ, how they were delivered out
of prison, and yet the prison doors all fast shut; they had a man set over
them to keep them, and an Angel sent to deliver them; they had full experience
of the power of God, that no power on earth, or watchfulnes of men, could
imprison them that God would set free.

There is another experience of this nature of the power and glory of God, Acts
16. lat. end.
in Acts 16. latt. end. where by an earthquake God opened all the doors of
the prison, with the bonds that were upon Paul and the rest of the prisoners;
yea, and the hard heart of the Jailer too, for he comes trembling now to
enquire after salvation: This Earthquake God uses to shake the Jailer and his
Family out of their earthly condition into a heavenly; he and his Family were
hereby taught to believe in God, then follows the kind usage of the
Apostles, and their deliverance out of prison; this affords great experience of
the powerful and glorious workings of God: God does not only shake the earth
and the heavens also, but by shaking the earth, he shakes into heaven, he
shakes the earth of unbelief out of this family, and fills them with heaven
through believing; doubtless it is glorious power that shakes earth out of
souls, and those souls into heaven, this is the work of God upon experience.

I shall now in some few particulars mention the experiences of Gods power and
justice in his righteous judgments: I shall mind you of Gods judgments upon
Pharaoh and all his host in the red Sea: but no more then mention it, because I
have used that Scripture already.

But in the next place consider Gods dealing with Herod, Acts 2.22, 23, 24.
in Act. 12.22, 23, 24. The proud wretch took Gods glory to himself. Now see
how God does vindicate his own glory, he is immediately smitten by the Angel
of God, and eaten up with worm^. God is zealous of his glory, he will not give
that to any other, nor suffer him to live long that takes it to himself; the
people made a god of this proud man, and he was content to be accounted so: but
God will let him and them know, that he is but sinful man, for he dies
immediately like man, and under a fearful judgment, as the just recompense of
that pride, which would have been taken for God: Here is a glorious experience
of Gods power, and his zeal for his own glory, which should make all flesh
tremble, and be careful that they cloth not their pride with that glory which
is only due to God.

We have another experience of God in his righteous judgment upon the
Sodomites, being struck with blindness in their bodies, when in the
blindness and wickedness of their souls, Genesis 19.11.
they would have abused the Angel of God that came to Lots house, according to
the lust of their own hearts; the Scripture says, Verse 4.
there came all the men of the City, old and young, and all the people from
every quarter. A tumult of wretches full fraught with the sin of Sodom, and
yet behold the experimented power of God, that preserves his few faithful ones
from this multitude of Sodomites, and judges their first kindness with a
second, so that they were weary in their pursuit after wickedness. I should
be glad if this example might teach all blind wretches to be careful how they
meddle with the servants of the most high God, for he is upon experience a God
that revengeth the wrongs done or intended to his people.

Lastly, Gods fearful judgment upon Korah and all his company; you may read
the story in Numbers 16. and in verse. 31. how the ground opened and swallowed
them up alive, they lived in death, and were buried alive, they murmured
against Moses, and believed not God; these were dead souls in living bodies,
and God throws in his displeasure, their living bodies into the graves of
death. Thus we see the Scripture is full of proof in this, that God is an
experimented God; these are the experiments that Saints of old have had of God,
and left them upon record for the use of after ages: It is a great mercy that
we have these experiments of God, but I do believe no age that ever lived
were without particular experiences of God, I am sure this present age is not
without wonderful, many, and great experiences of God in his goodness,
faithfulness, power, mercy, and grace to his poor, hated, and despised people.

I shall not here mention any particulers, I trust providence has a faithful
storehouse for them, and a time to bring them forth entire to the glory of
God, who is the living and eternal fountain of all mercy.

Yet let me desire Saints for their establishment in God, to look back upon
the foote-steps of his power and providence, his faithfulness and
righteousness, in ordering of battles, and disposing of victories, even
amongst the sons of men. If you cannot look many years, yet look but some
mone^^ (...) which you may see such glorious experiences of God, that if you
understand them they will fill your hearts with admiring God; and the language
of your lips will be as the servants of God in former ages, to be telling forth
the experiences of God wherever you come. God gives to his children some
more, and to some less experiences of himself: but in these latter days, God
has given such great experience of himself to the whole body of Saints, that
I trust he will thereby establish his people through believing in himself as an
experimented God; this is the things drive at in my self and other Saints, and
therefore have I made so large a recital of these experiences of God to the
sanctified reason of precious souls.

And give me leave now to argue the case a little with sanctified Reason, and
to tell you that God is no newfound fancy or appearance, which may prove good
or evil to the soul upon trial, but God is the ancient of days from
everlasting, and a tried God, such a one whom Saints in all ages have tried and
found to be a faithful, gracious, just, righteous, glorious, and omnipotent
God.

Now tell me the best of reason, that which is most sanctified; if God be not
the best, nay the only foundation to build our says upon: and if one so much
experiment does not captivate thy reason to himself, I know it is a principle
of right reason to trust that most which has been most tried, and always found
faithful; therefore have I been the more large to hold out God to sanctified
reason as a faithful God upon experience. Now reason must either deny it self
in its own right principles, or else choose God as the only object of faith:
If so, then I may cease to argue, for I have my end: if otherwise it cannot be
argued with as reason, for it ceases so to be, in denying its own right and
true principle.

But if any soul full of sanctified reason shall speak like it self, and
say, I will trust my self where I find by experience; there is most grace, and
goodness; faithfulness and righteousness, most power to preserve me, and
most fullness to supply all my wants, then I say to such a soul all this is
God, and none of this is any where else but in God, and that God is an
experimented God in all this; if thou knew his dealings with thy own soul,
thou wills confess him to be so; his Saint^ of old have recorded some of those
many and great experiences which they had of him. Now here is that thou look
for, experimented goodness and faithfulness in God, and that which God looks
for, is that: Now thou should trust him upon all that experience which thy
own soul, and other of his Saints have had of him: If thou have any thing to
object, make thy objection, there is fullness enough in God to answer all that
thou can desire; if all be answered, then trust him that is all, and does
satisfy all that trust in him with his own fullness.

The fifth argument that I shall offer to sanctified Reason why to believe in
God, is this; That God counts his faithfulness his glory, and was never
stained in it, nor can ever be, because he is the faithful God, a God that
never failed any that trusted in him: so says the Prophet David, Psalm. 18.30.
Psalm. 18.30.
As for God his way is perfect, his word is tried, be is a buckler to all
those that trust in him. God is perfectly faithful in all his words, his
works, and his ways; he cannot deny himself to be God, therefore can never
be unfaithful. From hence the Psalmist in Psalm 33.21. Psalm. 33.21.
says, that the righteous do reign in the Lord, when he makes them to trust
in him. For they then joy in their desires as fulfilled; for if God make them
trust in him for it, he will certainly accomplish it, he will never be stained
in his faithfulness. Mal. 37.40.
So in Psalm 37.40. God will save his people from the wicked because they trust
in him: That is, God will preserve his own faithfulness, not any soul shall
trust on him in vain, much less be deceived by relying on him. So Psalm
48.10. This it the praise of God unto the ends of the earth, that he is
faithful and righteous according to his Name, he will never loose nor stain
the name of a faithful God: So he says himself in Psalm 89.34, 35. My
Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.
Psalm. 89.34, 35.
Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David. That is, I
will make good what ever I have said, my Covenant and promises shall all be
performed, for I have sworn by my holiness, I have engaged that which is most
dear to me, and I will not for^ei^it. And in Psalm 105.8. Psalm. 105.8.
His Saint^ bear witness to him that thee remembers his Covenant for ever.
So in Psalm 119.89. For ever O Lord thy word is settled in beaven. It is as sure
as heaven, thou (...) so faithful a God: And in verse. 90. Thy faithfulness is
unto all Generations. It never wears out, or becomes unfaithful; it is the
faithfulness of God that is eternal like himself, Psalm. 119.160.
Psalm. 119.160. Thy word is true from the beginning, and every one of thy
righteous judgments endures for ever. That is, God is true to his word from
everlasting, and his truth and righteousness abides for ever, not any that
can challenge him with unfaithfulness; his robe of righteousness is
spotless; this is his glory, and so he values it. And the Prophet Isaiah bears
witness to it, in Isa. 34.16. Seek yet out of the book of the Lord, Isa.
34.16.
and read, no one of these shall fail. That i^, look into Gods word, and what
ever you find he has said, he will make it good, not any tittle of his word
shall fail, you shall never blemish him in his faithfulness, for it is his
glory.

Now sanctified Reason let me ask you if this be not a good reason why you
should trust in God, because it is his glory to be faithful, and that glory
which he has unspottedly preserved from everlasting. Fleshly judgments sees
reason in this; for when they commit business and trust to men, they will
choose as they think the most faithful to the work: and when men do
otherwise, we count they have lost their common reason, and when we choose men
to fight our Battles, in whom we commit much trust; Do we not choose such men
who make it their glory to be gallant; and will rather choose to dye, then
stain their fidelity and their valor? Why, upon this account sanctified
reason may safely commit all trust to God, it is his glory to be saithfull:
Sin and all the other enemies of God and his people shall perish in the
maintaining of the glory of Gods faithfulness: I am to seek of all reason if
this do not answer the best of reason, to trust that God who makes it his
glory to be faithful, and that faithfulness which never was stained.

A sixth reason that I shall offer, is this: That God is an inexhausted
fountain and treasury of all grace and goodness, that either the souls or
bodies of his people can stand in need of, he can never promise more then he
can perform, nor can any of his people want that good which is not in him; he
is not only all good in himself, but also the fountain of all that which fills
heaven and earth: good is original in God, and in every thing else, as it is
derived from God, or received of God; what ever of mercy and grace, either
external or internal, it is received, and God is the fountain.

The Prophet David does acknowledge God to be the fountain and giver of all the
good he enjoyed, Psalm 23. It was God that made him lie down in green pastures,
that lead him by still waters, that restored his soul, and lead him in the
paths of righteousness; that prepared a table before him in the midst of his
enemies; that anointed his head with oil, and made his cup to run over.

He found God so full of all good, that he filled him, till his cup run over,
and that in the midst of his enemies, a place more apt to streights then
fullness; yet this was David's condition, because God was his shepherd, he
received from an inexhausted fountain, therefore his cup runs over: God is so
full, that if he^ do but drop of his own fulnese, the narrow vessel of the
creature runs over, he is the fountain of life, and the God of salvation,
Psalm. 68, 19, 20. He daily loadeth his people with benefits, for he is the God
of salvation. The sull fountain of all blessings, there is fullness of grace in
him to kill sin, and to save the sinner; there is fullness of love in him to
pardon the greatest evil, and to love the least good in his children; there is
fullness of power in him to crush and destroy a world of Enemies, and to
preserve his own little Flock; there is riches of goodness and mercy in him
to supply all the wants of his people: In a word there is all good in God that
we can either ask or need; to read his Attributes, will discover his
fullness. And now me-thinkes sanctified Reason should answer as Simon-Peter did
our Savior in the 6th of John, verse 68. When Christ asked his Disciples if
they would leave him also, his answer is, Lord to whom shall we go, thou have
the words of eternal life. So should Saints filled with sanctified Reason say
to GOD, thou art an inexhausted fountain of grace and goodnessee, we can go
no whither but to thee for Eternal life, for thou art to thy people the
fountain of life; That is, life from all Eternity. To my understanding this
should be a prevailing argument, with the purest and rightest reason to cast
all upon him that is all, and to trust in the fountain of life, for life, that
can give most which is most, and nothing can give all, but GOD that is all in
himself. Eternity cannot wast^ nor consume the least of GODS fullness,
therefore is GOD a suitable fullness for Eternal souls, and him only to be
rested upon that can never fail to be what our souls stand in need of to all
eternity: Reason carries men from one thing to another, because they conceive a
greater good in the last then in the first, how should it teach men then to go
from all to God, because in him is all good, and to rest in nothing but in him,
because there is good in nothing out of him, and for over to depend on him;
because he is not only good, but the fountain of all good.

The seventh and last argument that I shall give to sanctified Reason, is this:
That what ever any soul believes and trusts in besides God, it must and
will deceive the soul, there is no rock of ages besides him, nor is there any
Almighty power ou^ of him, vanity is at the root of every created being, and
does as the worm to Jonahs Gourd, bring them to nothing; that which cannot
preserve its own being, cannot of it self preserve any other being, though
committed to it; but no created being can preserve or continue it self by its
own strength; therefore not able to preserve any thing committed to them;
borrowed strength, and received abilities will not be trusted by right
sanctified Reason; because the lender may call back his own, and then the
receiver is empty of any ability to answer trust, and must of necessity fail
the expectation of the Trustee: Now this is all that can be thought of besides
God, by nature empty Vessel^, mere Ciphers, have nothing original that is
worthy; every dram of excellency and good is received, now such a subject is
altogether unsuitable to make a God of; that is, to commit the trust of eternal
souls, or any thing that is precious too, but if trusted, it must needs
deceive, because that which is nothing in it self, cannot add any thing to
another, that which is vanity in it self cannot give better to any, nor make a
better return to any that trust in it; and the Wise man says of all things
under the Sun that they are vanity, Eccles. 1.14.
and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.14. At they are vanity, so they deceive all
that trust in them, and in the deceiving of trust, and great expectations, so
they become vexation of spirit: So the Prophet David, in Psalm. 62.9. Surely
men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: That is, men of
all degrees have so much vanity in them, that they are not simply in themselves
to be rested upon; the highest degree of men, are but men; (so vanity (...))
and must p rove a lie, to that flesh which trusts in them: The Psalmist in
Psalm. 103.15, 16. shows the vanity of all flesh in man, the top of the whole
creation, As for man his days are as grass: as a flower of the field so he
flourishes. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone; and the place
thereof shall know it no more: This makes good the Wise man's truth that all
things under the Sun^^re vanity: For if man the chiefest piece of the whole
creation, be so light as a flower of grass, which is withered, dead, and dry,
by a puff of wind, so made nothing that the place it was in shall know it no
more, then surely vanity is a girdle about the loins of all created beings,
then of necessity they must crack under any weight that is laid upon them, and
prove a lie to all those hoped for contentments that flesh looks for from
them, they must prove like Jonahs Gourd, because of that worm of vanity that
is at the root, and they will leave the soul as the Gourd did Jonah, arguing
for its peevish folly, saying it does well to be angry; though it has
committed a double evil; First, in trusting to vanity, and then to be angry
that it appears vanity.

In the 46. Isay beginning, there the Prophet shows how the Idols of Babylon
could not save themselves, but they and them which trusted in them, were led
into captivity together: I shall offer but one Scripture more to this truth,
and that is in the 17. Jer. 5, 6. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the
Lord, for he shall be like the Heath in the desert, and shall not see when God
comes: Here we see is the curse of God upon trusting that in flesh which is
only proper to God; this is his glory which he will not give to another, and
the curse of God will soon blast all flesh that is but grass; so that it
shall prove vanity and deceive all that trust in it; thus I hope the truth of
the argument appears by Scripture, and sure I am, the experience that every
soul has had of the vanity of all things besides God, does add much testimony
to this truth; and if thus, give me leave to ask sanctified Reason, if it can
justify it self to be reason, in choosing vanity to put trust in, and laying
the weight of eternity upon that which has not a moment of its own, or a dram
of sufficiency to answer that weight; if not, then to this sanctified Reason I
dare affirm, that God is the only object for a souls bellese, and that there
is no other eternal and sure foundation to build upon; and this is the maine
scope that I have in all the arguments, to hold this forth to sanctified
Reason, that God who is the only true, Almighty, Omnipotent, infinit^,
eternal, faithful, experimented God, and an inexhausted fountain and
treasury of mercy and grace, is the only foundation of trust and confidence,
and that all things besides God will prove vanity under such a weight, so that
the light of God in the reason of his people; that which sanctifies reason,
might from these arguments that suites with right reason, lead the souls of
Saints out of their own flesh and all other vanity, to cast themselves only
and eternally upon the free grace of God in Christ, by believing in God to the
establishment of souls, is my end in all this; and I trust thus dealing with
sanctified reason, will appear to be in the way to that precious end: I have
done with the Arguments, I trust the Lord will make them his, and bless them
to the end they are intended.

In the next place I shall offer by a few particulers, in some measure a
discovery of the evil of unbelief, of not trusting of God, and in God, of not
trusting all upon God, and making him our all in all; and this discovery has
one and the same end with the former arguments.

The first evil which I shall hold forth of unbelief, is this:

That it does as much as in us lies, make God a liar: For proof, consider
that full Scripture to this purpose, in the first Epistle of John 5.10. He that
believes not God, makes him a liar, because he believes not the Record that
God gives of his Son: This Scripture holds forth plainly this, that not to
believe the Record of God, is to say in the unbeleife of our ^earts, that God
is a liar, truly unbelief can speak no other language, nor give no better
title to God, for not believing the Record of God, is a denial of the truth of
that Record, and so consequently the truth of God; for the Record of God cannot
be false so long as God is true, and that unbelief which says the Record of
God is not true, does in the same breath say, that God is not true; now not to
believe the Record of God, is to say it is not true, for this carries the
strength and basses of all reason along with it, to believe that which we judge
to be true, and to deny belief where we judge untruth: The old Serpent the
Devil began in Paradise with this temptation, to persuade our first Parents,
that what God had said was not true, that they might eat of the forbidden
fruit, that death was not in the act, as God had said, But the knowledge of
good and evil; It was unbelief of God in their hearts that made them call God
the liar, and what the Serpent said to be truth; therefore chose to eat, not
believing they had eat to death, as God told them, and so in their hearts
making God a liar; this is properly the fruit of unbelief, to count Gods
record untrue, and so to act contrary to the recorded and revealed truths of
God: This is a horred evil, that which Saints in truth cannot but tremble to
think of, to put the lie upon God, reproach upon his perfection, to trample
his truths under our feet as untruthes, and to question the righteousness of
the ever righteous God; this is the springhead of all evil, the only safe and
retyring place for Satan, he reigns no where so securely as in the unbeleeving
heart, where God is made a liar, that darkness makes the Devil to be counted
as truth, so that there his laws prevail, and he reigns as supreme.

Secondly, Second evil of unbelief.
Unbelief makes men to deny and forsake their fairest professions of Christ
and holiness, rather then to suffer for them; and this is the true reason why
so many Professors of Christ and holiness in times of prosperity and public
owning of godliness, do forsake both Christ and holiness in times of
suffering for God and his ways, because these withering branches were only in
Christ by profession, not by faith; these profess Christ for the gain of an
outward reputation, but do not live in Christ by faith, and in times of
suffering, the beauty of Christ is lost to such an eye; and for want of an eye
of faith by which the fullness, glory and excellency of Christ is discerned,
these unbeleeving professors, deny their profession, and their Master too, if
it comes to suffering with Christ, if on him, they will swear with Peter, they
never knew him, and though they swear yet they do not lie; for such as leave
their profession of Christ and holiness through unbelief, and become unholy,
they may truly say they never knew him, for whom ever truly knows Christ in
the spirit will never leave him; an eye of faith sees so much beauty,
faithfulness, power, grace, and goodness in God and Christ, that though
sufferings comes as waves of the Sea, yet will not leave God and Christ, but
cleave closer to him, believing in his grace and goodness for support and
deliverance, but that soul which believes not in God, and does not by an eye
of faith see fullness in him of power, grace, and goodness, to support and
deliver, will never trust in him; but with De^^^, embrace the present World;
such as follow Christ only for the Loaves, will leave him at the appearance of
his Cross: That forward Professor in the 18. of Luke 18. so on, which
justified himself in keeping all the Commandments from his youth, yet could
not part with his worldly riches and make Christ his portion, much less take
up sufferings, because of unbelief; he would leave his good Master, as he
called Christ, rather then his goods, which were indeed his Master through the
unbelief of his heart, all his fair profession and offers after Christ, comes
to nothing, because of unbelief; this Christ knew, therefore makes discovery
of the man by trying his faith, or by manifesting his unbelief; it is the
believing soul that follows the Lamb wheresoever he goes, it is only faith
by which the soul is able to take up the Cross of Christ and follow him, but
unbelief leaves Christ and his Cross together, though it have professed not
to leave Christ though it should dye with him; yet in the appearance of such a
trial the unbeleever denies his profession to save his outside from suffering;
this is the constant associate of unbelief; and therefore God is pleased in
his wisdom to let sufferings be the attendance to the profession of his name
in truth, that thereby he might discover even to the World, the precious from
the vile, who live in him by faith, and whom only by profession; thus does God
discover the evil of unbelief, of which argument this present age has not
been wanting.

A third evil of unbelief, Third evil of ^beliefe.
is this, unbelief it questions with distrust the very power of God, it doubts
whether God be God, or his power Almighty and Omnipotent; can God give bread in
the Wilderness, and can God bring water out of the Rock, is there fullness
enough in God to make a barren Wildrnesse fruitful, and to give food where
there is no appearance of food, nay can God make a hard, dry, and stony Rock to
bring forth water; can God work both without means, and against means, is
this power in God; thus does unbelief question, and distrust the power of God:
So that proud unbeleeving wr^tch, King Nebuchadnezzar, in the 3. Dan. 15. Who
is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands: As if he had said, is there
any God has power greater then I, is there any God or any power in God, that
can deliver out of my hands; when I have heat the Furance seven times hotter
then before, what power can preserve you from the fire of my fury, and my
Furnace.

We may find unbelief in Sarah putting this very question, in Genesis 18.12.
Therefore Sarah laughed within her self, saying, After I am waxed old shall I
have pleasure, my Lord being old also: If we observe the Scripture it amounts
to this, What now I and my Lord am old, now all hopes in nature is gone, can
God now make good his word to me in giving me a Child, now we are both old;
this is the true question that unbelief makes, can God do this great thing?
She laughed in way of sleighting the tidings, through unbelief, concerning
the power which should effect it: So when Elisha the Prophet did Prophecy of
that sudden and great plenty in Samaria, when they were at that time strongly
besieged and in great wants, 2 Kings 7.1, 2. the Text says, That a Lord on
whose hands the King leaned, answered the man of God and said, Behold if the
Lord would make windows in Heaven, might this thing be; This is the proper
language of unbelief, thou talkest of too great things for God to do, are not
we straightly besieged, and all our provisions gone, and do thou speak of so
great a plenty in so short a time, which way should God do this; what shall he
make windows in Heaven, and rain down this plenty, it can come no other way;
thus we see the great evil of unbelief, how it questions the power of God,
and as it were ungods him, for to make his deficient, is to make him no God.

A fourth evil is this; Unbelief is the seal of damnation, he that believes
not is condemned in himself; we have a full Scripture to this purpose, in John
3.18. But he that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. Unbelief it seals up
to condemnation, because it casts off the salvation of Gods free grace; now
that which denies the one, seals up the other; not to believe in Christ is to
put from us all possibility of salvation, and to seal the soul up to a
certainty of damnation; read the last verse of that third of John, He that
believes on the Bon has everlasting life, and he that believes not the
Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides in him: Whom ever
believes not in Christ, the salvation of God, shall never see life, shall
never live in the beholding of God reconciled to him, but has the wrath of
God, the seal of damnation abiding on him, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is
impossible to please God; As unbelief keeps the soul from God, so it makes
the soul unpleasing to God, that there is no intercourse between God and an
unbeleeving soul; now what can be a more visible seal of damnation then this?
Separation of the soul from God which unbelief makes, unbelief bids
defiance to God and his salvation, and so seals up the soul unto
condemnation, unbelief is so truly the seal of damnation, that no sin nor
sins can damn any soul without, for where faith in Christ lives, there
Christ is the death of all sin, satisfaction for all sin, and the life of
souls, though all sin be damnable, yet no sin nor sins can damn without
unbelief: John 3.15. Whosoever believes in him (which is Christ) shall not
perish but have everlasting life. Observe the Text, and you shall find this in
it, that nothing but unbelief can hinder the soul of eternal life; for
whosoever, the greatest and vilest of sinners, that shall believe in Christ,
shall certainly be saved; whosoever sins and believes not in Christ has
damnation in every sin, and his unbelief is the seal of his damnation, but
whosoever believes in Christ, though the greatest of sinners, shall not
perish, but have everlasting life; damnation is sealed in unbelief, and
unbelief seals up damnation; the Devil delights in all sin, but he lives
in no sin so contented and secure, as in unbelief; it is the great seal of
his Kingdom, that which holds fast all his interest in the soul, unbelief it
maintains the Devils interest most of all sins in the soul, therefore his
endeavor most of all is to maintain unbelief in the soul; it was want of
faith in the Apostles when at they could not cast out Devils; Satan is never
deposed of his interest in any soul or body but by faith; if he maintains
unbelief he maintains his interest, the seal of his Kingdom of darkness.

A fifth evil of unbelief is this, It makes men vile in secret, though openly
they make a profession of godliness, he that professes holiness with his
outside, and endeavors only to keep that fair which comes to the view of the
World; but imbraceth secret opportunities to be evil, and to do evil, must
needs do it from a principle of unbelief; for did they believe the al-seeing
eye of God, and see God with an eye of faith, they would be more careful of
committing evil in his sight, then in the sight of men; an unbelieving soul,
may upon some considerations of repute, and esteem with the World, endeavor
to avoid open sins which makes open scandal, and so brings open shame, but
for secret sins it is ready to serve Satan when he pleases, because it sees
not God, nor does indeed believe that God sees him, and therefore Satan does
never disturb nor discourage that outward profession of holiness, which gives
obedience to his commands in secret, he is content the outside should seem to
be Gods, so that the inside be his, his chief business and endeavor is to
hinder true faith in the soul, he cares not, let profession be at what height
it will, if he can but keep a foot unbelief in the soul, he knows in secret
that soul will obey him what ever profession it makes of God and godliness to
the World; the Devil loves to be in Gods room in the heart, and if he can but
by unbelief maintain his interest there, he has his ends; and a profession
of holiness in hypocrisy, makes the soul seven times more his, then before;
and this advantage he makes to himself and his Kingdom, by keeping unbelief
alive in the heart, for thereby he keeps the heart entire to himself, and can
make such a soul sin in secret at his pleasure.

Sixthly, Men will through unbelief be false to their vows, promises, and
engagements, both to God and his people; when as their corrupted reason tells
them that they may be gainers by it, or their carnal hearts conceive a
necessity of it: Such as live not truly on God by faith, they never engage to
God or his people but for their own ends; it is self-love that ingageth them,
they neither love nor would they trust either God or his people, could they
effect their own ends, but many times God casts them into such streights,
that their fleshly reason teleth them there is no way out, but by the
assistance of Gods people; at such a time these unbelieving hearts will not
stick at the making of any vow to God, or promises to his people; but if once
they come as it were to see shore again, or but to have one foot upon the
Land that the danger and bitterness of does is over, then they think there is
no such need of the assistance either of God or his people, and then all former
vows and promises are forgotten: and it may be in this very nicke of time
fleshly powers press upon them to be faithless to God and his people,
declaring themselves to be enemies to all that shall be friends to God and his
people: Now the unbelieving soul calls this a necessity to him of being false
to God and his people, in all its former vows and promises; such souls will
argue thus, what should we do? the multitude call upon us, and are restless
with us, so that they will give us no rest till we satisfy them in that which
makes us false to God and man in our former vows and promises. If we were not
so pressed, we should not do as we do; we should in some measure make good
what we have formerly said.

This answer is made upon a mistake: It is not the pressing of the multitude,
but the unbelief of the heart that makes such prove false in their engagements
and promises to God and his people; were there faith to trust God, that would
keep the soul close to God; believing souls make God their refuge in all
streights, and counts nothing to be so great an evil as to be false to God,
or to distrust his faithfulness: but unbelieving souls they own, and deny
God, they promise, and prove false to God, as their fleshly reason presents God
to them, and their own advantage in what they do; this pretending to truth
and reality in falsenesse, is the natural proceed of unbelief in the heart.
Genesis 40.23.
We may read a discovery of this in Genesis 40.23. The chief Butler forgot both
Joseph and his promises to him in the prison, when as himself was in those
enjoyments that his heart thirsted after; when souls live upon God by faith,
such faith makes them faithful to God and his people; but where self is the
highest life, there it is the highest end: and thus it is with unbelieving
souls, they prize nothing above self, therefore can be false to all, when as
their fleshly reason tells them, that thereby they may preserve and advance
self. This is another great and certain evil of unbelief.

Seventhly, Unbelief it damps the glory of God, and lessens the grace of God
to the soul: A distrust of the truth and reality of any thing takes away from
such an eye all the beauty and glory of it, so puts a damp both upon the beauty
of the thing, and the affection of the soul.

If a man be showed a rich Diamond, and he believes it to be but some piece of
glass, or at best but a crystal; this his belief does to himself much take
off the beauty and value of the Diamond, so that the affections are little or
nothing answerable to the esteem, and this arises from his unbelief: So is
it with the unbelieving soul, say what you can of the riches, the glory, and
excellency of Gods free grace, of Jesus Christ, and the redemption of his
grace; yet he believes not any thing; If this unbelieving soul should hear
the Spouse in the Canticles say, that Jesus Christ her Beloved is fairer and
fuller of beauty then all the beloveds in the world. He would not believe, but
think that the world is a more beautiful Beloved then Jesus Christ, and upon
this consideration, unbelievers choose the world for their Beloved, as by faith
souls close with, and center in Christ: so by unbelief souls leave Christ to
embrace this present evil World. The reason is this; faith sees the beauty,
and believes the reality of Christ, and the free grace of God, so rests and
centers there: but unbelief that says there is no such grace in God, nor any
such riches of glory in grace, no such beauty in Christ, nor such necessity of
being saved only through his blood, and therefore rests and centers their
eternal souls in something below God and Christ; this is another true
property and perfect evil of unbelife in the soul.

Another evil of unbelief in the soul, is this; It makes men inordinate in
their pursuites after the World, and so likewise in their sorrow upon their
disappointments or losses of the World; it makes men seek their heaven here,
and look upon nothing in God as enough to repair the loss of the World: An
unbelieving soul cannot live upon God day by day for its daily bread; if the
barns be not full, it believes it shall starve; the fullness of God cannot
satisfy it; If the heart be empty of faith, the hand must be full of the
World, or there will be no quiet in the bosom, and therefore unbelieving
souls will in their inordinate pursuit after the World, venture soul and all
upon this foundation of unbelief; men create their own happiness in
themselves, and shape their own felicity in their own brains, and pursue
their own fancies with a violent zeal of spirit. Now if God disappoint them,
if he crack their foundation, throw down that building which they have
raised in their own fancies as a habitation for themselves to rest in, then
they are as inordinate in their grief, as they were before in their pursuit,
and both these the fruit of unbelief; unbelief makes them seek felicity out
of God, and the same frame of spirit makes them to be as men without hope, when
as the world proves empty, though God be everlasting fullness: Unbelieving
souls have no eye to see that more exceeding and eternal weight of glory
which is in God, in Christ, in heaven for Saints, and therefore they so eagerly
pursue a dying glory, and are such livelesse, hopeless, undone souls when
that sails them; If there be no heaven in the world, such souls thinks there
is no heaven at all; if their own heaven fail them, then there is not heaven
enough in God to satisfy them. It is worthy the observing, how unbelief in
Job did make him break out into passion upon this very consideration, Job 3.
beg. Job 6.8. How he quarrels with the day of his birth, and makes it his
request to God that he would cut him off: What is the matter with Job now? this
language had not he heard to fall from his lips formerly? why now Job is
stripped of the worlds riches, he would be cut off from the world; if the
comforts of the world dies, then he would have no longer being in the world: If
it be thus with Job when the sun of unbelief which is dying in him does but
appear, how is it then with those that live in unbelief, and have no
acquaintance with God at all, their disappointments is their hell; and they say
of God as those evil spirits did of Christ, That he is come to torment them
before their time. Thus we see that unbelief is so potent an evil in the
soul, that it unjoynts the whole frame of the soul, leaves it so loose, that
every blast shakes it, and overturnes all the joys and comforts of it; that
which is not fixed in God, is apt to change with all that is changeable, and
living only in changeable vanity, is always in a troubled sea, where it can
find no place to cast the anchor of hope on, because it sees not God: This is
another certain evil of unbelief.

The last evil which I shall mention of unbelief, is this; It is a sin
which has all other sins in it, and keeps the soul in a readiness to
answer all the temptations of Satan with obedience. It was unbelief that made
the children of Israel to murmr against Moses, and to doubt of Gods making
good his word to them, Exodus 14.10, 11. And they said unto Moses, Exodus 16.2.
Exodus 17.2.
because there were not graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to dye in the
Wilderness? They distrusted God as well as Moses, and therefore they murmr
at the work of God by Moses. It is unbelief makes the anger, so that it is a
teeming sin, it brings forth more sins then it self, and keeps the soul
in a readiness to entertain all sin; the unbelieving heart it is a treasury
of obedience to the Devil, he is sure never to fail of service from that
soul which does not believe in God; nay the Davill can have no service from
any soul, 1 Chronicles. 21. beg.
but so far as unbelief lives in the soul. Had not the Devil found unbelief
in David, he had never prevailed with him to number the People; when his heart
began to doubt the strength of God, then was a time for the Devil to tempt him
to try his own, therefore says he, number the people: Know how strong the
arm of flesh is, that thou may have something to trust too; this is as true
a touchstone of unbelief in the heart as any lives; when the soul by faith
sees enough in God, it is not solicitous to have an account of the fullness of
flesh: but distrust in the former, puts the soul upon enquiry after the latter
for satisfaction, and thus unbelief keeps open house for Satan at all times;
it is the chief engine by which he upholds his kingdom and his credit; no
sin so near and dear to him as this, it is his second self, where ever it
bears sway, it maintains his laws, and his Image. See an emminent example of
this in Judas, Matthew. 27. Matthew. 27.4, 5.
Who when he had betrayed his Master, went and hanged himself. Satan by his
Engine of unbelief drew him through the one sin to the other, he did not
believe in Christ, therefore he betrayed him; nor did he believe there was
grace enough in God to pardon the worst of sinners, and therefore hangs
himself. So the Devil first persuaded Eve in Genesis 3.4, Genesis 3.4, 5.
5. Not to believe what God had said, and then he knew he was able to effect
his own ends, to make her disobey God, and obey him, in eating the forbidden
fruit; he uses hsi grand picklock, unbelief, to open the door, to let him
in, and so soon as ever he gets entrance in at that door, his commands become
laws: Unbelief is the owner and power of darkness in the soul, by which
Satan reigns as supreme. This is the strongest hold of Satan in any soul;
and if once that stronger man, the Lord Jesus Christ cast him out of this hold,
he loses his whole laterest in, and command over the soul; but so long as he
can keep this Garrison, the soul shall surely be kept in a warfare against
Christ. Want of faith in God must needs make want of love, service, child-like
fear, and obedience, and where these are not, all manner of evil must needs
be. I hope by these particulers I have given some little light into this
Kingdom of darkness: it is a large field, the dimensions of it can be taken
by no hand, but such an one as can compass the whole earth, and all the but
it; for all the evil of the world will come within this circle of unbelief. I
intend here no farther a travel upon this discovery then I have gone; to a
spiritual heart I am sure every one of these particulers will appear to be
very great evils, then the fountain of them must needs be exceedingly great in
evil; All I aim it is this, that as unbelief is the greatest evil in, and the
greatest enemy to the soul, so that the Readers would thus look upon
unbelief, and as souls forewarned, to be fore-armed. Secret enemies are the
worst of enemies; I have therefore pointed at this great enemy that it might
not be greater then it is in it self, by its secret lurking undiscovered in
the soul.

I shall in the next place in some particulers as before, hold forth the
benefits of faith in God, in Christ, and his word, in the souls of believers.

The benefits of FAITH.
First, Faith in God makes the life of the soul pur^, it is a life only in
God, it lives upon nothing else but what God is, does, and says: This is
properly the life of faith, and the true advantage of the soul by that life.
Faith is that eye by which the soul looks into, and has a discovery of the
goodness, grace, and glory of God to it self. Now in this knowledge the soul
is carried out of it self into God, to live purely and singly upon God, it now
comes to know Gods strength to be exceedingly more then its own, and so
forsakes its own strength to live upon the strength of God. By faith the soul
sees the full salvation that is in God, and so casts it self upon God for
salvation, and lives purely upon God, and nothing but God for salvation and
deliverance out of the hands of all its enemies, to serve him in says above
carnal, distrustful fear; the life of says in God, Luke 1.73, 74.
with this benefit of that life does very emminently appear in the Prophet
David, Psalm. 62. He begins the Psalm thus: Truly my soul waits upon God.
This is his faith, he believes in God, and therefore waits upon him: Well,
but what is the ground or reason of the Prophets thus waiting upon God, he
tells us in the end of the first verse; from him comes my solvation. He did
by faith live upon God as the God of his salvation; that is, God was all to
him, his life of faith was a living purely and singly upon God; therefore in
verse 5. he lays a charge upon his soul: My soul, wait thou only upon God.
Have thy eye no where else, live purely upon what God is, for my expectation is
from him. The good I look for is the good which is in God, my waiting and
believing is to see the salvation of the Lord. So in 6. and 7. verses, He only
(meaning God) is my rock and my salvation, my defense and my glory, my
strength and my refuge, therefore I shall not be moved.

Observe this life of faith, it is purely in God, what God is, and makes its
conclusion according to what God is, I shall not be moved. Why not? Because God
is my rock and salvation, he is my defense and strength. What is in God is
the ground of his confidence, therefore God himself is the object of his
soul. This life of faith in David, is purely a life in God, such a life as
lives purely upon what God is. This life of faith in David puts him in the
latter part of that Psalm upon an exhortation to others to trust in God; that
is, to live upon what God is in himself: In this work he sets forth the
emptiness of all things out of God, he tells us in verse 9. That men of low
degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in the
balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity. All these are empty things
compared to God, are lighter then vanity, not to be trusted in, or lay any
weight upon, God is only enough to answer the wants of eternal souls: Live
upon God, this is purely the life and benefit of says in the souln of
believers, to live upon the living God, that is, to live purely upon what is in
God.

So the same Prophet, in Psalm. 3.3. But thou Lord are a shi^l^ for me, my
glory, and the lifter up of my head: In the verse before he tells us that
many say of him, There is no help for him in God; but says he, I know the
contrary, and I do live upon thy self as my shield, my glory, and the lifter
up of my head; his life is what God is, for faith has pitched upon God for his
life, Psalm. 7.10.
and he lives in what God is; So in Psalm. 7.10. My defense is of God: That is,
God is his strength, and the strength of God is his defense, he lives upon
God, And puts his trust in God, Psalm. Psalm. 16.1.
16.1. And in the 23. Psalm, The Lord is my Shepherd; all he has it is
received from the Lord, upon whom he lives, he makes mention of no Name but
the Name of God, as the fountain of all the good he injoyes, and this makes,
him in the 42. Psalm last. to call upon his soul when as it was cast down,
to hope in God; for says he, I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance and my God: Though my springs at creature, are soon drawn dry, so
that my soul may faint for thirst, yet hope my soul, For God is thy life; I
shall praise him because he is my life: Thus does faith live and satisfy the
soul in what God is in himself; Psalm. 121.2.
and in Psalm. 121.2. My help comes from the Lord: It is what is in God that
the believing soul looks upon for help, and therefore the life of faith
lives when all things below God have no life in them, for it lives in God,
and upon what God is: Give ear to the voice of a believing soul speaking, in
Lament. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in
him: This soul believes God to be its portion, and therefore lives upon God;
thus faith pitcheth upon what God is in himself to satisfy the soul withal;
the Prophet Habakkuk in his faith on God, mentioned in his 3 Chapt. verse. 17.
to the end, is a very emminent proof to this truth; he tells us there,
Although the fig tree shall not blosome, neither shall fruit be in the Vines:
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the
flock shall be cut off from the fould, and there shall be no heard in the
stalles: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord: I will joy in the God of my salvation:
The Lord God is my strength.

Observe the frame of his spirit and it speaks this; That though all creature
comfort should fail, and be cut off from him, yet that could not empty him of
joy and rejoicing, so long as the Lord continued to be the God of his
salvation, and his strength; what does this speak, but that the Prophet lived
purely upon what was in God, and upon God himself as the God of his salvation,
for had his life been out of God, his joy and rejoicing would have been cut off
when the creatures of all kinds and in all places did fail, but his soul
living purely upon what God was in himself, his joys are always green,
because God is the fountain of his joy, this is truly the benefit of the life
of faith in the soul, that must needs be a living advantage that leads the
soul to a living fountain, and lays it to rest in the arms of God,
satisfying the soul with what flows from the bosom of God, that soul can
never fear wants that has this for its belief, that what God is in himself
he is for that soul, and what is communicable in God, shall according to the
wants of that soul be communicated to it; and this is the life of faith, a
life of joy and rest in God, living upon the everliving God, it is esteemed an
advantage to joy and rest by the worldling to have his Bags and his Barnes
full, it is truly an advantage of joy and rest to a believer to live upon a
full, for God is ever full, though the field and the barn fail, though the
bag have a hole in the bottom and cannot hold what is put into it, yet the
soul that lives on God is full of joy and rest, because God never fails.

Nay this is the advantage of a believing soul that lives by faith in God, it
lives spiritually, the streams that continually runs through the soul are
Evangelicall, the light is pure, it is the light of the Lord; the life is pure,
it is the life of God; is lives upon what is in Heaven, in God there is its
treasure and its heart also; the life of faith it is the evidence of things not
seen, not common objects to earthly eyes, but sublime and spiritual objects;
the grace, love, redemption, purity, power, and faithfulness of God; these are
the objects of faith, which do certainly make a most glorious life and rest
in the soul, this soul is of Heaven, heavenly; it is begot and newborn in
Heaven, and there it lives, where ever it moves; though the body be carried from
one piece of earth to another, yet the heart is always in Heaven, the object,
rest, joy, and satisfaction of this soul is spiritual; God is all to this
soul, and all its life is in God; the eye is spiritual, and the heart is
spiritual, this eye does always see that in God which satisfies the heart;
for the heart seasts and fills it self with what it sees and injoyeth in
God; if the Rocks in the Wilderness should give no water, yet the spiritual
eye sees Christ to be a Rock and a fountain of life, and there it drinks
and satisfies it self with the waters of life; the Prodigal had this eye
when he said, In my Fathers house is bread enough; that eye which beholds God
as a Father, does acknowledge that there is bread of life enough in God, and
that is the spiritual eye, that eye of faith which makes God in single object,
and satisfies the heart with what God is in himself and to h^s people; such
souls as by experience knows what it is to live by faith in God, I am sure do
value this as an exceeding great benefit and advantage of the life of says,
that it has God to live upon for its life.

A second benefit of faith in the soul, is this:
By faith souls attain to the righteousness of God (which is Christ) a
believing soul makes Christ its righteousness, so the Apostle Paul, Phil, 3.9.
Phil. 3.9. And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is
of the Law, but that which i^ through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith: So long as this Apostle lived in his legal spirit and
principles, his legal duties and privileges, were his righteousness; but so
soon as the life of faith lives in his soul, Christ is made the
righteousness of his soul, he counts all his former righteousness, but as
dross and dung: Now nothing will satissie his soul but to be found in Christ;
that is, to have Christ his righteousness, that God may behold him in Christ
his own righteousness; faith it climes as high as God for righteousness,
nothing below Christ must be a righteousness to a believing soul, To be found
in him, (Christ) the righteousness which it of God by faith: When faith seeks
a righteousness, it restes no where till it attain Christ, Romans 9.30.
who is the righteous of God: And this righteousness the Apostle tells us in
Romans 9.30. That the Gentiles attained to by faith: That the Gentiles have
obtained righteousness, even the righteousness of faith: That is, they have
by faith pitched upon Christ for righteousness, and so through believing have
attained the true righteousness, that righteousness which the soul can
attain to no other way but by believing; the Jews in all their legal duties
could not attain to that righteousness which the Gentiles did by believing.

The righteousness of God is not of works, but by faith; Christ is Gods
righteousness, he does purchase and redeem the soul to believe, faith does
not purchase Christ for a righteousness, but believe in the purchase and
redemption that Christ has made for it, and so attaines Christ its
righteousness, who is Gods righteousness, and in whom the soul is to all
eternity righteous in the sight of God: Romans 4.3.


Thus was Abraham's believing in God, accounted to him for righteousness: It is
not Abraham's doing, but his believing, by which he attaines to the
righteousness of God, and is counted righteous in the sight of God; Gods
righteousness is the gift of his free grace, and can be attained by the soul,
no other way but in believing, because any other way would destroy the grace of
God in the gift.

Now this God is exceeding tender of, therefore he keeps all hands but the hand
of faith off from laying hold on Christ his righteousness, whom is the great
gift of free grace; but as all other hands are excluded from meddling with the
righteousness of God, so this hand of faith, that never fails; when ever Gods
puts forth this hand of the soul, he puts his own righteousness into it;
faith in the soul does certainly attain the righteousness of God, it is
such a hand as will preserve the free grace of Gods righteousness pure in the
heart, Christ the righteousness of God in the heart does preserve and keep up
entire the glory of free grace in God that made him righteousness to the
soul, and the hand of faith does not slubber this glory, but keeps it pure
upon the grace of God, and does acknowledge that it self, as well as the
righteousness it has attained, is all the gift of Gods free grace.

Now faith as it thus attaines the righteousness of God, must needs be an
exceeding great benefit to the soul, because the righteousness is of so great
a value; the feet of them which brings glad tidings is welcome; so must needs
be that glorious hand which receives Christ in into the soul, none can tell
but them that have it, what a mercy it is to have a hand and a heart for
Christ; this is the benefit of faith in the soul, it is such a hand as
receives whole Christ, and delivers up the whole soul back again to Christ,
it takes in Christ as its righteousness, and gives up the soul to Christ to
be made righteous in him; that soul which attained Gods righteousness, can at
all times go to God in his own righteousness, this is the benefit of faith
in the soul, it can go with holy boldness to the throne of grace, and to the
throne of justice too, because it can come before God in his own
righteousness, and can plead that to God which by faith it has attained of
God, even the righteousness of God by faith.

A third benefit of faith in the soul, is this:
True faith in the soul quenches the fiery darts of Satan; the Devil is a very
skillful fire-master, he makes his fiery darts so exact, that none but God can
quench them in the soul, and he is very free of his work, he will be always
casting into the soul, for his business is to keep the soul in a flame, that
is the proper Element he lives in; these fiery darts are his temptations, with
which he goes about the Earth seeking whom he may devour; with these he sought
to winnow Paul like Wheat, and he is not only fitted for Paul's temper, but he
has temptations to suite all tempers and all times, he has baits to please
the various pallats of all flesh, he answers the proud, the peevish, the
covetous, the envious, the selfish and worldly wise man, in all their desires,
he makes all sweet to the taste, how bitter soever it proves in the belley; he
is properly the tempter, it is his course of life which he has used ever since
our first Parents were in Paradise; this is his work to fit temptations to
persons and conditions, and to shute these fiery darts continually into the
souls of men and women: Now the only shield to keep of these fiery darts, is
faith, and the only hand to put out and to quench these temptations in the
soul, Ephesians. 6.16.
is faith: Ephesians. 6.16. Above all, taking the shield of faith wherewith ye
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: The scope of the holy
Ghost there, is to show the soul its proper armor of defense, against the
Devil and all his instruments, the wicked, and the wicked one, and in this
above all things, he commends faith; faith says he, that is able to quench all
the fiery darts, all the temptations of the Devil and his instruments; and
there is an exceeding full reason to be given of this:

For it is the true property of faith to lead the soul to God, the believing
soul will go to God for his allowance and approbation before he does any
thing; now this is a sure way to quench all the temptations of Satan, to carry
them to God, and not to do any thing till God have written his name and his
will upon it; the believing soul tells Satan when he tempts him to any thing, I
am not at my own disposing, I am Gods servant I will go to him and tell him
your demand, if God give me leave then, and not till then will I obey you; O no
says the Devil, God is light, and if you go to him he will discover to you
my darkness, I cannot abide the brightness of his presence, if you will not
obey without Gods leave I must b^ gone; thus faith quenches the fiery darts of
Satan: Now under this consideration how great a benefit and advantage is faith
in the soul, it contends with, and destroys Satan in his temptations, it is
the great trouble of Saintsion earth, that they have so busy and so watchful
a Devil for their enemy: Now the shield of faith is a sure defense against
this enemy, the believing soul lives in God, and has God to be a hiding place
to it from the tempter, the life of such a soul is by the faith of the Son
of God, it lives in God by faith through Christ, and the Tempter cannot go
through Christ to God to destroy such soul, but the soul can go through Christ
to God to destroy the Tempter in his temptations; thus faith in God is the life
of God, and the death of sin and Satan in his temptations in the souls of
believers; and sure I am, all such souls as have experimented this benefit of
faith in themselves will say, it is properly named a glorious advantage and
benefit which the soul has in believing.

A fourth benefit and advantage of faith in the souls of believers, is this:
By faith Saints go to God in all their wants as to a Father: In the pattern
of prayer which our Savior left, he hold forth thus much; That the soul
which prays in faith, goes to God as to a Father, though in Heaven yet a
Father, our heavenly Father; faith is that seed of God in the soul, by which
the soul is assured that it is begotten of Gods free grace; the new creature
is a child of Gods free grace; now faith it carrys the soul to its original
in all streights and wants, it tells the soul it is outly of grace that it
is what it is, and what ever yet is wanting, the same fountain must supply;
nay says faith to the soul, God is your Father, he has begotten you in his
own free grace to a lively hope in himself, you have therefore the greatest
and nearest relation to plead with God of any other, could you suppose any
other so able as God to answer your wants, ye^ there is none so near to you as
God in relation, to whom you may plead the interest of a Child, and from whom
you may expect the bowels of a Father, and upon this foundation the believing
soul goes to God in all its wants as to a Father; believing souls are only
satisfied with childrens bread, and this they look for from their Father, so
answerably in all their wants goes to their Father; faith is a great advantage
to the soul in this, in all its wants to carry it to a full fountain, and to
bowels of love which is ready to answer the souls with its own fullness; a
Fathes has a quick ear and a tender heart to his child cries and wants, God
is in this more exactly a Father then any on earth, he is most ready to hear
and answer the wants of his children, this faith does assure the soul of, and
hereby draws it forth to go to God as its Father and make his wants known:
First Epistle of John 5.14, 1 John 5.14, 15.
15. And this is the considence that we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will he bears us: And if we know that he hears us
whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petition that we desired of him.

Faith keeps the soul careful to make petitions according to the will of God,
and in the name of Christ, assures the soul that its petition is granted; the
reason is this, the Child beggs of the Father for the Fathers will to be done
and fulfilled in him, for that is it which a believing soul wants and seeks
for, only that God may be all in it, and that his will may always be done by
it; now this spirit and this assurance will be certainly carrying the soul to
God as to its Father in all wants, when creatures in their wants comes to lower
relations then a Father, they give this for a reason, my Father is not able, or
my Father is dead, were he alive I would not trouble you; which speaks this,
that if they had a Father to go to, which were able to help them, they would
carry all their wants to him, and center all their desires in him, because a
Father; but now says in the soul it makes out God to be a living Father,
able to answer all the wants that soul or body has, and makes known to him,
and therefore carrys the soul in all its wants to God his father; interest is
the strongest of all pleas, and the nearer the interest and relation is, the
stronger is the plea of the soul; the Prophet David in Psalm. 28.1. Psalm. 28.1.
uses this argument with God for his assistance. Unto thee will I cry, O Lord,
my Reek; be not silent to me: This is his plea, thou art my Rock; that is, my
foundation and my defense, I have builded on thee, therefore be not thou
silent; you see relation and interest is his argument, thou art my Rock
therefore I come to thee; I, says faith, thou art my Father, therefore I come
to thee, be not thou silent thou art my Father, I know thy bowels cannot but
yearn to see my wants, and the injuries done to me; he that believes most in
God is least in revenging his own injuries; the reason is this, faith carrys
the soul to God, and there it tells God all the injuries and wrongs that are
offered and done to him, and then the soul is at rest, leaves the recompense
to his Father; this thoroughly and spiritually considered, is a very great
advantage in the souls of believers, which is demonstrable by the many great
evils it keeps the soul from; what is the reason that men of the World in
their wants will deceive and lie, nay steal rather then go without what they
lust after, and in their streights will swear and forswear, yea do any
unlawful thing to break through, is it not want of faith in God, they say they
have no other ways to help them; that is, because they have no faith in God,
Gods children finds other ways though they be in the same wants, they go to
their Father, says pleads the interest of a Child, and begs day by day its
daily bread, and keeps the soul believing that as God is an inexhausted
fountain in himself, so that he can never let that dye which himself has
begotten, nor be worse to his Children then earthly parents are to theirs; it
is faith in the soul keeps it living upon God as a Father, which preserves the
soul from all evil ways to answer its wants, for it carrys the soul to God
as a Father in all its wants both for soul and body, see the operation of
faith in David's soul, Psalm. 31.14. I trust in thee, O Lord, I said thou art my
God. Psalm. 31.14.


Where faith clears up interest it begets trust, thou art my God therefore I
trust in thee; so does faith clear up the relation of a Father in God to the
soul, and then what follows; Thou art my Father, therefore I come to thee and
trust in thee: The soul is exceeding full of sweetness, joy, rest, and holy
holdnesse, when it can come to God as to its Father, and stand in his presence
as in presence of his Father: Now this sweetness, joy, rest, and holy
boldness of the soul, is the fruit of faith in the soul: Faith in the soul
makes the soul much in heaven by prayer, because it delights to be in its
Fathers presence, and spreading before the bosom of his love all the wants it
is in. Burdened hearts do use to seek some true friendly bosom to open
themselves to, and so in some measure to ease themselves; now in this, faith is
a mighty advantage to the soul, for it leads the soul to God, and God its
Father, where it shall not only open, but certainly ease it self of all its
burdens. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden (says God) and
I will refresh you. I, says faith in the soul, go to your Father, he will
ease you of all burdens, and rest you in his own bosom; when as the soul
sees the power of a God, and the love of a Father center in one object, it is
easily drawn to run after it in all its wants. Now thus faith holds forth God
to the soul, as God our Father, and by faith believing souls goes to God in
all their wants, and cry out, O our Father, we want victory over sin in our
conversations, deliverance from the temptations of Satan, to be carried in thy
Spirit above the love and joy of the world, to have our wills wholly melted into
thine, to be spiritual in our light, motion, and worship; We desire as our
head did for us, to be kept from the evil of the world, and that thou would
provide for us all things needful quite through the Wilderness; these are our
wants and desires.

But thou art God, in whom there can be no want, and thou art our Father,
therefore we pray thee answer all our wants according to thy wisdom and thy
glory; these are the breathings and motions of true and lively faith in the
soul, it carries Saints thus to God as to a Father in all their wants, and
makes them much with God in the opening their wants to him, because God is
their Father: Now what ever keeps the soul much with God, must needs be a great
benefit to the soul, and this is faith, that which carries the soul in all
its wants to God, and keeps the eye of the soul steady on God as a Father,
therefore a great benefit to the soul.

A fifth benefit of faith in the soul, is this;
By faith Saints do cheerfully undergo sufferings for Christ, and choose
them, though grievous to the flesh, rather then finne.

This is so truly the benefit of faith in the soul, that none but such souls
as believe in God can do thus. Saints do this by a strength out of
themselves, even in God, which they have in God by believing. By faith in God
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Dan. 3. chose Nebuchadnezar's fiery furnace,
rather then to worship his golden Image which he had set up: Faith made it
easier to them to suffer for God, then to sin against him; though the Furnace
was heat seven times hotter then before, Nebuchadnezzar gave them their choice,
and says taught them what to choose; These believing souls counts the flames
of sin to be more dreadful, and fuller of smart, then any flames which the
Tyrant could cast them into: they had faith to trust in God, and that carried
them above the commands of sin, or the fear of punishment in the disobeying
of man. The same effect of faith we find in Daniel, in the sixth Chapter of his
Book, verse. 10. Dan. 6.10.
Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his Chamber,
and prayed three times a day. He knew what snare was laid to catch him in, yet
he omitted not his duty, he chose rather to be cast into the Lions mouths, then
to keep his mouth shut from making Petitions to God: Thus faith in God kept
him close to his duty, though it led him into the snares of death. Faith leept
up the Apostle Paul's soul to this pitch in Acts 21.13. Acts 21.13.
when ^s fleshly relations would by tears have persuaded him to omit duty,
that he might wave bonds; he answers their solicitations thus: What mean ye
to weep, and to break my heart, for I am ready not to be bound only, but also
to dye at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. As if he had said,
your weeping is my greatest burden, you break my heart with that; as for bonds
and death for the Name of Christ, faith in God will carry me through all that,
and I had father choose to dye at Jerusalem, then to omit my duty, and not to
go for fear of bonds. Thus we see the choice of souls believing in God, when
sin and sufferings are before them, one to be chosen, and the other left; now
none but a believing soul can do thus, for it is faith in God which keeps the
soul close to God; the pleasure of sin though but for a season, will leave
such souls as have not their pleasure in God. Now none can live in God with
delight that does not believe in God, so that it is only the believing soul
that chooses God for its delight, and will rather choose sufferings, then leave
God^ Christ has many which profess to follow him, and to be in him: but when
he tryes them by sufferings for his Name and his Truths, they leave him, and
with Demas embrace the present world, by which he discovers them, that they
were only of him by bare profession, not truly in him by faith, for then they
would abide with him, and accounted of Christ to be as worthy and as lovely
with his Cross, as with his Crown, and would have chosen in all conditions to
abide with Christ; I, as Moses, to choose afflictions with the children of God,
rather then the pleasures and honors of Pharoah's Court; to a believing eye
Christ puts a beauty upon sufferings, and a blackenesse upon sin, so that the
soul for beauty-sake chooses sufferings rather then sins; this is a
precious advantage in the soul: but the truth of it speaks this, that there is
very little true faith in the world: this faith is accompanied with much love
to God and Christ, and that makes it the more rare and scarce to be sound: but
where i^ is, it makes a glorious soul and conversation: We may find many
that do choose sin in love to sin, though sufferings be visible to the
eye, and shame at the heels of such courses: but it is only the believing
soul, that to shun sin will choose sufferings, and that out of love to God and
faith in him: This is a rare advantage, for it makes the soul a rare soul,
such a one as is no where to be found but amongst Gods Jewels, his little flock
and peculiar ones; this faith is always leading the soul of sin to take in
Christ, though sufferings comes with him; nay chooses to embarque in a storm
with Christ, rather then to go with sin in the most pleasantest calm that
the world affords: It fears not to be with Christ in troubled Seas, because it
believes he can rebuke them at his pleasure, so that both wind and Seas shall
obey him: Faith knows nothing can bound God, but God can bound the creature
when he pleases: Faith knows, if God say the word, though the ship be split
in the midst of raging Seas, yet not the life of one man shall perish whom God
has promised to bring safe to shore, and hereby faith persuades the soul to
choose sufferings in communion with God, thereby to avoid sin, which leads
the soul from God; the believing soul can see no happiness out of God,
therefore refuses to embrace any seeming pleasure which leads from God, and
this soul sees such full happiness in God, that it believes what ever
sufferings it meets withal in communion with God; that God in such communion
will swallow up the soul in himself above all sufferings; and in this says,
does the soul cheerfully undergo sufferings for God, and choose them rather
then sin, which is a greater advantage to a child of God in this world, then if
all the world were at his disposing.

A sixth benefit and advantage of true Faith in the soul is this:
Faith makes the soul steady in its worship and service of God; when as a
soul believes that it does worship God according to his own mind and will,
then it in not easily removed or shaken in its worship and service of God,
therefore says the Apostle, let every one be fully persuaded in his own
mind; that is, what ever men do in the service and worship of God, let him
fully believe that it is the mind and will of God he should so serve and worship
him; for uncertainty of Gods mind, will make unsetlednesse in man's worship;
he that believes not that God is pleased with what he does, cannot be steady
in that service to God: He that worships an unknown God; that is, God in such a
way as he knows not whether God will approve of or not, will not be long
known by that worship; If faith cleares not up the will of God to the soul in
its way of worship and serving God, the soul walks in the dark, and has
trembling in it suitable to darkness, and trembling joints cannot be steady in
the way they walk, the uncertain soul will go with every one that pretends
to set it right: but when faith has cleared up Good will to the soul, then it
moves steadily: Faith is a steady eye, and it makes God its object, so that
where faith lives, the soul is steady in its motion; and though it may, as God
comes nearer to it go from lower to higher former, yet in all it goes nearer
to God, and is more and more clear in the mind and will of God, more steady and
spiritual in its worship and service of God; that is, worships God more
purely, more out of the flesh and more in the Spirit, according to that
Gospel Worship our Savior speaks of in John 4.24. God is a Spirit, John 4.24.
and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth. In spirit,
because he is a Spirit; in truth, because he is the true God: Now none but the
believing soul can worship God either in spirit or truth; for he that
believes not his worship to be according to God, cannot worship in truth,
because he knows not the mind of God who is the God of truth: nor can it be in
the spirit, for the Spirit is light, and makes knowledge of God, therefore it
is only the believing soul that can worship God in spirit and truth, and no
other souls can worship God truly, or be true to the worship and service of God
which it does profess. It was faith made the three Children and the Prophet
Daniel, in the Book of Daniel, so emminently steady in their worship and
service of God, and truly it is want of faith that makes the unsettlement of
souls in this thing, and such as are so zealous to have multitudes to worship
God, whether they know and believe it to be Gods mind or not, may bring many
pretenders to God, but not any whit more of worship and service to him. Faith
makes men true to the worship and service of God, and force makes men true to
the will worship of man; for as he that believes will not swerve from what God
has revealed to him, so such as worship only by the rule of man's will and
power, is always ready to worship in what manner soever man will have him, and
this makes him as uncertain in his worship, as man is who is his rule for
worship: but the soul advantaged to worship and serve God in spirit and truth,
is the believing soul; for what faith fixes of God in the soul, that the
soul is steady to God in, and always ready to worship and serve God with; it
therefore concerns such as would be steady in their worship and service of God,
to do nothing in his worship and service but what they can do from a
principle of faith, believing it to be the mind and will of God concerning
their souls, in their worship and service of him, and in this faith the soul
will be steady to God, and it may say as the Prophet David: O Lord my heart is
fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise. My heart is fixed on
thee, my joy is continually in thee, and my praise and worship shall be always
to thee according as thou have by faith sixed my heart on thee, so shall thou
have fixed worship and service from me; Souls thus fixed are rarely found, nor
are they ever found but where faith lives, and as faith grows, so the soul
fixes: This is a benefit and advantage fixed to says in the soul, for they
always go together, and the want of either is the want of both, but sure I
am, where both are, they may truly be called benefits and advantages to the
soul, for that soul is advantaged above all the unsteady souls in the World,
whatever they pretend to besides.

A seventh benefit of Faith in the soul, is this:
Faith it makes a ready submission in the soul to the will of God, that soul
which believes in God, and lives upon God for alit has or hops for, does
not quarrel with, or dispute against the will of God, nay though Gods will be
never so opposite against the will in man, yet where faith lives and bareth
sway in the soul, there the soul lays down its own will and readily
submits to the will of God; this was Joseph's case in Matthew. Mat. 1.24.25.
1.24, 25. there God bids him to take unto him his wise though she were with
child: Now in the 19. verse, his mind was to put her away privily, because he
would not make her a public example, but when God by the Angel had revealed
his will to him, he forsakes his former resolutions, and does as the Angel of
the Lord had bidden him: Now observe, it was faith in Joseph made him thus to
submit to Gods will, for had not he believed the Angel of the Lord when he
told him in the 20. verse That which was conceived in her was of the holy
Ghost, doubtless he would have keps to his former resolutions to put her away
privily, but believing that the thing was of God, and of it was the will of
God, he said, Take unto him Mary his Wise; he through faith makes ready
submission to the will of God: And in the 2. Matthew. 14. there by says he
readily obeyed God, Mat. 2.14.
In taking the young Child and his Mother by night and departing into Egypt,
which in the 13. verse was the command of God to him by the Angel the second
time, because Hered sought the Childs life: thus Joseph believing God is ready
to submit to all the will of God: It was thus also with Peter and Andrew in
Mat. 4.19, 20, Mat. 4.19, 20.
when Christ called them to follow him, he promising to make them fishers of
men; the Text says, They streighway lift their Nets add followed him. Had not
they believed in Christ they would never have followed him, but they did it
streightway: Faith it made them readily willing to obey the call of Christ;
says it is the day of Gods power in the souls, and it makes his people ^^iling
people unto his will.

This made Joshua readily obey all the commands of God in his besieging of
Jericho, as appears at large in the fixed of Joshua he believed the word of God
in the 2, verse, That God had given Jericho into his hands, therefore waits on
God for his directions and acts accordingly; it is faith makes the soul wiling
to the will and work of God: So says the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.7,
8.9.
in Heb. 11.7, 8, 9. By faith Noah being warned of God, prepared an Arc to the
saving of his house: And By faith Abraham when he was called to go out unto a
place which be should after receive for an Inheritance, obeyed, and he went
out not knowing whither he went, and so on: The holy Ghost makes this
express, that it was faith in the souls of these faithful ones that made
them ready to all the will of God; what ever flesh might have to object; yet
faith bearing sway, the soul obeys, where faith lives there the will, of God
lives, and there Gods will is readily obeyed; this is no small advantage to
souls in their Wilderness journey, to be bound up in the will of God, to have
that live in them by which they live in God, have Gods will for theirs, and
their will for God, this is true faith in the soul, it keeps the soul in a
ready posture to say. Amen, to all the revealed will of God, and to do in Gods
strength all that he requirs such souls and bodies to do, this ready frame of
soul to all the revealed will of God is that which Saints do breath after at
the throne of grace, therefore cannot but be welcome and highly prized by such
souls, that which is worth the seeking is a benefit to enjoy, but ready
submission to the will of God, is that which Saints do earnestly seek;
therefore this effect of faith in the soul must needs be a very great benefit
and advantage to the soul.

The eight benefit of faith in the soul, is this:
Faith makes the soul wait patiently upon God for his deliverance out of all
its streights, though with a single eye of hamane reason it can see no way of
escape; this is the language of faith in the soul; disquiet not thy self by
making conclusions according to thy dark apprehensions, stand still and see
the salvation of God; salvation and deliverance is Gods not thine, be quiet and
still, and thou shall see the salvation of God, faith speaks and works thus
in the soul that fears the Lord; That when it walks in darkness, and has
no light; then to trust in the name of the Lord and to stay himself upon his
God, Isa. 5.10. Isa. 5.10.
Not to give up all hopes, and to cast off all attendance upon God, when it
cannot see a way of deliverance by its Natural reason, but is wholly in the
dark in that point; Nay I think the Scripture goes higher when as faith
cannot see what God means, whether he will deliver or no; yet then to trust in
God, and to wait upon him for the manifestation of his will, though faith
cannot make out what God will do, yet faith keeps the soul waiting upon God,
and that in a still frame of spirit to see his salvation: He that believes,
says the Text, makes not have; he goes not before God, for faith keeps the
soul in a waiting posture upon God in all conditions; The believing soul
makes not have, through impatience to cast off any burden before Gods time,
nor does it make haste through inordinate affections to enjoy what it delights
in and desires before Gods time; faith in the soul esteems of things in
season, as in their full beauty, Like apples of Gold in pictures of Silver;
and to this soul Gods time is the season for all things, Gods time is the most
beautiful season to lay down a burden in, and to take up an enjoyment in to
a believing soul, therefore it makes not haste but waits upon God for his
season, lies patiently at the poole side till the Angel of the Covenant come
and trouble the waters; this was David's frame of spirit, in Psalm. 13.5. But I
have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.

Observe, he had put his trust in God, and therefore rejoices in his salvation;
the Psalm is a prayer for salvation, it being in faith the Prophet joys in
the salvation of God, as though he were in present possession of the thing he
prayed for, doubtless he waited joyfully, when as he joyed in the salvation to
come as if it were present, the same frame of spirit we shall find in the
righteous, Psalm. 33.20, 21. Our souls waits for the Lord, Psalm. 33.20, 21
he is our help and our shield: For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we
have trusted in his holy Name: Mark it, here is a waiting upon God and that
with joy, and this the fruit of faith; Because men have trusted in his boly
Name: Faith in God makes the soul wait on God with joy: So the Prophet David
in Psalm. 37.7. gives this counsel as the effect of faith in his own soul,
Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him, free not thy self because of him
who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings wicked devices to
pass: As if he had said, thou poor heart weak in faith, thou frettest thy
self because the wicked prosper in their ways, were thou strong in faith thou
would not mind them so as to disquiet thy self, but rest in the Lord, and
wait patiently on him, their prospering hinders not Gods design, therefore
wait on God and be at rest; this is the effect of faith, in my soul says the
Prophet, and I recommend to thee, believe in God so will thou be at rest, and
in that rest wait patiently on God for the manifestation of his will; So in
Psalm. 40.1. their waiting patiently on God is expressed to be an effect of
faith and confidence in God: And in Psalm. 62.1, 2. Truly my soul waits upon
God, he is my Rock, my salvation, my defense, and so forth: His soul by faith
trusts in God, he had made God his Rock, what is the effect of this faith,
therefore truly says he, my soul waits upon thee, faith makes the soul
truly to wait upon God: Lamen. 3.26.
Lament. 3.26. It is good obat a man should both hope and quietly wait for the
salvation of the Lord: This is the voice of faith in the soul, when the soul
asket faith, what is good? faith gives it this answer, It is good to wait
patiently on the Lord, Verse. 1.
though thou art the man that has seen al afflictions; yet it is good for thee
to wait patiently on the Lord; this is both the counsel and practice of faith
where it lives in any soul, and doublesse to have the soul in a quiet sweet
frame of spirit, waiting and depending on God is no small benefit; faith leads
the soul to God and acquaints the soul with Gods fullness, so that thereby
the soul is brought into a quiet waiting upon God; this blessed benefit,
neither is nor can be any where but in believing soul, therefore men fret
themselves, and make so which have in their own ways that they break their
necks, destroy themselses and their designs, because they have not faith to
wait on God, it is the property of faith to keep the souls close to God, as
near God as can be, that the believing soul presses after; now this
nearness is to wait on him, to follow him, (...) no^ to go^ before him; this
is a true and great benefit of sake in the souls of bel^^v^^^.

The Ninth benefit of faith in the soul, is this:
By faith all Mountains of difficulties are removed from the soul; if thou
beleevest, says the Text, all things are possibl^, there is nothing too heavy
for faith to remove, because faith in the strength of God in the soul, for it
is the soul going out of it self into God, out of its own strength into
Gods; therefore to him that believes, all things are possible; consider this
operation of faith in Queen Esther, Esther. 4, 16. Esther 4.16.
There she directs Mordechai and all the Jews to seek God, and her self and
her Maidens does the same; she had a great business in hand, in which very
great difficulties to the flesh lay before her, she seeks God to be with her,
and then she castern her self and business on God by faith, she gets above
all the Mountains of opposition into this resolution to do her duty, and
leave the issue to God; and in to the King she goes with this resolution, If
Iperish, I perish: She was upon the wings of faith carried above all those
Mountains which did threaten perishing, she now did not fear to perish,
faith in God carried her above those fears, removed those Mountains and made
her way plain; faith wrought to this height in Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abedingo: Dan. 3.17.
Dan. 3.17. If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hands, O King: How
bravely does faith here mount them, above all Mountains of opposition, our God
is able to deliver us and we will trust him, heat thy Furnace as hot as thou
will, it shall be no Mountain in our way, for our trust is in our God, and
th^^ faith carries us above all that thou can either say or do; but for the
clearing up of this truth, take that one Scripture for all, in Mark 11.22, 23.
(...). 11.22, 23
they are the words of our Savior to his Disciples by way of exhortation to
steadfastness of faith: And Jesus says unto them, have faith in God, for
verily I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this Mountain, be thou
removed, and be thou cast into the Sea, and shall not double in his heart, h^^
shall believe that those things which he has said shall come to pass, he
shall have whatsoever he faith: This is an exceeding full Scripture to the
thing in hand, which is the efficacy of faith in the soul to remove
Mountains, it comes with the authority of Christ himself, Verily I say unto
you: Well what is it that Christ says? why this, that whomsoever in faith
steadfastly believing shall say to any Mountain, be thou removed and cast into
the Sea, it shall be done; I conceive none understandingly can lay up our
Saviors meaning here by that term Mountain to a Mountain or heap of earth,
for that would be little advantage to faith or encouragement to lay out faith
upon, but that by Mountain our Savior largely means all Mountains of
difficulties that are in our way to Heaven, and by Sea is meant a place of
devouring, of obscurity to what is cast into it; so that our Saviors meaning
is this steady faith, the soul that doubts not removes all Mountains that it
meets withal in its way to Heaven; so that they are devoured in obscurity that
the soul shall never see them more; our Saviors exhortation is this, Have
faith in God, doubt not in thy heart but believe in God, and Verily I say it,
take my word for it, this faith shall remove all Mountains: That is, the soul
which thus undoubtingly lives in God, shall in that life be above all
Mountains of opposition that are below God, and shall be able to nihilate them
through faith in God, as though they never had been; Have faith in God, doubt
not: What does this mean but an undoubted belief that God can and will
destroy all Mountains in our way to Heaven; thus it was with Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, they undoubtingly believed, our God can, and our God
will deliver us; and verily God did destroy those mountains that were in their
way, God is the same in every soul that has faith in him, and believes
undoubtingly, he throws down all Mountains into the Sea of destruction, and
mounts up such souls into himself, above all that might hinder them in their
way to Heaven; unbelief is that great Mountain in the soul, which brings
forth all those lesser Mountains of fear which the soul meets withal in its
way to Heaven: Now faith in God it lives in the death of unbelief, and so
destroys that teeming Mountain which brings forth all other real or
imaginary Mountains of fear in the soul, thus faith in God plucks up the
Mountains of fear which flows from on belief, by the roots; and in this is
a very great benefit to the souls of believers.

A tenth benefit of faith in the souls of Believers, is this:
Faith souls up the soul to the redemption of Gods free grace, faith is that
work of God in the soul, which in man is the soul to Gods Covenant of free
grace, He that believes in God, puts to his seal that God is true: That soul
which does believe in God, and in his Covenant of free grace, so as to cast it
self for salvation and all good upon God and his grace, does therein put to
his seal that God is a God of grace, and will make good his Covenant of grace
to his soul, otherwise he would never venture his soul upon it; and our
Savior speaking of faith in the soul, in John 6.47. says, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, John 6.47.
he that believes on me has everlasting life: Christ delivers it as a most
emminent truth, with a Verily, verily, I say it: And what is it that Christ
says but this? that faith is the seal of life to the soul, He that
believes, he has everlasting life: That is, by faith the soul has the seal
of salvation in it self, all the elect have salvation in God and Christ,
according to the eternal purpose of God in himself, but when God makes souls
to believe, then they have the salvation of God sealed in their own bosoms;
so says the Apostle Paul, in Romans 5.1. Romans 5.1.
Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ: That is, faith in Gods grace does seal up the soul to a
justified state through Christ Jesus, and the soul having this seal in it
self knows its peace with God; faith cannot be understood to be a justifier
in the soul as by purchase, for then there were no need of Christ to go along
with it, but as the seal of purchase through our Lord Jesus Christ, and this
is the true meaning of the Text: for thus the free grace of God and redemption
of Christ is preserved in the salvation of souls, but in the other sense both
are destroyed, now in this sense it proves the thing in hand, that faith souls
up the soul to the redemption of Gods free grace through Christ, and herein is
the soul justified in it self by faith, But of grace through Christ: So the
Author to the Hebrews in Chap. 11. verse. Heb. 11.1.
1. giving a definition of faith in the soul; says, It is the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; Faith is such a grace
as gives a substantial enjoyment satisfact^ry to the soul of that is hopes
for, and this is does by evidencing and sealing up to the soul its real
interest in God, Christ, and heaven, though through the clouds of the flesh is
cannot (...) the fullness and glory of its inheritance, yet i^ does fully
believe its interest in the inheritance, because i^ has the seal in i^ self:
thus faith is the seal and evidence to the soul of that which no other eye
can see, nor any other heart suck the substance of it seal up the soul to the
redemption of Gods free grace, and thus it is an exceeding great benefit and
advantage to the soul; the want of this makes those sad complainings that be
in souls, wh^^ they hear of grace and good in God, this blows up the flames
of their misery; what is this to me says a soul that believes not in God, I
have no share in all this, or at least I know of no interest that I have in the
redemption of Gods free grace, and so breaks out into such sad complainings of
its condition, as does wound the hearts of standers by, and breaks the heart
that bear the first wound, for a wounded spirit who can hear^; this soul
would give ten thousand worlds if it had the power; for the seal of the
redemption of Gods free grace in it self; we use to say, things are worth as
much as will be given for them: by this rule the sealing love of God in his
redemption of free grace to the soul by faith, is more worth then can be
expressed; from whence I gather this, that faith as it seals up the soul to
the redemption of Gods free grace, so it is an exceeding great benefit and
advantage to the soul.

Another benefit of faith in the soul, is this:
Faith carries the soul above fear into the strength of God, so that though
all creatures and means fails, yet the believing soul has its refuge and
rest in God.

Faith in God carries the soul to God, and there it lives in what God is, in
which life all distrustful and distracting fear is banished from the soul.
It was thus with the Prophet David, Psalm 27.1. The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear: The Lord is the strength of my life, Psalm 11^.36.
of whom shall I be afraid. Here is first his faith in God, and his living
upon God by faith. The Lord is my light, my salvation, and my strength; he did
believe God to be so, and lived upon God as his light, salvation, and strength:
But now observe what is the fruit of this faith i^ his soul, and what the
benefit of such a presence: Why it is this, the soul is carried above fear
into the strength of God, he lives in God, and this makes him to be above
fear; whom should I fear, of whom should I be afraid. Is there any greater
then God^ can any power take me out of his hands? he is my light in which I see
the powers of darkness, and know they are too weak to contend with him; he is
my strength, so that not any thing can destroy me, which cannot overcome him:
Nay, he is my salvation, he has in the glory of his grace already saved me
out of the hands of all my enemies, to this end, that I might serve him without
fear; he has so overcome all enemies for me, that as I live in him, so I have
none to be afraid of; these are the arguings of faith in such souls as live
upon God, (which is the life of faith) such souls argue their safety from what
God is, and therefore till a greater then God appears, they know no cause of
fear. This is the Apostle Paul's argument, when as he was strong in faith, Romans
8.31. If God be for us, who can be against us. Romans 8.31.
His life was in God, and by faith he argues thus; what power can contend with
God, he speaks there of the greatest powers of darkness, that says, if God
be reconciled to us, no power, or powers can stand against him; now faith in
the soul says, God is reconciled to us, he is for us, he is our salvation and
strength, none can be against us and prosper in their way, therefore whom shall
we fear, or of whom shall we be afraid. So the same Prophet in Psalm 31.14.
In the verse before he says, that fear was on every side, until faith came
into his soul: but faith, that banisheth fear. I trust in thee O Lord, I say
th^^ art my God. Faith was his advantage to carry him above all those fears
that were before on every side, and he commends to all Saints for such an end
in v. 23. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your hearts, all ye that
hope in the Lord. As if he had said, you may live above fear if your trust be
in God. In Ps. 56.9.11. Psalm. 56.9.11.
We shall find the Prophet in the practices of what he exhorted to in the last
Scripture: When I cry unto thee, then shall my enemies turn back: this I
know, for God is for me. Mark it, here is his faith, that when he cried to God
for help against his enemies, that they should be confounded and turned back;
and the ground of his faith is this, for God is for me, God will engage on my
side, and I live on him as my strength and my salvation; but in verse. 11. There
is the ^ffect of this faith in his soul, and that is it carries him above
fear. In God (...) put my trust, I will not be afraid what man can do unto
me.

Observe, it is not fear, because I have put my trust in God: Faith in God
cast fear out of the soul, for it carries the soul up to God above fear; I
have put my trust in God, and shall I now be afraid of man? Shall I fear such
an inferior power to God, that which God can destroy in a moment, in the
twiackling of an eye; this fear has no confistancy with faith, nor can it
live where faith lives: Faith in God assures the soul, that all the Nations
of the Earth are but as the drop of a bucket compared (...) God, and therefore
where faith lives, the soul cannot fear the stroke of all the empty powers of
the world to be against it, when as God is for it, Psalm. 91.1, 2, 3.
and it has put its trust in God, Psalm. 91.1. He that dwells in the secret
place of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of his wings. Whom ever
lives in the bosom of God by faith, knows it self to be safe in the
protection of God, and so is above fear as it is in God; God is the refuge,
fortress, and deliverer of such as trust in him, therefore as he is all this,
and my God, in him will I put my trust, and surely he will deliver me, says
the believing soul; therefore whom should I fear, and of whom should I be
afraid. By faith souls live satisfied in God, and above fear, though all
creatures fail, as the Prophet Zephaniab, in Chap. 3. verse. last. Though the
Fig Tree and all other creatures and fruits of the earth should fail; yet says
he, I will rejoice in God, and joy in the God of my salvation, for the Lord he
is my strength. Here is living upon God, above, and without the creatures, and
this life is a life of joy, which must needs be above fear. Faith is a life in
God, as a God of salvation, so a life of joy, and this purely in God; not
because of any creature enjoyment that might go along with God, but in God
when all these fail, and yet this a life of joy, a life above fear, this is
the life of faith in the soul, and the benefit of such a life.

So the Church of God in Psalm 46. lives by faith above fear as it lives in
God: this is the Churches faith, God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble. Now the next verse tells us what is the effects of this
faith in them: (...)
Therefore will not we fear though the earth he removed, and so forth. This is
the benefit of faith in God, it quenches and destroys fleshly and carnal
fear, i^ empties the soul of all but God, so as it makes God all to the
soul, and to live only upon what God is: Faith in its growth destroys fear
in its very being; for as faith grows higher and higher, so is the soul
carried more and more into God, by which it lives more on God, and God in the
sold destroys that fleshly carnal fear that is the seed of nature in all
flesh: Faith at this pitch in the soul is an exceeding great advantage in
times of trial; for where fleshly fear lives as supreme, there fleshly
power commands the whole: Now in times of trial such souls will sail amiss,
that have this power at the stern; If in storms faith be not the Pilot,
souls will split on rocks, but never arrive at God; nay every calm will
endanger the soul, if faith guide it not to God: so that as faith does destroy
carnal fear, and keep the soul close to God, so it is a very great benefit
and advantage in the souls of believers.

Again, Faith in GOD does advantage the Soul in this:
Faith makes souls faithful, true to their trust and promises, trusting in
the true God to protect and carry them through all difficulties. It was thus
with Queen Esther, Est. 6.16. She promises Mordeeai and the Jews, that she
would first seek God to go with her, and then she would go in to the King; the
story tells us that there was great difficulties in the way, yet this
believing soul was true and faithful to her engagements, and the trust that
was reposed in her: She sought God to go with her and in God does faithfully
discharge her duty and trust, though death and danger was in every step of the
way: Faith i^ a vigorous grace in the soul, it fills with spirits, and
carries souls in the ways of the faithful God, though Lions and Beare^ lie
in the way: Thus faith wrought in this Heroic piece of the w^^ker Sex, depths
of dangers could not make her unfaithful to her God and Nation.

Faithful Joseph is another proof to this truth, in Genesis 39. Genesis 39.
his lewd Mistresses temptations could not make him false to his Master, and
he gives this for his reason, he could not be false to that trust his Master
had committed to him, nor durst he some against God, faith kept him true both
to God and man, and that is the true nature of faith to be faithful; therefore
faith James in his Epistle, show me thy faith by thy works. If thou have
faith, it will keep thee faithful both to God and man; what ever soul is
false to God and man in that trust which God and man has committed to it, I
dare affirm, it is the effects of unbelief; men in trust prove false to trust
as they think for fleshly advantages, or upon some outward necessity: but the
true cause is unbelief; for had they faith in God, they would be faithful to
God, and the trust committed to them: Did they believe in God to own them,
they would in that faith keep true to God, and own him; did they believe God
to be the owner, the author, and preserver of all truth and faithfulness, they
would in this belief be faithful to God, true to their trust, and trust the
God of truth to preserve them; for this is the effect of faith in the soul,
and I know no truer a demonstration of an unbelieving soul, then to be false
to God and man in the trust that is committed to it, upon any pretended grounds
whatsoever, nor is any thing a truer effect of faith, nor a clearer image of
God in the soul then faithfulness to God and man: In trust committed, and in
engagements given forth, this effect of faith I confess does declare the
present generation to be exceeding faithless, but yet let God be true, though
all men be liars; for such a soul as lives by faith, lives in God, so in
truth, and cannot be false to God or his people, to trust, or their own
promises: This is a precious benefit of faith, it is not only a benefit to such
souls in whom it is, but also to that Land and people where such souls do
dwell.

A further effect and benefit of faith in God, is this:
It makes men deny themselves to lift up Gods glory, and will not by any means
take Gods glory to themselves, though they have fair advantages for it. See
this fully proved in Peter and John, Acts 3.12. Acts 3.12. Acts 4.10. so on.
Acts 4.10. so on, when as by faith in God they had to the wonderment and
amazement of the people been instruments to make the lame man walk, so that
all the people ran about him to see what was done: Then Peter being afraid,
lest they should ascribe Gods glory to them, he speaks to the people in Chap.
3. verse. 12. And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people, ye men of
Israel why marvel you at this, or why look you so cornestly on us, as though
by our own power and holiness we had made this man to walk.

This Scripture clearly proves thus much, that the Apostles were careful that
not so much as a thought should remain in the peoples hearts that the lame man
was made to walk by any power and holiness that was singly or originally in
them, and therefore to put all that out of dispute, they declare themselves
nothing, but Christ all in the work, in Acts 4.10. Be it known unto you all,
and to all the people of Israel, that by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him does this man
stand before you whole.

Observe the care of preserving the glory of God and Christ entire that was in
these faithful souls, for they make a full Declaration of the power which did
the work, at which they were so amazed. Know all you, and do you make it
known to all the people of Israel, that by the Name and power of the Lord
Jesus Christ this work is done; They had here a fair opportunity to gain
great honor to themselves from the people, but faith in the soul makes it its
business to lift up the Name and glory of God, and to live upon that in all it
does. By faith these Apostles were isntrumental in this work, and this faith
keeps them true to the original glory which they acted by, namely God and
Christ, they wrought this great work in the Name of Christ, and by the power
of God, and their second work is to keep the glory of it upon its own
foundation, namely God and Christ: Now that they might more plainly show God
and Christ to the people in this great work, they throw down all that stands
in the way, and first begins with themselves; Look not upon us as if we by
one own power and holiness had made this man whole.

God has used us as instruments, but in this God is originally all, therefore
look upon God, not us: Thus faith in GOD throws down self and flesh, that
GOD in his glory may appear, that the soul might glory in what God is, and
not what self is; this is a precious grace in the soul, for it makes a
precious soul, a soul willing to work for Gods glory, and accounts this a
full recompense to all its labor and work, that God is thereby glorified, but
withal is exceeding tender that nothing of self should share with GOD in the
glory only due to his Name: Faith at this pitch is very rarely found in these
latter days, wherein m^n are lovers of themselves themselves more then lovers
of God, but where ever it is, it is an exceeding benefit and advantage to the
soul, such souls do the work of Heaven on Earth, lift up the name and glory
of God in all they do, and are not contented in doing any thing but in which
they may do this, throw down the veil of their own flesh, that the glory of
God might appear in them and by them, all those fleshly selfeish carnal
principles and practices that are in the hearta and lives of men, they are the
fruit and effects of unbelief in the soul; the evil of which does give
demonstration to the excellency and benefit of faith; says that works and
rules in the soul and conversation, to the throwing down of self, and to the
lifting up of Christ in the World, this is so great a benefit that none can
prize it but they that have it, it is more in the enjoying then it can be in
the desiring.

Another benefit of faith in the soul, is this:
Faith in God keeps the soul in a steady expectation of Gods fulfilling and
making good his promises though the acts of his providence may seem to work
crosly: Faith centers the soul upon God in his promiset, and brings it to this
pitch that though it cannot see Gods way of working, yet having believed God in
his word does rest in this, that all his works shall and do make good his
word; so that the soul when it is at a loss concerning Gods way of working,
yet it is at rest in the end of God made known by his Word, and can argue thus
with it self, though in the actings of God he seems to cross^ his own ends,
yet I know they shall all run into his faithful Word, and what he there
speaks he is now a doing; though I am a stranger to the way of his working,
yet he will never be failing to his own holy ends declared in his word; and
upon this account the soul is kept to wait quietly and to be steady in its
expectations of Gods sulfilling and making good his promises, though the
workings of his providence may seem to act crosly: Therefore says the
Prophet, I will trust in thee though thou killest me: Whatever thou deest I
know thou will fulfill thy promises; this was Moses faith at the Rad Sea, and
his counsel to the Israelites, Exodus 14.13.
Exodus 14.13. Not to fear but to stand still and see the salvation of God: As
if he had said, I and you have received promises from God that he will be with
us and deliver us out of the hands of Phareah and his Taskmasters, why let us
believe these promises, though his workings at this present may seem as though
he meant to let Pharaoh destroy us, yet having his word to the contrary, fear
not his works, but stand still and see the salvation of the Lord; all his
works shall accomplish the fulfilling of his Word; therefore in faith be quiet
and wait for it, there is not any thing that is more truly the nature of
faith then this to keep the soul quiet in waiting on God for the fulfilling
of his promises; God exhorts to this in Psalm. 46.10. Psalm. 46.10.
Be still and know that I am God, I will be exalted amongst the Heathen, I
will be exalted in the Earth: That is, you that have believed my word, if it
have spoken good to you, be still and quiet in your spirits concerning the
fulfilling of it, for I am God I am faithful and true, though my works seem
contrary to your eyes, yet they are but to exalt my name among the Heathen, and
in the whole earth, that men may not trace me in my way, but yet know, I am
God, I will be faithful to my ends and promises, fix you your eyes there and
quiet your heart in them, judge not my end by my ways, but my ways by my end,
wait on the fulfilling of my word, be still and know that I am God.

Faith in God makes the soul still and quiet in all Gods dispensations to it,
because it knows that he is God, therefore cannot be unfaithful to his
promiser, but is in all accomplishing his own will in the giving in to his
people the fullness of his p^^mises made to them; this the soul by faith is
assured of, and therefore waits patiently, and is not moved from its belief
of God though his present dispensations speaken some other thing to his fleshly
understanding: Now if this he the workings in the soul, as doubtless it is,
then faith is an exceeding great benefit in this very thing; for a soul fixed
on God in his word and promises, is in a measure in Heaven already, it is as
rest in God, and is filled with the joys of God in its rest, it lives above
^^tward appearances even in what God in and what God says, no^ doubting but
that all his worke^ shall make good his word; to that what ever his own flesh
or any other shall speak contrary to the Word of God, that faith beats down
in the soul, and keeps up the soul in a steady expectation of Gods making
good all his promises, and a patient waiting upon God for his (...) time; the
troubled unfixed souls of unbelievers, could they speak, would set forth the
exceeding benefit of faith in this particular; that which fixes the soul in
God, leaves it in the full possession of all good; now this is the true
property of faith, it is that gift of God which gives the soul singly and
purely up to God, to live only in him and upon him, and from hence flow this
benefit to the souls of Believers.

Again, Faith in God is a benefit to the soul in this, namely, That,
By Faith Saints are weaned from the World.

When a soul by faith sees its interest in God in that more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory; then, and not till then has it a low esteem of all
the dying vanities in the World, that i^ as the Wise man computes vanity all
things under the Sun; Faith is such an eye as can read that love which is in
Gods heart, and behold the glory of that love as an heir of God, a joint heir
with Christ, and a Citizen of the new Jerusalem, and in this vision is the
soul in all its affection centered in God, and so truly weaned from the
World, and it is nothing less can do it, there is such a naturalnesse, a
congruity, and oneness between the World and our own fleshly hearts that
nothing can break off this league and mount up the affections of the soul but
an Almighty power, the indwelling of God in the soul by says, through which
the soul dwells in God, and is continually feasted and satisfied with fuller
love and richer glory then the World can give, the soul now being made
spiritual, sees God and to be the only fountain of love, the single object
worthy of love, and its eternal portion of love, and so is carried in its love
and affections above the world into God and Christ; being thus swallowed up
into God, the soul in its love, joy, pursulte, and rest, becomes crucified to
the World and the World to it, it looks upon the World as a dead thing and its
heart is truly dead to the World; this is a true effect of faith, see this in
the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 2 Cor. 5.1.2.
5. begin. For we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacl^were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands but
eternally in the heavens: This is the work of faith in the soul, to assure
the soul of its interest in God; this we know says this Apostle that God is
our interest, himself is our eternal habitation; so that when ever these clay
walls shall crumble into dust we shall be no loosers by it, for the dissolving
of them is nothing else but the possessing of our full interest in God: Now
mark the effects of this faith in the 2. verse: For in this we gro^ne
earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house, which is from Heaven:
The knowledge of interest in God which is the proper work of faith in the
soul, it makes the soul not only weaned from, but also a weary of the World,
it groans earnestly to be uncloathed of the flesh, to be absent from the body
that it might be fully present with the Lord; faith weanes the soul in the
whole lump from the World, it would leave it wholly, it groans to be
uncloathed of the body that it might leave the World in all it is, the
disappointments of the World do many times make worldlings out of love with
sonte pieces of i^, but it is only faith that weanes any soul wholly from it,
and that because faith in God manifests the fullness of God to the soul, and
the souls interest in that fullness, so that it rests in God n^^ only as its
interest, and so better to it then all the World, (...) as a better interest,
so that being made wise in Christ its wisdom, the soul makes choice of God,
as having seen the dying glory of the World, and the living glory of God by a
spiritual eye of faith, it is thereby made dead to the World and alive to God;
Christ he speaks to a believing soul in the spirit, and tells the soul It is
your Fathers good will to give you the Kingdom; and that the Kingdom of
glory, to he joint heirea with me in glory, the soul believing this becomes
dead in its love to all the Kingdoms of the world, and to a world of King
lomes, Christ tells the soul further that in your Fathers house are many
Mantions, and I go to prepare them for you; your building in God is ready when
ever God shall uncloathe you of your flesh; the soul in believing this has
its heart where its treasure is, it in now risen with Christ and gone to
Heaven, and in its affection^ does manifest it self to be Crocified with
Christ to the World, w^^ner^ from all lower glories, because li^ing in the
glory of God; th^^ is, in God where all glory centers, and from whom all
gloryen have their original; so that when the soul is at the (...) does not
thirst after narrow streams, whom over d^inkes of thin fountain of life
thirsts no more; that is, no more after fatilfaction in any thing but God, it
has all in God, therefore weaned from all below God, doubtless this is a rare
benefit of faith in the soul, it is rare in its appearance, and for such
souls that with Demas forsake God and embrace this present World, what ever
they have professed, and though never so long under a profession of God and
godliness, yet they never truly knew God in the spirit, nor did they ever live
in God by a true and lively faith, for if they had, it would have wrought this
effect in the soul, to have weaned their hearts from, I, and have Crucified
their hearts to the World, had they ever tasted God in truth, the would never
have forsaken him for ten thousand Worlds: For the life of God in the soul
is the life of faith, and the effect of faith in the soul is a weaning of it
from the World, by a gathering of it into God.

The last benefit of faith in God which I shall mention, is this:
True faith in God does truly fix and establish the souls of Beleevere in the
redemption of Gods free grace from all our enemies from sin, death, Hell,
Law, grave, men, and Devils, none of these can hurt or destroy such souls as
lives in the free grace of God by faith; free grace it freely pardons finne,
and so plucks out the sting of death, delivers from the jaws of Hell,
satisfies and fulfils the Law, gathers from the grave that which in sown in
corruption and clothes it with incorruption, chains up the power and malice of
men and Devils against his people; this free grace does, and by faith the soul
lives thus on God, by which it becomes a fixed and established soul; believing
souls are not like the restless waves of the Sea, that roll from shore to
shore and soame up their own mire, but they are souls fixed in God and
Christ; God by faith did answer the Prophets prayer, which de^^red to be led to
that Rock which was higher then himself; that is, the work of faith, it leads
the soul to God and Chirst, and then it is an established soul, it is then
built upon (...) Rock higher then it self, so that winds cannot shake it, nor
(...) undermine it, as if it had built upon a sandy soundation; faith builds
upon a Rock, and that, the Rock of Ages, i^ (...) in the free grace of God, the
redemption and the righteousness of Christ, so that neither life nor death nor
any thing, no not finne, shall ever be able to separate such souls from God
and Christ, and hence it is that souls believing thus in God through Christ by
his spirit are fixed and established souls; the Prophet David in Psalm. 125.1.
gives in testimony to this benefit of faith in the soul; he tells us there,
They that tr^st in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be moved, but
abides for ever.

Faith in God fixes the soul in everlasting safety, and keeps it upon a Rock
of establishment even when Earth and Heaven is shaking.

Now I shall gather up what I aim at in all this, in reference to my own
soul and others, and it is singly this, to eye God with a single eye, and to
rest upon him with a steady undoubting heart; by a single eye, I mean a single
heart fixed upon what God is, does, and says concerning his people, and then
by faith to apply, and appropriate that to our selves, resting steadily and
undoubtingly upon him, assuring our souls that what he says concerning us he
will fully make good unto us: God cannot lie, when he speaks he speaks his
heart, and what is in his heart to do, no power or powers can hinder his hand
from doing, such souls then as thus see God and rest upon him, are sure to be
established; so as the counsel of good King Jeboshaphat is worthy to be
received by all souls, Beleave in the Lord your God, so shall you be
established.

Then first give me leave to advise to a serions and constant inquiry after
God, if establishment in the soul come by believing in God, then knowing of
God aright is of absolute necessity (...) such a believing; now souls slight
or inconstant in their inquities after God in what he is, does, and says, are
very unlikely souls to come to such a knowledge of him as will bring forth
belief to establishment; It was the saying of an established soul in God, I
know whom I have trusted; and doubtless there had not been trust to
establishment, but that knowledge was in the very foundation; the argument
seems to me to run thus, I know God, and therefore I have trusted in him,
and (...) I know him, I am assured I shall not be deceived by him; so that from
this knowledge I am established through believing; darkness is the proper
womb of fear, there in nothing else foturely begotten there, so is light of
faith and establishment; thi^ I say and speak by experience in which I shall
appeal to the ^^perience of all Saints, that the more any soul truly knows
God the more that soul will trust him; therefore give me leave again to say,
Be serious and constant in the inquiries after God, study him as he is in
himself, in his Christ and our Savior, i^ his Covenant of free grace, in all
his promises and performances, in his word and works, in our own and other
Saints experiences of him: And this I dare boldly affirm, the more God is thus
spiritually known of his people, the more he will be admired, loved, and
trusted by them, and such souls the more truly established.

Secondly, This seems to be suitable advice, to be exceeding watchful over
Satan and our own hearts in all the temptations to, or movings of unbelief in
our souls, there is nothing so great a friend to the Kingdom of Satan, and so
great an eneny to the Kingdom of Gods free grace as unbelief is, nor can any
sin so certainly destroy the soul as unbelief; nay all other sins
without this can never destroy any soul; doubtless these reasons have weight
enough in them to make Christian souls stand upon their guard, against this
enemy of unbelief; it is the General of the Host of evil, it commands all
other sins, and where it enters it comes with great attendants of evils
subservant to is self; unbelief is the supreme Agient in the World for the
Prince of darkness, in what ever God is distrusted and not believed, Satan
shall surely be served; Faith is that Anchor that keeps the soul close to God,
if that be plucked up; Satan sils the Sails, I mean the heart with the World,
and so carries the Vessel where he pleases; Faith is Gods interest, and
unbelief the Devile interest in the soul, and at the last day when Christ
shall give the Devil his due, I mean his share of men in the world, i^ will be
only unbelievers; for he has interest in, nor can lay claim to none else;
therefore unbelief should be dreaded as the Devils brand, that by which he
marks his own; distrust God, and honor Satan, for they cannot be parted, he
that does the former cannot avoid the latter: A soul watchful in this thing
i^ so for Gods glory its own peace and eternal saivation, for these two can
never be parted, what preserves the one preserves the other, but unbelief
loses both; consider free grace is the original, the first cause of all Gods
promises to, and his dealings with his people: Now a distrust in these, how
does it dishonor God, and not only unestablish, but undo our own souls;
therefore no enemy so dangerous as unbelief, and should with most
watchfulness be prevented, unbelief it opposes Gods ends in his Covenant of
free grace, and in all his gracious promises to his people, which is, that all
the ends of the Earth should come unto him and be saved; that is, believe on
his free grace for salvation; Now this is Satan's grand design to hinder faith,
because he is the great enemy of Man's salvation: Our Savior told his
Disciples, that to them that believe all things were possible, Satan knows
this full well, and therefore does all that possibly he can to hinder faith in
the soul; therefore be exceeding watchful over Satan in this thing, and look
often and diligently into our own hearts, and know that so much unbelief as
is there, so much interest the Devil has in us, and by that possession he
has an iolet to the soul for any temptation, therefore I say again in our
Saviors words, Watch and pray, lest you enter into temptation.

But in the last place, I shall wind up all in the Prophets own words,
Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established.

And first, believe God in himself, and now I pray look back upon his
Attributes, and you shall find him God, and always God, an everliving and
eterna ^ God, a faithful God, and a God that cannot lie, a God of love and an
everloving God, his love is like himself unchangable, he is the original of
all pure and holy love, and as love is originally in him, so that love is
eternal like him, he is a God of free grace and has made his own grace to be
his Childrens title to life and salvation: Now I date confidently affirm, that
whom ever thus believes in God, shall be established, what can shake that soul
that lives upon God, as God Almighty, Omnipotent, infinite, and eternal, what
can kill those joys and comforts that lives in God as he is a God of eternal
and original love and free grace, these joys and comforts will live so long as
the fountain of their life abider, and that is for ever; God in what he it, is
unchangable, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, from everlasting to
everlstaing; where God is the foundation and Christ the Comer stone, that
building will abide for ever; shakings and great s^^s do arise from sandy
foundations: But the Prophe: Davld teleth us that such people are blessed whose
God is the Lord; that is, they have this blessing to be established, whom have
pitched upon God for their all, and live upon what God is, that soul which
lives in God is above the fear of any other strength to overturne or destroy
it, because it lives upon an Almighty God, neither can this soul fear to
outlive its comforts and delights, because they are bound up in an ever-living
God, and the eternal love and free grace of God, to be the hand that bound
them up, and the womb that brought them forth; therefore this believing soul
does not say it shall one day fall by the hand of Saul; that is, of this or the
other lust, but that the eternal love and free grace of God has delivered it
from, and carried it up above all its enemies, so that it may serve him without
fear, as a soul established in himself, living purely upon what God is, so
that nothing can shake or unsettle this soul, which cannot lessen God, and as
no power can make God less then the true, Almighty, Omnipotent, Eternal and
ever faithful God; no more can such powers shake, much less destroy such
soul, souls as lives thus upon God; the Author to the Hebrews tells us, Chap.
12. verse. 27. That there are things which are made, that are and must be
shaken, and there is a Kingdom which cannot be shaken but shall remain for
ever: Truly all below and besides God are now shaking, and shall not cease til
they return to their first nothing, but the Kingdom of God, or more properly
God the glory of that Kingdom, shall never be shaken but abide for ever, so
shall all those that live in him, this is Mount Zion, which cannot be moved, to
live in God ever has and shall be a life of glory, therefore this exhortation
is always full of weight and glory; but me thinks in these latter days of the
World, when as the whole World is as it were giving up the ghost, and every man
complaining that there is no sweet nor relish in it, the most discerning eyes
plainly beholding its glory departed from it, the Pillars cracked and breken,
so that it can be but a very little time before the Fabric falls: Now
me-thinkes that which cannot be shaken but shall remain for ever, should have
its exceeding worth and glory in our eyes and hearts, and this is nothing else
but God himself: O then such as would live for ever must live in God, for all
things else are not only dying, but very near their death: God has written
upon honors, pleasures, and profits of the world, Death so visible in such
big characters, that every eye almost can read it: but himself is the
ever-living God; he that made all things out of nothing, can when he pleases
make all that he has made return to its first nothing, and yet himself be
to eternity what he was from eternity, an Almighty, glorious, and ever-living
God: Oh therefore live only in the glory of this ever living God, so shall you
live when the World is dead, so shall you dye to the World, but live above the
World; Jehovah will be eternal life to all that live in him: Faith in Jehovah
will make an established soul.

Secondly, Believe on God in the Covenant and salvation of his free grace, in
Jesus Christ the great gift of his grace, in whom he has satisfied his own
pure justice, and perfected the salvation of his people, and in all his
gracious promises. First, believe him in his Covenant of free grace, believe
that he means to keep it, and will perform it to the utmost: were there no
othere reason, this is enough to make us believe he will keep it, because he
has made it in himself, and he is God that cannot lie, he is Almighty, and
can want no power to prove himself the true and faithful God; it is all
grace, and so all God, that it can never be less then it is, but for ever the
grace of God, or the Covenant of the God of grace.

A little consider the conditions of this Covenant, and then see how faith on
God in this Covenant will establish the souls of believers.

First, Says God, this shall be the Covenant that I will make with my people:
As if God had said, it is my Covenant, so that if you that trust in it should
find it fail, blame me: but I am God and cannot lie. It is the Covenant of my
grace; that is, it is the powrings forth of my self, it is eternal as my
self, and shall never fail in a title of it, it is tru^ as I am true,
therefore believe this my Covenant as you would my self if I should speak to
you face to face, and in beleiving thus on me shall your hearts be established.

Secondly, God does engage himself by Covenant to forgive the iniquity of his
people, and to remember their sins no more. Now to believe God in this his own
Covenant, how exceedingly will it establish the soul; there is nothing like
sin and iniquity to make an earthquake, and a soul quake: If God once
brings a soul or a Land to account with him for sin and iniquity, that will
make dreadful shakings indeed: so on the contrary, where God acquits from
sin and iniquity, he makes rest and establishment, for it is sin that is
the troubler of Israel: but when God in his Covenant of grace shall engage
himself to pardon and acquit souls from sin; such souls as receives this
Covenant of God, and believes that he has and will make it good to them, will
surely be at rest. But this is not all, for God Covenants further with his
people: That he will put his law in our inward parts, and write it in our
hearts, so that he will be our God, and that we shall be his people. Now
examine it over again, and see what is wanting to make an established soul, if
God be believed in it, and rested upon for the fulfilling of it: Here is
choosing grace, pardoning and purging grace: here is justifying and sanctifying
grace, yea all this is grace, free grace, the grace of God, and God in his free
grace, engaging himself to make all this good to such souls, as rest upon
him. What now can any soul say against trusting in God for all that he has
covenanted to do in his own free grace; if the soul say I am not worthy,
what is that to the free grace of God, God does not move upon any such grounds,
it may be a good heart may say it is not broken enough; why a broken heart is a
new heart, that which God has Covenanted to give; trust God, he will make
good every part and tittle of his own Covenant, that should not hinder faith,
for it is the effect of faith: Seek not first to make thy heart good, and then
to trust God, but trust in God, and he will mend thy heart; nay, he will give
thee a new heart, that which thou would give all the World to gain, he will
give thee freely, if thou trust in him; he will not only establish thy heart,
but sanctify it also. Now hence I dare be bold to affirm to any soul, if it
believe i^ God and his Covenant of grace, it shall be established, finne shall
not shake it, for God has acquitted such souls of that, and cast all the
sins of Believers out of his remembrance; God has done this great work in
his own grace, and neither can nor will ever undo it: Corruption shall not be
able to unestablish a soul that believes on God in his Covenant of grace; for
such souls go to God, and spread their corrupt hearts before him, and
pleading his own Covenant with him for new hearts, and that he would renew
right spirits within them. Believing souls are fixed upon a rock that is
higher then themselves, so that nothing in self can reach them, and what ever
is in God does establish them; such souls see God to be rich in mercy, full of
grace, pardming iniquity, transgression and sins for his own Names sake. Thus
are souls established by believing in the Lord their God.

Again, Believe God in Christ; our Savior himself calls for this in John
14.1. You believe in God, believe also in me: That is, believe in God through
me, look through my wounds, and see how he loves you; behold the streumings of
my blood, and see how freely and fully he has justified you; consider your
union with me, and therein how he has made you completely right ^teous in his
own sight: He has made me to be sin for you who knew no sin, that you might
be made the righteousness of God in me, 2 Cor. 5. last. Now believe thus in
God through me, that I have born your sins, and satisfied his justice to such
a perfection, that you stand the righteousness of God in me: Believe in God
through me, so shall you be established above the fear of sin or
puni^^^ment; for you shall see I have borne them both for you, Isa. 53.
I have ^^orne your griefs and carried your sorrows; God has strucke^,
smieten, afflicted, and wounded me for your transgressions, he has bruised me
for your iniquities, the chastisement of your peace has he laid upon me, and
with my stripes are you healed, for the Lard has laid on me the iniquities of
you all: God has made my soul an offering for your sins, and has seen the
trav^ll of my soul, and is satisfied.

Now if you believe thus in God through me, your souls will be satisfied too,
you will be established as soulee that are fixed in the bosom of God; methinks
Christ says here, go with holy boldness to the bar of Gods justice, and by
faith offer up my wounds, my stripes, and the travel of my soul in full
satisfaction for all your sins, and I dare assure you he will acquit and
write your discharge by his own spirit in your own b^som^^, I beg of you
(says Christ) have not the least doubt of his faithfulness, or the fullness of
my satisfaction; I have paid the ^^most farthing, you may boldly go to Gods
justice, believing this, there shall not to all eternity be a tittle laid to
your charge: No says he, God will be just both to you and me, he will never
charge you with that which I have paid, and be^^^^ (...) have finished the
whole work of redemption, I have (...) that believe in God through me from the
curse of the law, being (...) curse for them. In the whole work of redemption
I did the will of my Father, in my agony, when I sweat drops of blood, and on
the Cross, when there issued out from my sides streates of ^^ter and blood: I
did bear your sins, for I had none of my own, and in all this I have
perfected your redemption in the ^^ll satifaction of my Fathers justice: so
that by believing in God through me, you will see Gods Justice fully satisfied
for your finnes, and your selves wholly acquitted from sin, and made righteous
in the righteousness of God himself, and this I am sure will establish your
hearts; where sin is discharged, and righteousness sealed up, there all
cause of fear and shaking is banish^^, and this is by believing in God through
me, says Christ; for (...) the great design of Gods free grace my blood has
discharged all your sins, and I am your righteousness; I that am the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, and you complete in me, perfectly righteous
without spot or wrinckle in the pure eyes of God; nay says Christ, had not my
blood made a full end of sin, I should have valued it at a higher rate, then
to have shedd^ it as I did, had I been but a perfect Redeemer: but I well knew
that the price of my precious blood was a full satisfaction to my Fathers
justice for all the finnes of all those that should believe in him through me.
John 6.47.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, be that believes an me has everlasting
life. What soul soever believes in the salvation of Gods free grace wrought
by me, shall certainly, nay, has eternal life^, and if eternal life, then
doubtless sure establishment. Says Christ, I came from heaven, and took
flesh for your sakes that shall believe on God through me, and I staid on earth
till I finished the work of redemption purely for your sakes, so now I am
ascended, and at my Father and your Fathers right hand in glory; I am here for
you as your head, to draw all my members after me; as your Mediator, I live for
ever to make intercession for you, to prepare your Mansions, and to preser^e
your glory, where you shall be fellow-heirs with me, and when I come again to
judge the World, it will be to pronounce you the blessed of my Father, to
change your mortality into in mortality, and then to give my Kingdom up to my
Father, where you shall be for ever with the Lord, and in all this my Father
and I am one, therefore believe in God through me, so shall you be established.

In the next place believe the word and promises of God, or God in them, and
you shall find them full of establishment.

And now once more let me defire you to turn back and consider those glorious
and gracious promises which God has made to his Saints, his Church and people
on earth, how he has ^^gaged himself to take care of them, and to preserve
them as his peculiar interest, so dear to him as the apple of his eye, for
whom he has given Christ, and to whom with Christ he has given all things.
Remember that general promise of God, and believe it, that he will never leave
nor forsake his people. So in Isa. 4^. b^g. There God makes promises to
particular cases: When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and
through the rivers, they shall not over flow thee. When thou walk through
the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

Now how exceedingly will the heart be established if God be believed in this,
the promise contains great things: but remember it is the promise of an
infinite and Almighty God, it is I that make this great promise say^^ God, I
that cannot lie, I that can do what I will, and will be sure to make good
every tittle of my promise to all that trust and believe in me.

Now to believe God in this, how will it spirit a soul, and carry it above all
fear, above deep waters, and slanting fires, above all dangers and
difficulties; what an heroicke spirit will this make, this man will be acted
above himself, because he lives believing in God, so above the fears and
doubtings of his own flesh: This faith will make souls speak in the language
of the Church, in Psalm. 46. God is our resuge and strength, a very prosent
help in time of trouble, in fire and water, in all difficulties and streights,
therefore will we not fear though the earth be removed, and the mountains
carried into the midst of the Sea. This is a soul that takes Gods word, and
believes that he will deliver it from all s^^eights, and therefore is not
afraid what ^ver it ^^ken or removed, so a^ God remains, having trusted in
him for refuge and help^ in all times of trouble. So in Isa. 51.3. Isa. 51.3.
There God by the Prophet promises to comfort Zion, yea to comfort her in all
her wast places, to make her Wilderness like ^den, and her Desert like the
garden of the Lord. This (...) wraped up in the arms of faith, will much
establish the hear^, for it does beget great thoughts of heart, how shall it
fare wi^^ the Church of God, and how shall it be with me that am a member of
that Church: Now believing on God in this promise answers those doubtful
questions, and so establishes the hear^ i^ believing. Isa. 27.3.
So in Isa. 27.3. We may read Gods care of his vin^yard, I the Lord do keep
it, I will water it every moment lift my hurt it, I will keep it day and
night. That is safe which God keeps, and doubtless such souls as believe God
in this promise, will believe themselves to be safe in the care and keeping of
God, and so will be established souls; God does both promise and profess his
care of his Church and people, Isa. 49.15, 16.
in Isa. 49. He tells us there, though a Mother may forget the soune of her
womb, yet that he would never forget his Church and people; Nay says God, I
cannot forget you, for you are graven upon the palms of my hands.

Now believe God in this, and try if it will not make an established soul;
again in any or the greatest opposition, remember that promise of God, That no
weapon formed against his Church and chosen ones shall prosper: He will blast
tongue and hands, head, and heart, and all that (...) themselves against him in
his people, though in their setting forth they may promise themselves victory,
yet they shall find God will make good his word to his people; such
instruments and weapons shall not prosper. Oh then take Gods Word, and our
hearts will be quiet; though the Heathens do rage, yet they imagine but a
vain thing: God has said it, and he will make it good, heaven and earth
shall pass away, but not one tittle of his word shall fail.

Read with an eye of faith that great and glorious promise of God to his
people, in Isa. 41.10. and so forward. Though Jacob be a worm, yet he should
not fear, when the Almighty is his God. It is too large to recite, but not too
great for the arms of faith to contain: and if believed, I am sure it will
make great establishment. And now give me leave to beg says in God for the
fulfilling of al those promises which God has made concerning the glorious and
peaceful Reign of Christ amongst his Saints in the latter days; I dare say,
such souls as believes God in them, will find much establishment in that
faith, those latt^r days must needs be hard by: Now the World is so near
a^end, and to believe that glorious Reign of Christ at hand, will make much joy
and settlement in the heart, though the present workings of God be to turn,
and overturne things, yet all this serves to accomplish these glorious promises
of his, in bringing forth this Righteous and peaceful Kingdom of Christ.

God is now a shaking and overturning all unrighteous powers, and governments;
now such souls as do not believe these promises of God, are ignorant of Gods
end, and so full of unsettlement in their spirits concerning the issue of his
present disp^nsations, and hereupon Gods shaking work makes shaking hearts and
trembling souls, but had they faith in God concerning these promises they
would stand still and be quiet waiting believingly for the salvation of God, in
the peaceful reign and righteous government of Jesus Christ; were God but
believed in what he says, all the temptations of Satan and the doubtings of
our unbelieving hearts would be silenced and brought to nothing, what exceeding
folly is it in our hearts, that GOD whom never deceived any that trusted on
him, should be distrusted by any, and not believed by all; he is the God of
truth, so is his word the word of truth, and not any soul that ever tried God
by trusting him upon his word but found him so.

The Apostle Paul, Romans 8.28. tells us, that all things works together for
good, to them that love God: This takes in all things as the other general did
all times; so that put them together, and it amounts to this, that all things
and all times are filled with Gods love to his people, and so work all
together for the good of all his, God loves his children as dearly upon their
beds of sickness as in their most perfect health, and his love in both makes
both work together for good to his people, upon this account the Apostle knew
both how to want and to abound, and in all estates to be content; such a
presence of God is in the word of God promised to his people, and God th^^
believed on, does quiet and establish the heart in all conditions, all carnal
fears are the fruits of our own darknesses, (...) the (...) of faith open to
see the loving kindness of God at he ha^^ ^^nifested it in the flesh of his
Son, and in his written (...), these seares would vanish and our hearts would
be fully (...) ^^ed by living on the fullness of God; I have mentioned b^^
^^^^ety Te^ts of Scripture, but I beseech you receive them and (...) whole into
the arms of faith, they will prove cordials to (...) heart and establishment
to your souls; believe it, GOD is worth the trust, if faith open the
everlasting gates and let this King of glory in, his presence will make all
such to be glori^^^ souls, he dispels all darkness, and so all fears, he
fixes (...) souls a^ believe on him in the Lord Jesus Christ, and lays them
to rest in his own bosom, so as no thing or time, no not H^^rulty i^ self
can either shake or disquiet them.

My whole design in this is to be an Advocate for faith in God, therefore give
me leave to mention one (...), and two Rules which are subservant to this
glorious end.

The caution is this:

He wary that you check not the spirit of God when it comes ^^om God about this
work.

The Rules are these:

First, Nourish all your experiences of God.

Secondly, Be diligent in observing the workings of GODS Pro^idence.

But first a little of the Caution: Be wary that you cheek not the spirit of
God when it comes from God to work over, and to seal up your souls in the
belief of himself; GOD and Christ has promised that the spirit of God shall
bear witness with our spirit that we are the Children of God; now this
promise is fulfilled many times in the hearing of the Gospel, in reading of his
Word, or it may be in the immediate workings of himself upon our souls; O be
careful to entertain this spirit well, a wound here may danger eternal life;
But it may be you will say, how shall I know the spirit of God from the
d^ltisi^ns of my own heart, and the temptations of Satan.

I answer, Try Gods Spirit by his Word, and you shall find them both center in
the manifesting Gods free gra^e in the salvation of the worst of sinners
through Christ in believing.

Now the delusions of our own hearts will lift up self, not God and Christ,
and the motions of Satan will be to distrust God, as it was to our first
Parents, Does God say the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye, says he, It
is not so, God does but delude thee, ^^te and thou shall be as God knowing
Good and Evil^. By this we may distinguish what spirit speaks in us, and as
the word and spirit of God, bears witness each to other, so does Satan's
contradicting what God says confirm the truths of God, for were it not
truth, he could not oppose, himself being the Father of lies; so that when I
would lay hold of truth, I would observe what Satan says to choose the
contrary; well then, if God by his spirit make known^ a Christ crucified to^^
and bid us believe on him through this Christ for everlasting salvation; have a
care of checking this spirit, if the D^vil and our own dark hearts in which
by nature the Prince of darkness rules, does contradict the testimony of Gods
spirit in this truth; that is, the fuller confirmation of the truth, if in any
straight or condition whatsoever, God shall by his spirit bring to your hearts
any suitable prom^se or place of Scripture, be exceeding watchful that you
check not that spirit; this spirit is a free spirit, it is as the wind, blows
where it pleases; this i^ Scripture advice, try all spirits if they be of God;
that which comes from God will lead thee to God, quench not the spirit which
leads thee to God in himself, in his Son, in his word and in his works,
for that spirit which thus leade^ thee, will bring thee to God whom will
establish thee; Oh prize that spirit that prizes God, and tells thee his grace
is free and rich, his r^demption full and complete, his word true and faithful,
his works great and glorious, and the enjoyment of him to be eternally with
him, if this spirit be dear to thee, it will seal thee up in this belief,
that thou art dear and near to God in Christ, and so establish thy soul by
believing in the Lord thy God.

Now a little of the Rules.
First, Nourish all thy experiences of God; this will much advantage faith in
the soul, we are apt to trust experimented creatures, much more if spiritually
wise shall we trust an ^^^^^mented God; I have been large in the particulers of
this be^on, I only mention it here by way of Rule, for doubtless such souls
as nourish their experiences of God do thereby nourish and increase faith in
God; if such as have fought Gods battles do preserve and nourish the
experiences they have had of the powerful presence and loving kindnesses of God
in those dying and difficult works, surely it will nourish faith in their soul
to trust God, if ever he shall bring to any more such works again^; Surely
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, did never fear to follow GOD through the
fire, after they had experimented the power of his presence with them in the
fire, nor Daniel the Lions: Experiences are to faith as oil to the fire, it
increases the flames, where they meet in any soul there is much mounting up
to God, that soul which keeps its experiences of God fresh and green, will be
sure to have its faith flourish; God gives many experiences of his love and
goodness to his people that they may believe on his Name: Now what God uses to
his ends must needs be an effectual means, therefore such souls as would have
faith live, must be sure to keep their experiences of God alive; these are
choice Jewels, they will be no burdens to our bosoms, every one that reads
knows his own experiences best, be they more or less keep them all alive,
faith will delight to live with them in the soul; but if these be lost, faith
will judge there is no company fit for him, and so take his leave and be gone,
and then will doubting and shakings be the companions to such a soul, be he
that keep experiences alive, will thereby keep a living faith; and such souls
as believe in the Lord their God shall be established: This is the first Rule
for the preservation and nourishment of faith in the soul.

The second Rule, is this:
Be diligent in observing the workings of Gods Providence; God is various in
those dispensations, but they all work^ together to the fulfilling and making
good of his promises, his wisdom is past finding out, and his footsteps
cannot be traced; no man can certainly say by the present dispensations of God
in his providence either to Person, or Nation, what will be his next, but whom
ever does diligently observe Gods providential workings in the World, will find
that though one after another it may be many years, yet that they work one
with another to the accomplishing of the most glorious will, word, and promises
of God, the former making way for the latter, and those that come after,
confirm them that went before; so that such soul^ which like the Virgin Mary
does ponder and lay up the words and the workings of Gods providence in their
bosoms, will find such eyings of God and treasuring up of his ways of
providence to be exceeding useful to the maintaining and increasing of faith
to God in the soul.

This was the Prophet David's frame of spirit, Lord, says he, thou have
delivered me from the Lion and the Bear, and thou will also deliver me from
this uncircumcised Philistim: Mark it, he had diligently observed and treasured
up in his heart Gods former providence to him, and this is the use his soul
makes in the remembrance of them, to trust God in another great undertaking for
him, as if he had said, I have had ample experience of thee in former acts of
thy Providence to me, and thou are the same God for love, power,
faithfulness, and goodness; so that in the remembrances of thy loving
kindness of old will I t^^st in thee, and though I contend with a Giant, yet
that I shall be safe under the shadow of thy wings.

Again, it is worth the observings of the most curious eye in the World, how
God does Season his providence, he brings them forth in such seasons that when
they appear they are like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver; not only
(...) o^ beauty in themselves, but also exceeding glorious in their season;
E^^her 5.
such wa^ the workings of God upon the heart of Abas^^^^ the King, to hold
forth to Esther the Queen the Royal Scepter, when as she hazarded her own life
to plead for the life of has Nation; the season of this kindness and
Providence of God, had as much beauty upon it as the life of Esther and the
whole Nation of the Jews could make, one wrinckle in the brow at this time
would have killed all the smiles of former times, but a holding forth the
Scepter at this very nick of time, does crown al former kindnesses with life;
the King knew not what was in Esthers heart, but God knew, and by his most
seasonable Providence did prepare the heart and hand of the King for her
entrance and her motion: I shall give but this one instance, though there be
many more in Scripture of the like kind, and sure I am, the experiences of
this present Age is not without instances of the same nature, I mean the
seasonable working of Gods provilences, to, and for his people; many times when
our unbelieving hearts have given all for lost, and could see no way of
deliverance, all lower helps proving either weak or false, then even then,
has God divided the Red Sea to make way for his peoples deliverances and their
enemies destruction; God has laid his own, and his peoples enemies low in the
highest pride of their hearts, and raised his people from the lowest of their
fears, both which reasons do much advance the glory of his Providence: Now
sure I am, such hearts as spiritually treasures up these ways and workings of
Gods seasonable acts of Providence will be much advantaged to trust God in all
times and trials they shall meet with through their whole pilgrimage; therefore
I beseech you make use of these Rules, if they advantage your souls to such an
end as faith in God, you will bless his Name, and be blessed in the trusting
upon his Name.

Now give me leave to argue with my own soul and others, in the behalf of
God.
Me-thinkes I hear the Lord say, You that distrust me come forth and produce
your reasons; Am I not God, and for ever God, is there, or can there ever be
any above me? I say I am infinite, Almighty, and eternal; disprove me if you
can, but if you gre^^^ me this, says God, then you can pretend no cause to
distrust me in point of power; Nay, says God, I am not only powerful, but I
am also faithful; I affirm it, that I am God and cannot lie, and I call your
own hearts to be my wi^nesses, I challenge you to produce one tittle of all my
Word, my Covenant, and my promises, that I have made to you, and you have
trusted in me to make good wherein I have failed and deceived your trust, if
you can produce none, but that your own hearts are the witnesses within you of
my faithfulness, then sure I am, those very witnesses will upbraide your
unbelie^e, and make as black as Hell all those black and hard thoughts you have
of me; you will choose a faithful man to trust, that very choice will condemn
you in distrusting me that am the faithful God, if I have my witness in your
hearth that I am faithful, why do you distrust me, you must be false to
your own bosoms, when you have thoughts that I should be false to you.

But it may be you will argue that you are sinful mortals, so that you fear
my Justice, and my Majesty, that you dare non draw near to me or rest upon me,
for fear I should consume you; why then come and argue with my free grace, my
eternal and unchangable love, my Christ crucified, and therein my justice
satisfied, and a perfect righteousness freely given to all that believe in me
through him, the pourings forth of my holy spirit, and those mantions prepared
in Heaven from all eternity for all that shall thus believe on my Nature
through Christ: I tell you poor doubting trembling souls, it is my chief
delight as God to glorify my free grace in the salvation of sinners, and to
show forth the riches of my eternal and unchangable love to poor souls lost
in themselves, do not fear to draw near to me to call me Father, and to
trust in my free grace, for you cannot please me better; if your hearts say you
are unworthy to be beloved, yet hear what I say, I love purely from my self,
and I save only of my grace, so that your unworthiness may heighten my grace,
but it cannot hinder your salvation that believe in my grace; argue not that
against your selves which I will never aggrevate against you, believe in my
grace, I will never charge you with your own^ (...), for I have laid them upon
Christ, and he has (...) my Justice fully for them all, I tell you so, and he
is your righteousness made so of me, that now you are righteous before me in
him to all eternity. If I that can only charge you will acquit you, why do
you fear; if I acknowledge my self satisfied for all your sins in Christ,
why do^ you so injure my justice and my grace, to think I will ever charge
them upon you again; nay me-thinkes Christ speak to our souls in this, as
he did to Thomas, put your hands into my wounds, be no longer faithless, but
faithful; by this hand of faith in my wounds, you may feel my Fathers justice
satisfied, he loved me so dearly that he would never have wounded me upon any
consideration whatsoever, but to save you: Oh says God, distrust not my saving
grace, and Christ he says, Oh distrust not my bleeding wounds, for your
salvation is the end of both these, and the eternal salvation of your souls
lies in believing this; Gods grace, says Christ, is so full, and the
redemption of my blood so complete, that no sin or sins, without unbelief
in these can damn you: Now why will you dye O house of Israel, says God; here
is my free grace and the blood of my Son for your lives; believe, and you have
eternal life; nay I have promised my spirit to them that ask it, a^ke me and
trust me, see if I deny.

For your own sakes, says Christ, I beseech you believe in God through me,
your salvation does not advantage my Father, for he is in himself that
perfection to which there can be no addition; it is for your sakes that I took
flesh and dyed; methinkes you should believe this love.

And now for your own sakes, I beseech you cast your eternal souls upon the
eternal love and free grace of God in his redemption through my blood;
stronger arguments of love cannot be given: but if refused, they will be the
stronger aggravations against your unbelief. Nay, says Christ, there is
mansions above prepared for them that love the Lord, and believe in him; God
loves you so dearly, that he will have you for ever with himself: Oh let there
never more be a hard thought of this love of God, and this God of love; trust
him, love him, admire him, rejoice in him, and speak good of his Name the
longest day of your lives. His free grace, says Christ, has plucked you our
of the power of the Prince of darkness, and made you heirs of glory: Oh glory
in this inheritance, be you filled with joy unspeakable and full of glory in
believing; Nothing can hurt you but unbelief: Oh beg heartily, and watch
carefully against those wounds of Satan: Nothing but unbelief can shake our
souls in the rest and joys of them through this shaking World, therefore such
as love and seek establishment must take this way to attain it, for it will
be found in nothing else but by believing in the Lord your God, and so shall
you be established.

To wind up all, let this faith live in our bosoms in all Gods ways to us,
and our walkings with God in the World; it has pleased God to make our beings
in those latter days, in which the Scripture tells us shall be perilous times,
and that because of this, men shall be lovers of themselves more then lovers of
God. We see that Scripture fulfilled in our daye^ most exactly; why, what shall
we do now for establishment in these perilous times: why believe in the Lord
your God, so shall you be established. Search his word, and what ever Scripture
you find which administe^^ comfort, believe in him, he will make that good as
well as this, let not this be our relief, that a little time may settle the
worlds shakings, and give us a more fixed being here: but let this be our rest,
to live in God himself, let him be our all here then, though the whole world
be not only shaken, but overturned also, yet we shall have rest in him on these
troubled Seas, and fullness of glory when we come into that safe harbor of
Heaven; to live believing on him will make us all the wilderness along, ^^^dy
in our way and work; we shall do Gods work in the world faithfully, and live
by faith in himself above the World; though Devils and men rage, yet such
souls as live by faith in God will be fixed, so that they as David, will in
their souls sing and give praise: If the earth tremble, yet this soul is
established, because it liven upon that rock which is higher then it self,
yea as high as heaven, even God himself. Oh then, we cannot complain of God
when as we complain of shakings, but of our selves; for if we live in God
through Christ by faith, we shall find he will establish our hearts above the
fears of Devils, World, or ^e: Though thousands encamp against me (says
David) and (...) sands make war with me, yet will I not be afraid, for my
(...) in thee. Thou art my shield, my buckler, my defense, (...) all, and
therefore was his soul so full of joy, rest, and holy confidence, because he
knew whom he had trusted, so shall all sucle as trust in God be established
upon his fullness: such souls will by faith be able to bring the whole Nations
of the earth before God, and to see them as the drop of a bucket, and the small
dust of the balance, when as they contend with God, and herein keeping close
to God, he knows nothing can hurt him, he can with God go through fire and
water, and believe that God will bring him safely out of all: Base fear can
find no corner to creep into, when as by faith the soul is imbosomed in God,
and bathed in the blood of Christ: This is not only the couns^ll of King
Jehoshaphat, but of our King Jesus, to believe in the Lord our God for
establishment. This I will end withal: Believe in the Lord your God through
Jesus Christ, so shall your hearts be established, though in a shaking World
even for this life and to eternity.

FINIS.

