THE PARLIAMENT OF JNSTRVCTJONS; FOR, The relief of afflicted, persecuted, and
plundered Christians.

Written by H. T. one of the Parliaments Soldiers, who has since lost his life
in the service.

PSALM. 55. 22. Cast thy Burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee, he
will not suffer the Righteous to fall for ever.

LONDON, Printed by JANE COE.

1645.

The Parliament of Instructions, for the relief of afflicted, persecuted, and
plundered Christians.
THe Ship of this Kingdom being now tossed with the Waves and Tempests of a
Civil and unnatural War, (the sharpest and sorest of all Gods Arrows) It
is no time for any man (like Jonas) to lie snorting in the bottom of the Ship,
but we must all endeavor to use some means for to stop the current of this
inundation, and overflowing of Gods judgments upon us, and as by our many
great and crying sins we have provoked God to wrath and indignation against us;
so by our humiliation, prayer, and reformation, we ought to seek to appease his
offended Majesty: Which that every particular man may the better put in
execution, I have collected these considerations and Meditations following, out
of the word of God, which may serve as directions unto all sorts of people, how
to behave and dispose of themselves in the most sad and disconsolate times.

1 Let a man examine himself, whether he be in the estate of grace or not? Let
us try our faith and repentance; if we will not try our selves, we shall be
tried, it is therefore our duty to do it before hand: Let us look that we lay a
good foundation, and build upon the sure and immovable rock Christ Jesus, and
then let the floods of affliction beat. (Lam. 3 40.) Let the Storms and
Tempests of persecution blow never so, yet we shall stand firm and sure.
Mariners, you know its enough for them almost, that they know their ships good,
however they be tossed, they know the nature of the Seas, I am well imbarqued;
why so may you in the midst of all your tossings who are right with him; say,
I am in a good vessel, I am in Christ, here is my Ark; let the world rage, let
what will come, I am in Christ, I am in a very blessed Ark. (Math. 3. 26, 27,
28. Mar. 5. 37. Luke 8. 28. Romans 13. 14.)

2 We should wean our minds from the love of the world. A thing hanged on a
pin is easily heaved off, but the things that are glewed or cemented together,
are hardly surrendered or divided. David loved Absalom too much, which made him
so much lament for the loss of him. Excessive love to the world makes the
cross the harder to be endured. (2 Samuel 18. 33.)

3 We should be twice as much exercised in religious duties, as in other more
peaceable times. When Judas was plotting, Christ went to the passover; when
Almighty God comes to visit, let him find us well employed; let us be moved
with reverence and diligence to use means to save our selves, and our families,
and all that belong unto us. Mat. 26. 14. Lu. 22. 4.

4 We should labor to keep a good conscience, that when we have troubles
without, we may have peace within. For (says Solomon) a good conscience is a
continual Feast. (Acts 24. 16. 1 Cor. 1 3. Gal. 1. 3.)

5 We should inure our selves to some hardness, a delicate person will hardly
suffer. We should deny our selves something in meat, something in apparel. Let
us abase our selves lest God abase us. God threatens a severe curse by the
mouth of his Prophet, unto those that humble not themselves in times of common
calamity. (Joel 2. 1. 12. Zeph. 1. 12.)

6 Pray and sue and entreat evermore, for the favor of God; it will be
intolerable to apprehend the wrath of God and the wrath of man both at once;
God has promised, that if we call upon him in the time of trouble, he will hear.
(Psa. 50. 15. Jam. 5 13. Jer. 29. 12.)

7 Let us make much of the promises, they being up, will be as strong waters to
keep us from fainting. Amongst other precious promises of God in Scripture,
meditate upon these Texts following:

Psa. 125. 1, 2. They which trust in the Lord, shall be as M. Sion which cannot
be moved, but abides for ever. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so
the Lord is about his people, from henceforth even for ever. 1 Samuel ^. 9. The
Lord will keep the feet of his Saints. Prove. 1. 33. Who so hearkneth unto me,
shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet for fear of evil. Psalm. 91. 4. He will
cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be sure under his feathers, his
Truth shall be thy sword and buckler. Psalm. 121. 3, 4, 5. He will not suffer
thy foot to be moved, he that keeps thee will not slumber: Behold, he that
keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is thy Keeper, the Lord
is thy shade upon thy right hand. Seeing the Lord is our Keeper, we need not
fear the greatest dangers in the most dangerous times. (See also, Job. 11. 18,
19. Matthew. 10. 39. Chap. 19. 24. Psalm. 125. 3. 1 Samuel 2. 20. Deuteronomy. 28. 7. Deuteronomy.
30. 7. Prove. 21. 18.)

8 Get into thy heart, sound and experimental knowledge of the truth, as also
the love of it. It is the truth we are likely to suffer for, we cannot suffer
for that we do not know, much less for that we do not love. (Joh. 17. 3. Tit.
1. 16. Joh. 18. 37.)

9 We should labor to encourage and comfort one another in these evil times;
God has a Book of remembrance of them that speak often one to another. Mal. 3.
When men do ask what news? we should question with them, what shall we do to
escape Gods judgments? shall we pray and humble our selves? shall we fast?
shall we become new men, and bind our selves to God with an everlasting
covenant? Many good friends oftentimes in the world shake hands at parting,
therefore when we keep our solemn Assemblies, which should be now more often
then ordinary, we should keep them with the more reverence and devotion, for we
know not whether we shall make them any more. (Mal. 3. 17. Luke 21. 38. Joel 1.
14. Pr. 27. 12. Isa. 45. 20. Ezr. 6. 23. Neh. 8. 30. 1 Pe. 5. 6.)

When we make our humble repentance unto God* we had need do it sincerely
indeed, it may be our last* It is said of certain Hawks in colder Countries,
that they are most earnest and eager to take their prey, when the day light
there is of least continuance. Let us not care so much what shall be after us
in the World, but let us care what will become of us when we are departed, in
the World to come. Hear good counsel (says Austin) do that before death,
which may do thee good when thou art dead. When the Church in Hesters time, was
sold to be destroyed by wicked counsel (as we now are) Hester and Mordecai and
all the Jews, they fasted, and humbled themselves before the Lord, and had a
glorious deliverance. (Esth. 4 15. 16.)

We should labor to make good our interest in God, to clear up our evidence
for heaven, our assurance of God in Christ; when David was driven from home and
harbor, he encouraged himself in the Lord his God: Toll meum, and toll Deum,
says Augustine. If a man knows, that God is his in Christ, his friend, his
God, his habitation, his Rock, unto whom he may continually resort; he will
soon believe himself in the loss of all outward things thus: Well, though I
have lost my house, yet I have kept my God, he is such an habitation as cannot
be plundered, such an habitation as cannot be plundered, such an habitation, as
wind, and rain, and weather, cannot beat through; such an habitation, as I may
carry about the World with me. (Psalm. 73. 23. Psalm. 18. 1, 2. 1 Samuel 2. 2.
Prove. 10. 29. Isa. 49. 8. 9.)

There is a story of a King, that when he had destroyed a Country, in his
destroying fell in Love with a beautiful woman, whom he brought away with him
and married, and afterward much lamenting to her that he had slain her father,
that he had killed her husband, massacred her friends, and destroyed her
Country, she answers him sweetly again with a great deal of affection: My
husband, my father, my friends and Country are now in thee O King; This is
that Love which God would fain have from you, and this is that language which
would express a great deal of Peace and comfort in your Souls, and which the
hand of God now leads you to, at this time, when God threatens your Country,
when he brings confusion upon your estates, when he destroys your armies, if he
should go further, if he should turn your Country absolutely into a
wilderness, if he should take away all your dear Relations from you; Then do
you comfort your selves after this manner: What Is my country? Which are my
children? and where is my estate? My country, my children and my estate, They
are in thee oh my God. Be sure of this therefore that you clear your interest
in God himself.

10. We should learn now before the rainy day come to be dead unto all the
world. The Man that is dying is senseless, not affected with the cries of his
Children, wife and friends, that stand round about him, though they weep and
wring their hands he is not stirred, Why? Because being a dying man he is dead
to them; and if you be dead to your houses, Liberties and Estates aforehand,
you will be able to buckle and grapple with that condition, So it was with
Paul, who died daily, 2 Cor. 5. 4. Phil. 1. 21.

11. Have ever sweet thoughts of Death from this consideration, this world,
this life is a stage of sorrow: Death is but your Exit, by it you go off the
Stage, why then death puts an end to your part of sorrow; it is a strange
darkness that lies upon our apprehensions, that makes death fearful to us,
indeed it is this life that is dreadful, all the sufferings of a saint they are
contained within the compass of this life; and life is nothing else but a
Tract of sufferings, and death cuts the thread of all our sorrws, by cutting
the thread of life: He that writes the life of Saint Austin, tells a story of
him; An holy man was upon the point of dying, but was very unwilling to die, a
couple of young men, clothed with a beauty and majesty more then earthly,
appeared to his bedside and spoke thus: O vain men, what shall I do with you,
you cannot endure miseries, and yet you are unwilling to go hence, you cannot
endure pain, and yet you desire to live. Let me say this to you all, why are
you afraid to die? Do you love sorrows? Are you unable to bear misery, and
are you unwilling to go off from this stage of suffering? In this life we are
as it were in a dark cave, beyond which is a glorious habitation, why are you
afraid of passing the flame, the flame is at the very mouth of the Cave, and
you are no sooner in it, but you are out of it. Live in grief, these your
griefs are as the glory of your God upon you; Die cheerfully when you die,
because with the loss of life, you enter into glory.

12. Let us set before our eyes the joys of heaven, as Christ did. Heb. 12.
That man that does not mind the things of this life is never likely to be
rich, (if he do not mind them in a moderate way) so that man that does not
mind the joys of Heaven shall never come thither. Where should the Members
be but where the Head reigns? Where should the heart be but where our
Heavenly treasure is? Christ who is our Treasure is in heaven, whither our
affections first ascend and then we follow after. (Heb. 12. 2. Mat. 6. 19. 20.
Luke 12. 33. 1 Timothy 6. 19.)

13. Let us consider the uncertainty of all earthly treasures or comforts: they
are like Absaloms Mule, they will go away from under us when we have most need
of them, and leave us hanging by the hair of the head. When night comes we
willingly lay off our clothing, and then make ready to rest. A night of
Affliction and destruction is now coming upon the Kingdom, let us be willing
to depart as we came into the world, naked. A great Conqueror of the world
would have his Ensigne-bearer carry forth a sorry cloth or shrowding sheet,
saying: Lo here is all of his conquests, that a worthy Captain does carry with
him. (Saladin. Asiae Dominator. Job 14. 1. Job. 17. 14. Eccles. 1. 8. and 12 8.
Jam. 5. 1, 2 3.)

14. Let us often meditate upon the fire of Hell. The Scripture calls it, A
Bottomless Pit, Tophet, a Dungeon, large and deep, the burning whereof is
fire and brimstone; The Lake of the second death. If a man cannot endure a
little fire in one part of his body (as on his little finger) but one hour, how
intolerable shall the pain of the damned be when they shall burn within and
without! Who can dwell with everlasting burning (says the Prophet Esaias) And
yet our fire here is but a picture and shadow of that unquenchable fire there
in Hell, where one drop of cold water will be more worth then all the Jewels of
the World, though only to cool the tongue. (Reve. 9. 1 and 20. 15. Mat. 22.
13.)

15. Let us set before our eyes the example of the Saints which have suffered,
for the truth we profess. Examples show us it is novelty, nor impossibility to
suffer for Christ's sake and the Gospels. Who would not follow having such a
cloud of witnesses. He. 12. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 16. 17. 18.

16. Spare not one sin unmortified, keep not beloloved Dalilah, for it will
make us more woe then we think for, and will make us have inward fears and
doubtings, when others shall have consolation. Christ when he arose, he arose
early; Lazarus that lay four days, began to savor, If we lie long in our sins
we shall wax unsavory too. We see by experience, that the longer we defere the
curing of wounds, the harder is their rocovery at the last. Jer. 8. 11. 1 Kin.
17. 13

17. We should cast away all confidence in our selves, and in our own strength,
Peter trusted ^o himself and fell, In his own mihgt shall no man boast. 1 Samuel
2. Let us be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10.
Mat. 26. 33. 1 Samuel 2. 9. Deu. 3. 39.

18. We should redeem the time because the days are evil, especially from
idle talking and speaking of those things which do not concern us, for that
speaking may endanger us. The Prudent should keep silence in an evil time.
Amo. 5. The Advarsary may entrap us in our words. Therefore let us take heed
before whom and what we speak.

19. Let us labor to have true faith in God, this weapon where ever God has
put it in any hand, has done glorious things for the Church of God, if thou
can but get this weapon into thy hand and heart, it will cause thee to live
comfortably in the worst times thou can meet withal, and make thee say with
the Prophet, Hab. 3. Though the figtree should not blossom nor no fruit be
left in the Vine, though the Labor of the Olive should fail, and the Fields
not yield their increase, yet will I rejoce in the Lord, and joy in the God of
my Salvation. (Heb. 11. 11, etc. Mat. 21. 21.)

20. Let us be often conversant with God, we should enter into Chambers; shut
the door upon us, and hide our selves till this jndignation be passed over.
Isa. 26. 20. Let the stream of our thoughts be for Heaven. Let us get under our
Fathers wings and say to him: Thou art my hinding place, Psalm. 32. We must run
to God, not fly from him, if we will be safe in the evil day: Oh happy and
comfortable shelter that alone can defend us from the scorching heat of
persecution, Pro. 27. 12. Psalm. 32. 7. Act. 8. 21, 22.

21. We should often exercise works of Mercy, and charity toward our poor
Brethren: visit the sick, releeve the wounded and distressed servants of
Christ, Give a portion to seven and to eight, for thou know not what evil
the Lord will bring on the earth. Eccles. 11. 2. Mat. 25. 45. 1 John 3. 18. and
24.

22. Meditate Terror, conceive the worst before hand. To be forewarned is to
be forearmed, get hope, get submission, get patience. Let us prepare and set
our selves in a readiness: Think of the Judgment coming upon us. All the
faithful Ministers of God admonish us; The sword is now amongst us, and God is
now riding upon his Red Horse through England to chastise us for our former
sins. Meditate as if the enemy had overcome our Armies, and that a famine and
siege should ensue, The things that I feared says Job, are come upon me. (1
Pet. 4. 12.)

23. Let us take heed of these things now, that may make our condition
uncomfortable then.

There are three things, that will make that condition very uncomfortabe:
Pride, wanton abuse of your creature Comforts, and unwillingnesse to lay them
out in the cause of God. If you have house, Lands, estates, friends, or good
clothes, and be now proud of them, when they are taken from you, your hearts
will smite you and say: Ah, this was because I was so proud thereof, and lifted
up my self above my Brethren, and therefore I am now made even with them, as
poor as they: (Esaias 3. from the 16. to the 25. M^^ 10. 37. Luke 14. 26. 1 Cor.
7. 30.)

If you do wantonly abuse the creature in Drunkenness, Chambering,
Wantonnenesse, etc. When (...)hey are taken away, your heart will upbraid you
and (...)ay: Ah, This you may thank your wantonness for, (...)ou used these
creatures so basely, that they groaned (...)nder your hand, and so now they be
got from you. (...)f you be not willing to lay them out in any good cause, your
heart will reproach you in the evil day; Ah, it is even just with God to take
all from me, I would not lay out my money and estate for his (...)ruth, his
Ordinance, his cause, and now he has (...)iven me and all into the hands of
spoilers.

24. In the last place I shall conclude with some (...)sefull directions unto
those, that have or shall fall in(...)o the hands of the enemy, and thereby
suffer the (...)osse of their Estates or goods;

If it shall please the Lord to bring any into that condition; Let them first
humble themselves, and accept of the punishment of their iniquity, and say;
The Lord is righteous in all that is come upon them: So did Daniel, Dan. 9. 7.
O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as
at this day. (1 Pet. 5. 6. Isa. 2. 11. Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Ier. 13. 18)

2 Be sure to bless and praise the Lord for that little you have left, and if
nothing be left, praise God for others that are free from your condition. If a
man be in prosperity, and grieve for others in adversity, it is the only way
to keep him in prosperity; if a man be in adversity, and can praise God for
others, and rejoice in their prosperity, it is the only way to have his own
adversity changed into prosperity.

3 Be careful to keep Gods promise in your full view. The promise is very full
and clear, what condition is there enriched with more promises? Are you afraid
when you are driven out of your Houses, that you shall faint and fall in the
streets, that you shall die in the Fields, or some Ditch? Remember that promise
where God has said; (Matthew. 19. 29.) Those that forsake house and land, shall
receive an hundred fold. Then remember the 100 fold promise. But would you
return to your own house, and are you afraid you shall not do so? Then remember
that promise, Micah 4. 6. 7. In that day (says the Lord) will I assemble her
that halteth, and gather her that is driven out. and her that I have afflicted.
In the interim, are you afraid of misery, poverty, beggerie? Then remember
that promise which has 5 seals upon it, I will never leave you nor forsake
you: Where in the Original there are 5 negatives, as if he should say thus; I
will never, never, never, never, never, leave you, or forsake you. (Heb. 1. 3.
5. Jos. 1. 5.) Luther insists much upon that promise of our Savior Christ unto
his Disciples, (Matthew. 10. 33.) You shall not have gone over all the Cities of
Judea, until the Son of man shall come: The son of man was already come
(says Luther) when he did speak these words, and therefore the promise belongs
not only to the Disciples, but to all the Disciples of Jesus Christ that shall
be, the promise speaking thus much; that though they be persecuted and driven
from one place to another, yet there shall be always some place open to
receive them* When persecution is in one place, another shall be free from it,
and there shall be always some place free until the Son of Man shall come.
Stock and store your selves with many such promises, that when this misery
spoken of shall come; keep them in your full view. Think on all these things (I
say) for the present, and in the future if such a condition fall. And the Lord
give us understanding in all things.

FINIS.
Published according to Order.


