To all our Generous and Charitable Contrymen within the CITIES of Dantzick
and Konings-berg, and the Kingdom of POLAND.
The humble Representation of the Principal and Masters of the Marischall
College of ABERDEEN in SCOTLAND.

Shows,
THat the Edifice of our College having, from its first founding after the
Reformation from Popery, continued mean and incapable to lodge our Students, or
allow convenience for our public Solemnities; We being pressed with the daily
Disadvantages of so small and incommodious a Building, were forced to begin a
New-Work, which by the favor of Heaven and charitable Contributions of pious
Persons we have now near completed: and is so spacious, stately and
convenient, that its no less an Ornament to the City, then an Advantage to the
College. And as this Work has been much advanced, and in a great measure
carried on by the Charity of our worthy Contrymen in Dantzick,
Konnings-berg, Elbing and other Foreign Parts (all whose Memories shall ever
be honored by Us, and some of Whom for their great Liberality have Chambers
appointed in the said New-work for their Name and Friends) and our money being
now exhausted, in order to the perfecting and furnishing of the Fabric, we are
under a Necessity of having Recourse to the Piety of Those of Our Contrymen
who have not had Opportunity to extend their Charity for so good a Work. And
therefore have Recommended to Our trusty and good Friend Mr. James Robertson
Merchant, (whose love to Religion and Learning, and kindness to this Town and
College have Encouraged Us to offer Him this Trouble) that He may present this
Our Address to all Those who are true Lovers of their Country, and wish the
Advancement of Religion, and Increass of Learning; And that he or any entrusted
by him may receive from them what Contributions they shall be pleased to allow
for the finishing of our New-Work; and as We shall never be wanting to offer up
our Prayers for the Prosperity of our Benefactors; so we shall duly Record the
Names of all Those who are pleased to allow Us any Assistance in Our Public
Registers, and by the Monuments of Our Gratitude render the Memory of their
Charity as lasting as the Society on which it is bestowed. This is solemnly
Promised and shall be Inviolably and Faithfully Performed by

June 2d 1699. MARISCHALL College of ABERDEEN, JAMES OSBURN T. P. GEORGE
LIDDELL S. M. P. ROBERT PATERSON Principal. GEORGE PEACOCK Regent. JAMES MORE.
Regent. ALEXANDER MORE Regent. WILLIAM SMITH Regent.



