TWO PROPHECIES Full of Wonder and Admiration.

MADE ^y HUMPHREY TINDALL Vicar of Wellin^ two hundred years past: And after
his death, found in his Study, with his Name subscribed thereunto.

And some sixty years since coppied out by a worthy Gentlem^^ and ever since
kept private.

Foretelling many strange accidents which shall befall to this Kingdom.

depiction of Humphrey Tindall, vicar of Welling

feb: 23 1643

London, Printed for Bern: Alsop, according to Order. 1644.

TWO PROPHECIES MADE BY HVMPHREY TINDALL VICAR of WELLING, Two hundred yearees
past, and after his death found in his study, with his name subscribed
thereunto and some sixty years since coppied out by a worthy Gentleman; and
ever since, kept private.
THE time will come, as true as the Creed
Of Priests and Clerks we shall have need;
Churches shall fall, it shall be great wonder,
The Clergy, and Laity, they shall be asunder;
Hnd praying to Saints, shall pass away
And holy writ shall teach us, what is to say:
The Churches where Images were wont to be set
With lively letters, they shall be writ;
Though young men's hearts, as heavy as lead,
Both young and old may them read:
But to God of his pre-eminence, and of high Throne,
All honor shall be to him alone:
For fancies shall fail, and right shall appear,
And thus it shall continue from year to year.
But at the last a world to tell,
There shall be stirred str^fe with many a Battle:
For a double danger shall be the cause,
For often changing and breaking of Laws.
The other shall be, if you read aright,
The losses of Lords, Earls and Knights:
For woe worth the time, and woe worth for sorrow,
Mischief draws on, and it will woe borrow.
A maiden Queen shall have in hand to govern,
And rule this her Hand:
Her Lords by righteousness rule shall she,
At length of her great Realm discharged shall be.
For Berons and Lord a promise shall make,
Of Gods holy word, that part to take:
But Prelates in pride their lust to fulfill
Shall cause thereby much mischief and ill:
Which made say both Priest and Clerk^,
They never heard of such a piece of work.
For happy shall he be then, that is so true
That can bid Britain farewell and adeiw:
For sorrows shall come both to high and to low,
How one man shall trust another, no man shall know.
For then Ladies with sorrow shall sing,
And widows and maids their hands shall wring.
Children at their paps shall dye in the street,
All kind of creatures shall mourn, and weep.
VVoe and alas then may be said
All kind of pastimes down shall be laid.
Then Castles and Towers, and all pleasant buildings
Shall be destroyed, and come to endings.
Then who so be in bed over night,
The next morning shall be pressed to fight:
Then great sorrow, hunger and pain;
To eat dead folk, men shall be fain
VVoe worth that sin, that this cause should be
To cause God thus, to show such extremity,
But a voice shall come both night and day
Crying to heaven, to call you away:
But sorrow and pain for our offenses
With battle, famine, and pestilences:
As a dissolved land brought shall it be,
But who knows more, no, no, but he:
Then a peace there shall be pretended,
That peace may be dissembled:
That peace may be removed,
That peace will false be proved.
But now great sights will appear,
For great Mars Armipotent will be very diligent,
His bloody bands of steel to whet,
Upon their side, that we shall them betide;
This Mars with cruel faction, with Nation unto Nation,
And all Bri^tish situation, shall be with oppression:
And still ride in their passion.
Flanders shall rise in with France,
With spear with shield, Bill and Lance;
Confetered with all yance,
To offer their defiance;
Spain shall employ the Britains to annoy
The Irish, us to destroy; the Welchmen to annoy,
The Danes, to pluck and pull: all this resurrection
Shall put to their full fection, to bring thee to destruction,
Britain take this admonition,
Be wise and change thy condition:
Doubt not, but think it sure, this storm thou shall endure:
With heart confess, and to heaven redress thee,
For Britains name shall cleave away
Out of this land, for ever and aye.
The End of the first Prophecy.
THE SECOND PROPHESY OF HUMPHREY TINDALL, Vicar of Welling.
WHen Rome is removed into England,
And every Priest the Popes power shall have in hand,
Betwixt six and three as I understand,
This Battle shall be in Britton land.
When pride is most pressed, and lechery most rife,
And Knights and Knaves clad both in a clothing,
Holy Church awlesse, and the Land law less,
By the years of Christ be come and gone,
In the Land of Albion shall be much confusion;
Clerks shall be taxed and great benefits have,
With flattring and fawning their Prince they shall please
And all against the Laws they shall rave,
And cause the Commons to be at great discord.
A dreadful Dragon with a red Rose of great fame
A Bastard in wedlock borne shall be,
The Crown to attain to challenge by name,
Tunc veniet puer ubinam ille.
The shortest night and longest day that shall be found in the whole year.
There shall be challenges in fight great desire to see and hear.
Penticost night shall be clothed in white in token of Lightening,
For to be at Candlemas when torehes be light, a new Mumming for to be.
Afterward to be convayed out of the Northward to meet at Ravenspron.
S. and P. shall stand in case full hard.
Till as the Keeper of the Crown,
Shall dye upon his brothers sword point,
Then all shall be turned up side down.
Then a Lion shall come out of the West,
To stir them for to cease.
Then shall there be no manner of rest,
Till twenty hundred Steeds run masterlesse away.
A wet Summer before this shall be: a bloody harvest,
A wallowing winter, and a windy Lent, after this shall be.
Thus ends Humphrey Tindall Vicar of Welling.
FINIS.

