THE FOURTH PRINCIPLE OF Christian Religion: OR, The FOUNDATION DOCTRINE OF
Laying on of Hands. Asserted and Vindicated by way of Answer to such Arguments
as by Lieutenant Colonel Paul Hobson have been presented against this Gospel
Ordinance. Affectionately tendered to such enquiring souls as are desirous
thoroughly to forsake Babylon notion and humane tradition, and by universal
obedience to follow the Lamb in all his righteous appointments. By THO. TILLAM
a Minister of Jesus Christ.

PSALM. 102.13, 14. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to
favor her, yea the set time is come.

For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold by William
Hucheson of Durham M.DC.LV.

To all the espoused Virgins of the Prince of Peace, whether Persons or
Churches, with such precious panting Spirits as are breathing after his Divine
embraces.
Heirs of Glory,
WHatsoever be your outward state, yet since the distinguishing love of God
has enriched you with grace, I dare confidently (as his Ambassador) salute
you with peace, even that peace which the world can neither give nor take away;
the peace of God that passes all understanding, such peace as unbelieving
disobedient ones never tasted, neither can enjoy. For however the Prince of
darkness transforming himself into an Angel of light, does now more then
ever, by strong delusions Captivate thousands in his airy region, where fancied
spiritual enjoyments possess them with vehement desires to their conceited
Paradise: Yet alas! Isa. 44.20.
True peace is a mere stranger, they feed upon ashes, deceived hearts have
turned them aside, that they cannot deliver their souls, nor say, Is there not
a lie in my right hand? While they boast of perfection, light, infallibility,
the enemy has stolen their hearts from Evangelicall obedience. I would in a
word warn your precious souls ( ye who desire to obey from the heart that form
of Doctrine which was delivered you) beware of the great deceit of these days,
Romans 6.17.
wherewith Satan deceives multitudes, to a sleighting that wholesome form of
sound words; and in the mean time leads them by the noses into the most
pitiful forms that ever were invented, as putting off the hat, bowing the
knee, saying, Sir, Master, Lord, thou, and such like. And such as differ from
them about these gnats, shall presently discern the serpents sting full of
deadly poison, denouncing Wrath, Woe, Damnation, all the plagues of God. But
for the precious ordinances of Christ, as Baptism, Church fellowship,
Love Feasts, washing of feet, breaking of bread, singing of Psalms, Imposition
of hands, Church officers, Sabbath, Lords day, Anointing with oil, Holy kiss,
Christian salutes, Censures and such like, their very souls abhor them, and
their presumptuous tongues dare curse the precious saints that use them. But ye
beloved, building up your selves on your most holy faith, Jude v. 10, 21.
praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, waiting for
the second coming of Jesus Christ, in all the ways he has appointed. Be not
found in the fire of foolish Virgins when the Bridegroom comes, but labor to
stand complete in all the will of God, lacking nothing. To this end I here
present you with a precious Ordinance of Christ, opposed by many professors;
and particularly by a Northern Gent. a Preacher, whose arguments I do profess
should never have received answer by me, had not some boasted, that because
they were not, therefore they could not be answered. Whereupon at the earnest
desires of some choice spirits I did engage, with purpose to confine my self to
a narrow compass, such as might be easily copied; but the enlargements of that
holy Spirit who is variously communicated through this Ordinance of Hands, has
put me upon the necessity of making it more public: with which purpose I did
acquaint my Antagonist that if he pleased he might alter any thing of form in
his arguments; but after several weeks expectation, I heard of his absence far
from home, so that my occasions, and present opportunities of the Press have
engaged me to publish the Gent. Arguments as they were first presented, with my
answer thereunto. And now the God of truth, accompany his own Precept with his
own presence, for the confirmation of those obedient souls who have greatly
honored Christ by early submission. For the information of those precious
Spirits who are weeping and seeking the way to Sion, with their faces
thitherwards. And for the mitigation of that bitter persecuting, harsh
imposing, imperious spirit, that so greatly rages in many professors against
the practice of this duty. O that darkness might be dispel'd, and the true
light shine in professors spirits, lips, and lives! Let all that fear Christ
beware of resting in that light so much cried up by deluded souls. The light in
the natural man will never save him, no nor so much as show him what he ought
to do (as a Christian) No wonder then that those who so cry up that light, live
in such gross disobedience to Gospel Ordinances. But if natures highest
attainers will know what they ought to do, Act. 10.6. if they would be told
words whereby they may be saved, Act. 11.14. they must not be sent to the light
within (as deceivers say) but they must send for a Gospel minister to tell
them words. But those that cry up the light in the Conscience, are enemies to
those words of Scripture. Alas pitiful dark souls! they know no light but
that which lights every man that comes into the world; Joh. 1.5.
but thy precious soul (thou Spouse of Christ) can witness the Gospel light
that lightneth every man that comes out of the world, Joh. 15.19.
by religious separation, not by a voluntary Popish humiliation. The former is
a true light but natural; the latter light is truly evangelicall. And this
light is communicated through the Word and Ordinances, and particularly,
through this holy Ordinance of Laying on of hands Psalm. 119.130.
Act. 9.17.
, to which light I leave thy enquiring soul, to illuminate thy understanding in
the knowledge of this Ordinance, that through obedience to it thou may have
more light, to conduct thee into everlasting life, through Christ thy King; for
whose sake I am thy servant.

Tho. Tillam.

This Question it seems was propounded to the Gent.
WHether the laying on of hands upon all Believers be a standing Ordinance to
continue in the Church of Christ, and to be practiced now by the Ministers of
Christ, yea or no. To which he returned these lines.

Your Quere does not at all relate to the use of Laying on of hands for the
designing of fit subjects to Offices, according to these Scriptures, Act. 6.16.
and 13.3. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. Nor to your laying hands upon the sick
according to these Scriptures, Jam. 5.14. Act. 28.8. Therefore in my answer I
shall mind neither of them, but singly your Quere as ye lay it down (which is)
Whether hands are to be laid upon all believers as believers without relating
to an Office be a standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ, Yea or No.

My answer to it briefly is, That I judge it not a standing Ordinance, and my
grounds are these.

The first is taken from the unwarrantable foundation of such an act.

Secondly, The sad absurdities that will come upon it.

For the first.I. Where we have no command given out by Christ to his Church
for a practice, there the Church has no ground to continue a practice; but
there is no command given forth by God or Christ to the Church of Christ for
the laying on of hands upon all Disciples. Therefore there is no ground to
continue that practice.

The Major Proposition is proved from these Scriptures, Isa. 1.12. and 8.20.
Ezekiel. 43.7. Job. 15.14. Romans 4.15. Levit. 10.1, 2. applied to the 13. v. Enod.
13.5.

If any shall question the minor, I should be glad to see their proof. If any
say it is proved in Heb. 5.12. with Heb. 6.2. where it is called, An oracle of
God. And some have from that indevoured to prove Oracles and Commands both one.
I shall say little to the reasons, but refer the Reader to the justifying of
the proof.

And how inconsistent the application of those Scriptures they bring, are to
make good this particular, to wit, Laying on of hands upon all believers, and
that by them that are bare Ministers. Now though it be not proper for any to
prove negatives, yet something I must say to them that go about to maintain
this practice from that Scripture.

First, I would have you consider that all that is said by them from hence is
but a supposition, and a supposition is not a sufficient foundation for the
continuation of any thing that is called a Gospel Ordinance. And that it is
but a supposition is clear, if ye read but the Arguments of them that
paraphrase upon that Scripture, and consider well the Scripture it self, Heb.
5.12. applied with Heb. 6.2.

Secondly, It is not only a supposition, but a doubtful supposition, for it is
more probable that the Laying on of hands by the Apostles upon any that were
bare Disciples, was rather concluded in that word in the first part of the
second verse of the 6. of the Heb. concerning Baptismes; then that which the
Apostle speaks in the second verse. concerning laying on of hands; for if this
be not one of the Baptismes that was here expressed in this Scripture, Heb.
6.2. I should gladly know how they would make up Baptisms according to this
Scripture, Heb. 6.2. for that if you will consider all the case is doubtful,
and whether a doubtful supposition be a sufficient foundation to bear up an
act as a Church Ordinance, we leave it to any soul to judge. So that the minor
is as well true as the major, then the conclusion must follow.

Object. Object.
If the Apostles did it, we have a command for it, for we are commanded to
follow them, 1 Cor. 4.14. 1 Cor. 10.1.

Answ. In answer to this consider these things.

First, Those that object do not, nor cannot follow the Apostles in their works
of Miracles.

Secondly, The two Scriptures, and ye will see, it does not at all make good
what they intend.

For the first place, 1 Cor. 4.16. the Apostle there does not intend following
him in all things, but he exhorts them from false Apostles to follow him that
is his teaching, and that teaching which he had preached to them, and in all
the Churches; that you will see if you read the 15. v. But the Laying on of
hands upon all disciples he taught in no Church nor to them.

Now to the second Scripture, 1 Cor. 11.1.

1. To that is, Answ.
that the Apostle did not intend acts of power, as this is, but acts of
imitation, for it is the same word of the Apostle has in Ephesians. 5.1. where we
are commanded to be followers of God as dear children. Now none are so ignorant
as to think we are commanded to follow God in acts of power. But in imitable
acts answering the commands of Christ, and the practices of the Churches. But
there is, as we said before, neither a command from Christ, nor any practice of
the Churches that we can read of for Laying on of hands upon all Disciples, but
it was properly an act of power, Act 8.19. and 19.6.

2. That which we have no example from the practice of the primitive Churches,
we have now no ground to practice now. But we have no president in the
primitive Churches that ever Laying on of hands was practiced upon all
believers, by them that were not Apostles; therefore there is no ground for
that practice. Now the Major proposition none will deny; and as for the Minor,
it will clearly appear if ye consider,

1. That we have no Scripture that ever hands were laid upon bare believers;
two Scriptures Act. 8.17. and 19.6. and no other Scriptures declares, that that
act was performed either then, afterward, or before; and I am confident that
if you with a single heart desire to see truth, as it is expressed and intended,
you will see no foundation to warrant such an act as the Laying on of hands
upon all believers, by the Ministers of the Churches to be a standing
Ordinance, and that you will clearly see if ye mind these things. 1. Who did
it. 2. Upon whom. 3. Why.

First, By whom, it was by the Apostle and no other, if any should be so absurd
as to say, What the Apostles did we are commanded to do, though we have no
command for it, nor practice in the primitive Churches. To that I answer, If
the bare examples of the Apostles without a command does bind in any thing,
then in every thing; the great absurdities that will follow upon that, you will
clearly see, if ye view well these Scriptures, Act. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 16.3,
21, 26.

Secondly, Mind upon whom it was done, they were a people ignorant of and
strangers to the Holy Ghost, as you will see if you read the said Scripture
Act. 19.2. and also the forementioned Scripture. But where you read of so many
thousands as was converted Act. 2.41. so many at another time Act. 4.4. nay if
ye read over all the practices of the Church of Corinth, the Church of Rome, or
the Church of Thessalonica, or any other Churches, that were settled, ye shall
never see any such practices amongst them.

Thirdly, It was not as men pretend in these days to put men in expectation of
the Holy Ghost to wait for him in this practice. But it was absolutely to
communicate the Holy Ghost in and by the action, Act. 8.14. and 19.6.

Now we might speak much more to the minor proposition, were it proper to speak
much to negatives, but that which has been said is sufficient to manifest the
truth of the Minor, therefore the conclusion follows.

The second thing is the Absurdities that of necessity must follow such an
unwarrantable practice. The first absurdity is, they lay unfaithfulness upon
Jesus Christ, Exodus 25.8, 9, and 40. verse. Heb. 8.5.
crossing this Scripture, Heb. 3.2. and advancing Moses above Christ, for Moses
who was but a servant of God to declare the order and form of Gods house never
left any to act upon doubtful suppositions, but gives them a particular
command for every ordinance that was to abide in Gods house.

The second Absurdity is, They lay a lie upon Paul, he says that he had
declared the whole counsel of God to the Church, Act. 20.27. and yet never did
deliver this to the Ministers of Christ to lay hands upon all Disciples, which
if they say is a truth, then they lay an untruth upon Paul.

The third Absurdity is, They cannot do it in faith, therefore sinful, unless
it be an imaginary faith. All acts done in faith have a command for it, or a
promise to meet God in it. But in this they have neither.

The fourth Absurdity is, It brings them out of a capacity to answer this
Scripture 1 Pet. 3.15. In being able always to give a reason of the faith or
hope that is in them, that so gainsayers mouths might be stopped. Now to
maintain an act from nothing but supposition, can never stop the mouths of
gainsayers; for supposition is as strong in the one as in the other, and is so
far from convincing any, that it produces disputes in all.

There is two things to be considered in the Acts of the Apostles, which were
glorious discoveries of the power and authority of Christ in the settlement of
the Gospel, which these men do directly cross who are bare imitators of the
act, but cannot carry on the end.

The first is, The Apostles had power before to preach and Baptize with water,
yet before they did this, they must wait for power, and that an eminent and
glorious power at Jerusalem, Luke 24.49.

Secondly, When they did do it, it was so done that no men as men could imitate
it, that made Simon so amazed. Act. 8.18, 19.

Now these men that thus plead and endeavor thus to practice, have neither
waited for power, nor yet have received that power, and what they do as their
imitating the act without carrying on the end, which is the essence of the act,
in that thing men as men may do. And what an absurd thing this is, let them
that fear the Lord, and love the glorious discoveries of his power and
authority in the settlement of the Gospel, judge.

Now dear friends I desire you in the fear of the Lord seriously to mind not
only what has been said, as to the unwarrantablenesse of such an act, and the
absurdities it does produce; but further consider these few considerations that
I shall in Christian love present to you who own and practice such a thing.

First, Consider how injurious you are to Jesus Christ, which you will see if
ye mind well the fifth absurdity, Act. 8.18, 19. and 19.5, 6, 7.
Christ bringing forth an act to show his power, you imitate the act and have
not the power; so turns acts of power into a bare imitation, and so are
injurious to Christ's intention.

Secondly, Consider how you put your selves under the reproof of God, Isa.
1.12. when he shall say, Who has required these at your hands? should you then
bring that place of Scripture, Heb. 6.2. and if God demands, How ye know he did
intend the Laying on of hands upon all Disciples in that place, you can only
say, you think so. And what a sad thing is that? How justly do you come under
Gods reproof?

Thirdly, Consider not only in your acting how unlike all the primitive
Churches you are, but also unlike Philip you are Act. 8.12, 13. though he was
able to work miracles, and in many things beyond you, yet when he had Baptized
with water, he left the Laying on of hands to the Apostles, Act. 8.14, 15, 16,
17.

Fourthly, Consider the great danger of turning acts of power, into bare
imitation and want the power, see Act. 19.13, 14, 15, 16. Exodus 7.8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13. and 8.16, 17, 18, 19.

The Fourth Principle OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION: OR, The FOUNDATION DOCTRINE OF
Laying on of Hands. Asserted and Vindicated by way of Answer to these Arguments.
THE Gents. first ground, Why the Foundation Principle of Laying on of Hands,
is not a standing Ordinance, he takes (as he says) From the unwarrantable
foundation of such an act. To which in Christ's strength I answer.

That it is to me a Paradox, that a Foundation Principle of Christianity, should
want a warrantable foundation. How then can Christ be accounted faithful in
all his house, even as Moses was, if he has shewed-himself such a foolish
builder to raise a superstructure upon an unwarrantable foundation? Heb. 3.2.
Moses never left his house in such a pitiful plight.

The Lord Christ timely expostulates with such as will give him the hearing,
Luke 6.46.
but will not do the things that he says; and such this age abounds with, that
grant this Foundation principle to be the teaching, saying, or doctrine of
Christ, but it is only to be learned, not to be practiced. But I am sure this
assertion has none other then an unwarrantable sandy foundation, which this
interrogatory must needs overturn, Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the
things which I say? Whereas the man which Christ commands, dug deep, and
laid the foundation upon a rock, and such a foundation have the Six Principles
of Christian Religion, and every one of them, for they are plainly called
Foundation Principles, which all the rising floods, Luke 6.48.
and vehement streams of opposition shall never be able to shake, for they are
all founded upon a rock, and the rock is Christ: Upon this rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

The Gent. Mat. 16.18.
has laid but a sandy assertion for his first groundwork, in judging
Imposition of hands no standing Ordinance, as having no warrantable foundation.
Whereas, it has not only as firm a foundation as Christ himself the rock of
ages, being one of his first Doctrines, words, sayings, or teachings, (as the
Original holds forth) but is also it self (with the other principles) called a
Foundation. Not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, Heb.
6.1, 2.
and of faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of Laying on of
hands, etc. The word in the Greek is (...), which signifies such a basis or
principle is laid under another thing, without which that thing cannot stand.
Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
It is one of those foundation stones of the Apostles and Prophets, laid next
the chief cornerstone Christ Jesus, and whatsoever building would grow up to
an holy temple in the Lord, Can no more want this foundation principle of
Laying on of hands, Heb. 5.12.
then its fellow principle Baptism, for it is (...), the word of the beginning
of Christ, which the the Apostle says, Every Christian babe ought to be
taught, 1 Pet. 2.2.
as being a part of that sincere milk of the word, which he ought to use in
the infancy of his profession, whiles yet he is unskilful in the word of
righteousness. Heb. 12.13.

We have talked much of the Six Principles of Christian Religion, but alas, it
has been but an uncertain sound from unskilful Trumpets, whereby Christ's
Soldiers have not prepared themselves to the battle, Act 8.30.
through their obedience; so that if a Philip should demand, Understand thou
what thou read, or hear? who could give a clear answer?

A great noise is made of Six Principles, and yet this Gent. says, that one of
them is not a standing Ordinance, as wanting a warrantable foundation; thus the
number of our Principles are only five, by his account. And Christ himself
affronted as a deceiver. For if this be true that the Gent. says; there is a
title, yea and more then a title of a law, word, or doctrine, far exceeding the
law of Moses, that is fallen to the ground, and no more a standing Ordinance,
Christ's lips being not a warrantable foundation (it seems by this assrrtion) to
support it.

But who would not tremble that ever was truly awakened to hear a practical
Doctrine of Christ, which at first was spoken by the Lord Heb. 2.3. with 6.1, 2.
to be so flighted? He that despised Moses law, died without mercy. O that
timely repentance may avert that so much sorer punishment, Heb. 10.29.
due to those who bring another Doctrine, to raise a foundation Principle of
Christian Religion, as no standing Ordinance. Contrary to many clear
Scriptures, as Mat. 28. ult. Phil. 4.9. 2 Timothy 2.2. 2 Pet. 1.15. Joh. 14.26.
Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. which clear Scriptures (with many more) do prove the
continuance of all Gospel Ordinances throughout all ages, and yet this plain
institution of Christ himself, seems to the Gent. Luke 24.11.
(like Mary's message) but an idle tale, no standing Ordinance, as having no
warrantable foundation.

From which absurd and unjust conclusion, the Gent. proceeds to twist a rope of
sand, in a strange Syllogism, for the subverting a people, who are little
better acquainted with mood and figure, then their plow-shares, to whom Logic
is as much a stranger, as the truth of this Principle of Laying on of hands.
But though the Gent. differ not much from a Barbarian to them in this Logical
dress: yet to a prejudiced people set led upon their lees, any thing that
looks but against this truth will serve turn.

The substance of what he asserts in such a multitude of words, is, That Christ
has given no command to his Church to practice the Laying on of Hands upon all
Disciples.

But so far are those Scriptures he quotes, from proving his assertion, that
they return vigorously upon his own head.

For from the first of them I do in Gods name expostulate with him, Isa. 1.12.
Who has required this at your hands, to contradict and oppose one of the
Principles of Christian Religion? Whosoever therefore shall break one of these
least Commandments and teach men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.19. that is, utterly cut off. Act. 3.22.23.

His second Scripture directs us to the Law and to the testimony, Isa. 8.20.
which through distinguishing grace has engaged gracious hearts in obedience
to this law of Laying on of hands; whiles he rejects the Law, and shunneth
the clear testimony that Christ has given to this, equal with other of his
Ordinances, Heb. 2.4.

His third, Ezck. 43.7.
Me thinks should lay a loving restraint upon him, no more to defile the
precious things of Christ's house, of which Laying on of hands has the fourth
place.

And O that his fourth proof might prove armor of proof upon his, Joh. 15.14.
and many others hearts! to stop their carreer against the commands of Christ;
for how can he mention this Scripture, Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I
command you, whiles he shows himself an adversary to this command of Christ?
which the Apostle shows is necessary to be taught Christ's babes, Heb. 5.12. and
doubtless they acted according to their commission, which runs thus, teaching
them to do all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Mat. 28.20. Yea the
Spirit expressly testifyeth that what the Apostles did teach or write are the
commands of Christ, 1 Cor. 14.37. Then doubtless Christ's true friends, will
hear and observe these teachings ( Heb. 5 12. Ye have need that one teach you
again) which are none other then Christ's own commands.

The Gents. Romans 4.15.
fifth Scripture informs us that where no law is, no trasgression. But why did
he produce this Scripture? or what is this to the Fourth principle or Christian
Religion, but only to ratify and confirm this law of Christ: unless it can be
imagined that Christ's foundation principles are not his own laws? he commands
nothing but what he teaches, he teaches nothing but what he commands, yea
what his Apostles teach, he teaches, Luke 10 16. He that hears you hears
me, and he that despises you despises me.

Let such therefore as tremble at Gods word take heed of the transgression of
his own laws, issuing from his own lips, such as this foundation Principle is
fully proved; Lest they share in Nadabs judgment, Levit. 10.1. and 2.13.
remembering that of the Apostle, Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole law,
and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all; for he that did teach
repentance, faith, and Baptism, did also with the same lips teach Laying on of
hands. Now if thou be Baptized, and yet do not submit to the Fourth
Principle, thou art become a transgressour of the Law Jam. 2.11.
.

And when once the seal is opened, and the trumpet has sounded forth that
opened Gospel truth; nothing remains but the pouring out of Gods Vials upon
such as refuse it.

Certainly he has no discerning eye that beholds not sad marks of Gods
displeasure upon several persons who have turned their backs upon this fourth
foundation Principle in those parts where this Gents. papers are spread abroad,
of which I may speak particularly in a convenient season; for because they
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, 2 Thessalonians 2.10, 11.
therefore God does send them strong delusions to believe lies.

The good Lord make the fearful falls, Schisms, Apostasy and blindness of
some, to be a timely warning unto others, 1 Cor. 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and
2 Cor. 4 3, 4.

But I must proceed to declare that we make no such matter of the word Oracle,
as the Gent. deems, for though all the lively oracles of God are his commands;
to be embraced, if Notionall, and to be obeyed if Practical, (as Baptism and
Laying on of hands) yet they are no such niceties that we insist on, neither
resting on suppositions, or doubtful suppositions, wherein the Gent. so much
toyls and entangles himself and his readers. But have plainly and clearly
proved that Laying on of hands is a doctrine of Christ, or one of the words of
the beginning of Christ, a foundation Principle, the Apostle teaching a command
of the eternal King; and he that has an ear let him hear, for it is the
Spirit that speaks to the Churches.

But more dust in new doubts arise from the Gent. supposition or probability
that Laying on of hands upon bare Disciples was rather concluded in the word
Baptism then in the word Laying on of hands: for if Laying on of hands be not
one of the Baptisms here expressed, he says, He would gladly know how we would
make up Baptism according to the Scripture? Heb. 6.2.

Answ. First, I would demand of the Gent. whether ever he read that Laying on
of hands is any where termed a Baptism? if not, then it is a wild
supposition, and has no probability at all that Laying on of hands should be
concluded (as he phraseth it) in the word Baptism.

Secondly, I shall (now I am set to it) as gladly answer his demand that we can
very currantly make up Baptism, and never be beholding to imposition of hands
for the matter.

There are three sorts of Baptism, Flaminis, Fluminis, Sanguinis, Ephesians. 4.5.
of Spirit, of Water, of Blood, and these three agree in one, 1 John 5.8.

The first is that heavenly birth, qualifying the subject for Water, Joh. 3.3.
as I long since deliverd in his hearing at Muggleswik from Heb. 10.22. In
this, the eternal dove with his extended wings, Isa. 30.1. Luke 1.35.
covers, or overshadoweth the believing soul, who (like the blessed Virgin)
conceives with his Jesus, by the hearing of the ear.

The second is that external administration in which the Disciple of Christ is
buried with him, as our Lord commanded, and his Ministers practiced, Mat. 28
19. Act. 10.47, 48.

The third is that bitter cup, the drinking whereof, first baptized our
Redeemer in a sea of sorrows, Luke 12.50. His Fathers wrath forcing his vital
blood in streams through every pore of his body, falling down to the ground,
Luk 22.44. This is that cup and Baptism, which the true servants of Christ must
also submit unto, Mat. 20.23. following their Lord without the Camp, (through
many tribulations) bearing his reproach. Heb. 10.32.
Call to remembrance the former days, in which after ye were illuminated, ye
endured a great fight of afflictions.

It is observed by one that the word (...) which we translate illuminated, (and
that truly is rendered in the Syriack, Arabic, and Aethiopick, Baptized. And
that the Greek fathers do sometimes call (...), Baptizo.

But enough has been said and proved, in answer to the Gentleman's demand, so
that I hope he and others will see that we are put to no straight at all to
make up the Doctrine of Baptisms, of Spirit, of Water, of Blood; without any
need of imposition of hands upon that account. And therefore this doubtful
supposition is utterly vanished, and the fourth Foundation Doctrine of Christ
established, as an eternal Mar. 24 35. with Heb 6.1, 2.
decree of his own lips, which the Church throughout all ages ( Ephesians. 3.21) is
obliged faithfully to observe, Mat. 28.20.

But the Gent. goes on to answer an objection made from Apostolical example. 1
Cor. 4.16. and 10.1. Concerning which (before I reply to his answers) let this
be observed, That although Apostolical example be sufficient ground to
practice Christian duties, yet we have in this particular of hands, much more
then bare examples, namely the teachings of Christ and his Apostles, for it is
already fully proved, and I hope will be retained in obedient hearts.

1. Institution.
That this foundation Principle is the express Doctrine, or word of Christ.

2. That such as be babes in Christ, had need to be taught this Doctrine.

3. That this Doctrine was religiously taught and practiced in the Churches of
the Hebrews, etc. And

4. That the Spirit of God enjoins all that are truly spiritual to embrace the
things written by the Apostles, as none other then the commands of Christ, 1
Cor. 14.37.

First, And as for Apostolical examples, we look upon them as binding,

1. If they were performed in the Churches of Christ, Phil. 4.9.

2. If those Apostolical practices were never solemnly repealed; for there
were some ceremonies wherewith for a time they complied, which were afterward
utterly abolished, Gal. 2.3, 4, 5, 12, 13. and 4.9, 10, 11. and 5.2.

3. If such performances be not impossible (such as miracles) for Christ does
not command impossibilities, his yoke is easy, his burden light; yea the Gent.
himself confesses, that we are not commanded to follow in acts of power, I
suppose he means miraculous acts, which may serve as a just reply to his first
consideration; for though Christ has left us an example that we should follow
his steps, yet it is only in his moral, not in his mediatory actions.

Moreover, let it be observed, That miracles are no part of the Ordinance, for
though many miracles did attend Preaching, Baptism, Supper, Laying on of hands,
and other Ordinances, yet I hope the Gentleman will not conclude that the
cessation of miracles does strip us of these mercies.

These things being premised, 1 Cor. 4.16. and 10.1, 2.
I do confidently assert from the two Scriptures he mentions, That the Apostles
examples are obliging to all believers.

1. Because we have no other warrant for many of our Ordinances then
Apostolical example. There is no express command for observing the Lords day,
and but one Apostolical example, but this I fear too many ungrateful (that I
say not ungracious) spirits would readily and willingly dispense with.

2. Where have we ought but Apostolical example, for women to receive the
Lords supper?

3. What shall we do for authority to ordain officers by imposition of hands,
if we refuse Apostolical Precedents?

Secondly, We must observe Apostolical examples, because they have exactly
followed the commands of Christ. That which we have seen and heard (says John
1 Epist. 1.3) declare we unto you, touching fellowship. We have not fellowed
cunningly devised fables, says Peter 2 Epist. 1.16. I received of the Lord
that which also I delivered unto you, says Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23. So that
whatsoever I find the Apostles practicing (except before excepted) I shall
freely and cheerfully observe, and expect the presence of the God of peace in
so doing, Phil. 4.9.

And in the very case in hand, touching the Fourth foundation Principle, had I
no more to rest upon but the bare example of the Apostles in the Churches, I
would faithfully obey: for I hope enough has been said punctually proving,
that what they so practiced, Christ commanded them. and though I have heard
much ignorance in the handling of this point, yet I hope none will henceforth
be so blasphemous as to charge the Apostles of will worship, but rather bewail
their own blindness.

Well then, if the Apostles laid on hands by command from Christ; Certain I am,
that all Baptized Disciples are bound to observe it, for so runs the
Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations baptizing
them -- Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. He
does not say, observe what I shall command them, neither does he leave them or
us to teach and practice what, and so much as we please, But all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. You Peter, and John, etc. so that if Peter and
John, were commanded to practice Laying on of hands, then all Baptized
Disciples are bound to observe it. And upon these terms (and none other)
Christ has promised them his presence to the end of the world.

But the Gent. says (upon 1 Cor. 4.16) That the Apostle does not intend
fellowing him in all things. I must needs say these are very slender, Reply.
sorry shifts to shuffle off obedience, since it is evident in the same Epistle (1
Cor. 11.1.) that he commands them for remembering him in all things, and keeping
the ordinances as he delivered them to them. And would the Apostle so praise
them, for that they were never exhorted to?

But secondly, Whosoever (in his right mind) shall peruse that Chapter ( viz. 1
Cor. 4.) may easily see that the Apostle intends all things, even all the
mysteries of God, whereof he was a Steward, v. 1, 2.

And as a Steward of such divine mysteries he shunned not to declare all the
counsel of God, his care being alike in all Churches, Act. 20.27.
1 Cor. 7.17. and 14.33, 34. and 2 Cor. 11.28. the care of all the Churches.
Yet the Gent. confidently affirms, That he did not teach the Laying on of
hands upon all Disciples in any Churches nor to them.

To which I reply.

First, It seems somewhat more then strange that the Apostle should be thus
censured of Pharisaicall hypocrisy, in making clean the outside of the cup and
platter, tithing Mint and Cummin, and neglect the great and weighty matters of
the Law. Is he so careful in all Churches about particular callings, 1 Cor.
7.17. about orderly speaking, 1 Cor. 14.33, 34. about Alms, 1 Cor. 16.1. And
is he so careless in laying the Foundation Principles of Christian Religion?
Either the Apostle in neglecting, or the Gent. in asserting such neglect, 1
Cor. 4.1, 2.
must needs be grossly guilty of ignorance, unfaithfulness, or hypocrisy.

Secondly, It Is plain the Apostle practiced Laying on of hands in the Church;
and did he enforce obedience without teaching? Act. 19.5, 6. Chap. 17.11. Chap.
2.40.
or were those Ephesian Disciples so ignoble to act by an implicit faith, in
submitting to they know not what. The Bereans are recorded noble, for not
barely resting on the Apostles words; it is said of Peter, that with many other
words he did testify and exhort. For the Gospel and Acts is but an Epitomy of
what Jesus and his Apostles did and said. Must it then be asserted that because
it is not declared in so many words, He taught laying on of hands, that
therefore he taught it not at all? why then they practiced what he never
taught; this is will worship with a witness.

We do not find that Philip spoke one syllable of the Doctrine of Baptism,
either to the Samaritans, or to the Eunuch, Act. 8.12, 36.
and yet they are Baptized, and he calls for the Ordinance; so that I dare
boldly affirm that Philip did teach the Doctrine of Baptism, though no
mention be made of teaching, and so of hands; for what liberty soever others
dare take, yet I dare not charge the Apostles with acting besides their
Commission; and certain I am, their Commission binds them to teach, that which
the Disciples are bound to observe, Teaching them to observe; Mat. 28.20. and
Paul himself professes, That what he received of the Lord, that he also
delivered unto them, by way of teaching, 1 Cor. 11.23. And requires us to
account of him and his fellow Ministers, as faithful stewards of the mysteries
of God, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. So that whatever the Gent. confidently affirms to the
contrary, I dare boldly avouch that if there were no more but Apostolical
practice, and Disciples observing Laying on of hands, I say, I dare from hence
aver it with full assurance, that the Apostle did teach Laying on of hands on
all Disciples, faithfully in all Churches. Christ having purchased the same
privileges for all his Saints, commanded the same exact rules for them all
(teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you) And the
Apostles most faithfully dispensing all to al Churches, and particularly to
this Church of Corinth, for says he, 2 Cor 12.13. What is it wherein ye were
inferior to other Churches? Nay he professes, That in every thing they were
enriched by him, So that they came behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1.5, 7.

But if the Gent. speak true in saying, that the Laying on of hands upon all
Dyciples, he taught in no Church nor to them: I must be bold to say, the
Apostle spoke false in affirming that they were enriched in every thing -- in
all knowledge, and that they came behind in no girt. For I am sure that Laying
on of hands is the Vehicle, Vehiculum Spiritus.
or conduit pipe, through which many gifts of the Spirit are conveyed. And as
sure that those divine ornaments wherewith the Corinthians were so enriched,
were graciously handed through Paul, 1 Cor. 4.15.

Lastly, I do positively assert, That the Apostle did expressly teach the Laying
on of hands upon all Disciples in the Churches, for besides the Church of
Samaria, Act 8. and the Church of Ephesus, Act. 19.5, 6. where it is declared
that they heard before they observed either Baptism or Laying on of hands.
When they heard this, they were Baptized -- and Paul laid his hands upon them
all.

I say, besides the Apostles teachings in these Churches, it is evident that
they did expressly teach this Doctrine with other foundation words, Act. 5.31.
Gal. 1.22.
once and again to the Churches of Judea, or Christian Hebrews, who were then
comfortably walking in the complete order of the Gospel, Heb. 13.7. and 17.24.
Yea this Doctrine is taught to all the Disciples or babes in Christ, as milk
fitter for constitution; for though by the improvement of their time, and
talents they might have been teachers, yet they were still such babes (not
teachers) that there was a necessity of teaching them again these first
foundation Doctrines, which possibly they had so forgot, that young converts
were deprived of them.

Thus it is evident this Doctrine of hands was taught in the Churches to babes,
yea to the Hebrew Disciples, and though it be so much slighted, yet the
Apostles do reckon it one of the six foundation Doctrines, for Sions babes.

The Gent. proceeds to overturn Apostolical example, by his answer to the
second Scripture brought to assert it, namely 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of
me, even as I also am of Christ, to which he says the Apostle did not intend
acts of power, but acts of imitation. My reply is,That if his meaning be, Reply.
that the Apostle did not exhort all the Corinthians to exercise the
Ministerial function, or to follow him in doing miracles, it is freely yielded.
But if he mean that the Apostle did not command them to follow him in all
imitable Christian duties, it is utterly denied; for what he commands more
generally in this Scripture, he he does more particularize in Phil. 4.9. Those
things which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do:
and the God of peace shall be with you.

Now to the point in hand; such babes to whom he writes, 1 Cor. 3 1, 2. had
learned the Doctrine of Laying on of hands, Heb. 5.12. and this Doctrine they
had also received, Act. 19.6. which likewise they had heard and seen in Paul,
when he was a babe in Christ, Act. 9.17. This therefore they ought to do as
ever they expect the presence of the God of peace, so that in this particular
it is evident that Paul commands them, Be ye followers of me: as being fully
proved a command of Christ, and practice of the Churches.

But the Gent. says, That imposition of hands is an act of Power. To which I
reply,

It Is no more an act of power then its fellow Principle Baptism, Preaching, or
any other Ordinance of Christ, touching which, that of the Wiseman may be
applied, Say not this is better then that, for they are all beautiful in their
season.

It Is true, the gifts of the H. Ghost were so eminently poured out through
Laying on of hands, that Simon Magus thought it an act of power, Act. 8.19. But
Simon Magus shall be no tutor of mine, for Simon Peter teaches me a contrary
lesson, Act. 3.12. namely, that what gift Christ is pleased to convey through
Ministers, is not by any power in the poor instrument.

But wherein is Laying on of hands an act of power, more then Baptism or
Preaching? is it because the gifts of the Spirit were received by it? Why so,
they were by Baptism, or else Peter preached false doctrine, and failed in
what he promised, Act. 2.38. Repent and be Baptized every one of you, and ye
shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost.

Object. Nay, but there were miraculous gifts bestowed visibly upon Laying on
of hands, Act. 19.6. They spoke with tonguet and prophesied.

Answ. So there was in Preaching, Act. 10 44. While Peter yet spoke these
words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word, and they spoke
with tongues and magnified God, verse. 46.

Now what reason or religion can call Laying on of hands a greater act of power
then Preaching is? Or who dare put an end to the Fourth Principle because the
visible power is ceased; and yet retain Preaching from which the very same
visible power that did accompany it is also ceased.

But the Gent. Syllogistically asserts, That the laying on of hands upon all
Believers, was never practiced by any save only Apostles. If by Apostles he
means the Twelve, Answ.
and Paul, then I deny his assertion, for Ananias was not such an Apostle, and
yet he did Lay hands on Paul, presently after his conversion, and before his
Baptism; and that not for ordination to office: but as the Scripture plainly
declares, for these two ends.

1. Act. 9.17.
That he might receive his sight.

2. That he might be filled with the holy Ghost.

Which latter, is the very end of the administration of the Fourth Principle;
which is not buond up to any precise time, but is here administered before
Baptism. In Act. 8. soon after Baptism. In Act. 19. long after Baptism. Which
is the ground of our latitude in waiting for believers submission to their holy
Ordinance. But

Secondly, If his assertion were true, that none but Apostles may administer
this Ordinance of hands, yet must it not fall to the ground for want of such
officers to administer it, for Christ's hand is not shortened, neither are the
gifts and graces of his Spirit restrained. I know not of any gift that is
ceased, but what Reprobates may have and go to hell with, Mat. 7.22, 23.
Neither are those gifts utterly ceased in the Churches of the Saints.

And as for those choice gifts of his love, Jer. 3.15. Ephesians. 4.8.11.12.
for the work of the Ministry, those Pastors after his own heart, which he that
is faithful has promised; no less has been his liberality since his
ascension then before. Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days
were better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this,
Eccles. 7.10.

I know that many deceived souls have traditionally received the cessation of
Apostles, with as much confidence as they dare blot out this Fourth Foundation
Principle. But where is that Scripture that says, Apostles are ceased? To put
a distinction between ordinary and extraordinary officers, is to coin such
terms and conclusions, as will never pass for current in Gods account, as
being not once mentioned in the Scriptures of truth.

I have therefore laid down this as an eternal truth, That Apostles are not
ceased, but by the free gift of Christ continued in, and to the Churches of the
Saints. As Christ has given them to, ( Ephesians. 4.11.12.) so he has set them in
the Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. And in his Churches we frequently find these
Apostles, Epaphoditus was an Apostle of the Church of Philippi, (...), which we
translate Your Messenger; so 2 Cor. Phil. 2.27.
8.23. (...), The Apostles of the Churches, the glory of Christ. So that we
must not be unfaithful to Christ, to let fall one of his Foundation Principles
for want of an officer to administer it. If it were true, as the Gent. says,
that none but Apostles may do it, yet it is clear that Christ has richly
furnished his Churches even with Apostles, so that neither Officer nor
Ordinance is yet fallen to the ground.

Thirdly, Gal. 2.18.
the Apostle says, If I build again the things which I destroyed, I make my
self a transgressour. Such a transgressour is this Gent. in bringing slime in
stead of mortar by these his Arguments to build again that Popish, Prelaticall
superiority, which Christ and Saints have exploded.

It was indeed their aspiring project to uphold their tottering Babel, that all
the Ministers of Christ had not equal authority, and therefore must not
presume to administer all ordinances,; and particularly none but Lawn-sleeves
must presume to meddle with this Ordinance of hands, either to private Disciples
(wherein they being purblind did grossly mistake the subject, as they did also
in Baptism, taking Carnal babes for Spiritual) neither might any else
without these Lordly Prelates ordain any to Church office.

And such a design is this Gent. driving, who would confine and limit this
ordinance of hands, to the hands of Apostles. It Is strange that this foundation
Principle must either be mounted and advanced above its fellows, or else it
must be buried in oblivion, and not practiced at all.

What is imposition of hands, more then the Doctrine of Faith, Repentance,
Baptism, and the rest, that the beautiful feet of him which brings the
Doctrine of Faith, and Baptizeth, may not presume to administer hands?

Christ's Doctrine owns no such difference in point of superiority, but
whosoever is orderly called to preach, has also full authority to carry on all
Ordinances whatsoever Christ commanded his Apostles, Mat. 28.19, 20. If what
has been said does not satisfy, as to the equal power of all preaching
Ministers to carry on all Ordinances, let these Scriptures be considered, 2 Timothy 2.2. Act. 20.28. 1 Cor. 3.5.8. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. 3 John 9. 1 Thessalonians.
1.1. with many more; which clearly hold out equal power, not one for any
superiority. So that the Gent. is much mistaken in saying, it is an Absurdity,
yea that many Absurdities will follow our assertion, that we are commanded to
follow the Apostles in all things (except still before excepted.) Act. 9.
) And in this thing it is plain Ananias did it, and the Presbytery did it, and
Timothy had power to do it, 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22.
and other Ministers may do it, and God will bless it.

And thus having answered the Gent. touching fit Ministers for this ordinance;
I shall in the second place take a view of the subjects, which he says were a
people ignorant of, and strangers to the holy Ghost.

Whereunto I answer,

1. That it is true of those Act. 19. before Paul instructed them better; but I
hope the Gent. will bethink himself, and confess that before the Laying on of
hands, they were taught and believed in the holy Ghost.

And as for those Disciples of both sexes in Samaria, they heard Christ
faithfully preached, ( Act. 8.5, 6.) they saw the power of the holy Spirit
working by wonderful miracles, ( v. 6. unclean spirits cast out ( v. 7.) they
were filled with joy (a lively fruit of the Spirit, v. 8.) they believed (which
is an eminent gift of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.9.) and were Baptized in the name
of Jesus, that is, according to the command of Jesus, ( v. 12.) Now to affirm
that these were ignorant of, and strangers to the Holy Ghost, is that which I
dare not venture upon, for the reverence I owe to God, and fear lest his Saints
should shun me for gross untruth.

But however, the Gent. at unawares has thus far helped us, in acknowledging
some truth, namely, That they were but young beginners, mere babes in Christ, to
whom this Ordinance of hands was administered.

Whereas he says, That there was no such practice amongst. the 3000. Act. 2.
nor Act. 4. nor in the Churches of Corinth, Rome, Thessalonica, or any other
settled Churches. I answer, If Laying on of hands be the Apostles Doctrine, Answ.
then the 3000. did religiously practice it; what a needless thing is it now to
play the Logician, and muster up a Minor, and Conclusion. But Laying on of
hands is the Apostles Doctrine, Ergo. Is it not much more substantial to prove
this truth by the plain word of God; thus, Act. 2.42. They continued steadfast
in the Apostles Doctrine; so that either the Gent. must deny Laying on of hands
to be the Apostles Doctrine for babes, or else he must perforce confess, (with
humility) that they did practice it. What wiseman will say, this Church
neglected, what their messengers in another Act. 8.14, 15, 16, 17.
Church practiced?

And as for that uncouth reasoning, that neither the Churches of Rome, nor
Corinth, nor any settled Churches, did practice the Fourth Principle. As it is
not true in it self, as I have already fully proved, so it must unavoidably
bring in such gross Absurdities (if he talks of Absurdities) as shall shake,
yea and overturn most of our Ordinances.

For I may as well conclude, that breaking of bread, and the Lords Supper is
not to be practiced, because neither the Churches of Rome, of Ephesus, of
Philippi, of Colosse, of Thessalonica, nor any of the seven Churches of Asia,
have any mention of it.

I know not of any more then three Churches that mention the Lords supper;
namely, Judea, Troas, and Corinth, and in so many (at least) is the Fourth
Principle recorded, viz. the Hebrews, Samaria, and Ephesus.

I might produce many Churches, where not a syllable of Baptism is once
mentioned, and the like of several other Ordinances; but I am persuaded so of
the Gent. that he will ingenuously acknowledge, it was for want of a better
reason that he produced this.

From the subjects, he proceeds to the end of this Ordinance, which he says,
Was not to put persons in expectation of, or waiting for the Holy Ghost, but
immediately to communicate the Spirit in the action. It Is strange to me that the
Apostles should so earnestly pray for the holy Spirit, Answ.
Act. 8.19.
to fill them that were not to expect or wait for it. Deserves he food that
thinks it vain to gape? The Lord Jesus has put all his upon earnest prayer and
expectation for his Spirit, Luke 11.

Neither is it in the power of any creature to communicate of the Spirit
through any ordinance, for the Wind (or Spirit) blows where and how it
lists, having several gifts which he distributeth as he pleases, 1 Cor.
12.11. whether sooner or later, it is worth the waiting for.

Now the just end of this Ordinance of hands (as of all other ordinances) is
for spiritual babes to obtain a geater measure of the same Spirit, some
heavenly qualification, some sealing, confirming mercy, such as Believers have
need of, as Ephesians. 1.13. In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed by
that holy Spirit of promise; that is, after the poor babe has rolled it self
upon Christ by a faith of adherence, God is pleased to seal it by faith of
assurance, sometimes sooner, sometimes later, sometimes in Baptism or after,
sometims, through laying on of hands, Lords Supper, Prayer, Preaching, how he
will, and when he will; wherefore it behooves the gracious soul to wait upon him
for his Spirit in all his holy appointments, for there he will hand out his
loves, Cant. 7.12.

There is a generation of professors that are rather principled by sight then
faith, who will not believe except they see signs and wonders, but they should
remember that an evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign. And yet
they might see signs and wonders every day, 2 Cor. 12.12.
yea the signs and wonders of Apostles wrought amongst them; that is, those
greater works, that Christ promised his Disciples should do, Joh. 14.12.
Greater miracles they never could, they never did do. But greater works of
conversion were wrought by them, and these are the great signs and seals, and
mighty deeds, that God is working by his Apostles even before our eyes. There
being many through grace that are able to say, The seal of mine Apostleship are
ye in the Lord: 1 Cor. 9.2. 2 Cor. 3.2.
Ye are our Epistle written in our hearts, seen and read of all men.

Yet these signs will never satisfy a doubting Didymus, no not all the
attestation of all the Apostles; except he shall see in his hands the print of
the nails, and put his finger into the print of the nails, Joh. 20.25.
and thrust his hand into his side, he will not believe. Such a faithless
generation has this age brought forth, except they see the very same miracles
as were wrought by Peter and Paul upon men's bodies, they will not believe there
are any Apostles now in being, except they see the same gifts of tongues, or
some visible operation upon laying on of hands, they will not believe there is
any such Ordinance now in force. Although the same unbelieving professors will
not reject preaching upon that account (that were too open a discovery of a
half Christian) though the same signs did, but now do not accompany that
Ordinance.

Thus Herod may do many things, and hear John gladly, but foolish Virgins
cannot be thorough spirited; something will be found wanting in the day of
Christ, when it will be too late to go to buy, what now they slight. And then
they shall experimentally find the truth of St. James his Doctrine, Jam. 2.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point (one
principle) he is guilty of all. Remember that after Trumpets, Act. 13.41.
come Vials. Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in
your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it
unto you.

But as for the gracious heart, who puts forth his faith into obedience upon
the account of a naked institution, because he finds that Laying on of hands is
the Doctrine or word of that Christ whom he loves, and in whom he lives,
because it is one of his Foundation Principles; because it is sincere milk for
new born babes; because the Master builders declare that such babes have need
of such Principles; because these were the Apostles teachings in, and writings
to the Churches; because the eternal Spirit binds true Disciples to embrace
the Apostles writings, and teachings, as none other then the commands of Christ.

Hence the faithful soul mounted on the wings of love (without attendance upon
miraculous or visible operations) divinely ecchoing to the language of his
beloved, cries, Lo I come to do thy will O God, yea thy law is within my heart.
I am weary with forbearing, and I can no longer stay.

And thus putting resolution into action, he frequently meets with such holy
transportations and true spiritual refreshings (far exceeding any miraculous
visible operation) that he breaths forth this or the like heavenly Rapture, (as
being translated and transformed into the same image from glory to glory, Cant.
6.10.
by the Spirit of the Lord) Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the
Chariots of Amminadib.

These are no fancies; we speak that we know, and testify that we have seen.
And thus the believing babe, meets with that benediction which Christ entailed
upon his obedience, Joh. 20.29. Because thou have seen, thou have believed,
blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. These are the
proper objects of Christ's prayer, Joh. 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone,
but for them also which shall believe on me through their word. He does not say
through their miracles, but through their word; because it is a surer rule of
direction then any miracle, yea then any revelation, vision, or extraordinary
voice from heaven whatsoever, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18, 19.

The Apostles voice is the trial of spirits, 1 John 4.7. We are of God, he
that knows God, hears us: hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the
spirit of error.

For further illustration of the end of this Ordinance of Laying on of hands;
namely, A fuller attainment, and greater measure of spiritual gifts; Let it be
observed, that the gifts of the Spirit are of two sorts.

The first, External, and visibly miraculous; and the se have two special
uses.

1. To confirm the word and ordinances. 2. To convince unbelievers.
The second sort are more intrinsecall, soul-satisfying and glorious; for the
sealing, establishing, and nourishing of Christ babes.

Those external gifts, which are of such excellent use, Mark. 6.7, 13
and are accompanied with choice consolation to believers; yet may a Judas,
Demas, or any other reprobate be largely stored with them, Mat. 7.22.
and go to hell afterward.

Those gifts are, 1. Healing. 2. Miracles. 3. Extraordinary Prophecy. 4.
Diverse kinds of tongues. 5. Interpretation of tongues, 1 Cor. 12.9, 10.


1. For healing. Although it be a gift continued in the Churches, and is the
proper work of Elders, Jam. 5.14, 15. and we enjoy it to this day, and have
sometimes seen and heard of wonderful effects, yet it cannot be constantly
expected no not from the hands of Apostles. If Paul could have healed his
faithful fellow laborer ( Phil. 2.25, 27, 30.) I am confident he would.

2. If any are by this means healed, Christ has performed his promise. If all
were under the influence of this gift (at all times) mortality should cease; no
man would ever dye, that might so easily enjoy life.

3. This gift is rather for confirming Mark. 16.20.
the word and Ordinances, and for the conviction of Heathens, then for the
recovery of Christians. Act. 28.8.


And thereupon Paul leaves the Heathen Parent of Publius at Miletum well. But
the Christian Trophimus, he left at Miletum sick. 2 Timothy 4.20.

4. A reprobate may enjoy this gift and perish, Luke 9.6.

Therefore this is no such desirable gift for believers to look for in Laying
on of hands.

Secondly, Miracles, of what kind soever, are 1. To confirm the word and
Ordinances, Heb. 2.4. Whereupon such Ordinances as God confirmed by Miracles,
are firmly to be retained and observed, and not at any time to be let slip,
Heb. 2.1.

Now it is most clear that Laying on of hands upon Disciples, was confirmed by
miracles; so that this Ordinance (amongst others) must be carefully observed,
with earnest heed Heb. 2.1. opened.
, lest at at any time we should let it slip. Observe poor soul, thou that
stand in awe of thy God must not let it slip at any time, therefore hold it
fast at this time.

1. Because it is a super-angelicall ordinance, and therefore to remain
steadfast and unmovable, Heb. 2.2. Verse. 2.


2. Because the slighting of this, and other Gospel mercies will unavoidably
bring the greatest miseries ( v. 3.) Verse. 3.
no possibility of escape: if every transgression and disobedience to Moses law
Heb. 10.28, 29.
(every transgression) were so severely punished; how shall we escape?
Impossible to escape.

3. Thou must take heed to this Fourth Principle as well as other duties,
(earnest heed) Because it was at first spoken by the Lord, and confirmed to his
Apostles, and by them faithfully taught us. Mind it Christian, it is for thy
life; thou can not escape, if thou let it slip; after warning, if thou
receive not the truth with love, God will send thee strong delusions to believe
a lie. Ah! how have I seen the Lords professed people carried away captive,
that have slighted this Ordinance. Hurryed by Satan, to blaspheme other
glorious truths, drowned in the world, and the love of it (1 John 2.15.) given
up to horrible lying, bitterness, emulation, envy, strife, sedition, making
schisms, rents, divisions, what not? O thou believer, that professest Christ,
mind this word of Christ, these four first verses of the Epistle to the
Hebrews; Remember, that this fourth principle was first spoken by the Lord
himself, and is plainly called, The word of the Heb. 6.1.
beginning of Christ, and was confirmed by signs, and wonders, and miracles.

2. Miracles are given for conviction of Heathens, Act. 8.6. and 16.27, 29, 30.
But alas! this avails not at all, if love (manifested by obedience to all
Christ's commands) be wanting, 1 Cor. 13.2. A person may have this gift, and
perish.

The third gift of this nature is extraordinary Prophecy, or foretelling of
events; such as may wonderfully possess a Balaam, a Saul, a Caiaphas, a Witch;
this may confirm truths, and convince sinners, but the Prophet be damned; it is
an excellent gift in a gracious heart, but short of ordinary Prophecy.

The fourth extraordinary gift (that is according to Court custom not the
chief) is kinds of tongues, not new tongues, for that is a special gift
peculiar to true believers; a real sign of an effectual work of grace; for
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Rev. 14.1.
wherefore those 144000. Redeemed Virgins, are presented with a new song in
their mouth, which none else could learn. Act. 17.19.
When once Paul becomes a Convert he Preaches a new Doctrine; he was before a
Blasphemer, but now he has learned a new lesson. He is not a believer, that
has not learned a new language Ephesians. 5.4.
.

These miraculous tongues are never called new tongues, but strange tongues,
and other tongues, to convince a strange people; to preach to other Nations, as
was needful then, but now cannot well be employed, since Popish inquisitions,
and Turkish slavery, has shut the Gospel out of their territories, Act.
13.46. Neither have Christ's Ministers any warrant to attempt the publishing of
Gospel truths in other Nations, who are known to be dogs, swine, and
persecutors, Mat. 7.6. and 10.23.

And therefore Satan, and not Gods Spirit, has engaged some foolish deluded
souls called Quakers to pass the Seas, in expectation probably of some
miraculous ability to publish their poison against Christ's Ordinances, but have
only performed the work of Barbarians, and so returned.

But certainly should Christ call into forain parts, he would enable his
servants to help sick souls abroad, as well as to heal sick bodies at home.
Alas! our native Country has need enough of more laborers.

Wherefore (says the Apostle) tongues are for a sign, Not to them that
believe, 1 Cor. 14.21.
but to them that believe not. This gift therefore belongs not to thee thou
dear Disciple of Christ, It is our mercy that the Ordinance I now contend for
came once under hand and seal from heaven; our Masters hand, and this sign of
tongues confirming it.

Since therefore this fourth Foundation Principle of thy Religion is thus by
this miraculous gift ratified, and thy precious soul converted; thouart not to
expect such needless unsuitable gifts as these, which Gods word tells thee are
not convenient for thee; But fince the Spirit of truth has more excellent
treasure, then tongues, or the interpretation of tongues; take thou the
counsel of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.31.
Covet earnestly the best gifts, and yet show I unto you a more excellent way;
there are some gifts more excellent then others, and there are graces more
excellent then any other gifts, the best gifts will be fuel to thy choice
graces, and set thy heavenly heart all on a holy flame.

Wherefore covet earnestly the best gifts for this end. And fince it is evident
that the golden gifts of Christ Zech. 4.12.
pass through golden pipes or Ordinances, into the bowl of the Candiestick,
that is, the Church; put thy affectionate mouth to these precious pipes, that
contain such precious gifts, and draw with the buckets of joy out of the wels
of salvation.

It is undeniable that this fourth foundation Doctrine of Christ is one of
those pipes, or channels, through which these eternal streams do run; and
doubtless did not poor creatures (drowned in delusions) conclude these streams
were dried up, they would not neglect this pipe, this ordinance of hands, as
they do. But so they think, and so they speak, for say they, the power or gifts
of the Spirit are ceased, and therefore the ordinance is of no use.

Well, when I shall clearly demonstrate, that the best gifts are to this day
continued, as I have already proved that no gift is ceased, that is needful
for believers; And when it shall appear that these best gifts have been
conveyed through impofition of hands; Then surely both the Ordinance and gifts
will be earnestly desired, and affectionately embraced, by gracious souls.

These best gifts which being continued, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
Saints should covet, are 1. Wisdom. 2. Knowledge. 3. Faith. 4. Prophecy. 5.
Discerning of Spirits.


It must be granted without controversy, that these are the best gifts of the
Spirit, and that they are continued in power and efficacy to this generation.

And first of Wisdom, Prove. 4.7. Job 28.18. 2 Samuel 14.20.
which the eternal Spirit that gives it, has recorded as the principal
thing, and therefore it is here in the Catalogue of gifts deservedly set in the
first place; The price thereof is above Rubies, it is a defense better then
strength, it transformes the person so, that he appears as an Angel of God.
Mavelous encomiums of deserved praise, are given by the Spirit to this most
excellent gift; far surpassing all those other gifts before mentioned, as
Healing, Tongues, Miracles, etc. which the devotion of a Didymus does so much
dote upon, making so great a noise in the world, so that all is lost with such a
professor, because tongues are ceased, and miracles do not appear to satisfy
his sense. Ah poor shallow creatures, shadows of Saints, that thus cry out as
undone, for the want of what they may perish with. Scarce one word of wisdom
to be heard; nay the very Ordinance which is most particularly designed for the
conveyance of Spiritual gifts, must be cut off, though it be a foundation
Principle because they see not the prints of the nails, and spear.

The power is gone, we want Apostles, the Fourth Principle is void, Gifts do
not now appear, the power is gone.

This is the great cry of these times, to cry down a foundation Doctrine of
Christ. But let the true babes of Christ know to their comfort that the pwoer
is not gone, so long as this gift, this best gift of the Spirit remains, which
is better then they all. Wherefore get wisdom thou believing obedient soul,
Prove. 4.7.
and with all thy getting, get understanding, forsake her not, and she shall
preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep thee; exalt her, and she shall
promove thee; she shall bring thee to honor when thou do embrace her. He
that thus counsels thee, has richly experienced the truth of what he assures
thee: he asked wisdom, and God gave him a large heart, and was so well pleased
with his choice, 2 Chronicles. 1.10, 11, 12.
and desire, that he added to his request, the greatest wealth, honor and
royalty that ever was given to mortal man.

This precious gift shall conduct the true Christian to the Bridegrooms
Chamber, yea into his Masters joy, Matthew. 25. Dan. 12.3.
where he shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, for he made wisdom
his choice, and used all means, all the appointments of Christ to attain it,
and did not find those pipes empty, which others slighted and neglected; but
through those channels his vessel was filled, wherefore he now lifts up his
head with confidence; Heb. 5.9.
and Christ is become what he promised, even the author of eternal salvation
to his obedient soul. While those who lived in the profession of some (it may
be many) truths, are found with empty vessels, void of this excellent gift of
wisdom, as refusing the channel through which it passes; so that now, Psalm.
45. Mat. 25.10, 11, 12.
when all too late, they would run to buy, the Bridegroom enters his royal
chamber, the Bride with the wise Virgins attend him, and the door is shut,
eternally shut; Lord, Lord, open to us, is all too late.

Because I have called and ye refused, (O read and tremble) Prove. 1.24, etc.
Hos. 14. ult.
Who is wise and he shall understand these things? prudent and he shall know
them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them:
but the transgressors shall fall therein.

By this time possibly some gracious soul will confess, that the best, and
most excellent gifts of the Spirit are not ceased. But this powerful, yea most
powerful operation is continued, in this principal gift of Wisdom, and
seeing the necessity of it, may possibly cry out, O help me to wisdom or else
I die! Which way is my beloved gone? in what path does this most excellent gift
of wisdom pass? Why thou poor enquiring soul, it is the Prince of gifts thou
inquire after, he is free, and I dare not confine him to any particular
passage, he has many walks, but I can point thee out which way he has gone,
namely, in yonder path, which is one of his principal walks, termed Laying on
of hands; it is a path of his own preparing, and indeed, a foundation Doctrine
of his own lips. His servant Joshua found him in this very path, and therein
obtained this precious gift of wisdom, which for the excellency of it bears
his own name, Deuteronomy. 34.9. And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the Spirit of
wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him.

Was this transcendent gift of the Spirit conveyed through the Laying on of
Moses hands? Luke 7.28.
Why, the least Gospel Minister is greater then Moses.

Object. But Joshua was an Officer.

Answ. He was a great Captain indeed, and did conquer Canaan, but there is not
a Disciple of Christ, but is a greater Captain, even a King and a Priest, and
conquereth the world; yea is more then a Conqueror through Christ. Whatsoever
privileges the chiefest in Moses house enjoyed, even the least member of
Christ's Kingdom is invested with; that is, to enter into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, or most holy place with boldness, Heb. 10.19.
which was the peculiar privilege of their high Priests.

So that this way, even through impositions of hands has the blessed Spirit
communicated wisdom, his most excellent gift.

In the time of the Gospel we find the great Apostle of the Gentiles rich in
this gift, A wise Master builder. And St. Peter greatly admires this gift of
Wisdom in him, 2 Pet. 3.15. Even as our beloved brother Paul also, according
to the Wisdom given unto him.

Quest. But when was this Wisdom given unto him?

Answ. At the same time when the Holy Ghost first filled him; that is, when the
first Messenger was sent for this (as the chief end) from the Lord Jesus to
him; Brother Saul (said Ananias) the Lord Jesus -- has sent me, that thou
might receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost, Act. 9.17. and
accordingly the eyes of his mind (as well as of his body) were so enlightened
with this choice gift of wisdom, that he was able to preach Christ so, that
all which heard him were amazed; he being so able presently to prove that he
which bestowed this gift upon him, is the very Christ.

So that here we have the precise time when this wisdom was given him.

Quest. But how, or by what means was this gift communicated?

Answ. By that especial Ordinance through which other gifts of the same Spirit
were conveyed by Peter, and John, and Paul himself, afterward; that is, by
imposition of hands, Act. 9.17. And Ananias went his way and entered into the
house, and putting his hands on him said, etc.

So that here in two lively examples, the way and means of communicating this
principal gift, is discovered to thy inquiring soul.

I shall add no more at present concerning this gift, which I would be found in
at the sound of the great trumpet, but to counsel thee in the words of my
Redeemer in another case, Go, and do thou likewise. Luke 10.31.


The second best gift which is also continued to, and must be more and more
increased in the Saints (as we may see this day) is Knowledge, Dan. 12.4.

As this is honored in the next place to Wisdom; so are they both locked up
together for the newborn babe, in the richest Cabinet that heaven has, even in
the heart of the Lords Christ, and our Jesus, Col. 2.3.
in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and knowledge.

This is one of those choice acquirements for the building up of the Saints,
which whosoever wants is blind, 2 Pet. 1.5, 8.
and in a perishing condition; My people are destroyed for want of knowledge,
is the great Gods patheticall expression, Hos. 4.6. Take heed therefore thou
do not reject it, nor the means by, and through which it is attained; for as
it is treasured up in the same magazin or storehouse, so it runs in the same
channel with wisdom; that is, communicated through the same Ordinance; Then
shall we know, Hos. 6.3. Hab. 2.14.
if we follow on to know the Lord.

Faith is the third continued gift, running through several channels, that is,
different administrations, from the same Lord. 1 Cor. 12.5.
But that says which so runs as through Baptism, Supper, Hands, and other
Ordinances, I do not judge that foundation Principle ( Heb. 6.) but a faith of
assurance, Ephesians. 1.13. or the sealing of the Spirit, which has been
communicated to some upon their purpose to obey Christ in this Ordinance, to
others, whiles they have been under the administration of hands; to a third
sort immediately after, to diverse at a greater distance; yea I have seen such a
presence, and (with an eye which the natural man never enjoyed) beheld so
great a Majesty in the administration of this fourth Principle, as has
constrained me to admire the mighty operation of the Spirit, and to conclude
that wonders are not totally ceased.

Let babes in Christ covet earnestly this great gift, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 3.8.
Hab. 3.17, 18. 1 Samuel 30.6. Mat. 21.22. Josh. 10.12, 13. 1 John 5.4. Isa. 45.11.
and be found in all the means and ways of obtaining it; for it is a
Christ-exalting gift; a self-abasing gift; a soul-satisfying gift; a
heart-encouraging gift; a mercy-obtaining gift; a wonder-working gift; a
world-conquering gift; a God-commanding gift.

Now certainly, if I have spoken truth concerning this precious gift of Faith,
then it is not true which some have so confidently asserted; namely, that the
powerful operations of the Spirit are ceased. But I know, what they mean, viz.
the visible print of the nails, and spear, so that it appears to me, they
believe little further then they see, and therefore slight this Doctrine of
Laying on of hands.

Which I think few will deny to be a notable means for the conveyance of the
fourth continued spiritual gift, which is Prophecy.

All spiritual gifts are beautiful in their place, but this rather to be
desired, for the edification of others, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14.1.

I do not judge a person completely in Gods way, how eminent soever he be
gifted, until he have received this Ordinance of hands. I look upon the Church
as neglecting her duty when omitting it, or employing persons in the
Administration of Ordinances without it, and hiding her talents when she does
not separate such persons by it, as are fit for the Lords harvest.

And I esteem any man that sets to the Ministry without it (if he may and does
not receive it) as running without his errand.

Let none here mistake me, as though I did confound the fourth Principle with
Ordination; I know the one is an initiating Ordinance proper for babes, 2 Timothy
1, 6.
such as Timothy received at the hands of Paul, by which often this gift of
Prophecy is communicated; which when it mounts to such a flame, that the soul
is constrained with the Prophet, Jer. 20.9. to cry out, I was weary with
forbearing and I could not stay; Then I judge it the Churches duty to set upon
this separating administration, with sasting and prayer, according to pattern,
Act. 13.2, 3. As the Eldership or Presbytery, did to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14.
Persons thus designed to the work, are sent out by the Holy Spirit, Act. 13.4.
therefore prize it.

The last standing or continued gift here mentioned, is, Discerning of Spirits,
which raises the soul to a notable degree of spirituality 1 Cor. 2.14.
.

No wonder then, that the Apostle urges the necessity of the Six Principles,
as being the dishes, in, and by which this spiritual gift is brought by
degrees to the believing soul, which when he heartily feeds of, it is of that
strengthening nature, as transforming the Disciple from a babe to a strong man,
Heb. 5. ult.

It Is no small mercy to be able to try the spirits whether they be of God, and
to know Christ's voice from a stranger, 1 John 4.1. Joh. 10. Mat. 7.15, 16.
a wolf from a sheep.

Since therefore the use and end of Laying on of hands, is for attaining the
Spirit of Christ by degrees. And that I have so fully proved, that the choicest
gifts of the Spirit are as largely (that I say not more liberally) handed to
believers now as ever, and that these heavenly gifts are so clearly
communicated through this Ordinance of hands; Let my counsel be acceptable to
thee, if ever thou desire thy friends society, get thee to his place of
abode, that is, Can. 1.8.
forth by the foot steps of the flock, and feed thy kids besides the shepherds
tents.

There he makes his flock to rest at noon. There he will give thee his loves,
not every where, but in ways of his own appointment.

His flock have left thee fair prints of their footsteps both in Doctrine and
practice; A goodly flock has the Shepherd of Israel, whose faith follow, and
lean not to thine own understanding.

Say not the Lords hands is shortened, or his power ceased; thou see his
richest gifts are continued to thee, and many more then I have mentioned, as
the spirit of grace and supplication, Zech. 13.10.
the gift of suffering, Phil. 1.29. of courage and boldness, Act. 4.10, 13.
and sundry others.

Be not wanting to thy self in slighting this or any Ordinance, through which
Christ is pleased to convey his gift. Jonah 2.8.
They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.

If there be any breathings in thy soul after these spiritual treasures which
will stand thee in stead when the trumpet sounds, get thee to the Merchants
now, if thou drive off thy bargain till then the door will be shut. Possibly
thou may think this Ordinance of hands not worth half my writing, or thy
reading I am sure my pains is the greater, and I do not think it too much to
clear up an Ordinance whereby Christ has sweetly refreshed my soul; I know it
has long lien sullied amongst the Romish pots. Psalm. 68.13. Isa. 60.8.
But God can give it the wings of a dove to thy bosom to engage thy dove-like
soul to fly (though in clouds) to thy windows.

What if thou should look upon this Ordinance with a contemptible eye, Joh.
9.6, 7.
and esteem it no better then clay and spittle, yet use it, because it is the
Doctrine or word of Christ; possibly it may clear thy sight.

Thou have many precious Lambs of Christ in view, that have led thee the way
through this administration, as Peter, John, Paul, Ananias, and thousands more,
who continued steadfastly in this and all the rest of the Apostles Doctrine.

And remember that thou art commanded to observe and do all things whatsoever
Christ commanded his Disciples in those days, so shall thou be sure of the
presence of Christ whose favor soever thou losest. So shall thou approve thy
self a new-born-babe, a new Creature, a friend of Christ. And as many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

I must now return to the Gent. my Antagonist, to wipe off those Absurdities,
which he says must of necessity follow this practice.

First, We lay no unfaithfulness upon Christ, nor advance Moses above him,
since Christ has not left us to doubtful suppositions (as the Gent. speaks)
for the institution of this practice of Laying on of hands is substantially
proved from the mouth of Christ.

Secondly, Neither do we lay a lie upon Paul, who has declared this Principle
as a part of the counsel of God, and so to be practiced by Christ's Ministers,
2 Timothy 2.2.

Thirdly, We have both commands and promises, and therefore can act in faith in
this Ordinance, as is already fully proved.

Fourthly, We have given substantial grounds of our hope, in this point, to
the stopping the mouths of gainsayers, let suppositions go to the supposers.

As for the Gentleman's two Apostolical acts, which he says we cross, if
there were any thing worth noting it would fall fall upon himself; for I
suppose he is but an imitator of the Act in Preaching, but cannot carry on the
end, insomuch as he wants the power they had (if it be a want.)

2. They were as much amazed at the power of the Spirit in Peter's Preaching (
Act. 10.44, 45.) and more, then Simon Magus was. Neither can the Gent. imitate
Peter's Preaching, any more then I can their imposing hands; he has neither
received like power, neither is he able to carry on the like end (as he
phraseth it) nor do any thing in Preaching, but what men as men may do. And
whatever of this nature he brings forth is equally applicable to his own
practice of Preaching. Really the Gent. writes more like a Notionist, Quaker,
or Seeker, then a settled Christian; I wish he were thoroughly weaned from those
wanderings; for why does he raise such a dust about waiting for the power and
receiving the power, of being imitators of the act, but cannot carry on the end?

Let all that fear the great God and tremble at his glorious word, and have any
love to his Ordinances, consider whither this Gent. would lead them.

He says, The Apostles had power before to Preach and Baptize with water, yet
before they did this (Lay on hands) the must wait for power, and that an
eminent glorious power at Jerusalem, and he quotes Luke 24.49. Answ. Here are
big words, and smooth words, to deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.17,
18. But I do utterly deny them to be the words of truth.

For why does he? how durst he quote Luke 24.49. and yet so confidently assert
they had power to preach before?

Let him, and those dear friends he writes to, (if they be not willing to be
deluded) look two verses backward, viz. Luke 24.47. and they shall see that the
Apostles had no power to preach upon the account of their full and great
commission, until this power came. For thus speaks the Lord Jesus -- And that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name, Luke 24.47,
48, 49.
among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. -- And behold I send the promise of
my Father upon you, but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endued
with power from on high.

Now friends in the name of Christ consider whether the Gent, has declared
truth in saying they had power to Preach and Baptize before, upon the account
of their last Commission? for that only he relates to in quoting Luke 24.49.
their former Preaching and Baptism being at that time utterly void, as you may
clearly see by comparing these Scriptures, Mat. 10.5, 6. with Mat. 28.18, 19,
20. and Luke 22.35, 36. and Act. 19 4. Their former work was to preach, The
Kingdom of God is at hand. But now, Mat. 5.7.
The Kingdom of God is come with power, Mark. 9.1. Luke 24.49. and such as was
their Preaching, such was their Baptism.

But here I must challenge the Gent. to make good his word, that they did ever
preach one Sermon, or ever Baptize one person, before this power came, or else
he has but deluded you, in making you believe that there is need of a greater
power for administering the Ordinance of Laying on of hands, then there needs
for Preaching, and Baptism, for that is his full scope and design, in which I
appeal to any ingenuous soul. Nay, I appeal to himself.

Secondly, He would persuade persons (but then they must be very ignorant) that
the Miraculous visible power, is the essence of the Ordinance.

Whereas I have abundantly proved that the command of Christ gives essence to
the Ordinance, and that the communicating of the Spirits gifts is the full end
of the Ordinance to obedient souls for Christ's honor.

And I have also proved, That the Spirit has communicated better gifts and
more glorious power through this Ordinance, then ever were or can be visible to
a natural eye, 1 Cor. 2.9. ad finem; and that the same gifts still remain, for
which by all means we should endeavor.

Thus I hope it is evident that the same power is requisite for Preaching,
Baptism, and other Gospel Ordinances, as for Laying on of hands, and that the
very same power has accompanied Preaching, as has attended the fourth
Principle, and as often has it appeared in the one, as in the other.

Wherefore consider in the name of the Lord what a design is here laid to raze
the foundation of all Ordinances, and level them with the dust? And indeed what
presumption is it for the Gent. to Preach, Baptize, break-bread, etc. and yet
want the essence of these Ordinances; if it were true as he holds forth, that
the visible miraculous power of the Spirit were the essence of Ordinances?

But to the Gent. fifth absurdity, which he says is injurious to Jesus Christ
who brings forth an act to show his power, and yet we having not the power, do
imitate the act turning acts of power into bare imitation, and so are injurious
to Christ's intention. Answ. 1. All the acts which Christ brings forth are acts
of power, since all power in heaven and earth is put into his hand, we profess
he cannot act unlike himself, therefore we are slandered in being charged as
injurious to Christ.

2. The great power Christ intends in all the acts he brings forth, is to
convert souls, these acts are those greater works which Christ promised his
Saints should perform, Joh. 14.12. and these are the mighty signs of true
Apostles, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. and 2 Cor. 3.2, 3. Whosoever therefore is enabled to
perform these greater works, is so far from being injurious to Christ, that he
fully answers Christ's intention, for herein Christ's greatest power is put
forth, and shines most gloriously, and they that are isntrumental thus in
bearing up his name and power in the world, shall at last shine as the
brightness of the Firmament, Dan. 12. 1 Pet. 5.5.
and receive at his hands a Crown of glory that fades not away.

3. I have already fully proved, that those external visible gifts of the
Spirit, which Carnal Christians, and distrustful Didymusses do so strangely
dote upon, are not the greatest acts of Christ's power, those prints of the
nails and spear, are but Christ's condescensions to weak Christians. Those
tongues which were given once (and but once that we know of) in the laying on
of hands, and in Preaching, although the Gent. do ever so highly magnify them
amongst professors, and believers, so as to raze the foundation of a foundation
principle, because he sees not that sign of tongues, does but feed his hearers
with food that is not for them. If we dare but give credit to that wise master
builder, he will clearly show us what an unwise steward is this Gent. Mat.
24.45. Luke 12.42.
what an unfaithful servant, not dividing the word of truth aright, not giving
them their portion of meat in due season. 2 Timothy 2.15.
But indeed setting them a gaping for such food as Christ intends not for them.
Tongues being for a sign, 1 Cor. 14.22.
Not to them that believe, but to them that believe not.

And while they are thus busily enquiring after the visible power, the signs,
the miracles, (like that impertinent question Act. 1.6.) they are robbed of
that proper, powerful, food that Christ has fitted for his table guests, and
conveyed through laying on of hands; that true Manna, which whosoever feeds
upon shall never die. I mean those best gifts which true Christians ought
earnestly to covet, and use all means to procure; as Wisdom, Knowledge, Faith,
Prophecy, Prayer, and the rest, wherein the mighty Almighty power of Christ is
put forth, and which sundry believing souls have felt, and found, in this
Administration of hands, some eminently, and speedily, others more obscurely,
and by insensible degrees The blessed Spirit dividing to every man severally as
he will; that is, What he will, how he will, 1 Cor. 12.11.
and when he will.

Lastly, I must declare that the Gent. and others, making so much noise about
the visible Power, the miraculous Power, the external glorious Power, etc. do
but hereby proclaim their own unbelief: The Apostle plainly telling us that
tongues are for a sign, not to believers, but to unbelievers, as above.

Secondly, As for that reproof in Isa. 1.12. I have already spoke to it, and
the God of heaven make it a warning to him, that he may cease to reproach the
ways, ordinances, and servants of Christ.

And as for Gods demand, how we know Heb. 6.2. is meant to lay hands on all
Disciples; though the Gent. says we can but answer we think so, and how sad
that would be. I answer,

We can confidently tell him (for God will make no such idle demands) that we
know so, we know the fourth Principle belongs to all Disciples.

1. Because it is one of the first Doctrines or Words of Christ.

2. Because it is one of the foundation Principles for Christians.

3. Because it is plainly called milk for babes, Indefinitely.

4. Because the Ministers of Christ taught and practiced it to all his.

5. Because Christ's babes have need of it, God himself has spoken it, and
therefore will never question us for observing the Apostles writings and
teachings, 1 Cor. 11.37.
which his holy Spirit has testified are his own commands.

Thirdly the Gent. would have us consider, How unlike this practice is to the
primitive Churches, and to Philip, Act. 8.12, 13. who wrought miracles, more
then we can do, and Baptized with water, but left the Laying on of hands to the
Apostles, Act. 8.14. Answ. 1. We have diligently considered, and through grace
found our selves in the very steps of the primitive Churches, whereof some are
particularized as the Church of Samaria, the Church of Ephesus, the Churches of
Judea, or the Hebrews, who were taught and continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, they being careful to settle the same order in all
Churches: Especially in foundation Principles, upon which all the Saints are
built.

Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forainers, Ephesians. 2.19, 20.
but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God; and are built
upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief cornerstone.

2. It Is too bold to say that Philip left Laying on of hands to the Apostles,
when it was the special work of God to employ Philip suddenly in the mighty
service of converting that noble Ethiopian, whom Historians record to be so
famous in converting his whole Nation.

But secondly, What a deal of stir here is to set up the poor weak instrument,
as though there were any power or virtue in one Ministers hands more then
another, or in one Ordinance then another? Why, this is nothing but the old
Pope and Prelate, masking in a new habit. Let the eternal Spirit determine,
what difference there is between Peter and Philip (I shall offer no violence to
the text, only change names a little) 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7, 8. Who then is Peter,
and who is Philip, but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to
every man? Philip planted, Peter and John watered, but God gave the increase.
So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but
God that gives the increase.

Now he that planteth, and he that waters are one.

And one would think this should satisfy an honest humble heart in this matter.

But thirdly, Philip was an Evangelist, in the very same rank with Timothy, and
it cannot be denied but laying on of hands was the work of an Evangelist, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man.

Fourthly, Act. 9.17.
Doubtless Philip had as much authority as Ananias; for it is confidently
asserted by some, that Ananias was but a bare Disciple, though it is a wild
assertion, but let that pass at present. Well, certain it is, Ananias who had
power to Baptize, had equal power to lay hands upon Paul, upon a twofold
account.

1. For the cure of his body.

2. For the filling of him with the holy Ghost. The very end, and use of this
fourth Foundation Principle.

Paul was at present but a new-born-babe, learning and observing, or practicing
his Principles. I hope none will presume to say that this main end of Ananias
imposing hands, that Paul might be filled with the Holy Spirit, was any
ordination to office, unless they will be wise above what is written.

Paul was not then Baptized, and not likely to receive ordination before his
Foundation Principles were laid.

Besides, Certain it is, that his solemn Ordination, by imposition of hands,
was long after, namely, Act. 13.

But Lastly, Philip being an Evangelist, was not inferior to the settled
elders, or Presbytery 1 Timothy 4.14.
, and they had authority to impose hands.

If any shall object, That was in Ordination.

I shall only answer this, That strong meat for men is not inferior to milk for
babes.

But enough has been said, to prove Christ's Ministers equal in power.

The Gents. last Consideration, warns his dear friends of the danger of
turning Acts of Power into bare imitation and want the power, quoting, Act.
19.13, 14, 15, 16. Exodus 7. to 13. and 8.16, 17, 18, 19. Answ. 1. I know no
power that was ever put forth in Laying on of hands, more then there was in
Preaching. Act. 10.44, 45. How dare he then imitate them in Preaching and want
the power?

2. I know no power any man has to Preach Authoritatively, Tit. 2.15. but the
same person has by the same Commission power to carry on all Ordinances that
ever Christ commanded. Paul and Apollo are equal in power, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7.8.
Here Paul is the planter, and Apollo the waterer. In Act. 8. Philip is the
planter, and Peter with John the waterers. Now by the Gents arguing from Act.
8. Apollo bears the bell away from Paul in point of power. But the Spirit of
God says, they are equal, One. Ananias had power to Baptize, Ananias had
power to impose hands.

3. Thrre were certain Conjurers cudgel'd by the Devil, Act. 19. for calling
on the name of Jesus whom they abhorred.

And a sort of Sorcerers, whose serpents, Moses's serpent devoured.

But were ever any Gospel Ministers in the least reproved for administering any
of Christ Ordinances?

Why, those Vagabond exorcists knew not, believed not Jesus; how then should
they call on him Romans 10.14. 1 John 2.3, 4.
? but we know him, and obey him, as we are able. And hereby we know that we
know him, if we keep his Commandments. He that says I know him, and keeps
not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

He will never charge us with sin for observing all things whatsoever he
commanded his Apostles.

He never commanded his Apostles to teach his Churches that it was necessary to
have such ministers, as must either do miracles, or else they must not
administer all Ordinances to the end of the world. But he lays down plain
directions how Ministers must be qualifyed, 1 Timothy 3. Tit 1. not one syllable
of miracles or tongues.

And yet they are bound to teach the same things, 2 Timothy 2.2.
that Paul and Timothy did, amongst which I am sure Laying on of hands was one.

To conclude, lest the Gents. bustle about imitation of Christ and his
Apostles, in carrying on Gospel Ordinances, without power to confirm them ten
thousand times over, with new miracles; I say lest this noise and dust should
weaken the hands, and blear the eyes of Christ's enquiring ones, so as to have a
slight esteem of Christ's commands, since all Gospel Ordinances, and Ministers
have equal authority;

Let it be remembered that those Divine writings and Ordinances which our
deceased husband left as Legacies, for the trial of our love to our first
love, in remembrance of his sad sufferings till his second coming, were all
confirmed once unto us by signs and wonders.

And being thus ratified under hand and seal, by him whose Kingdoms, Laws,
are less mutable then the Laws of Medes and Persians, it is not for us to
question them, but testify our love, Joh. 14.15. and 15.14.
and friendship by observing them, even all of them.

Remember the pattern of heavenly things, I mean those Mosaicall
administrations, Heb. 10.1.
which were a shadow and no more of what we now enjoy.

But whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our Learning.

And therefore at the giving and writing of the Law, mighty signs and wonders
were wrought in the sight of Israel, and Egypt.

So at the giving and writing of the Gospel signs and wonders from heaven
confirmed it, in the sight both of Christians and Heathens.

But at the Jews return from Babylon, not one miracle wrought, and yet the
people observe all their ordinances, yea some that were discontinued hundreds
of years. Neh. 8.16, 17.
We are now returning out of Babylon, praised be God, let us embrace all our
ordinances with thankfulness, without expecting new miracles to confirm them.

It Is true, all our Ordinances have been discontinued many hundreds of years
during the time of Popish Apostasy, or else in an Antichristian garb, have
they been administered to false subjects. Yet even in the darkest times of the
Beasts rage, did the Lord preserve himself a remnant, that held fast his truth
in some corners; perhaps by fifties in a Cave: for the woman had a being though
in a wilderness, sackcloth condition, Revel. 12.
all that 1260. years, being nourished there with her own proper food, the
sincere milk of the Word, the Scriptures of the old and new testaments, which
are none other then those two witnesses appointed of God to seed her Joh. 5.39.
Jer. 15.16.
.

And at her approach into the open light, and cheerful day of liberty (which
shine most gloriously under this happy Government we now enjoy) being by
degrees freed from that imposing, persecuting Babylonish thraldom* she
searches those divine records, her own peculiar treasure, and portion, and
like those Nehem. 8.14. what she finds written in that law, she obeyes, step
by step, as God discovers truth, without expecting new miracles to confirm it;
and at length has found out, and laid this fourth Principle in its proper
place. Yet some have branded this precious Ordinance in Print, as A new
Administration.

But really I stand amazed that their consciences did not give their pen a
check; since it is so evident that Peter, and John, and Paul, and Ananias, and
thousands more, were found in this practice, sixteen hundred years ago, and did
most faithfully teach the same doctrine as one of the six foundation Principles
of Christian Religion; as the proper food or milk for babes, young beginners in
Christianity, to whom the Epistle to the Hebrews is chiefly written, nay only
written.

For although it is clear that those Hebrew or Judean Churches, had officers
settled amongst them, whom they are exhorted to remember, as those that had the
rule over them, etc. Heb. 13.7. and to obey them, and submit to them, verse. 17.
Yet was not this Epistle written to those Officers, or Rulers, or Ministers, or
Angels (like the 7. Epistles to the Asian Churches Rev. 2, and 3.) but only to
the members of those Churches; as is most evident by the close of that Epistle,
where this exhortation or injunction is laid upon those babes; Heb. 13.24.
Salute all them that have the rule over you.

Had this been wisely considered, the adversaries of this fourth Principle
would not so much have betrayed their weakness, and discovered their
nakedness, as with such confidence to assert that the Doctrine of hands Heb.
6. belongs only to the Ministry.

The wiseman cries out, Eccl. 10.16.
Woe to thee O Land when thy King is a child. I may much more sadly apply it to
Churches, if our adversaries speak truth that the fourth Principle belongs to
Ministers. Woe to thee O Church when thy Elders (or Bishops) are babes: Yea
such babes as are unskilful in the word of righteousness, Heb. 5.13. And yet
it is as clear as the Sun, that this Principle (among the rest) is to be used by
such babes as are unskilful in the word of righteousness. Wherefore let our
adversaries pretend never so much ability, or eminency, or experience to teach
others; I dare boldly assert, that until such time as God shall draw out their
hearts to use this milk of the fourth Principle, they are but unskilful in a
Foundation Doctrine of the word of righteousness; And truly that is exceeding
sad, if we consider, Tit. 1.9.

Well then; to weaklings in the faith, to young Disciples has Christ designed
this A B C. Doctrine of six principles, to be laid as their first foundation
upon himself, Ephesians. 2.20. which is so far from being A new Administration (as
our Antagonists term this fourth Principle by way of derision) that what we
contend for, is one of the words of the beginning of Christ; (...). Heb. 6.1.
one of those first things which Jesus began to do and teach, which are not set
down particularly by the Evangelists (for if they should be written every one,
it is supposed the world could not contain them, Joh. 21.25) this is one of
those Commandments which Christ gave to his Apostles after his resurrection,
one of those things that he spoke to them concerning the Kingdom of God, Act.
1.1, 2, 3. for as Christ was forty days instructing Moses in Sinai, how to
govern his house under the Law; so he was forty days instructing his Apostles
in Sion, how to order his house under the Gospel, not writing his Laws (then)
with ink and paper, or in tables of stone, but acccorto the tenor of the new
Covenant, he did engrave them in their minds, Heb. 8.10.
and write them in their hearts, with this full assurance (upon the word of a
King) Joh. 14.26. that his holy Spirit should bring all things to their
remembrance, whatsoever he had said unto them; so that he has been exactly
faithful in all his house, Heb. 3.

As truly therefore as Christ gave them Commandments, ( Act. 1.2.) so truly
are those things which the Apostles taught, Act. 2.40, 41, 42. and 8.17. and
left in writing, Heb. 5.12. and 6.1, 2. so truly, I say, are these things, the
very Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37. which at first began to be spoken
by the Lord, Heb. 2.3.

So that the vanity of that taunt (that Laying on of hands is A new
Administration) does too much betray an ignorant, that I say not an envious
frame of spirit.

And as this foundation Principle was laid in Sion, by those wise
master builders in the beginning of the Kingdom of Christ, which is to be
practiced and observed equally with its fellow principles, Faith, Repentance,
Baptism, etc. to the end of the world:

So was it religiously performed with the rest, in the purest Churches, for
some hundreds of years after the Apostles, as is fully and faithfully proved
from the purest streams of Antiquity, by those eminent shining lights in the
Church of God, to whom this present generation is so exceedingly obliged, for
their indefatigable labors in vindication of this, and many other precious
truths of Christ; namely, Mr. John Tombs in his Anti-paedobaptism, Second Part.
23. Sect.
and Mr. Christopher Blackwood, in his Soul-searching Catechism, page 58. to
whom I refer you.

Only one testimony I shall set down out of Eusebius, lib. 6. cap. 42. Novatus
(says he) being very like to die, was baptized in the bed where he lay, if it
may be termed a baptism which he received, for he obtained not after his
recovery that which he should have done according to the Canon of the Church,
to wit, confirmation by the hands of the Bishop: In so much then as he obtained
not that, how came he by the Holy Ghost?

In which passage I observe,

First, That in those days (namely in the third Century) it was not the
custom to baptize Infants, but Professors, that lasie practice of Infant
sprinkling being after wars fomented and advanced by the man of sin.

Secondly I observe, That it could not be termed or judged a lawful baptism,
which was Administered in bed; for how was that a burial? Nay both the Clergy
and Laity opposed his admission into the Ministry, because they judged that
bed-baptisme unlawful, page 118.

Thirdly, I observe, That the Church had received the fourth Principle, as one
of their Canons, Laws, or Rules.

Fourthly, That he is recorded as a disobedient person to all posterity, for
neglecting and omitting that duty of Laying on of hands.

And lastly, That it was so long received as an eternal truth, that the holy
Ghost was communicated (in his gifts) by Laying on of hands.

So that I hope God will cause shame to work unfeigned sorrow in such as have
so rashly termed Laying on of hands, A new administration.

My counsel and advice to all that truly fear the Lord, and desire a greater
measure of his Blessed Spirit, in the gracious gifts, and flourishing fruits
thereof, is speedily to hasten to the use of all means that the redeemer of our
souls has designed for his dear Disciples, his babes, his lambs, which he
folds in his bosom, and has enjoined all his under-shepheards faithfully to
feed, as ever they would manifest their loves to him their Savior.

Wherefore I as the unworthyest of them all, would gladly serve thee, thou
espoused soul, that have devoted thy Virgin affections to the divine embraces
of the King of Saints. I beseech thee (as Christ's Ambassador) I humbly entreat
thee, open the mouth of thy enquiring thirsty soul, that as a newborn-babe thou
may receive this growing thriving food, in the rich increases of Gods holy
Spirit; it is sincere milk fitted for thy constitution. O taste and see how
gracious the Lord is! thou do not yet know, how he will communicate himself
to thee through this Ordinance; thou can never experience the virtue and
goodness of food till thou receive it.

I do not so earnestly invite thee to the meanest things of Christ's house,
those inferior gifts which Reprobates may have, and Simon Magus would have
purchased with money, and which carnal Christians so much cry out for, the
power, the visible miraculous power, the tongues, the signs, the wonders, etc.
Alas poor soul! these will not feed thee, the wisest Stewards that ever Christ
employed, 1 Cor. 14.22.
tell thee (thou panting spirit) they are not for thee.

Why, thou art a believer, I prithee what good would tongues or miracles do
thee? would they satisfy thy gaping thirsty soul? did not that excellent
Apostle earnestly dissuade Disciples from their vain affection of these
external gifts? What if I should come with tongues to you (says he 1 Cor.
14.6.) would that profit you? I should not be understood, ver. 7.8. and if you
did enjoy your desire of tongues, ye should but speak to the air, and be a
Barbarian, verse. 9, 11. Ah brethren (says he, after long laboring to blunt
the edge of their fond desire of tongues above other gifts) verse. 20. Be not
children in understanding; as if he should say, thy desires are childish, in
making such a noise about this lesser gift, which will neither edify thy self
nor others, verse. 14, 17.

No, no, thou little one, thou suckling, Luke 10.21.
to whom the good pleasure of thy Father is to reveal the mysteries of his
Kingdom, which he conceals from the wise and prudent. I stand (as one of
wisdoms maidens) to give thee an earnest invitation, yea to compel thee to
come, Prove. 9.3. Luke 14.23.
and sup with the Lord, upon a daintier dish then tongues, or any such
external things: Upon that hidden manna, the bread that comes down from
Heaven, Joh. 6.50. Cant. 1.3, 4. and 2.4.
which whosoever eats of shall never die. I would lead thee and all thy virgin
companions, by the savor of his good ointments, into the inner chambers of the
King, yea into his banqueting house, where thou shall be presented with his
choicest gifts, Wisdom, Knowledge, Faith, etc.

The Wisdom of God in a Mystery, not an external sound, Col. 2.3. Ephesians. 3.17,
18, 19, 20.
to satisfy a carnal heart, but all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
such as will warm thy inside, and by degrees so root thee and ground thee in
love, that at length thou shall be filled with all the fullness of God; Col.
2.2.
Unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement
of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.

Come then, Rev. 22.17.
let heaven and earth ring together. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and
let him that hears, say Come, and let him that is athirst Come, and
whosoeverwill, let him take of the water of life freely.

Who so is simple let him turn in bither, Pov. 9.4, 5.
as for him that wants understanding, she says unto him, Come eat of my
bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.

Ah thou beloved believer! here is a feast for a King, such a King as thou art,
and thou shall be a welcome guest, the more thou shall eat, Cant. 5.1.
the better welcome, Eat O friends, drink abundantly O beloved.

I have acquainted thee in what dishes this supper is served, through what
pipes these best gifts are conveyed; Act. 10.44. and 2.38. and 9.17.
namely, through the word Preached, through Baptism, through Laying on of
hands, and other Ordinances.

Thy obedience will dispell the clouds of thy Ignorance. If any man will do his
will, he shall know of the dectrine whether it be of God or whether I speak of
my self. Joh. 7.17. Romans 2.13.
For not the hearers, but the doers of the Law are justified.

Therefore look upon them as the enemies of thy soul, that tell thee thou must
learn the fourth Principle but not practice it.

Thy dear Redeemer learns thee another lesson; If ye know these things, Joh.
13.17.
happy are ye if ye do them. Do them therefore, and wait upon God for what he
pleases to give, and when.

The sucking babe is not always sensible of its grouth, in drawing the
breasts; Possibly God may give thee an Eunuch's portion speedily, possibly by
insensible degrees.

The Christian Hebrews had been in the use of this milk (this fourth Principle
and in the other five) a considerable time, Heb. 5.12, 13.
before they had any eminent gift; wherefore let not any precious soul in this
practice either say God is a hard master, or question his own condition, if
gifts do not presently or eminently flow as they desire. O Augustine! he is
come, he is come, warmed the Martyr within, when the flames were most scorching
without. Possibly God reserves his gifts till thou have most need of them. Some
sooner, some later.

If any shall say the Hebrews were not in the practice of this Doctrine of
Laying on of hands, because they were not eminent in gifts.

I must tell such persons that they flatly contradict the Scriptures which
tessifie, Act. 2.42. Heb. 5.12.13.
That they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine; yea that they had
been taught it, and did use it.

And to say, That they were taught Baptism, and did practice it; and were
taught, Laying on of hands, but did not practice it; is such a sign of a
shallow capacity as deserves no answer but silence and pity.

Wherefore I invite thee again thou troubled tempted soul, whom the enemy keeps
back with scruples, it is thy Lord calls for thee; Behold I have prepared my
dinner, Mat. 22.4.
my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready, come unto the
marriage.

Take heed thou tender Lamb of making light of these invitations; beware of
delays, they are very dangerous, as thou tenderest the good of thy soul look
not upon thy livings or livelihood, but especially thy relations; Luk 14.18,
19, 20. Chapter 9.59, 61. Chapter 14.27.
no not so much as bury thy dead, or take leave of them that are at home. He
that loves father and mother more then me, is not worthy of me. And whosoever
does not bear his cross and come after me, cannot be my disciple.

How many poor souls have I known, some at the very door of Baptism, and while
they have delayed, slumbred, and loitered, the enemy came and sowed tares, Mat.
13.25.
by some deluded Quaker, or otherwise, slighting Christ's Ordinances.

I am come in my Fathers name and ye receive me not, Joh. 5.43.
if another come in his own name, (crying up his light within, in the secret
chambers, Mat. 24.26.) him ye will receive.

Some have been ready to fall upon their knees (for convenience sake) to have
hands laid upon them, and though God has had mercy upon any that have
afterward obeyed; yet others have been left to strong delusions, to believe, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
write and practice lies. If any man draw back, Heb. 10.38.
my soul shall have no pleasure in him. And others who have slighted the
fellowship of the Saints, neglecting Christ invitation; I have seen death
surprise them in their disobedience. Luke 14.24.
For I say unto you that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste of my
Supper. And is not that sad, thou poor enquiring soul?

But in the last place,

If God have drawn out thy heart, by the smell of Christ's garments; I say
Christ's garments, those outward things, which proud ones pass by, and deluded
souls disdain; Which yet the Spirit says, Psalm. 45.8.
Come out of the Ivory Palaces, casting forth the fragrant odours, and cordial
perfumes of myrrh, Aloes and Cassia.

If these have made glad thy gracious heart, whiles thy Queen-like virgin-soul
has adorned her self with the choice embroyderies of thy beloved, not
contenting thy self which a fancied light in thy conscience, but approving thy
self the Kings daughter indeed, Verse. 13.
legitimately descended, all glorious within, (and) thy clothing of wrought
gold; That is, if thou have yielded thine obedience to those principles, and
other Ordinances Zech. 4.12.
, through which the golden gifts and graces of his Spirit flow: Let no man
deceive thee with vain words, giving thee leave to learn, but not to practice
thy Principles.

The Lord make my counsel acceptable to thee, which is, To live in the
perpetual exercise or practice of all thy Principles.

Yet mistake not, I would not have thee set them up for Idols, Judge. 17.13.
and live upon them, to say, Now I know that the Lord will do me good, seeing
I have got a Levite to my Priest.

Take heed of so practicing any of thy Principles. Now I have done enough once
to believe (a Magus may do so) or repent; Act. 8.13.
Judas did it; or be baptized, so was Ananias and Sapphira.

In this respect, Phil. 3.13, 14.
thou must forget what is behind, and press forward.

In this respect, Heb. 6.1.
thou must leave thy Principles, and go on to perfection.

But how must thou leave thy Principles? What, never to look at them any more?
No such matter. Mat. 19.5.
But as thou must leave thy father and mother and cleave to thy wife, so thou
must leave thy Principles.

Whosoever shall teach thee (in a married state) to be disobedient to, or
utterly to leave and forsake thy Parents; I shall bequeath to him the Legacy
fit for a blind Pharisee, Mat. 15.6.

And the like portion to him that shall counsel thee to learn thy Six
Principles, but not to practice them; or at any time to leave them, so.

As for the first Principle, which is Repentance,

Why thou poor soul, as often as thou call for thy daily bread, so often thou
must practice thy Repentance. For thou do daily contract new flaines,
therefore thou must daily go to that sountain Zech. 13.1. Rev. 7.14.
, to wash thy robes, and make them white in the blood of the Lamb. Crying,
Father which art in heaven, forgive my trespasses, as I forgive others; that
is, manifest forgiveness, seal my pardon, satisfy my soul, that all my sins
are imputed unto Christ, and his righte-ousnesse to me.

And can thy soul live a day without this satisfaction, without this assurance?
The Lord would have thee ask to purpose; not barely pardon, but assurance that
thou art pardoned; Ask and ye may receive, Joh. 16.24.
that your joy may be full. And thus thou must not leave, but practice
Repentance.

Secondly, for Faith;

If ever thou did receive it, embrace it, Romans 1.5.
and yield obedience to it, be careful constantly to live in the exercise of
it. Why thou no longer live then thou believe; Verse. 17.
therefore go thy ways on, from faith to faith, in the mounting steps of
Abraham's faith, as one of the household of faith. Romans 4.12. Gal. 6.10.
Take heed of Hymeneus sin 1 Timothy 1.19.
, and let Paul's exercise be thine, Act. 24.16. O beware of men that will yield
thou should learn it, but not practice it.

As for Baptism;

If ever thou was buried with Christ in it, Romans 6.4.
one burial will serve the turn, (...), he that is once baptized, or washed,
needs not save to wash his feet Joh. 13.10. compared with 2 King. 5.10. and
14. and Heb. 10.22.
; and yet there is daily need of Mortification, Col. 3.5. this thou must be
practicing all the days of thy Pilgrimage, thou do never learn it till thou
practice it; There Is daily need of a holy walk in newness of life, Romans 6.4.
Wherefore thou Baptized Believer, whatever men say, be thou daily in the
practice of this Principle.

A chaste Virgin often resisted Satan's temptation, with this weapon, Christiana
sum, I am a Christian. As often as the enemy makes his appoaches against thee,
tell him thou art espoused to Christ, and have (not in thy childish infant
state, when perhaps thou wast asleep) made a bold manly profession of thy
subjection to him in this Ordinance. What should I fear? if truth speak truth,
Mark. 16.16. I did (I do) believe. I was Baptized, I shall be saved.

And for this fourth Principle.

Be sure thou practice it, as ever thou desire a larger measure of the
Spirit, for the communicating of which it is appropriated.

If God do immediately confer his gifts in, or soon after the administration, be
careful to improve them to his glory, put them not under a bed of ease, or a
bushel of gain. If he deal with thee as with those Hebrew babes, keep thee
long in thy childhood, without some eminent manly gift, yet practice this
Principle, in the exercises of patience; waiting for a return to those prayers,
that did accompany this Ordinance, and indeed is an essential part of it,
without which, neither this nor any thing else is or can be sanctified, Luke
11.13.
and upon which precious promises are entailed. Breaking bread, is no ordinance
of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.11.
without prayer and praise. Remember the Spirits method, who is a free Agent,
Dividing to every man severally as he will, what, how, and when he pleases.

Some seed in some sort of ground, will spring up speedily. Though I do not say
that is either the best seed, or the best soil, see Mat. 13.5. And such is the
gift of tongnes, to such as greedily gape after it, and pettishly cast away the
ordinance of hands, if they may not have it. That, or nothing will please their
palate.

But the Spirit has another sort of seeds, which may not so suddenly appear,
but possibly lie all winter under the clods, and yet the ground very good, and
the seed lying so long in it, makes it better; and although it make not such
speed in springing, yet it is carefully kept, Luke 8.15.
and brings forth fruit with patience.

At the first practice of this Principle, the seed is sown, Isa. 45.19. and in
a suitable season it will spring and appear. Be patient therefore, brethren,
unto the coming of the Lord: Jam. 5.7.
Behold, the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has
long patience for it, until be receive the early and latter rain. We are at a
great loss for want of waiting for returns of duties.

Having therefore yielded obedience to this Ordinance, let no man persuade thee
(thou longing soul) to cast off the exercises of a patient waiting for a
return; but take up thy resolution with the Prophet, Psalm. 85.8.
I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to folly. If God have
but bestowed so much wisdom upon thine obedience, as to wait with faith and
patience, for fuller manifestations of himself; then I am sure thou have not
found this ordinance empty.

The fifth Principle,

If thou be truly spiritual, must be thy daily practice. It is a duty
incumbent upon thee, and bears a date as ancient as thy visible profession and
real subjection to Christ's commands. Romans 6.4.
For in thy burial with thy Redeemer in the Baptismall sountain, 2 Cor. 5.17.
Heb. 10.20.
thou did begin thy case in the similitude of his resurrection, with an
engagement so to run, by the rules of the new creature, in that new and living
way, all the days of thy life. Thou wast a miserable polluted creature, Ephesians.
2.1.
before he met with thee dead in trespasses and fins, but he has breathed upon
thee by his quickening Spirit, and therefore in the power of the same Spirit
daily thou must practice the resurrection. Romans 3.11.
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the death dwell in you; he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his
Spirit that dwells in you. Wherefore stop thy ears to any other Spirit, that
would dull the edge of thy devotion in the practice of the resurrection. Live
at present in the power of it, and make use of all means with the Apostle.
Phil. 3.11.
If by any means I might attain unto the refurrection of the dead. Thy God will
be found in the use of his own means. Col. 3.1.
If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above.

And Lastly,

Let the eternal judgment be thy exercise continually. Thou have no other way
in this world, to avoid the horror and terror of it, and this way (whatever
men talk, to keep thee in idleness) thou may escape it. 1 Cor. 11.31.
For if we would judge curselves, we should not be judged.

Cheer up thy drooping spirit, take courage and resolution, and be as lively as
possible, in the practice and exercise of all thy Principles: The more lively,
the more like Christ, whose meat and drink was to do the will of his father;
and the more like Christ, the more boldness thou shall have in the day of
judgment 1 John 4.17.
.

Wherefore labor diligently to be found in all the will of thy God. Let no man
spoil thee of any truth, but especially of one of thy Foundation principles.
What though this milk be never so mean, it is the more like a crucified Christ.
I confess Laying on of hands is but a simple service, Romans 6.17.
no more is its companion (Baptism) but it is one of the first words of thy dear
Redeemer, a part of that form of Doctrine which he delivered and has owned,
Act. 8. and 19.
and by signs and wonders confirmed, which he would not so fignally have
ratified, had it not been a part of his own service.

Let not men's conceits of the cessation of this holy Ordinance, deprive thy
precious soul of those choice gifts which stream through it, which thy panting
spirit (if thou be truly thirsty soul) cannot but find as much need of, as thy
fellow saints, sixteen hundred years since.

The promise runs as strenuously to this age, and the Saints in it, though we
be those afar off, as it did to them that were nigh Act. 2.39.
: For he that made promise remains faithful; and what ever men dare affirm to
the contrary, yet he has said, that It is easier for heaven and earth to
pass, Luke 16.17.
then one tittle of the Law to fail.

THE END.

