THREE SPEECHES Spoken at a Common Hall, Thursday the 3. of July, 1645. BY Mr.
Lisle, Mr. Tate, Mr. Brown, Members of the House of COMMONS: Containing many
Observations upon the Kings LETTERS, found in His own Cabinet at Nasiby fight,
And sent to the Parliament by Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Read at a Common Hall.

Published according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Presse in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1645.

Mr. Lisle his Speech.
MY Lord Major, and you worthy Gentlemen of the famous City of London, I am
commanded by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, to observe to you
some Passages out of these Letters which you have heard; They are Passages of
that nature, though it be most happy for this Kingdom and Parliament to know
them, yet my very heart does bleed to repeat them.

The first thing that I shall observe to you, is concerning the Kings
endeavors to bring Foreign Forces, a Foreign Prince with an Army into this
Kingdom: By his Letters to the Queen, which you have heard read, he endeavors
to hasten the Duke of Lorraine with an Army into England; It is well known to
the Parliament, that the Duke of Lorrain is a Prince highly esteemed at Rome,
the most complying with Jesuits of any Prince in Christendom; and yet the King
writes to the Queen, to hasten the Duke of Lorrain to come with an Army into
England.

The next thing that I shall observe to you, are, Endeavors to overthrow the
Law of the Land by Power, to Repeal the Laws and Stat^tes of this Realm by
Force and Arms, endeavors by Force and Arms to Repeal all the Statutes of this
Kingdom against Papists; I shall read a Passage to you, which you have already
heard, out of one of the Kings Letters to the Queen; The Letter was dated the
Fifth of March, 1644.

I give thee power, in my Name, to promise that I will take away all the Penal
Statutes in England, against the Roman Catholics, as soon as God shall enable
me to do it, so as by their means, or in their favors, I may have so powerful
assistance as may deserve so great a favor. When we consider, that the
Statutes of this Kingdom against Papists must be taken away by Force; when we
consider that the Laws of this Kingdom are to be Repealed by Power, who cannot
but when he calls to mind the Declarations that have been made to put the
Laws in execution against Papists, of the Protestations that have been made,
and have been often made to maintain the Laws of this Kingdom, who can choose
but grieve to think of it.

The third thing (Gentlemen) that I shall observe to you, is concerning the
use, and the Ends that have been made (which you may observe out of these
Letters) of a Treaty with the Parliament, I shall read His Majesty's words to
you in the Letter of the Fifteenth of February, 1645. a Letter to the Queen;
And be confident that in making peace, I shall ever show my constancy, in
adhering to Bishops and to all Our friends, and not forget to put a short
period to this perpetual Parliament.

And in His Letter to the Queen of the Ninth of February, 1644. there is this
Passage, Be confident that I will never quit Episcopacy, nor the Sword.

We did all hope, that the end of a Treaty had been to settle a happy Peace, a
firm and a wellgrounded Peace; but now we see by the Kings Letter, that His
Resolutions are, still to keep the Sword in His own hands: We did all hope,
that the end of a Treaty was to settle Churchgovernment according to the
Protestation, the Solemn Vow and Covenant which we have all taken; But you see
by the Kings Letter, that He avows it to the Queen that He will never quit
Episcopacy.

We did all hope, that the end of a Treaty was rather to confirm the Parliament
then to dissolve it; but the King says in His own Letter, that He will not
forget at this Treaty, to put a short period to this perpetual Parliament.

The last thing that I shall observe to you (for you will have the rest
observed to you by a better hand) is concerning the Kings disavowing this
Parliament to be the Parliament of England; we cannot have any greater
assurance of any thing from the King, then of this present Parliament; there is
no Law stronger that gives any property to the Subject, then the Law is to
continue this present Parliament.

This is so well known to the world, that Kingdoms and States abroad
acknowledge it; and now for the King to disavow it, after it is confirmed and
continued by Act of Parliament after the King has so lately acknowledged it,
now so suddenly to disavow it, how can we be more confident of any assurance or
Act from his Majesty?

There be many things more observable in these Letters, but I shall leave them
to those worthy Gentlemen that come after me.

Mr. Tate his Speech.
THe Letters are so full, that I shall rather be your remembrancer of what you
have heard in them, then give you any observations upon them.

I shall present before you a very sad Spectacle, the whole Kingdom of Ireland
bleeding, a Kingdom all in Peace without any thoughts of War, without any
thoughts of Arms; and of a sudden, a Popish party rising up, laying hold upon
all the Forts, Seizing all the Lands, and all the goods of the Protestants in
Ireland; and not content with that, when they had done, killing one hundred
thousand of them, man, woman and child: These Rebels of Ireland that had thus
inhumanely murdered so many Protestants; (here is the sadness) Now the
Favorites of the King, and those Subjects that the King did profess to
maintain, in maintaining Arms against those Rebels; we that by Acts of
Parliament of the Kings own Grant, had the Irish Rebels Lands and Territories
granted to us to maintain a War against them; Now because we maintain that War,
we are Rebels and Traitors; and the Irish Rebels because that they stand
against you, they shall be freed from all penal Laws, they shall have any
thing that they desire, nothing is too dear for them, any Laws may be altered
for their sakes; but when the Protestants come to desire an alteration of Law
for the advancement of the Protestant Religion, and for the settlement of the
Protestants, nothing can be granted to them by a Protestant King, but every
thing to the Irish: I shall say but a word more, and pray consider of it; The
condition why all this is granted to the Irish, and denied to you, it is only
this, That the Irish may come over into England to cut your throats, as they
cut the throats of all the Irish Protestants in Ireland; this is the cause for
which they are encouraged to come hither, if there be such a reward for
Treachery, if there be such a fruit of the Protestations of the King, what can
we expect. All I have to say, is, you see you must stand to your Arms, and
defend your selves; for there is no hopes for you, unless you can submit your
necks to the Queen, and be transformed into Irish Rebels and Papists: I know
not how you can obtain any favor at Court, especially having such a Mediator,
as you have a Parliament that is so hated by this King, as long as that
mediates for you, you shall have nothing, but if you can have a Popish
Catholic Queen to solicit in your behalf, you shall have any thing: I know
you are too much Englishmen and Protestants to submit to such base conditions;
therefore lay aside all divisions, and unite your selves in this Cause, that
you may be Masters of the Popish party, that otherwise will kill you all.

Mr Brown his Speech.
MY Lord Mayor and you worthy Citizens of the City of London, I shall not
trouble you to repeat any of the Letters that you have heard read, I doubt not
but you that heard them do remember most of them, only this I will say to you;
That for my part I know not whether we have more cause of joy or sorrow, for
this which this day you have heard. Cause I know we have to be sorrowful, that
things are so ill with us as they are* and I am sure we have cause to rejoice,
that things are now discovered and brought to light, that have been so long hid
in darkness. This day is a day of discovery; heretofore those that spak those
things that you have herad this day manifested unto you; were accounted the
Malignant partee, they were termed Rebels, they were suspicious jealous people
without cause; The Lords and Commons in Parliament, they have heretofore
declared their fears of the things that you see now proved: Answers have been
given to those fears with slights and scorns. Things are this day discovered
to you that were enjoined to be kept secret by the strongest engagements; the
goodness of God giving success to our Army has brought these things to
light. Before his Majesty departed from the Parliament, the Lords and Commons
by a Petition to him, did present unto him their fears, occasioned by the
favoring of ^^^^sants; their fears that he would bring in foreign Forces*
that he would change and alter the Laws, they gave him their Reasons for all*
but he was pleased to give his Answer with denying all, as they affirmed all:
For that of Foreign Forces, because he gave a punctual Answer to that* I will
tell you what it was: When they told him that they were informed that the Popes
Nuncio did deal with the French and Spanish Kings, to send to him 4000. men a
piece, the King did Answer to them: That it was improbable in it self, and
scandalous to him, for which he desired reparation at their hands.

And at another time he Answers that very point concerning Foreign Forces
positively, and says: No sober nor honest man can believe that We are so
desperate or so senseless (they are his very words) to entertain such a
design, As to bring in Foreign Forces, which would not only bury this Our
Kingdom in distraction and ruin* but Our own Name and Posterity in
perpetual scorn and infamy.

You have heard what has been said for that, you have heard his own Letters,
how he deals with the Queen, and how pressing he is with her to bring into this
Kingdom the Duke of Lorraigne with his Army* the Duke of Lorraigne you know is
a Catholic Popish* Foreign Prince: So you see how much he is altered from
what he thought then, and how his endeavors are now, that both honest men and
sober men may believe that he would do it* because he writes to her with such
earnestness, to pray her to do it for him*

For their fears of his making war against the Parliament* of his alteration of
Religion and Laws* (...) has heretofore in his Printed Declaration, expressed
these words: We do again, in the presence of Almighty making war against the
Parliament, then against our own children, that we will maintain and observe
the Asts assented to by Us this Parliament, without violation; and that we have
not, nor shall not have, any thought of using of any force, unless we shall be
driven to it for the security of Our* person, and for the defense of the
Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the just Rights and
Privileges of Parliament.

And in another of his Printed Declarations he has said: God so deal with me
and mine, as my thoughts and intentions are upright for the the maintenance of
the true Protes^ant Religion, and for observation and preservation of the Laws
of the Land.

And in another Declaration, he says, That He is resolved not only duly to
observe the Laws himself, but to maintain them, against what opposition
soever, though with the hazard of his being.

And in his Declaration concerning his resolution to go into Ireland, which is
also Printed, he calls God to witness, the sincerity of his professions there
made, with this assurance; That his Majesty will never consent, upon what
pretense soever, to a toleration of the Popish profession there; or the
abolition of the Laws now in force against Popish Recusants in that Kingdom.

What could his Majesty have said more to satisfy his people.

Now compare his actions with his Declarations, and compare his Letters to the
Queen, with his promise and protestations to the Parliament, and you will say
Quantum mutatus, how much is his Majesty changed.

All that we have heard read, we may divide into three parts.

The first concerns the Letters, Propositions, and transactions, concerning
Ireland.

The second, the Letters from the Queen to the King.

The third* Letters from the King to the Queen.

Concerning Ireland, you have heard the Propositions made, to the Queen, for
fending into this Kingdom diverse Irish Rebels, under the Command of two
professed Papists* 6000. of them were to be under the Command of the Lord
Glamorgan, the Earl of Worcesters eldest son, the other of 10000. under the
command of Colonel Fitz Williams: the terms that they were to come upon, were
read to you in the Propositions, which themselves sent to the Queen* You will
not think that these came to maintain the Laws, but to destroy them, not to
maintain the Protestant Religion, but to overthrow it, these Propositions being
sent to the Queen* and allowed by her and she sent them to the King.

For the Letters concerning Ireland they were written by the King to the Earl
of Ormond, who is now Governourthere: in some of them Letters, the King gives
way to the suspending of Poynings Law, I which was an Act of Parliament, in the
10. year of Henry the 7. it was called Poynings Law, because Sir Edward
Poynings was Governor of Ireland, when that Law was made; that Law made
all Statutes that were before made in England, of force in Ireland; and the
King may as well suspend all the Laws there, as that Law; by that Law of
Poynings, all Laws that were after to be presented at the Parliament in
Ireland, must be first sent hither for approbatition, before they could be
presented to the Parliament there* and no Parliament must be called there
before the causes of calling the Parliament, and the Acts to be passed in that
Parliament, are first sent hither and approved but that Law now must be
suspended.

Further, in the Letters to the Lord of Ormond you see the King does not count
it a hard bargain, for to make a Law in Ireland to suspend or to take away
the penal Laws, against Papists there, so that they will help him here,
against his Protestant Subjects: when this promise was made the Declaration was
not remembered, wherein the King does declare, that upon no pretense whatsoever,
he will tolerate the Popish profession in Ireland, or abolish the Laws against
Popish Recusants now in force there. He further says in another Letter to my
Lord of Ormond, that rather then he will fail of making a peace or a cessation
with the Rebels, he would have him engage himself to join with the Rebels
against the Scots, and the Lord Inchequin, which is the main visible Protestant
Forces, that are in Ireland: all this is enjoined to be kept secret, from all
but two or three of the chiefest Rebels in Ireland, whom you heard named in the
letters: you may further observe, that a peace was treated of with the Rebels
about the same time that the King did Treat with the Parliament here concerning
Ireland; and the King wished a quick dispatch of the peace there, least if he
should make a peace here first, he could not show such favors to the Irish as
he intended; they are the words of his letter.

You may see by all the letters to my Lord of Ormond, that the King did little
stick at any thing to grant to the Rebels, for a peace with them, but how
little he granted to the Parliament of England, at the last Treaty, I hope all
the world will soon know.

The next are the Queens Letters to the King; in them you may see Her unwearied
endeavors by Sea and Land to raise Forces against the Parliament to destroy
it, you see she marches in the head of an Army, and calls her self the
Generalissima; you may see further in her Letters, the great interest she has
in the Kings Counsels, no Office or Place can be disposed of without her, you
may see by her Letters, her advice concerning Peace, in making Peace, she
advises the King not to abandon those that have served him, for fear they
forsake him in his need; she expresses whom she means, the Bishops and the
poor Catholics; she advises the King for the honor of God, that he trust
not himself in our hands; if he go to London before the Parliament is ended,
she tells him he is undone; you may see by her Letters, how active she is with
the Duke of Lorraine for sending over ten thousand men, you may see her advice
concerning this Parliament; She says, that perpetual Parliament must be
disbanded, the rest she says will follow, if the King conclude a Peace without
that, she will into France she says, I am sure you cannot forget these
Passages.

In the Kings Letters to the Queen you may observe these following particulars.

First* his Apology to her, for calling us a Parliament at the last Treaty, it
seems she was offended at it, and you may see by His Letters with what
difficulty he did it, for he says, that if but two more had joined with him in
opinion to the contrary, he would never have done it, yet he has told us, he
will keep all the Acts of this Parliament inviolable: how these can stand
together, let all men judge; he has told us that he will maintain the Laws,
and observe them himself, yet you see he lay the blood of that Kingdom that is
shed in these wars, upon the shedding of the innocent blood (as he calls it) of
my Lord of Strafford, yet my Lord of Strafford was condemned by himself, and by
the Law, that he says he will maintain.

You see how pressing he is to the Queen to procure aid from the Duke of
Lorraine, upon hopes of his coming he is very glad, and says, the Prince of
Orange shall help to transport his Soldiers: compare this with his former
Declarations concerning Foreign Forces* it needs no aggravation, we have all
of us more cause to pray for him.

For his maintaining the Laws, you may observe in a Letter dated in March last
to the Queen, there is this passage. I give thee leave to promise in my name,
to all that thou think fit, that I will take away all the penal Laws
against the Roman Catholics in England, as soon as God shall enable me to do
it, so as I may by their means have such assistance, as may deserve so great a
favor and enable me to do it.

To this promise of his, he enjoynes much secrecy, which he had need to do,
being so contrary to former Declarations, and Protestations.

If this be done, he may as well alter and take away all our Laws, both for
property and Liberty; these Laws against Papists are of as much force* and
bind as much as any Laws whatsoever: upon all these Letters and passages
together you may observe the great design, to put an end to this Parliament,
although it cannot be done without the consent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, and the Kings joining with them.

You see another design is, to take away all Laws against Recusants, and that
must be when the King is able to do it, as he says, and that cannot be without
force; you see, to enable himself to do these things, He invites in Foreign
Forces, you see he deals with Papists and Protestants, and all to assist Him
against the Parliament: You see in those Letters, what Privileges and
immunities are promised to Papists, and nothing at all to His Protestant
Subjects; you see the great trust He reposeth in the Queen, to make a bargain
for Him, although it concern Religion, which is the strongest point of
confidence He can express to Her; I need not repeat the words: You cannot but
observe the Reward that He bestows upon them that contrary to their trust
reposed in them by the Kingdom have disserted the Parliament: He tells the Queen
He is free from the place of base mutinous motions in His Mungrell Parliament
there; Let the like reward befall all such as shall betray their trust reposed
in them by the Kingdom; You may see whom you have cause to thank, for the
seizing of your goods in France, you heard it read, upon the score of whose
kindness it was set.

Lastly, you may see by the Letters, if a Peace be had, what a one it shall be,
it shall be such a one as shall invite the Queen to return.

The Treaty for it shall be according to the Instructions given to the
Commissioners, which upon the Kings word, are according to the little Note the
Queen so well remembers: In making Peace the King assures her, He will be
constant in adhering to the Bishops, and all His friends, those whom the Queen
calls in her Letter, the poor Roman catholics.

Lastly* In making Peace, He will not forget to put an end to this Parliament;
but some will say, What Is all this to us?

Yes, it much concerns us all, that we may pray for, and pity our King, and to
learn us to look to our selves.

You see by their Letters the way they hope to bring about all their designs,
they say it is by our divisions among our selves, they say the City is divided
in it self, they say the Houses of Parliament are divided among themselves, and
they say, they are divided one with another, they say, one part goes one way,
and another part goes another way; I hope, that which appears by these Letters,
will make us all go the same way for the maintenance of this Cause.

These Letters that ye have heard read, are beyond all exceptions; the Kings
Letters all of His own hand, and in many places Corrected by himself. The
Letters to the Earl of Ormond are all His own hand; there are diverse other
Letters besides them, now read, which were taken at the Fight, all of them
together, with these read, are deposited into an indifferent place, that any
one that will may see them.

By what you have heard read, you see the unwearied endeavors of your Enemies
to destroy you, they are diligent, let us be vigilant in prosecuting this Cause
we have undertaken, that we may have a happy end of these unhappy differences;
do you of the City agree among your selves in the prosecuting of this Cause,
though you may differ in private opinion in other things; I hope and pray that
both Houses of Parliament may ever agree in the maintenance of this Cause,
which I doubt not but they will as they do: let us all go on together, hand in
hand together, in the maintenance of this Cause, according to our Protestation;
we cannot do it without unity among our selves; if we have division among our
selves, we undo our selves, and hazard the Cause; if we in the Parliaments
Quarters agree among our selves, I hope we shall be invincible* I will conclude
with this Sentence, Si fueritis inseperabiles, eritis insuperabiles, if we be
inseparable and undivided, we shall be invincible: Let us all do our duties
faithfully, and leave the issue to God.

FINIS.

