TIMES ALTERATION OR A Dialogue between my Lord FINCH and Secretary
VVINDEBANCKE; at their meeting in France, the eight of Ian. 1641. Brought up to
Billinsgate the next Spring tide following.
depiction of Lord Finch with wings

That I have wronged the Land, I now repent,
But who the Devil thought o'th Parliament?
depiction of Windebancke with quill

Beware you false Traitors, that are left behind
TO is best for you to sail by Windebanck's wind.
Windebancke. WEll met my Lord, it seems that you have taken flight over the
great Pond, pray what news in England?


Finch. Faith I durst not stay to hear what news, for I fear if I had
tarried a little longer, my wings would have been clipped, and then I am sure, I
had never came hither.


Windeb. I commend your policy, for you being sure to fly, were sure to
escape, but I pray good my Lord, what do they say of me in England?


Finch. News more than I can relate, think you and I have bin the best
benefactors to the ragged Regiment of Poets, that ever came since Noah's flood?


Windeb. Why good my Lord?


Finch. Why I believe there has bin more Impressions of several kinds of
lamentable Ballads and Pamphlets, (made upon us two) then ever was of the
Practice of Piety, or Crumbs of Comfort.


Windeb. But I pray some more serious news good my Lord.


Finch. I will tell you so much as I durst stay to hear, and some other which
I have had by proxy since my flight hither.


Windeb. I should be glad to hear it, proceed good my Lord.


Finch. They say that your great Grape-sucker, Alderman Medium and his great
adversary the politic solicitor, are fast friends, they may be found at their
lodging at any time of the day.


Windeb. Truly you give the Alderman Medium a very fit name, for I believe he
has sucked more sweetness from Grapes, than any man in the Kingdom besides.


Finch. I, I think no less, but it seems he has sucked so much that he has
taken a surfeit.


Windeb. Good my Lord proceed, if you have any more news concerning the
Alderman.


Finch. There is another costive Alderman, which has swallowed a barrel of
white Soape, and it is thought it will give him such a purge that the Physic
in all the Apothecaries shops in London, will hardly give any man the like.


Windeb. Truly my Lord, your news pleases me well: yet one thing I had almost
forgot, I pray what is become of your kinsman Ren.


Finch. Faith he had taken flight too before this, had his wings been but as
long as mine, but I believe he is cadged before this, how sweetly he will sing
I know not.


Windeb. I hear some news my Lord, concerning your self, which I know your
Lordship can resolve me.


Finch. I prithee what is that?


Windeb. The news goes in these parts, that in England they picture your
Honor with wings.


Finch. It Is true, good reason, for they have done me as good service as ever my
dry palms did me.


VVindeb. I? Thinks your honor so?


Finch. I am sure I know so, for had not my wings been long, I am very
certain I had been shorter by a head ere this.


VVindeb. But what other news have you my Lord? What becomes of the man in the
great ruff?


Finch. Why faith I know not, but if I were his Judge, I would have the sets
filled with Gunpowder, and fire set to it, and if that blow not off his head, he
should be hanged.


VVindeb. My Lord, your judgement's very hot. But I pray what more news? I
hear they will have no Bishops in England.


Finch. I hear so too, and I believe it, for they have already began with your
great Metropolitan, he is fast (I faith) in a stronger house then ever was
built by a Clothier of Red^ing.


Windeb. I am very sorry he had so much grace and so little wit, for he might
have trusted to his footmanship, and showed himself as wise as we, but what
is become of the great Lord Deputy?


Finch. Faith, the report goes that he is gone to God without a head.


Windeb. He should rather have taken his head with him, and gone without his
heart. For I believe that was the most faulty, but my Lord, I pray resolve
what is become of your project concerning the ship money, will the Subjects pay
it willingly?


Finch. Pox on it, prithee speak not of that, I hear it is quasht.


VVindeb. I hear so too by some, that your Lordship was pleased to lie at
stake for all.


Finch. There let them lie, I believe the Parliament will pay them their wages.


VVindeb. I believe they had rather do your honor service here Gratis, then
tarry to receive their pay there.


Finch. Now I pray good Master Secretary, now I have wearied my self with
telling you news, let me hear some from you.


VVindeb. About two days ago, I met with Corpus juris civilis, or the bulk
of the Civil Laws, Doctor Rhoane who told me that the Canons had murdered
the canonists themselves.


Finch. You mean the Book of Canons that was lately made, but I pray what is
become of the oaths of ex officio? and etc.


VVindeb. Faith they have bin sworn so often, that they are sworn out of
fashion with your Civil Lawyers.


Finch. I pray tell me what is like to become of the Civillans, I hear they
begin to droope?


VVindeb. Faith the Ducks wings will be plucked, and Lamb begins to be out of
season; I am afraid they will starve the Rats and Mice, in the Doctors-Commons
now, for I believe they will live more sparingly then they have done formerly.


Finch. Master Secretary, I have more news to tell you, which I had almost
forgot.


VVindeb. What is that good my Lord?


Finch. Why not long ago I met with witty Sir John, and some other of the
ryming crew, and he made a great complaint to me of an hour long, all in
pitiful meeter.


VVindeb. What was the substance of his complaints I pray?


Finch. That he had been a great while a studdying a new play, and the plot
being none of the best, he was forced to run off the Stage, and durst not stay
to see the first Act.


VVindeb. Why I heard that he is gone with a troop of horse into Portugal, to
aid the King there against the great Don of Spain.


Finch. It may be there was some such report, but it is like there were false
dice in hand, for I am sure there has been but little fair play.


VVindeb. Indeed it is very probable, or else he has much mistaken his way.


Finch. Well Master Secretary, I can stay no longer with you at this time, for
I am now going to the Post to receive letters from England, at our next meeting
I will inform you all other news my letters affords, in the mean time I
commit you to your good fortunes nd bid you farewell.


VVindeb. May your Lordships flight be swift and prosperous.


FINIS.
1641.

