MODERATION IVSTIFIED, AND THE LORDS BEING AT HAND EMPROVED, IN A SERMON AT
WESTMINSTER BEFORE THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in Parliament:
Preached at the late solemn Fast, December 25. 1644.

By Thomas Thorowgood B. of D. Rector of Grimston in the County of Norfolk:
One of the Assembly of Divines.

Published by Order from that House.

Matthew. 10. 16. -- Be wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Mensura
convenit, ne aut nimia remissio reddatur aut nimiaa severitas. Ambros. Offic.
lib. 2. cap. 22. Si quid corrigendum est, adhibeatur ea Moderatio, quae
Christianos deceat, etc. Erasm. Epist. l. 22. p. 916. LONDON, Printed by I. L.
for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, and for Thomas
Slater at the Swan in Duck-Lane. 1645.

Die Mercurii 25. December. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That Master
Heveningham, and Master Lisle, do from this House give thanks to Master
Thorowgood, and Master Langley, for the great pains they took in the Sermons
they Preached this day at the entreaty of this House, at S. Margarets
Westminster: (It being the day of Public Humiliation) And to desire them to
Print their Sermons. And it is Ordered, that none shall presume to Print their,
or either of their Sermons without first obtaining liberty under their
handwriting.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Do appoint Christopher Meredith, and Thomas Slater to Print this Sermon.

THOMAS THOROVVGOOD.

TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons, Assembled in Parliament at Westminster.
THe thought of coming into that Pulpit was dreadful to me, and I did
unfainedly decline it; 1 Samuel 10. 22.
as Saul, I would willingly have hid my self among the stuff, any where
rather then undertake the task. Palluit ut (...) qui pressit calcibus anguem.
Et Juvenal. Sat. 6.
Lugdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad aram, Did Advocates change color pleading at
that Bar? And should I have no fear being to speak in such a presence,
where so many of you were, and each one resembled the children of a King, Judge.
8. 18.
as the Kings of Midian said to Gideon, in respect of his brethren; yea upon
whose votes and determinations, depends the welfare of three glorious
Kingdoms? But being summoned to the service, it was my duty to run and
prepare my self, and I found presently my lot was cast upon that very day,
which the providence of heaven had designed to fall on Christmas Day, Gentilet.
Exam. p. 206.
(as it is named yet) the Metropolitan of all the Festivities, so Gaspar
Ferrandi called it in the Council of Trent; It was time for me then by
consideration, recollection, and other thoughts to cast out fear; 1 John 4. 8.
and for my animation, the allusion of him to Caesar happily occurred, as they
that dare confidently speak in your judicious and formidable Assembly,
consider not what Constellations you are, nor of what Magnitude; so those, that
despondingly be afraid, are ignorant of your benign Aspects, and gracious
Influences. The election of a Theme, and the manner of handling it was in my
power, and by Divine guidance I chose Moderation, not because you wanted it,
but for that some so supposed, and I saw, even that Christian grace, well
understood would justify your proceedings: Your ears entertained the
Discourse with spontaneous attention, with the virtue of the Text, which
Tertullus begged of Felix, Act. 24. 4.
(...). you have now required it to the other sense, to another censure, in
publicum formidandumque judicium as Cassiane said upon his like occasion; De
Incarnat. praefat.
and for my part, Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata libelli.
though the subject matter, I know, will meet with fatal judgings, and my
weaknesses also be ever before me, yet I have obeyed your Commands, and with
the exoptation of Orosius to Austin, Utinam tam efficaciter quam libenter:
Praefat. Hist.
for now, as Dedications have been made to you of Zeal, Righteousness,
Magnanimity, Perseverance, etc. so the world shall see you Patrons of
Moderation also, notwithstanding the unpolitique, Antichristian, and
Tyrannical endeavors of your Opposites, some of which labored so much some
years since to embroyle the Nation against Scotland, in irreconciliable and
intestine combustions, the perfect uniting of whom to ENGLAND was the zealous
industry of the wisest Patriots in former times, as our Chronicles relate, and
who now also, by supernatural providence, in Covenant, and many other
obligations, are contrived into a more firm accord then ever. Those other
horrid Miscreants of Ireland have raked Hell and Rome for the inventions, and
exercises of such cruel barbarities upon our miserable brethren, King Charles
Declarat. with the advice of his Privy Counsel.
that no Christian ear can hear without horror, nor Story parallel, as his
Majesty did declare against those barbarous Rebels. I wish that Remonstrance
of our Clergy there were commanded to be in every Parish of ENGLAND, and the
additionall depositions hastened to the Press, that all the good people of the
Land might know their good meaning to them: And in this Kingdom there was a
generation of New Reformers that paved the way to Popery, and under the color
of a good work in hand, Holy Table, Name, and Thing, p. 2. p. 192. p. 204.
and the piety of the times were busied in taking the out-workes, and that
being done they would have a bout with the Fort it self: It is the language
and sentence of him that here may well be credited, and our eyes saw then, the
Innovations so numerous, that with a little time and observation it might be
demonstrated, the lawless Mutation even then was greater from the rules, and
received practice, then it is like to be by the Directory so much expected,
which beside Parliament Authority, will have the Scriptures, and the example
of Reformed Churches to give it countenance; I thought in this Epistle I might
make some further mentioning, but I must remember that of Austin to Macedonius,
Negotiosissimos in Republica viros, Ep. 54. Init.
and non suis, sed aliorum utilitatibus attentissimos non debemus occupare
prooemio: I will turn therefore my prefacing, into praying, that our God only
wise, Romans 16. 27.
would fill every one of you with wisdom, Jam. 3. 17.
even that wisdom which is from above, and is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, (...), the grace of the Text, Ruth 4. 11.
Moderate, and full of good fruits, that gasping Ireland may be recovered by
you, and as you have done worthily for Scotland, you may be famous in ENGLAND,
and regaining the Kings royal Person and favor, you may make him glorious
also, and raise up in his Dominions the foundations for many generations, Isa.
58. 12.
and be called the Repairers of the breaches, the Restorers of the paths to
dwell in. I shall wait the complement of Gods good providence in you, and by
you, that in his due season every mountain of opposition may be a plain,
Zach. 4. 7.
and these troublous times may determine in the readvancement, Dan. 9. 25.
and firm establishing of Righteousness and Peace, through your hands; which
is, and shall be in the daily devotion of

Your constant Orator at the Throne of Grace, THOMAS THOROVVGOOD.

A Sermon preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at the Monthly
Fast, December 25. 1644.
Phil. 4. verse. 5. (...). Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord
is at hand.
IT is Gods word that I have read, let no man's zeal be hot against it, or me;
and how meet it is for this time, this very time, judge not till you have
heard: my thoughts were not fastened here without some difficulty, I
considered again and again, and as often prayed, that I might speak a word in
season; it must be affirmed, there is all the reason in the world, you be even
now also incited to zeal, wisdom, magnanimity, and present resolution, but
inclusive, there is no Christian grace, I know, Ephesians. 4. 15.
but you would be acquainted with it, 2 Thessalonians. 2. ^7.
and grow up into Christ in all things, and be established in every good word
and work. But that I may in time take off all prejudice, I shall not speak of
Moderation in the sense of Politians and the world, but as it is a Christian
grace, and not inconsistent with holy zeal, they were both in our Master
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 1. we read it, Joh. 2. 17. (...).
gentleness of Christ, and my Philippians had to do with dogs, evil workers,
dangerous men of the concision, Chap. 3. verse. 2. yea, verse. 18, 19. With
wicked walkers, of whom he could not speak without weeping, enemies of the
cross of Christ, belly gods, muck-wormes, minding earthly things, lively
characters of a great part of your opposites: and if Saint Paul then, surely, I
may say now, Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand.

If yet to any apprehension the first clause seem a cooler, the second will
show, it seems so only, and my Moderation does not make a medley of Religion,
nor complyes with any transgression, but it is a blessed, and a watchful
virtue, living always in Gods sight, and in expectation of judgment to come;
it quenches no man's zeal, only it makes it burn fair, and shine more
clear; it is enjoined in the first clause of the Text, and the reason thereof
is in the latter, the Lord is at hand.

In the former we have these four things.

1. The grace required, Moderation. 2. The seat or subject of it, your, of you.
3. Its declaration and discovery, let it be known. 4. The ampliation and
extent, to all men.
The second clause shall be touched upon as a reason, but my purpose is, God
willing, to handle both in that method, which our days have found so happy, by
Doctrine and Use, yet in the explication, and application, I shall pass
thorough each particular.

Let this then be the first Doctrine, Doctrine 1.
Moderation is a catholic grace of universal practice by all men to all men:
and the Application will fall into five particulars, words of Complaint,
Limitation, Consutation, Instruction, and Exhortation.

The second Doctrine of the Lords being at hand, 2.
will from the Scriptures hold forth unto us these seven seasonable
considerations, fitted for our present practice.

1. Speedy Repentance from dead works. 2. Wise weaning our selves from the
world. 3. Constant perseverance in true Religion. 4. Zealous endeavor after
holiness. 5. Christian patience in tribulation. 6. Holy faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ. 7. Sober watchfulness unto prayer.
Moderation is a catholic grace of universal practice by all men to all men.
Doctrine. 1.
In the Original, it is (...), Adjectively; which is sometimes emphaticall, in
the propriety of the language; but that criticisme, and curiosity shall be
omitted, yet it is fit to mention the different interpretation.

First, Theophylact. Haimo, Lyra, etc.
Modesty, so it is read by some, which is a virtue, keeping such mediocritie in
external things, that no man's eye, or conscience is offended, it moderates the
outward converse in speech, Aquin. 22. 120. 2, 3.
apparel, and life, in their sense, who refer it to the words immediately
foregoing, Verse. 4. Rejoice, etc. So Bernard, We rejoice in that we hope,
because the Lord is at hand, T. 1. p. 178.
we rejoice in that we suffer, that our Modesty might be known to all men: this
modesty is not the maidens blush only, but a color well becoming men, women,
all that be Christians; nature puts a modest aspect upon those that shame to
do evil, the blood making have, as it were, to cover even the suspicion of
guilt, Offic. l. 1. c. 18.
Ambrose extends it to gestures, gate, and bodily motion, telling his own
experiment this way, how he refused to admit one into Orders, merely for his
immodest gesture; he suffered not another Clergyman to walk before him, his
going was so offensive, and uncomely: and I was deceived, says he, in neither,
the one ran out of his function, the other out of his Religion, and turned
Arrian, so discernable is the inward man sometimes by the motion of the
outward: no marvel therefore if lightness of gesture be immodesty and a
prohibited evil, Prove. 6. 13. Esa. 3. 16. Some better Expositers read it,

Secondly, Genoven. Fulk. etc.
Patient mind; and so our own Translators elsewhere English the word, 1 Timothy
3. 3. and thus it is a duty very seasonable for these suffering times, when
men can be as the Turtle, Pier. Hierogl.
though in several conditions, have but one note, keep the same tune, when
they be quiet in tribulation, and murmr not when affliction comes; but the
last clause of the Text will invite us to patience by and by.

Thirdly, I shall insist therefore upon our own reading. Moderation, which is
allowed by all Reformed Divines that I have seen, Clvin, Beza, Zanch. etc.
Illyr. Clav. Scr. Modestia.
one only excepted, who in some other things also is himself excepted
against. And Moderation is a word of such latitude, that it reaches to
public employments, in civil matters, Zanch. etc.
in the judgment of those that well understood the force of it; thence they
call Moderation the Assessor of Justice, mollifying the rigor, and severity of
the law, for Legistators intend strictness of rule, but their providence, not
being infinite, nor able to foresee all occurrences, leave a necessity for
Moderation, Aquin. 22. 120. 10.
and Writers of both Religions do thus instance, Antonin. S. 4. 5. 19.
it is just depositum reddere, Zanch. in Phil.
It is honesty and faithfulness to restore the pledge, or that we are trusted
with, yet sometimes, say they, it is not iniquity but Moderation to do
otherwise: for example, a man has given another his sword to keep, he proves
furious and distempered, the other is not bound to restore the sword, because
he may abuse it to his own, or others hurt; Vel, cum quis depositum reposcit ad
impugnationem patriae, Thus, to take away a man's goods or lands is injustice,
yet if it be done indeed for the Commonweal, it is Moderation, not iniquity:
For the welfare of the natural body diet is abated, though the patient be
unwilling, sleep is denied, blood is let out, yea a member is cut off for the
preservation of the whole; and for the safety of the body politic, we may
without wrong be drawn to part with our private for the public good, Interest
Reipublicae ut re sua quisque been utatur. This Moderation is the soul and life
of the law, without which the law it self sometime will savor of
unrighteousness. This may seem a paradox, and it is indeed miraculum
Iuristarum (...). c. p. 94.
quia discedit a regula, says Luther, a strange thing to transgress a Rule
without transgression: and this serves much to justify the present
proceedings, and might satisfy the disaffected also, if reason could do it,
in such times as these, which they have helped our sins to bring upon us: it
is not injustice, much less cruelty, to raise forces, require contributions,
impose taxations for the safety of the kingdom; Aquin. and Antonin. ubi supar.
and two of the forenamed Writers give this rule, it is good sometime, to pass
by the words of the law, and follow that which reason calls for, and the
common benefit. I shall touch upon Moderation again, as it reflects upon
public affairs, now therefore I speak of it, as it has reference to
private Christians. Some will have the word (...), as (...), over and above
that which is right and just; others, (...).
either from a Noune that signifies equal and good, or a Verb that is to
yield, the Preposition adding further force, (...)
and then it is a virtue inciting good men so much to right and equity, that
for its promotion they yield sometimes, and part with their own. Further, it
stops the violence of a man's own passions, guiding them to their due ends, Pier.
therefore in the Hieroglyphick the Bridle and Helm are the Emblemes of
Moderation; and in this sense it is a prime and choice virtue, carrying a man
to the top of the hill, morality cannot get higher, and many Christians come
short thereof, both in themselves, and to others. And yet further, it is a
grace shining outwardly, it is visible, and illustrious, known unto men, it
has influence into all other virtues, it qualifies and tempers them, it is as
salt that makes other things savory, they relish not so well without the salt
of Moderation, it is the grain that evens the scale, aequipoyseth all, it
curbs excesses, supplies defects, and is every way helpful; the most zealous
would be loath to hear, as those, Romans 10. 2. They have a zeal of God, but
not according to knowledge, the zeal according to knowledge is the Moderation
commended, commanded in the Text: and as in Schools and taking up of
differences the Vmpire, and Moderator understands, pro and con, the allegations
of either side, by his wisdom he is able to remove scruples, and give every
one their due; so this Moderation is the medium, makes the virtue, walks as it
were betwixt the two extremes, and keeps off the distempers of either, as
Matthew. 10. 16. Be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves, this Moderation
regulates the rigor of the one, and the simplicity of the other, standing up
to keep out both venom and folly, that wrong be neither done, nor revenged.
And yet nearer, in our converse with men, this Moderation has chief place,
forbidding us to be fierce in reasoning, rash in censuring, not stand too
strictly upon our terms, but in our defense and vindication abate our right,
part with our own, yield to our neighbors, interpret fairly their sayings,
and doings, and make the best constructions we can, that our Moderation may be
known, etc. It is in Beza's description, a quiet spirit taking all in good
part, and I may call it a gracious mind that thinks and speaks well of all,
and does ill to none.

First, It regulates those evil humors, that be so rise in nature, even
debates, envyings, wrath, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings,
tumults, which Saint Paul was so much afraid, he should find among his
Corinthians, 2 Epist. 12. 20. and thus Moderation is nigh of kin to Christian
charity, it is not apt to credit rumors, or be misguided by reports, it is
not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemely, thinks not evil, etc. 1
Cor. 15. 4, 5, 6, 7. it will have full information before it pass sentence so
much as in its own breast against any, she will follow her Lords example, who
though the cry of Sodom was great, yet for our instruction he said, I will go
down now, and see, whether they have done altogether according to the cry,
etc. Genesis 18. 21. and though the appearance be foul, our thoughts and speeches
must be as fair as they may; Joseph thus moderated the sorrow of his brethren
for their selling him into Egypt, God, says he, sent me before you, to save
your lives by a mig^^ie deliverance. Genesis 45. 7. and is it not considerable,
that though Solomon had then taken to himself so many wives and concubines,
which in a great measure also took away his heart, yet the holy Ghost uses
this expression, Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord, and went not fully
after the Lord, as did David his father? 1 Kings 11. 6. see and learn the
language of Canaan; Moderation, teaches to ascribe many offenses to ignorance
and infirmity: Thus our Savior Christ prays for his crucifiers, Facinus
enorrae ignorantus tribuit, non ma^^tiae Theophylact. in lo^.
Luke Doroth. Doct. 16.
23. 34. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do; and Saint Peter
learned this Moderation from his Master, Act. 3. 17. I wot that through
ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers: As that holy man judged one
brothers soul to be very pure, because his cell was so trim, and he said,
another was very righteous within, that took so little care of external
neatness.

Secondly, Moderation is a well-doing grace, so good, that it does ill to none,
she knows, that even nature did ever account desire of revenge a feminine and
cowardly passion: and that is but an empty objection, with which nevertheless
some men's mouths are filled, he is a silly fellow, has no metal in him,
that is insensible of affronts, but that coin of revenge what metal is it
made of? its stamp and allowance, I am sure, is not from heaven, it is dug
from the mines of hell, by the hands of flesh, and bears the image, impresse,
and superscription of the world, the flesh, and the devil, -- it is earthly,
sensual and devilish, Iam. 3. 15. You see then the low descent, the base
pedigree of this lofty valor; but our Moderation is better borne, even from
above, and has learned of her Master Christ, to be friendly to those that be
hostile, Matthew. 5. 44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, though
they revile, we must not, do good to them that hate you, etc. though by word
and action they damnifie us, we must study to win them by our well-doing; and
this is the good turn, says father Latimer, Part 2. p. 57.
our Master Christ allows us to do to our enemies, to Warm them at our fire,
and draw them from evil by our good: It were easy to expatiate here, and
enlarge several reasons: as

First, Reasons.
Moderation is a gracious and an acceptable virtue, it sweetens and endeares
the owner thereof, wherever he comes, it offers a kind of violence upon men's
affections bofore they be aware: as the unbeleeving husband is won by the
holy conversation of the wife, 1 Pet. 3. 1.

Secondly, it is an healthful virtue: immoderation and wrath kills, Aug. de
C. D. Ho^^ot* etc.
etc. Job 52. As Sylla is said in his anger to break a vein, of which Rupture
he died; but, qui suavis est vivit in moderationibus, Pro. 12. 12. It is not
indeed in the Hebrew, but the Seventie, and Latin so have it; and Interpreters
thereupon say, That life is preserved and prolonged by Moderation: but,

Thirdly, take the reason of the Text, in that sense of it, the Lord is at
hand, seeing, and hearing, all our cogitations and speeches, Psalm. 129. 2, 3,
4. Thou know my downsuting, etc. thou understandest my thoughts afar off,
etc. there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, thou O Lord, know it
altogether. It was good counsel of Seneca, Sic fac omnia, tanquam spectet
aliquis; and Moderation is not to learn, that God himself always observes
the motions and commotions of our spirits, and every other distemper.

Fourthly, The Lord is at hand, to call us to account for every inward and
outward exorbitance, think, speak well of all, do ill to none; if we have
been immoderate in this or any other way, let us repent, amend, and remember
the Lord is at hand to reckon with us for every misdemeanour. I might proceed
in further confirmation, and declare that this Moderation is of such vast, and
comprehensive extent that it checks all overflowings of heart, tongue, gesture,
apparel, diet; yea it has influence upon all our doings and sufferings: and
then the

First Use will be matter of complaint in the universal want of this
Moderation almost in all things and persons, Application. Use 1.
in this age, and inundation of misery; no Moderation or abatement of mirth;
though all the Land mourn, how few do lay it to heart? as much excess in
diet almost as ever, when so many be ready to sterve; pride, and those other
abominable vanities now notorious also, even women, wont to be the devout Sex,
yet now how are some of them spots in your feasts, Jude 14. with spots in their
faces, as if they would outface our very days of Humiliation; and men, how
greedy are they of the world, plotting and projecting for riches and places, as
if here were their abiding city, and they had no thought of one to come? and
in Civil matters, those Courts and contentions, I hear not that men find
either much more equity or expedition.

Second Use of limitation; Use 2.
for it is (...), it must be of you; your moderation, not of, or in things
belonging unto God, it reaches not to the principles or practice of Religion;
observe that once for all; Men must be as zealous for truth and holiness as
they can; Men, all men have no power to be Moderatours of them, themselves are
bounded, and confined by the Almighty, as Solomon said to Shimei: Build thee an
house at Jerusalem, go not from thence any whither, 1 King 2. 36, 37. From
Gods word nothing must be taken, and nothing must be added to it, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
12. 32. Revel. 22. 18. Our God is omniscient, discerning at first all possible
emergencies of things, persons, and occursions; so his Statutes be perfect and
absolute, and must be obeyed without dispute or moderation; it is a most
dangerous adventure, to examine, or regulate Divine Truths by Humane wisdom;
such daring has introduced many foul Errors into the Church, and retained
them: our Master Christ said, Drink ye all of this, Matthew. 26. 27. All the
Clergy, say the men of Rome, the blood may hang on Laymens beards, they may
spill it on the ground: our God commands all men to know his Word and will; the
Papists will needs be Moderators here, and forbids Scriptures in the Mother
Tongue, because the common people may profane and abuse them: a seeming
antinomy and opposition appears sometimes in the Word of God; yet even there
and then men ought not to moderate, but one Text must be compared with another,
and so dark places will be enlightened; In every doubtful business they were
wont to ask of the Lord, Genesis 25. 22. 1 Samuel 23. and elsewhere; or of his
Priests, Exodus 18. 15. Deuteronomy. 17. 9. alibique; or at his word, 1 Samuel 22. 5. 2 Chronicles. 18. 4. and in other places; we must say with Saint Paul in all such
matters, What says the Scripture? Romans 4. 3. And again, what says the
Scripture? Galat. 4. 30. The Scripture is the sole rule, judge, and moderator.
The first Christians were exceedingly precise this way; not to tell you how
they would not part with a word, not a syllable, not a letter in divine truths;
they complied not with the Heathen in small matters: Optat. l. 3. p. 71. Plin.
Ep. 97. Tertul. de Cor. Mil. p. 153. Id. p. 283. Suidas in (...), Eusebius. Hist.
l. 4. c. 15. m p. 180.
They would not burn incense, nor wear a crown, nor stick their doors with
Laurel, nor lay grapes at Bacchus feet; Polycarpe would rather dye then swear
by Caesar's fortune; and the Christians in Iustine Martyr would not tell a lie
to save their lives: the after connivence and complication brought in errors by
heaps, and huddles: and Rhenanus a learned Papist confesses the foundation
thereof was laid in this presumed Moderation: the first approaches of Gentiles
to Christianity were invited and entertained with some pleasing changes of
their rites; whereas their total resection would have thrust them quite off:
In Tertul. p. 103. M.
but those tolerable alterations as they seemed, introduced most intolerable
superstition, and profaneness, the smart whereof does yet remain; and we are
not purged from the shame, and stain of it to this very day; there ought to
have been no blinding, no blending in Divine Truths; Men should not bring
their mixtures hither: Offer this now to thy governor, and will he be pleased
with thee? Mal. 1. 8. We will not have dross with our silver, nor mingle
vinegar with wine; we must say here as Iehu to Iehonadab, Come see my zeal, 2
King. 10. 16. And you must be most earnest against those errors that be
likeliest to encroach; and even Christian Moderation will grow warm against
the stream of common corruption: Our Master Christ forbad expressly, to
swear by heaven, or by earth, or by Jerusalem, etc. Matthew. 5. 34, etc. For it
seems by Philo the Jew, m. p. 490.
that was the customary sin of those times: and so, Gal. 1. 4. Christ has
delivered us from the present evil world. There is an Emphasis in that (...),
the present evil world: we must be most watchful against those corruptions,
in faith, and manners, that are growing upon us, what ever they be; and not to
speak of others now, for my part, use what Moderation you please to the
persons, and estates of the Papists; but let us avoid, I beseech you,
whatsoever in truth, or true appearance is doctrinally so: the Judicial Rites
had another kind of claim, yet the first Christians declined them with great
and universal vehemence: Say the world what it will, I freely pronounce,
August. T. 2. ep. p. 346.
says Hierome, that the Ceremonies of the Jews are pernicious and deadly to
Christians; and whosoever observes them, whether he be Jew or Gentile is sunk
down into hell: and yet Gods direction to his first people concerns all his
Israel now, Levit. 18. 3. After the doings of the Land of Egypt wherein ye
dwelt shall ye not do, and after the doings of the Land of Canaan, whither I
bring you, shall ye not do, etc. And in both respects we should abandon the
ways of Popery, for we came halting from them, and they yet dwell among us; we
have found by too long, and woeful, and wounding experience, all our complying
with them could not win the least upon them. In our first Reformation
Archbishop Cranmer enjoined that no Minister should order matters so, Injunct.
3.
that the unlearned people think the old Popish Mass continues still; but the
piety of our times, as it was called, wanted nothing, but a command, to trim
the Sacraments of Christ after the plain Popish dress of Antichrist. In our
second Reformation a Bishop printed it, Bp. of Dur. Anno 1561.
in the beginning of the Queens reign; we are but too much like the Papists,
that is our fault generally, that we differ not more from them; but the good
work in hand of late, accounted it their great honor and glory to come nigh
unto them: To conclude, and I know you observe it well, danger from Rome was
foresene in the first, and second Reformation; I say no more, but, Beware the
third time.

The third Use of Confutation: Use 3.
it is of the Remonstrants, Arminians, and Socinians, who endeavor from my
Text, to get countenance for the Babylonish Error, the allowance of all
Opinions, as if, because the Apostle says, Let your moderation be known unto
all men; Remonstranst. sect. ult. Censur. Remonst. Praef. Harm. Remonst. and
Socin. p. 231.
therefore all men's conceits must be borne with in Religion, and every one
suffered in what he supposes to be truth: it is a cunning and cousening
devise, that strikes in with corrupt nature; but because it offers violence to
my Text, I cannot be true to it, or you, if somewhat be not added by way of
vindication, and it will be in these six particulars.

First, Is it probable that our Apostle, who elsewhere, almost every where, is
so zealous for unity, against Schisms, should in any sort tolerate them, and
so voluntarily open a wide door^ for division? in this very Epistle he writes
for peace, even passionately, but with mighty power, Phil 2. 1, 2. If there be
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind. And in the next
Chap. 3. 16. -- Let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing:
expressions different from all licentious tolerations: the same Apostle abounds
in serious dehortations from schisms and dissentions, Rom 13. 12. 16. 17. and
as carnal, 1 Cor, 3. 3. and in other places: And he does very often exhort
with earnest words and arguments, not only that we be likeminded, Romans 15. 6.
Phil. 2. 2. and of one mind, 2 Cor. 13. 11. but of the same mind, (...).
1 Cor. 10. 10. joined, yea ioynted together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment: And is here the least approbation of that multiplying Doctrine?
neither will that excuse, so long as they all breath Christ, tend to the
advancement of Christ; it matters not: but let Saint Paul answer this Objection
also, Is Christ divided? 1 Cor. 1. 13. Consider it well, and season your
consideration with that of our Master Christ himself, Mar. 9. 50. Have salt in
your selves, and have peace one with another: If we were preserved by humility
from the corruptions of selfe-opinion, it would be no hard matter to embrace
unity.

Secondly, Such allowance would prove destructive to holiness, both personal,
and domestical; Omnis religio, and nulla religio, would soon be the same:
Suppose the husband of one opinion, the wife of another, the children, it may
be, of one or two other, (...).
and the servants of as many more; what shall the Master of the house do here?
how perform the family duties? diversity of opinions, like so many hatchets
interrupting their prayers, 1 Pet. 3. 7. chopping all devotion and piety in
pieces: as the Duke of Wittenberge was wont to say, New garments introduce new
manners, new manners bring in new men, and new men thrust out the old; so new
opinions suffered will devour the old; and the toleration of every Religion,
will destroy all Religion: and in conclusion, leave no Religion at all.

Thirdly, this liberty is inconsistent with civil tranquillity; the bleeding
condition of our own Nation at present is a living, almost a dying witness of
this; and if that one Religion of Popery so tolerated as it was, has brought
in upon us so many destructions; what will that multiplication do, but hasten
desolation without recovery? for every party would endeavor to support it self
to the prejudice of the rest; and dum de religione certatum est regio, dum de
caelo terra amissa; as it was said long since.

Fourthly, the late Bishops of Ireland may put this liberty to to silence and
shame; for when not long since a toleration of Popery in that Kingdom was
proposed, they said, To give the Papists a toleration is a grievous sin, and
will make us accessory to all their abominations, and the perdition also of
seduced souls.

Fifthly, Came. op. succis. part. 1. p. 262.
This may be current doctrine among the Turks; and the Grand Signior told his
Mufti, that is, his chief Priest, As a Garden is beautified with variety of
flowers, so his Empire would be adorned with diversities of religion: let such
toleration find allowance in the Turks Paradise; it shall never, I trust, be
planted in the Paradise of God.

Sixthly, We have undertaken all in the National Covenant, the establishment
of Uniformity, and how that can stand with this Omniformitie, indeed
Nulliformitie, I understand not: it was a prodigious thing in the days of
Jeremiah the Prophet, Ier. 2. 28. According to the number of thy cities, are
thy Gods, O Judah: here would soon appear another kind of multiplying and
increase; but though this fancy be never so plausible, Divine providence has
shut it out of our Camp by our Covenant.

Fourth Use of Instruction; Use 4.
If our Moderation must be known unto all men, in some cases then it is not
unlawful to cause our light to shine, not purposely, proclaiming our
righteousness in the Market, or sounding a Trumpet; but first, a man may be
his own Encomiast, if his innocence be suspected, or besmeared; thus did
Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 3.

Secondly, if a Preachers doctrine be traduced, he may make his own Apology,
as Saint Paul did, Act. 22. 1.

Thirdly, By the same example, a man may stir up others to emulation, by
magnifying his office, so we read, Romans 11. 13.

Fourthly, Thus it is said, if a man be tempted to despair, it is wisdom to
remember good actions past, as Job, when he was staggered by the reproaches of
his friends, thought of his former integrity, which kept him standing; and I
have read of another, that in his tentations to pride, objected his sin
against himself, which brought him to humiliation, and in his fits of despair
he reflected upon his righteousness, and was so preserved from falling: and
Moderation must not be known for pomp and ostentation; Plus laborandam est
celare virtutes quam vitia; It is not so dangerous to hide our virtues, as our
vices; the revealing even of piety may be sin, but the confession of sin is
piety; and if a man's righteous performances be occasionally divulged, God must
have the praise for it, who is the donour of it: Like vessels of gold and
silver, that receive not into them the Sun-shining splendor, but by
reverberation return it whence it came, so do the Saints in all their gifts
and graces, well called in our language gifts, that nothing be assumed unto
man, but all ascribed to Christ, the King of Saints, Revel. 15. 3. from whom
proceeds every good and perfect gift, Iam. 1. 17.

Fifth Use of Exhortation, Use 5. 1.
will speak as it is of private and public concernment, and first, A sensu
diviso ad sensum compositum; Let every man's Moderation be known to all men, all
men in sensu composito and aggregato, that is, the Parliament; which is indeed
the (...), the Parliament of England is, the All men of England, and now if my
voice could reach to every native, and freeborn of this Kingdom, my Text
should ring loud in their ears; Let your Moderation in thought, word, and
action be known to All men, be shown to this All men, for these considerable
reasons.

First, They are your selves, you sent them hither, you remain here virtually
in them, and with them, do not vitiously suspect, or prejudicate their
endeavors, do not perfidiously, I might say self-feloniously desert, and
oppose them, as some have done; Qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? it is self-injury
and iniquity to be injurious to them.

Secondly, The Parliament is the supreme Magistracy of the Kingdom, and it is
a law in the Old Testament, not repealed in the New, but reinforced, Exodus 22.
28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, that is, the Judges and Governors, as the
word is in the preceding Chapter, 21. 6. and so it is, Act. 23. 5. Thou shall
not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people.

Thirdly, They have studied to break off every heavy yoke, and deliver you
from that vassallage was brought upon you by the tyranny of evil counselors;
Consider well, Old Israel felt their lives bitter by their cruel bondage in
Egypt, Exodus 1. 14. And because of it, they hearkened not to Moses, Exodus 6. 9.
Such a spirit of bondage was upon you, you cried for a Parliament, God heard
you, and will you now murmr against Moses, and fight against your Deliverers?

Fourthly, All the evil that is come upon you, and the kingdom, is from your
selves, in this very particular, some groan under burdenous taxations, in
other places the war and plundering devour all in a grievous and bloody
manner; the former would not have been, the other could not have been done, if
you had been true to your selves, and your moderation known, and shown to this
All men, and in them to your own peace and happiness.

Fifthly, And yet let it be so manifested, because the odium, envy and danger,
that is upon them from their opposites, is for endeavoring your good; let them
therefore have your prayers, your purses, your persons, your power, because
their peril is from their Moderation; they would confine and regulate the
evil counsels about the King in Religious and Civil affairs, this is, and
has been their great offense, which is indeed their praise, and I shall speak
to them, as I say it of them elsewhere, they are ready to embrace any
Moderation, that is consistent with the safety of Religion, King, and Kingdom.

And now Worthy Senators, 2.
I beseech you, suffer ye also a word of Exhortation; Gods truths, you know,
are above, beyond man's power, one Nation presumes not to give Laws to another,
and if all the Nations in the world were conveened in an Occumenicall Assembly,
they should have no Authority to moderate any one Doctrine of the most High;
there be some circumstantials, concerning which my Text speaks to you; Let your
Moderation be known unto all men.

First, Modus regendi.
In the manner of enforcing them; fierce and furious prosecution even of a good
cause, is rather prejudice, then promotion, but Eckius told Melancthon as it
was, Tua Philippe (...), and Pontani (...) plurimum adjuverunt causam vestram.
Vit. Melanct. page 335. per M. Ada.
that his Modeartion, and the fair language of Pontanus, did exceedingly
further them; when James and John saw the Samaritans would not receive Christ;
they said, Lord will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and
consume them as Elias did? but he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know
not what manner of spirit ye are of, Luke 9. 54, 55. We must verily even
tenaciously adhere to all divine truths our selves, and with our wisest
Moderation labor to plant, and propagate them in others, and I would say with
Erasmus; Ep. l. 6. p. 258.
Mihi videtur plus profici civili modestia, quam impetu; Opposites, indeed,
must be opposed, gain-sayed, reclaimed, but all must be done in a way, and by
the means appointed from heaven; It is one thing to show moderation to pious,
peaceable, and tender consciences; it is another thing to proclaim beforehand
toleration to impious, fiery, and unpeaceable opinions: I say no more, but, Sic
vigilet Moderatio, ut non dormiat disciplina; Let Moderation be so much awake,
that discipline fall not asleep.

Secondly, Sacrilegium.
Give me leave in the next place, to mind you of the Harpies of this Age, who
spying a great alteration like to be made in the revenues of the Church, have
their mouths open, and their fingers itch for a share; here is great need of
your Vmpirage, and Moderation: consider, I beseech you, there be many dark
corners in the Land, that have not where with to get oil for their lamps,
their souls cry aloud for your help, and some ask no more but their own,
which has too long been kept from them, and it is now high time to make
restitution; Sacrilege has ever proved a fatal offense, you will not so much
as in purpose be defiled with it; you would not have Ministers meddle with
secularities, poverty will make them more secular, and if Preachers be poor,
there will be poor Preaching too at the last; Oh that every Lamp in the
Kingdom had its proportionable oil, that is your endeavor, and as you have
no thought your selves to entangle your own Patrimonies with the Churches
possessions, I wish you would declare to the world, you will not suffer others
to do it; And again, I beseech you in this; Let your Moderation be known, etc.

3. Templa.
And the fabrics of the Churches in some places call for your care, the stone
out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber decaying apace: I am glad for
my part, they are scoured of their gay gazing, and I marvelled a great while
since, how, and why the Organs grew so many, and blew so loud, when the very
Homilies accused them for defiling Gods house; Part 2. 131.
Much dispute there was of late about adherent and inherent holiness of
Churches, and it was accounted a sin to be covered in them, and it is now a
pnnishment in some not to be covered, a punishment by the wind and weather,
from the roof, and windows; so easily men fall from one extreme to another,
and it is meet that in this also your Moderation should be known. Dies festi.


4. And your Moderation must have influence upon Holy days also; the Lords day
indeed, the holy Sabbath, is a Noli me tangere, you must not otherwise meddle
therewith, then to sanctify it your selves, and command that by all others it
be sanctified, and in this you do well to use all diligence, because of the
most profane and desperate attempts of late made against it, as if we had been
Turks or Pagans, De C. B. l. 16. c. 32.
and not Christians, from Christ; Divino praecepto intonante obediendum est,
non disputandum, Augustine. the thunder of Gods word was not heard, and now the
thunder of Gods sword is felt; Immodicam festorum multitudinem non ego solus
improbo, praescrum, quia hodie nullis diebus plus peccetur, quam festis;
moderata festa valde prob^, sed ea velim sacris rebus, non voluptatibus and
sceleribus dari. Io. Long Episc. Lincoln. l. 22. p. 914. De B. Philogon.
you have power, it is most happily improved for the Lord, and the day of the
Lord; there is reason and religion your Moderation should be known and shown
to the other festivities, not only because of their abuse, superstition, and
other evils, but of their increase, the holy week of Lent crept into the
rubricated Calendar in these days: so did the Conversion of Paul and Barnabas
his day. I would commend the zealots of this devotion to the care of Rome
heathen, C. Cassi: de Moderatione festorum, or else to their own Lyndwood, or
above them both to Erasmus; for I hasten to make mention of that which I know
every one observes, that the providence of heaven is here become a Moderator,
appointing the highest Festivitie of all the year, to meet with our monthly
Fast, and be subdued by it: for Chrysostom does well call the day of Christ's
Nativitie the Metropolis and chief of all other festivalls; for indeed from
this arose all the other dedications in the name of Christ and his Apostles,
which else had not been known in the world, those be the children of that
mother, and who is not abundantly satisfied with the hand of God upon them
altogether, which has, as Austin said of the Jews synagogue, given them an
honorable burial? but to those that are not thus satisfied, I have three
other things to say.

First, It Is probable enough, we never yet kept right the day of Christ's
Nativitie, Wolf. de T. p. 81.
I do not mean in respect of the manner, but the time, learned men supposing
it very unlikely that such a general taxation should be made through the
peaceable world in the depth of winter, so unseasonable a time for all to
travel into their own Cities to be taxed, as in Luke 2. 1. etc. not to
mention their other conjectures.

Secondly, Scromat. l. 1. m. p. 98.
Clemens Alexandrinus about 1400. years since declares, that some thought the
day of Christ's birth was in the month of May, and others in January, others yet
in April; there were yet further surmisings: but observe, if there was so
little certainty in those days, so near the times of the Apostles, there must
needs be much more uncertainty now.

Thirdly, Epist. l. 9. 71.
It was Gregory's counsel, that the Pagan feasts should by degrees be changed
into Christian Holy Days, that they might the more easily be drawn to
Christianity; and some write expressly, that our Christmas Festivities, in
respect of time and manner of celebration, Io. Beleth. c 120. Hospin. de Festis
Christianis. p. 111.
came from the Saturnals of the Gentiles; These were also observed in the month
of December, They had their liberal Feastings and Invitations, ServantS among
them also at that time were Masterly and followed their own affairs, They had
a wild Ceremony, like to the Lord of Misrule in some places, New-yeers gifts
were also sent abroad, which Hierome calls Saturnalium sportulas. But it will
be said, Object.
this is hard doctrine for servants, whose condition shall be worse then
beasts, if they have no rest, nor relaxation, and shall those abuses quite
abolish the memory of Christ's Birth and Nativitie, and that among Christians?
Is this your Moderation? this relisheth surely of extreme excess rather. R.
I have three things to speak against this pretense, not doubting, but that
servants shall have time allotted them for their refreshing, and yet God not
robbed of his honor, care being taken that their sports be not sinful, nor
they in them; and if any Sermon or Lecture occasionally be in the place, and on
the day of their refreshings, that they repair thither also, for even the
Canons of 1604. required Schoolemasters to bring their Scholars to the
Sermons, see them quietly and civilly behave themselves there, and examine them
at times convenient what they have learned by such coming* Yea their condition
then both inwardly and outwardly will be much bettered. Can. 79.
And to the other part of the Objection I say;

First, I wish on mine own behalf and others, that those heathenish, mad, and
riotous usages had never been known among Christians, and that now they might
be quite abandoned for ever; but let the neighborhood, and charity of those
times at least in some time of the year be continued; sure I am, that some who
had withered hands all the year beside, did at that season stretch them out to
the poor.

Secondly, Though this day of Christ's Birth be thus overcome by our monthly
Fast, yet our Saviors Nativitie has, and shall have its Commemoration, not
only in the Day solemnized for his Resurrection, in which is involved all the
Complement and Consummation of Christ's doing and suffering, and Exaltation; but
further, the Lords Day is thought to be the very determinate Day of the week
when Christ was borne; for those that mention the Privileges of the elder
Brother, the first Day of the week, say it was not only the first Day of the
world, no night went before it, Alb. M. Comp. p. 158.
but it shall be the last day, and no night shall come after it, and that it
was the very Day of Christ's Birth and Baptism, etc.

Thirdly, If the serious disquisition of Historians, and Mathematicians, shall
calculate and design the month and the day, I shall not vote against the
Christian celebration thereof, but as at Berne, when the Gospel was first
reintroduced, they set their prisoners at liberty, and proclaimed freedom;
and we observe a Day in memory of our Deliverance from that Hellish, Romish
Powder Plot; so, if God please to deliver us from the Diabolical designs of
these times, I hope you will appoint a Day in Commemoration thereof.

Fifthly, Jejunia.
And for Fasting Days, your Christian Moderation is already made known, not
twice or thrice in the week, which they said of old might savor of
vainglory, Vit. Pat. part. 2. p. 150. 4.
neither have you commanded such rigourous observation, as Luther blamed in
Melanct. macerating his body, Vit. ubi sup.
quasi ferrum, aut saxum esset; nor as Bernard, who confessed he did too much
debilitate his body by abstinence, and watching, but as Zach. 8. 19. The Fast
of the fourth month, etc. and yet besides this, you have had many other
occasional days of Humiliation, that which you had the last week among your
selves, was most remarkable among men, and acceptable, we are assured, unto
your God also, and yet I crave leave to invite unto one Solemn Fast more: Oh
that a Trumpet were blown in Sion, and a Fast sanctified; but I would have it
sanctified, through both the Armies, in all the Kingdom, and though your power
reach not so far, I wish it were tendered to them; and trial were made of
them; however, two most memorable occasions implore Divine direction and
blessing upon your unwearied labors.

First, Treaty of Pacification, is in your serious endeavors, that the
Kingdoms may yet be happy in a safe and well-grounded Peace; and it is high
time to hasten it, the whole Land almost is already laid waste by the Sword,
which, if not speedily sheathed, is bringing upon us a worse evil unavoydably,
a Famine; for they that be slain with the sword, are better then they that be
slain with hunger, etc. Lam. 4. 9. but let not the fear of Sword, or Famine
scare you into any other Peace then that which is the Peace of God made in
Christ, joined with truth, else a greater mischief will fall upon the Nation,
then war or hunger; Not a famine of bread, or a thirst for water, but of
hearing the word of God, etc. Amos 8. 11. Great cause have we therefore now to
cry mightily unto God, and seek of him a right way for us, and for our little
ones, and for all our substance, Ezr. 8. 21.

Secondly, The great change in Ecclesiasticals, that is to appear suddenly in
the Kingdom, in respect of Worship and Government, may well double our
devotions in this very time; Prolog. in Matthew.
Hierome Writes, that when Cerinthus, Ebion, and other heretics, denied
Christ's coming in the flesh, the holy men of those times desired Saint John the
Evangelist, to write his Gospel in their confutation; which he promised, upon
their undertaking to Fast, and Pray for Gods blessing: which done, Saint John,
he said, was full of the holy Ghost, and wrote; In the beginning was the Word,
etc. Joh. 1. 1. And indeed when the greatness of this work is looked upon,
with the multitude of opposers, there is great reason we should all with our
holiest diligence invocate the Majesty of heaven, that these things may tend
to his glory, and find acceptance in the souls, hearts, and lives of the
people.

Sixthly, Ecclesiastici.
The men of my Profession desire to have a share in your Moderation also; and
indeed I cannot think, but that of Titus, otherwhere called, Joseph. de B. J.
7. lib. c. 13.
deliciae humani generis, favored not of humanity, when his soldiers had
taken the Temple at Jerusalem, and the Priests begged their lives, he denied
them, saying, they should perish together; I wish all the evils of these men
were destroyed, but do none of their persons deserve favor? did none of them,
to their power, withstand the inundation of superstition? When the Monks and
Nuns here thrust themselves out of their unclean Cages; they had salaries for
their lives, and in other countries, Exire poterunt ad laborem, Mycou. Vit.
Zuingli.
coniugium, literas, quis erat animus, They were dismissed from their
employment, but had stipends to their death: You have already herein declared
your Moderation, in assigning a portion, for the support of wife, and children,
and it were well, if no complaints were brought before you against some, that
are so loath to part there with.

Seventhly, Heterodoxi.
Another sort of men call for your Moderation; yea, and plead merit too; I know
not what to call them, but I mean the men of many opinions, though, I hope,
they be neither so numerous, nor faulty, as their opposites suggest, and yet
to as many of them, as pretend to godliness, and be with us in Covenant, I say
no more, but wish them to read it, to study it, to keep it; in the rest, I
would wonder with what conscience, or wisdom they abstain from that bond,
when the Romanists universally are in armed combination against them, and us; a
very hard matter, I confess, it is to moderate erroneous opinions, some have
dared into the world that should have been, Anonyma, not once named as becomes
Saints; and for the rest, I thought sometimes, and pardon me, if I think so
still, if their Tenants were commanded from them, in express terms, they
would appear, either not to be tanti, that for them public tranquillity
should be endangered, or else coming forth naked into the world, barefaced, and
in their colors, they would be a shame to their abbettors.

Eighthly, Papifts.
The Papists indeed, that be Iesuited, in respect of their guilt, and Irelands
blood, expect not your Moderation; and surely such should be shown them, as
may preserve your selves and the Kingdoms from their frauds and cruelties;
against which you will be now more vigilant then ever, because they have
revealed now more then ever their evil intentions, and can swallow those
oaths without chewing, which former times of peaceablenesse could not get
down, by any art or persuasion: and though their very Religion, p. 503.
like Draco's Laws, be written in blood, as King James observed: and in the
Nether-lands they made a show of Moderation, and called their Edict so, yet
even that in truth was, was felt, and was then called Murderation; also as
Meterane writes, p. 46
they had then their Consilium sanguinis: they walk by the same Principles,
and worse Practices; yet none of them ever suffered death among us merely for
Religion. [I had other particulars to have mentioned, but I saw the time would
not permit me to speak them out of the Pulpit; I forbear them therefore now
also; Secunda par. (...).
] and I come to handle the reason of the Text, but Doctrinally, and very
briefly: The Lord is at hand: and I shall not insist upon the Lords being at
hand, by his providentiall approximation to support us in, or deliver us from
trouble, as Psalm. 22. 11. Be not far from me, O Lord, for trouble is near:
nor how he is at hand to observe all our actions, so keeping us in awe and
obedience, because All things are naked, and opened to the eyes of him with
whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13. But in this Doctrinall part of the
propinquitie of our Lords coming to judgment, I shall show first, the parallel
Scriptures; and secondly, the probable reasons thence; and then the Application
will be in such practical uses as you shall see Gods Word hold forth visibly
in those places where the Text, or the sense of it, is mentioned.

First, Scripture.
It is very considerable that the Apostles all so speak, as if Christ, the
Lord, would in their days come to judgment, so many hundred years ago. Thus
1 Cor. 10. 11. We are they upon whom the ends of the world are come. So Heb.
10. 37. Yet a little while, (...), yet a very very little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry. And Saint James 3. Behold, the Judge
stands before the door, 5. 9. And Saint Peter, The end of all things is at
hand: And thus Saint John, It is the last time, 1 Ioh. 2. 18. And so Saint
Jude, 18. And if so then a thousand years ago, it is the miracle of miracles,
that yet the Lord is not come to judgment: the succeeding Ages after the
Apostles were of the same mind, and they watched on Easter Even by ancient
tradition, as if their Master Christ would in one of those Vigils come to judge
the world; in similitudinem Aegyptii temporis, says Tertullian: As Pharaoh the
King rose up in the night, p. 107. K. Lactan. 7. 19. Hieron. in Matthew. 25.
August. de T. 154. 251. De Un. Eccl. p. 301.
and all his servants, and there was a great cry in Egypt, etc. Exodus 12. 30.
And in Cyprians time all things were accomplished, as he thought, that were
forerunning tokens of the worlds end. It were easy to heap up the conjectures
of several Centuries; but we must all acquiesce in the determination of our
Master who shall be the Judge, Matt. 24. 36. Of that day and hour knows no
man, no not the Angels of heaven, but the Father only. But that I may prepare
my self and you to the serious and practical consideration of the
forementioned Uses: observe these Scripture arguments.

First, Reasons.
There shall be signs in the Sun, and the Moon, etc. Luke 21. 25. And if
Mathematicians, may be credited, the celestial Orbs are not as they were:
Aret. Probl. p. 1016.
the Sun not so distant from us as at the first, but nearer by many Germane
miles; to say nothing of the prodigious sights and noises seen and heard in
our days.

Secondly, Men's hearts fail them for fear, etc. Luke 21. 26* As lightning is
first seen, then thunder heard; smoke precedes fire, and the sea swells before
a storm; so the soul of man, that (...), Epist.
as Synesius, calls it, droops before danger, trembles before it is hurt, and by
its inward timorousness foretells evils to come; and that appears by the
several presagings of men that discover their fears by their conjectures:
That famous Grebner found out the year of the worlds end by the word Iudicium,
JVDICIVM numerum ruituri continet orbis. Problem. p. 1057. Ecce Spons. ven.
every letter thereof being numerall; but we have already outlived that fancy
above thirty years. Aretius by some Chronogrammaticall expressions of
Scripture, proposed this next to be the last year of the world. Doctor
Alabasters conceit out of those two Greek words, (...), may savor of fancy
and fear.

Thirdly, Religion and Holiness, the two pillars of Heaven and Earth, are so
much decayed and discountenanced, as we need no other demonstration that those
last and perilous times are come, that Saint Paul spoke of, 2 Timothy 3. 1. For
as the old age of man, the lesser world, is full of corporal infirmities; so
the greater world in its declining estate abounds with manifold abominations:
read at leisure the two next verses, and see how unhappily these days comment
upon them; if you think on any one of those sins, the same thought will tell
you where to find them.

Fourthly, The unnatural divisions that are up in the world, are undeniable
presages that the Lord is at hand: for when the Disciples privately demanded of
their Master, what should be the signs of his coming to judgment; among
others this is recorded by the three Evangelists: The brother shall betray the
brother to death, and the father the son, etc. Mar. 13. 12. Matthew. 24. 10.
Luke 21. 16. And we need not enquire among Jews, Turks, and other Nations for
the accomplishment hereof; but as Christ in another case, Luke 4. 21. I may
say, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your cares, O England: never since
thou were a Nation did thou see thy self so miserably torn, and rent with
such civil, uncivil, unnatural, and bloody distractions: If it had been
said to any of thy people, four or five years since, that they should do
such things, as are now done in the midst of thee; they would have replied with
the indignation of Hazael, 2. King. 8. 13. Are we dogs, destitute of all
humanity, to do this? and yet, wretched things are done by men, Christian men,
Englishmen against Englishmen, professing the same Religion, protesting the
same Cause, and End of their quarrel: O that thou could yet discern those
formidable clouds of blood in their scattering: but alas, they threaten
worser evils, even to make thee a full sea of blood within, as thou art without
surrounded by water: for the woeful divisions of England there be great
thoughts of heart: I will not say, as Jeremy 2. 12. Be ye astonished, O
heavens, at this; Nor, be ashamed ye Husbandmen, Joel 1. 11. But let all those
be ashamed and astonished, Prophets and people, that have not helped to quench,
but kindle this fire: This is indeed a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation, Ezekiel. 19. 14. But to return from this sad complaint upon our most
miserable dissensions, a doleful presage that the Lord is at hand, the props
of the world decay; prodigious sights portend as much, and the fainting of men's
hearts fore-bode the same: I am not ignorant, that some convinced by strong
evidence of Christ's reigning here upon earth; before that time, understand all
these places of that coming of Christ; and my purpose is not at all to pry into
those hard and hidden moments of Gods own concealing: and sure I am, those
that wade this way meet with deep difficulties; as bow?

first, all the forenamed Scriptures should be so applied, 1 Cor. 10. 11. The
ends of the world are come: and it is not (...), the Roman world or Empire, as
Luke 2. 1. And Saint Peter is yet more universally express; The end of all
things is at hand, 1 Pet. 4. 7.

Secondly, the day of judgment is called, A great and notable day, Act. 2. 20.
An appointed day, 17. 31. Yet it is more then one, one of the days of the
Son of man, Luke 17. 22. 26.

Thirdly, Who can determine the finals of the Beasts power, unless the
Originals were manifest? Rev. 13. 5, etc.

I might say much of Ancient and Modern confidences this way, but my purpose
is to improve the remaining time allotted, in the serious consideration of what
God himself tells, we ought all practically learn from the Lords being at
hand, and the judgments now in the land may, and ought to hasten these truths
home to our souls.

First, Repentance.
Speedy Repentance from dead works: read Act. 17. 30, 31. -- Now he
commands all men every where to repent, because he has appointed a day in
which he will judge the world, etc. Many things are here observable, but the
(...), the Now, is that I desire to fasten upon you, and my self; for if in
Saint Paul's days it was an argument of, and to Repentance; it should much more
accelerate us thereunto, upon whom the Lord is nearer now by sixteen hundred
years. Consider with thy self then, O my soul, and suppose, thou were here
guilty of some capital crime, for which the Judge were ready to reckon with
thee, and pass sentence of death, or deliverance, as he finds thee; could
thou sleep or be secure? or would thou trifle away thy time? would not all
thy care be by some means or other to gain favor from the Judge? Be thou
assured, O my soul, That the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, Psalm.
1. 5. Thy conscience knows what a load of sin lies upon thee; even a burden
too heavy for thee to bear, Psalm. 38. 4. Oh why do thou not hasten to ease
thy self of this weight by unfeigned repentance, before the Judge come, and
pronounce the irrevocable sentence? Read, and remember to do as Act. 3. 19.
Repent ye, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the
times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Infinite is the
matter of our Humiliation, in respect of nature, persons, and nation; of past,
and present times: but this day, and those next it, have been heretofore the
only merry season of the year, and the Devil has been served better on
those Twelve days, then on all the twelve months beside; and our Master
Christ has most unchristianly by many been dishonored, even in those days
said to be devoted to his glory: And I may borrow here the words of Nicholas de
Clemangis, M. p. 143.
touching his Popish Festivities; What heathen man, if he had come into those
feasts, seen and heard our Christmas Gamboles, would not have taken them
rather to be the Floralia of Venus, or the Orgia of Bacchus, then Christian
holy days? and who can lay his hand upon his heart, and say, he is innocent as
touching this in all respects? Ordinance.
Great cause therefore had your Ordinance to command this day to be kept with
more solemn humiliation, because it may call to remembrance our sins, and
the sins of our forefathers, who have turned this feast, pretending the
memory of Christ, into an extreme for getfulnesse of him, by giving liberty to
carnal and sonsuall delights, being contrary to the life which Christ himself
led here upon earth: Those days were professedly dedicated to extraordinary
mirth, and rejoicing: we read no such thing of our Master Christ at any time,
but he wept often, and offered up many prayers, and supplications with strong
crying and tears, Heb. 5. 7. Our Master Christ was never idle; but went about
doing good, Act. 10. 38. and elsewhere, every where in the Gospel; but among us
it was accounted almost a crime, for men, or their servants to do any labor
on any of those days: practices, as your Ordinance said truly, contrary to the
spiritual life of Christ in our souls, for the sanctifying and saving whereof
Christ was pleased both to take an humane life, and to lay it down again: but
the extreme forgetfulness of Christ in those days of Christ, the extreme
excess of carnal and sensual delights were most extremely distant from that
spiritual life should be in Christians, who work out their salvation with
fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. not in secure, heathenish, and profane
merriment; They pass the time of their soiourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17.
Not only because he that has called us is holy, and bids us to be so
likewise, verse. 15. 16. but because of our redemption by the precious blood of
Christ, etc. verse. 18, 19. therefore we should pass our time in fear; not in
wanton, wild, and impious pastimes, which do put men into a posture altogether
unmeet for the service of Christ, or care of our souls: had the Nation no
other sins to answer for, surely without the blood of Christ, whom men have
so much dishonored to his face, we should be in a most desperate condition:
Go hence therefore and examine, and bewail, and consider, Gods providence
has made this day, this very day, the head of all that jocundity, a day of
Humiliation; do not miscall it, let it be so to every one of us, for our own,
the National transgressions it has been formerly guilty of in those days;
and if the Lord, who is at hand, had called any of us out of the world, when we
were busy in those foolish, vain, and unchristian usages; we may now tremble
to think how unfit we had been to meet the Lord Jesus coming in the clouds.

Secondly, Heavenly-mindednesse.
Let us wisely weane our selves from the world, and this we learn from the
very next words after the Text, The Lord is at hand, In nothing be careful:
Yea, our Lord himself gives us the same counsel, in the very same words, Luke
21. 34. Take heed that your hearts be not at any time overcome with the cares
of this life, and that day come upon you unawares: There may be a season for
other things, but none for Christians to be sollicitous for earthly things: Our
Father is in heaven, so we say, so we pray; heaven is our Country, so we
profess, Heb. 11. 16. Why do we then dig so deep in the earth, and desire
to load our selves with thick clay? The Apostle, in the Chapter before my Text,
has expressions that may loath any man thereof; whose end is destruction, and
their glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. Damnation
is their end, and why should not Hell be their portion, who care not for
Heaven? But they are the brave men of the world in the mean time: No such
matter, their glory is in their shame; they wallow in the mire with swine, that
might have conversed with Saints: But who are those damnable and inglorious
men? (...), men that are wise for the world, that mind earthly things. What
shall I say more, what can I add better, then that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.
29, 30, 31. This I say brethren, the time is short, it remains that both they
who have wives, be as though they had none; and they that weep, as though they
wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that
buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as though they
used it not; for the fashion of this world passes away: The dehortation is
very full and emphaticall; but that which I especially observe in it is, that
it is compassed in, and about, at the beginning, and in the end, with the
argument of my Text, lest our hearts, that hanker so much world-ward, should
any way get out, after it.

Thirdly, Perseverance.
The Lord is at hand, therefore constantly persevere in his holy truths, and
this Use is held out to us by John the Divine, Blessed is he that reads, and
they that keep the words of this Prophecy: for the time is at hand, Revel. 1.
3. Yea and S. Paul, as soon as he had mentioned this doctrine, 1. Cor. 10. 11,
makes this very use and application; Wherefore let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he full, ver. 12. He that is strong, must not be
secure, because he stands in slippery places, nay he stands not, only he
thinks that he stands, therefore let him take heed lest he fall: and caution
for perseverance is not only suitable to my text, but the times, these
suffering times, wherein men are most apt to recidivate, and fall away, as the
parable of the seed and sowers make evident, Matthew. 13. 21. Peter and the other
Apostles promised fairly to themselves, and their Master in the Calm, Though
we should die with thee, yet will we not deny thee, so said all the Disciples,
Mat. 26. 35. Yet in the storm, nay before the storm came at them, they run
away for fear, they haste to shelter, indeed from shelter, because from
Christ, They all forsook him, and sted, verse. 56. Thus Demas entangled with
the love of earthly things, deserts Christ, and his Apostle, embraces the
present world, and departs to Thessalonica, 2. Tim. 4. 10. where he is made a
keeper of the Pagan Idols, as some of the Ancient have recorded; Doroth. Synop.
but as for us, let that of our Master Christ be ever in our ears, always in
our hearts, Luke 12. 9. He that denies me before men shall be denied before
the Angels of God, and if Christ turn his face from thee in that day, tremble
at thy doom, who will, who can; who dare speak for thee, if thine own
Advocate be silent, and indeed it is most just they be so dealt with, that
Apostatize from the truths of Christ; it is just, I say, Lege talionis, even by
the Law of retaliation; for that is the sentence of the holy Ghost, If we deny
him, he will also deny us, 2. Tim. 2. 12.

Fourthly, Holiness.
Zealous endeavors after holiness: and thus S. Paul having spoken of the
Judgment to come, 2 Cor. 5. 10. he adds presently, verse 11. Knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, to what? but the righteous actions of
godliness and Christianity: and upon this very foundation S. Peter builds a
strong argument to holiness; for having spoken at large doctrinally of the day
of the Lord, as also concerning the formidable manner of his coming, 2 Pet. 3.
11. Seeing then that all these things must be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness? he interrogates, but
answers not, not because the holy Ghost was at a Non plus, and could not
express it; but because he would have us enquire, examine, and increase in
every good word and work in our own persons, and as far as ever our
relations do, and can reach private men in their interests, public persons
in their engagements, according to that of the holy Prophet, which concerns
every one of us, Let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a
mighty stream, Amos 5. 12. It must be done speedily, delayed no longer, let it
run down, and it must be performed impartially, run down as waters, which
favor none, drench all that be near them, yea and powerfully also, as a
mighty stream, that will suffer no obstructions, but bears all oppositions
before it; and that of the author to the Hebrews is pertinent to this purpose
also, Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good works, not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together as the manner of some is, but
exhorting one another, and so much the more, because ye see the day
approaching, Heb. 10. 24. 25. a Scripture otherwise remarkable in these times,
wherein men consider one another, and provoke not to love, but to schism, and
siding, not to good works, but their own fancies, to separation, and forsaking
the assemblies: but there the Apostle lays the force, and so would I, in the
(...), so much the more provoke one another to good works, because ye see the
day approaching.

Fifthly, Patience.
Christian Patience in tribulation, is the next thing to be learned from this
doctrine of the Lords being at hand; an hard lesson I confess, and they are
out of the Form, and School of nature that have learned it, for it is an
herb of Grace, and grows not in man's garden, we are all by nature children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. not only passively, subject to suffer the wrath of God
because of our sins, but actively also, we are hot, fiery, and impatient, and
upon every occasion do discover our distemper; Luther spoke observably,
because his own heart, God has given us, says he, many blessings, health,
quietness, wife, children, and which is above all, the word of his Patience,
and yet one fit of the Stone beats out the memory of all these benefits; 3. 59.
5. 81.
Vno malo plus movemur quam mill bonis, Though we have had twenty years of
felicity, if one day of sorrow come, all the former calmnesse is forgotten,
clouds of indignation gather, and break out into streams of impatience; nay,
if one tooth do but ache, that Center or point of pain darkens all the Sphere
and circumference of Gods mercies; It were easy to abound in complaining, but
far more comfortable to fasten upon a remedy, and that is not far of;
because the Lord is at hand; and what sense soever is put upon the words, they
breath upon us abundant matter of patience.

First, The Lord is so nigh, that no suffering can befall us without his
appointment, and if we remember it is his hand, we will not utter so much as
one word of impatience; as David professed, He was dumb and opened not his
mouth, because the Lord did it, Psalm. 39. 9.

Secondly, The Lords example is near, should always be at hand for our
animation and encouragement; It is enough for the disciple to be as his Master,
and the servant as his Lord, Matthew. 10. 25. an expression that may make us not
only patient, but joyful, yea triumphant in misery, Christians to be as their
Master Christ, it is enough, and they that consider it well, need no other
consolation.

Thirdly, The Scriptures of Christ are written for our comfort, Romans 15. 4. and
in them the Lord is at hand; For the word is near thee, even in thy mouth, and
in thy heart, Romans 10. 8. and for this, in this, thou may be patient; I will
rejoice in him because of his word, in the Lord I will rejoice because of his
word, Psalm. 56. 10.

Fourthly, Yea the Lord is at hand, to put a period to all our pressures; Look
up, and lift up your heads, for the day of your redemption draws nigh, Luke
21. 28. so Iam. 5. 7, 8. Be patient therefore brethren, unto the coming of the
Lord; Behold, the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and
has long patience for it, till he receive the early and latter rain; be ye
also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh; It
is no great matter that the husbandman expects, fruit of the earth, yet he has
great patience; we have much more in hope, heavenly and eternal things: and
therefore we should be much more in patience, and we may note also the reason
of the Text, begins and ends, compasses about this lesson of patience; initio
7. verse. and fine 8. Yea in this, and for this, hear the Judge himself, who is
at hand, Luke 21. 19. By your patience possess your souls, a direction for
times like ours, suffering times, ye shall be hated of all men for my names
sake, Verse. 17. and if they say, Master, in that deplorable condition, where no
man will appear for us, what shall we do? Non villas vestras, non lauds, non
luxurias. August. Faith.
his answer is, be not solicitous for your houses, or lands, or reputation, or
body, but for your souls; possess them by patience.

Sixthly, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is also commended to us, from this
Doctrine of the Lords being at hand, for when the Apostle had said, Heb. 10. 37.
Yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry;
every one that hears this, and believes it, would presently make enquiry, Is
the Judge coming, so certainly, so speedily, so suddenly? and is he indeed so
nigh at hand? Alas, what shall we then do, what course shall we take, where,
or how shall we appear? The answer is ready, most excellent and comfortable,
in the very next words, Verse. 38. Now the just shall live by faith; Now, at
that very time, in the instant of Christ's judging the world, faith shall
support and uphold all that depend upon God: A man indebted, that has not
where with to satisfy his Creditor, dares not look him in the face; but if
his Surety take out the Bond, all is well, and he is safe: We are all run
into deep arreares with, and against God by our sins, and cannot answer him
one thing of a thousand, Job 9. 3. not the least part of one of many thousands,
what shall we then do? Live by faith, and our interest in the price of Christ's
blood, pay all the debt of our ungodliness, that great and superabundant
expiation is made over to us by holy believing; for he was not only our
Surety, Heb. 7. 22. but he has blotted out the handwriting that was against
us, and taken it out of the way, etc. Col. 2. 14. It is written of Pilate, M.
West. ad A. 38.
that being called to Rome before the Emperor, to give account of some
Mal-administration, and misgovernment, he put on the seamlesse Coat of Christ,
and all the time he ware that garment, Caesar's fury was abated, to his own, and
others admiration; That may be a Fable: but sure I am, if we have the Robes of
Christ's Righteousness upon us by a lively faith, we shall then have no cause
of fear, in that we have not only an Advocate with the Father, 1 Ioh. 7. 2.
but Christ the Judge, for our defense and deliverance; It is a terrible
question, that of Job, but very profitable; and oh my soul sleep not this
night, nor any other till thou have put it home to thy self; For the Lord is
at hand; the question is, What shall I do, when God rises up, and when he
visits, what shall I answer him? Job 31. 14. To which no other answer, no
better answer can be given, then that of Saint Paul. Rom 13. 14. Put on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof.

Seventhly, Prayer.
The last Practical consideration held sorth from this Doctrine of the Lords
being nigh at hand, is sober watchfulness unto prayer, and this is the very
Use, in terms, Saint Peter wills us to make thereof, who having said; The end
of all things is at hand; adds this immediate inference: Be you therefore
sober, and watch unto prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Yea, our Lord himself, who is a^
hand, speaks to each of these.

First, Concerning Sobriety; Take heed, lest at any time your hearts be
overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and that day come on you unaw^res,
Luke 21. 34.

Secondly, The Evangelists generally, for the same reason exhort to watching,
Matthew. 24. 42. Mark. 13. 33. and they do not mean so much abstinence from
sleep, but from sin, and watching, not for worldliness, but for prayer.

Thirdly, So, Luke 21. 36. Watch ye therefore, and pray always: and in the
next words, he gives a Directory of Prayer, two heads of petitions, one, That
ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass;
the other, that ye may stand before the Son of man; and if you ask when, and
how often this must be remembered, he tells us that also; pray always: a duty
needful ever, but most of all now, in respect of our own particulars, and the
Churches of Jesus Christ.

And for our selves, let us pray for pardon of sin, strength against lusts,
standing in judgment; and as the Martyrs in prison, and at the stake, said to
themselves, and others; Pray, pray, pray: so remember the Lord is at hand;
therefore forget not to pray, yea, Watch, and pray, Matthew. 26. 41. that ye
enter not into tentations, into the devouring part thereof, Ne intremus in
ventr^m tentationis, quasi bestiae cujusdam. Theophylact.
as the belly of a beast: we know not what calamitous times may be reserved for
us, but whatsoever they are, or may be, we cannot be armed against them, but by
prayer, so we must be prepared, and this we see by our Apostle, who to the
Text, The Lord is at hand, instantly subjoynes; Be careful for nothing, but in
every thing by prayer and supplication with thanks giving, let your request be
made known unto God, Phil. 4. 6. Pray for me, says Father Latimer to Bishop
Ridley, again and again pray for me, p. 14.
for I am sometimes so fearful, that I could creep into a Mousehole; (It is
his own expression) but God does visit me again with his consolation: and then
the other answers him, unless the Lord assists me with his gracious aid in
the time of his service, I know I shall play but the part of a white-liver'd
Knight; p. 15.
and yet what Champions, what victorious Champions were they both; and that by
prayer? For in the same little Treatise of their comfortable conference, during
the time of their imprisonment, Ridley calls on Latimer, as upon an Old beaten
Soldier for instruction, p. 16.
and help to buckle on his harness; as he phraseth it: and Latimer tells him,
you shall prevail more with praying, then studying, p. 36.
though mixture be best; but forget not to pray. Let every one for our selves
remember, the Lord is at hand; Besides, the houses we dwell in are made of
clay, and the calamities of these times are daily battering these Tabernacles
of dust, that may very soon, and suddenly fall about our ears; therefore let
every one of us always be sober and watchful unto prayer, and pray earnestly
to God, that he will give us Repentance from dead works, that he will weane us
from these things below, and teach us to persevere in all Divine truth, and
make us abound in every good word and work, that he will enable us to be
patient in tribulation, and fill us with the most holy faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ.

And for the Churches of Christ, Jer. 30. 7.
remember it is their Day, the very day of Jacobs trouble; all the Israel of
our God is in perplexity, pray for them all, at home and abroad, pray for the
overthrow of Antichrist, the fall of Babylon; pray for the Peace of Jerusalem,
and the welfare of Sion; yea, pray earnestly, holily, constantly, Genesis 32. 26.
and as Jacob, wrestle with God, and do not let him go, till he give you a
blessing; And you that make mention of the Lord, hold not your peace, Esa. 62.
6, 7.
day nor night, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish, and
till he make Jerusalem, the Churches abroad, and in these Kingdoms, a praise
in the earth. And let us of this Nation pray, pray that God would return the
Head to the Body, the King to the Parliament; that he will heal our breaches,
compose our differences, and hasten the restoration of a safe and well
grounded Peace, that yet sticks in the Birth; pray that he would lift up the
light of his countenance upon England, Scotland, and Ireland. Lord, lift up the
light of thy countenance upon them, and they shall be safe; And let all them
that love God, that love their Religion, that love their Country; that love
their Souls, say Amen; Yea, say thou Amen to these things; Thou that Art the
Amen, the faithful and true Witness, Revel. 3. -- 14.
the beginning of the Creation of God. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

