A Sermon of CONSOLATION FOR ALL TRUE CHRISTIANS; As it was lately delivered at
LONDON-VVALL, By Mr TILL, a faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, who though he
be deprived of his outward bodily sight, yet is endued with inward spiritual
light.

Taken from him as it was delivered in Shorthand, and now published for the
comfort of all true Christians, by J. H. a friend of the Authors.

It being very useful for dejected souls in sad Times.

JOHN 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

Licensed, entered, and printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons for John Hancock, and to be sold at his
Shop at the entrance into Popes-head-Alley out of Cornhill. 1646.

TO THE READER.
THis Sermon was preached by that godly and famous Divine, Mr Till, and
published to the world for comfort to all the children of God, to trust in
Jesus Christ in these times of tribulation. For God promises to be with them to
the end of the world; and as the Apostle Paul says, Though we suffer for
Christ here, we shall reign with him hereafter. For to you is the Kingdom
prepared; to you, which continue constant to the end, faithful to the death;
you shall have a Crown of bliss: God has promised, nay, God has sworn, and
he will perform, that they that live holy and righteously here in this life,
shall live for ever in the Kingdom of Heaven. Though here is mourning, there
rejoicing; here afflictions, there comfort; All tears shall be wiped away from
your eyes; There are joys for ever, which eye has not seen, care has not
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive. You are Gods
jewels, you are the wheat, which shall be laid up in the Barn, when the chafe
shall be burnt with unquenchable fire: Ye shall sing Hallelujah, when your
tormentors shall be howling; Ye shall be in the Sanctum Sanctorum, when the
wicked in the lowest dungeon shall roar, and not one drop of water to quench
their thirst.

Thine in the Lord, F. W.

A SERMON OF CONSOLATION for all true Christians.
2 COR. 1.5. For as the sufferings of Christ abounds in us; so our
consolation abounds through Christ.


AS the Philosophers once said concerning Christ, that he was God-man, A man of
sorrows; so may I say of Paul, who was but a man, that he was a man of
sorrows. A Catalogue thereof you may read in the second Epistle to the
Corinthians, the 11. Chapter, where he says, he received five times, forty
stripes save one, and he was thrice beaten with rods, and he thrice suffered
shipwreck, and in journeying he was often, in perils of waters, in perils of
robbers, in perils in the City, in perils in the Sea; yet notwithstanding so
good was the Lord unto him, that in all his difficulties, he did enjoy a
portion in him; for, says he, in the sixth Chapter, though I was chastened, yet
I was never killed, though persecuted, yet not forsaken; nay more then so, as
he had his times of suffering, so he had his times of comfort; the one came
from an enemy, the other from a friend; the one from a creature, the other from
a Creator: So our consolation abounds in Christ.

In which words, you may observe Paul's twofold condition, his suffering
condition, and his comforting condition; or else if you will, 1. Paul's Hell; and
2. Paul's Heaven.


1. Paul's Hell, because the world calls it so, as the sufferings of Christ
abounds in us.

2. Paul's Heaven, because the Christians judge it so, so our consolation
abounds through Christ.

I am now to speak of a Christians Heaven upon Earth, and I shall show you the
privilege of a Christian, and that is in the Text.

In the Text there are these five particulars; as

First, The Christians privilege, and that is Consolation.

Secondly, The right to the privilege; our Consolation.

Thirdly, The measure of our consolation, it abounds.

Fourthly, The sutablenesse to Paul's suffering, as the sufferings of Christ
abounds in us, so our consolation abounds in Christ.

Fifthly, The ground of this consolation, and that is Christ; so our consolation
abounds in Christ.

Now there are as many points of Doctrines, as there are parts in the Text.

As first from the privilege of a Christian, you may gather this point of
Doctrine;

That the condition of a Christian is sometimes a suffering condition, and
sometimes a comfortable condition.

I have oftentimes compared a child of God, like unto the Picture of Solomon;
who is pictured half in Heaven, and half in Hell: So a Christian is sometimes
rapt up with comforts above, and sometimes sinking down into Hell with dreams.

The second Proposition from the right to this privilege, is,

That it is not impossible for a child of God to be assured in this life of
his interest in Christ; this the Apostle knew well.

The third Doctrine, from the measure of our consolation, is this;

That the consolation of a Christian, is an abundant consolation.

Friends, you that fear God, think of this Text; God gives you not this by
drops, but by showers.

The fourth Doctrine, from the sutablenesse of Paul's suffering, is this;

That God bath comforts suitable to his peoples afflictions.

Sometimes the people of God have light afflictions, then God gives them small
comforts; sometimes they are under great trials, then they have great comforts.

Fifthly, from the ground of our consolation, which is Christ; observe this
point, which is the point I intend to insist upon.

That Jesus Christ is the ground of a Christians comfort in all suffering
conditions.

This point specially concerns all those that fear God; what your sufferings
are I know not, but where your comfort is, God willing I shall declare unto
you; I suppose you that are resolved to walk close to God, whatever you
resolve to meet withal, expect sad days; and in those sad days you will have
sweet and good comfort from Jesus Christ; though friends be taken away, and the
Ministers, and all gone; then Christ will stand a man in stead when all
creatures fail; But for the proof of the point, That Jesus Christ is the
ground of a Christians comfort; I shall give you but one Scripture, in the 15.
of John 18. I will not leave you comfortless, but I will come unto you. At the
first the Disciples might think, Why, who shall be our Comforter, we have
none now Christ is gone. But mark; I will not leave you comfortless; but I
will come unto you again; hence I gather, That a child of God may be
friendlesse, and moneylesse, and helpless, in regard of creatures, but not
comfortless in regard of Christ; if I should go away and never come again,
then you might hang down your heads, but I will come unto you.

Now if you will hearken unto me, I will prove by three reasons, that there is
no comfort to be had, or found in any, but in Jesus Christ, and therefore it is
in vain to trust to silver, or gold, or the creature. Three Reasons.
1. From the free offer of Christ. 2. From the fullness of the promise. 3. From
the emptiness of the creature.


The first Reason, proving that there is no comfort but in Christ, is taken
from the free offer of Christ unto his people.

You shall see who Christ offers himself unto; He came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance; Mark here, he came not to call the
righteous, that is, he came not to call such as had need of none, but trusted
in their own; no, but sinners to repentance; such who felt the burden and
weight of their sins; God has promised meat to the hungry, and not to the
full; men must have right qualifications, suitable to receive Gods mercies.

But now may a poor drooping dying soul say, if it be so that we must have
right qualifications, why, then I have nothing to do with Christ; alas,
miserable is my condition, I have no qualifications.

But for answer to this: Art not thou dead, art not thou sick, art not thou
lame, or art not thou blind? why then thou may live, thou may have
health, thou may be whole, or thou may see, if thou will, Christ is
offered unto all, if they will receive him.

The second Reason is taken from the fullness of the Promise.

There is a fullness of grace, of mercy, of glory, in the promise; but
sometimes perhaps you read some promises, and you think they are empty, but
when a Minister of God comes and opens it, then you will go home, and say, you
never thought there was so much in a promise; O Beloved, when you do once see
the fullness of comfort in a promise, you will enquire more after them; for all
the promises in Christ, are yea and amen, blessed for evermore.

A third Reason is taken from the emptiness of the creature.

And here I shall prove there is no comfort in the creature; for go toward
Heaven to the creature the Angels, why thou can have no comfort by them; for
in the 1. Ephesians 12. All things are reconciled to God in Christ; well then,
come down to the Minister, but do not rest for comfort in him; for if God be
not in his Ministry, he can do thee no good. Why then go to thy rich friends;
will some say, such a one has an Uncle, or an Aunt, that are worth so much,
and so much; I, but what of all this? alas, this is nothing to what shall
become of thy poor soul; your fasting, and sighing is nothing, if Christ be
not in them. I would not give you a straw for a thousand such duties; for in
the 15. of John, says Christ, without me ye can do nothing. So that there is
no comfort to be had or found in any but in Christ; and in the 15. of John 16.
Whatsoever you shall ask of my Father in my name, says Christ, he shall give
it you. Thus you have the reasons of the point, why Jesus Christ is the ground
of a Christians comfort. I shall now come to the use of the point. Four Uses
of the point.
1. For Examination. 2. For Comfort. 3. For Terror. 4. For Exhortation.


The first Use for Examination.
To examine whether Christ be yours, and so to be your comfort.

Some may say, how shall I know whether Christ be ours or no?

1. I answer, by being a new creature, and he that is a new creature, has a
new soul and body, new hands, new eyes, new actions, he does speak and walk
in a better way then ever he did.

2. He that is a new creature, has a new light; before he faw the creature to
be the chiefest good, and now sees Christ to be the chiefest good, not only
the chiefest good, but his chiefest good.

3. He that is a new creature, has a new will; before the man would have his
will, though it cost him his life; now he is a man of a new spirit, Not my
will, but thy will be done, O Lord; and Lord, what would have me to do? or
Lord what would have me to suffer, I will do or suffer.

4. New affections of love; before he loved sin, and hated God, now he loves
God, and hates sin, with an eternal hatred.

5. New joys, and new sorrows; he mourned before, because he could not enjoy
sin, but now he mournes for sin; and joys that he can mourn for sin.

6. That man that is a new creature, has new hopes, and new thoughts; before
he hoped in the creature, now he hopes in Christ; before he had revengefull
thoughts, and Atheistical thoughts, now he has heavenly thoughts.

7. Again, He that is a new creature, has new society; before he used to be
among the wicked, now he is with David's companions, with such as are godly;
wicked wretches are now as Hell to him.

8. Again, He that is a new creature, has new strength, and new experience;
before he performed duties in the strength of a creature, but now in the
strength of a God; before by his own experience, but now by Christ's experience.

9. Again, He that is a new creature, has new parts; before his parts puffed
him up with pride, but now his good parts make him humble.

10. Lastly, He that is a new creature, has new resolutions, and new ends, he
resolves now to give up himself to Christ, and his end is to enjoy Jesus
Christ. Now if you can find all these that I have named, then you are a new
creature, and it is a sign that Christ is yours.

The second Reason is this; if Jesus Christ be the ground of your comfort, see
then how you improve him.

For he that makes Christ the ground of his comsort, makes Christ the ground of
his confidence; he does not rely on any thing he does; the Prophet David
taught him that lesson; and so the Prophet Jeremiah, Trust not in lying
vanities, saying, The Temple of the Lord: So I say, trust not in lying
vanities, trust not in your prayers, saying, My prayers, my prayers, for then
you make your prayers, lying vanities. Why, you will say, what must not I pray?
I, pray in the name of God, but rely not on them; put not thy confidence in
them; but rely upon Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, He that has Christ to be his, is contented with him: come what will
come, if Christ be his, he is contented, though times of famine come, though
times of blood come (as it is likely) and the Ministers taken away, and the
Ordinance taken away, yet he is resolved to fear nothing, he will trust in
Christ, and be content with him: Nay, come to a child of God that has lost
his estate, and ask him, how he does now; why, says he, I am in health still,
though I have lost my estate; Suppose he has lost his liberty, come to him
now, how do thou now? I am well still, I have not lost my friends; nay,
suppose he has lost his yoak-fellows; how do now? alive still through Gods
mercy; nay, further, suppose he has lost his estate, friends, liberty, and
that God has struck him sick, and hid his face from him; why, how is it now?
why, out of hell, through Gods mercy, still he acknowledges Gods mercy in what
condition soever he is in.

The second Use is a Use of comfort.
What is there any new creatures here now? if there be, blessed be God, for all
is yours: as in the 1 Cor. 3.22. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours,
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. The longer you live, when you die,
Christ is yours, and the sooner you die, you shall have life. And see how God
strengthens them that trust him, as you may see in Isai. 51. I am he that
comfort David, even I am he that comfort thee. Ah, but says the poor
soul, my enemies are very strong: why needst thou fear man, that is but the
creature? A child of God, and afraid of the son of man; a child of God to
live in glory hereafter for ever, and be afraid of man that shall wither like
grass? I, but says the poor soul, there is one thing more then this, if men
and Devils were my enemies, they were but creatures, but my God is gone; if
that men, or friends, or creatures had forsaken me, then I might not be afraid,
but my God is gone, and I have cause to mourn. But see in the 49. of Isai.
13.14, 15. Sing O Heaven, and be joyful O earth, and break forth into singing
O mountains; for God has comforted his people, and will have merey on his
afflicted. Sure the Lord has some great thing to say, that he calls all to
sing: well, what then, see the objection; But Zion said, my Lord has forgotten
me, and my God has forsaken me. But mark the answer; says the Lord, Can a
mother forget her child? yea they may, yet will not I forget thee; As if he
should say, What, do thou think that I will forget thee? no; thou art my
child, and I will not forget thee, no. See in the 66. of Isai. 13. As one whom
his mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in
Jerusalem. As if the Lord should say, I will comfort you in spite of all the
Devils in Hell. Thus much for the second use, the use of comfort, showing the
happy and comfortable condition of all that are new creatures, God and all is
theirs.

A third Use is a Use of Terror.
To you old creatures, who have lived this thirty, or forty, or fifty years
in sin; in swearing and drunkenness and cozening your neighbors; well, all
of you that live in this estate, are in a most desperate condition; still
continue in sin, and never look after heaven; know my brethren, that the
Lord will one day pay you home. Where is your comfort; in God? no, in hell, if
the book of God be true; for see in the thirtieth of Isai. Hell is preserved of
old. Here is a place for you, what think you of it? Give me leave to ask you
a question, you that have lived so long in London, and may hear as many
Sermons throughout the year, as there are days in the year, if you will;
what is your comfort? you must have some comfort, therefore deal plainly with
your one hearts, what comfort have you, what are your riches your comfort? well
then before you go home to them, take one Scripture with you, which is in Luke
5.24. woe unto you that are rich, for you have received your consolation. Now
see if you can find any comfort out of this, if you can, then blessed are you,
but if not, you are cursed. Why, will some say, are rich men cursed? no, but
such as make riches their Gods, woe to you. Well then, come to a poor rich
man, I call him poor, though never so rich, because we are all poor that are
without Christ. It may be your house is full, and your bags full, and your
shops full, but woe be to you that are full; and then woe be to you that laugh.
What may some say, may not we laugh? yes, but it is such a laughter, as will
end in mourning, O woe be to you. Well, come to you poor men, where are your
comforts? what on your means and good hearts? I, but all is nothing without
Christ; ah me thinks I see one lying on his deathbed, with a dreadful
howling, lamenting, and bewayling his condition, expecting comfort, but can
find none; for when he looks on God, there is nothing but terror; look on
the creature, nothing but terror; look on the word of God, and every sentence
speaks terror to him; nay, every letter in the Bible are as so many daggers to
strike him in the heart, and whosoever dies out of Christ. That is a sweet
saying in the Psalms to a godly man; The Lord comfort me on every side; but
now to a man out of Christ, when he looks on every thing, they are but as
curses to him, his wife, children, neighbors, goods, houses, and all as curses
to thee. And see what the Psalmist says in the 58. Psalm. 10. The righteous
shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood
of the wicked. Well, I beseech you Brethren, labor to be new creatures, and to
get an interest in Christ; for your souls and bodies shall fry in hell to all
eternity, if thou have no part in Christ; for Jesus Christ is the ground of a
Christians comfort. So then without Christ, without comfort, without Heaven,
and without all; So then most miserable is that man that is Christlesse.

The last use is a Use of Exhortation.
Let us all labor to go to Jesus Christ for comfort; it may be you pray, and
you go amongst Christians; why, it is good, and you go to Ministers, it is
well, but if you go not unto Jesus Christ, all is nothing, there is no comfort
but in Jesus Christ.

Now I shall show you that there are four impediments that hinders a soul
from going to Christ.

The first impediment is sin.
O my Brethren, take heed of sin; for see in the 59. of Isai. 2. Your
iniquities have separated between God and you, and your sins have hid his
face from you. Not your afflictions, but your sins; sickness separates from
health, and imprisonment from liberty; but sin separates God from thy soul;
oh therefore Brethren, have a care of sin, your special sins; get your
hearts up in a morning, and be sure you find your heart broken in every duty;
for many of you never come to a duty, but your hearts are icey, therefore you
must break the ice, or else you cannot drink of the water of life. And this
is the first impediment that hinders a poor soul from going to Christ.

The second Impediment is too much inordinacy after the creature.
Those comforts that are grounded, partly between Christ and the creature, are
dead comforts; ah Brethren, we may preach all our lives long, and yet not drive
men off from the creature, without God pull and tug them off: see in the 45. of
Jeremiah ^. (...) thou great things for thy self? seek them not: What, thou
an heir of Heaven, a child of God, one that is married to Jesus Christ, and
seek after the creature? oh in the name of God rest not on the creature, but
go to Jesus Christ oh if that the Lord would open your eyes this day, you
would then cry, None but Christ, none but Christ. The Apostle Paul says, Trust
not in uncertain riches, (...) in the living God, who gives all things richly
to enjoy. O trust in God, trust not in riches that are ^y, but in God who is
full; trust not in man who cannot live, but in God who lives to all eternity;
O who would not trust in God? my Brethren, if that any creature can give you a
drop of comfort, trust in them, if not, why then trust in the Lord Jesus
Christ. But if you go to look comfort in the creature, you may as soon find
the Sun in the Earth, as comfort in the creature.

The third Impediment, is groundless objections.
If the Devil or wicked men hindered you from comfort, it were lamentable, but
you hinder your own felues of comfort, I dare say, th^re are many that take
part with the Devil and wicked men in finding out objections against the
Ministers, and though the Minister answers them one by one, and gives them
soul-convincing arguments thy Scripture; yet the very next day, the same still,
that I am persuaded, many there are that study objections to object against the
Ministers, that if the Minister should study to answer them, it would be his
only work; for they still study objections to put him to a nonplus. Well,
Brethren, do not yield to these objectio^s, for they come from hell. But let me
persuade you to labor to see Jesus Christ at all times, in every trouble,
cross, or affliction; my meaning is, labor to see the attributes of God in
all afflictions, see the love of God; when you walk in the fields, see the
power and wisdom of God; and when you see your enemies, look on the power of
God that is able to confound them all; ah Brethren, we have lost many Sermons
and many good duties for want of Jesus Christ, pray God we do so no more. Now,
Brethren, let us all resolve to say, all Sermons are empty, and all prayers are
empty, all duties are empty, all creatures are empty, and all things are empty,
without Jesus Christ; oh therefore you old men and women, look up, do not you
see your glass is even out? do not you see the Sun is down? as it is with
the laborers in the field, that have loitered all the day, and see the Sun
is down, then they begin to stir, and say, O come let us be doing, for our
Master will come presently, and we shall not have done our days work; so
Brethren, it is with you, you have been loitering all this while, and now the
Sun is down, the glass is even out, therefore up and be doing, for our
Master will come, the Lord Christ he will come, and woe be to that soul, that
when Christ shall come, shall be found idle in his service, therefore for the
Lords sake labor to get the Lord Jesus Christ.

And you young ones, who seem to be the upholders of the Ministry, it is well,
we have hopes of you, well, labor to get Jesus Christ, and keep him when you
have him; for the Gospel will not be taken from us, I hope, therefore labor to
get Jesus Christ for your comfort; for what is the reason in times of war and
famine, that men are so fearful, and afraid? only because Christ is not the
ground of their comfort, therefore let me beseech you, both young and old, all
for to labor after Jesus Christ, and having got him, then trust him with all,
with health, wealth, goods, estate, soul and body, trust him with all; for if
Christ be the ground of thy comfort, thou needst not fear, neither men nor
Devils, nor any thing under the Heavens, for they can do us no hurt at all.

FINIS.

