Jews in America, OR, PROBABILITIES That the AMERICANS are of that Race.

With the removal of some contrary reasonings, and earnest desires for
effectual endeavors to make them Christian.

Proposed by THO: THOROVVGOOD, B. D. one of the Assembly of Divines.

CANT. 8. 8. We have a little sister, and she has no breasts, what shall we
do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?

MAT. 8. 11. Many shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit
down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Aethiopes vertuntur in filios Dei, si egerint paenitentiam, and filii Dei
transeunt in Aethiopes si in profundum venerint peccatorum: Hieronym. in Esai,

London, Printed by W. H. for Tho. Slater, and are be to sold at his shop at
the sign of the Angel in Duck lane, 1650.

TO THE HONORABLE Knights and Gentlemen that have residence in, and relation
to the County of Norfolk, Peace, from the God of Peace.
WHen the glad tidings of the Gospels sounding in America by the preaching of
the English arrived hither, my soul also rejoiced within me, and I remembered
certain papers that had been laid aside a long time, upon review of them, and
some additions to them, they were privately communicated unto such as persuaded
earnestly they might behold further light; being thus finished, and licenced
also to walk abroad, as they were stepping forth, that incivility charged upon
Chrysippus occurred, that he dedicated D. Laert. p. 381.
not his writings to any King or Patron, which custom presently seemed not
only lawful, but as ancient as those Scriptures where Saint Luke in the
history of the Acts of the Apostles applies himself to Theophilus, Act. 1. 1.
And Saint John to the Elect Lady, so named, D. Heins. in 2. Jo.
some think, or for her graces so entitled, I was easily induced to follow
this fashion, and my thoughts soon reflected upon you, Who are (...), as well
as (...), lovers of God, and choice men of your Country. I may be censured for
this high, general, and ambitious dedication; but I do freely publish my own
utter unworthiness: it is true, my respects and love be very much to you all,
and my native soil, yet in this I do not drive any private design, I look
beyond my self, at your honor, the honor of the Nation, yea the glory of
God, and the soule-good of many millions that are yet in darkness and out of
Christ; By you is the following tract communicated to the world, I wish, and
pray, that the design bespoken in it may be cordially furthered by you, and
all that read or hear thereof; it is like you will find in the probabilities so
many Judicial resemblances in America, that as it was said of old, (...)
Hesych. ph
(...), either Plato writes like Philo the Jew, or Philo is become Platonicke;
so the Jews did Indianize, or the Indians do Judaize, for surely they are
alike in many, very many remarkable particulars, and if they be Jews, they
must not for that be neglected; visible comments indeed they are of that
dismal Text, Thou shall become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword to
all Nations, etc. Deuteronomy. 20. 37. and so they are every where to this day: what
more reproachful obloquy is there among men, then this, Thou art a Jew? Oh the
bitter fruits of disobedience; and it is high time for us Gentiles to lay up that
example, in the midst of our hearts, Pro. 4. 21. remembering always, because of
unbelief they were broken off, and, if God spared not the natural branches,
take heed lest he spare not thee. Romans 11. 21. It was a sudden sentence, Tam
viles inter Christianos Iudaei, ut inter mundum Io. Maj. Hist. Scot. l. 4. c. 9.
triticum mures, Jews are as bad and vile among Christians, as Mice in clean
wheat; for glorious were their privileges, and we have a share in some of
them, that last especially -- of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is
God over all, blessed for ever, Romans 9. 4, 5. and for another thing they have
highly merited our regard -- To them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3.
9. The holy Scriptures were concredited to them, and they have faithfully
preserved them for us, and conveyed them to us: Former times indeed found cause
to exterminate them these dominions, I say nothing for such their
reintroduction, which must be with sacred and civil cautions, that the svveet
name of our dearest Lord be not blasphemed, nor the Natives robbed of their
rights, but when will Christians in earnest endeavor their conversion, if the
name of Jevv must be odious everlastingly? I speak for their Gospelizing,
though some suspect they are never likely to come again under that covenant, as
if the Liber repudii, the bill of divorce mentioned Sixth. Sen. Bib. S. l. 2. R.
p. 97. Wollet. Comp. Theol. p. 197.
by the Prophet did put them away from God for ever, Esa. 50. 1. as if they
should return to their Spouse no more, but that there is for them a time of
love, and that they shall be grafted in, Romans 11. 23. is manifested afterward
upon Part. 1.
Scripture grounds; and if the period of their wandering be upon its
determination, and their recovery approaching, how may we rejoice in the
return of that Prodigal? It is meet that we should make merry and be glad,
for our brother that was dead is reviving again, Luke 15. 32. How should we
beg for them that God would pour upon them the spirit of grace and
supplication, that they may look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn
for him as one mourns for his only son. Zach. 12. 10. Or if the lost
Tribes are not to be found in America, of whatsoever descent and origination
the poor Natives be, if they find the Lord Christ, and the Nov-angles be the
Wisemen guiding them unto their peace, great cause shall we have to lift up
the high praises of our God in spiritual exultation; how should we cast our
mite into this treasury, yea our Talent, our Talents, if we have them? for
certainly the time is coming, That as there is one Shepherd, there shall be
one Sheepfold. Io. 10. 16. It is true, our own Country in many respects
stands in need of help, we are fallen into the last and worst times, the old
age of the world, full of dangerous and sinful diseases, Iniquity is
increased, and if ever, if to any people, the saying of that Torrent of Tullian
eloquence (so Jerome calls Lactantius) T. 1. Ep. p. 105.
be applicable, it is to poor England, that is not only in the gall of
bitterness, but in the very dregs of error and ungodliness, Ideo mala omnia
rebus humanis ingravescunt, quia Deus hujus mundi effector ac gubernator
derelictus est, quia susceptaesunt, contra quam fas est impiae lib. 5. c. 8.
religiones, postremo quia ne coli quidem vel a paucis Deus sinitur. But, O my
soul, if thou be wise, be wise for thy self, Pro. 9. 12. and give me leave
to say to you as Moses to his Israel, Only take heed to your selves, and
keep your souls diligently, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. make your calling and election sure,
2 Pet. 1. 10. and because you are the children of faithful Abraham, command
your children and families that they walk in the ways of the Lord, Genesis 18.
9. and let who will serve themselves, follow lying vanities, and set up their
own lusts; let every one of us say and do as Joshua, I and my house will serve
the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. And not only serve the Lord with and in our households,
but in furthering the common good of others, and it is considerable God is
pleased to own public interests, though in civil things with the Nehem 3.
5. 2 Samuel 20 19.
name of his own inheritance. But this is the sin, this is the misery of
these times, All seek their own, not the things of Jesus Christ. Even Phil. 2.
21.
regulated charity may begin at home, it may not, it must not end there, it
is the only grace that is sown on earth, it grows up to heaven and continues
there, it goes with us thither, and there abides to all eternity, and it is
therefore (...), greater then faith and hope, 1 Cor. 13. last.
not from continuance only, but its extensivenesse, it delights to be
communicative, it reaches an hand of help one way or other to every one that
needs, though at never so great a distance; after the cloven tongues as of fire
had warmed the affections of the holy Act. 2. 1.
Apostles, they had so much love to souls that they forgot their fathers
house, discipled all Nations, and preached the Gospel to every creature, Their
line went through all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world, that
former Psa. 19. 4.
known world, the same spirit has warmed the hearts of our Countrymen, and
they are busy at the same work in the other, the newfound world; For behold
a white horse Revel. 6. 2.
and he that sat on him had a bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he
went forth conquering, and to conquer; so the Lord Christ shall be light to
that world also, and Gods salvation to the ends Esa. 49. 6.
of the earth. Britain has won the Gospel-glory from all other Countries, not
only embracing it with the foremost, as old Gildas testifies, De excid. Brit.
but it was the first of all the Provinces that established Christianity by a
law says Sabellicus, our Lucius was the first Christian In Bal. Cent. p. 23.
King that Annals make mention of, and venerable Bede out of Eutropius
declares that Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, was created to that dignity in this
Island, and Sozom. l. 9. c. 11. says that so were Marcus and Gratian also; But
Constantine brought further honor to the Nation and Religion: For the Saxon
Bid, and Ponticus Virunnius affirm expressly, that p. 25.
Constantine was born in Britain; after this, ingemuit orbis videns se totum
Romanum, All the world wondered after the Beast, and groaned under the Papal
Rev. 13. 3.
servitude, and our K. Henry the eight was the first of all the Princes who
brake that yoke of Antichrist: but nearer yet to our purpose; The Inhabitants
of the first England, so Verstegan C. 5. 123.
calls that part of Germany whence our Ancestors came hither with the Saxons
and Iutes, derive their Christianity from Iewry, Ad nos doctrina de terra
Iudaeorum per sanctos Apostolos, qui docebant gentes, pervenit, as that great
linguist, Not. in Bed. Hist. p. 257.
learned, and laborious Mr Wheelocke has observed, and translated out of the
old Saxon Homilies, it is but just therefore lege talionis, that we repay what we
borrowed, and endeavor their conversion who first acquainted us with the
eternal Gospel, and if it be probable that providence honored this Nation
with the prime discovery of that New World, Part. 3.
as is intimated hereafter, it is true without all controversy, that from this
second England God has so disposed the hearts of many in the third, New
England, that they have done more in these last few years toward their
conversion, then has been effected by all other Nations and people that have
planted there since they were first known to the habitable world, as if that
Prophecy were now in its fulfilling; Behold, I will do a new thing, now it
shall spring forth shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in Esa. 43. 19.
the Wilderness and rivers in the desert, etc. When K. Theodoric. Theodob^rt,
Clotharius, Qu. Brunechild of France, and to Aldibert and Aldiberga of England.
Council. p. 71.
our Ancestors lay also in darkness and the shadow of death, Gregory wrote
diverse Epistles to several Noblemen and Bishops, yea and to some Kings and
Queens of France and England, these Sir H. Spelman that famous Antiquary, your
noble Countreyman, and of alliance to diverse of you, calls epistolas
Britannicas, which are also mentioned afterward; in these he gives God thanks
for their forwardness to further the work of grace, and desires earnestly the
continuance of their bountiful and exemplary encouragement of such as were
zealously employed in that Soule-worke, and that is one of the two businesses
intended in the following discourse, which begs your assistance in your
Spheres, and cordial concurrence to promote a design of so much glory to the
Lord of glory. This is no new notion, or motion, all the royal Charters
required the Gospellizing of the Natives; and in the beginning of this
Parliament there was an Ordinance of Lords and Commons appointing a Committee
of both, and their work was, among other things, to advance the true
Protestant Religion in America, and to spread the Gospel among the Natives
there; and since, very lately, there is an Act for the promoting and
propagating the Gospel of Jesus Christ in New England. I wish prosperity to
all the Plantations, but those of New England deserve from hence more then
ordinary favor; because, as by an Edict at Winchester, about Holinsh. Chro.
part. 1. p. 15.
eighth hundred years since, King Ecbert commanded this Country should be
called Angles-land, so these your Countrymen of their own accord, and alone,
were, and are, ambitious to retain the name of their own Nation; besides, this
England had once an Heptarchate, Kent, Mercia, West Saxons, Northumberland,
East Angles, East Saxons, South Saxons.
and then your Country was the chief of that Kingdom called Anglia
Orientalis, and these are the nearest of all the seven to you in name,
Nov-angles, East Angles; I pray that you would be nearest and most helpefull to
them in this most Christian and Gospel-like design, which I leave with you,
and two or three Petitions at the throne of grace for you; one is that of
Moses, Ye shall not do after all the Deuteronomy. 12 8.
things that we do hear this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own
eyes, but that ye walk by rule and not by example; this is an age much
enclining to Enthousiasmes and Revelations; men pretend to external and inward
impulses, but we must remember, though we had a voice from heaven, yet having
the Scriptures we have (...) a more sure Prophetical word, whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed, as unto a light, that shines 2 Pet. 1. 19.
in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your
hearts; here is a comparison, even with an heavenly voice, which must veil and
submit to the written word, because poor mankind may easily be deluded by him,
who among his many other wiles and depths can transform himself into an Angel
of light. Again, 2 Cor. 11. 14.
my prayer for you is, that in the woeful concussions and commotions of these
days, your selves may stand firm and unmovable: You have seen the waters
troubled, and the Mountains shaken with the swelling thereof, Psalm. 46. 3.
Oh, that you may say, in and with holy David's sense, though an host should
encampe against me, my heart shall not fear, though war should rise up
against me, in this will I be confident; this? Psalm. 27. 3.
and what is it, but ver. 1. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall
I fear, the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid; even
heathens have said much and done much toward that (...), magnanimity and
patience, but Christians have an higher prospect, they look above the terrors
of men, and they do not fear their fear; for as Stephen through (...) 8. 12.
a shower of stones, they can see the heavens open and the Son of man sitting
at the right hand of Act. 7. 56.
God; nihil crus sentit in nervo, si animus sit in Tertull.
caelo, they are not so much affected with what they feel, as with that they
believe, because we walk by faith and not by sight. 2 Cor. 5. 7.


And oh, that these strange mutations may persuade us all, all the days of our
appointed Job. 14. 14.
time to wait, until our change come, even that change which never, never can
again be changed; these are the last times and yet a little 1 John 2. 18. Heb.
10. 37.
while, yea (...), yet a little, little while, and he that shall come will
come, and will not tarry, his fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge
his floor, and gather the wheat into the garner, but Mat. 3. 12.
will burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire. The Psalm. 1. 5.
ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, for all faces shall then be
unmasked, and every vizard shall be plucked off, The Lord will then 1 Cor. 4. 5.
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the heart, and then every one that has done well, shall have
praise of God. The Lord God of our mercies fit you for his appointment,
stablish you in every 2 These. 2. 17. 3. 3.
good word and work, and keep you from evil, that you may give up your
account with joy, and not Heb. 13. 17.
with grief; and now I commend you all, and all that love that appearing of
our Lord, unto the Tim. 4. 8.
word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them that Act. 20. 32.
are sanctified; such is the serious and unfaigned devotion for you, of him who
willingly subscribes himself,

Your most humble servant in our dearest Lord, THO: THOROWGOOD.

JEWS IN AMERICA, OR Probabilities that the Americans be Jews: From
Part. 1.
Six several conjectures. General Introduction. Chap. 1. 1. Conjecture. Their
own acknowledgement. Chapter 2. 2. Rites and customs in both alike, Common
ceremonies such, Chap. 3. and solemn. Chapter 4. 3. Their words and manner of
speech, as the Jews, Chap. 5. 4. Their man-devouring. Chapter 6. 5. They have not
yet been Gospellized. Chapter 7. 6. Their calamicies, as 28. Deuteronomy. Chapter 8.

Part 2.
Some contrary reasonings removed. 1. In the General. Chapter 1. 2. Particularly,
How, 1. The Jews should get into America. Chap. 1. 2. So few empeople that
great part of the world. Chapter 3. 3. Become so predigiously barbarous. Chap. 4.


Part. 3.
Earnest desires for hearty endeavors to make them Christian. 1. To the
Planters. 1. Cause of their removal. Chap. 1. 2. Hope of the Natives
Conversion. Chap 2. 3. Directions to it. Chap. 3. 4. Cautions about it. Chap. 4.
2. To the English there. 1. In behalf of the Planters, aspersions wiped off.
Chap. 5. and 6. 2. Toward the Natives conversion. 1. Motives. Chap. 7. 2.
Helps. Chap. 8. 3. Encouragements from our Countrymens pious endeavors there.
Chapter 9. 4. And the success thereof upon the Indians. Chapter 10.



The Preface to the READER.
BOna domus in ipso veistbulo debetagnosci says De Doct. Chr. l. 4.
Austin, the portall commonly promises somewhat of the house it self, and
prefaces be as doors that let in the Reader to the Book, and bespeake much of
the intention of the writer; you are in some measure prepared already by the
foregoing Epistle, with the forefront, and first page: Marsilius Ficinus said
of his book De triplici Vita. Esca tituli tam suavis quam plurimos alliciet ad
gustandum, The title will invite some Longa, San^ Caele^us, Apolog. ad finem.
to further enquiry; it is in man's nature to be well pleased with novelties,
thence later times have had good leave to correct former mistakes. It was
written with confidence long since, that the she Bears did lick their
inform litter into fashion, that the young Viper thrusts its Dam out of the
world to bring it self into it, and that the Swan sings its own dirige at his
dying, all which Oblect. Acad. c. 21. Pseud. Epidem.
be sufficiently confuted by after experiences, famous varieties of this sort
be daily produced to view, those are curious enquiries into common errors by
Doctor Brown. It was said of one contort in body, but of a fine spirit, Animus
Galbae male habitat, It was a bad house for so good an Inhabitant; many thought
so and worse of Richard the third, King of England, till Mr Bucks Hist.
those late endeavors to rectify him and his readers. that Geographia Sacra
is an exact and accurate work, in respect of the subject and materials, the
scattering of Nations at the building of Babel, and it may puzzle some men's
thoughts, that he should know so well the places of their dispersion so long
since, and yet we continue ignorant what is become of Gods own first people,
which shall be recovered to him again, and have not been missing so many
years. The Trojans, though now no Nation, live yet in the ambitious desire of
other people, clayming from them their descent: The Jews, once the Lords own
peculiar people, are now the scomme and scorn of the world; Florus calls Hist.
Romans Tac^tus. Id^os ab Ida. l. 5. Plut. Symp. c. 9. Suidas in (...).
their glory the Temple, Impiae gentis arcanum; Democritus another Historian
said they worshipped an Asses head, every third year sacrificed a man, etc.
Others speak spightfull things of them, and their pettigree; only the
Lacedemonian King, in that Letter whereof you have a copy, 1 Macab. 12. 20.
etc. tells Onias the High Priest. It is found in writing that the Spartans and
Jews are Brethren, and come out of the generation of Abraham. The original
indeed of the Jews is assuredly known to themselves and all Christians; We
have no such evidence for any other people that have now a being; there is
nothing more in the dark to the inhabitants of the several parts of this
earth, then their own beginnings, and it is thus in Countries of along time
known to each other, and yet in such disquisition they cannot afford one
another almost any light or help; no wonder therefore that the Original of the
Americans is in such uncertain obscurity, for their very name has not been
heard of much more than one hundred and fifty years, it is a wonder rather that
so great a part of the world should be till then Terra incognita,
notwithstanding the ambition, curiosity, and avarice of mankind carried him
into a greedy inquisition after all places and corners where men and beasts
abode, or any commodity was to be found: Hieronimus Benzo in his Nova novi
orbis Historia, so often hereafter mentioned, professes, that above all things
concerning the Americans, his great design was to find out what thoughts l.
2. c. 18. p. 248. Io. de Lact descriptio Am^ric. dedic. Carolo R. Britan. Mr.
Castle, Mr. Gage, etc.
they had of Christians; touching the Country it self in the Topography and
other particulars, besides diverse mentioned in the following discourse; some
have of late done excellently that way: that it is no part of my business,
which, next to the desire of their conversion to Christ, was, and is, to ask
whence they came; and that they be Judaicall, I have laid together several
conjectures as they occu^^ in reading and observing, to stir up and awaken
more able inquisitors, to look after the beginning, nature, civilizing, and
Gospellizing those people, and to cast in my poor mite toward the
encouragement of our Countrymen in such their pious undertaking; and though
some men have spoken mean things of them in reference to their labors that
way, as if they had been negligent therein, such men consider not I fear, how
long their Countrymen have been wrestling with diverse difficulties, and busily
employing their minds and time in providing outward accommodations for
themselves in a strange land, they remember not the natural perverseness of
all mankind to spiritual things, nor with what counterworkes Satan does oppose
the underminers of his Principalities, nor how he has broken the language of
the Natives into several tongues and dialects to impede their conversion, nor
how the Novangles have themselves been broken into diverse ruptures, lest they
should be at leisure to further the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom upon the
spoils and diminution of his; this was in the purpose of their hearts at
first, and now to their comfort they do abundantly see that the Natives are a
docible people, who for their contempt of gold and silver, and for some other
reasons, have been deemed brutish, and almost irrational; but to what is
after written it may be mentioned in this place, that in Mexico they were
observed to be wise and politic in I l. p. 37.
government, to the admiration of Christians, yea they were not ignorant in
those parts of letters and writing, though in a different fashion from others:
Acosta did observe, the Jews write from the right hand to the left, others
from the left to the right, the Chinois or East-Indians write from the top to
the bottom, and the Mexicans l 6. c. 9.
from the bottom to the top, the Reformed Dominican in his new survey of the
West Indies, tells of a Town as he traveled, called Amat Mr Gage p. 182
Titlan, a Town of Letters, and of very curious Artifices of p. 50. etc.
their Citizens, of Goldsmiths work and otherwise, their ingenuity, cunning
and courage is marvelously manifest in their leading Acost. l. 3. c 15.
a Whale as big as a mountain, with a cord, and vanquishing him in this
manner; by the help of their Canoes or little Boats, they come near to the
broad side of that huge creature, oand with great dexterity leap upon his
neck, there they ride as on horseback, and thrust a sharp stake into his
nosthrill, so they call the hole or vent by which they breathe, he beats it in
with another stake as forcibly as he can, the furious Whale in the mean time
raises Mountains of waters, and runs into the deep with great violence and
pain, the Indian still sits firm, driving in another stake in o that other
passage, so stopping his breath, then he goes again to his Canoe, which with
a cord he had tied to the Whales side, and so he paesseth to land; the Whale
running away with the cord, leaps from place to place in much pame till he
gets to shore, and being on ground, he cannot move his huge body, then a
great number of Indians come to the conqueror, they kill the Whale, cut his
flesh in pieces, they dry it, and make use of it for food, which lasts them
long, thus plainly verifying that expression, Psalm. 74. 14. Thou breakest the
heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to the people
inhabiting the Wilderness: When, or where, or by whom is this thus done, but
by these? who will not now desire, and willingly lend his help to cover their
naked bodies, and cloth their more naked souls with the Gospel, who, and who
alone have so literally fulfilled that Scripture of our God? But let me
commend three other things to thy consideration, that thy affections may be
warmed toward thy Countrymen, and they receive encouragement in the planting
of themselves, and the Gospel among the Natives.

First, they may be preparing an hiding place for thy self, whoever, whatever
now thou art, thou may be overtaken by a tempest, and stand in need of a
shelter, and where can thou be Gage survey. p. 85. 1* 5. 139.
better for sweetness of air and water, with the fertility of the soil,
giving two wheat harvests in one year in several places, yea in some, three,
says P. Martyr, and Books generally speak of that P. 153. 245.
Land as of a second Canaan: and for New England you may believe the relation
of a very friend there to his like here, who mutually agreed upon a private
character, that the truth might be discovered without deceit or glozing, and
thus he wrote to him whom he entirely loved. The air of this Country is very
Letter of A. C. 1635.
sweet and healthful, the days two hours shorter in Summer, and two hours
longer in Winter then they be with you, the Summer is a little hotter, and the
Winter, a little colder, our grounds are very good and fruitful for all kind
of corn, both English and Indian, our cattle thrive much better here then in
Old England, Foul increase with us exceedingly, we have many sweet and
excellent springs, and fresh Rivers, with abundance of good Fish in them; of a
very truth, I believe verily, it will be within a few years the plentifullest
place in the whole world, etc. I might proclaim, says Lerius, the Inhabitants
of that Land happy, meaning p. 168.
the Natives, if they had knowledge of the Creator; so that as parents
intending to marry their Daughters well, extend themselves in what they may to
increase their portion, and make way for their preferment, our heavenly Father
has dealt thus with these Americans, enriching them with Gold, Silver, good
air, good water, and all other accommodations for use and delight, that they
might be the more earnestly wooed and sought after.

And yet further, as he commended his house offered to sale, that it had good
neighbors, if thou be driven thither, go chearefully, Plutar. Themist
for thou go to thine own Countrymen, from one England to another, New
England indeed, witness that experimented asseveration of him worthy of
credit, who having lived in a Colony there of many thousand English almost
twelve years, Sim. C, p 61.
and was held a very sociable man, speaks considerately, I never heard but
one oath sworn, never saw one man drunk, nor ever heard of three women
adulteresses, if these sins be among us privily, the Lord heal us, I would
not be understood to boast of our innocence, there is no cause I should, our
hearts may be bad enough, and our lives much better. And yet they have more
abundantly testified their pious integrity in serious endeavors to propogate
Gospel-holinesse, even to those that be without, their godly labors
Christianizing the Natives must be remembered to their praise, they have had
long and longing preparative thoughts and purposes that way, and as Saint Paul
once to his Corinthians, 2. 6. 11. they have seemed to say O Americans, our
mouth is opened unto you, our heart is enlarged, you are not straightned in us,
be not straightned in your own bowels, and now for a recompense of all our
endeavors to preach Christ unto you, we ask no more, but be ye also enlarged
with gladness to receive the Lord Jesus Christ: their active industry in this
kind with the success is now famously visible in several discourses, which
whosoever shall read will be sufficiently contented in his spiritual and
outward well-wishings to his friends, both of this Nation and the Natives, for
the Gospel runs there and is glorified: and here I crave leave to speak a word
or two to the Military Reader, the late English American traveller, dedicating
his observations upon Mr. Gage.
his journeys of three thousand three hundred miles within the maine Land of
America, to the Lord Fairefax, speaks knowingly to his Excellency, that with
the same pains and charge that the English have been at in planting one of the
petty Islands, they might have conquered so many great Cities, and large
territories on the Continent as might very well merit the title of a Kingdom;
he shows further, that the Natives have not only just right to the Land, and
may transfer it to whom they please, but that it may easily be won from the
Spaniards, and that for these three Mr Gage pref. and p. 139, and 10
reasons among the rest. 1. The Spaniards themselves are but few and thin. 2.
The Indians and Blackamoores will turn against them, and so will 3. The
Criolians, that is, the Spaniards borne in America, whom they will not suffer
to bear office in Church or state; Look Westward then ye men of War,
thence you may behold a rising Sun of glory, with riches and much honor, and
not only for your selves, but for Christ, whom you say you desire above all,
and are delighted to honor: In yonder Countries, that the following leaves
speak of, non cedunt arma togae, the pen yields to the pike, the first place
of honor is given to the profession of arms, and therefore in Mexico the
Noblemen Acosta. Hist. l. 6. c. 26.
were the chief soldiers; thus you may enlarge not only your own renown,
but the borders of the Nation, yea the Kingdom of the King of Saints. We have
all made covenants and professions of reformation at home, with promises to
propagate the Gospel of our dear Lord among those that remain in great and
miserable blindness, how happy were it for them and us, if this England were
in such a posture of holiness and tranquillity, that all opportunities might be
embraced to advance its territories abroad; In the interim I could wish with
the most passionate, and compassionate of all the holy Prophets, Oh that my
head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day
and night for the sins, and for the slain of the daughter of my people, Oh
that I had in the wilderness, etc. Ier. 9. 1. 2. Our Country is justly called
our mother, whose heavy groans under multiplied miseries be heard from all
places, whose bowels do not sympathize with her, and yerne over her, who is
not unwilling or ashamed to gather riches or honor from her rents and ruin;
the Heathen Orator spoke affectionately, our parents are Cic. de Offic.
dear to us, and so be our children, alliances and familiars, but the love of
our country, comprehends in it and with it all other dearnesses whatsoever;
and in another place, Omnes qui patriam conserverunt, Somn. Scip.
adjuverunt, auxerunt, certum est esse in caelo, it is certain they are all in
heaven that have been lovers and conservators of their Country; and when
heathenish Babylon was the place of Isreal's exile, they are commanded by God
himself, to seek the peace of the City whether they were carried, and pray
unto the Lord for it, Jer. 29. 7. It is recorded to the honor of Mordecai,
that he sought the wealth of his people, Esth. 10. 3. the contrary to this
entailes ignominy to men and their posterity, by the book of Gods own heral
dry, Esa. 14. 20. Thou shall not be joined with them in burial, because thou
have destroyed thy land, and slain thy people, the seed of evil doers shall
never be renowned; for that Judge judged righteously: In a civil war there
is no Sir Io. Dod^. Hist of Princi. of Wales. p. 23.
true victory, in as much as he that prevails is also a loser. But I return,
and reinvite to peruse these probabilities, and if they like not, because they
are no more but guesses and conjectures, yet the requests I hope shall be
listened unto, for they aim at Gods glory and man's salvation, and nothing
else; and surely the poor Natives will not be a little encouraged to look
after the glorious Gospel of Christ, when they shall understand that not only
the English among them, but we all here are daily suitors for them at the
throne of grace, so that we may say as Paul to the Romans, 1. 9. God is our
witness, whom we serve with our spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that
without ceasing we make mention of them always in our prayers; Mr. Elliot
whose praise is now through all our Churches, 2 Cor. 8. 18. deserves public
encouragement from hence, besides those sprinklings of an Apostolical spirit
received from heaven, by which in an high and holy ambition he preaches the
Gospel where Christ had not been named, Romans 15. 20. such another (...),
like-minded soule-lover is not readily to be found, that naturally cares for
their matters, Phil. 2. 20. regarding the Indians as if they were his own
charge and children, and as God has furnished him with ministerial and
spiritual abilities for the work. I wish that he and his com-Presbyters and
companions in that labor, might be supplied with all external accommodations,
to further the civilizing, and Gospellizing of the Americans.

And now me thinks I hear thee say also, Oh that the day breaking of the
Gospel there, might be the way of Saints, even the path of the just, as the
shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Pro. 4. 18. and
oh that all our Nation here and there, would forbear all other strivings,
being ashamed and afraid lest their woeful quarrels be told in Gath, and
published in the streets of Askalon, to the prejudice of the Gospels progress
here and there and every where; Erasmus felt what he said of the differences in
his time, Tragaediae Lutheranae Ep. p. 819.
mihi ipsi etiam calculo molestiores, and who laments not the woeful tearings
of our Nation? who bewailes not to see the breakings of the sheepfold? who
mournes not to hear the strange bleeting of the flocks? and what soul is not
grieved for the great divisions of England? and let me wish once more, Oh that
all who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, would study to speak the same
things, and that all would be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and
in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 10. converting all their tongue-combats, and
pen-contentions into an earnest contending, that the faith once delivered to
the Saints (Jud. 3.) might be preserved whole, holy, and entire among
themselves, and be with like holiness and integrity communicated to the
Indians, that do now so much hunger and thirst after that righteousness of
our most dear Lord and Master Christ; let us all with our tongues, purses,
pens, counsels, and prayers, promote this work of God with one shoulder and
consent: there be among us here that have had this in their daily devotions
more then twenty years, which is mentioned to no other end but from desire to
call in thy help also; I will take leave by commending to thy practice the
imitation of learned and holy Theod. Beza in his daily prayer for the Jews,
Lord Jesus thou do justly avenge the contempt of thy self, and that
ungrateful people is worthy In Romans 11. 18
of thy most severe indignation; but, Lord, remember thy covenant, and for thy
names sake be favorable to those miserable wretches, and to us the most
unworthy of all men, unto whom thou have vouchsafed thy mercy, bestow this
goodness also, that we may grow in thy grace, that we be not instruments of
thy wrath against them, but rather, both by the knowledge of thy word, and by
the examples of holy life, we may, by the assistance and virtue of thy holy
Spirit, reduce them into the right way, that thou may once be glorified of
all Nations and people for ever,

Amen.
An Epistolicall Discourse Of Mr. JOHN DVRY, TO Mr. THOROWGOOD. Concerning his
conjecture that the Americans are descended from the Israelites. With the
History of a Portugal Jew, Antonie Monterinos, attested by Manasseh Ben
Israel, to the same effect.
SIR,
IAm bound to thank you for the communication of your book, which I have read
with a great deal of delight and satisfaction; for the rarity of the subject,
and the variety of your observations thereupon, which you have deduced with as
much probability to make out your theme, as History can afford matter: I did
show it to another friend of great judgment and ingenuity, who was so taken
with it, that he said he would have it to be coppied out at his cost, if you
would not publish it to the world, which he and I have resolved to importune
you to do: for although at first blush, the thing which you offer to be
believed, will seem to most men incredible, and extravigant; yet when all
things are laid rationally and without prejudice together, there will be
nothing of improbability found therein, which will not be swallowed up with the
appearance of contrary likelyhoods, of things possible and lately attested by
some to be truths: whereof to confirm your probable conjectures, I shall give
you that information which is come to my hands at several times in these late
years, which you, (if you shall think fit) may publish to the world, as I
have received them, which to the probability of your conjectures add so much
light, that if the things which I shall relate be not mere fictions (which I
assure you are none of mine, for you shall have them without any addition, as I
have received them) none can make any further scruple of the truth of your
assertion; but before I come to particulars, I shall tell you of some thoughts
which are come upon this occasion into my mind, concerning Gods way of dealing
with men's spirits for the manifestation of his truth and wisdom to those that
seek after it; and concerning the wonderful contrivances by which he brings
his counsel to pass beyond all men's thoughts: I have observed, and every one
that will take notice must needs perceive, that the spirits of men in reference
to spiritual matters, whether divine or humane (by humane, I mean all matters
of science and industry depending upon judgment and sagacity) are
distinguishable into two kinds, the one are steadfast to some principles, and
the other are unstable; this distinction in divine matters is clear, from 2
Pet. 3. 17. Jude, ver. 3, 4, 6, 12, 13, 17, 18, 20, 21. and in humane matters
we need none other proof but daily experience. Again, these that are
steadfast to their principles, will be found of two sorts; some are led in an
ordinary common way and rest therein, admitting of nothing further then what
they have attained unto; some (though they do not undervalue the ordinary
ways which in their own kinds are useful and necessary, yet they) aspire to
something more then ordinary and rest not where they are, they believe that
both in humane and divine matters, there is, as long as we are in this life, a
plus ultra, and that we never ought to rest in seeking after the advancement of
learning and the increase of knowledge, till we shall come to see the Father
of lights face to face; the different inclinations of these three sorts of men
in the world, leading them to different courses and strains in their
proceedings, and these begetting diverse encounters amongst them wherein they
disagree, and know not how to right matters toward one another for mutual
content and edification, are the causes of all our strife and confusion in all
affairs, as well of Religious as of civil concernment; nor is it possible to
be free from the disorders and distempers, which make the life of mankind
uncomfortable in this kind, and full of vexation, till God has removed those
that fall away from their own steadfastness out of the earth, which will not
come to pass till he has filled the earth with the knowledge of Esa. 11. 9.
the Lord as the waters cover the sea; till he has brought us all that are
steadfast unto true principles, and that walk by rules, unto the unity of the
faith and knowledge of the son of God, unto Ephesians. 4 13.
a perfect man unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: which
things because they are clearly promised, we may expect shall come to pass,
but till then we shall be carried Ephesians. 4. 14.
differently about with several winds of doctrine, and ensnared in our own
ignorance by the cunning craftiness of men who lie in wait to deceive; for
the unstable are either wickedly set to work changes upon those that are
settled for ends of their own, or weakly carried up and down through the
uncertain apprehensions of things differently represented unto them, sometimes
one way and sometimes another; so that between the motions of men's spirits
subtly unstable tending to unsettle others, and weakly stable susceptible of
any unsettlement from others, all our changes and disorderly carriages, both in
divine and humane affairs do arise; when either those that have no principles
of truth to walk by, study lies to puzzle those that pretend to walk by
rules, or those that have true principles vary from one another in their
degrees of understanding, and in their manner of applying the same to advance
knowledge, and to make discoveries of Gods manifestation of himself; for as
these motions meet with one another in opposite courses, and men led thereby,
stand by one another in disproportionat frames, or justle one another out of
their places for contrary ends; so all our confusions and revolutions of
Churches and States, and therein of scientificall strains, and of practical
undertakings, arise differently in the world: here then is a threefold
diversity in acting, the changeable and moveable disposition of the one sort,
is made to try the stability of the other two, and those that are settled in an
ordinary way, are tryers to those that are led forth to something that is
extraordinary; and those that upon allowed principles do rationally bring forth
something more then ordinary, try the ingenuity of the other two, how far
they love truth for it self; So that each of these puts his neighbor to the
trial of his property, and constraines him to manifest the nature of his way,
how far it is, or is not from God: And although every thing which is beyond
the ordinary strain, is liable to be censured and contradicted by men of
ordinary apprehensions. who condemn for the most part as extravagant and
ridiculous whatsoever is not level with their capacities; yet I am inclined to
believe, that there is always something of God in all men, that are led forth
by extraordinary motions, namely when their spirits do not reject the common
true principles, and yet are raised above them, to apprehend conclusions and
inferences which are not common; and when their affections are regularly
constant to their works, and their undertakings pursued with sobriety in the
fear of God, then I conceive that God has put upon them a special stamp and
character of his virtue, by which he does fit them for some design and service
whereunto he has raised them. I have observed this in very many men of public
spirits, most commonly they have bin laughed at by others for going out of the
common road-way of acting; whether to make good some opinions, which others
never dreamt of, or to do some business which others have thought
impossibilities to be effected; (I say) I have observed, that when they have
been led forth with modesty, without self conceitednesse and vanity, and when
they have prosecuted their enterprises with remarkable perseverance, that God
has made them one way or other remarkably isntrumental and useful toward
their generation for the advancement of his work, which is the reformation of
this world, and the restoration of all things by the kingdom of Jesus Christ,
whereunto all extraordinary gifts, and the unusual leadings forth of men's
spirits are preparatives. I could instance in several men which I have known,
and do know abroad and at home, of several professions, whose studies and
endeavors have been looked upon as whimsies and extravagancies by the
road-way-men of that profession; and yet I am persuaded that they are led and
acted by that Spirit which leads the children of God in all truth; and
because other men otherwise rational and observant, (who though not altogether
destitute of the spirit, yet are not raised above the ordinary pitch) do not
know the drift of the spirit of these; therefore these are looked upon by them
as men of odd conceits: I have seen some of the great Rabbis of our times,
heretofore much scandalized at the proposals and undertakings of Mr Comenius;
but it has pleased God to assist him so with grace, and support him with
constancy in his way, notwithstanding many trialls and temptations; that he
has been able during his ownelife, to see the usefulness of some of his
endeavors, whereof a more full account will be given to the world very
shortly. I could speak of others, whose attempts, though not so apparently
successful during their life, yet no less useful in their kind, and which
in due time, will prove the grounds of great advantages and discoveries unto
posterity, although in the generation where their lot is fallen to live, they
have not been believed nor received. Gods way to dispense grace is not
according to outward appearances, and for this cause, the multitude does not
entertain the instruments thereof with due esteem, nor the means by which it
is offered to the world with respect, because they come in a homely dress, and
without the affectation of any show; nevertheless wisdom at all times is
justified by her children, and there take notice of her paths, and trace the
counsel of God therein, for they can see that Gods ways and counsels reach
from end to end, and that he comprehends in his aim both that which is past,
and that which is present, and that which is to come in future ages; so that in
the conclusion of all, he will make it appear, that the unusual motions of
his servants, which the world have disesteemed and counted foolishness, have
been the extraordinary work of his Spirit in them, whereby he does convince
the world of sin, of righteousness, of judgment: of sin, because the
testimony which they bore to the truth was not received; of righteousness,
because they who served their generation faithfully with the righteous use of
their talent in the midst of scorners, are justly taken away from an
unthankful generation and the evil day, to rest from their labors, that
their works may follow them; and of judgment, because the self conceited
pride and partiality of the wise and prudent of this world, shall be judged and
condemned by the work of his spirit, when he shall bring all the effects
thereof together to make out his complete design against the world, and by
the conjunction of the seemingly scattered parts which his servants have acted
upon their stages, produce the new frame of a perfect Scene, the catastrophe
whereof shall make up a building fit for the kingdom of his Son.

I am fallen upon these thoughts, and acquaint you thus with them, partly to
support mine own spirit against the contradictions which I meet withal in the
way wherein God has set me, for the constant prosecution of peace and truth
without partiality amongst my brethren; partly to apologize for the drift of
your spirit, whereby I perceive you have been led these many years in some of
your studies; for it is very evident to me, that you have sought after a
matter, which to most men will seem incredible, rediculous and extravagant; and
to tell you the truth, before I had read your discourse and seriously weighed
matters, when I thought upon your theme, that the Americans should be of the
seed of Israel, it seemed to me somewhat strange and unlikely to have any
truth in it; but afterward when I had weighed your deduction of the matter, and
looked seriously upon Gods hand in bringing into those parts of the World where
the Americans are, so many religious professors, zealous for the advancement of
his glory, and who are possessed with a belief from the Scriptures, that all
the Tribes of Israel shall be called to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, before
the the end of the world: and when I had recollected and laid together some
other scattered and confused thoughts which at several times I have received,
partly from the places of Scripture, which foretell the calling of the Jews,
and their restitution to their own land, together with the bringing back of
the ten Tribes from all the ends and corners of the earth, partly from some
relations which I had heard a few years ago concerning the ten Tribes, which
the Jews here in Europe had given out; and partly from the observations of
Gods way, which he seems to make by all these changes, and the dissolution of
the States and Empires of the world, toward some great work, and
extraordinary revolution which may shortly come to pass: all which things when
I had called to mind and represented unto my self, I was so far from
derogating any thing from that which you have conjectured concerning the
American Indians; that I began to stand amazed at the appearances of the
probabilities which so many ways offered themselves unto me, to make out and
confirm the effect of that which you have said: And then I begun also upon
another account, to wonder at the strangeness of Gods conduct over your
spirit, that he should have set you a work twelve or more years ago, after
the search of such a matter, by historical observations, whereof then so few,
and almost no footsteps at all were extant to be traced, and whereof now, of a
sudden, the world is like to be filled with such evidences, that it will be an
astonishment to all that shall hear of it, and lay it to heart; and that all
who have any ingenuity will be constrained to confess, that indeed there is a
God who rules in the earth, and that he has ordered the affairs of the
Nations by an universal providence, to bring to pass his own counsels, and
that the things which he has revealed by his word, should in the latter times
be accomplished; for to my apprehension, this will be the great benefit of
these discoveries; namely, that the mouths of Atheists will be stopped, and
convicted of irrationality and foolishness: For when it shall appear to all
men undeniably, that the transmigration of Nations, and the affairs of this
world, have not been carried hitherto by mere chance, or by the craftiness of
humane counsels, or by force; but by the wisdom of a Supreme conduct, who
has ordered all things from the beginning toward an end which has been
foreknown, and to a design foretold. (I say) when this shall appear, and that
in the midst of all these changes and confusions, there is a conduct
overruling the force of man, and disappointing the councels of the crafty;
then the eyes of all men will be upon the Lord, and God alone will be exalted
in righteousness, and the Holy one of Israel in judgment: For seeing it is
evident that the ten Tribes of Israel have been as it were lost in the world
near about the space of two thuusand years, if now they should again appear
upon the stage, first as it were in another world by themselves, and then
afterward speedily come from thence hither to the land of their ancient
inheritance, where they shall be joined to their brethren the Jews (which is
clearly foretold by the Prophets shall come to pass) if (I say) those things
should now begin to come to pass, what can all the world say otherwise, but
that the Lords counsel Isa. 2. Ezec. 34 and 37. Jer. 3^. and 46. Amos. 9.
Micha. 4 etc.
does stand, and that he has fulfilled the words spoken by his Servants the
Prophets concerning Israel; that although all the sinful kingdoms of the
Nations shall be destroyed from off the face of the earth, yet that the house
of Jacob shall not be utterly destroyed, but shall be corrected in measure, for
lo I will command (says God by the Prophet) and I will sift the house Jer.
30. 10, 11. Amos. 9* 8, 9.
of Israel among all Nations, like as corn is sifted in the sieve, yet shall
not the least grain fall upon the earth. These Prophecies must needs be
fulfilled, if there be a God in heaven who has foretold them, and when he
shall make this his word good unto Israel, he will thereby make it undeniably
apparent, that it was he himself and none other who did foretell it: and that
it is also none but he who brings the work about beyond all humane
appearances, according as he did foretell it: and by all this he will show to
all the world, that which he oft-times repeates by the Prophet Isaiah, that he
alone is the Savior, and that there is none besides him, Isa. 45. 5, 6, 15.
till the end. The destruction then of the spiritual Babylon by the
restoration of Israel, shall make out this to all the earth, that God alone is
the Lord over all, and the Savior of the people that put their trust in his
name.

Now the appearances which offer themselves unto me, that these Prophecies are
toward their accomplishment, are many, which now I shall not insist upon,
(perhaps God will direct me to declare them in due season more fully then now I
can intend) but I shall only mention that which I find to be a confirmation of
your conjecture, leaving it to your own discretion, what use you will make of
it.

First then I shall impart unto you some stories which I heard five or six
years ago, when I was in the Low Countries, concerning the ten Tribes; and
then I shall add some information concerning the state of the Jews in our
Europaean and Asiaatique worlds, which I have learned at other times by some
providence which God has offered unto me; and upon the whole matter I shall
leave you to your further conjectures, by that which I shall guess at.

The first story which I heard was at the Hague, a person of chief quality
about the Queen of Bohemia, and one of her Counsel, and a discerning godly
man, and my special friend told me, that the Jew (a Jeweller residing
ordinarily at the Hague) whom I knew, had been there at Court, and with great
joy had told, that they of his Nation had received from Constantinople Letters,
bringing to them glad tidings of two special matters fallen out there; the one
was, that the Grand Seignior had remitted the great taxes which formerly had
been laid upon the Jews of those parts, so that now they were in a manner free
from all burdens, paying but a small and inconsiderable matter to that Empire;
the other was, that a messenger was come unto the Jews who reside near about
the Holy Land, from the ten Tribes, to make enquiry concerning the state of the
Land; and what was become of the two Tribes and the half which was left in it,
when they were transported from thence by Salmanasser. This Messenger was
described to be a grave man, having some attendance in good equipage about him.
He told them that the people from which he was sent were the Tribes of Israel,
which in the days of Hosea the King, were carried captives out of their own
Land by the King 2 King. 1^.
of Assyria, who transported them from Samaria into Assyria and the Cities of
the Medes; but they being grieved for the tronsgressions which caused God to be
angry with them, they took a resolution to separate themselves from all
Idolaters, and so went from the Heathen where they were placed by Salmanassar,
with a resolution to live by themselves, and observe the Commandments of God,
which in their own Land they had not observed: in prosecuting this resolution,
after a long journey of a year and six months, they came to a country wholly
destitute of inhabitants, where now they have increased into a great Nation,
and are to come from thence into their own Land by the direction of God; and
to show them that he was a true Israelite, he had brought with him a Scroule
of the Law of Moses, written according to their custom.

The Gentleman who told me this story, as from the mouth of the Jew, said that
it brought to his mind fully (by reason of the agreement of circumstances
almost in all things) the story which is recorded in the Second Book of
Esdras, which is called Apocrypha, Chap. 13. ver. 40. till 50. which will be
found a truth if that Messenger came and made this Narrative. This was the
first story; and not long after viz. Within the space of five or six months, a
little before I came from the Low Countries, I was told of a Jew who came from
America to Amsterdam, and brought to the Jews residing there* news concerning
the ten Tribes; that he had been with them upon the border of their Land, and
had conversed with some of them for a short space, and seen and heard
remarkable things whiles he stayed with them, whereof then I could not learn
the true particulars; but I heard that a Narrative was made in writing of that
which he had related, which before I went from Holland last, I had no time to
seek after, but since the reading of your Book, and some discourse I have had
with you about these matters, I have procured it from the Low Countries, and
received a Copy thereof in French, attested under Manasseh Ben Israel his
hand, that it does exactly agree with the original, as it was sent me, the
translation thereof I have truly made without adding or taking away any thing;
and because I was not satisfied in some things, and desired to know how far
the whole matter was believed among the Jews at Amsterdam, I wrote to Manasseh
Ben Israel, their chief Rabbi, about it, and his answer I have gotten in two
Letters, telling me that by the occasion of the Questions which I proposed unto
him concerning this adjoined Narrative This narrative so attested and
translated, is at the end of this Book.
of Mr. Antonie Monterinos, he to give me satisfaction, had written instead of
a Letter, a Treatise, which he shortly would publish, and whereof I should
receive so many Copies as I should desire: In his first Letter dated Novem.
last, 25. he says that in his treatise he handles of the first inhabitants of
America, which he believes were of the ten Tribes; moreover, that they are
scattered also in other Countries, which he names, and that they keep their
true Religion, as hoping to return again into the Holy land in due time.

In his second Letter, dated the twenty three of December, he says more
distinctly thus: I declare how that our Israelites were the first finders out
of America; not regarding the opinions of other men, which I thought good to
refute in few words only: and I think that the ten Tribes live not only
there, but also in other lands scattered every where; these never did come
back to the second Temple, and they keep till this day still the Jewish
Religion, seeing all the Prophecies which speak of their bringing back unto
their native Soil must be fulfilled: So then at their appointed time, all the
Tribes shall meet from all the parts of the world into two provinces, namely
Assyria and Egypt, nor shall their Kingdom be any more divided, but they shall
have one Prince the Messiah the Son of David. I do also set forth the
Inquisition of Spain, and rehearse diverse of our Nation, and also of
Christians, Martyrs, who in our times have suffered several sorts of torments,
and then having showed with what great honors our Jews have been graced also
by several Princes who profess Christianity. I prove at large, that the day
of the promised Messiah unto us does draw near, upon which occasion I explain
many Prophecies, etc.

By all which you see his full agreement with your conjecture concerning the
Americans, that they are descended of the Hebrews: when his book comes to my
hand, you shall have it God willing.

In the mean time I shall add some of my conjectures concerning the Jews
which live on this side of the world with us in Europe and Asia; these are of
two sorts or Sects, the one is of Pharisees, the other of Caraits, the
Pharisees in Europe and Asia are in number far beyond the Caraits, they
differ from one another wheresoever they are, as Protestants do from Papists;
for the Pharisees, as the Papists, attribute more to the Authority and
traditions of their Rabbis and Fathers, then to the word of God; but the
Caraits will receive nothing for a rule of faith and obedience but what is
delivered from the word of God immediately: and their name imports their
profession, that they are readers of the Text, or Textuaries, for so the word
(...) you know when it relates to books and writings, is to be rendered. These
two Sects are irreconcilably opposite to each other, and as the Papists deal
with Protestants, so do the Pharisees with the Caraits, they persecute and
suppres them and their profession by all the means they can possibly make use
of: Nay as Mr Ritangle (of whom I have all the informations which I know
concerning the Caraits) tells me, the hatred of the Pharisees is so fierce
against their opposites the Caraits, that they have Anathematized them so, as
never to be reconciled unto them; insomuch, that it is counted unlawful so
much as to speak to any of them, or to any that belongs unto them, but at
the distance of four cubits at least; their Books and all things belonging to
them, are avoided as things abominable and to be abhorred; nor will the
Pharisees, although the Caraits should become penitent, and desire to be joined
to their Congregations, and renounce their own way, admit of them as a Caraite
reconciled unto them: but the Caraite must first become a Christian, a
Mahumetan, or an Idolater, before he can be admitted to join with them, that
it may never be said that a Pharisee was reconciled to a Caraite, or that a
Caraite is become a Pharisee. As their principles and affections are thus
different, so are their opinions, and the course of their life extremely
opposite; the Pharisees are full of superstitious imaginary foolish conceits,
and thalmudicall questions and nicities in their Sermons and Books; the
Caraits are rational men that take up no doctrines but what the Scriptures
teach, by comparing one text with another: The Pharisees have wild and
extravagant fancies concerning the Messiah and his reign; but the Caraits have
true grounds of spiritual and raised thoughts concerning the Messiah and his
Kingdom, little different from that which the better sort of Christians truly
believe, and profess of these mysteries. The Pharisees in their Sermons insist
upon nothing but their traditions and ceremonies, and foolish curiosities; but
the Caraits insist only upon necessary and profitable duties, teaching the way
of Godliness and honesty, to bring men from the outward form to the inward
power and spiritual performance of divine worship.

As concerning their course of life, the Pharisees live every where by a way of
trading and usury, which is destructive to those with whom they have commerce;
but the Caraits abhor that way, as pestilent unto humane societies, and betake
themselves to trades, and manufactures, to become husbandmen, and servants in
the places where they live, and to serve as Soldiers under the Magistrate, who
does protect them.

This being the state and difference of these two Sects, (as he who in Asia and
some part of Europe has been above twenty years conversant with them, and a
Doctor in their Synagogues, has informed me) I shall acquaint you with my
Conjectures concerning the event of our present troubles in the world over all,
and the revolution of the Jewish state, which are these; that it is not
unlikely to me that the issue and effect of these changes which now are
wrought, and afoot to be wrought in the world, (wherein the highest powers are
shaken, and a general distress is brought upon all the Nations of the earth)
will be a breaking of the yokes of tyranny and oppression, under which not
only the Jews every where groan, but with them most of the Gentiles, or
rather all of them that are under an arbitrary power of absolute Potentates,
and superstitious selfe-seeking teachers; that the breaking of these yokes is
already a great way advanced. First, in the Eastern China Empire by the
invasion of the Tartarians. Secondly, in the Northern and Eastern Mahometane
Empire, by the changes brought upon, and likely to fall out in the Ottoman
house and line; and by the liberty which of late has been granted to the
Jews, not only from taxes, but of repairing to Jerusalem, and having
Synagogues there, which heretofore was utterly prohibited. Thirdly, in the
Western, which is called the Roman or German Empire, by these late troubles,
and the assistance which the King of the North the Swede, has given to
Protestants to maintain their liberty: All the power of these yokes must yet
further be broken in the Supreme and Subordinate Ministers thereof; in respect
of the whole bodies of these Empires, and of the particular Kingdoms and
States which resort under the same; for all Nations by the light of natural
reason, but chiefly those, whom the Gospel has enlightened, and prepared in a
measure, to apprehend the hope of the glorious liberty of the Sons of God,
will more and more every where resent their privilege and right to a freedom,
from which they have been restrained, by the mystery of iniquity in spiritual
and corporal matters; and when the grounds of righteous order, of impartial
love to mankind, and of common preservation, shall break forth at last, and
be taken notice of in the midst of these confusions and great troubles which
fall upon all sorts of men; then the Jews will come and appear in their own
rank, and for their own interest, they will by others be respected; for their
interest will be upon the dissolution of the Mohammedan, to resist and oppose
the Spanish Monarchy, that it may not propagate it self Eastward, and
Southward, beyond the Mediterranean Sea; and that the Inquisition by which they
have been so cruelly persecuted, may be every where abolished; but above all
things, kept out of the holy Land and their beloved City Jerusalem: If then
there should be any transactions (as it is said there is like to be) between
the Ottoman house and the house of Spain about the Holy Land, the Jews who
are now at some liberty there, and begin from all parts of the Earth to lift up
their eyes to look thitherward, will quickly resent it, and find their
interest to be the enjoyment of their own inheritance; and to help them to
it, they will find assistance from all Christians that are not slaves to
superstition and tyranny, and that assistance and favor which by such
Christians will be given them, may in Gods hand be a means to open the
Pharisee his eyes, to see somewhat in Christianity, from which he has been
hitherto blinded, by reason of the prejudice which the Idolatry of the Papal
Sea, and the Spanish Inquisition has begotten in him. As for the Caraits, God
has so ordered it, that the greatest bodies of them are in the Northern parts
of the World, by which the ten Tribes, if ever they come to the Holy Land, are
like to come; there be some few in Russia, some in Constantinople, some in
Alcair, some in Persia, and some in other places of Asia and of Africa; but Mr
Ritangle told me that their chief body is amongst the Asiatique and European
Tartarians, who now appear upon the stage as beginning to be conquerers. For
besides that which they do fully possess in China, they have tasted somewhat
of a victorious progress of late in Poland, and they are the next pretenders
to the Ottoman Crown, if the line fail, which is like to be: their rising and
dissipation abroad from their own centers to their circumferences toward
neighbor Nations, will weaken them at home; and if then, when they are not
strong within their own bounds, and by their invasions have weakened their
neighbors Southward on; God call the ten Tribes to march toward the place of
their inheritance: the Caraits their brethren will be leaders of them on their
way, and so their march may be, as Manasseh Ben Israel says, to make their
Rendezvous in Assyria; and on the other side, the Jews that are Pharisees, may
make their Rendezvous from Arabia and other neighboring places, and out of all
Europe into Egypt; that so when the Shunamite shall return (as it is said in
the Canticles, chap. 6. ver. 13.) the world may look upon her, and may see in
her the company of two Armies, which both shall look toward Jerusalem. Then
will the great battle of Harmageddon be fought, whereunto all these troubles
and changes are but preparatives: then shall the sword of the Spirit, the word
of God, prevail mightily over the spirits of all men; the two edges thereof on
the right hand and on the left, will cut sharp, and pierce to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and to the
discerning of the thoughts and intentions of the heart: and when this sword
shall be thus powerful in the hands of his Saints, (the true Protestants with
the one troop, and the true Caraits with the other) then shall be fulfilled
the Prophecy of the Psalmist, that Psa. 149 7, 8, 9.
vengeance shall be executed upon the Heathen, and punishments upon the people;
that their Kings shall be bound with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of
iron; and that the honor due to all Saints shall be given them, to be made
executioners of the judgment written in the word of God against them. We know
not how near these things are at hand, let us therefore be watchful, and put
on the armor of light, to be ready, when the Bridegroom comes, to go with
him in our wedding garment, having our lamps burning, and provision of oil,
into the wedding chamber. And to this effect, the Lord teach us to be diligent,
to be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless, that in the midst of
these fightings and confusions, we may not be found as many are, smiting their
fellow servants, eating and drinking largely of the spoil of those that are
spoiled, and being drunken with the passions of malice, entertained for the
revenge of injuries, or of covetousness and ambition, prosecuted for
self-interests: and with this prayer I shall commend you to the grace of God,
and rest,

Your faithful friend and fellow labourer in the Gospel of Christ. J. DURY.
St James, this 27 Ian. 1649/50.
Jews in America, OR, Probabilities that the Americans are Jews.
CHAP. I.
IT has been much, and many times, in several men's thoughts, what Genius
devoted our Contrymen so willingly to forsake their Friends, and Nation,
exposing themselves by voyages long and perilous to so many inconveniences, as
are to be encountered with by Strangers in a foreign and unchristian land;
some were hastened by their dislike of Church Government; other perhaps were in
hope to enrich themselves by such Adventures; and it is like, diverse of them did
foresee those Epidemicall Calamities, now for so many years oppressing this
forlorn Nation, following thereupon Solomon's Counsel, A prudent man foreseeth
the evil, and hides himself, etc. Prove. 22. 5. Or else those pious souls by
a divine instinct, might happily be stirred up to despise all hazards, that
the Natives for their temporal accommodations might be spiritually enriched
by the English, and though this was little seen at first in the endeavors, at
least the success of many gone thither, yet who can tell but supreme
Providence might then dispose men's hearts that way, themselves not discerning
that influence; even as Cyrus promoted the cause of the Jews, he knew not why,
nor whence, Esa. 45. 4, 5. Upon confidence that the Gospel of Christ shall be
revealed in the midst of that yet most Barbarous Nation, the next desire was,
if possible, to learn the Original of the Americans, and by observations from
Printed Books, and written Letters, and by Discourse with some that had
traveled to, and abode in those parts several years, the probability of that
opinion as yet praeponderates, that the Western Indians be of Jewish race.
Restitut. c. 2.
R. Verstegan proves the Saxons to be Germans, because their speech is alike,
the names of persons and things sometimes agree, and the Idols of them both are
not different; Bodine Met. Hist. c. 9.
mentions 3 Arguments (b), by which the beginnings of People are
discoverable, the fair and true dealing of Historians, the comparing of
Language, with the description of the Country, such helps have assisted also
in this enquiry: Grotius Dissertat. de Orig. Gent. Americ.
conceives these Americans to have come out of Europe, passing from Norway
into Iseland, thence by Friesland into Greenland, and so into Estotiland, which
is part of that Western Continent, he is induced to that opinion from the
names and words of places and things in both sounding alike: but Io. de Laet
Not. ad istam Dissert.
abundantly disproves this Conjecture, which yet the Governor of the Dutch
Plantation Key of the Language of Amer. Pref.
there told Mr. Williams was his judgment: Some others take them Lerius Hist.
Brasil. p. 231.
to be a remnant of those Canaanites that fled out of that Land when the fear
of Israel approaching thither fell upon them, Josh. 2. 9. Others think Laet
Descr. Americ. Mr. Gage.
it most probable, that they are Tartars, passing out of Asia into America by
the straights of Anian. Emanuel de Moraes apud Laet in Grot. Dissertat. Part.
1. p. 216.
willingly believes them to be derived from the Carthaginians and Jews; from
which latter that they be descended, these following Conjectures are propounded
to Consideration.

CHAP. II. The first Conjecture that the Americans are Jews.
THE Indians do themselves relate things of their Ancestors, Pet. Mart. Decad.
aliique.
suitable to what we read of the Jews in the Bible, and elsewhere, which they
also mentioned to the Spaniards at their first access thither; and here the
Speech of Myrsilus In Boroso. l. 6.
occurred as observable: if we would know, says he, the Antiquity and
Original of a Nation, there is more credit to be given to the Natives and
their Neighbors, than to strangers, and Caesar In Bodin. Meth. p. 493.
concluded the Britons to be Gauls, because that was the affirmation of them
both. P. Martyr Ib. p. 353.
tells at large, how Muteczuma the great King of Mexico in an Oration made to
his Nobles Mort. N. Canaan. p. 49. Malvend^r de Anti^ri p. 155.
and People, persuading subjection to the King of Spain, minds his Country
men, that they heard from their forefathers, how they were strangers in that
land, and by a great Prince very long ago brought thither in a Fleet, They
boast their Pedigree from men preserved in the Sea by God himself, that God
made one man, and one woman, bidding them live together and multiply, and how
in a Famine he rained bread for them from Heaven, who^ in a time of drought
also gave them Water out of a Rock: many other things, themselves say were done
for them, such as the Scriptures relate concerning the Israelites at their
coming out of Egypt, as, their Peregrination many years, the Oracles they
received, their Arc of Bulrush, wherein Vitzi-Liputzli was included, of the
Tabernacle the Ark Acosta. Hist. l. 7. c. 4.
carried by four Priests, and how they pitched their Tents according to its
direction, and who sees not says Malvenda Vbi supra.
much probability that the Mexicans are Jews, how could they else report the
manner of their coming into the promised Land; they affirm there is one
chief God, who has been from all eternity, by whom the lesser Gods were made,
who became Assistants in the Fabric and Government of the World, as some of
the Aquin. in Genesis 1.
Rabbis also called the Angels Con-Creators with God, to whom the Lord did
say, Let us make man in our Image, etc. Genesis 1. 26. The Indians judge the
Sun, Moon and Stars to be living creatures, a thing a so avowed in the
Jewish Talmud Arr. ag. Br. p. 343.
, showing it to be a thing easy enough for the Heavens to declare the glory of
God, Psalm 19. 1. seeing they have understanding souls as well as men and
Angels; they Pet. Mart. p. 353.
say of themselves, that they be strangers, and came from another Country.
M^^^s Laet. in Grot. p. 219.
before named does not only aver that many learned men in Brasile take the
Natives to be Jews, but that they themselves, taught by a most ancient
Tradition, acknowledge their forefathers to be of that lineage; and Peter
Martyr ibid.
has from them also such a kind of assertion: And now whereas some conceive
the ten Tribes to be either shut up beyond the Comestor Hist. p. 137. and 169.
Caspian Mountains, whence they could not get out, though they begged leave of
Alexander the Great, yet the way was made miraculously unpassable against them,
as the same Comester relates: Others suppose G. Sands. Trav. p. 146.
them to be utterly lost, and if once so, it is probable in the opinion of some
that they are to be found in America; Hist. l. 1. c. 29.
Acosta acknowledges this to be the judgment of diverse, to which he is not
only adverse himself, but endeavors to answer their Arguments, as will be
showed hereafter; to these conjectures of the Natives, let this Chapter be
concluded with the judgments of two others, that have reason for what they
say, the first is Apud 10. de Laet. part. 1. p. 217.
Emanuel de Moraes, forespoken of, affirming those of Brasile to be Judaicall:
First, because those Brasilians marry into their own Tribe and Kindred.
Secondly, Their Manner is also to call their Uncles and Ants, Fathers and
Mothers. Thirdly, they are given much to mourning and tears in their Funeral
solemnities: And last of all, they both have Garments much alike. The next is
Master Letter.
R. Williams, one of the first, if not the first of our Nation in New England
that learned the Language, and so prepared toward the Conversion of the
Natives, which purpose of his being known, he was desired to observe if he
found any thing Judaicall among them, etc. He kindly answers to those Letters
from Salem in New England, 20th of the 10th month, more than ten years since,
in hac verba. Three things make me yet suspect that the poor natives came from
the southward, and are Jews or Jewish quodammodo, and not from the Northern
barbarous as some imagine. 1. Themselves constantly affirm that their
Ancestors came from the southwest, and thither they all go dying. 2. They
constantly and strictly separate their women in a little Wigwam by themselves
in their feminine seasons. 3. And beside their God Kuttand to the south-west,
they hold that Nanawitnawit (a God over head) made the Heavens and the Earth,
and some taste of affinity with the Hebrew I have found.

CHAP. III. Second Conjecture.
THe rites, fashions, ceremonies, and opinions of the Americans are in many
things agreeable to the custom of the Jews, not only profane and common
usages, but such as be called solemn and sacred.

Common and profane Customs in both alike.
1 The Indians Acosta. l. 1. c. 23.
wear garments fashioned as the Jews, a single coat, a square little cloak,
they go barefoot: if you should ask a man of Brasile what vestment would
please him best, he would answer presently, Lerius. Vbi supra.
a long cloak the habit of the Jews, and this may seem no light consideration
to such as mind Seneca's De cons^at. ad Helvid. c. 8.
confidence, that the Spaniards planted themselves in Italy, for they have the
same kind of covering on their heads, and shoes for their feet.

2 They constantly Mr Will. Key* preface.
anoint their heads, as did the Jews also, Luke 7. 46.

3. They do not only pride themselves with earerings Benzo. p. 6. and 50.
Acosta. l. 7. c. 17.
but their noses are borcd also, and have jewels hanging on them, which they
call Caricori, like that is read, Esa. 3. 20, 21.

4. In all India Benzo. p. 193.
they wash themselves often, twice or thrice in the day, and the women in
Brasile ten times says Lerius Id. p. 94. 107
and the Jews were frequent in this, Mar. 7. 3, 4. Io. 2. 6.

5. They delight exceedingly in dancing, Id. p. 107. 109
men and women, yea and women apart by themselves; and so they did in Israel.
Exodus 13. 20. 1 Samuel 21. 11, 12. and thus especially after victories Nova
Francia. p. 221.
and overthrows, of enemies, which is found also, Iud. 11. 34. Iud. 21. 21. 23.
and 1 Samuel 18. 6, 7.

6. As the Jews were wont to call them fathers and mothers, that were not
their natural parents, so Jo. de Laet. p. 217.
the Indians give the same appellation to Uncle and Aunts.

7. In America they eat no swines flesh Mr Will. Key prospect of N. E. p. 95.
it is hateful to them, as it was among the Jews, Levit. 11. 7. Esa. 66. 15.

8. They wash Benzo. p. 117 222. Lerius. p. 256. 258. Laet Descr. of America.
p. 545.
strangers feet, and are very hospital to them, and this was the known
commendation of old Israel.

9. The Indians compute their times by nights Lerius. p. 225 P. Mart. p. 314.
478.
an use which Laet Not in Grot. p. 37.
confesses they had from the Hebrews; they reckon by lunary rules, giving the
same name to their months they do to the Moon, Tona.

10. Virginity is not a state praiseworthy among the Americanes Acosta. p. 57
and it was a bewaileable condition in Jury, Iud. 11. 37.

11. The Natives Id. p. 569. Laet. p. 317. and descrip. Amer. p. 470.
marry within their own kindred and family, this was Gods command to his
people, Number. 36. 7.

12. The Indian women Capt. Smith. p. 31. Laet Descr. Amer. p. 479.
are easily delivered of their children, without Midwives, as those in Exodus 1.
19.

13. They wash their infants newly born Lerius. p. 236.
and this you find also, Ezekiel. 16. 9.

14. In faeminine seasons they put their women in a Wigwam by themselves, (t)
for which they plead nature Mr Will. Key pref. p. 7. and
and tradition; another writes expressly such kind Nova Fran. p. 236.
of purification they have as had the Jews.

15. The widow marries P. Mart. p. 526.
the brother of the deceased Husband, which was also Moses law, Mat. 22. 24.

16. Dowries for wives are given Mr Will. Key.
by the Indians, as Saul enjoined David, 1 Samuel 18. 25.

17. The husband has power Lerius. p. 234 Acosta. l. 5. c. 27
over the adulterous wife, to turn her away with disgrace, they have also
other causes of divorce, as was in Israel, Mat. 8. 19.

18. They nurse their own children, 46. Laet des. Amer. p. 479
even the Mr Will. Key.
Queens in Peru, and so did the mothers in Israel.

19. The husbands come not at their wives till their children be weaned, (a)
such an use is read Hos. ^8. p Lerius p. 236.
and at Pera if they be forced to weane them before their time, they call such
children Ainsco, i. e bastards.

20. Among the Indians Mr Will. Key. p. 139.
they punish by beating, and whipping, and the Sachims if they please, put
offenders to death with their own hands, and secretly sometimes send out an
executioner, as Mark 6. 27. 2 Cor. 11. 25.

21. If a Brasilian wound another, Lerius p. 241.
he must be punished in the same part of his body, and with death, if the other
die, for they also answer an eye for an eye, etc. as the law was. Deuteronomy. 24. 19.

22. When the master of the family dies, he is buried in the middle of the
house, Benzo. p. 168. 291. 39. Acost. l. 5. c. 8.
with his jewels, and other things he delighted in; the Spaniards were often
made rich by such sepulchars, and Josephus Antiq. l. 7. c. 12.
tells of much treasure laid up even in David's grave.

23. The Indians are given much to weeping, Lerius. p. 266. 267. Benzo. 396
Laet des. Amer. p. 545. 642.
their women especially, and at burialls; this was in fashion among the Jews.
Ier. 19. 17. Famous for this they were among the old heathen.

24. Balsamum Benzo. p. 222. Acost. l. 4. c. 28.
was peculiar to the Jewish Country, and thought to be lost long ago says
Pliny; l. 12. c. 15.
if it were, it is now found again in America.

25. Their Princes and Governors whom they generally call Sachims, Sachmos,
Sagamos, Laet Descr. Amer. p. 75.
are no other but heads of families, as it was of old in Israel. Number. 7. 2.

26. The Indians have their Posts Acost. l. 6. c. 10. 17.
and Messengers that were swift of foot, whom they dispatched upon their
affairs, and they ran with speed, and such were among the Jews. 2 Samuel 18.
24, 26, 27.

CHAP. IV. Sacred and solemn rites and customs alike.
A Costa Hist. l 5. c. 27.
affirms the Americans to have ceremonies and customs resembling the
Mosaicall.

1. Circumcision Id. de procur. Ind. Sal. p. 6. 45
is frequent among the Indians, which some not observing, have thereupon denied
them to be Judaicall, and Io. de Laet In Grot. part. 1. p* 45.
is forced to acknowledge such venereous people have somewhat like to
circumcision occasioned by their lasciviousness; but daily P. Mart. p. 175.
290. 293. 296. 300.
experience declares that they have indeed upon them this Judaicall badge.
Herodotus l. 2. p. 143.
averreth the Colchi for this to be of the Egyptian race, and that the
Phenicians and Syrians of Palaestina learned from them that rite; and though
some have judged the Tartars to be Jews, because circumcised, others Dr Helin
Geo. p. 662. Laet. ibid. 127.
yield not to this, because they were Mahometans by Religion, and from them
received that custom; but these people have cut off their foreskinne time out
of mind, and it cannot be conceived whence they had this ceremony, but that it
is national. And though the fore mentioned Id. p. 128.
writer endeavors much to prove, that there is no circumcision among them, and
that some other people be so handled, whom none yet ever imagined to be
Judaicall, but that of Ier. 9. 26. is not so fitly I think cited for his
purpose; and Grotius tells him In Laet p. 2. p. 59.
confidently, we have so many witnesses that the Americans be circumcised, as
it becomes not a modest man to deny it; and among the rarities brought from
those quarters, Pancirollus Tit. 1. de No viter repet is, Cultellos Lapideos
quidvis secantes*
speaks of stony knives, very sharp and cutting, and his Illustrator p. 135.
H. Salmuth, shows that the Jews of old did use such in their circumcisings,
knifes of stone, which Sacrament omitted forty years in their travel, is
revived by Gods command to Joshua 5. 2. Make thee sharp knives, cultros
petrinos; Arias Montanus reads, cultros lapideos in the vulgar Latin, but the
Septuagint does not only mention those rocky knives, but adds, taken from a
sharp rock, as if the allusion also were to Christ, the Rock, that does
circumcise our hearts; Lerius p. 191.
affirms he saw some of those cutting stones or knives at Brasil.

2. The Indians worship that God Mart. p. 524
they say, who created the Sun, Moon, and all invisible things, who gives them
also all that is good.

3. They knew of that flood which drowned Id. p. 444. Lerius. p. 220. Acost. l.
6. c. 19
the world, and that it was sent for the sin of man, especially for unlawful
lust, and that there shall never be such a deluge again.

4. It is affirmed by them Id. de procur. Ind. Sal. p. 68.
nevertheless that after many years, fire shall come down from above and
consume all.

5. They believe the immortality of the soul, and that there is a place of
joy, Benzo. p. 396 Relation of Maryland. p. 33. Cap. Smith. Lerius. p 223.
Acosta. p. 345.
another of torment after death, whither they shall go that kill, lie, or
steal, which place they call Popogusso, a great pit, like the expression, Number.
16. 33. and Rev. 19. 1, etc. but they which do no harm shall be received into
a good place, and enjoy all manner of pleasure.

6. The Americans have in some parts an exact form of King, Priest, Mr Will.
Key. p. 100.
and Prophet, as was aforetime in Conaan.

7. Priests are in some things among them, as with the Hebrews, P. Mart. p.
418. 473 521. 529. Godwin of the Esseni, in Jewish Antiqu. Malvend. de
Antichristo. p. 153.
Physicians, and not habited as other men, and in Tamazulapa there be vestments
kept like those Aaroniticall robes of the High Priest.

8. The Temples wherein they worship, Capt. Smith p. 120. Acosta. l. 5. c. 13.
Pet Mart. p. 350.
sing, pray, and make their Offerings, are fashioned and used as with the
Jews; at Mexico they were built four square, and sumptuous, as Ezekiel. 40. 47.

9. The Priests have their Chambers Id p 351.
in the Temple, as the manner was in Israel. 1 Reg. 6* 7.

10. They had places also therein Id. p. 314.
, which none might enter into but their Priests. Heb. 9. 6, 7.

11. In their worship of Viracoche Acost. p. 339
, and the Sun, etc. they open their hands, and make a kissing sound with their
mouths, as Job 31. 27.

12. They had almost continual fire before their Idols, and took great care
lest the Id. l. 5: c. 16* 6. 24.
fire before the Altar should dye, they call that the Divine Harth, where there
is fire continually, like that in Leviticus 6. 9.

13. None may intermeddle with their Sacrifices but the Priests, Id. l. 5. c.
14.
who were also in high estimation among them as they were among the Jews.

14. Every Nobleman in Mexico Ibid. l. 5 c. 8.
had his Priest, as Israel had the Levites within their gates.

15. In their necessities Pot. Mart.
they always sacrificed, which done, they grew hopeful and confident.

16. They burnt Incense, Relat. Mar. Land. p. 169. Acost. 5. 16.
had their Censars, and cake Oblations, as Ier. 7. 18.

17. The first fruits of their Corn Pot, Mart: p. 522. 351.
they offered, and what they gat by Hunting and Fishing.

18. At Mexico and some other places Ibid.
they immolate the bodies of men, and as the Jews of old, says P. Martyr, did
eat of their Beasts so sacrificed, they feed on man's flesh so offered.

19. In all Peru they had but one Temple, Laet. Descr. Amer. p. 398. 434.
which was most sumptuous, Consecrated to the Maker of the world; yet they had
four other places also for Devotion, as the Jews had several Synagogues,
beside that their glorious Temple.

20. The Idols of America Malvenda. p. 169.
were Mitred, in a manner, much as Aaron was.

21. A year of Jubilee Id. ibid. and Acost. Hist. l. 5. c 29.
did they observe, as did Israel also.

22. Lerius tells a story of them, Id. p. 269.]
much like that of Apocryphal Bell, and the Dragon, and his Priests.

23. In their Idol services they Benzo. p. 113, 114. cum tympano.
dance and sing, men and women, almost as Miriam, with Timbrells, Exodus 15. 20.
and then they offer bread, as it is in Malac. 1. 7.

24. They have hope of their bodies Cento ad Solin. p. 256. Benzo. p. 403, and
Hist. of Peru.
resurrection, and for that cause are careful in burying their dead; and when
they saw the Spaniards digging into Sepulchers for gold and silver, the Natives
entreated them not to scatter the bones, that so they might with more ease be
raised again.

25. The Indians make account the world shall have an end, but not till a great
drought come Benzo ubi sup. and Solin. Cent. ibid.
, and as it were a burning of the air, when the Sun and Moon shall fail,
and lose their shining; thence it is* that in the Eclipses of those two greater
Lights, they make such yellings and outcries, as if the end of all things were
upon them.

CHAP. V. The third Conjecture.
THE Americans words and manners of speech, be in many things consonant to
those of the Jews, Idem genus ca'cementi, and verba quaedam. Vbi supra.
Seneca has that other reason, persuading that the Spaniards planted in Italy,
because they both speak alike; and as Volaterrane l. 30. p. 323.
for his Countrymen, so some suppose the Greeks long since mingled with the
Brittans, because we still have diverse words of Grecian Idiome. For this
reason Vbi ante.
Caesar judged the British to be Gauls, in that the Cities of both the Nations
were called by the same names. Giraldus Cambrensis derives his Countreymens
Original from Troy, because they have so many Trojan names and words amongst
them; Oenus, Resus, Aeneas, Descr. Cambr. p. 266.
Hector, Ajax, Evander, Eliza, etc. and Grotius In Laet. part. 1. p. 30.
therefore imagines that the Americans came from Norway, because they have many
words the same with the Norwegians. It is then considerable to our purpose, how
in this the Jews and Indians be alike.

1. The aspirations of the Americans have Pet. Mart. p 248. Laet. ibid. p. 186.
the force of consonants, and are pronounced by them not as the Latins and
some other Nations, but after the manner of the Hebrews.

2. The name of that great City Mexico Malvenda p. 169.
is observed in sound and writing to come very near unto that name of our
dear Lord, Psalm 2. 2. Meschico, and Mexico in their Language is a Gag.
Survey. p. 46.
Spring, as of our Master and Messiah; the day spring that from on high has
visited us. Luke 1. 78.

3. The Ziims mentioned Esa. 13. 21. and 34. 14. are Jerem in loc,
supposed to be wicked Spirits, deluding Mankind, as Hobgoblins, Fairies,
etc. Such are the Zemes among the Indians so often spoken of by p. 88. 93, 94.
etc.
Peter Martyr, these they call the Messengers of the great God; every King
among them has such a Ziim or Zeme, and from them came those Predictions
constantly current among them, of a covered Nation that should spoil their
Rites.

4. Acosta marvailes much Hist. l. 5. c. 3.
at the Indians, that having some knowledge that there is a God, yet they call
him not by any proper name, as not having any peculiar for him, a Relic it
may be of that Judaicall conceit of the non-pronuntiable Tetragrammaton.

5. It Is very remarkable that Escarbotus Lact. Descr. Amer. p. 53. 164.
tells, how he heard the Indians often perfectly use the wvrd Hallelujah; at
which he marvailed the more, because he could not at all perceive that they
had learned it from any Christian; and this is with like admiration recorded p.
164. 172.
by the describer of Nova Francia.

6. In the Island of St. Michael or Azores, which belongs to America, says p.
154.
Malvenda, certain Sepulchers, or Grave-stones are dug up by the Spaniards,
with very ancient Hebrew Letters upon them, above and below, thus above, (...)
Why is God gone away; and beneath this Inscription (...) He is dead, know God,
which words seem to have a woeful enquiry of Gods departure from them, with a
comfortable Declaration of his dying for them, together with an incitation to
know him.

7. Very many of their words are like the Hebrew, which our Novangles Mr. Will.
Key Pres of N. E. p. 91.
have observed, and in the general attested: A more serious disquisition into
their Language would conduce much to find out their descent, and help
exceedingly toward their Conversion; and if it be said, the Jews were ever
tenacious of their Language, which Pref. to Chaldean Diction.
Elias Levita says, they changed not in Egypt, but if they be now in America,
all in a manner is lost. It Is fit then to consider, that in all Nations, in two
or three Ages there is a great alteration in their Tongues; the words of the
League between the Carthaginians and Romans in fifty years space, says Bodin.
Meth p. 494.
Polybius, were so uncouth, and little known, that they could scarce be
understood; and Syst. Phys.
Keckerman shows, (r) that the German language in almost as short a time
received the like mutation, and our Saxon Ancestors translated the Bible into
English as the Tongue then was, but of such antique Words and Writing, that few
men now can read and understand it, which waxing old, and hard, it was again
Translated into newer words, says Archbishop Pref. to the old English Bible.
Cranmer, and many even of those words are now strange and neasie to us; in
such sudden Change of Language universally, we need not wonder, that so
little impression of the Hebrew Tongue remains among them, if the Indians be
Jewish; but we may marvel rather, that after so many years of most gross
and cursed blindness, and having no commerce, nor converse with other Nations,
that any the least similitude thereof should be left.

CHAP. VI. The sixth Conjecture.
THis which follows next, at first sight, will appear a Paradox rather than
a Probability, that is (...) Americanorum, the Man-devouring that is in
America; for what an inference may this seem to be; there be Carybes,
Caniballs, and Man-eaters among them, therefore they be Jewish? But let it be
considered, Among the Curses threatened to Israel upon their disobedience, we
read Levit. 26. 29. Ye shall eat the flesh of your Sons and of your
Daughters, etc. So Deuteronomy. 28. 53. Which Predictions, according to common
supposalls, seem to be fully verified in the Famine mentioned, 2 Kings 6. 28.
and Lament. 4. 10. and those words are spoken of things then done and past; but
the Prophet Ezekiel, that lived about the same time, speaks in the future
tense of some new, and till then unheard of calamity, but such as should be
common afterward; I will do in thee that I never did before, for in the midst
of thee the Fathers shall eat their Sons, and the Sons their Fathers, etc.
Ezekiel. 5. 9, 10. Before indeed, and at the Romans beleaguering Jerusalem, Women
did eat their Children, but there is no relation of Fathers and Sons
devouring one another, though this be foretold, and as a thing easily to be
taken notice of, Josph. de Bello Judaico. l. 7. e. 8.
Josephus in that last siege tells but of one Woman eating her child, and it is
like there was no other, because the whole City was astonished at the news,
and the seditious themselves did abhor it; yea and when the Romans heard
thereof in their Camp, it exceeded credit at first, and their General
comforted himself against that most inhumane and hideous fact, by remembering
he had often proffered them peace, and they had as often wilfully refused it;
but that Prophet foretells an infelicity without parallel, both de praeterito,
and de futuro; I will do in thee that I never did before, neither will I ever
do the like, Verse 9. And it should be a public and notorious calamity, for
in the midst of thee the Fathers should eat their Sons, and their Sons their
Fathers, Ver. 10. Words implying, yea expressing more than we can read was
done, either when the Chaldees or Romans begirt their City: And the gloss of
St. Jerome In Ezekiel c. 5.
strengthens this conjecture; When the Fathers, says he, did eat the Sons,
or the Sons their Fathers, is not related in any History, and yet it was to
be done openly in the midst of them, and as it were in the sight of the Sun.
But if the Jews be planted in that Western World, we shall soon find the
accomplishment of that Prophecy from Heaven, for P. Mart. p. 206. Lerius.
Benzo. alii.
there be Caniballs and Man-eaters in great multitudes; some whose trade is
Homo cupium, and Homo capium, hungring and hunting after Man's flesh, and
devouring it, whose greedy bellies have buried Millions of them, these Carybes
are scattered all the Country over, the Mauhacks are such, and so near they
are, or were to some of our Prosp. of N. Eng. part. 2.
Planters, that finding an Englishman, they eat one part of him after another,
before his face, while he was yet alive. If it be said, they eat none but
strangers, or enemies, not Fathers their Sons, and Naucler. Chr. part. 2. p.
519.
a contra, p. 275.
Peter Martyr removes that scruple, by affirming, if they want the flesh of
Foes and Forraigners, they eat then one another, even their own In fine. p.
188.
kindred and allies, as he writes that added the Centons to p. 55.
Solinus.

If it be objected, those Caniballs are of a different Nature and Nation from
the rest, Peter Martyr answers that also, supposing all the Inhabitants to be
of one stock, because they use all one and the same kind of Bread, every where
called Maiiz, and their Cymbae Uni-ligneae, their Canoes and Boats are in all
places alike, and as Benzo. p. 120.
those Western Nations generally call their Boats Canoes, and their Bread
Maiiz, so their common word for wine is Chichia, for swords Macanas for Kings
Caciques.

And if the Americans be Jewish, the Spaniards have yet in another sense
fulfilled that Prediction of Ezekiel, for their own Bishop Crudelit. Hispan.
p. 50.
Bartholomeus de las Casas writes, how they took Indians 10000, sometimes
20000 abroad with them in their Forragings, and gave them no manner of food to
sustain them, but the Flesh of other Indians taken in War, and so
Christian-Spaniards set up a shambles of man's flesh in their Army; children
were slain and roasted, men were killed for their hands and feet sakes, for
those they esteemed the only delicate parts: this was most hideous and most
barbarous inhumanity, the Tidings whereof was soon carried through the Land,
and overwhelmed the Inhabitants with Horror and Astonishment.

CHAP VII. Fifth Conjecture.
THE people that have not yet received the Gospel of Jesus Christ are Jews,
but the Americans have not yet been gospelized; and here three things come to
consideration.

1. All other nations at first received the Gospel. 2. The Jews before the
end of the world shall be converted. 3. These Indians have not yet heard of
Christ.
1. As the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles through
faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all the
Gentiles be blessed, Gal. 3, 8. Genesis 12. 2, 3. 18. 8. In like manner the
glorious Gospel was soon conveyed to them, soon after the coming of Christ,
even before the death of the Apostles; holy David spoke of this promulgation,
when he said, Psalm. 19. 1. The Heavens, i. e. the Apostles did declare the
glory of God, etc. For the fourth, Their line is gone out into all Lands, and
their words into the end of the world, is applied by Saint Paul to this very
purpose, Romans 10. 18. It was the command of their Master, Go teach all
Nations, etc. Mat. 28. 19. and preach the Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16.
15. and they gave hereto most willing obedience, which we must have believed,
though it had not bin so exactly recorded in undoubted ecclesiastical
Histories. There we read often Socrat. l. 1. 15 Ruffin Tripartit. etc.
Discessuri ab invicem Apostoli normam praedicationis in commune constituunt.
Cypr. de Symb. Ap.
that they divided the world into 12 parts, every Apostle accepting that which
fell to his lot; but first they compiled the Creed, called therefore (...) or
Collation, says Cassian, De Incarn. l. 6* c. 3.
who was Chrysostomes Scholar; because that which was at large expressed in the
several volumes of the Bible, was by them briefly contracted into that form;
and to this he applies that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 28. a short work we read
it now, but of old it was rendered, verbum abbreviatum a short word, a short
rule, to which all of them were to conform their doctrine, and the fifteenth
of July was afterward, and is still celebrated by Witek land de Sphaera.
some Christians, in memory of their thus going to Gospellize the world; and it
is called Festum divisionis Apostolorum: yea and the place is yet showed to
Travelers at this day, G. Sands tra.
where they are said to assemble upon this occasion. Very Socrat. ubi ante.
Ruffin in Symb. and Hist. l. 1. c. 9. Tertul. de vel. virg. l. 1. c. 1. Regula
quidem fidei una omnino est sola immobilis. and inreformabilis. Clem. Ep. ad
Jacob. quam Latin. fecit. Ruffin. Ambr. Ser. 138. Aug, de T. 119.
many ancient writers, historical and others, Disput. p. 21.
agreeing with Vigilius in this, Authenticum symbolum quod Apostoli
tradiderunt; and a little before he blames some for venting such doctrines, as
were neither Ibid.
delivered by the Prophets, nor had the authentic authority of the Apostles
Creed, and yet suppose it dubious whether that Symboll be indeed of
Apostolical constitution; and that they did not so divide the world to further
their work, which is so confidently avouched by the ancient, together with the
Countries where each of them had their portion; yet we are sufficiently assured
such was their commission, which they pursued with exactness and success; so
that in their life time by their diligence the whole earth was enlightened: Thus
Saint Paul tell his Romans, 1. 8. Their faith was published through the whole
world; the same is said to the Collossians also, 1. 6. and (...) is used in
neither place, lest curiosity should restrain it to the Roman World, but
(...), is the former expression, and the latter is (...) in the whole and every
part of the world; and is it not considerable, as the injunction was, preach
the Gospel to every creature, as was before remembered from Saint Mark, 16. 5.
So Saint Paul avoweth that in his time it was preached to every creature, Col.
1. 23. such was then the use of that word; the name creature was especially
given to man, the chief of all creatures below.

And this is unanimously acknowledged by the next writers, Ignatius Ep. ad
Philadelph. p. 4.
thought to be that little child called by Christ Mat. 18. 1. has this
expression (...), There Niceph. l. 2. c. 35.
is one Church which the Apostles settled from one end of the earth to another
in the blood of Christ, by their sweat and labor. Tertullian Britannorum
inaccessa Romany loca Christo patuerunt. ad v. Iud. c. 7.
in the following Century affirms that the Gospel in those very first times
went beyond the Roman Monarchy, even to us Britons; and Hist. l. 2. c. 3.
Eusebius shows how the doctrine of salvation by divine power and
cooperation, was carried into all the world: and Julius Firmicus Maturnus De
error. profan. relig.
professes that in his time 1300 years since, there was no Nation under
Heaven, East, West, North, or South, unto whom the Sun of the Gospel had not
shined; and not only in all the Continent, but in every Island says Greg.
Nissene; Thus De consid. l. 2.
Bernard also, and others; for when the Jewish fleece was dried up, all the
world says Jerome In Math. and T. 1. Ep. p. 103.
was sprinkled with that heavenly dew.

2. The Jews before the end of the world shall be converted to Christianity;
this truth is to be found in the Old and New Testament, and has bin the
constant belief of the faithful in every age. The children of Israel shall
remain many days without a King, and without a Prince, etc. Hos. 3. 4. yet
Ver. 5. afterward they shall convert, and seek the Lord their God, and David
their King, i. e. Christ the Son of David the King of his Church, thus
Zephan. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. Zach. 12. 10, 11, etc. and some predictions in that
Evangelicall Prophet Esaias. Saint Paul applies to this very purpose, Romans 11.
26, 27. from Esa. 59. 20. and 27. 9. yea and our common Master Christ tells
us, Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, until the time of
the Gentiles shall be fulfilled, Luke 21. 24. So Saint Paul, when the fullness
of the Gentiles is come in, all Israel shall be saved, Romans 11. 25. Some by
Israel here would understand, Israel according to the spirit, that is, the
Elect from all the Nations: but all along the Jews and Gentiles are spoken of
as distinct people according to the flesh, so all Israel shall be saved, that
is, Willet de Vocat. Iud. Malvend de Antichristo.
a very great and numerous company, or many from every tribe, as we use to say
genera singulorum, not singuli generum, or all the elect of them; for when
their heart shall be turned to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away, 2 Cor.
3. 16. Ancient Christians have subscribed to this; In the end of the world
says Jerome In Mat. 24. In Hos. 2. In Joh. 4. Mic. 2:
the Jews receiving the Gospel, shall be enlightened, thus Augustine De Civit.
D. l. 18. c. 28. and 20, 21.
, Gregory Mor. l. 35. c. 9.
, Bernard In Cant. ser. 39.
, Primasius In Apoc. mei p. 31.
, this was, this is the common opinion of Christians.

Coepitah his, defertur ad hos, referetur ad illos Sum. Raymundi. p. 81.

Nostrafides, and erunt submundi fine fideles. From the Jews our faith began,
To the Gentiles then it ran,
To the Jews return it shall,
Before the dreadful end of all.


3. The third consideration has a twofold branch.

1. The Americans have not, but 2. shall be acquainted with Christianity: and
to the first all are not of this mind that the Indians have not heard of the
Gospel: for Epit. Cent. 16 part. 2.
Osiander speaking of Vilagagno, and his planting there in Brasil, writes
confidently, without doubt those people received the Gospel of Christ by the
preaching of the Apostles 1500 years since, but they lost it again by their
unthankfulness; and Malvenda p. 169.
allegeth some conjectures that Christianity might have been among them, but
these are so few, and so forced, that himself supposes them rather satanicall
suggestions, illusions, and imitations, than remembrances indeed of the Gospel.

There be Doroth. Synop. Hieron. Catal. Socrat. l. 15. Ruffin. l. 1. c 9.
Eusebius. aliique
some records where every one of the Apostles planted the faith of Christ, in
what Nations and Kingdoms, but they are all silent touching this part of the
world, which indeed was not known till of late; yea some Salmuth. in Pancirol.
de Noviter Repert. c. 1. p. 7.
conceive, they had no being at all in former ages, and that there was not so
much as land or earth in those places; however questionless they be but of
late discovery; for though some Bocha. Geo. Sac. p. 716.
will have America to be those Atlantique Islands mentioned by Plato, others
that the Phaenicians arived thither more than 2000 years since, and some
further improbable conjectures there be, it is concluded nevertheless by many
judicious and observant men, that it was never heard of in this world, till
Acost. Benzo. Pet. Mart. Lerius. etc.
Christopher Columbus of Genoa brought news thereof about 1590. when then, or
by whom should they be made Christians? is it credible there should be no
records thereof in the Annalls of any Nation? Could so great a part of the
world become Christians, without any whispering thereof to any other; is it
likely that all Gospel impressions should be utterly obliterate among them? all
the light thereof quite extinguished? and not so much as the least glimpse
thereof remain? as is also acknowledged by him Io. de Laet in Grot. part: p.
71.
that has written and observed so much of these nations.

2. Seeing they were never yet enlightened, without question they shall be, for
the Gospel of the Kingdom must be preached every where for a witness to all
Nations, Mat. 24. 14. Surely so large a part of the world shall not always be
forgotten: Is it imaginable that the God of mercy, who is (...), a lover of
souls, Wisd. 11. 23. should suffer so great a portion of mankind everto
remain in darkness, and in the shadow of death? Is it credible or fit to be
believed, that the wisdom of the Father who takes his solace in the habitable
parts of the earth, and his delight is to be with the children of men, Prove. 8.
31. should have no compassion of such an innumerable multitude of souls? The
earth was inhabited Bucholz Chro. mei p. 136.
by degrees, from the place where Noah's Ark rested they went as the Sun, from
the East, and so planted themselves forward; and the progress of the Gospel
says De Vit. Constant. l. 2. c. 65.
Eusebius, was in the same manner, and for this there is more than allusion in
Psalm. 19. 5. compared with Romans 10. 18. That Western part of the world was
last inhabited, and it shall hear of Christ also in due time, as certainly as
there be people to receive him, for he shall be salvation (...) to the last end
of the earth, Act. 13. 47. And the Americans have a tradition among themselves,
Pet Mart. Decad. p. 95. etc. 244. Malvenda. ibid.
that white and bearded Nations shall subdue their Countries, abolish all their
rites and ceremonies, and introduce a new religion.

CHAP. VIII. The sixth Conjecture.
THE Americans calamities are suitable to those plagues threatened unto the
Jews, Deuteronomy. 28. Such a comment upon that terrible Scripture is not any where
to be found, as among the Indians, by this also it will appear probable that
they be Jews: and here three things shall be touched upon. 1. The Jews were a
very sinful people. 2. The Indians were and are transcendent sufferers. 3. In
that way (...) literally, as was threatened to the Jews.

1. The Jews were grand offenders; De Arcan Cathol. Vent.* c. 24. p. 282.
Galatinus mentions sonre of their enormous transgressions, with their ensuing
vengeances. 1. The selling of Joseph into Egypt, where themselves were kept
afterward in an iron furnace, and dwelt a long time in an house of bondage. 2.
Their first rejection of the Messiah, typified in David, 2 Samuel 20. 1. which
was punished by the Assyrians. 3. The sacrificing of their own children to
Idols, and murdering the Prophets that deterred them from such abominations,
he calls their third great offense, for which the Babylonian captivity fell
upon them. 4. Their fatal and most grievous crime was the denial of the Holy
one, and the just, with desire that a murderer should be given them, Act. 3.
14. and this brought upon them, first the tyranny of the Roman conquest, and
then all those hideous and horrid tribulations that press and oppress them to
this day.

2. The Natives of America have endured the extremities of most unspeakable
miseries: They are a Nation says Lerius Lerius p. 230.
cursed and forsaken of God, and the men of Spain to their other cruelties
added that most abominable reproach, these Barbarians are Benz^ p. 77. 111. 167.
dogs, unworthy of Christendom; it is too true they were so used by them, as if
they had bin such or worse, they did so wear them up with labor, that they
became weary of their lives, the poor creatures choosing rather to die any kind
of death, than to live under such bloody Masters and Monsters; they scared the
Indians into woods, where the men and women hanged themselves together, and
wanting instruments sometimes for such self execution, they helped one another
to knit their long locks about the branches of trees, and so cast themselves
down headlong, their own hairs being their halters; and thus many thousands
of them ended their days with most lamentable yellings and outcries; their
intestine violences and injuries among themselves were woeful by rapine,
war, and sacrificings of one another, many Surius in Append. ad Naucler. p.
775.
thousands of them have been immolated in one day at Mexico; but their
sufferings by the spaniards exceed not only all relation, but belief, and
surely the savages could not have outstripped the Spaniards in barbarous
savagenesses, if those Infidells had gotten the upper hand of these Christians;
a very prudent Cacique says Benzo P. 222.
, that was near an hundred years old, reported freely, that when he was
young, a very strange disease invaded those countries, the sick commonly vomited
many filthy worms, such a wasting plague he said followed this calamity, that
we feared none of us could survive it: and a little before your coming we of
Iucatana had two cruel battles with the Mexicans, in which above one hundred
and fifty thousand were slain, but these were all light and easy vexations,
in respect of those terrible examples of intolerable insolence, avarice, and
cruelty, exercised by your selves upon us; thus he: we read, when the Prophet
of God foretold Hazael, the evil be should bring upon Israel Hazael said, Is
thy servant a dog that he should do this? 2 King. 8. 13. But the Spaniards did
more evil things to the Indians, and showed themselves with shame to be worse
than dogs, witness that bloody Bezerill, though not so bloody as his Master
Didacus Salasar Ovied. Hist. Ind l. 16. c. 11. in Benzo. p. 295
, who set that his Mastiffe upon an old woman, employed by himself, as he
feigned with letters to the Governor, who seeing the cruel curre, by his more
cruel Masters setting on, with open mouth coming upon her, falls to the
ground, bespeaking him in her language, sir dog, sir dog, I carry these letters
to the Governor, holding up to his view the seal, be not angry with me, sir
dog, the Mastiffe as decalmed by that begging posture and language, abates his
fierceness, listes up his leg, and besprinkles the woman, as dogs use to do
at the wall: the Spaniards that knew well his curstness at other times, saw
this with astonishment, and were ashamed to hurt the woman, that so cruel a
dog had spared.

3. The Indian sufferings have run so parallel with those threats, Deuteronomy. 28.
as if they had been principally intended therein also. Was Israel offending to
be calamitous, in all places, town and field, at home and abroad, etc. The
poor Indians Casa, Benzo, alij Historici passim.
for their gold and labor, were by the Spaniards hunted out of all places,
corners and Islands, as if the end of their discovery had been indeed to make a
full end, and a total devastation of the American Nations. Against the sinning
Jews it was said, Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, etc. verse. 18. The
pestilence shall cleave unto thee, etc. The Lord shall smite thee with a
consumption, etc. ver. 21, 22, 35, 29. Strange diseases have destroyed the
Natives, as the histories of those countries do relate; their cruel
taskmasters the Spaniards, did so much overburthen them with load and labor,
that the Iidem.
cohabitation of man and wife did cease: seven thousand infants of Cuba did
perish in three months space, their mothers worn out with toyling had no milk
to give them. The Lord said, He would smite Israeel with blindness, madness,
and astonishment of heart, and thou shall grope at noone day, as the blind
gropeth in darkness, etc. ver. 28. 29. And woeful indeed is the veil of
ignorance that is come over the Natives Pet. Mart: p. 506. Guacca Regio, jarima
podex.
; they imagined the Island Hispaniola to be a living creature, eating and
digesting like a monster: that vast sea-den or hollow place which they call
Guacca-jarima, is the voider of its excrements, a fancy like that antique fable
of the Demogorgon lying in the womb of the world, whose breath causes the
flux and reflux of the sea: the dark part of the Moon Id. p. 525.
they take to be a man thrown thither, and tormented for incest with his own
sister, whose eclipse they guess to be caused by the Suns anger; those
responsalls of the aires reverberation, which we call echo, they suppose to be
souls, wandering thereabouts. How were those poor creatures astonished, when
they saw themselves torn by Casa. p. 100.
Spanish dogs, whose Masters would borrow quarters of Indians, men and women,
for their hounds, and as commonly expose them to such a kind of death and
burial, as if men and women had bin made for dogs meat? how were they
affrighted when the fear of Spanish cruelties provoked fathers, mothers,
children, to hang themselves together? that Bishop knew of two hundred and more
so perishing by the tyranny of one Spaniard. No Casa. p. 24.
marvel therefore if when the Friar told Hathuey, the Cacique, of heavens
happiness, and the torments of hell, and he understanding upon enquiry that
the Spaniards dying went to heaven, because they were Christians, let my lot
says he fall in hell rather than with that most cruel people. God said of the
Jews, They should be oppressed and spoiled evermore, ver. 29. thou shall
betroth a wife, and another shall lie with her, ver. 30. you shall be left few
in number, though ye were as stars for multitude, etc. ver. 62. And these
Americans were made by the Spaniards every where and every way miserable,
without any help or relief: Barthol, las Casas upon forty two years sight
of their suffering, sympathized so much with them, that he represented the same
to King Philip, in hope to obtain for them some favor and mercy, but he
little prevailed. One of them boasted of his care to leave as many Indian women
as he could with child, that in their sale he might put them off to his better
profit: from Id. p. 60.
Lucaios to Hispaniola, about seventy miles, dead carkases were cast so
abundantly into the sea, that they needed no other direction thither; and we
know it for truth, says he, that Countries longer than all Europe and a great
part of Asia, by horrid cruelties were destroyed, and more than twenty Millions
of the Natives perished; Benzo. p. 111.
yea in Hispaniola alone, scarce one hundred and fifty, of two millions were
left alive. In another place he professes their tyranny was so cruel and
detestable, that in forty six years space they caused, he verily believed,
more than fifty millions of them to pay their last debt to nature; for I speak,
says he, the truth, and what I saw: they dealt with the poor Indians, not as
with beasts, hoc enim peroptarem, but as if they had bin the most abject dung
of the earth: and is this the way says Benzo to convert Infidels? Such Id. ib.
p. 7 and 8
kindness they showed to other places also, Cuba, Iamaica, Portu ricco, etc.
It was said against Israel, Cursed shall thy basket be, and thy store, ver.
17. the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy cattle. ver. 18. all shall be
devoured by enemies and other Nations, etc. ver. 30, etc. For very much is said
of their suffering in riches and honor etc. And the Spanish Christians that
brake into America showed themselves so covetous of their treasure, that the
Natives with wonder said Casa. p. 12. 22. 29. 54.
surely gold is the Spaniards God; they broiled noble Indians on gridirons, to
extort from them their hidden wealth, giving no respect at all to their
Caciques or Kings. Memorable in Benzo. p. 285.
many respects is the History of Attabaliba the great King of Peru, who being
conquered and captivated by Francis Pizarro, redeemed his liberty by the
promise of so many golden and silver vessels, as should fill the room where
they were so high as one could reach with his hand, and they were to take none
away till he had brought in the whole sum; expecting thereupon according to
covenant his freedom and honor, he dispatched his officers and servants with
great care and diligence, and did faithfully perform his bargain, in bringing
that vast heap of treasure together; but they resolve nevertheless most
impiously to murder him, though with many arguments and tears he pleaded for
his life, desiring sometime to be sent unto Caesar, then expostulating with
them for their perfidiousnesse and falsehood, but neither words nor weeping,
nor their own inward guilt could mollify those hard hearts, they sentence him
to death by a rope, and the cruel execution followed; but p. 289, etc.
Benzo observed a miraculous hand of vengeance from heaven upon all that gave
consent thereto: so that as Suetonius c. 89.
records of Caesar's stobbers, Nullus little sua morte defunctus est, every one
of them found that consultation and contrivance fatal; Almager is hanged,
Didacus his son is slain by Vacca de Castro, the Indians kill John Pizarro
at Cusco, who fell upon Friar Vincent also of the green valley, and slew him
with clubs in the Isle Puna, Ferdinandus Pizarro was sent into Spain, where he
consumed his days in a prison, Gonsallus Pizarro was taken by Gasca and hewn
in pieces, and Francis Pizarro that was the President, and gave judgment, died
an evil death also, being slain by his own Country men in that strange
land; so just was God in avenging so perfidious a regicide and King-murder, so
ominous was their presumption against the honorable, vile swine-herds
sentencing so great a King to so foul a death: those, are his words, in whom,
and his interpreter Benzo. 179. 311. 315. etc.
, he that please may read further, those murderers were base in birth and life,
and they instance in despicable particulars.

It were endless to mention all the parallels that the Spaniards have drawn
upon the poor Indians, according to the threats of God upon the sinning Jews,
Deuteronomy. 28. 43, The stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very
high, and thox shall come down very low. 48. Thou shall serve thine enemy in
hunger, and thirst, and nakedness, and in want of all things, and he shall put
a yoke of iron upon thy neck till he have destroyed thee. 59. The Lord will
make thy plagues wonderful, etc. 61. And every plague which is not written in
this Law will the Lord bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

Their Kings and Caciques were no more regarded by them than the meanest, they
enthralled all the Natives in most woeful servitude and captivity; their
sufferings have bin most wonderful, such as the Book of the Law has not
registered, nor any other record; they spared no age nor sex, not women with
child; they laid wagers who could dig deepest into the bodies of Casa. p.
19. 11.
men at one blow, or with most dexterity cut off their heads; they took
infants from their mothers breasts and dashed their innocent heads against the
rocks; they cast others into the rivers with scorn, making themselves merry
at the manner of their falling into the water; they set up several gallowses,
and hung upon them thirteen Indians in honor they said of Christ and his
twelve Apostles: And yet further the same Bishop mervailes at the abominable
blindness and blasphemy of his Countrymen, impropriating their bloody crimes
unto God himself, giving him thanks in their prosperous tyrannies, like those
thieves and Tyrants he says spoken of by the Prophet Zachary, 11. 5. They
kill, Id. p. 57.
and hold themselves not guilty, and they that sell them say, Blessed be the
Lord, for I am rich.

And now if all these parallels will not amount to a probability, one thing
more shall be added, which is the dispersion of the Jews, it is said, The Lord
shall scatter thee among all people, from one end of the earth, even to the
other, etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 64. The whole remnant of thee I will scatter into all
winds, Ezekiel. 5. 10, 12, 14. and Zach. 2. 6. I have spread you as the four
winds of heaven.

Now if it be considered how punctual and faithful God is in performing his
promises and threats mentioned in the Scripture of truth, we shall have cause
to look for the Jews in America, one great, very great part of the earth;
Esaias had said, 1. 8. The daughter of Syon shall be left as a lodge in a garden
of Cucumbers, and as Helena Tripartit. Hist. l 2. c. 18.
found it in her time, pomorum custodium an Apple-yard; so Catech. 16. p. 263.
Cyrill affirms in his days it was a place full of Cucumbers; Ieremies
prophecies of Babylons destruction, even in the circumstances thereof, are
particularly acknowledged and related by Xenophon Cyropaid. passim.
, The Lord had threatened to bring a Nation upon Israel swift as the Eagle
flies, Deuteronomy. 28. 49. Josephus De B. Judaica l. 3. c. 57*
says this was verified in Vespatians Ensign, and the banner of Cyrus was an
Eagle Vbi supra. 7. p. 501.
also, as the same Xenophon relates; and if the Jews be not now, never were
in America, how have they been dispersed into all parts of the earth? this
being indeed so large a portion of it; how have they bin scattered into all the
four winds, if one of the four did never blow upon them? Much more might be
said of their sufferings from the Spaniards, whom the barbarous Indians
thereupon counted so barbarous and inhumane, that they supposed them not to
come into the world like other people, as if it were impossible, that any borne
of man and woman should be so monstruously savage and cruel; they derived
therefore their pedigree from the wide and wild Ocean, and called them Lerius.
p. 152. alijque Cent. ad Solin. p. 218.
Viracocheie, i. e. the foame of the Sea, as beeng borne of the one, and
nourished by the other, and poured upon the earth for its destruction. Hist. l.
7. c. 22.
Acosta indeed gives another interpretation of that word in honor of his
Nation, but other Lerius, alij.
writers unanimously accord in this; and p. 405. 406.
Benzo confidently averreth, that the conceit and judgment of the Indians
touching the original of the Spaniards, is so settled in them, that none but
God himself can alter their minds herein; for thus says he they reason among
themselves, the winds tumble down houses, and tear trees in pieces, the fire
burns both trees and houses, but these same Viracocheies devour all, they
turn over the earth, offer violence to the rivers, are perpetually unquiet,
wandering every way to find gold, and when they have found it, they throw it
away at dice, they steal, and swear, and kill, yea and kill one another, and
deny God: yea these Indians in detestation of the Spaniards, he says, do
execrate and curse the sea it self for sending such an intractable, fierce,
and cruel a generation into the earth: But thus have wicked sins drawn
woeful punishments, threatened to the Jews, and suffered also by these
Americans, wherein the more has bin spoken, not only to deter all Christians
from such inhumane barbarities, but to provoke the readers every way to
compassionate such transcendent sufferers, the rather because as Canaan of old
was Emanuels land, Hos. 9. 3. the holy land, Zach. 2. 12. and the Jews were
Gods peculiar people, so these surely are either a remnant of Israel after the
flesh, or else God will in his good time incorporate them into that
commonwealth, and then they also shall become the Israel of God.

Part Second. Some contrary reasonings removed, and first in the general.
CHAP. I.
THere be some that by irrefragable arguments, they suppose, evince and
overthrow all conjectures that the Americans be Jews: Apocryphal Esdras in
Historicalls may be of some credit, and that sentence of his by many is applied
to this very purpose; and these very people, the ten tribes led away captive by
Salmanasar, took this counsel among themselves, that they would leave the
multitude of the Heathen, and go forth into a farther Country, where never
man dwelt, that they might there keep their statutes, which they never kept in
their own land, and they entered into Euphrates, by the narrow passages of the
river, for through that Country there was a great way to go, namely of a
year and an half, and the same Region is called Arsareth, etc. 2 Esdr. 13.
40. etc. Acost. l. 1. c. 9
Acosta is of opinion that these words thus produced by many, make in truth
against this conjecture, and that for two reasons. 1. The ten Tribes went so
far to keep their statutes and ceremonies, but these Indians observe none of
them, being given up to all Idolatries: And is this at all consequent, such was
their purpose, therefore the success must be answerable? is it likely they
should be so tenacious in a far and foreign land, that never kept them in
their own, as the next words express? His second Argument is of like force,
for it is not said, that Euphrates and America be contiguous, or places so near
one the other, muchlesse that the entries of that River should stretch to the
Indies; but he tells of a very long journey taken by them, suitable to the
places of their removal, and approach, which was to a Country where never man
dwelt, and what Country could this be but America? all other parts of the
world being then known and inhabited: Besides there has bin a common
tradition among the Jews, and in the world, that those ten tribes are utterly
lost; in what place are they then like to be found if not in America? for they
shall be found again. Some conjectures that they came from Norway, and be of
that nation, have bin mentioned, with the improbability also thereof; and now
lately T. Gage sets forth his new survey of the West Indies, his long abode
there, and diligent observation of many, very many remarkable passages in his
travells; there I hoped to read somewhat of their originalls, and find him
Gages survey. p. 73.
affirming that the Indians seem to be of the Tartars progeny, his reasons
are, 1. Quivira and all the West side of the Country toward Asia is far
more populous than the East next Europe, which shows these parts to be first
inhabited; but if the meaning be, the nearer Tartary the more populous,
therefore they came from thence, its falls in with the third reason. 2. Their
barbarous properties are most like the Tartats of any; this argument militates
with more force for their Judaisme, to which many of their rites be so
consonant, both sacred and common, as has been said. And thirdly the West side
of America, if it be not continent with Tartary, is yet disjoined by a small
strait; but the like may be said of some other parts, that they be or may have
been near some other maine lands, and so by that reason of some other race and
extract. 4. The people of Quivira nearest to Tartary, are said to follow the
seasons and pasturing of their cattle like the Tartarians; this particular, a
species of the general, delivered in the second reason, is there glanced upon,
but all he says of this nature, and others with him, are so far from
weakening our conjecture, that they may be embraced rather as friendly supports
thereunto, if others have guessed right that conceive the Tartars also
themselves to be Jowes. Matthew Paris M. Parisad An. 1240 mei p. 732. and 756.
, no mean man in his time, was of that opinion; in his famous history he
mentions it as the judgment of learned men in that age, it is thought the
Tartars, quorum memoriaest detestabilis, are of the ten Tribes, etc. Yea and of
latter times Dr Fletcher In M. S.
a near neighbor to them while he lived among the Russes as Agent for Queen
Elizabeth, supposes the same, and gives diverse probable arguments inducing
him thereto: the names of many Towns in Tartary the same with those in
Israel, Tabor, Ierico, Chorasin, etc. They are circumcised, distinguished into
Tribes, and have many Hebrew words among them, etc. for he adds other
probabilities; yea and the same M. Paris Vbi supra*
shows that the Jews themselves were of that mind, and called them their
brethren of the seed of Abraham, etc. There was another transmigration of them
when Vespatian destroyed Jerusalem; their own, and other Histories speak
little thereof: it might be well worthy the endeavors of some serious hours
to enquire after the condition of that Nation since our most dear Saviors
Ascension; a strange thing is reported by themselves, and of themselves, and
with such confidence Buxtors. Synag. Iud. c. 9. mei p. 231:
that it is in their devotion. It says when Vespatian wan Jerusalem, he gave
order that three ships laden with that people might be put to Sea, but without
Pilot, oars, or tackling, these by winds and tempests were woefully
shattered, and so dispersed, that they were cast upon several coasts; one of
them in a Country called Lovanda, the second in another region named Arlado,
the third at a place called Bardeli, all unknown in these time, the last
courteously entertained these strangers, freely giving them grounds and
vineyards to dress, but that Lord being dead, another arose that was to them,
as Pharaoh to old Israel, and he said to them, he would try by Nabuchodonosors
experiment upon the three young men, if these also came from the fire
unscorch'd, he would believe them to be Jews, they say Adoni-Melech, most
noble Emperor, let us have also three days to invoke the Majesty of our God
for our deliverance, which being granted, Joseph and Benjamin two brothers, and
their cousin Samuel, consider what is meet to be done, and agree to fast and
pray three days together, and meditate every one of them a prayer, which they
did, and out of them all they compiled one which they used all those three
days and three nights; on the morning of the third day one of them had a
vision upon Esa. 43. 2. which marvelously encouraged them all: soon after a
very great fire was kindled, and an ininnumerable company of people came to see
the burning, into which they cast themselves unbidden without fear, singing,
and praying till all the combustible matter was consumed, and the fire went
out; the Jews every where published this miracle, and commanded that this
prayer should be said every Monday and Thursday morning in their Synagogues,
which is observed by them to this day says Buxtorsius: In this narration if
there be any truth we may look for some confirmation thereof from America.
But that there be no Jews in those parts, Io. de Laet endeavors otherwise to
evince; as 1. They are not circumcised, therefore not In Grot:
Jews; but their circumcision has been made so manifest, that this reason may
well be retorted; they are circumcised, therefore they be Jews.

Again the Indians are not covetous, nor learned, nor careful of their
Antiquities, therefore they are not Judaicall; in which allegations if there be
any strength, it will be answered in the examination of those three following
scrupulous and difficult questions.

1. Whence and how the Jews should get into America. 2. How multiply, and
enpeople so great a Continent, so vast a land. 3. How grow so prodigiously rude
and barbarous.
CHAP II. Answer to the first Quere, How the Jews should get into America.
THE Jews did not come into America, as is feigned of Ganimed Hygin. Astron.
, riding on Eagles wings, neither was there another Arc made to convey them
thither, the Angels did not carry them by the hairs of the heads, Bell, and
Drag.
as Apocryphal Habakuk was conducted into Babylon, these were not caught by
the Spirit of the Lord and settled there, as Saint Philip was from Jerusalem to
Asotus, Act. 8. 5. They were Agathias Hist. m p. 142.
not guided by an Heart, as it is written of the Hunns, when they brake in upon
the nearer parts of Europe In Euagr. l. 4. c. 18.
, Procopius reports of the Maurisii, an African Nation, that they were of those
Gergesites or Jebusites spoken of in the Scriptures, for he had read a very
ancient writing in Phaenician Characters thus, (...), i. e. We are they that
fled from the face of the destroyer Jesus the son of Nave; and so the
Septuagint names him, whom we call the son of Nun, and as (...) formerly,
(...) was not in those days of such odious signification: It may be said these
might pass from the parts of Asia into Lybia by land, but the Jews could not
so get into America, which is thought by some to be very far distant on every
side from the Continent; l. 1. 19.
Acosta therefore supposes the Natives might come at first by sea into that
maine land, alleging some experiments to that purpose, but in the next Chapter
he judges it more probable, whosoever the inhabitants be, that they traveled
thither by land; for though some few men happily by tempests, might be cast on
those shores, yet it is unlike, so large a part of the earth by such mishaps
should be replenished. F. Cotton (f), it seems was puzzled with this scruple,
therefore in his memorialls he propounded to Tract. P. Cott.
the Daemoniaque that Interrogatory, Quomodo animalia in insulas, etc. Quomodo
homines, how got men and other creatures into those Islands and Countries.
Acosta Vbisupra.
subscribes at length to the sentence of St. Austin De C. D. l. 16. c. 7.
for the entrance of Bears, Lions, and Wolves, that they arrived thither,
either by their own swimming, or by the importation of curious men, or by the
miraculous command of God, and ministration of the Angels, yet his Idem.
final determination is, and he lived seventeen years in that Country,
America joyneth somewhere with some other part of the world, or else is but by
a very little distance separated from it. And it may yet be further considered,
the situation of Countries is much altered by tract of time, many places that
were formerly sea, are now dry land says Strabo Geograp. l. 1.
, a great part af Asia and Africa has bin gained from the Atlantique Ocean,
the sea of Corinth was drunk up by an earthquake, Lucania by the force of the
water was broken off from Italy, and got a new name; Sicily says Apol. c. 39.
Tertullian, the sea gave unto the Aelian. Var. Hist. p. 455.
earth the Island Rhodes; Pliny l. 2 c. 89 91.
mentions diverse places, Islands long since, but in his time adjoined to the
Continent, and the sea has devoured many Towns and Cities, that were
anciently inhabited; that Vallis Silvestris as the Latin translation renders,
Genesis 14. 3. or of Siddim, i. e. Labored fields, as it is in Hebrew, was
certainly a veil of slime-pits in the days of Abraham and Lot, ver. 10.
which very place about four hundred years after, was a sea, the salt sea,
ver. 3. Between Thera and Therasia an Island suddenly appeared, says Chro.
Anno 46
Eusebius, and the sea perhaps has broken into some places, and of one made a
double Island; all Ages and Nations tell of the water and the Earth, how they
gain one from the other: and thus some Verst^g. c. 4. Lamb. Peramb. p 18.
have conjectured, that our Britain since the flood, was one Continent with
France, for the distance between them, at Callis and Dover is but small, about
twenty four miles, and the cliffes on both sides are like each other, for
length and matter, equally chalk and flinty, as if art, or sudden violence
had made an even separation. Thence Hollinshead writes confidently, because
Lions and wild Bulls were formerly in this Island, that it was not cut from the
maine by the great deluge of Noah, but long after; for none would replenish a
Country with such creatures for pastime and delight. Chron. 1. pars. p. 225.


And if these be no more but conjectures that America was once united to the
other world, or but a little divided from it, time and the sea two insatiable
devourers have made the gap wider: But the question is not in what age, before,
or since the Incarnation of our Lord the Jews took their long journey, and
planted there; but how the way was passable for them: Malvenda Ibid.
speaks confidently that they might come into Tartary, and by the deserts into
Grotland, on which side America is open; and Mr Brerewood In 10. de Laet. p.
126.
assures us that the North part of Asia is possessed by Tartars, and if it be
not one Continent with America, as some suppose; yet doubtless they are
divided by a very narrow channel, because there be abundance of Bears, Lions,
Tigers, and Wolves in the Land, which surely men would not transport to their
own danger and detriment, those greater Ibid. p. 116.
beasts indeed are of strength to swim over Sea many miles, and this is
generally observed of Bears: and Ibid. and p. 25.
Herrera says, the inhabitants of the West Indies came thither by land, for
those Provinces touch upon the Continent of Asia, Africa, and Europe, though it
be not yet fully discovered, how, and where the two worlds be conjoined, or if
any sea do pass between them, they are straites so narrow, that beasts might
easily swim, and men get over even with small vessels; Our Country man
Nich. Fuller Miscellan. Sacr. l. 2. c. 4.
gives in his suitable verdit for the facile passing into Columbina, so he
calls it from the famous first discoverer, saying, from other places they might
find several Islands not far distant each from other, and a narrow cut at
last through which passengers might easily be conveyed; and Acosta Hist. l. 7.
c. 3^ and. l. 1. c. 20.
tells that about Florida the land runs out very large toward the North, and
as they say joins with the Scythique or German Sea; and after some other such
mentionings, he concludes confidently, there is no reason or experience that
does contradict my conceit, that all the parts of the Earth be united and
joined in some place or other, or at least, approach very near together, and
that is his conclusive sentence. It is an indubitable thing, that the one world
is continued, and joined with the other.

CHAP. III. Answer to Question 2. How such a remnant should enpeople so great a
part of the world.
THE whole Country of Jewry, whence we would have it probable that the
Americans came, is not above one hundred and sixty miles long, from T. 3. Ep.
p. 69*
Dan to Beersheba, and the breadth is but sixty miles, from Ioppa to Jordan, in
St. Ieromes account, who knew it so well; and how some few Colonies, as it were
removing from thence should multiply into such numbers, that so large a
Country should be filled by them, is a scruple that has troubled some
considering men. America in the latitude of it is Lerius. p. 169.
is four thousand miles; and Bishop Casa's Ante p. hujus 24. n.
has said already, that the Spaniards in his time had forraged and spoiled
Countries longer then all Europe, and a great part of Asia; it seems
incredible therefore that the Incommers, who were but few in comparison, as a
little flock of Kids, should so marvelously spread into all the Western
World; for the Americans before that Spanish devastation, filled all the
Country. But this will not seem so difficult, if former examples be taken
into consideration; Versteg. p. 188.
some have made special observation of the (...) such as had many children;
it is much that Acosta Hist. l. 6. c. 22*
writes of one of the Inguas or Kings of Peru, that he had above three hundred
sons and grandchildren; it is more that Philo Iudeus Qu. in Genesis and Come. c.
37.
tells of Noah the Patriarch, who lived, he says, to see twenty four
thousand proceeding from him, all males, for women were not numbered. We use to
say, Rome was not built in one day; and indeed Eutropius Hist. l. 1.
speaking of the Empire of that City, says, at first none was less, but in
its increment it exceeded all others by many degrees, so that he who reads the
story thereof, reads not the acts of one people, but of all Nations says
Florus Prolog. ad l. 1
; yea and Seneca de Consolat ad Helv. c. 7.
looking on Rome in its minority, and her immense magnitude afterward, is
amazed thereat; this one people says he, how many Colonies did it send into
all Provinces, he writes of numerous increases from other Cities also, as
Athens and Miletus, but it will be nearer to our purpose to observe, how small
the number of Israel was at his first descent into Egypt, how short a time
they tarried there, what cruel ways were taken to stop their increase, and
yet how much, and how marvelously they multiplied, and then it will not be
strange, that a far greater number, in a longer time should or might grow
into such vast multitudes. And for the first it is most certain, all the souls
of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt were seventy. Genesis 46. 27. It Is true
also, though not to all so manifest, that the time of their abode in Egypt was
about two hundred and fifteen years, and not more; at first appearance indeed
it seems to be otherwise, because we read, Exodus 12. 40. The sojourning of the
children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years,
but the Septuagints addition is here remarkable (...). They dwelt in Egypt and
in the Land of Canaan, they and their Fathers, four hundred and thirty years,
and this is one of those thirteen mutations that the seventy Interpreters made;
when at King Ptolomes appointment they translated the Scripture into Greek,
which they said was done rightly by them, for Israel was indeed in Egypt but
two hundred and ten years, which collection they make from Ben. Gor. p:
the numerall letters of that speech of Jacob. Genesis 42. 2. / 6 / 4 / 200 and
there be many impressions in the Scripture, evidencing that their abode in
Egypt was according to this computation. Saint Paul first taught this high
point of Chronology, where and how the account must begin, namely at the time
when the promise was made to Abraham, for the Law was four hundred and thirty
years after, Gal. 3. 16, 17. God bidding Abraham get out of his own country,
etc. Genesis 12. 1. makes a Covenant with him, ver. 2. 3. and Abraham was then
seventy five years old, ver. 4. Isaac is borne twenty five years after, Genesis
21. 5. Jacobs birth is sixty years after that, Genesis 25. 26. Jacob was one
hundred and thirty years old when he went down into Egypt, Genesis 47. 28.
which together make two hundred and fifteen years, and two hundred and fifteen
years after they came all out of Egypt; for when the four hundred and thirty
years were expired, even the self same day departed all the Hosts of the Lord
out of the land of Egypt, Exodus 12. 41. The computation of Suidas In Voce (...).
in l Suidas thus computes the four hundred and thirty years of Isreal's being
in Egypt, and the land of Canaan: From Abraham's going into Charran to Isaacs
birth, years 25 Thence to Jacobs Nativity. 60 From him to Levi. 87 From Levi to
Caath. 45 From Ceath to Amram. 63 From Amram to Moses. 70 From Moses to their
Exodus, and going out. 80 Sum 430 years*

the margent is consonant hereunto; and how these seventy in the space of two
hundred and fifteen years did increase, is next to be declared, which is also
plainly expressed, ver. 37. They took their journey from Rameses to Succoth,
about six hundred thousand men on foot, beside children, so great a
multiplication of so few in so short a time, may easily convince the
possibility of a far greater augmentation from a beginning so vastly different,
and the continuance so much surmounting. The Spaniards first coming into
America was about the year one thousand four hundred and ninety: the great
dispersion of the Jews immediately after our Saviors death at the destruction
of Jerusalem, was more then fourteen hundred years before, and their former
importation into the City of the Medes was seven hundred and forty years
before that; if therefore upon either of the scatterings of that Nation, two
thousand or fourteen hundred years, or less then either number be allowed for
the increase of those that were very many before, such multitudes will not be
miraculous: besides, in all that time no foreign power did break in among
them; there were thence no transplantations of Colonies, no wars did eat up
the inhabitants, but such light battles as they were able to manage among
themselves, in all that long time they did increase and multiply without any
extraordinary diminution, till that incredible havocke which was made by the
Spanish invasions and cruelties.

CHAP. IV. Answer to the third Quaere, about their becoming so barbarous.
IF such a passage through Tartary, or some other Country for them were
granted, and the probability of so numerous multiplication acknowledged, the
persuasion will not yet be easy, that Jews should ever become so barbarous,
horrid and inhumane, as books generally relate of these Americans.

Villagagno Ler. Hist. pre p. 8.
writing of the Brasilians to Master f.
Calvin, speaks as if he had bin uncertain at first whether he were come
among beasts in an humane shape, so stupid he found them and sottish beyond
imagination: But here every reader may take occasion to bemoane the woeful
condition of mankind, and into what rude, gross, and unmanlike barbarities we
run headlong, if the goodness of God prevent us not.

We marvel at the Americans for their nakedness, and man-devouring, we
cannot believe the Jews should be given over to such barbarity: But in our own
Nation the Inhabitants were anciently as rude and horrid, (...), says
Herodian, the Britons knew not the use of apparel, lest their clothing In
Sev. p. 83.
should hide the several forms and figures of beasts and other creatures
which they paint, and imprint upon their bodies; and Hierome says, when he was
a young man, he saw the Scots, Gentem Britannicam humanis vesci carnibus, T. 2.
Ep. p. 75.
and that even here of old were Anthropophagi, is averred by Diodorus Siculus,
and Strabo. And to what has Lib. 6. Geor. l. 4.
bin said of the Jews formerly, shall here be added.

It seems strange to us if they be Jews, they should forget their religion,
and be so odiously idolatrous, although after so many years; but, if the
Scripture had not spoken it, could it have bin believed of this very people,
that they should fall so often into such foul offenses, as, if circumstances
be considered, have no parallel. Israel, when but newly delivered out of
Egypt, by many signs and wonders, with several evident and miraculous
impressions of Gods Majesty and power; yet in six months space all is
forgotten, they make unto themselves a God of their own, attributing unto it
all their deliverance, and say, These be thy Gods O Israrael which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt. Exodus 32. 4. which base Idol of theirs had not its
nothing, till they were all come out safe thence; who can sufficiently wonder
that those very people who saw and heard those terrible things mentioned, Exodus
19, and 20. which forced them to say but a while before to Moses, Talk thou
with us, and we will hear, but let not God talk with us, least we die,
Exodus 20. 19. Yea God himself seems to admire at this, and for this to disowne
them, telling Moses, Thy people which thou have brought out of the land of
Egypt, they are soon turned out of the way, etc. Exodus 32. 8. It may seem past
belief any of Jacobs race should be so unnatural as to devour one another,
as is frequent among these Indians; and would it not be as much beyond credit,
if the Scripture of truth, Dan. 10. 21. had not asserted it, that these sons
of Jacob in former times when they had Priests and Prophets among them, and the
remembrance of Gods justice and mercy was fresh in their minds, That they
should then offer their sons and daughters unto devils, Psalm. 106. 36. as
they did in the valley of Hinnom, 2 King 23. 10. smiting Hier. in loc.
on the Tabrets while their children were burning, that their cry could not be
heard; it is not impossible therefore that the Jews should be again overwhelmed
with such savagenesses and inhumanity; nor improbable neither, if to what has
bin said three other things be added. 1. The threats of God against them upon
their disobedience, Deuteronomy. 28. where be words and curses sufficient to portend
the greatest calamity that can be conceived to fall upon the nature of man, as
has already bin in several things declared; and M. Paris Vbi supra.
so answers the objection, that the Tartars are not Jewish, because they know
nothing of Moses Law, nor righteousness, etc. If when Moses was alive, says
he, they were so stubborn and rebellious, and went after other Gods, they may
be now much more prodigiously wicked, even as these Americans, being unknown
to other people, confounded also in their language and life, and God so
revenging their abominations. 2. The ten Tribes in their own land were become
extremely barbarous, renouncing all almost they had received from Moses, Ezekiel.
36. 17. and 2 King. 17. their captivity is mentioned, and the sinful cause
thereof, more then abominable Idolatries; and they were not only guilty of
wicked, but even of witless impieties: God forbad them to walk after the
customs of the Nations, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. and yet, as the Heathen in all their
Cities, they built high places, making Images and groves upon every high hill,
and under every green tree, and made their sons and daughters to pass
through the fire, using witchcraft and enchantment, etc. 2 King. 17. 8, 9. This
was their religion and wisdom while they were in their own Country, and they
were no better in the land of their captivity; for it may be, they had not
there the books of the Law, nor any Prophets among them, because it is said
again and again, They left the commandments of their God. And if it seem
unlikely, that the Jews being in America should lose the Bible, the Law, and
ceremonies, then let the Prophecy of Hosea be remembered, where it is foretold,
that the children of Israel shall remain many days without a King, and
without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Ephod, and without a
Teraphim, Hose. 3. 4. Yea and before that time there was a lamentable defection
of religion in Israel.

While they were in their own land, for a long season they were without the
true God, and without a reading Priest, and without Law, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. yea
and as Chrysostom Chrisost. in 1 Cor. 2. m. p. 218.
affirms that the Book of Deuteronomy had been lost along time among
Christians, and was lately recovered from dust and rubbish a little before his
days; so it is most certain that in Iosiahs reign, Hilkiah the Priest found
the Book of the Law in the House of the Lord, which when the King heard read
unto him, he was astonished, as at a new and strange thing, and rent his
clothes, 2 King, 22. 8. etc. and this was the Book of the law of the Lord
given by Moses, 2 Chro. 34. 14. which was then little known or regarded among
them, ver. 24, 25. etc. But thirdly, the stupor and dullness of Israel was
even admirable, when our Savior came into the world, for they give no credit
to their own Prophets read in their Synagogues every Sabbath, the Shepherds
publish what they received from the Angels concerning Christ, Luke 2. 17.
Simeon proclaims glorious things of Jesus, and they will not hear, ver. 25.
Wise men came from the East to Jerusalem enquiring and discoursing, but still
they apprehend not; yea they shut their eyes against all the marvailes that
Christ performed among them, such as would have convinced not only Tire and
Sidon, but even Sodom and Gomorrha: the heavenly Sermons of the Son of God
wrought upon stones, harlots, publicans and sinners, but those Jews remain
inflexible against all, and at his death they still continue seared and
stupefied; the veil of the Temple is rent, the earth did quake, the stones
were cloven asunder, and the graves did open, but their hearts are shut up
still; yea and at his resurrection there was a great earthquake, the Angel of
the Lord comes down from heaven, his countenance is like lightning, for fear
of him the keepers become as dead men, Christ rises again in glory, and the
watch show the High Priests all these things, they are hereupon convinced, but
they will not b^ convinced; for they take counsel together, and with money hire
the soldiers to say, the disciples stole away his body while they slept; if it
be therefore well considered of what dark and darkened condition the Israelites
were in these times, how many years have passed since, what means they have
had to increase their rudeness and incivility, and irreligion; no way,
commerce, or means left to reclaim them, it will not seem so strange if they
be wholly barbarous, seeing also the vengeance of God lies hard and heavy upon
them for their injustice done to his Son, nam crucifixerunt In Io. Tr. 4.
salvatorem suum and fecerunt damnatorem suum, says St. Austin, they crucified
their Savior, and made him their enemy and avenger. It is no marvel then,
supposing the Americans. to be Jews, that there be so few mentionings of
Judaicall rites and righteousness among them; it may be, and is, a wonderful
thing rather, that any footstep or similitude of Judaisme should remain after
so many ages of great iniquity, with most just divine displeasure thereupon, and
no possibility yet discerned how they should recover, but manifest necessities
almost of praecipitation into further ignorance, grossness and impiety; the
loss of which their customs and ceremonies, in so great a measure, in time
may prove advantageous toward their conversion, seeing they cannot be
obstinate maintainers of Mosaicall Ordinances, the love and liking whereof and
adhesion to them, was ever a prevailing obstacle to the knowing Jews, and that
is a consideration tending directly to the last part, and particular, and will
help, I trust, to encourage us who are already desirous, not to civilize only
the Americanes, (...) even to Gospellize and make them Christian.

Part Third. Humble desires to all, for hearty endeavors in all, to acquaint
the Natives with Christianity.
CHAP. I. To the Planters, and touching the cause of their removal hence.
THis discourse will be directed to the English planted there, and our selves
at home; concerning the former, three or four things may be minded.

1. Cause of their removal. 2. Hope of the Natives conversion. 3. Directions
to it. 4. Cautions, and some other additions.
Deep considerations, without doubt, and mature, were in those that hence
transplanted themselves into that other part of the world, but quo jure, by
what right and title they could settle in a foreign land was surely none of
their last enquiries. Io. Bodin Meth. Hist. p. 522.
reckons five reasons why Colonies may be planted in other Regions. 1.
Expulsion from their own native Country. 2. Increase of inhabitants upon a
land. 3. Want of necessaries at home, and unseasonable times. 4. Desire to
preserve and enlarge their own territories. 5. Favor to prisoners and
captives. The ampliation of the Kingdom of Christ was expected here as a
motive in vain; but I find it elsewhere among our Novangles, and it shall be
mentioned in due place: for those are causes why men go out of their own
land, but for the jus and right of settling in another they say nothing.

When the Bishop De las Casas had set forth his tract of the Spanish cruelties
committed in the Indies, some Casas. p. 134. etc.
guilty persons he supposes suborned Doctor Sepulveda, the Emperors
Historian, to undertake their patronage, which he did in an elegant and
rhetorical discourse, endeavoring to prove, that the Spanish wars against the
Indians were just and lawful, and that they were bound to submit unto the
Spaniards, as Idiots to the more prudent; but he could not obtain leave to
print a book so irrational and unchristian.

Their more plausible plea is, that Columbus was first employed by them to
discover some of those parts; but the same offer was before tendered to this our
Nation, and the King thereof; yea and the English were as early in that very
design as the Portingales, for our Stow ad An. 1501, and 1502.
Chronicles show that Sebastian Gabat or Cabot, borne at Bristol, was employed
by King Henry the seventh, and he with some London Merchants, adventured three
or four ships into those Newfound lands, Anno one thousand four hundred
ninety eight; and it cannot be doubted, but they had made some former
sufficient experiments, before that their so confident engagement: Thence it is
affirmed by others Purchase. l. 4. c. 13.
, that the English were there before Columbus, and about the year Stow. Ibid.
one thousand five hundred and two, three of those Natives were brought unto
the King, they were clothed in beasts skins, did eat raw flesh, spoke a
language none could understand, two of those men were seen at the Court at
Westminster two years after, clothed like Englishmen. But we of this Nation
have yet a more ancient claim, three hundred years before Columbus, in the
time of Henry the second, Anno Dom. one thousand one hundred and seventy; when
Madoc ap Owen Gwineth did not only discover the Country, but planted in some
part of Mexico, and left Monuments of the British language, and other usages,
taken notice of by the Spaniands, since their arrival thither. Mr. Herbert L.
3. p. 360.
in his travailes does not only remember this, but shows it to have bin
mentioned by many worthy men of late, and ancient times, as Cynwic ap Grieve,
Meredith ap Rhice, Gul. Owen, Lloyd, Powell, Hackluit, Davis, Broughton. And
Purchase. l. 4. c. 13. p. 807.

But yet more particularly, Dr Done Sermon to Virginia Planters. An. 1622. p.
20. 26.
allows that as a justifiable reason of men's removal from one place to
another, public benefit; Interest Reipublicae ut re sua quis been utatur,
every one must use his private for the common good: and if a State may take
order that every man improve what he has for the benefit of the Nation where
he lives, then, interest mundo, all mankind may every where, as far as it is
able, advance the good of mankind in general, which not being done by the
Natives there, others are bound, at least have liberty to interpose their
endeavors, especially, when by divine providence one land swells with
inhabitants, and another is disempeopled by mutual broiles, infectious
diseases, or the cruelty of Invaders, all which have helped to sweep away the
Americans, while the English in the meanetime did multiply in such manner and
measure, as they could scarcely dwell one by another; and because man is
commanded more than once to bring forth, multiply, and fill the earth, Genesis 1.
28. 9. 1. he may well therefore, and justly look abroad, and if he find
convenient and quiet habitation, he may call the name of that land Rehoboth,
because the Lord has made him room, Genesis 22. 26. That is also a lawful cause
of settling in other lands, when a right therein is acquired by purchase, as
Abraham bought of Ephron the field of Machpelah, Genesis 22. 17. And thus Paspehai
Declara. of Virginia. p. 11*
one of the Indian Kings sold unto the English in Virginia land to inhabit and
inherit; and when Mr Williams of late Mr Cott. ans. p. 27, etc.
called upon our Planters in New England to be humbled for making use of the
Kings Patents, for removing hence, and residing there, he is well answered
among other things, that they had those lands from the Natives by way of
purchase and free consent. Again, the Territories of strangers may be
possessed upon the donation and fore-gift of the natural Inhabitants, as
Abimelech said to Abraham, behold the land is before thee, dwell where it
pleases thee, Genesis 20. 15. and Pharaoh said to Joseph, in the land of Goshen
let thy father and brethren dwell, Genesis 47. 5, 6. So in Virginia King Declara.
of Virgin. Vbi supra.
Powhatan desired the English to come from James Town, a place unwholesome, and
take possession of another whole Kingdom, which he gave them; thus the
surviving Mr Cot. Ibid.
Indians were glad of the coming of the English to preserve them from the
oppression of the next borderers; and surely divine providence making way, the
care of emprovement, the purchase from the Natives, their invitation and gift,
some, or all these, may satisfy the most scrupulous in their undertaking, or
else what will such our inquisitors say to maintain the right of their own
inheritances? The English invaded the Britons the ancient inhabitants of this
Island, and crowded them into the nooke of Wales, themselves in the mean time
taking possession of the fat of this Land, by what right, or by what wrong I
dispute not, says Metrop. 129.
Crantzius; but such in those days were the frequent emigrations of people to
seek out new habitations.

To these that other expression of the eloquent Deane Ibid.
may be added, accepistis potestatem, you have your Commissions, your Patents,
your Charters, your Seal from that sovereign power upon whose acts any
private subject in civil matters may rely; and though our forenamed
Countryman seems to slight the Pattent of New England, as containing matter
of falsehood and injustice, that Ib. Mr Cott.
imputation also is sufficiently removed by Mr Cotton in that his answer before
mentioned. And yet further, the desire and endeavor to plant Christianity
there, will fortify the former reasons, and sufficiently vindicate the
transplantation of people, this Ibid.
seals the great seal says that Doctor, authorizeth authority, and justifies
justice it self, and Christians may have learned this from our dear Master
Christ, who coasted the Country, and crossed the seas Ser. 16. init
says Chrysologus, not to satisfy humane curiosity, but to promote man's
salvation; not to see diversities of places, but to seek, and find, and save
lost mankind. And if such be the aim of our Nation there, we may with more
comfort expect and enjoy the externalls of the Indians, when we pay them our
spiritualls, for their temporalls, an easy and yet most glorious exchange, the
salvation of the salvages, to the hope of the one, the like sound of the other
may give encouragement; but that is the next consideration.

CHAP. II. Hope of the Natives conversion.
SAint Paul enforced himself to preach the Gospel where Christ was not yet
named, Romans 15. 20. such is the condition of that forlorn Nation, a good
subject to work upon, and if so good an end be propounded, the success by
divine blessing will be answerable: and though the Country has been known
more than a Century of years to Christians, yet those that came first among
them, minded nothing less than to make them such. Benzo Benzo. p. 76. 77.
passimque.
relates abundantly how the Spaniards laid the foundation of their endeavors
in blood, their Friars and religious persons at first instigating them thereto.
That Christian King indeed gave them leave to subdue the Caniballs, but they
destinate all the Nations to bitter bondage, proceeding therein with so much
rigor and severity, that the Dominicans are constrained at length to complain
thereof to the Pope Paul the third, imploring from him a Bull for the
reinfranchisement of the Indians, which they obtained, and brought into Spain,
and presented it to Charles the fifth, who made them free to the grief and
loss of some of the Grandees, whose wealth and grandour consisted most in
slaves; they were most prodigiously libidinous Id. p. 11. etc.
also, contracting upon themselves most foul and pernicious diseases, that
loathsome lust first brought into this world, the filthy and infectious
contagion, now so much spoken of. Their covetousness was notorious also, the
Indians scorned them for it, and for their sakes abominated the name of
Christianity; and when they took any Id. p. 100. 104. 248. etc.
of the Spaniards, they would bind their hands, cast them upon their backs, and
pour gold into their mouths, saying, Eat, O Christians, eat this gold: Yea
their lives were generally so odious, and opposite to godliness, that the same
writer professes, their scandalous conversation deterred the Americans from
the Gospel; they did indeed teach some children of their Kings and Nobles, to
read, and write, and understand the principles of Christianity, which they
acknowledged to be good, and wondered that the Christians themselves so little
practiced them; and thus one of them bespake a Id. ibid. etc.
Spaniard, O Christian thy God forbids thee to take his name in vain, and yet
thou swearest upon every light occasion, and forswearest; your God says, you
shall not bear false witness, and you do nothing else almost but slander,
and curse one another; your God commands you to love your neighbor as your
self, but how are the poor injured by you? how do you cast them into prison,
and fetters, that are not able to pay their debts? and you are so far from
relieving needy Christians, that you send them to our cottages for alms,
spending your means and time in dice, thefts, contentions, and adulteries: He
tells also of an Indian Prince, that was very apt and ingenious, he attained to
a very good measure of learning and knowledge in religion, and was hopeful
above others in both; but about the thirtieth year of his age, he deceived the
expectation of friends, and became extremely debauched and impious, and being
blamed for his bad change, his excuse was, since I became a Christian I have
learned all this, to swear by the name of God, to blaspheme the holy Gospel,
to lie, to play at dice; I have gotten a sword also to quarrel, and that I may
be a right Christian indeed, I want nothing but a concubine, which I intend
also shortly to bring home to my house; And Benzo further adds, when himself
reprehended an Indian for dicing and blaspemy Id. p. 251.
, he was presently answered, I learned this of you Christians, etc. And if it
be said, Benzo was an Italian, and lays the more load upon the Spaniards, as
no friend to that Nation, Bartholomeus de las Casas Casas. p. 27. 101. 115.
one of their own, and a Bishop also, is as liberal in telling their faults,
as has been in part mentioned already; the Natives indeed are capable and
docible, but these other took no care to lead them unto godliness, either by
word or example; but this, says that Spanish Bishop, was the manner of their
gospelizing them; In the night they published their edict, saying, Oyee
Caciques and Indians of this place, which they named, we let you all know,
that there is one God, one Pope, one King of Castile, who is the Lord of these
lands, come forth therefore presently and do your homage, and show your
obedience to him; so in the fourth watch of the night the poor Indians
dreaming of no such matter, men women and children were burnt in their houses
together: He affirms again, they regarded no more to preach the Gospel of
Christ to the Americans, than if they had bin dogs, and their souls to perish
with their bodies; he tells further of one Colmenero, who had the soule-care of
a great City, being asked what he taught the Indians committed to his charge,
his answer was, he cursed them to the Devil; and it was sufficient if he said
to them, per signin santin cruces, by the sign of the holy cross. The Spanish
instruction then, it is evident, was the Natives destruction, and not so much a
plantation as a supplantation, not a conscientious teaching, but a Lion-like
rather devouring of souls; their errors may warn and rectify us, yea and
sharpen our edge, seeing these poor Indians be not indocible, and shall be
converted; and be they Jews or Gentiles, as there is much rudeness and
incivility among them, so many hopeful things have bin observed of them; and
as Aristotle said of the humane soul at its first immission, it was a new
planed table, The Americans in like manner says P. Martyr p. 100. 104.
, are capable, and docible, mindelesse of their own ancient rites, readily
believing and rehearsing what they be taught concerning our faith; Acosta Hist.
l. 6. c. 1.
declares them not only to be teachable, but in many things excelling many
other men, and that they have among them some politic principles admired by
our wisest statists; their natural parts and abilities were visible in that
their whale-catching and conquest mentioned Epist. before.
already, yea they are says Benzo p. 32. 444.
, very apt to imitate the fashion of the Christians; if we kneel at our
devotion, they will kneel also; if we reverently lift up our hands or eyes at
prayer, they will do the like: Lerius Presat. p. 38.
writes several observable things, of their aptness and capacity, that they
be quickly sensible of their own blindness, easily deterred from lying and
stealing; they told us, Id. p. 221. 225
says he, that very long ago, they could not tell how many Moons since, one
came among them clothed and bearded like unto us, endeavoring to persuade us
unto another kind of Religion, but our Ancestors would not then hear; and if
we should now forsake our old usages, all our neighbors would scorn and
deride us; he found them of tenacious memories, if they hear but m Id. 230.
248. 301. etc.
once one of our names, they forget them no more: and as he walked in the
woods upon a time with three of those Brasilians, his heart was stirred up to
praise God for his works, it was in the spring of the year, and be sang the
hundred and fourth Psalm, one of them desired to know the reason of his joy,
which when he had mentioned, with the meaning also of the Prophet, the Indian
replied, Oh Mayr, so they call the French, how happy are you that understand so
many secret things, that are hidden from us! And when the Natives of Virginia
Cap Smith. p. 11.
heard Mr Harriot speak of the glory of the great God, showing them his book,
the Bible, many of them touched it with gladness, kissed, and embraced it,
held it to their breasts, and heads, and stroaked their bodies all over with
it, and in Book of that Planta. Anno 1632. p. 12.
Guiana they desired Captain Leigh to send into England for instructors, and
one of them was so well taught, that he professed at his death, he died a
Christian, a Christian of England. But the Treatises thereof.
Sunne-rising of the Gospel with the Indians in New England, with the breaking
forth of further light among them, and their enquity after the knowledge of the
worlds Savior, etc. has been abundantly discovered by our Brethren there of
late, to our very great rejoicing, and for the encouragement of them and
others. To what has been said, let me add what some Malvenda ubi supra. p.
150.
suppose they read foretold concerning the Americans access to Christ, out of
Philip. 2. 10. At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, of things in heaven,
things on earth, and things under the earth, i. e. Heavenly things, Saints
already converted, earthly, such of the known world as the Apostles were then
laboring to Gospellize, under the earth, that is, the Americans which are as
under us, and as Antipodes to us, and live as it were under, beneath, in the
lower parts of the world; for it is not like he should speak of the
corporally dead, their bodies not being under, but rather in the earth, and
inferi, infernus, do not always mean Hell, and the place of the damned, but
the regions as under us sometimes, that be opposite to us, as that Epistle,
said to be brought by a wind from the upper to the nether world, had those
words first, Superi inferis salutem, we above the earth wish health to them
under it; and thus the captive Indians Cap. Smith. p. 63.
told the English Planters: We therefore seek your destruction, because we
hear you are a people come under the world to take our world from us. Others
find their conversion praefigured in that threat, Mat. 25. 30. Cast the
unprofitable servant into utter darkness, those tenebrae exteriores, outward
darknesses Barradus. T. 2. l. 8. c. 4.
are regiones exterae, the outer and foreign nations in the judgment of
Remigius; and some conceive the same to be fore-signified by the Prophet
Obadiah, ver. 20. The captivity of Jerusalem shall possess the Cities of the
South. i. e. of America, so situate, or, the dry cities, that Country being
much under the Torrid Zone; Acosta De not. Nov? Orb. l. 1. c. 15.
confidently applies thus this text, as some others do that of Esa. 66. 19.
Fredericus Lumnius p. 85. 93. etc.
in his book Devicinitate extremijudicii, finds or makes diverse other
Scriptures look this way, upon that ground, three sorts of people should be in
the Church of Christ at several times, Jews formerly, Christians now, and
these Indians afterward; he cites Hilary thus understanding that parable of
the talents, the possessor of five is the Jew, he that had two talents is the
Gentile, then known, he that received one, a people all carnal and stupid;
and according to this triple time of the Church, and order of believers, he
expounds other Scriptures, Zach. 13. 8. Mat. 13. 3. and the three Watches,
Luke 12. 38. and craving pardon of his rashness, or rather fidei nescientis
mensuram suam, of his faith not knowing its own measure, he further
allegorizeth the former parable, The Jews had one Talent, the ancient and
present Christians two, Law and Gospel, and the servant to whom five Talents
were given, by which he gained other five, is the Indian and American nation,
last in time converted, and called after others into the vineyard; but it shall
be more abundant in obeying the Gospel, more fervent in charity, more zealous
of good works, and therefore Malvenda Malvenda ubi supra. P. 154.
will have those to be the dry Cities before mentioned out of Obad. ver. 20.
Because they shall so much thirst after the Gospel; for that younger sister of
the four, says Ho. Sta. p. 194.
one of her friends in this England, is now grown marriageable, and daily
hopes to get Christ to her husband by the preaching of the Gospel. Comines
Hist. l. 1.
said of the English that they were much addicted to, and taken with Prophecies
and predictions, I believe that is incident to all Nations, Some even among
these have foretold of the mutation of their rites, and religion, as has b^^
mentioned, and in reference to their Gospelizing Herberts sacr. Poems. p. 190.
a divine and prophetical Poet has printed his thoughts hereof in several
particulars.

Religion stands on tiptoe in our land,
Ready to pass to the American strand;
When height of malice, and prodigious lusts,
Impudent sinning, witchcrafts, and distrusts,
The marks of future bane, shall fill our cup
Unto the brim, and make our measure up;
When Sein shall swallow Tiber, and the Thames.
By letting in them both pollute her streams;
When Italy of us shall have her will,
And all her Calendar of sins fulfill,
Whereby one may foretell what sins next year
Shall both in France and England domineer,
Then shall Religion to America flee,
They have their times of Gospel even as we:
My God, thou do prepare for them a way,
By carrying first from them their gold away,
For gold and grace did never yet agree,
Religion always sides with poverty;
We think we rob them, but we think amiss,
We are more poor, and they more rich by this;
Thou will revenge their quarrel, making grace
To pay our debts, and leave our ancient place,
To go to them, while that, which now their Nation
But lends to us, shall be our desolation, etc.
Here is a sad prognosticke for this England, but a joyful calculation for
America, longing, thirsting America; and if such be their ripeness and desire,
we should also make haste to satisfy them, The harvest there is great, and
the Regions are already white thereto; the laborours indeed are few, it is more
then time that the Lord of the harvest were more earnestly entreated to send,
to thrust forth laborers into this Harvest: they that have gone into those
parts have not all had a care of this, the harvest of souls: It was indeed the
profession of Villagagno, and the purpose surely of Peter Richiers, and Will.
Charter Pastors, and others from Geneva, Anno, one thousand five hundred fifty
six, to publish the Gospel there, and they were very serious therein, yea and
Lerius, Lerius. p. 62. 300. 338.
one of them, believes they had bin successful also, if that Apostate
Governor had not become a most cruel persecutor of the Reformed Religion in
that strange land, where he most barbarously murdered three of those his own
Country men, and the aforesaid Lerius piously took care that their Martyrdom
should be commemorated by Io. Crispin in his History; and though these were not
so happy in that holy attempt, others have not been, will not be discouraged in
such a work; a work worthy of the choicest diligence of those that profess
the glorious Gospel in sincerity, who have had also many and manifold
experiments of divine favor in their several preservations, directions, and
accommodations; and because their friends (with praise to God, and thanks to
them for what is done and declared already) desire to know more of those their
pious and blessed endeavors, Let me add a third consideration, Wishes of
furtherance and direction in such great and gracious employments, which shall
be, I hope, and pray, as a spur to more able advisers to bring in every one
somewhat or other toward the erecting of a Tabernacle for our God in America.

CHAP. III. Directions toward the conversion of the Natives.
SOme give violent counsel here, presuming they find it in that parable, Luke
14. 23. compel them to come in; but judicious In loc.
Austin calls this Amoris, non timoris tractum, not a force of fear, but of
love, producing the example of a sheep following the shepherd holding a green
bough in his hand; and it is the sentence of a serious Historian Agathias. l. 1.
among the Gentiles, such are worthy of pity not hatred, that err from the
truth, for they do it not willingly, but being mistaken in judgment, they
adhere to their first received opinions; and the Saints in the first times
never thought outward compulsion a fit mean to draw on inward assent. The
Evangelicall Prophet foretold this, They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain says the Lord, Esa. 65 last. And our most dear Lord himself
says, The son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them,
Luke 9. 56. Saint James derives the pedigree of that wisdom which has bitter
envying and strife, though it be but in heart, though it may rejoice and think
highly of it self, yet its parentage is from that Cerberus of iniquity, the
world, the flesh, and the devil, Jam. 3. 15. But regenerated Saints delight
surely in that wisdom which is from above, and that is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy, etc. Jam. 3. 17. Full
of mercy, no room therefore for violence and cruelty; and the holy men of the
next ages were children of this wisdom. It Is not Religion, says Tertullian Ad
Scap. init.
, to compel Religion, which ought to be introduced by persuasion, not force;
for even sacrifices of old were expostulated from willing minds; our Church
has nothing to do with murder, and bonds. Apolog. 2. p. 300. 450.
Athanasius never committed any man to a Jailer, says he himself in his
Apology; and again, the truth is not to be preached with swords, and darts,
and Armies, but by reason and Arguments, which find no place among them whose
contradiction is requited with suffering, banishment, and death: the Ancient
Christians abound with mentionings of this kind; It is said indeed of Crantz.
l. 1. c. 7. l. 2.
Charles the great, that conquering the Saxons, he commanded them to embrace
Christianity, and that he dealt in such a manner with the Hungarians, and some
others; yea and though there be that speak the like of Constantine, yet
Eusebius De Vit. Constable. l. 2. c. 55.
writes confidently, he wished all, commanded no man to be a Christian, and
for this Orosius Hist. p. 100.
commends him, that he shut up the Pagan Temples, but offered no violence to
men's persons. The Devil indeed, because he is no friend to truth, comes with
axes and hatchets, but our Savior is gentle, and with a sweet voice says,
Open unto me my sister, my love, etc. Cant. 5. 2, 5. and if they open, he
enters, if not, he departs, says Athanasius in the forecited place.

Four things did especially assist in the first coverting of people to Christ,
besides those miraculous helps; and if they be now conscienciously practiced,
God will show himself mervellous in his blessing. 1. Language, the necessity
thereof was visible in those cloven tongues as of fire, the history whereof we
read Act. 2. 1. etc. Men must learn the speech of the Natives, that dealing by
Interpreters must needs be difficult, tedious, and not so successful;
Meinardus Tripartit* l. 10. c. 5.
of old first gained the tongue of the Livonians, and then became an happy
instrument of their conversion; and Vit. per G. Patriark.
Chrysostom did the like with the Scythians; and the French Colony Ep. p. 439.
propounded and promised the same course at their first planting in America, as
they certified Mr Calvin in their letters; and the English in Cap. Smith. p.
20. 37. etc.
Virginia laboring to bring the Natives to Christianity, were woefully impeded
therein by the ignorance of their language, which defect in themselves they did
both acknowledge and bewail. 2. Laboring in the word was required and
practiced, Mat. 28. Act. 20. 18. and passim Preachers should be appointed with
all diligence to instruct the Indians; for men are begotten to Christ by the
word of truth, Jam. 1. 18. The Iberians Sozem. l. 2. c. 6.
received the first inckling of the gospel by a Christian maidservant that
was a captive among them; and they sent afterward unto Constantine the
Emperor for Preachers; the old Indian told the Spanish priest Hist l. 6. c. 25
complaining of their averseness to the Gospel, The laws of Christ we
confess are better than ours, but we cannot learn them for want of teachers,
wherein he spoke the truth, the very truth says Acosta, to our very shame and
confusion. 3. The piety and holiness of those Apostolical Christians was
exceeding and exemplary, by which as well as by their preaching they wooed and
won Kingdoms and people to Christianity; their enemies could find no other
fault in them, but that that they were Christians: our dear Masters general
command was universally practiced, the light of their holy lives did shine to
Gods glory, and the benefit of others; thus Victor Vticensis p. 388.
shows that Caprapicta was converted as well by the piety and godliness, as
by the preaching of the Africans; as on the other side the impiety of the
Spaniards deterred the Americans from the Gospel. 4. Blessing was fetched
down from heaven by prayer, this was their (...), their only work in a
manner, prayer and ministration of the word, Act. 6. 4. Thus l. 7. c. 30.
Socrates reports, that after seven days fasting and supplication the
Burgundians were Christianized; so Crantzius Vbi supra. p. 16.
tells of those northern Nations that by prayer and preaching they prevailed to
bring many other people to Christ: If men do now work with these tools, the
building will go up apace, the foundation being laid in the honor of God by
the conversion of those that yet remain in the shadow of death.; in all which
some furtherance might be found, by knowing and observing the dispositions,
fashions, and customs of the Natives, which would also in a good measure be
understood by serious converses with them, and by several books that from
several places upon several occasions have been written of them; and to all
let be added studious industry, that some Indian children be taught
Christianity, and trained up to such abilities that they may have skill to
instruct their own Country men.

It was Gregory's counsel to further the conversion of Lib. 5. Ep. 10.
our Countrymen here, they should buy English children and youths of seventeen
or eighteen years, that might be educated in Gods service, and helpful this
way. The Franciscan that had been so many years among them, and learned two of
their languages, and used much diligence in this work in his way, told Benzo
Benzo. p. 256.
, that of necessity such a course must be taken to Gospellize them, all other
endeavors would be fruitless and labor in vain; and that writer Id. p. 390.
shows how those of Peru were well contented to deliver their young ones to
be taught in Christianity; and surely their Fathers and Contrymen would
sooner listen unto them than unto strangers. And in all these the good counsel
of the holy Apostle must be remembered, walk wisely toward them which are
without, Colos. 4. 5. not only in watchfulness and care to prevent all
dangers from them, but in the most pious wisdom of winning souls, Prove. 11.
30. by setting before them in practice also the examples of every grace and
virtue, with the perfect hatred of all vice and ungodliness; and let me have
favor here to commend 3 or 4 cautions.

CHAP. IV. Cautions.
1. TAke heed and beware of cruelty, the God of mercy hates nothing so much,
says In Math. 16.
Theophilact as unmercifulness; the badge of Christ is clemency, his livery
love; by this it shall be known that you are my Disciples, says our dear
Master himself, if ye love one another, Ioh. 13. 35. Other men's followers
were known by their garments and colors, but charity and love made the first
Christians famous over all the old heathen world, but in the new World the
Spaniards die was not so black as bloody, and the Indians called them Casas. p.
66.
Yares, i. e. devils, so little humanity, as they conceived, was visible among
them. The same Bishop, when he made an whole book of the Spanish cruelties
which he saw executed by them on the Indians, protests it was his opinion,
that he scarce mentioned one of a thousand of their tyrannies; p. 35.
and more than once or twice he averreth, that they allwaies grew from bad to
worse, and exceeded themselves in their diabolical doings. Nothing is more
odious p. 34. 99.
to this day than their name in those Countries; for where ever the spanish
Christians displayed their banners says Benzo p. 11.
, they imprinted upon the Natives by their horrid cruelties, eternal monuments
of implacable hatred toward them; but the fair, civil, and gentle deportment
of our Nation to the Natives, has already won much upon them, as is
acknowledged by a Io. de Lact. Descr. Amer. pref.
foreign pen.

2. Take heed and beware of covetousness, it is our sweet Saviors own
ingeminated command, Luke 12. 15. happy shall the Natives be, and we also, if
they find our conversation without covetousness, Heb. 13. 5. that they may see
and say, the Englishmen seek not ours, but us, and us, not to make us slaves
to themselves, but fellow servants to Christ our common Master; they saw the
Spaniards so guilty of this Casas. p. 22.
evil, that they conceived them to adore no other God but gold, the
observation of which fetched from p. 118.
Benzo that pious exoptation, I wish to God, says he, we were no more
addicted to earthly things than they, the name of Christian would be glorious
were it not for our covetousnes; the Spaniards indeed tell fair stories, some
of them, as if their sole desire had been to Christianize the Natives, when
indeed all their endeavor was to satisfy their lust and avarice; and Acosta
Hist. l. 4. c. 2.
himself cannot deny but that his Countrymen did commit many great outrages
for gold and silver; but where those metalls were not to be found, they made no
stay, continued not in such places; and Benzo p. 204.
is large in producing their frequent and sudden removes upon this occasion,
and he tells that the Bracamorians are unsubdued by the Spaniards to this day,
not so much because they are a warlike people in their kind, but especially by
reason of their poverty and indigence.

3. Take heed and beware of complying with them in any of their rites and
ceremonies, if we intend they should indeed come out of Egypt, let not an hoof
be left, as Exodus 10. 25. let them have Christian religion purely, without
blinding or blending; the wisdom of the flesh must not here be heard, we must
listen to no other but the counsel of the Spirit. It was Ep. before ferm. in
Jona.
good advice the godly Bishop and martyr Hooper gave to King Edward the sixth
and his honorable privy Counselors, As ye have taken away the Mass from the
people, so take from them her feathers also, the Altar, vestments, and such
like as apparelled her: there has not doubtless, been any one thing so
powerful in begetting and maintaining doctrinall quarrels in Christendom, as
the unhappy complication with nations and people in some of their supposed
tolerable rites at their first approaching to Christianity; the Pagans of old,
says Rhenanus In Tertul. p. 103.
, were relieved by the mutation of some things in their religion, whose
universal abolition had irritated, if not totally scared them from us; and
Acosta Hist. l. 6. c. 28
concurres with him in this matter, even in reference to the Indians: How this
policy prevailed at first in the Church was long ago observed, and it became
the lamentation of latter times, when men were more tenacious of humane
superstructures, than of the fundamentalls laid by Jesus Christ, the shell and
shadow of Gentile ceremony is yet more carefully hunted after by the Man of
Rome, than the most solid and substantial truths of the Gospel; pity it is,
that sense and eyedazlelings should prevail more than divine verities, that
abundance of good things should breed surfets, and yet it will ever be thus,
where there is want of care and spiritual exercise at home, and but cold
endeavors to promote piety and godliness abroad.

4. Take heed and beware of all and every ungodliness, not only for your own
sakes, but that the sweet name of our God be not blasphemed among the Nations,
Romans 2. 24. Holy examples are a nearer way to righteousness than verbal
precepts and instructions; the Indians may, even without the word, be won to
the truth by a godly conversation, as St. Peter speaks in the like case, 1
Pet. 3. 1. a corrupt life is a violent argument persuading to evil; the
Americans were scared from Christianity by the scandalous iniquities of the
Spaniards.

The evil example of one ungodly Christian did more hinder the Indians
conversion, than an hundred of their religious could further it, * he says it,
who saw what Cas. ^^ud Hist. p. 116.
he spoke, for they are verily persuaded that of all the Gods in the world, the
Spaniards God is the worst, because he has such abominable and wicked
servants. Id. ibid.
Benzo l. 2. c. 16.
tells of a confabulation himself had with an old Indian, who in serious
discourse said unto him, O Christian! what kind of things be Christians, they
exact Mayz, Honey, Silk, an Indian woman for a concubine, they require gold
and silver, Christians will not work, they dice, blaspheme, etc. when I
replied, evil Christians only do such things, not such, as be good, his
answer was ready, but where are those good Christians? I could never yet see
one of them; and not this American only, but a Franciscan Friar publicly
affirmed, that not a Priest, nor Monk, nor Bishop in all India, was worthy of
the name of a good man; Didacus Lopez Benzo. p. 257.
in his Epistle to the Bishop of Guattimala, says, the Christians were so
prodigiously wicked, that they were odious not only to heaven and Angels, but
even to the earth, and devils; do you believe says he, the Indians will
become Christians, when your selves are not so but in name only, and in title?
surely those silly nations will sooner be persuaded to good by the example of
one days conversation, than by an whole years preaching; for to what purpose
do we strew among the people odoriferous roses with our tongues and language,
if we sting and vex them in the mean time with the thorns of our wicked
doings.

But our Country men take care to follow the aforementioned injunction of the
holy Apostle, Col. 4. 5. they walk righteously, or as in our old English it
was, in right wisenesse, so they called righteousness, toward them without;
and so their charter on earth, as well as those letters patents from Heaven,
wills that the English be so religiously, peaceably, and civilly governed, as
their good life and orderly conversation may win and incite the Natives of
the Country to the knowledge and obedience of the only true God and Savior of
mankind, and the christian faith, which in our regal intention and the
Adventurers free profession, is the Charter.
principal end of this plantation.

And let these words be understood, as awakenings to those of our Nation there,
and our selves also, that we all labor mutually, and from our hearts, to
propagate the Gospel there, because we, who eat every man of his own vine,
and of his own figtree, and drink every man water out of his own cisterne,
Esa. 36. 16. should witness our thankfulness unto God, for these favors, by
sympathizing affections toward our brethren there, and the Natives.

CHAP. V. To the English here, and first in behalf of the Planters there.
THey should have our hearts and love for many reasons, How many felicities did
they forsake, both of the right hand, and of the left, in respect of estate,
friends, and the comfort of their own native soil? It was said by the
Prophet, Weep for him that goes out, for he shall return no more to see his
own Country, Jer. 22. 20. besides, that dulcis amor patriae, how many hazards
did they run into by dangerous and tedious sea-voyages? they were exposed to
diverse certain inconveniences, not only in regard of externalls, change of
air, diet, etc. but change of men especially, having little security, because
they were in daily dread of Indian treachery, which might then fall upon them,
when they supposed it most remote; they have also left more room at home, of
which we were wont to have more need than company, which increased so fast,
that we were ready to extrude one another; and by them we have more strength
abroad, because transplanted colonies Clapmar arcan. Reip. p. 52.
be domestique fortifications, though they have been invented sometimes, and
used to abate popular undertakings, but I mean it in the Roman interpretation,
the Nations where they fix, are reduced by degrees to their fashions, laws,
and commands: yet some have unnaturally followed those our Country men with
reproaches, accounting them so base, as not worthy to be set with the dogs of
their flock, as one to them applied that of Job 30. 1.

To the Western Plantation indeed, at first men of mean condition generally
resorted, but soon after people of better rank followed; diverse of good
families, and competent estates went into Virginia, and settled in some Islands
thereabouts, but because those of New England pretended more to Religion than
the rest, they are more laden with uncivil language, but most injuriously;
for the transplanting Novangles were many of them severally eminent, some of
noble extract, diverse Gentlemen descended from good Families; their first
Charter mentions three Knights, among other 40 Caroli.
men of worth; and it seems their example, or somewhat else was like to
prevail with many others of no mean condition, so that eleven of the then
Privy Counsel directed their letters in December, one thousand six hundred
thirty four, to the Warden of the Cinque ports, taking notice that several
persons went over with their families, and whole estates, forbidding subsidy
men, or of the value of subsidy men to be imbarqued without special license
and attestation of their taking the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
submission also to the Orders and discipline of the Church of England: And
three years after, viz. one thousand six hundred thirty seven, a proclamation
issued from the King to the same purpose, and in the same words.

Others instead of affections and hearts, sling darts after them, and say, they
are gone out from us indeed, but they were not of us, 1 John 2. 19. neither
liking our doctrine nor government. Yet surely they differ not at all from us
in Religion, witness our own confession and their profession; and for the
first, our learned men have continually acknowledged the Puritans to consent
with them in Doctrinalls, Archbishop Sands Sermon. p. 81, 82. etc.
in his Sermon before Queen Elizabeth more than once asserteth this, We have
here says he, to praise our God, that in public doctrine touching the
substance of religion we all agree in one truth, the greater pity it is we
should so much dissent in matters of small importance, in rites and
circumstanees; the Puritanicall errors did not at all oppose any part of our
Religion, but it continued most sound even to the dying day of that most
renowned Princess, says he that Rogers pref. p. 19.
analyzed our thirty nine Articles, and so printed them by authority; and King
James Pref. Basil. Dor.
averreth the like of his Scottish Puritans, We all God be thanked agree in the
grounds, and after his reception of this Crown, he calls Parlia. spe? Anno.
1603.
the English Puritan a Sect rather than a Religion; and in his Declaration
against Vorstius His works. p. 358.
he joyneth his Churches of great Britain with those of France and Germany,
opposing them all against Vorstius, Bertius, and the Arminians; Notwithstanding
the Disciplinarian quarrel says Res. ad Apol. p. 28.
Bishop Andrews, we have the same faith, the Cardinal is deceived, or
deceives, in using the word Puritans, as if they had another Religion
differing from that publicly professed, and this has been the unanimous
asseveration of English Bishops, and other learned Divines, as were easy
abundantly to declare. But themselves have spared us that labor, by their
constant acknowledgement thereof; Mr. Rogers Rogers passim.
in his forecited Analysis, produces their own writings to this purpose, and
what one of them can be named that refused subscription to those 39 Articles in
reference to matters of Doctrine; Mr. Brown it is thought, went as far astray
as any here, yet I have seen his own M. S.
hand declaring at that time his allowance of all those Synodicall Articles;
and lest any should imagine the Novangles differing from us in dogmaticall
truths, besides many, very many printed books testifying their concurrence
with us herein, beside diverse private Letters, that subscribed by the Governor
and principal assistants sufficiently manifests their judgment and affection,
wherein they desire to be accounted our brethren, and implore our prayers;
adding, howsoever our charity may have met with some discouragements through
the misreport of our intentions, or through disaffection, or indiscretion of
some among us, for we dream not of perfection in this world, yet would you be
pleased to take notice of the principal and body of this Company, as those
that are not ashamed to call the Church of England our dear Mother, and cannot
part from her without tears in our eyes, but shall ever acknowledge that such
part and hope as we have obtained in the common salvation, we received it in
her bosom, and sucked it from her breasts, etc.

From South-Hampton. John Winthrop, Governor. Rich: Saltonstall. Tho: Dudly,
etc.


CHAP. VI.
THere is another in jaculation that has gone current among many, that the
Puritan of old and New England is Antimonarchicall, the former is sufficiently
cleared by that Bishop, who has left this testimony, Resp. ad Apol. p. 29.
Presbyterio lis est cum Episcopis, cum Rege nulla est, or if that be not
enough, King James King James works. p. 340.
in this is an irrefragable Assertor, The Puritans do not decline the oath of
Supremacy, but daily take it, never refused it; and the same supremacy is
defended by Institut. l. 4^ c. 20.
Calvin himself. And in New England Mr. Williams Letter 20* of the 10 month.
1635.
seemed in other things to be extravagant, yet thus he writes to this point:
For the Government of the Commonwealth from the King, as supreme, to the
inferior and subordinate Magistrates, my heart is on them, as once Deborah
spoke: and as the Governors and assistants do themselves take the oath of
Allegiance, Charter.
so they have power by their Charter to give the same to all that shall at any
time pass to them, or inhabit with them; But, Tempora mutantur, and it may be
it is with them, as with us, and nos mutamur in illis. And it is further said, that
their Ecclesiastique government, is not only opposite to the ancient
Episcopacy of the land, but to the discipline of the other Reformed Churches,
even that which the Covenant calls for: it may be worth our consideration,
that as there was a time when forraigners reformed were not so opposite to our
Bishops, but those Divines Calvis. Beza. Gualt. alii.
thought well of them, willingly-gave to them Titles of Reverend Fathers, and
Illustrious Lords; and in their public convenings, Epit. Cent. 16. p. 185.
285. and council. Dordrac.
spoke of that Government with good respect, and the valedictory Epistle of Mr.
Cotton, to the then Bishop of Lincoln, full of respective expressions, is yet
to be seen, So the Bishops then were not such Antipresbyterians, Caecus sit,
says Andr. Posthu. p. 176.
Bishop Andrews to P. Moulin a Presbyter, qui non videat stantes sine ea
Ecclesias, ferreus sit, quisalutem cis neget, nos non sumus illi ferrei, Let
him be blind that sees not Churches consistent without such an Hierarchy, let
him be accounted iron-hearted that shall deny them to be in a way of salvation,
we are not such iron-hearted men, yea and several reformed Congregations of
several Nations have not only been tolerated, but much refreshed under the
Bishops of London, Norwich, Winchester, etc. These times have widened all
differences every where, even among such as are or should be one in covenant;
how are disaffections increased, divisions heightened, which have not only
woefully abated christian love, but miserably augmented iniquities of all sorts?
many being scrupulously curious about mint and annis, having little respect in
the mean time to faith, righteousness, and the more weighty things of the
law; and here may be taken up the lamentation of Erasmus ^p. p. 749.
, bemoaning himself exceedingly, that he had in books cried up, libertatem
spiritus, liberty of the spirit, which I think this age would call liberty of
conscience, I wished thus says he, a diminution of humane ceremonies, to that
end, that divine truths and godliness might be enlarged, Nunc sic excutiuntur
illae, ut pro liberate spiritus succedat effraenis carnis licentia, and he
does justly call it carnal licenciousnesse, for the Spirit of our God, Gal. 5.
20. names contentions, seditions, heresies, etc. works of the flesh, which
being but lately sown, have strangely grown up and multiplied, so that a
foreign pen has to Englands shame printed it thus to the world, Honor.
Reg. Commentar. Dautisci. 1647.
Anglia his quatuor annis facta est colluvies, and lerna omnium errorum, ac
sectarum, nulla a condito orb provincia tam parvo spatio tot monstrosas
haereses protulit atque haec, Episcoporum tempora intra sexaginta annos non
nisi quatuor sectas protulerunt, and eas plerunque in obscuro latentes, etc.
For I had rather bewail than reveal the nakedness of the Nation, I had
rather stir up my own soul and others to piety, and peace, oh, when will
men lay aside all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil
speaking, with all malice; and instead thereof be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake forgave you,
Ephesians. 4. 32. I wish there were a law to forbid all needless disputes, I wish
that it and those other several laws were put in execution impartially, so
that all men by all means were provoked to godliness, that would preserve
from every error, for God is faithful that has promised, If any man will do
the Fathers will, he shall know the doctrine whether it be of God, Joh. 7. 17.
Hearty endeavors for holiness in our own persons, and those related to us,
would take away the occasions of many unkind controversies, for the Kingdom of
God is not meat or drink, this or that government, or any such externalls, no
further then they serve to promote righteousness and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. and this is the best way to show our obedience unto
Christ, for he that in these things serves Christ is acceptable to God, and
approved of men. ver. 18. When our Countrymen planted themselves first in
America, the name of Independency was not known; he indeed that lately has
wrote Idem ibid.
of the state of the Churches in England, draws so the scheme that our
Novangles are thus become Independents, but with the epithete of orthodox.

Schema sectarum recentium, Puritani
Presbyteriani, Angli. Scoti.
Erastiani, sive Colemaniani. Independentes, sive Congregationales. Orthodoxi
Novo-Anglici, Londinenses. Pseudo-Independentes, sive Fanatici. Anabaptistae,
Quaerentes, Antinomi, and mill alii.


And for our Novangles it cannot be denied, but many of them well approve the
Ecclesiastique government of the Reformed Churches, as of old, communi
Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae regebantur, they desire it were Hieron. Tit.
so now; and some of them in New England are amazed at the manner of our
gathering of Churches here: thus one writes Simp. C. p. 42
that had bin a long time a Pastor among them; What more ungodly sacrilege, or
manstealing can there be than to purloine from godly Ministers the first borne
of their fervent prayers, and faithful preachings, the leven of their flocks,
the encouragement of their souls, the crown of their labors, their Epistle
to heaven? If men will needs gather Churches out of the world as they say, let
them first plough the world, and sow it, and reap it with their own hands,
and the Lord give them a liberal harvest. He is a very hard man that will
reap where he has not sowed, and gather where he has not strowed, Mat. 24.
25. and if I mistake not, such kind of unkind and hard dealing was practiced
here in England even in popish times, what means else that Canon among the
Saxon Counsels Sir H. S. p Panang. p. ^92.
, Vt sacerdotes aliorum parochianos ad se non alliciant, how like this looks
to that I leave to the judgment of others, but these be the words of that
rule, Let no Presbyter persuade the saithfull of the Parish of another
Presbyter to come to his Church, leaving his own, and take to himself those
tithes; but let every one be content with his own Church and people, and by
no means do that to another, which he would not should be done to himself,
according to that Evangelicall saying, Whatsoever ye would that men should do
unto you, do ye the same to them; but whosoever shall walk contrary to this
rule, let him know he shall either lose his degree, or for a long time be
detained in prison. I shall by and by speak more to this on their behalf, now
add only, that as many in New England approve of the discipline of the other
Churches Reformed, and some of them sufficiently dislike the way and manner of
our Church gathering here, so all of them have now seen by experience the
necessity of Synods: For in their great storm of late that was so like to
wrack all, the means to settle it was as strange as the disease, so he writes
that was an eye, and eat witness, They that heretofore slighted Synods, and
accounted of them as humane inventions, and the blemish of A discourse of New
England not printed.
those Reformed Churches that made use of them, are now for the preservation of
themselves enforced to make use of that means which in time of peace they did
slight and contemn; the Synod, says he, being assembled, much time was spent
in ventilating and emptying of private passions, but afterward it went on and
determined with such good success, that in token thereof, he says, we keep
a solemn day of thanksgiving, as there was cause, and the two men most
different in opinion, were selected for the public exercise, wherein they
behaved themselves to admiration, the Acts and conclusions of the Synod, etc. I
would further ask, if the Independent government, so far as it is
congregationall, be not as rigidly Presbyterian as any; sure I am, unkind they
are not to the other Presbyterians, Mr Winslow is an irrefragable testis
herein, who mentions some there that are in that way, and known to be so, yet
never had the least molestation or disturbance, but Relat. of proceagainst Sa.
Gort. p. 99.
have and find as good respect from Magistrates, and people, as other Elders
in the congregationall way; yea diverse Gentlemen of Scotland, that groaned
under the late pressures of that Nation, wrote into New England to know whether
they might freely be suffered to exercise their Presbyteriall government, and
it was answered affirmatively they might; and yet further none of them here or
there, that continue true to their first principles, differ at all in
fundamentalls and doctrine from the other Presbyterians, and it is not unlike,
but when God shall enlarge their borders, they will find it needful to
approach yet nearer to the way of other Reformed Churches in their discipline:
And there is of themselves, that upon observation of their former very great
danger, have left their judgment, with which I will conclude this Chapter: An
excellent Discourse before mentioned.
way they have, meaning their Ecclesiastique government, if Pastors and people
would ever be of one opinion, but when they shall come to be divided into as
many opinions, as they are bodies, what will the sequel be? and I see little
probability of subsistence, where Independency yields matter of divisions, but
no means to compound them.

CHAP. VII. To our selves, in behalse of the Natives toward their conversion.
IT is the unfeigned desire of every pious soul, that God would please to
guide and bless some holy and happy hand, in taking up the differences that
are grown up among those that are named by the sweet name of Christ, that all
who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, would also sincerely love one another;
that mutual forces were conjoined to promote the glory of our common Master,
not only every man in his own person, family, place, and Country, but by
apprehending all opportunities to publish the eternal Gospel of our Lord even
to those other ends of the earth. Gregory the great In Bed. Ecclesiast. Hist.
l. 2. c. 1.
did willingly encourage himself in his desire to Christianize our Ancestors
the Saxons from hints of his own observation, for seeing children of
beautiful feature offered to sale in the market at Rome, as then the manner
was, he sighed within himself, and said, when he understood they were not
Christians, Alas that the Prince of darkness should possess such fair and
lightsome countenances; enquiring further after their names, Angles, they have
Angels faces indeed said he, and it is meet all diligence be used that they be
as the Angels of God in Heaven; when he asked of what Province they were, it
was answered Deiri, or Deira, for so was then that Lambard Peramb. of Kent. p.
5.
seventh Kingdom called, Northumberland, in the time of the Saxons, Dei ira
eruti says he, being made Christians they shall be delivered from the wrath
of God; and upon demand, hearing that their Kings name was Aelle, he said
Allelu jah, and praises to God must be sung there: In this work if that may be
any invitation, we have the like allusions, the whole Country is called the
New world in the general, and particularly there is New Spain, New France,
New Netherland, New Scotland, New England, why should not there be solicitous
endeavors that all the Natives of that New World, should be made a world of
New creatures; and if upon occasion and enquiry the Inhabitants be called
Barbarians, such were we our selves in the common acceptance of the word,
being neither Jews nor Greeks; if Salvages, it is a name of hope that they are
a salvable generation, and shall in due time be partakers of the common
salvation; their complexion indeed is dark and duskish, as it is made after
birth, but their souls are the more to be pitied, that yet be in a far
more unlovely hue, even in the suburbs of that darkness, that blackness of
darkness, which is so terrible to think of: It was Gregory's desire that
Hallelu-jahs should be sung to and for the English, then heathen, the
Christian English may observe and wonder at that very word of frequent use
among the Indians, as has already been mentioned; finally there is a
constellation or star, called the cross, peculiar to that Country, says
Acosta Hist. l. 1. c. 5.
, and it is so named because four notable stars make the form of a cross,
set equally, and with good proportion, a good omen I wish it may be, and that a
star may lead them also to their Savior, that Christ may be made known to
them, and his peace through the blood of his Cross, Col. 1. 20. To which
employment we have likewise other persuasions, besides what has been formerly
sprinkled here and there. 1. The necessity of the poor Natives require this
care, who stand so much in need of spiritual bread, and so few prepare to
break it to them, they yet walk in the vanity of their mind, having their
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, etc. Ephesians. 4. 17. etc. and the less sensible they be
of their own forlorn condition, the more sollicitous should others be to
acquaint them therewith, together with the way of their deliverance. When
Malmbs. p 1. and Beda. l. 1. c. 25.
Austin the Monk came hither among the Saxons to preach the Gospel, King
Ethelbert opposed him not, but said I cannot so easily forsake my own
Religion, and embrace theirs that is new; yet seeing these strangers are come
so far and bring that to us which they esteem most excellent, we will use
them kindly, they shall want nothing for their work: And surely were the
Americans but a little civilized, they would by degrees understand their own
miserable estate, and themselves would then bespeake further enlightening; yea
this is already in some of their fervent desires, Daybreak^ etc.
as has been intimated also formerly.

2. Christians have a care of this for Christ their Masters sake, good subjects
wish the ampliation of their Sovereigns honor, and how glad should we be
when the kingdom of darkness is empaired, and there be continual accresses
to the Kingdom of Gods dear Son, Col. 1. 14. It Is our daily prayer, Hallowed
be thy name, divulged, and made glorious all the world over, we cannot better
improve our interest and power, then by being active and industrious
instruments thereof; we endeavoring as much as we may that the Kingdoms of
this world may become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, Revel. 11.
15. Non est zelus sicut Zelus animarum Greg. M.
, this zeal for souls carries in the womb thereof glory to God, and honor
to the zealots themselves, Dan. 12. 3. and unutterable comfort and benefit to
them that are warmed thereby, Iam. 5. 20. and their debtors in this verily we
are, if the words of another Apostle be with a little mutation applied hither,
for if we be made partakers of their carnal things, our duty it is also to
minister unto them in spiritual things, Romans 15. 17.

3. The several Patents to several Planters call for this endeavor, such was
that first granted to the Virginians by King James, it intended principally the
propagation of the Christian faith; the like is to be read in the Patents and
confirmations made by him and King Charles to others. And in the beginning of
this Parliament, that Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons were appointed
chiefly for the advancement of the true Protestant Religion, and further
spreading of the Gospel of Christ among the Natives in America. Yea and in the
Charter to Maryland, the pious zeal for the spreading of the Gospel is first
mentioned, and what ever suggestions be made, or aims otherwise, there is a
special proviso against the pr ejudice, or diminution of Gods holy and truly
Christian Religion, and the allegiance due to the Kings Majesty, his heirs,
and successors; it is not well then if Romish designs have been managed
there, injurious to Religion, and offensive to our other Plantations, but
herein stands the force of this Motive, the mutual and interchangeable Pact
and Covenant of Donor and Receiver is in all those Charters and Patents the
conversion of the Natives.

4. I find another encouragement from a Doctor lately lapsed into popery Dr.
Vane lost sheep. p. 186.
, yet professing his willingness to return upon Protestants successes this
way; for he deemes it improbable, that ever they should convert any Nation, or
so much as any one single person, except some poor wretch or other, whom fear
or gain will drive, or draw to any thing; but if ever the historical relation
of Gods wonderful workings upon sundry of the Indians, both Governors and
common people, in bringing them to a willing and desired submission to the
Ordinances of the Gospel, and framing their hearts to an earnest enquiry after
the knowledge of God the Father, and Jesus Christ the Savior of the World; I
say if ever those discourses come to the Doctors view, he may once again
change his mind, how ever the happy progresses of our Country men in that
work, if they be known and well considered of by the Papists themselves, they
may be carried to admiration, expectation, and it may be further.

5. The honor of our Nation may be another argument to this undertaking, that
as to Charlemaine of old Crantz. Met. p. 405. 8. 12.
the Saxons owe their Christianity, and those of Phrysia, Dithmarse and
Holsatia, the Vandalls also and Hungarians: It will be glorious for the
Chronicles and Annalls of England, that by the means of this Nation the
Nansamonds were brought to the true and saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, and
so were the Sasquehannockes, Wicomesses, Conecktacoacks, Massachuseuks,
Mouhacks, Aberginians and others; Thus will the renown of the English name and
Nation, ring over all the Western World. Gregory complains Lib. 5. Ep. 58. 59.
more then once, that those Angles our Ancestors were willing to become
Christians, but the Priests of France refused to give help and instruction. The
Britons also refused to join with Austin here in his preaching to the Saxons,
not out of pride and contempt as Beda Hist. l. 2. c* 7.
reports, but for that those people, invited hither as friends, became their
only enemies, driving them from their possessions, which themselves invaded as
their own, but these Indians give harbor to our Nation, whose fair and free
accomodating of our Country men has fully purchased to themselves all the
spiritual favor we and they are able to afford them, of which, when they
also become sensible, honor will redound to this England, not only from ours
there, who profess truly, if they prosper, we shall be the more glorious, but
the Natives enlightened by us will return hither the tribute of their abundant
thankfulness. And that every one of us may be cordial coadjutors of our
Country men in this most glorious undertaking, let me endeavor to warm the
affections of the English there, and at home, by proposing a traffic in a
threefold stock for the promotion of this design.

CHAP. VIII. Further helps to this work.
THe first of these is already going, the stock of prayers, both hence and
thence on that behalf to heaven, and not now in a vision, as to St. Paul once,
there stood a man and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia and help
us, Act. 16. 9. but the Natives begin to be really sensible of their spiritual
necessities, and call earnestly for that bread, and our country men desire the
assistance of their brethren here in many respects, all their Letters earnestly
bespeak us in this, and O that we did heartily answer them in our constant and
fervent prayers, in reference to this work. There was indeed of late a
generation of men, though extreme lovers of that Lethargy, yet forgate to be in
charity with all men, they were content in their Letany to pray it would please
God to have mercy upon all men, yet deemed it piacular to pray for the
Novangles; The Directory guides otherwise, even by name advising to prayers for
those Plantations in the remote parts of the World.

2. This work would be much prospered by a stock of wise and constant
correspondence mutually betwixt Old and New England in regard of this
business, what progress is made in the work, what meet to be done for its
furtherance, etc. Such communication of counsels would marvelously encourage
and quicken the Americans conversion. The French were spoiled of this help and
intercourse from Brasil, by the Governor Lerius, Hist. praef.
Villagagno's Apostasy to Popery, and it is not credible, but if the poor
Indians were made to understand that all the Nation of England were thus
solicitous with God, and among themselves, in all industrious endeavors to
recover them from their sinful and lost condition by nature, but they would
look up also, and in earnest cooperate with them, and say also it may be, as
was in the precedent Chapter mentioned of our Saxon King, who said, those
Preachers should be kindly dealt with, and want nothing for their work; yea
somewhat like to this was long since spoken of by Benzo. p. 390.
Colonchi one of the Princes of Peru, when he was invited to be a Christian,
his answer was, Sir I am old and unfit to forsake the rites and laws of my
Ancestors, but take my children as you will, and teach them what you please,
they are young, and can more easily apply themselves to your customs, and
instructions.

3. And a stock of money must be remembered, which in some sense, is as it were
the soul of this work; the Poet said truly (...)* If we mean the Indians
shall be Gospellized, they must c Hesiod. Op. and Di. l. 2.
first be civilized, who are yet a very wild Olive, both by nature and life,
they must be weaned from idleness, and hunting, and nakedness, they must be
persuaded to labor, planting, learning, arts, and manufacture, that they may
get clothing, they must be taught to build for their own habitations, for
meeting houses or Churches on the Lords days, Schools must be erected for
instruction of their youth at other times, books of all kinds, tools and
instruments of all sorts must be provided, many and necessary materials
toward this structure may be easily mentioned, but are not so easily
purchased: If our Country men there have for their own comfort and
subsistence, it is little less then a miracle, all things considered, and a
wonderful mercy, it cannot be expected, that they should be able to add
considerable supply toward all the forenamed particulars, and other emergent
needful occasions, though there be that can bear them record, that to their
power, yea and beyond their power, they are willing of themselves as the
Apostle said of his Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8. 3. I crave leave therefore to pray
every Christian reader with much entreaty to take upon him the fellowship of
ministering to this work, that you may abound in this grace also, that I may
use to you the same holy Apostles words; Chrysostom Theodor. hist. l. 5. c. 29.
desirous to plant the Gospel in Phaenicia, stirred up many godly men, and
devout women, by their liberality to contribute toward those endeavors. Yea
and here let it be remembered, that as Gregory commends Queen Brunechild of
France, and Queen Adilberga of Kent, for their charitable furtherance of this
work, the gaining of souls, the first Gospellizing Lib. 9. Ep. 56, 57.
of our Saxon Ancestors; So some pious Christians among us of both sexes, have
showed much bounty this way, encouraging and exampling others: The Spanish
books relate strange things of their zeal in this kind, and one Gage survey
of America. p. 81.
whom we may credit tells us, that America has four Archbishops, thirty
Bishops, and many other houses as they call them of Religion, and if it be said
their lot fell into the golden part of that world, and out of their
superfluities they might well spare very much, it is very much indeed, and yet
it is Id. p. 3.
somewhat more that the same writer observes how the King of Spain maintains
the lists and bonds of Missionaries, Priests, Friars and Jesuits, that are
continually transported into America, he provides for every of them ten
years, and that to this day, and shall the children of this world in this also
be wiser then the children of light, Luke 16. 8. shall they be enlarged for the
promoting of themselves, and their abominable superstitions, and shall not we
be as forward in that which directly aims at the glory of Christ and the good
of souls, as St. Paul says of his Thessalonians, that they were examples to
all that believed in Macedonia and Achaia, 1 These. 1. 7. I trust the liberality
of some will invite and open the hands of many to be very forward in this
work, for the administration of this service, will not only supply their
wants, but will be abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God, 2 Cor. 9. 12.
And I hope to hear once of a liberal collection and benevolence to be
advanced in every Parish and Congregation of the land, to be put into safe
hands, and such profitable employment, as may indeed further the reering up of
a Christian Tabernacle in America. And while these papers were thus in their
framing, an Act, before mentioned, for propagating the Gospel of Jesus Christ
in New England, declares much forwardness toward a national contribution in
reference to this work, and the disposal thereof to be according to the
desires of those that have bin most industrious that way, and good care, I
trust will be taken that the moneys run into the right channel; and for the
better gale and conduct, the two Universities Cambridge and Oxford, have
affectionately expressed their Christian longings that this soule-businesse may
obtain all possible furtherance, in their Letters to their reverend and dear
Brethren the Ministers of the Gospel in England and Wales, the Divines of
London are desired also in their sphere cordially to act in this common cause
of the Gospel, that no obstruction be left in the way of this most glorious
endeavor, why should any then be straightned in their own bowels, why
should not all learn willingness to this work, by reading, considering, and
practicing what we find the old Jews did in a like case, Exodus 35.

CHAP. IX. The Novangles religious care to advance Piety and Learning.
IT has been laid and left at the doors of those whom some call Independents
here in this England, that they have showed little love to others going astray,
and that their zeal has been wanting against those blasphemies and heresies
that have manifestly dishonored the most sweet and holy name of God, Father,
Son, and Spirit. Our book tells us of Agathon in Doroth. Doctr. and vita
patrum.
a good man in former times when he was accused of lust, pride, etc. He said,
I confess I am a sinner, and I beseech you pray for me, but when they laid
heresy to his charge, his heart was hot within him, his zeal was inflamed,
and he said, Haereticus non sum, and hoc vitium nulla patientia possum aut
vole dissimulare, hoeresis enim separat hominem a Deo, and adsociat Diabolo:
alienatus a Christo non habet Deum, quem oret propeccatis suis. It Is not for me
to judge any, every one shall stand or fall to his own Master, Romans 14. 4. but
I would remember my self and others of his zeal, who said Erasm, Ep. 6.
fateor in causa fidei etiam vitam negligendam; I find this grace very warm
and working in our Novangles, for whom I have some few words more to mention in
this particular, that my readers may be invited to think well of them, to do
well to them, and for them, or for the poor Indians rather, or rathest for
Christ himself, who shall have honor from us all, if we all by communication
of counsels, prayers, purses, and every other way endeavor the furtherance of
their conversion to our Lord Jesus; and to procure our cordial conjunction
with our brethren there in this, I shall transcribe some things out of their
own late printed book of the laws and liberties concerning the inhabitants
of Massachusetts, by which their love to truth, godliness, peace, and learning
will be evident, together with their liberal and enlarged care to propagate
the eternal Gospel of our Lord among the Natives.

At the title of haeresie, p. 24.
this is the preface. Although no humane power be Lord over the faith and
consciences of men, and therefore may not constrain them to believe or
profess against their consciences, yet because such as bring in damnable
heresies, tending to the subversion of the Christian Faith, and the destruction
of the souls of men, ought duly to be restrained from such notorious impiety,
it is therefore ordered and decreed by this Court:

That if any Christian within this jurisdiction shall go about to subvert and
destroy the Christian Faith and Religion, by broaching or maintaining any
damnable heresy, as denying the immortality of the soul, or the resurrection
of the body, or any sin to be repented of in the regenerate, or any evil
done by the outward man to be accounted sin, or denying that Christ gave
himself a ransom for our sins, or shall affirm that we are not justified
by his death and righteousness, but by the perfection of their own works, or
shall deny the morality of the fourth Commandment, or shall endeavor to
seduce others to any the heresies aforementioned, every such person continuing
obstinate therein after due means of conviction shall be sentenced to
banishment. 1646. And before Tit. Ecclesiastical. p. 19. 20
having said, that the open contempt of Gods word, and the messengers thereof
is the desolating sin of civil States, etc. It is therefore ordered, and
decreed, That if any christian, so called, within this jurisdiction, shall
contemptuously behave himself toward the word preached, or the messengers
thereof -- either by interrupting him in his preaching, or by charging him
falsely with any error, which he has not taught, or like a son of Korah cast
upon his true doctrine, or himself, any reproach -- every such person or
persons (whatsoever censure the Church may pass) shall for the first scandal
be convented and reproved openly by the Magistrate at some Lecture, and bound
to their good behavior, and if a second time they break forth into the like
contemptuous carriages, they shall either pay five pounds to the public
treasury, or stand two hours openly upon a block or stool four foot high on
a Lecture day with a paper fixed on his breast, written in capital letters, AN
OPEN AND OBSTINATE CONTEMNER OF GODS HOLY ORDINANCES, that others may fear and
be ashamed of breaking out into the like wickedness. 1646.

There be some in this England that account it piety and Religion to speak
evil of Christ's Ministers, and cast off his Ordinances; now blessed of God
from heaven and earth be our Novangles, Magistrates, Ministers, and people that
have so seasonably witnessed against these abominations.

They are great lovers of peace and government, these therefore be their words
in another place; Tit. Anabaptists. p. 1.
For as much as experience has plentifully and often proved that since the
first-rising of the Anabaptists about an hundred years past they have bin the
Incendiaries of Commonwealths, and the infectors of persons in maine matters
of Religion, and the troublers of Churches in most places where they have been,
and that they who have held the baptizing of infants unlawful, have usually
held other errors or heresies together therewith (though as heretics use to
do they have concealed the same until they espied a fit advantage and
opportunity to vent them by way of question or scruple) and whereas diverse of
this kind have since our coming into New England appeared amongst our selves,
some whereof, as others before them, have denied the Ordinance of Magistracy,
and the lawfulness of making war, others the lawfulness of Magistrates and
their inspection into any breach of the first Table, which opinions, if
connived at by us, are like to be increased among us, and so necessarily bring
guilt upon us, infection and trouble to the Churches, and hazard to the whole
Commonwealth: It is therefore ordered by this Court and authority thereof,
that if any person or persons shall either openly condemn or oppose the
baptizing of infants, or go about secretly to seduce others from the
approbation, or use thereof, or shall purposely depart the Congregation at the
administration of that Ordinance, or shall deny the Ordinance of Magistracy, or
their lawful right, or authority to make war, or to punish the outward
breaches of the first Table, and shall appear to the Court wilfully and
obstinately to continue therein, after due means of conviction, every such
person or persons shall be sentenced to banishment. 1644.

And that we may discern how worthy they are that we should do all the good
we can for them, for they love the nation where they inhabit, and are very
serious in preparing them for one husband, to present them a pure virgin unto
Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Several therefore are their decrees in order to their
conversion.

Tit. Indians. p. 28. 29.
1. Every Town shall have power to restrain all Indians from profaning the
Lords day. 1633. 1639. 1641.

2. The English shall not destroy the Indians corn, but shall help them to
fence in their grounds.

3. Considering one end in planting these parts was to propagate the true
Religion unto the Indians, and that diverse of them are become subjects to the
English, and have engaged themselves to be willing and ready to understand the
Law of God; It is therefore ordered and decreed, that such necessary and
wholesome Laws which are in force, and may be made from time to time, to
reduce them to civility of life, shall be once in the year (if the times be
safe) made known to them, by such fit persons as the general Court shall
nominate, having the help of some able Interpreter.

4. Considering also that interpretation of tongues is appointed of God for
propagating the truth; It is therefore decreed that two Ministers shall be
chosen every year, and sent with the consent of their Churches (with whomsoever
will freely offer themselves to accompany them in that service) to make known
the heavenly counsel of God among the Indians, and that something be allowed
them by the General Court to give away freely to those Indians whom they shall
perceive most willing and ready to be instructed by them.

5. They decree further that no Indian shall at any time Powaw, or perform
outward worship to their false gods, or to the devil, and if any shall
transgress this law, the Powawer shall pay 5 l. the procurer 5 l. etc. 1646.

Their love to learning also is meet to be remembered, and encouraged, wherein
they have Tit. Scheels. p. 47.
observed a chief project of that old deluder Satan to keep men from the
knowledge of the Scriptures, as in former times keeping them in an unknown
tongue, so in these latter times by persuading from the use of tongues, that so
at least the true sense and meaning of the original might be clouded with
false glosses of saint-seeming deceivers, and that learning may not be buried
in the graves of our forefathers in Church and Common wealth, the Lord
assisting our endeavors, It is therefore ordered by this Court and authority
thereof, That every Township increasing to the number of fifty households, shall
appoint one within their Town to teach all such children as shall resort to
him, to write and read, whose wages shall be paid either by the Parents or
Masters of such children, or by the Inhabitants in general by way of supply,
as the major part of those that order the Prudentialls of the Town shall
appoint, and where any town shall increase to an hundred families or
househoulders, they shall set up a Grammar school, the Masters thereof being
able to instruct youth so far, as they may be fitted for the University, and if
any town neglect this above a year, every such Town shall pay five pound per
ann. to the next such School, till theyshall perform this order. 1647.

And an Academy or University is not only in their aim, but a good while
since they had more than begun well, and therefore we read these words in
another Tit. College. p. 12.
part of their laws, Whereas through the good hand of God upon us there is a
College founded in Cambridge in the County of Middle sex, called Harvard
College, for encouragement whereof this Court has given the sum of four
hundred pounds, and also the revenue of the Ferry betwixt Charles Town and
Boston, and that the well ordering and mannaging of the said College is of
great concernment; It is therefore ordered by this Court, etc. Then follow
directions for the President and Commissioners to establish orders and dispose
gifts, etc. 1636. 1640. 1642.

Mr. Coleman that was Erastianly principled, preached publicly that except
some other way be found to Sermon at Westminster. in Ann. 1646. July, 30. e Job. 11.
22
keep up learning, our Universities will be but useless places, and learning
it self an unnecessary thing; for under this notion of Independency, Weavers
and Tailors may become Pastors, so that if some stop be not, the issue may be,
that one may bind his son Apprentice to a Cobbler, and at seven years end he
may go out a free Minister, etc.

But our Brethren of New England we see have other principles and practices,
and notwithstanding that they went out as exiles hence, Stat. Eccles. Brit.
praeface.
extra anni solisque viam -- yea as Jacob of old with his staff only passed
over Jordan, and suddenly became two bands, Genesis 32. 10. These ventured upon
the wide and wild Ocean with poor and small provision, and how great how many
are the mercies that our God has showed unto his servants there, that they are
not only furnished themselves with necessaries of all sorts, and have made
large steps in an Academicall way, having Acts, Degrees, and Commencements
according to the commendable fashion of England, as their own words are; The
theses at their Commencements disputed upon have been printed several years
at Cambridge in New England, and thence dispersed here; but they have also
industriously furthered by their godliness, gentleness, and good orders, the
conversion of a miserable people that have lien so long in darkness. To warm
the affections of the English here, to raise all our hearts and endeavors to
join all possible forces here and there in this soule-worke, the next chapter
is added.

CHAP. X. The success of the Novangles in Gospellizing the Indians.
THE Reader here shall have a Breviate inviting him to peruse those larger
discourses, printed Day breaking if not the Sunrising of the Gospel with the
Indians in New England. Printed for Fulk Clifton, on New Pish. street hill.
1647.
on purpose to raise our hearts in lifting up the high praises of God, that
has given this grace unto men.

First Treatise.
Four of the English, having sought God, went among the Indians, Octo. 28.
1646. to make known the things of their peace, they were conducted into the
principal Wigwam of Waaubon, their chief minister of justice, who like
another Cornelius, Act. 10. 24. had called together many men, women, and
children to hear and learn, they began with prayer in English, not for want of
language, but to show them the duty was sacred, and that we might agree
together in the same page. 1. and 2:
heart-sorrowes for them, even in that place where God was never wont to be
called upon: It was an affecting spectacle, after prayer, to see a company of
forlorn outcasts diligently attending upon the word of salvation, which in the
space of an hour and a quarter discovered to them the grounds of Religion,
repeating, expounding, and applying the ten Commandments, then preaching Jesus
Christ the only means of recovery from sin and wrath, persuading them to
repentance for several sins which they live in. We next p. 3.
asked them if they understood what was spoken, which they affirmed with many
voices, and then we desired to know if they would propound any questions to
us, for their further satisfaction, and this they did, but not such curiosities
as some others of them had done before, as, what was the cause of thunder, of
the ebbing and flowing of the sea, of the wind: no, the wisdom of God directed
Questions of the Indians.
them to ask, How we may come to know Jesus Christ? one of them after we had
answered, said, he was praying in his Wigwam to Christ that he would give him
a new heart, but another Indian interrupted him, saying, p. 4.
he prayed in vain, because Christ understood not what Indians speak in
prayer, as not being acquainted with their language, his question therefore
was, Whether Jesus Christ did understand the prayers of Indians? another
demanded, if English men were once so ignorant of p. 5.
Christ as themselves? and how can there be an image of God, seeing it is
forbiden in the second Commandment? If the father be bad, and the child good,
will God be offended with that child? for it is said in the second commandment,
he will visit the sins of the fathers upon the children? How is all the
world become so full of people, being all p. 6.
were once drowned in the flood?

We then asked them three questions. 1. If they Questions to them.
did not desire to see God, and if they were not tempted to think there was no
God, because they could not see him? some of them replied they did indeed
desire to see him, but we had taught them that could not be, yet they believed,
though their eyes could not see him, he was to be seen with their souls
within. 2. We asked if it were not strange to them there should be but one
God, yet this God should be in Massachusetts, Conectacut, Quimipenik, in old
England, in this Wigwam, in the next, every where? It is strange one of them
said, as all else is we hear preached; yet they thought it might p. 7.
be true that God was so big every where. 3. Whether they did not find
something troubling them within after the commission of sin, as murder,
adultery, theft, lying, etc. they confessed the trouble, but could not tell what
to say to it, he therefore that first spoke to them concluded with a doleful
description (as far as his language permitted) of the trembling condition of
every soul that dies in sin, and shall be cast out of favor from God.
Having thus spent three hours, we asked them if they were not weary, they
said no, we resolved to leave them with an appetite; the chief of them seeing
us conclude with prayer, desired to know when we would come again, we
appointed the time, gave the children some Apples, and the men what was at
hand, they asked more ground to build a Town together, which we liked well,
and promising our furtherance for them at the General Court, we departed with
many welcomes from them.

November 11. 1646, We came again to the same Second coming.
Wigwam, there was a greater concourse, and seats provided for us, we began
again with prayer in English, and then catechized the younger sort, we asked
them p. 8.
only three questions in their own language. 1. Who made you and all the
world? 2. Who shall save you from sin and hell? 3. How many commandments
has God given you to keep? The Preacher then proceeded, We are come to bring
you good news from the great God, and to show how evil men may come to be
good, and be happy while they live, and go to God when they die; then in
familiar descriptions he set forth God to them in his glorious power,
goodness and greatness, showing what his will was, and what he required, even
of the Indians, in the ten Commandments, and how angry God was for any sin,
yet that he sent Christ to die for their transgressions, and to pacify God by
suffering in their room, if they did repent and believe the Gospel, and that
he would love the poor Indians if now they sought God, threatening wrath
against all such as stood out and neglected so great salvation, etc. In hearing
these things about sin, and hell, and Christ, one of them showed much
affliction, p. 9.
desiring to conceal his grief; about an hour thus spent, we desired them
to propound some questions, and the first was by an old man, If it were not to
late for Questions.
such an old man as he to repent and seek after God? which cleared, 2. They
demanded, How the English came to differ so much from the Indians in knowledge,
seeing at p. 10.
first they had all one father? 3. Being satisfied in this also, they said, How
may we come to serve God? which being answered, their fourth question was, Why
the sea water was salt, and the land water fresh? and their fifth, If the p. 11.
water be higher then the earth, why did it not overflow it? a Philosophical
answer was given to this, and they conferred much among themselves about these
questions, but night hasting we desired them to proceed, thereupon one of them
said, If a man has committed adultery, p. 12.
or stolen goods, and the Sachim does not punish him, and he restore the
goods, is not all well, will no punishment come from God, as if restitution
made God amends? this answered, we asked two things. 1. What do you remember
of that spoken to you the last time we p. 13.
were here? after some speech among themselves, one of them said, They did much
thank God for our coming, and the things they heard were wonderful to them;
then Secondly we said, Do you believe the things we tell you, and that God is
Musquantum, i. e. very angry for the least sin in your thoughts, or words, or
works? they said yes, and we spoke further of the terrors of God against
sinners, and his mercy to the penitent, seeking after Christ; night being
almost come, considering the Indians desired to know how to pray, and thought
that Christ did not understand their language, one of us therefore prayed in
their tongue above a quarter of an hour, diverse of them holding up eyes and
hands, and one of them hung down his head, with his rag before his eyes, A
weeping Indian.
which when he had wiped, he held up his head again, yet such was the power
of God upon his heart, that he hung down his head again, covered his eyes,
wiping them and weeping abundantly, till prayer was ended, p. 14.
then he turned to a corner of the Wigwam, and wept more by himself, which
one of us perceiving, spoke encouraging words, he then wept more and more;
when he came out of the Wigwan, we spoke to him again, he then fell into
more abundant weeping, like one deeply affected, so as we could not forbear
weeping over him also; we departed greatly rejoicing for such sorrowing. And
while I am transcribing this, I know not whether first, to pity the poor
Natives in their spiritual distres, or sympathize with the English in their
holy compassion, or praise God more for discovering to the Indians their lost
condition by nature, or that he has made our Countrymen so industrious in
recovering them out of it; however I cannot but remind my Reader of the
relators observations hereupon, at least some of them. Observations.


1. That none of them slept sermon, nor derided Gods Messengers; Woe to those
English that are grown p. 17.
bold to do that which Indians will not, heathen dare not.

2. There is need of learning in Ministers, who preach to Indians, much more
preaching to gracious Christians, these had sundry Philosophical questions
which could not have bin answered without some knowledge of the Arts; worse
than Indian ignorance has blinded their eyes, that renounce learning as an
enemy to Gospel ministeries.

At a third meeting it did appear that the Indians notwithstanding
discouragements from other Indians, Third meeting November. 26. ^
did increase in their desires after the word, and propounded more questions.

What is the meaning of the word Humiliation, so often Questions.
heard of by them in our Churches? 2. What a spirit is? 3. Whether they should
believe dreams? 4. How the English know God so much, and they so little?
Being satisfied in this, they desire a place for a Town. A day or two after
Wampas a wise Indian offered his own son, and three more Indian children, to
be trained up p. 19.
by us, saying they would grow wicked at home, and never know God, he with two
other young lusty Indians tendered their service to dwell in some of our
families, they are two of those weeping Indians, and they are received into two
of the Elders houses, where one of them confessed his former adulterous life,
and feared that God would never look upon him in love; upon p. 20.
our declaring the greatness of that sin, yet hope of pardon through
repentance and faith in Christ, he wept bitterly; the other then present also
confessed his like guiltines, and brak out into great mourning, wherein they
both continued above half an hour. An English youth occasionally lodging in
Waaubons Wigwam the third night of their hearing, assured us he instructed his
company in the things he heard, and prayed among them.

While the general Court was considering where to lay out a town for the
Indians, they consulted about p. 22.
laws for themselves.

1. If a man be idle a week, at most a fortnight, he must Indian Laws.
pay five shillings. 2. If a man unmarried lie with a woman unmarried he shall
pay twenty shillings. 3. If a man beat his wife his hands shall be tied behind
him, and he severely punished. 4. If a woman's hair hang loose, or cut as a
man's, she shall pay five shillings. 5. If a woman goes with naked breasts she
shall pay two shillings six pence. 6. All men that wear long locks shall pay
five shillings, etc.
They were desirous to know the name of their Town, it was said Noonanetum, i.
e. rejoicing, because the English rejoiced at their desires to know God, and
God did rejoice at it; this pleased them much. The two honest Indians told us
that Waaubon and the rest used p. 23.
these expressions in prayer, Take away Lord my stony heart, Indian prayers
another, O Lord wash my soul, another, Lord lead me when I die to heaven.

December 9. The children being catechized, and that of Ezechiel touching the
dry bones opened, they offered Fourth meeting.
their children to be instructed by us, complaining they had nothing to give
us. We propounded sundry p. 24.
questions to them, and one of them being asked what was sin, said, a naughty
heart, another old man complained of his fears, he purposed to keep the
Sabbath, yet he was afraid whether he should go to hell or heaven, another p.
25.
complained of other Indians reviling and calling them rogues for cutting off
their locks, for since the word has wrought upon them, they discern the
vanity of their pride in their hair, of their own accord therefore they cut it
modestly.

Second Treatise.
THE awakening of these Indians raised up a noise The clear sunshine of the
Gospel upon the Indians, etc. by Mr. Shepherd. 1648.
round about, a Sachim from Concord side came to Noonanetum to an Indian
lecture, where the Lord spoke so to his heart, that he desired to cast off his
sinful courses, etc. some of his men opposed him therein, he called the
chief of them about him, and spoke to this effect, That they had no reason at
all to oppose the way of the English for their good; while you lived after the
Indian fashion, what did the Sachims for you? only sought their own ends out
of you, taking away your skins, kettles, and Wampam at their pleasure, but
the English care not for your goods, only seek your good, etc. Upon this they
desired Mr Elliot should come among them and preach, and they framed to p. 3.
themselves certain laws for their more religious and civil government.

1. Abusers of themselves by wines or strong liquors shall pay Orders made by
diverse Sachims, at Concord, 1646.
for every time 20 s. 2. There shall be no more Powawing, the penalty 20 s. 3.
They desire to be stirred up to seek God. 4. And understand the wiles of
Satan. 5. And detest them. 6. That they may improve their time better. p. 5.
7. A liar shall pay for the first fault 5 s. for the second 10 s. for the
third 20 s. 8. Against stealing. 9. Having more wives than one. 10. Against
pride. 11. For paying their debts to the English. 12. Observing the Lords day,
prophaners of it pay 20 s. 13. Wear their hair comely as the English,
offenders pay 58. 14. None grease themselves as formerly, penalty 5 s. 15. Set
up prayer in their VVigwams, before also, and after meat. 16. Adultery
punished with death. 17. So wilful murder. 18. Not come to an English man's
house without knocking. 19. Whosoever beats his wife shall pay 20 s. etc.
Most of these Indians set up prayer morning and evening in their families,
before and after meat, keep the Lords day, cut their hair, minister what
edification p. 6.
they can one to another, manifesting great willingness to conform unto the
English fashions.

March, 3. 1647. At the Lecture in Noonanetum, we saw some Indian women well
affected, and considering how unmeet it is for women to ask questions
publicly, p. 7.
they were desired to acquaint their husbands privately therewith, or the
Interpretor, the first was propounded by the wife of one VVampooas, Whether
said Indian women's Questions.
she do I pray when my husband prays, if I speak nothing as he does, but I
like what he says, and my heart goes with it? The wife of one Totherswampe
proposed this, Whether an husband should do well to pray with his wife, and
yet continue in his passions and be angry with her, etc.

An aged Indian complained of an unruly son, asking p. 8.
what should be done with him, when he will not hear Gods word, though his
father command him, nor forsake his drunkenness. An aged Indian told us
openly, p. 9.
that the very things which Mr Elliot taught them of God and his Commandments
they have heard some old men speak, etc. and many of them have now this
apprehension among them, that their forefathers did know God, but after this
they fell into a great sleep, and when they did awaken they quite forgate him.
Another p. 10. An Indians dream.
Indian told his dream, that about two years before the coming over of the
English, one night he could not sleep a good while, then he fell into a
dream, thinking he saw a great many men come into those parts clothed as the
English now are, a man rose up among them all in black, with a thing in his
hand, which he now sees was all one Englishmans book, he stood upon a higher
place than the rest, on one side the English, and a great many Indians on the
other, he told all the Indians that God was Moosquantum or angry with them, and
would kill them for their sins, whereupon himself he said stood up, and
desired to know of the black man what God would do with him, and his Squaw,
and Papooses, but he would not answer him a first time, nor a second, till he
desired the third time, and then he smiled on him, and said, He and his
Papooses should be safe, God would give unto them Mitchen, i. e. victuals, and
other good things, and so he awakened.

At Noonanctum the Indian men women and children, especially upon the Lecture
days, are clad partly by the p. 11.
gift of the English, and partly by their own labor. June, 9. the first day
of the Synods meeting at Cambridge, the morning spent in a preparative Sermon
to that work, in the afternoon there was a great confluence of Indians from
all parts, to hear, Mr Elliot out of Ephe. 2. 1. showed them their miserable
condition out of Christ, dead in trespasses and sins, pointing unto them the
Lord Jesus who only could quicken them. They then propounded questions.

What Countreyman Christ was?
How far that place from them? Indian Questions.

Where Christ was now?
How they might lay hold on him?
And where being now absent from them?
The English Magistrares, Ministers, and people, were much affected at what
they saw and heard. An Indian brake out into admiration, that God should look
upon p. 13.
them that had bin so long in darkness; Me wonder says he at God, that he
should thus deal with us.

That winter many questions were propounded.

Why some so bad that they hate those that would teach them?

A Squaw said, might she not go and pray in the wood alone, when her husband
was not at home, because she was ashamed to pray in the Wigwam before company?

To what Nation Jesus Christ came first, and when?

If a man should be enclosed in iron a foot thick and thrown into the fire,
what would become of his soul, would it come forth thence?

Why did not God give all men good hearts?

How long is it before men believe that have the word of God made known unto
them?

How they should know when their faith and prayers be good?

Why did not God having all power, kill the devil, that made all men so bad?

If we be made so weak by sin in our hearts, how can we p. 19. p. 20.
come before God and sanctify a sabbath?

They propounded three cases about the Sabbath.

In the exercises, besides prayer for a blessing, Mr. Elliot does four things.

1. He catechizeth the children and youth, by which the aged learn. 2. He
preaches out of some Scripture plainly and briefly. 3. If there be cause,
admonition follows. 4. They ask us questions and we answer them.
Some cases and admonitions are there mentioned. Indian cases and admonitions,
of one beating his wife.
1. Wampoonas upon a light occasion beat his wife, for this he was brought
before the Assembly, where the quality of the sin was opened, as against Gods
command, cruelty to his own body, etc. he turned his face to the wall and
wept, he was so penitent and melting, that all forgave him, but the Indians
would have his fine notwithstanding his repentance, which he paid also
willingly. Another case of was of Cutshamaquin a p. 21. Or an unruly son
recovered.
Sachim, who had a son fourteen or fifteen years old, he was drunk, and
behaved himself disobediently against his father and mother, they rebuked him,
but he despised their admonition, he was brought before the Assembly, stood
out a long time, though his father for his example confessed his own faults,
the young man still persisted, diverse of us called upon him to acknowledge his
offense against his parents, and entreat their forgiveness, yet he refused;
the Indians also affectionately put him on, diverse spoke one after another, and
p. 22.
some several times, at last he humbled himself, confessed his sin, and
asked forgiveness of his father, taking him by the hand, at which his father
burst into p. 23.
tears, he did the same to his mother, who wept also, as did diverse others,
and many English wept also, the house was filled with weeping, we went to
prayer, all the time thereof the Sachim wept so abundantly, that Prayer.
the board he stood upon was all dropped with his tears. Some questions were
after this propounded.

An old Powoow asked, Why we had not taught them to p 24. Questions.
know God sooner?

Another said, Before he knew God he was well, but since I have known God and
sin, I find my heart full of sin.

Whether their children go when they die, because they have not sinned?

If any of them shall go to heaven, seeing their hearts are so full of sin,
especially Nanwunwudsquas, mad after women?

If they leave Powawing and pray to God, what shall they do when they are
sick, having no skill in Physic?

What shall we say to such Indians as oppose our praying unto God, and
believing in Christ, what get you say they by this, p. 25.
you go naked still and are as poor as we, our corn is as good as yours, and
we take more pleasure then you, etc.

They bring their cases to Mr. Elliot. A Law is now among them against gaming,
other Indians demand Indian cases.
their old debts, which they refuse to pay because it was a sin to play, and
they must not pay such sinful p. 27.
debts. They took it to heart when Mr. Elliot told them he was afraid they
were weary and cooled in their love to religion, and enquired when they did
hear and pray aright, how they might know when they were weary of them, what
time it might be before the Lord might come and make them know him, etc. some
other cases were moved by them. A man before he knew God had two wives, the
first is barren, the second p. 33.
brought forth sweet children, which of these must he put away? if the former,
they offended God, if the latter, they illegitimate their own dear children?
And, a Squaw leaves her husband, commits adultery with remote Indians, hears
the word, repents, and returns to her husband still unmarried, is not he bound
to receive her? An old widow Squaw said, if when men know God, p. 34.
God loves them, why then are any afflicted after they know him?

Mr. Elliot preaching upon Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship, etc. They asked
what Englishmen thought of him; p. 35.
because he came among the wicked Indians and taught them?

Another said, Suppose two men sin, one knows it, the other does not, will God
punish both alike?

Again, If a wise Indian teach good things to other Indians, should not he be
as a father or brother to such?

One Tutaswampe prayed at the burial of an Indian child, with such zeal,
variety of gracious expressions, p. 37.
and abundance of tears, that the woods rang with their sighs and prayers, the
Englishman that heard him, said, he was ashamed of himself and some others,
that have had so great light, but want such good affections.

Third Treatise.
THat woman that propounded the first question according The glorious progress
of the Gospel among the Indians, etc. published by Mr Winslow, 1649. An Indian
woman living and dying Christianly. p. 6.
to appointment by another man (2. Treatise, p. 6. hujus p. 4.) moved this also.

When my heart prays with my husband praying, is this praying to God aright?

This woman kept at home, learned quickly to spinne well, held her children to
labor, after she submitted to the Gospel her life was exemplary, she died of a
sickness taken in childbed; Mr. Elliot visited her several times, prayed with
her, asked her about her spiritual estate, she said she still loved God though
he made her sick, and was resolved to pray unto him as long as she lived, and
to refuse Powawing, she believed God p. 7.
would pardon all her sins, because Jesus Christ dyed for her, that God was
well pleased in him, that she was willing to die, believed she should go to
heaven, and live happy with God and Christ; of her own accord she called her
children, and said to them, I shall now die, and when I am dead, your
grandfather, grandmother, and Unkles, etc. will send for you to live among
them, and promise you great matters, but I charge you do not believe them,
live not among them, for they pray not to God, keep not the Sabbath, commit
all manner of sins, and are not punished; but I charge you live here, for they
pray to God, his word is taught, sins are suppressed, and punished by laws,
therefore I charge you live here all your days, she died, and it fell out as
she said. It Is observed many other Indians would come in, but they have neither
tools nor skill to sense p. 8.
in their grounds, if the word were constantly taught, government exercised,
encouragements for the industrious, with means to instruct them in letters,
trade and labor, as building, fishing, flax, hemp, etc. many wellminded
Indians would thus be drawn together. Mr. Elliot stirs up the Ministers to
learn the language, and assist in the work, there is nothing else to invite
but the good of souls, not so much as meat, drink, and lodging to be had
among the Indians, but such as we must carry with us, beside what we give
away to them, etc.

Several questions they then propounded. p. 10. Indian Questions.


Does the Devil dwell in us, as we dwell in an house?

When God says honor thy Father and thy Mother, does he mean three Fathers,
our Father, our Sachim, and God?

When a soul goes to heaven what does it say? And what says a wicked soul
when it comes to hell?

Why did Christ die in our steads?

Why must we love our enemies, and how shall we do it?

How does Christ redeem and deliver us from sin, when every day my heart
thinks I must die, and go to Hell for my sins, what shall I do in this case?

How long was Adam good before he sinned?

If two families dwell in one house, one prays, the other does not, what
shall they that pray do to them that pray not?

Now the Indians desire to go to heaven, what shall we do that we may go
thither when we die?

How shall I bring my heart to love prayer?

Do not Englishmen spoil their souls to say a thing cost them more than it
did, and is it not all one as to steal?

I see why I must fear hell, and do so every day, but why must I fear God?

If I reprove a man for sin, and he answer why do you speak thus angerly, Mr.
Elliot teaches us to love one another, is this well?

If a wife put away her husband because he will pray to God and she will not,
what must be done in this case? May such women as pray to God, marry those that
do not pray to God?

If my wife does some work on the night before the Sabbath, and on the Sabbath
night also, is it a sin?

If I do that which is a sin, and know it not to be a sin, what will God say to
that?

Whether is faith set in my heart or in my mind?

Why have not beasts a soul as well as man, seeing they have p. 20.
love, anger, etc. as man has?

Why does God punish in hell for ever, man does not so, but after a time lets
out of prison again?

What is faith?

How shall I know when God accepts my prayers?

How does Christ make peace betwixt God and man, what is the meaning of that
point?

In wicked dreams does the soul sin?

Does the soul in heaven know things done here on earth?

If my heart be full of evil thoughts, and I repent and pray, and a few hours
after it be full again, and I repent and pray again, and after this it be
full of evil thoughts again, what will God say?

What force of wicked men is lawful, and what not?

What if a Minister wear long hair, as some other men do, what will God say?

Why does God so hate them that teach others to commit sin?

If a man will make his daughter marry one she does not love, what will God
say? etc.

There be sundry of them begin to enquire after Baptism and Church Ordinances,
and Mr. Elliot with consideration speaks solemnly not suddenly, nor lightly,
but before the Lord, As I apprehend, says he, in my conscience, were they but
in a settled way of civility and government, cohabiting together, and I called,
according to God, to live among them, I durst freely join into Church
fellowship with them, and could find out at least twenty men and women in some
measure fitted of the Lord for it. That Indian that was Mr Elliots Interpreter,
and first taught him words, was joining himself to the Church of Dorchester,
and the very day of this writing was the day for the trial of that Indian in
order to his admission, and this was 2. of the 12. 1648. Since which time these
laborers with the Lord have not been idle in this Vineyard, they are digging,
and fencing, and gathering out the stones thereof, and planting it with the
choicest vine, etc. Esa. 5. 2. and though some informations of their happy
endeavors have unhappily miscarried, there be other passages that have arrived
hither, to give us assurance that they wax not faint in that Gospel work, they
are not indeed yet printed, but I have obtained leave to give the Reader a
little taste thereof, for as we here long to understand what further foot steps
be made, so the discoveries thereof will in due time and better manner be
recommended.

Mr Elliot in the beginning of the last spring prepared for his journey among
the Indians, to a great fishing Letter to Mr Winslow. 18. of the 8. 1649.
place upon Merimak, and hired an Indian to mark trees, and pilot him thither,
which he did, with the help of some Indians, they passed by other of the
Natives, who had heard of his preaching, and were very glad of his coming that
way, but sickness prevented him at that time; howbeit upon his recovery, he
went to another place called Pantuket, where from all parts they meet, there he
asked them if those Indians were desirous to pray to God, and when they said
yea, he demanded how many desired it, they answered Wamee, i. e. all. The
chief Sachim of this place had heard him before, and now showed great
affection to him, and the word of God, using many arguments to persuade him to
tarry among them, saying, his coming but once a year did them little good, it
was as if one should come and throw a fine thing among them, and they like it
well, but cannot tell what is within, whether something, or nothing, but if it
be opened and they see it precious, they should believe it, etc.

Another Indian learning from Mr. Elliot that he had five sons, asked him if
they should all teach the Indians to know God, as he did, which when he
affirmed, the other was well pleased, and Mr. Elliot himself much encouraged,
for he had often dedicated them in his prayers to that service of the Lord,
desiring no better preferment for them, than to be fitted for that work, he
endeavors therefore with that small means he has to train them up in
learning, and God will I doubt not raise up some liberal hearts and hands to
assist him therein.

This summer he was making another journey, but in regard of some quarrels
among the Indians, the Church was doubtful at first of his going, which when
the Nashaway Sachim heard, he took twenty men armed after their manner, and was
his guard, with many other nearer Indians, so much do they hunger after
instruction; this was a long journey into the wilderness of sixty miles, it
proved very wet and tedious, so that he was not dry three or four days
together night nor day, but the Lord upheld him and his company in strength and
health. One of the Indians would needs know of Mr Elliot the reason why they
that pray to God, love the Indians so doing, more than their own Brethren, and
when the rest of them said they all found it so in their hearts, this gave him
occasion to discourse to them of the unity of the spirit. They propounded
questions.

If a man know Gods word, but believe it not, and yet teach others, is that
good teaching, and if others believe that teaching, is that good believing?

And when Mr. Elliot asked them How they could tell, when a man knows Gods
word, and does not believe it, they answered, When he does not in his practice
answerable to that he knows.

If I teach on the Sabbath that which you taught us, and forget something, is
that a sin?

What should I pray for at night, what at morning, and what on the Sabbath day?

What is true repentance, and how shall I know when it is true?

How must I wait on God?

When I pray for a soft heart, why is it still hard?

Can one be saved by reading the book of the creature?

When such die as never heard of Christ, whither do they go?

What is the meaning of the name Hebrews, why does God say he is the God of
the Hebrews?

If one purpese to pray, and die before that time, wither goes his soul?

Does God know who shall repent and believe, and who not? why then did God use
so much means with Pharaoh?

What means that, Blessed are they that mourn?

What means lifting up hands to God?

What anger is good, and what is bad?

If a child die before he sin, whither goes his soul?

If one that prays to God sin, like him that prays not, is not he worse?

And while they discoursed of this, and about hating of wicked persons, one of
them said, they must love the man and do him good, but hate his sin, etc. For
I will not forestall but prepare the publication of those other remarkable
occurrences; and now ex pede Herculem, when this little of those many matters
worthy of observation, is seen together, none will call it a day of small
things, Zach. 4. 10. Shall we call this a day of small things? Shall not those
poor Natives in New England rise up in judgment against Old England and
condemn it? they at once or twice preaching of the Law and Gospel, repent, and
weep, and pray, and hear, and most earnestly enquire after God; but we, when
the Sunshine of truth has been so long clear among us, degenerate into those
very sins which they abandon and detest, and with indignation say, get ye
hence, Es. 30. 22.

They willingly forsake their Powawing, and enchantments; but the devil is
broke loose among us, and many desire commerce with those that have familiarity
with him.

The Indians set a mulct upon those women that tie Day break. p. 22.
not up their hair, that go with naked breasts, what would they say, what
would they do, if that sex were as immodest as some in this Nation, bepainted,
bedaubed, debauched, not more with spots in their faces, then stains in their
glory, if Christianity be to them any honor?

The Indians wear their hair comely as the English, Clear Sunshine. p. 5.
and punish those that do otherwise; there be among us that would account it
piacular it should be said of them that in the least they look Rome-wards, yet
like those locusts having the faces of men, they have hair as the hair of
women, Rev. 9. 8. grace is pleased to borrow that from nature, if a man have
long hair, it is a shame to him, 1 Cor. 11. 14.

Those Natives surely will rise up in judgment with the men of this generation
and condemn them; they pray in their families morning and evening, and upon
other occasions, they sanctify the sabbath; we have those among us, that
scoff and scorn these practices of piety, and call the practisers thereof
Duty-mongers.

The Indians desire public meetings, and delight in the places where God is
worshipped and his word is taught; but there be those in this England that make
it a great piece of religion to divide and separate, though God himself would
not have us forsake the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of
some is, Hebr. 10. 25.

The Indians asked Mr. Elliot, if any teach us good things should we not love
him as a father, or a brother? 2 Treatis. p. 35*
but it is now among some esteemed a sign of grace, and a badge of holiness, to
despise their teachers, as if that Scripture of truth were never again to be
fulfilled. They mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his peaple,
till there was no remedy, 1 Chronicles. 36. 16. But many other be the sad symptoms
of our Englands defection and danger, and our God has made himself many ways
marvelous in New England, We cannot call it a day of small things, Or if at
first it was like a little cloud arising out of the sea as a man's hand, 1 King.
18. 44. certainly it carried with it a a sound of abundance of rain, ver. 41.
even that rain that comes down from heaven and returns not thither but
waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to
the sower, and bread to the eater; Gods word has not returned unto him void,
it has accomplished that which he pleased, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I send it, Es. 55. 10, 11.

Now the blessing of the God of Jacob be upon them and their endeavors, even
the blessing of Jacob upon Joseph, the God Almighty help them and bless them
with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lies under, Genesis
49. 25, 26. That God by their means may say to the North give up, and to the
South keep not back, bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the
ends of the earth, Esa. 43. 6. so from the uttermost parts shall we hear songs,
songs of praise, even glory to the righteous, 24. 16. and not only glory to
the Lord our righteousness, but those that win many to this righteousness
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3. and not only
hereafter in that heaven of heavens, but this shall be told as Englands
memorial, in present and succeeding generations, and those American Nations
especially shall call them blessed (Mal. 3. 12.) yea the blessings of them that
were ready to perish, will come upon them, Job 29. 13. for they have done
worthily in Ephrata, and are famous in Bethelem (Ruth 4. 11) and when they be
indeed sensible of this great mercy, they will not only say, thanks be unto
God for this unspeakeable gift, 2 Cor. 9. 15. But they will long to require
this kindness to the English also: and as of old almost all Nations receiving
from Jerusalem the first means of their. Christianity, expressed their
grateful minds by their charitable beneficence upon all occasions to those
that dwelt there, this began in the Apostles days, Act. 11. 19. Romans 15. 26.
Those of Macedonia and Achaia distributed to the poor Saints at Jerusalem, so
it was the use till Ieromes T. 2. Ep. p. 126.
time, that all the Churches of the Gentiles sent collections to the Christians
at Jerusalem, because they all from thence received first the glad tidings of
the Gospel; where the same Christ is preached, there will be the like Christian
affections, which likewise will be demonstrable upon every possible opportunity.

Gregory in several Epistles, not less then twenty four, to the great
personages of those times, shows Lib. 4. Ep. 52. l. 5. 10. 152. etc.
much zeal in this kind, sometimes encouraging them, afterward commending
them for their assistance afforded to that glorious work, the first conversion
of our Countrymen.

Nothing more shall now be added but the praise and practice of Crantz. Metrop.
l. 5. c. 18.
Albertus the Archbishop of Hamburgh, who took upon him a resolution to visit
in his own person all the Northern Provinces, not leaving so much as any one
Island unbenefitted by his preaching; when all things were prepared, and his
attendants chosen, and shipping ready, he was diswaded by Zueno King of
Denmark, who told him those people would sooner be instructed by men of their
own Nation, who were best acquainted with the rites, manners, and language
thereof; the Archbishop hereupon dealt earnestly with others to that purpose,
and made them most willing to the work, for there was not a man among them whom
he had not encouraged, and by his bounty he warmed their zeal in publishing
the Gospel, frequently repeating that sentence of our Savior, The harvest
indeed is great, but the laborers are few, pray ye therefore the Lord of the
harvest, that he will send forth laborers into his harvest, Mat. 9. 37. 38.
Finally as David to Solomon in the bulding of the Temple, 1 Chr. 22. 16. I wish
it were effectually spoken to, and by all the English here and there, Up and be
doing, and the Lord will be with you.

The Relation of Master ANTONIE MONTERINOS, translated out of the French Copy
sent by MANASEH BEN ISRAEL.
THE eighteenth day of Elul, in the year five Elul is the first month of the
Jewish year answering to our August and to some part of September.
thousand four hundred and four from the creation of the World, came into
this City of Amsterdam Mr Aron Levi, alias, Antonie Monterinos, and declared
before me Manassah Ben Israel, and diverse other chief men of the Portugal
Nation, near to the said City that which follows.

About two years and an half ago, the said Monterinos going from the port of
Honda in the West Indies, to go to the Government of Papian in the Province of
Quito, did hire some Mules of a certain Indian Mystique, called Francis du
Chasteau, in which company, together with other Indians, went a certain owner
of Mules who was also called Francis, whom all the Indians named Cacique, to
whom it fell out, passing over the mountain Cordecilla, in a day of great
wind and rain, that their carriages fell to the ground, whereat the Indians
being grieved, as also at the evil weather, they begin to complain of their
ill fortune, saying that they deserved all that, and more also for their
sins, which the said Francis hearing answered, that they should have
patience, that shortly they should have rest; whereunto they answered that they
deserved it not, having used the holy people so ill, and the most noble of all
the Nations in the world; but contrariwise that all the cruelties which the
Spaniards had used against them did befall unto them for the expiating of that
sin; after they were gone a little while, they stopped upon the Mountain to
rest, and pass the night season, at which time the soresaid Monterinos did
take out of a box some few biskets, some cheese and sweet-meates, and offered
some to the soresaid Francis, saying to him, take this though thou do speak
evil of the Spaniards, whereunto he answered, that he had not told the half
of the hard usage which they received from that cruel and inhumane Nation; but
that after a short space they should see themselves avenged upon them by a
hidden Nation: after these discourses between them, Mr Monterinos arrived at
the Town of Cartagena in the Indies, where he was taken by the Inquisition and
put in prison; one day praying unto God, he uttered these words, Blessed be
the name of Adonay, that he has not made me an Idolater, a Barbarian, an
Ethiopian, nor an Indian; and pronouncing the name of Indian he reproved
himself, saying the Hebrews are Indians; and then coming again to himself
said, am not I a soole, how can it be that the Hebrews should be Indians? the
same fell out the second and third day, making the same prayer and giving the
same thanks unto God, whence he gathered that that fancy did not come to him
by mere chance, remembering also that which passed between him and the
aforesaid Indian; so that he took an oath he would so inform himself of
the whole matter, that he should know the truth, and that coming out of
prison he should instantly seek the Indian, and would bring to his mind the
discourse which they had together, to obtain by that means the satisfaction
of his desires. Being then come out of prison by the goodness of God, he went
to the forenamed Port of Honda, where he had so much good luck that he found
instantly the foresaid Indian, to whom he made his application, and brought
into his memory the discourse which they had upon the Mountain, whereunto he
answered that he had not forgotten it, which Monterinos hearing, said that he
would go a journey with him, to which he answered that he was ready to do
him service: So the said Monterinos gave him three Pataques to buy some
provision; whiles then they followed their journey and talked together, the
said Monterinos at last discovered himself unto the said Indian, and told him
in these words, I am an Hebrew of the tribe of Levi, my God is Adonay, and all
the rest are nothing but mistakes and deceites; whereat the Indian being
somewhat surprised, did ask him the name of his predecessors, whereunto he
did answer that they were called Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Israel, which the
Indian hearing, did ask of him whether he had none other Father, he said
yea, and that he was called Lodwick of Monterinos; but the Indian being not
well satisfied as yet, said these words unto him, on the one side I did rejoice
at that which thou have said unto me, and on the other I am resolving to
disbelieve thee, because thou can not tell me who were thy Fathers,
whereunto the said Monterinos answered with an oath, that the thing which he
said was truth, having spent some time in questions and answers, and the Indian
being wearied at the matter said to him, art thou not the son of Israel, to
which he answered, yea, which the Indian having heard said, make an end then of
thy speech, for certainly thou did put me in such a confusion that I would
have been perplexed at it all my life time; nevertheles let us rest a little
and drink, and then follow on our discourse. After a little space, the Indian
said unto him, if thou have the courage and boldness to follow me, thou shall
know all what thou desire, but I tell thee before hand thou must go a foot
and eat roasted Mayz, and do that which I shall bid thee; the said Monterinos
answered, that he would not at all transgress his orders; the day following
which was Monday, the Indian came to the said Monterinos, and bid him take out
all that which he had in his pockets, put on his Alpergatas (these are a
certain sort of shoes which the Indians wear) and take this staff and
follow him, which the said Monterinos did, leaving his cloak and his sword and
all what he had, and so they followed on their way, the Indian carrying on his
back three measures of roasted Mayz, two ropes, the one made with knots and an
hook with two teeth to climb up by the Mountain, and the other untied, to be
made use of in the Marshes and passages of Rivers; with a little Axe and the
Alpergatas; they went then after this manner the whole week till Saturday on
which they rested, and returned to follow their course the whole Sunday and
Monday; on Thursday about eight of the clock they came to a River as broad as
the Duero in Spain, and the Indian said unto him thou shall here see thy
Brethren, and making a flag of two pieces of Cotton cloth which were their
girdles, made a sign, after which they saw a great smoke, and in a moment
afterward the same sign with another flagge; and it was not long after that
they saw in a Boat coming to them three men and one woman, which being arrived
to the bank of the River, the woman leapt a shore, and the men tarried in the
Boat, which after a long discourse which she had with the Indian, which the
said Monterinos could not at all understand, went back to the Boat, and told
the three men all that she had heard of the Indian, which came instantly out
of the Boat (having always looked with attention upon him, viz. the said
Monterinos) and did embrace him, and the woman did the like; after this one of
the three men went back again to the Boat, and the other two together with
the woman did stay there; which coming near unto the Indian he did prostrate
himself at their feet, and they received him with demonstrations of civility
and affection, and begun to talk with him; after a little while the Indian
said to Mr Monterinos, be not amazed, and do not believe that these men will
tell thee a second thing, before thou have well understood the first; the two
men instantly put him between them, and told him the verse following in Hebrew
out of Deuteronomy. Chap. 6. verse. 4. Semah Israel Adonay Elohim Adonay Ehad, Hear O
Israel the Lord our God is one Lord; and he informing himself of every thing
by the Indian Interpreter, and learning to say it in the Spanish tongue, the
two men told him that which follows, putting a little space of time between
one sentence and another.

1. My Fathers are called Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Israel, and they named them
all four with three fingers, and then they added Reuben, making a sign with
four fingers.

2. All such as will come and dwell with us we will give them lands.

3. Joseph dwells in the mids of the sea, making a sign with two fingers shut,
and afterward dividing the same into two parts.

4. We shall all one day speak together, uttering with the mouth ba, ba, ba,
and shall come forth as the earth had brought us forth.

5. We shall go out from hence shortly (speaking hastily) some of us to look
out, and to make water, and saying these words, they winked with their eyes and
thrust their feet to the ground.

6. A Messenger shall go.

7. Francis shall say somewhat more, making a sign with the fingers, that it
would be a little.

8. Give us time to make our selves ready, and shaking their hand on all sides,
said with their mouth, and with their hands, stay not long.

9. Send 12 men, making a sign that all shall have beards and be able to write.

These discourses being all ended, which lasted all that day, they came back
and told him the same Wednesday and Thursday, not adding a word more thereunto.
And Monterinos being wearied, that they answered him nothing to that which he
asked, and that they would not permit him to pass the River, did draw near
the Boat in a dissembling way, and would have cast himself therein to go to
the other side, but they thrust her from the shore with a staff, and the said
Monterinos falling into the water he was in danger of being drowned, because
he could not swim; the men cast themselves suddenly into the water, and drew
him out, and showing themselves angry, said unto him, do not think that thou will bring to pass thy purpose by force; which the Indian declared unto him,
and they showed unto him by signs and words.

Notice is to be taken that the Boat for the space of those three days did not
at all stay in one place, but four men went and four other came, which all of
them said the same nine things which we have mentioned, being all the men who
during that time came to see him, about 300 more or less.

These men are somewhat burnt with the Sun, some of them wear their hair to
their knees, some others shorter, and others as we use to wear it, fair
bodies, good countenances, well made of foot and leg, with a linen about their
heads.

Moreover the said Mr Monterinos declared, that going from that place on
Thursday at night with a great deal of provision which they brought to him, he
took his leave of them, having been entertained by them, during the three
days which he stayed there; and having showed him how they enjoyed all things
which the Spaniards have in the Indies, as well of meats as of other things
needful for the life of man. Being come the same day to the place where they
had lien the night before, Mr Monterinos said to the Indian, Francis, thou do
know that my Brethren said unto me that thou should tell me something,
therefore I pray thee tell it now to satisfy my desire, whereunto the Indian
said, I shall tell thee what I know, if thou will not anger me, and shall
relate unto thee the truth so as I have heard it from my Ancestors, but if thou
do vex me (which I apprehend, perceiving thee to be so speculatif) thou will
oblige me to tell thee lies; so then I beseech thee take only heed to what I
shall say unto thee.

Thy Brethren the sons of Israel were by divine providence brought into these
Countries, God doing many miracles for them, which thou would not believe, if
I should tell them to thee as I have heard them of my Fathers; We Indians went
into those Countries and made war against them, and did use them worse then
the Spaniards do us: Afterward by the command of our Mohanes (these are their
Sorcerers) we went as Soldiers toward those parts where thou have seen thy
Brethren, to wage war with them, and of all those that entered there, not one
came back again alive; we made a great Army, and entering into his lands,
all fell down dead, so that not one escaped; at last we raised another Army,
for the making of which the Country was dispeopled wholly, so that none but
old men, women and children remained therein, which came to an end as the
former had done; which those who remained alive, and were not gone to that
war perceiving, said, that the Mohanes had deceived them and were the cause
of the death of their Fathers, for which they deserved to be put to death,
having then killed many of them, those that remained alive did entreat them to
hearken to them, and they would discover to them all the truth of that which
they knew, which having gotten leave, declared that which follows.

The God of these sons of Israel is the true God, all that is written in his
stories is true, they shall be Lords of all the world in the latter end, a
people shall come hither which will bring many things to you, and when the land
shall be well provided, these sons of Israel shall go out of their
habitations, and shall become Lords of all the earth as it was theirs before,
if you will be happy join your selves to them. The Indian having made an end
to relate the prediction of the Mohanes, followed on his discourse after this
manner, My Fathers were Caciques, and there are yet four of them. These 5
Caciques then having heard what the Mohanes had foretold, as if they had been
some of the Sages of the Hebrews, came and took their habitation near that
place, to see if they could get acquaintance with some of thy Brethren. They
satisfied their desire after a long time by the intercession of an Indian
woman: because thy Brethren would never speak to our Fathers, and he of us
that went into their Lands, did fall down dead, and none of thy Brethren did
pass over to us; we therefore made a League with them, by the means of that
woman, under these conditions. First, that five men, sons to five Caciques or
their successors, should come to visit them every seventy Moons, and that none
should come with them. Secondly, that the man to whom the secret was to be
declared, should be three hundred Moons old, and that nothing of this should
be revealed to him in a place inhabited, but only in the open field, and when
it should be revealed, that it should be in the company of all the Caciques;
thus then (said the Indian) we keep this secreet amongst us, for the great
reward which we hope, for the innumerable services which we have done to thy
Brethren. We cannot go to see them, but from seventy to seventy Moons, if no
new thing fall out; there has not been any in my time except thy arrival
which they have so much desired and waited for. I find no more but three new
things according to my reckoning; the first, the arrival of the Spaniards in
these Countries, the second that Ships arrived in the South sea, and the third
is thy arrival. Of all three they have greatly rejoiced, for they say that the
Prophecies do come to pass.

Moreover the said Monterinos declared, that afterward he came to Honda, where
the said Indian did bring to him three Indian young men, not telling him their
names, till he told him that he might speak freely with them, seeing they
were his companions, whith whom he was in league, and that the other namely
the fifth was old, and for that cause was not able to come. The three Indians
did embrace him affectionately, and asked him of what Nation he was; to whom
he answered, that he was of the Hebrew Nation, of the Tribe of Levi; and then
they embraced him the second time, and said to him, Thou shall see us one day,
and shall not know us, we are thy Brethren by a special favor which God has
showed us, and having saluted him they went away: the Indian Francis bid him
also farewell, and that he went to speak with his Brethren in the company of
the other Caciques. As concerning this Country, we have all the Indians at
our command, and when we shall have made an end of these cruel Spaniards, we
shall go and draw you out of the slavery wherein you are, if it please God;
which he will permit, because his word cannot fail.

Finis. Laus Deo.
I Manasseh Ben Israel underwritten, bear w^tnesse, that this present paper
has been coppied with the whole truth of the original, and that the Author
Monterinos is a vertous man, and separate from all manner of worldly interests;
and that he swore in my presence that all that which he declared was a truth.

MANASSEH BEN ISRAEL.

J. DVRY Received this at London, 27 of Novem. 1649.

The Reader is entreated with his pen to amend these mistakes of the Press.
IN the Epistle Dedicatory, remove the note at the bottom of the Margin in the
third page of (b) to the second line of the next page. Page 5. line 12. read
Comestor. p. 16. l. 19. r. and uneasy. p. 18. l. 3. r. e contra. p. 21. 1.
Witekind in the margent. p. 21. l. 16. r. they were. p. 22. l. 23. r. Maternus.
p. 24. l. 19. r. records indeed. p. 32. l. last. r. thou. p. 49. l. 28. r.
Israel was. p. 50. l. 8. add, should so far, and so suddenly degenerate. p.
6. l. 32. r. converting. p. 76. l. 31. r. for our, the. p. 80. l. 20. r. your
charity. p. 93. l. 13. r. Leitourgy. and l. 15. r. pray that. p. 93. l. 15. r.
holy Spirit. Our books tell us. p. 107. l. 30. r. too late. p. 118. l. 11. r.
hujus. p. 113. p. 126. l. 4. r. 16, etc. p. 136. l. 12. r. their lands.


