Die Iovis 27. Iulii. 1643.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that M. Newcomen has
hereby thanks given him for the great pains he took in the Sermon he made at
the Fast, for the Assembly of Divines in the Abbey Church, Westminster, on
Friday the 7. of this instant July. And he is hereby desired to cause his said
Sermon to be forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.
THREE SPEECHES Delivered at a Common Hall, On Saturday the 28 of July, 1643.

At the reading of a Proclamation from the KING: VIZ. I. By Edward Earl of
Manchester, concerning the Tower of London. II. By John Pym Esquire by way of
Observation upon the said Proclamation. III. By Henry Martin Colonel,
concerning Sir William Waller, and what course is now to be taken.


With a true copy of the Proclamation aforesaid.

Also, the Deposition of Mr. Mayo, taken at Bridges in Flanders, July 20. 1643.
concerning Contributions there made for the Assistance of the Papists in
ENGLAND.

Imprimatur, JOHN WHITE.

London, Printed for Peter Cole, and are to be sold at the Glove and Lion near
the Royall-Exchange. August 2.

The Right Honorable, EDWARD Earl of Manchester's Speech:
MY Lord Mayor, and you worthy Citizens of London, I am Commanded by the Houses
of Parliament, to express their thanks, and their acknowledgments to you, for
your good affection and fidelity, which you have always expressed for the
preservation of the Parliament, and the Kingdom; particularly for that great
care and readiness that you have showed in sending forth those forces for the
suppressing of that Tumultuous Insurrection in Kent: It has pleased God to
bless you with good success, and to you is the honor due, and to those that
have commanded those forces in that happy execution of it.

I am likewise Commanded by the Houses of Parliament, to let you know that they
will agree with you in all things, that shall be in order to the preservation
of this City, and of the Kingdom; and that they may manifest and express
their good opinion, and their trust, and confidence that they have in the City
of London, in order to that, they have this day passed two Ordinances, The one
for the putting into the power of my Lord Mayor, and the Militia of the city of
London, all those forces that are within the lines of Communication here in
London, and in those Counties adjacent to it.

And they likewise have passed an Ordinance for the putting of the Tower of
London into the power of my Lord Major, and Sheriffs of London.

They have likewise agreed, That all the Forces that shall be raised by the
City of London, and are now under the Command of the Militia of the City of
London, shall be Committed to Sir William Waller as Commander in chief under
the Militia of the City of London.

Gentlemen, I am further commanded to let you know, that they will be wanting
in nothing, that may express their care, not only for the preservation of the
whole Kingdom, but in particular for the preservation of this City of London,
that has expressed greater affection then ever any City did to a Parliament,
or a Kingdom.

JOHN PYM Esquire, His SPEECH.
MY Lord MAJOR, and you the rest of the worthy Citizens of this great City, I
am commanded by the Lords and Commons in purs^i^^ of that, which has been
expressed by this (...) Lord in general, so to show you the particular care,
and sense of every thing that may concern this City, either in the honor, or
in the safety of it; And to accquaint you with a Proclamation, that is here in
my hand, which they conceive to be very pernicious to you, very full of danger,
and to express a great deal of wrath, and a great deal of desire of doing
great hurt, even the greatest of all to this City; you shall be pleased to
hear the Proclamation read, and after it is read, I shall then declare to you
some observations by direction of both Houses of Parliament, which they make;
and afterward I shall offer to you somewhat that may be by way of Remedy and
prevention of great mischiefs which this Proclamation is likely to bring upon
you, that it may not have that effect which your enemies, and the enemies of
the Kingdom do desire.

By the King. A Proclamation prohibiting from henceforth all intercourse of
Trade between Our city of London and other parts of this Our Kingdom, until
other direction given by Us.
WHereas out of our tender care to Our City of London, and in hope to reduce
them to their due obedience to Us, We by Our Proclamation, bearing date at Our
Court at Oxford the 8. day of December now last past, did Declare Our Royal
pleasure to be, That there should be no stop or interruption to any of our
loving Subjects, as they should travel to our City of London with any
Clothes, Wares, or Merchandise, but that they should freely and peaceably
pass without any let, trouble, or molestation whatsoever; Which grace and
favor unto them, has in these many Months wrought this contrary effect, That
above all other parts of this our kingdom, a prevalent faction of that City
(which overrules the whole) has so far joined with, and in that horrid
rebellion, that it has denounced war against the whole kingdom, by violent
opposing all the possible ways to peace; and so that City formerly famous for
their loyalty and love to their Sovereigns, is now become the head of that
traitorous faction, and the receptacle of all such as are disaffected to our
Government, and the Laws of the Kingdom; and not only willingly consents and
submits to all burdens and impositions laid upon them for the support and
maintenance of the rebellious Armies raised against Us, but maliciously
prosecutes and pursues all such who are but suspected to wish well to Our
service. And when We pitying the desperate and deplorable condition of Our
People, were graciously pleased to desire a Treaty for an Accommodation, and
propounded that whilst that Treaty should continue, there might be a cessation
of Arms, and a free Commerce for all Our loving Subjects in all the parts of
Our Kingdom, that so the benefits of Trade and Commerce being enjoyed, Our good
People might be the more in love with Peace; yet this motion thus proceeding
from Us, was nevertheless by special incitation from the city of London,
(which by the Grace of Our said Proclamation enjoyed the advantage of the whole
Trade of the Kingdom) scornfully neglected by the Enemies of Peace, and all
intercourse interdicted to Our city of Oxford, the present place of Residence
for Our Court and Army, and that restraint is continued upon all those who are
thought to be serviceable, or but well-affected to Us: We therefore being
thereunto enforced out of this necessity, and finding that the Trade and
Commerce of the Kingdom, which ought to be maintained for the public benefit
of all our good people, is by this means inverted only for the advantage of
those Places, and Persons which cherish this Rebellion, the Goods and
Merchandise of such who are thought well-affected to Us ^^^ng seized when they
are brought to London (...) thought it fit and reasonable to revoke (...) that
Our former Act of Grace and (...) this Our Proclamation, We do publish (...)
Declare to all Our Subjects, That whosoever of them, either in their Persons
shall from henceforth travel unto our city of London, without License from our
Self, or one of our Principal Secretaries of States, the Generals, or
Lieutena^^-Generalls of our Armies, or the Governors of any our Towns,
Castles, or Forts, or with their Goods, cattle, Victual, or Merchandise of any
sort whatsoeover, shall from henceforth travel unto, or for our said city of
London or suburbs thereof, without our express License for the same under our
Sign Manual, shall adventure the same at their own perils, We being resolved
by all possible means to seize the same; And that all those who from any parts
of this our Kingdom shall furnish or serve our said city of London, or suburbs
thereof, either by sea or land, with any Victuals, or other Provisions, or
with any Merchandise to maintain them or their Trade, as long as they shall
thus obstinately stand out in Rebellion against Us, We shall esteem as persons
disaffected to Us, and to our Government, and as Ayders and Assisters to the
Rebels, and shall accordingly deal with them, and proceed against them; And
that this restraint shall continue upon them until such time as the
Inhabitants of the said city, finding their Errors, shall return to their due
Obedience unto Us, straightly commanding all the officers of our Armies, and all
other our officers, Ministers, and loving subjects, in all places through which
any persons, Goods, cattle, Victual or Merchandise, shall pass or be conveyed
toward the said city of London, to apprehend the persons, and seize and detain
the Goods, until upon speedy notice to Us they shall receive our farther
directions; We hereby assuring them, they shall receive part of such Goods so
seized in satisfaction and for their reward. But for the continuing of the
general Trade and commerce of the Kingdom, and the Manufactures thereof (which
we desire to uphold and advance) We leave all Our subjects to Trade freely in,
and unto all other parts, and in and unto all other Ports, or Harvens of this
our Kingdom, not being in actual Rebellion against Us; and from those ports to
Trade with their Merchandise freely into any other parts wheresoever beyond the
seas, being in amity with Us, without any restraint whatsoever.

Given under Our Sign Manual at Our Court at Oxford this Seventeenth day of
July, in the Nineteenth year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
AFter the Proclamation was read, Mr. Pym spoke as follows:
My Lord, and these worthy Gentlemen, you have heard this Proclamation read,
there is no man but in the very hearing of it, must needs apprehend that it is
very contrary, not only to the wealth and profit of the City, but to the Peace
and Safety of it; This in general I doubt not does appear to every one of you.

I am commanded to make you some particular Observations: The first that I
shall present to you is this, That in this Proclamation there are terms of
great aspersion, of great Infamy, put upon some Actions of the City, which
actions in themselves are not only warrantable, and very laudable, but such as
will be evidences of your virtue, of your piety, of your honor, to the present
age, and Monuments of all to the future age; you are here in respect of that
obedience which you have shown to the two Houses of Parliament, in respect of
that fidelity which you have shown to to the State, in defending the Parliament
from violence of the War that is raised up against them: you are here called
Traitors, nay to be the head of a great Rebellion, to be the Fomentors of it,
This action of yours, so full of Honor, of Justice, and of Duty, is now
represented here in these odious terms: that is the first.

Another action of yours which is represented here in very odious terms is
this; That you have been ready by the valor, and by the diligence of the
Citizens, to suppress Mutinies, and Rebellions, and Insurrections, and
Violence, in your Neighbor and adjacent Counties here, and this is called a
making War against the whole Kingdom; being an action very full of honor in
you, and very full of good care of the public peace; yet it is here odiously
represented.

The third is this: That you have given safety and protection here, (by the
good Government of the City) to many that could find no safety in the Country,
Ministers, and others, and for this work of Charity, of Honor, of public
good, you are represented here to be a Den, a Receptacle of Rebels, and
Traitors: These particulars are upon the first head, that your actions, that
are virtuous and honorable, and worthy both of present thanks, and of future
remembrance, to the honor of the City, they are hoar represented after an
odious manner.

The second Observation that I shall make to you is this; That some actions of
the Kings, that are here represented to you with a face of Favor and of Grace,
were yet in themselves such as would have been either fruitless to you, or
would have been full of danger both to you, and to the whole Kingdom.

The first is this: That Proclamation that there should be a free Trade from
all parts of the kingdom to this City, it has a face of much Grace, but it
was in a great manner fruitless: for notwithstanding this Proclamation, diverse
Carriers were robbed, not only of private men's goods, but of the good; of the
Kingdom; even those Provisions that were sent for Ireland, they were taken
away: that is the first thing.

An other thing that is represented unto you, as a matter of great Grace, is,
That the King was pleased to desire a Treaty for an Accommodaton: A Treaty
indeed was desired, but there have no evidenses been given, that we can
believe that an Accommodation was indeed desired, for though Committees weer
sent, though such propositoins were offered, as were full of Honor, and
security to the King, and yet did afford the Subject also, reasonable security
and safety in enjoying Religion, and liberties, (which they ought to desire)
they were refused, the Treaty was desired, which would have been a snare to
you, which would have withdrawn the hearts of the People from you, and your
abilities from the Parliament, of raising such strength as was neessary: The
Treaty was desired indeed, but if the Accommodation it self had been desired,
we might have expected a betrer Answer to the Propositions that were made.

A third thing is this, it was represented, that a Cessation was propounded,
that there might have been a free Trade to Oxford, udder which all provisions
of Munition, Arms, and money might be sent thither to strengthen your enemies
against you: And yet this here has put on a disguise of favor, and of grace
to you.

This is the second Head, that as your Actions, that are good, are represented
in an odious form, so those actions which are hurtful and prejuditall to you,
they are represented to you in a gracious form. That is the second Observation
upon this.

The third observation, that though you have had many evidences of wrath, and
of revenge, that have bin expressed against you, you have been intended as a
prey to both armies, when they were invited to come up against the Parliament;
you were that that gave hope to the Kings army by such a sudden and hasty march
to surprise the City, that they might have had the spoil of it. Though you
have had a Conspiracy here among you, which would have thrust your swords
mutually in one another sides, which would have filled this City with blood;
yet in this Proclamation there is somewhat of wrath against this City
expressed, beyond all those; here you see is a restraint of all trade, no
provisions, or merchandise, must go out from you, or must come to you, this
will necessarily (if it should take effect) introduce a famine, a want even of
bread amongst you, it will introduce a general poverty because your
handy-crafts, they will have no vent for their commodities, yea the merchandise
and manufactures of the Kingdom, they will be at a stop, and so not only the
City, but the Country will be exceedingly distempered with it; Farmers will
not be able to pay their rents; the Gentry and Nobility will be brought into as
necessitous a condition as the rest, because they will be able to make nothing
of their own, and this general necessity can not be avoided: it will also
put you into a general combustion, because the poor will rise, and rich be
made poor, and none shall know his friends, and we shall even fight for a
morsel of bread, which God (I hope) will avert. These are the miscries which
this Proclamation will bring upon you, which in many things exceedes the
former: For first, it is more general, in that it comprehends all, in the
former notice was taken of some that were well affected, and some ill affected,
one part would have escaped, those that they thought well-affected, and termed
the Kings friends: but here those that they say are well assected, and those
they say are ill affected, will be joined together (if this Proclamation take
effect) in the mischief it will produce: therefore in that respect it exceeds
all the former: And in diverse other respects, For it does extend not only to a
moment, to have been acted in a night, as that would have done, but this will
be a durable evil and mischief, which will not be recovered to the Kingdom
in many ages, being likely ta brirg an universal desolation upon the Kingdom.

This I am commanded to represent to you, as that which is intended for a great
mischeife but through the blessing of God, if you take a rise from hense, to
do that which which you have hitherto showed yur selves very forward to do
that which is intended for universal mischeife, to bring perpetual misery and
desolation upon the City, it may be a means of procuring for you not only
peace and safety, but eternal honor, that is this, that since your trade is
to be interrupted, you will have many men will not have wherewith to employ
their hands, nor wherewith to fill their bellies, that now you will set them
all upon the work; that before this misery and desolation come upon the
Kingdom, you will raise all the forces you can, for it is force must do it, You
fee there is a Commander provided for you, so you see you have all
encouragements that can be from the Houses of Parliament. That now you will
improve the time, and raise all the forces you can, that may remove the
fountain, and go to the root of all your miseries, that may be such a force
as may be applicable to the several dangers of your selves and Kingdom; Your
Enemies you see are very diligent, they stir up one another, and combine one
with another; and I have here in my kand, an examination to acquaint you with
taken beyond Seas, wherein all that would come in, and give any money for the
relief of the Catholics in England, they should come in; this was done in
Flanders; so they make it the general cause of all the Papists in England; let
us that are of the true Religion, that are of one and the same Country, let us
unite our selves, with all our strength and means to defend our Religion, and
to defend our Liberties and to defend the public safety, as our Enemies
unite themselves, and combine, and stir up one another, to do that which may
overthrow and destroy all; This is commended to you from both Houses of
Parliament, You have expressed such affections heretofore, that we cannot doubt
that we shall fail in this; There is somewhat else that will be said to you
by another Gentleman, which are the expressions of Your City, in some
particulars, which will be represented to you, and I shall leave that part to
him; I shall end here, hoping that you will make a good use of this admonition, to
stir up your selves to prepare all the force you can that you may join
together, under such Commanders as are appointed to you to do the work, and to
restore your selves to peace and safety in as short a time as may be, least you
be consumed.

THE EXAMINATION OF HENRY MAYO.
Who says, that on Thursday last being the twentieth of July one thousand
six hundred forty three, he being at Bridges in Flanders, heard proclamation
made in Dutch, (who understands it very well) that all people within that
City, that would go to the Governors house, and give any money to maintain
the Roman Catholics in England, they should have their money repaid them
again in a years time, with many thanks.

HENRY MAYO.
This Examination was taken before us EDWARD BOYCE. JOHN BOYCE. GEORGE TROTTER.


HENRY MARTIN Collonell, His Speech.
MY Lord Mayor, and you worthy Gentlemen of this Honorable City, the
principal cause why this meeting was desired, was to communicate unto you, a
Petition of many thousands of well affected persons of this City, and other
parts of the Kingdom, that Petition it did represent the groans of the people
under this tedious and destructive war, it did desire that now at last a
speedy end, (by Gods blessing) might be put unto it, it did desire that for
that purpose, a Committee might be appointed to receive contributions, and list
and dispose of men, for a present army under the conduct of such a Commander,
as was fit to be trusted, to be employed for the restraint of the Common
Enemy. This Committee has met, has considered of this Noble Meaning Sir
William Waller.
Gentleman, for a Commander in chife over those forces, has presented him to
both Houses of Parliament, and you have heard, they have approved of their
choice; I need not commend the cause to you, it is Gods, it is your own, I
think I need not commend the Gentleman to you, you have cause to trust him; I
am to commend that work unto you, a work which the House of Commons conceives
to be the only hopeful means under God to preserve our Religion, our Laws,
our Liberties, and that which is left of our estates; They conceive that if
there shall be a general and unanimous rising of the people both in this
City, and in other parts of the Kingdom, it will take down the partition
wall betwixt well-affected, and ill-affected; Your enemies will spare none of
you, their bullets do not distinguish you, they would starve you all. It is
desired you would all join in saving your selves, if it please you to give
your best assistance and furtherance, to that work under the hands of that
Comittee, I presume they will be very faithful, and they have been very
dilligent in the work, but certainly I am of opinion, that either you must go
forth all, and meet the Ememy as Vassalls with Ropes about your necks, or
like men with swords in your hands.

FINIS
Imprimatur

JOHN WHITE. July. 31. 1643.

This is Licenced according to an Order of PARLIAMENT.


