The Title of Sir Thomas Dawes Knight. Thomas Cromwell, and Humfrey Walrond, Esqs
and Josias Tully, Gent. to certain Improved Lands in the West and North Fenns
in the County of Lincoln, together with the Objections, and Answers to the
same, as it now depends in PARLIAMENT.
THe late King Charles being seized in Fee in right of his Duchy of Lancaster,
of the East, West, and North Fenns, in the County of Lincoln, in which his
Majesty and his progenitors, as Lords, had right of common and liberty of
receiving in Cattle to agistment, his Majesty and his Progenitors (until the
late improvement made by his Majesty) have anciently let his said right of
Common and Agistment, for the yearly Rent of 18 l. per annum, for which his
Majesty's Farmor has used to keep and take into Joistment, as great a Stock as
all the Commoners kept, as the Commoners themselves confess.

16 July, in the 11 year of his said Majesty's Reign, a Commission issued under
the Duchy Seal to sir Anthony Irby and others, to treat and agree with the
Commoners for an improvement to be made out of the said Fenns unto his
Majesty: Upon the treaty of which Commissioners, the Commoners did offer and
agree under their hands, that his Majesty should have one Moyty of the West
and North Fenns, so as they might have the sale of the other Moyty granted unto
them, discharged of the said Rent of 18 l. and of all right of common to be
after claimed by his Majesty or his said Farmor of the said Agistment, which
was accepted of by the Commissioners for his Majesty, so as his Majesty might
have 1000 Acres out of the said East Fenn, all which was then set down in
writing, and assented unto, and subscribed by about 1700 of the Commoners
(being more then in truth had right of Common in the said Fens) which they
desired might receive further strength and settlement by decree of the Duchy
Court.

Whereupon in Mich. Term following, for settling of the said agreement by
Decree, an Information was exhibited in the Duchy Court by his Majesty's
Attorney of that Court, against the Commoners that had assented to the said
improvement; and others that had not assented, to the number of 200, or 300 by
special name.

In the same Mich. Term, 11 Car. the Commission was renewed to treat and
compound with such Commoners as had not assented, and it was then also ordered
by that Court, that those who had assented, being many in number, should elect
some certain persons to answer for them, by whose answers they would be bound,
and that such as had not assented, should likewise elect some persons to answer
for them, by whose answers they would be bound.

In December following, a Commission issued accordingly to sir Anthony Irby and
others, who meeting with the Commoners, those who formerly had assented,
together with such others as had not formerly assented, did all sign the said
former agreements, and did also under their hands elect certain persons to
answer for them.

Whereupon the persons so elected to answer, made their answers, confessing the
agreements aforesaid, in haec verba, and that they were willing to perform the
same, so as the agreement, as to them, might be performed on his Majesty's part.

Whereupon in Hillary Term following, in presence and by assent of Mr. Attorney
General for his Majesty, and of the Commoners council, it was ordered in the
Duchy Court, that a Commission should issue forth, according to the first
agreement, unto 8 Commissioners; 4 to be chosen on his Majesty's part, and 4 by
the Commoners, to make division of the said West and North Fens; and to set out
1000 acres in the East Fen, according to the said agreement.

According to which order, Hill. 11. Car. a Commission issued to sir Edward
Heron, sir Anthony Irby, Richard Tothby, Thomas Hatcher, Isaac Johnson, Thomas
Coke, Thomas Wright, Esquires, and Thomas Styleman Gent.

2. Maii, 12 Car. the said Commissioners certify, that they had made a
division of the West and North Fens into two moyties, and had set out 1000
acres in the said East Fen, which moyties were designed upon a plot by the
Letters of A. and B. and election given and made, by the Commoners, to choose
which part they would (the plot remains on Record in the Duchy Court
subscribed by the said Commissioners.

In the same Hill. Term 12 Car. An Injunction out of the Duchy Court was
granted to establish the possession of the moyties, according to the division,
and an Order made to decree the division if cause were not shown to the
contrary by a certain day that Term.

At the day appointed, in presence of Mr. Attorney General for his Majesty,
and of Sergeant Foster, sir Richard Leidall, Mr. Lane, and Mr. Welcome, of
council with the Commoners, upon reading of the agreements and all former
proceedings, the said agreement and division were decreed.

Since which his Majesty for a yearly Rent of 600 l. per annum, and other
valuable considerations has granted his moytie unto sir Robert Killigrew, Mr.
Kirk and others.

Some of these Patentees have since for great sums of money, sold their parts
unto such as are now interested, who have bestowed much money in building upon,
dividing, planting, and husbanding of the said Lands.

About Mich. Term 1641. some in the names of themselves and others, preferred
their Petition in the Commons House of Parliament against the said improvement,
not by their Petition so much as alleging any injustice in the Decree made
for the same in the Duchy Court, nor any thing else (except some untruths to
be denied) worth the answering: Which are as follows.

Obj. First, that they were terrified to yield assent to the said improvement,
by being served with a multitude of Privy Seals.

Answ. It was their desire upon the Agreement aforesaid, that for the
strengthening thereof it might be decreed, and for that the decree might have
been erroneous, if passed without process served in the Defendants, they were
therefore served with Privy Seals (which was the process of the Duchy Court)
there to answer; and where so many were interested, many must of necessity be
served: But to lessen the number, none were served but the persons elected to
answer for themselves and the rest, according to the Order before agreed.

Obj. 2. That they were drawn to the agreement by specious pretenses and
threats, as that they should have his Majesty's grace and favor, if in a fair
way they would consent to yield his Majesty a proportionable part of the
Common; but if not, his Majesty would proceed in suit against them.

Answ. We deny any such words used, but if they were, it could imply no more,
but that his Majesty would be glad to have that from them in a fair way, which
otherwise he must be forced to seek (being his just right) by a legal way.

Obj. 3. That many of the most considerable persons amongst them never
consented to the improvement.

Answ. This we deny, and say, all that have any shadow of right have assented,
the rest are Cottagers, or inhabitants in new erected houses, which cannot
prescribe to any right of Common.

Obj. 4. That the agreement was not performed on his Majesty's part.

Answ. 1. The King by decree is barred of his Broovadge, and all right of
Joystment in the Commoners part, and they ever since have enjoyed their part
free from the same. 2. His Majesty's Broovadge Rent of 18 l. per annum is by
the Decree and by right of Turbery likewise discharged, and the soil of their
part decreed to them. 3. The parties above named, and others under whom they
claim, long since (being in quiet possession of their Lands) did for several
years together desire the said Commoners to nominate the persons to whom they
would have the soil of their part granted for them, offering that the same
should be passed and sent to them under the great and Duchy Seals, without
charge or trouble to the Commoners; but could not be effected, by reason the
said Commoners could never amongst themselves agree who should be their
Trustees in that behalf.

So that the improvement being made by consent, settled by Decree in a Court of
Justice, all performed that could be performed on his Majesty's part; quiet
possession enjoyed on both sides accordingly for diverse years, yet the
Commoners whilst their Petition depended in Parliament undetermined, nay
unheard through their own slackness, in apparent contempt of the Justice of the
Parliament, and against all Law, did in great Troops enter upon the said
Patentees Lands, destroyed their grass and corn, cast down their enclosures,
pulled down their houses on the said Lands, and by force kept possession of all
the said Lands ever since, to the damage of the parties abovesaid, and others
interested in the said Lands of above 50000 l. whereupon the parties above
named, in their Petition to this present Parliament, do pray, that upon their
showing the said decree by consent as aforesaid, and proof made of their quiet
possession thereupon, and of their forcible casting out, they may be restored
to their quiet possession, of their several shares of the said Lands, amounting
in all to the quantity of about 1400 ac. and an Act pass for their future quiet
and enjoyment of the same in severalty, according to their respective Estates
therein.


