The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader:
THis little Pamphlet would not have needed a preparatory Epistle, were there
not amongst us a very great generation who are parties in the point I speak of;
I shall therefore crave leave to propound unto them, before they read it,
whether the Clergy-bellies of these times can be any whit better Christians,
than Demetrius the Silver-Smith with his Craftsmen, Act 19 19.20. etc. whilst
they cry out, Great is the God of tithes! Sacred is the duty of tithes! of
tithes we fill, and swill, hold belly, hold; were it not for tithes learning
would be neglected, the Ministry despised, and we must take pains like other
silly people of the Laity: Let us rather cram the Prisons full, as we do our
guts with tithe pigs, of all such as sacrilegiously refuse to pay us tithes.

Let me likewise entreat them to consider, whether it were not the same
Tyth-spirit, the spirit of covetousness, which caused the Masters of the
Damsel, out of whom Paul cast the evil spirit, Act. 16.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
etc. not only to hang back from receiving the Gospel, but even to persecute
the Apostles for cutting off that Divelish gain which the evil spirit had
wont to bring them? Let them interrogate their own consciences, whether they
believe it to be Scripture or good doctrine, that a gift blinds the wise,
and perverteth the words of the righteous, Ex. 23.8. Deuteronomy. 16.19. that it
destroys the heart, Ecclesiastes 20.29. corrupting their very understandings,
in such manner, that they even persuade themselves to be in the right, when
they were never more in the wrong: Let such, I say, who always had, and still
have the faculties of their souls imprinted with this gift or rather theft of
tithes, consider and suspect themselves to be no competent Judges, how much
this Gospel-tithing savors of Judaisme, Antichristianisme, and is inconsistent
with the subjects prop^e^y.

Being thus prepared, I shall desire them with me to observe, that the Levites
being excluded from possessing any inheritance in the land of Canaan, unless
the Lord had given them his own portion and inheritance the tithes, Deuteronomy. 18
1.2. they must have starved, and yet we find not that the Lord gave them any
compulsive power for levying and bringing in this contribution of tithes: But
under the Gospel, where the whole land is open and free to all alike, to
Clergy as well as to Laity, to purchase and keep possession of, where the
Apostles practice was to labor with their own hands, 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. and Paul's
express command to all in general, that if any would not work he should not
eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. for a supposititious illegitimate tribe of Levi, who are
not above the five hundredth part of the Kingdom (there being upon calculation
thought to be not above one Clergyman to every 500. men and women) to lay
claim to, and by violence possess themselves of the tithes of all increase,
free of all charges, which in valuation is better then if the fifth part of the
whole land were divided amongst them for gleab-land, whereof most of them have
some small pittance besides their tithes, is the greatest cheat and robbery
which was ever practiced; I say yet more briefly, that if the whole Kingdom
were to be divided into 500. parts, the Clergy (as I said before, being but as
one to 500. by computation) besides the free denization which they enjoy in
common withal other people, run away with about one hundred and twenty five
shares, I mean with about one hundred and twenty five times as much as any of
their fellows; Oh prodigy of Covetousness! but I must decipher it more clearly.

Suppose there were 500. men and women in a Country Parish, and all the land in
that Parish to be worth 2000 l. by the year; the Minister, who is but one of
the aforesaid 500. pretends 200 l. for his tithes of the abovesaid 2000 l.
clear of all charges, which said charges on all arrable grounds one with
another, for manuring, seed-corne and reaping, etc. or of stocking pasture
ground, together with the hazard of a small crop, or death of cattle, is so
great, as that the landlords to be free of paying tithes, the tenth sheafe
clear of charges, had better give the fifth acre of all their lands for
gleab-land unto the Minister.

Thus then their tithes of 2000 l. amount in valuation unto the fifth part of
2000 l. which is 400 l. and this 400 l. for the Minister being taken out of
2000 l. which is the whole revenue of the Parish land, there remains 1600 l.
to be divided amongst 499. men and women, who are the Parishioners, which is
not full 3 l. 4 s. 1 d.. a pecce, whereas the minister devours 400 l. which is
more than any 124. of his Parishioners enjoy, upon such a calculation,
supposing them to be all poor, or all rich alike. And yet the unsatiablenesse
of these Clergy-bellies is not here with content, but they lay claim to tithes
on house rent, and the tenth part of whatsoever any person of any profession,
does any ways lawfully advance, to be due unto the Minister of the Gospel both
by the law of God and man, unless some special custom, composition or
privilege of the place allowed by law, exempt him: They are the very words of
that Episcopal, Presbyteriall, Ambodexterous Tythe-Champion (for Tithes are a
common motto to both parties.) Dr. Burgess, an eminent member of this present
Assembly, in a Discourse of his entitled, A new discovery of personal Tithes,
or the tenth part of men's clear gains, etc. p. 1. as I find it observed in
John the Baptist, Chap. 2 about Christ's order and the Disciples practice
corcerning the Ministers maintenance, etc.

But why tro did not the Dr. with his brethren in covetousness, as well claim
tithes of children, as of fruit and personal gains, whereof we find not the
least mention in either of the Testaments? Surely they would not continue so
indulgent, they would not bate us our children, could they but get it once
enacted, that it might be lawful for them to sell tithe children in the
market as well as tithe pigs: and to deal clearly, the Leviticall law, from
whence they seek to color tithes, subjected every first borne, whether it
were of man or beast, unto this tax of tithes, it fell unto the Priests share,
Lev. 13.2. c. 22.29. Numb. 18.15. the Leviticall Priest was to have the first
borne of children, unless they were redeemed, and our English Priests, could
they but get an Ordinance of Lords and Commons for it, as well as tithes, I
should not trust their courtesies.

Tell me, good Reader, who ever thou art, did thou ever think these fair
pretending Clergymen, every one whereof having devoured above 124. of his
brethren by divine right, as they allege, their tithe patent which they say
God granted the^, should be yet, thus Canine-like hungry; this craving as of
their own mere fantasy and invention to lay title unto the tenth part of all
clear gains besides, which would be many times more then the Leviticall tithes
amounted to (the gain of handicraft mysteries and trading, being by manifold,
more considerable than the increase of all the land in England?) and that which
is yet more irrational and pestiferous, they will have it whether we will or
no, they wrest it from us by violence, they rob us of it: It Is not my desire
thou should take this calculation upon trust: Nature has taught every
reasonable man Arithmeticke enough to make trial of it, the truth thereof,
when thou thy self perceivest and consideres^ the consequence, I shall not so
much desire thee to stand amazed, as to contribute thy ingredient for curing
our Clergymen of this their desperate covetousnes, which is Idolatry, Col. 3.5,
Farewell.

To the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers:
I Could not choose but give you notice of a Design discovered unto me, of no
small a party which at present is conspiring, how the possessions of Bishops,
Deanes and Chapters, etc. which by our Ancestors were intended for public and
pious uses, may become their peculiar inheritances, and totally discourage
posterity from all charitable legacies, when they shall see them alienated to
such qui^te contrary purposes.

I understand likewise of several Petitions by multitudes of the most
conscientious freeborn subjects of England, demonstrating how unjust it is,
that a small number, who in complement call themselves our Ministers, should at
their own pleasure become our Masters and so contrary to the subjects liberty,
force from us the fifth part of the whole Kingdom in valuation without either
articles or consent, and that which is worst of all, even not to be longer
endured by such as make conscience of any thing, they lay claim to it by
Divine right, and for such services, as to many seem little less than
Antichristian, or Idolatrous: It Is frivolous for you to distinguish between a
conscience truly informed, and contrarily; for, unless you will pretend your
arguments to be like the peace of God which passes all understanding, Phil.
4.7. you must unavoidably permit men, even every particular man for himself,
to resolve the whole Scripture and every part thereof into a full persuasion of
his own heart concerning whatsoever he is to practice or believe, Romans
14.5.22.23. either grant this, or burn your Bibles, how many soever differing
translations, with their whole impressions, as have been brought unto you,
since you do but teach your Lay People to suspect them all, whilst you your
selves will not be ruled by any, in any man's judgment besides your own.

A word to the wise should be enough; It is of so great interest and
consequence to this whole Kingdom, for one respect or other, to demolish and
root out the very memory of this Tith-Idoll, which all other Reformed
Christians have long since abominated, that it concerns you to look out some
other maintenance less scandalous, and more Gospel-like.

But you will say perhaps, you have maintenance allotted you by Ordinance of
Parliament: what an Ordinance of Parliament? ^ reverence Ordinances of
Parliament; but, me thinks, you should rather fly for refuge to Christ's
Ordinance; Ordinances of Parliament are repealable, what one Parliament
bestows upon you, another Parliament may take away, but Christ's Ordinances,
are like himself, unchangeable; what ever you think of him, doubtless you
cannot leave him for a better Master: Try then a little, compare the Ordinances
together, look before you leap, if ye be Men, if Christians, consider which
may prove the surest, the better title.

Christ ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel,
1 Cor. 9.14. that is, they should have such a livelihood as is set out, and
warranted by the Gospel, which is the free benevolence and bounty of their
brethren, and if you will have it in Christ's own words unto the true
Disciples, That into whatsoever house they enter they should remain eating and
drinking such things as were set before them, Luke 10.5.7.8. and having food
and raiment they should be there with content, 1 Timothy 6.8, On the other side:

The Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, Die Veneris, 8 November. 1644.
Ordain that every person or persons within the Realm of England and Dominion
of Wales, shall pay all and singular tithes, offerings, oblations, obventions,
rates for tithes, and all other duties commonly known by the name of tithes,
unto the respective owners both Lay and Ecclesiastical.

This is the effect of Christ's Ordinance, with that of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament: I shall not seek to make enmity betwixt them, and I hope every
Reader, will, in time, see how far forth they will run parallel. What will you
more then? Our Savior, you see, has by an Ordinance of heaven provided for you
both food and raiment, requiring you by his Apostle Paul to be therewith
content.

But me thinks I hear you murmuring that this Gospel maintenance, being by the
Spirit of God termed a free gift, 2 Cor. 8.4. Phil. 4.17. a matter of bounty,
and not grudging, 2 Cor. 9.5. you have not the conscience, what ever your
practice be, to think you may command it at your pleasure, have it whether your
Parishioners will or no; and it is irksome to your high^indednesse, to suppose
your selves their Almesmen, and live on their benevolence. But what advantage
have you by your tithe Ordinance? how, I pray, will you get your tithes, if the
people will not pay them? how can you force them to it, if the people be
resolved on the contrary? Oh! I know your meaning, you will distraine their goods,
imprison their persons, and with some vexatious accursed act or other, you will
take away their lives, and all they have together: but are you so stout and
sturdy (not being perhaps above one for a thousand of your Lay-brethren) as to
imagine that a Regiment of Blackcoats, can, with a bare humane Ordinance of
tithes, defeat a whole Nation, both of their Christian and Civil privileges?
believe me bold Soldiers, you will find hard service of ^it; the peoples eyes
begin to be open, and if you discover the nakedness of your unsatiable
covetousness a little more, they will, questionless, so far reflect on the
express clear words in our Saviors Commission unto his true Disciples,
saying, Freely you have received, freely give, Mat. 10.8. that your mercenary
praying and preaching will grow contemptible, and our exercising Weavers,
Feltmakers, Cobblers, etc. be found more to resemble true Ministers of the
Gospel, than your learned Doctorships. But because I see some of you are not
ashamed to be thought Politicians, who take for granted that you may, and ought
to be provident, no less than your Lay-brethren, both for your selves and
families; I hope I shall not prove an unwelcome Monitor, if I be instant with
you to ponder seriously, whether it be for your benefit to wave Christ's
Ordinance, and adhere unto the Parliaments for maintenance.

It Is true, the Lords and Commons have been bountiful unto you, most
transcendently bountiful, no Protestant State did ever do the like! ( I wish
it were well considered) they give you tithes with an etc. offerings,
oblations, etc above a tenth part, even above the fifth, in a just valuation,
of all that the land produces: But what if they should give you half, or
three quarters of all we have? can you enjoy it longer then good people please
to pay it you? I hope, it will not be impertinent, toward meaning you from a
Canonical obedience, by minding you that there have been many laws agreed on
in Parliament, which never had execution afterward, for want of a secondary,
and more effectual assenting of the people in general, whom the Parliament
does but represent. You know, likewise, much may be said, both from Laws and
Custom, in behalf of the Kings Prerogative, Revenues, and not much less than
a boundless subjection, and yet you see, how little he has of either for the
present; a Prince can reign no longer over the persons of his subjects, than
he can master their affections; A usurped tyrannical power is of short
continuance, but the free consent and love of a people, is that only, which
makes all Empire durable and happy.

Do not then sees your selvees up, that a Nation which has been at charge of
so many millions (as some Accountants think the Visited Provinces never had,
to spend upon all their (...) years war) with the loss of so many (...)
thousand slain, in red^eming their propriety and privileges from the (...) of
evil counselors, will afterward prostrate themselves, both soul and body,
(...) your discretion? do you think a people, which capitulates with their
Master, will submit unto their Ministers? is it not a pretty mock show, a
contradiction, a very lie, for Ministers to be carvers of their own wages,
whether their Masters will or no? to pay themselves out of their Masters
purses, under pretense of administering to them spiritual things, and yet
restrain them from participating thereof, when they see good, or but pretend
to see it? it may not, it cannot, it must not long endure.

Ponder then a little, which may (...) best win upon the peoples disposition,
whether your submitting unto their Christian charity which to many of the
Independent may proves more beneficial then tithes, or to continue contrasting
with them, as his Majesty with his evil Councillors have done, to the
haza^ding fall

Forbear then to take too much upon you; Encroach neither upon your Brethrens
Spiritualities, nor Temporalties; Renounce such power and principles, as may
justly move the Civil State to be jealous of you, and (...) like enough (for
they have both be^o^red and been liberal to you beyond desert) they will
distribute or appropriate unto your T^^^^, all the possessions, that
unrighteous mammon, of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, etc.

Believe me Friends, they are worth the looking after, and if, through your
own carelessenes, or your enemies vigilance you miss thereof, you may like
enough be put to get a living by laboring in some honest calling, as your
neighbors do: Be w^se as Serpents, and (Gramercy Bishop) you may yet fare well.

Errata.
Page ^. line 10. read of such. ibid. l. 34. neither can. p 4 l.5^. due for. p.
7. l. 5. much is. p. 15. l. 8. he demure, p. 1^ l. 11. may be p. 18. l. 35 same
coat.

Certain brief Observations concerning the institution and paying of tithes
in the Old Testament, with the Ministers maintenance in the New; neither of
which was levied in a compulsive manner, nor could possibly become a sweet
savor in the nostrills of the Lord, had they not been given freely, as a
matter of bounty, not grudgingly.
HAving often in my saddest thoughts bewailed the lamentable condition, which
Gods dearest people are brought into, through that accursed yoke of a forced
uniformity, which is endeavored to be put upon their consciences, and casting
about what evil spirit it was, that had so vast a malignant influence
throughout the world; at last, it appeared clearly unto my understanding, that
it could not possibly, for the most part, be any other, besides that Grand
Idol or rather devil of covetousness, which is the root of all evil and
mischief that happens unto mankind, Col. 3.5. 1 Timothy 6.10. Act. 19.19.20. c.
16.16, 17, 18, etc.

Then; pondering with my self, how this Imp of covetousness, as it produced
persecution, was suckled and maintained; I found at last, that it must
necessarily be both begotten and continued by that specious golden wedge of
Gospel-tythes, which an illegitimate Tribe of Levi had at first, only
Achan-like, purloyned from their brethren, but afterward presumptuously
entitled upon God himself, that both they and their successors, might with an
uncontroleable security live and dye surfeting upon the fatness thereof.

But if any man perceive not how it comes about, that a coveting after tithes
begets persecution; I answer, that these Tythmongers, as Esaiah describes those
of his time, 56.11. terming them greedy dogs, which can never be satisfied, are
so intent upon the gain which comes from their quarters, (that since they
cannot for shame require contributions from such as refuse out of conscience to
join with them in Church duties) they put themselves upon inveying with all
manner of exasperation and bitterness, against all such as differ from them,
whether in discipline or doctrine, continually insencing both their Parishoners
and Civil Magistrates against them as Heretics, such as hold dangerous
opinions destructive to the State, not to be endured upon any quarter and
composition, because no accommodation can be to their purpose wherein Tithes
are not the princ pall article to be agreed upon.

In contemplation hereof, I put my self again to search the Scripture,
(though I know there is scarce any one how vile soever, whether for practice or
opinion only, who pretends not to be Gospel-proofe, but I speak to such of
whom John the Evangelist said, Search the Scriptures for in them ye think to
have eternal life, Joh. 5.39. to such I say, who would be thought to have the
Scripture for their rule, and really expect salvation by living according to
that rule) and am willing to give a faithful, though brief relation thereof,
on such particulars I mean, as have not to my knowledge been published by
others, to show how vain the ground is of pretending Gospel-tythes, and how
dangerous to continue them.

The first place I meet with speaking of Tithes is Genesis 14.20. where Abraham is
said to give Melchisedeck tithes of all, that is, of all the spoil only, which
he had in the victory against the four Kings in rescuing of his brother Lot,
whom they had taken prisoner, as you may see in the same Chapter: and though it
be objected that the Apostle Paul seems to tell the Hebrews that Abraham gave
iythings of all things unto Melchisedeck, Heb. 7.2. yet you may find that the
same Apostle in v. 4 whilst be would magnify the pre-eminence of Melchisedeck
in his relation of receiving tithes, before Abraham paying tithes, instances
only in his paying him tithes of the spoils, but had Abraham paid tithes of all
things he possessed, the Apostles argument might have thereby been so much more
improved, if he had urged it. But this paying tithes unto Melchisedeck was
supereminently typical, as Melchisedeck was a type of Christ, Heb. 8.4.5. and
in that respect only, Paul says that Melchisedeck received tithes of Abraham
blessing him that had the promise, and without contradiction the less is
blessed of the greater, Heb. 7.6.7. for even the tribe of Levi is said to pay
tithes unto Melchisedeck in the loins of Abraham Heb. 7.9.10. and the Levites
could not be properly said in the same time and respect, both to pay tithes in
Abraham, and yet receive tithes in Melchisedeck, so that this is no Scripture
for their purpose; the very tribe of Levi paid tithes unto Melchisedeck, and
therefore neither they, nor a suppositions offspring of theirs much less,
pretend with any other than a brazen-face and countenance, to derive a just
grant and title from Melchisedeck for receiving tithes; but besides these words
of Paul's to the Heb. 7.5. The Levites who received the office of Priesthood,
had commandment for receiving tithes according to the Law, dee plainly teach
us that the payment of tithes, the tenths of all increase, as our selfe-seeking
Clergy will have it understood, began not till the law was given, and that the
Levites had the Priesthood entailed upon their Tribe, and consequently that
till then there was no commandment for paying them, nor any body warranted to
receive them.

Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. We find that Jacob when he went to Laban at Padan-Aram
to take a wife, being on the way of Luz so called anciently, but by him named
Bethel, v. 19. in the morning after his vision, he made a vow unto God, saying,
If God will be with^^e and keep^ use in this way that I go, and will give me
bread to eat, and raiment to put o^^ so that I come again to my fathers house
in peace, then, of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the tenth
unto thee.

Upon this occasion, it will not be amiss, 1. to remember that all vows ought
to be voluntary; such is this promising of Jacob, and Abraham's paying tithes
unto Melchisedeck, neither of them being commanded, nor so much as usually
practiced from Abraham his first paying to this time of Jacob^ vowing them: for
i^ Jacob had been obliged, or but accu^^omed to pay tithes from the time that
Abraham first paid them unto Melchisedeck, this present vowing of his would
have been different from the nature of a vow, which is of some new thing not
customarily, much less obligatorily performed before; nay, it might have
seemed a kind of deriding God Almighty, in pretending to do some
extraordinary service, prefixing thereunto the sacred preamble and title of a
vow, but in the upshot, not so much as promise more, than was both due and
ordinarily discha ged before: then secondly, these tithes Jacob vows not to
begin to pay them, till he return unto his fathers house in peace, which we
know was many years after, and is a certain argument that till then he made no
reckoning of paying a continual fixed tithe or tenth part of what God gave him
at least we see no example of it.

Levit. 27.30 32 it is said, all the tithe of the land both of the seed of the
ground, and of the fruit of the trees is the Lords, it is holy to the Lord, and
every tithe of bullock and of sheep, and of all that gooth under the red, the
tenth of all shall be holy unto the Lord: and v. 34. it is said, these are the
commandments of the Lord by Moses unto the children of Israel in Mount Sinai;
so that before that time, there was no commmandment for paying of (...).

These tithes being thus set apart by the Lord, are in Numb. 18 21.24.
appropriated unto the Tribe of Levi, but neither to be enjoyed by the Le vites,
nor paid by the Israelites, until they came into the land of Canaan, as
appears in that the Lord says, I have given it them, therefore shall they
possess no inheritance among the children of Israel, v. 24. that is, in the
land of Canaan, as is likewise imposed upon Aaron, v. 20. for before that time,
both Aarons and the other families of the Levites had their proper inheritances
and possessions, as had the other Tribes, Deuteronomy. 18.8.

Here then we may observe, that by Gods ordinance there was no tithes of any
thing due, save of the seed of the ground, of the fruit of the trees, and of
four footed beasts, Lev. 27.30.32. both fish and foul were free, much less
do we find here any tithes, any excise put upon men's labors; that was likely
thought a duty to be exacted and collected rather by Publicans, then by a
consecrated Tribe of Levi, concerning whom the Lord said, that, from what time
their tithes grew due, it should be a law for ever throughout their
generations, that among the children of Israel they possess no inheritance,
Number. 18.23. which I much wonder how such as claim tithes at this day do yet
dispense withal; I mean, how these pretended Clergymen should both receive
tithes, and yet enjoy all manner of inheritances and possessions in common with
the Laity.

Then; as we find in Numb. 18.29. the Levites were cut of their tithes to pay
the one tenth for an offering unto Aaron and his family, who was also of the
Tribe of Levi, Genesis 4.14. and for this respect, as also in that the Lord gave
him the offerings of all hallowed things, whether meat offerings, sin offerings
or trespasse-offerings, v. 8 9. he was also to have no inheritance in the land
of Canaan, the Lord promising him to be his part among the children of Israel,
v. 20. Now, unless this pretended Tribe of Levi, can find out one besides the
Pope, who like Aaron, has as good a title to the heave offering, as they
themselves have unto the tithes of all; me thinks they should be jealous of
their own title, and let it fall to ground for shame, if not for modesty.

Besides the tithes of all increase, the Jews were with their household to eat
another tenth thereof at Jerusalem in the sight of God, Deuteronomy. 14.23. but if the
way were far, so that they could not carry the tithes ^hither conveniently,
then they might sell it at their homes, and carrying the money unto Jerusalem,
buy what their hearts desired, and there, eat it before the Lord, rejoicing
with their households, v. 24, 25, 26. This tithe some conceive to be due of
feasting two years in three, though the text may well be understood of every
year, v. 23. for all that I can find to the contrary.

But I wonder whether they were thus to spend a whole tithe in feasting, as the
text seems to insinuate, v. 23.26. and the Jews even to this day spend both
much money and time in feasting, or whether they saw a part thereof thus spent
at Jerusalem, leaving the rest for the benefit of the Levites, as they did the
other tithes.

Then we find Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. etc. 26.12. that every third year they were to
lay up one tenth in store at their own habitations, for the use of the
Levites, strangers, fatherless and widows; so that by this calculation, they
paid and spent two tenths yearly, if not full three tenths every third year, of
all their cattle, and what the earth produced.

David tells us, P. 110.4. That our Savior was a Priest after the order of
Melchisedech; and Paul says that he pertained unto another Tribe, whereof no
man served at the altar; and that it was evident that our Lord sprang out of
Judah, concerning which tribe Moses spoke nothing touching the Priesthood, Heb.
7.13, 14. and v. 12. if the Priesthood be changed, thou of necessity must there
be a change of the Law: from whence, together with v. 5. which says that the
sons of Levi, who received the office of Priesthood had a commandment to
take tithes according to the Law; it follows:

1. That the Leviticall tithes, the tenths of all things are as much abollished
as the Leviticall Priesthood it self, v. 12. so that the present Ministers
under the Gospel can no more pretend unto the one, than to the other.

2. What ever tithes were due unto Melchisedech, the same became due
afterward, and were payable unto our Savior, who was a Priest after the order
of Melchisedech, (as the whole Laviticall Priesthood was typical, a shadow of
heavenly things, Heb. 8.4, 5.) and of whom Melchisedech was a type; that is,
they were to be fulfilled in our Savior, to whom only all homage and
subjection is due from Abraham, and his posterity, and from whom only both
Abraham and his posterity are to expect their blessing: so that as our Savior,
laid no claim, nor received Judaicall or Leviticall tithes which Paul says
must necessarily be changed with the Priesthood; much less ought they who will
approve themselves true Ministers and followers of Christ, to be so greedy
after them, since it renders them so much unlike their Master.

Being evident then that real or material tithes have never been due, since
our Savior that other Priest as Paul calls him, arose after similitude of
Melchisedech, who was not made a Priest after the law of carnal commandment,
Heb. 7.15.16. it follows that all such (...) have, or do exact and compel
men to pay them tithes, do but ^ob them in effect, and thereby become
accountable both to God and man.

Mr. Roberts in a Treatise entitled The Revenue of the Gospel is tithes due
to the Ministry by the word of God. c. 7. p 52. etc. says to this purpose,
that our Savior received tithes in the New Testament, and endeavors to prove
it from these words to the Heb. 7.8. Here men dye that receive tithes, but
there be receives them of whom ^s i^ witnesse^ that he siveth; and will have
whatsoever is spoken of Melchisedech, to be meant of Christ from v. 13.14. v.
^. He of whom t^^se things are spoken pertains to another tribe, whereof no
men served at the altar, for it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah.

But how unwarrantably, or little to the purpose, will easily appear, if we
consider not only who this is that the Apostle says, receives tithes and
lives, distinguishing him from those who received tithes and ^yed; but also
what this there signified, which is likewise differenced from here; and if the
men which received tithes and dyed, and ^e which receives tithes and lives
for ever, be not one and the same (which may well ^e reconciled, whilst the one
was typical, and the other the antitype) then must there needs be two
receiving of tithes, which how far forth so ever they be considered on, or spun
out in frivolous discourses; what will it make to the pretense of a whole tenth
of every thing to be now due unto the Clergy?

Suppose Christ did, or does still, in some sense receive tithes: it is in no
other sense, be it what it will, than in the very same sense, wherein be
received them under the Law even when he was on earth; or now as he is
ascended into heaven both as our High Priest and sacrifice, v. 27. which would
evidently condemn all such of most accursed ^^^riledge and blasphemy, who
should lay claim to them by such a title.

Do we find it any where commanded to give material, real tithes of all we
have unto our Savior? did he take or so much as require them when he was on
earth as Aaron and MMelchisedeck did? i^ not the Priesthood which the Apostle
there speaks of changed, v. 1^. and there withal the very law even that of
tithes changed, as well as other particulars thereof, as that which made
nothing perfect, v. 19.

But the truth is, that if tithes have any establishment by Abraham's giving
Melchisedech the tenth of all his spoils, it would follow, that the Clergy
should primarily have the tenth of all prize-goods and spoils of War,
particularly of these present Wars of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and so
much plainly affirmed by Mr. Fo^lke Roberts in his Revenue of the Gospel, c. 6.
p. 30, 31. which I hope not only the Soldiery, but the State also will
seriously consider of, and discharge a good conscience, by making restitution
to them, or requiring an account of their judgment in this behalf.

And now as touching what is said in the New Testament concerning the Ministers
maintenance, I find not there the least footsteps that tithes or any first
allowance instead thereof was either made payment of, or commanded; it was left
to be a free will offering, as most suitable to the Gospel; only the equity
there of is hinted at in several passages; as, The workman is worthy of his
meat, Matthew. 10.10. The labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10.7. Who gooth to
Warfare any time at his own charge? Who planteth a vineyard and eats not of
the fruit thereof? or who seedeth a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock? even so has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should
live by the Gospel, 1 Cor. 5.7.14. They which minister about holy things, live
on the things of the Temple, and they which wait on the altar are partakers
with the altar, 1 Cor. 9.13. This is all that the New Testament teaches us, and
that by way of equity only, how to proportion out a maintenance to the
Ministers of the Gospel.

Then, as touching both the Ministers and Believers practice in this
particular. 1. Paul tells the Corinthians that he had kept himself from being
burden some unto them, and so was resolved to keep himself as the truth of
Christ was in him, and that no man should hind^^ that beasting of his in the
Regions of Achaia, 2 Cor. 11.9.10. But in his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
c. 9. v. 15.18.23. he insinuates, that it were better for him to dye, than that
this boasting of his, of not making the Gospel chargeable should be prevented;
neither was this Paul practice for himself only, but it seems he gave Titus
and such others as he sent unto them, express order that their Minist^ry
likewise should not become burdensome unto the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12, 16, 17,
18.

And when he came to Ephesus, he called the Elders of the Church together, Act.
20.17. and having had a large discoure with them wherein he told them that he
had not shuned to declare unto them all the counsel of God, v. 27. he put
them notwithstanding in mind again how he had coveted no man's silver, nor
gold, nor apparel; yea that they themselves knew, how those hands of his had
ministered unto his necessities, and to them that were with them, v. 33.34.
adding that he had showed them all things, how that so laboring they ought to
support the weak, v. 35.

The same Paul with Silvanus and Timotheus, told the Thessalonians, that they
wrought with labor night and day that they might not be chargeable to any of
them, and that they might be an example unto them to do the like, even unto
them of the Ministry, if there be any who could say with Paul that they had
power to eat and drink, that they had power to forbear working as well as any
of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 9.4, 5, 6. Even such I say, are required by Paul,
Silvanus and Timotheus to work with labor and travel night and day that they
may not be chargeable unto any, 2 These. 3.8 9.

However we may not think so uncharitably of the Primitive Christians, that
they did not, and that liberally too, contribute unto their Ministers, I mean,
such as were able: Paul bears witness of their readiness both to the Romans,
Corinthians and Philippians, certifying us that they were willing even beyond
their power, 2 Cor. 8.3.4. and that in so large a measure, as the text says in
several places that they sold their possessions, and parted them to all men as
they had need, laid them at the Apostles feet, or had all things in common, so
that no man said, that ought of the things he possessed was his own, Acts
2.44.45. Chap. 4.32.35.

But as the Scripture says, not many noble, not many rich were called, 1 Cor.
1.26. so it is clear in all history, that the poverty of the Primitive
Christians was general; and so it may have been observed to be in all ages
even till these present days; from whence we find it so often objected to
the disparagement of such as now seek after truth, what are they but a company
of poor, base, contemptible people, such as ^aye nothing to lose? as if there
were nothing worth losing besides the rich men's Idols, of superfluity and
pelf, who in consequence to their own saying, must think nothing besides
these worth getting: But alas I have not such poor contemptible Christians, in
these men^ account, souls to lose, as well as they? I Will promise them, they
have souls to save, better then they: The truth is, they want the temptation
of wealth and greatness, which too too commonly overswayes men from seeking
after truth, as it pleases God to discover it by peace-meales, and in such
manner only, as we grow capable to receive it; being apt to think they were
the poor Christians of whom it was said, that from John Baptist until the
Apostles time the Kingdom of heaven suffered violence, and the violent took it
by force, Mat. 11.12. I hope the Reader will pardon this digression, and so I
return to the point again.

It is acknowledged then that under the Gospel, a competent and comfortable
maintenance is due unto the Ministry; yet this the Apostles did, not only, not
capitulate for, but Paul alleadges two most emphaticall reasons, which might
prevail with any man that were not a very muckworme, or had any sparks of
piety remaining in him, that they should betake themselves to any lawful
calling, and work even night and day with their own hands, as he did, rather
then be reduced to need the benevolence of their brethren, saying, It is more
blessed to give than to receive, Act. 20.35. and that the children ought not to
lay up for the parents, but the parents for their children, 2 Cor. 2.14.

And if at any time the Apostles did stand in need, and that the Disciples, of
their own Christian disposition, gave them any thing, the Apostles still
received it as a gift, 2 Cor. 8.3.4. a matter of bounty, c. 9.5. expressly
declaring that they sought not theirs but them, 2 Cor. 12.13, 14. Nay, Paul
would not have accepted of a gift, even to the relief of his necessities, had
it not been rather to give them an occasion to show forth the fruits of their
proficiency of their charity, that it might so much the more abundantly redound
to their account, Phil. 4.15, 16, 17. Had Paul been the most eminent
Rhetoritian, of his time, as he was no mean one; had he studied to deliver
this notion of his in strains of highest expressions; I cannot conceive how it
was possible to out go himself herein; but we must impute it to the
sufficiency of that Spirit which gave him matter of glorying above all other
Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 11.21.23.

Thus we find in sundry Scriptures declared, and particularly in Numb. 18.20.
Deuteronomy. 10.9. and 18.1. Jos. 13.4. En. 44.28. that in the distribution of the
land of Canaan amongst the Israelites, the tribe of Levi was to have no
inheritance, the Lord promising that he would be their inheritance; but in
regard that he had assigned unto them all his owns lot and share, which was the
tithes of all that the earth pre^^^^, Lev. 27.30.32, besides that of four
foo^ed beasts, as also all things hallowed, whether meat offerings, sin
offerings or trespass offerings, v. 8.9. which w^^ a larger stock and
proportion than if they had had assigned them ther^^ part of the whole land of
Canaan; it may be demanded, to what putpose then does God say he will be the
Levites portion? I answer, that it may likely be the Lords intention, that the
Levites whom he had drawn unto himself by a nearer relation of office and
service, should not have any certain permanent inheritance in Canaan, as the
other Tribes, but that they should rely upon the tithes, and such other duties
as God had first assumed unto himself, and then allotted unto them, which
being more uncertain, because of the Israelites would not pay them these
duties, these tithes, I find no coercive power appointed to compel them
thereunto, the Lord would notwithstanding have them rely thereon, or rather on
himself, who promised to be their inheritance, their portion, that is to
provide for the Levites, though their brethren should fail of paying tithes;
for in other respects the Lord was the inheritance of all the Israelites, all
alike; he fails not to take care and charge of all that trust in him: just so
is it with Christ's Ministers in the New Testament; a maintenance is due unto
them from their brethren, but in such a manner, that whosoever will not give
them any, cannot be compelled unto it; and from such as give it them, they are
to acknowledge it as a gift, 2 Cor. 8 4. Phil. 4.17.

But least it should be thought a bare assertion of mine, that then was no
compulsive power allotted by God for constraining the Israelites to pay their
tithes; let the Reader be pleased to observe how it is said in Samuel, that the
sons of Eli came with a flesh hook, and striking it into the pot when the
people offered sacrifice, took all the meat that came up for the Priest, and
this they did per force sometimes when they so pleased, 1 Samuel 2.13. to 16. but
we find they were called sennes of Belial for it, v. 12. and the text says,
their sin was very greet before the Lord, and that for this cause men abhorred
the offering of the Lord v. 17. Besides we see in Malachi 3.9.10. Nehem.
13.10.11.12. when the people refused to pay tithes, the Lord complained of them
exceedingly by his Prophets, but never gave the Magistrate order to punish them
for it, or so much as reprehended him for omitting it.

But let us debate the case a little further with these greedy muckworme
Tith-mongers; do we not see by experience how few of them would be contented
that their Congregations, their Parishes should violently d^^ine them, not
suffering them to depart, when they found opportunity to remove themselves unto
a larger maintenance? and yet if their Parishioners should say, Sir, you
expect, require; nay, even compel us, hitherto, to pay you tithes, the tenth
part of all we have; but now there is a godly man, who would be glad of the
opportunity to administer unto us such spiritual things as our souls delight
in, and stand to our free will offerings for his malntenance, who would be
abundantly satisfied with one half, even any portion what ever it be, that
comes from us voluntarily.

We entreat you therefore give us leave to make use of this advantage in
favor both of our purses and our souls: do you find these selfe-seeking
Clergimen would be contented to lay down their pretended Commission? No, it is
too too evident they would not: Their pretenses are; Our livings are given us
for our lives, we have as good a title to them as you have to your lands; Nay,
they stick not to fly higher, and even Bishop-like to argue their tenor,
providentia Dei, by divine right.

But is this equal brethren? Does Christianity engage us to renounce our
Civil rights, our very reason? may these Clergymen who in complement sometimes
please to call themselves our Ministers, our servants, (though like their Great
Grandfather the Pope who subscribes servus servorum Dei, even whilst be
expects that Kings and Emperors should wait upon him) and have their
livelihoods out of our purses, thus easily become our Masters, intrude
themselves at first upon us whether we will or no, continue with us as long as
they themselves list, take upon them to keep us from the Ordinances when they
will, preach what trash and trumpery they please, exact the tithes, which in
effect is one fist part of our whole estate, as is made appear upon
calculation in the Epistle to the Reader; and yet leave us at their own
pleasure, when it makes for their advantage? Micha his Priest when he could get
no more g^insome employment, agreed with him by the year for 10 shekels of
silver, a suit of apparel, and his diet, Judges, 17.10.11. but so so one as
he met with opportunity of becoming Priest unto a whole Tribe, he laid hold
thereon with joy, c. 18. v. 19.20. even thus these Merchants of the Gospel;
none in appearance at first more diligent and officious then they, until they
get into a Benefice or Locture endeavoring themselves what possibly they can,
that, besides their tithes, they may raise the price of their benevolences; but
if a more fat Parsonage present it self, Quis nisi mentis inops ablatum
respuit aurum, is their practical divinity, they account it the greatest folly
under heaven to refuse it.

For this cause like enough the Answerer of Mr. Pryns 12. Questions used these
words concerning them, page 20. May it not well be said according to Micah
3.11. that the Clergy teach for hire, and Prophecy for money, which God by him
exclaimed against in his time? does not the same Prophet say truly of them, v.
5. he that puts not into their mouths, they even prepare War against him?
do they not with the most prostitute Popelings cry out, No penny, no Pater
noster? Is not maintenance, maintenance, the burden of all their Parlour or
Pulpit pastime? and why should they so sacrilegiously set a price on that which
is but supposititious, the phancie of their own brains, the real truth
whereof God required all true Disciples to give for nothing? Mat. 10.8. Es.
55.1.2. or why should people be forced to buy the chaffer of these
Clergy-merchants, rather then the wares or labor of a Shoemaker or porter?
would not such dealing be damned for an unjust monopoly, which yet these
Encroachers practice without a Patent, if any but themselves should do the
like? Nay, why must we be forced to pay these mercenary Clergymen for such
counterfeit service and ministration which others will discharge better, and
that for nothing? Is not this the greatest infringing of the Subjects propriety
which the Kingdom suffers? I say not this to undervalue the Ministry of the
Gospel, or to diswade an ample and abundant maintenance to such as truly
labor in Gods Vineyard; but to exaggerate the heynousnesse of those that do
not only set, as they pretend, the inestimable treasure of the Gospel, the
unvaluable Word of God to sale as if it were an unholy thing, Heb. 10.29. but
as much as in them lies, compel all people and Nations by fire and sword to
buy trash and trumpery in stead thereof, and that at what price they themselves
please.

I know this Controversy will not easily be reconciled; our English
Belly-Priests will doubtless struggle for their tithes, with no less
subtillity and stoutnesse, than the Popish did, for their Supremacy and
Peter Pence when the Reformation first began; the truth is, they still plead
prescription for them in England, though they were long since damned by all
Reformed Churches of Scotland, Sweadland, Denmark, France, Germany, the
Cantones, and United Provinces, not without the incessant witnessing against of
Gods people amongst us ever since, as is evident in their own and other men's
writings upon Record; but bad Laws, as well as Oaths, are better broke then
kept, fitter to be repealed than continued: I wish therefore, amongst such
other hard questions and arguments, as have been put to them formerly, in this
behalf, they would likewise take into consideration these few Queries.

What is the difference betwixt a Ministers calling, and any other, whether
Handicraft or Tradesmans? wherein are they distinguished? What is requisite to
make them both legitimate? Is there not an outward Call, and an inward Call to
either of them?

Whether may it now adays be infallibly discerned that a Minister is truly
called to preach unto a people, any otherwise, than by the peoples calling of
him?

Whether ought a Minister once called and accepted of to preach unto a People
or Parish, leave the said Parish or People all his life time upon any pretense
whatsoever, without consent of those that first called him?

Whether may a Minister be said to be truly called, who is put upon a Parish,
contrary to the wills and approbation of the whole or major part thereof, as is
the condition of most Parishes, according to the present Laws of England?

Whether may such a Minister as is once called to teach in any Parish, withdraw
himself without being called away by God that called him thither? How may a
Minister know when God truly calls him from one Parish to another? Whether is
it not most probable that such are not called by God, but run away, who remove
from a lean Benefice or Lecture unto a fat one?

Whether did God ever really call any man to the Ministry of the Gospel,
without enduing him with gifts fit for such a Calling? What are the necessary
signs, gifts, and qualifications of such a Calling?

Whether is it not one necessary qualification of a Minister truly called to
divide the word of truth aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. to hold fast the faithful word
as it has been taught, and be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort and to
convince the gainsayers? Tit. 1.9.

Whether have the Papist, Lutheran, Calvinist, or Anabaptict, Presbyterian or
Independent, (any one, or either of them more then the other) any infallible
way of exhorting and convincing gainsayers, according to Paul's rule to Titus?
if they have, why do they not show it unto their brethren? If they have not,
is it not a sign they are no true Ministers, no true Christians, that do not
bear with their brethren until they can convince them?

If it be not in the Clergies power to make it infallibly appear unto me, that
such a one is a Minister unto me, my Minister, after a more certain, nor any
other manner, than such a one, the very same, by which a man is, or becomes a
Servingman unto me, my Servingman, to wit, because I have accepted of, and
entertained him into my service; with what reason may this Minister require the
tithes of my estate, whether I will or no, when this Servingman can recover
nothing, but what I my self will give him or agree for with him? what reason
can be given why every man (if a pretended Minister will be so shameless to
put him to it) should not capitulate and article with a Minister for his
pains, his service, as well as with a Servingman, a Porter? Why may not a
Carpenter or Tailor be put upon every Parish, whether the Parish will or no, as
well as a Minister; and each of them pretend to do the work of the whole
Parish in general, and of every one in particular, compelling them to pay him
for it, though he did no work for them, through their default, as well as the
Minister?

But that I may be the better induced to render all reverence and other dues,
which these Clergymen lay claim to, it is necessary that I be a little farther
satisfied concerning the demonstrative verity of so extraordinary a Calling, as
they pretend to be invested with, or how they have any pre-eminence above all
other believers, who jointly so long since were by Peter declared to be a
royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9.

For all that I can understand, these Clergymen were borne stark naked as well
as others; their education at Schools and University (to say no more) is no
better then their fellows, and, in brief, they are very little to be
distinguished from other men, until they begin to feel an itching, a longing
after Tith-crops, by which (for all that can be discerned) they judge
themselves to be ripe, and expect only Gods call unto the Ministry.

That far, (I mean till they grow tith-sicke) their progress is not
difficult, the world can apprehend it at well as they themselves; but now
forsooth, the reale of Gods house devours them daily, Ps. 69.9. and all such as
may be friend them, must know they have no rest in spirit, through their
vehement desire that God would call them to preach the Gospel Hereupon good
people, like enough, enquire and ca^t about both lowne and Country, for some
vacant Parsonage or Lectureship; suddenly one brings news of 10.20.30.40. or
50. pounds worth of tithes, or other benevolences, which may be compassed, if
God so please, (this phrase mult in, that God may bear the blame, until this
new Evangelist be pleased;) he gives them a gracious hearing and acceptance,
but finding it too small, inferior to his ravenous appetite, he still with
Moses alleadges, that the Lord has not yet appeared to him, Exodus 4.1. He
does not apprehend himself to be sufficiently called; and thus in the best
seeming manner he can, he devours, until some great Cedar falls to warm him
by, until the stalled Ox be killed to feast him with, until a far Parsonage
of 100, 200. or 300. pounds a year grow void, which no sooner happens, but the
first toal thereof pierces both his ears, that they stand listening continually,
until his Scoutes, some friend or other propound it to him, which is no sooner
mentioned, but as if he were impatient, that his Predecessor had injured him to
dye no sooner, he breaks out with Samuel, saying, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears, 1 Samuel 3.10. in brief, their rule is, God calls them not to small
games, they are consident he will not do them so much injury, he will not have
them serve him for nothing, much like to what the Devil said of Job. c. 1.9,
10, 11. but if a fat Benefice be mentioned, they run in full assurance that
their God (God Mammon) calls them.

Dear Reader, is this the truth? then ponder on it, and weigh well the
consequence thereof; let not thy understanding be any longer captivated; be
not superstitious, and thou shall see greater things then these, Job. 1.50.

Cast then thy thoughts a little on all such as pretend unto the Ministry
among us; consider their different ways and doctrines, and thou shall find
many of them to agree no less then opposites, then contradictions.

Some of them hold the Church of Rome to be a true, though erroneous and
corrupted Church; others, that whosoever lives and dies in the belief thereof,
cannot possibly attain salvation. Some hold the Ministry in the Church of
Rome to be a false Ministry, not knowing otherwise how to excuse their
separation from it ^ Others dare not do so (no more then of their Baptism) as
knowing their own Ministry to be derived successively from that of Rome. Some
hold Episcopacy to be of Divine right ^ Others say as much for Presbytery; and
not a few there be who affirm no peculiar government at all to be by Divine
right. Some hold we are saved by faith alone: Others by such not without good
works. Some hold that Christ could not be just and equal, unless he had
dyed for all the world alike, even all that would believe on him: Others think
Christ might possibly have loft his labor, had he not dyed for a set number
only, for his Elect, who therefore cannot sin at all, or possibly miscarry
though they sin never so much. Some hold we are justified by Christ's passive
obedience only, and that for all his active obedience; he might have said, he
was unprofitable as touching man's redemption: Others affirm that not only
Christ's passive obedience, but his active also, were both necessary to our
justification and his own. To be brief, (for volumnes of this nature may
recounted.) Some hold the baptizing of Infants to be obligatory: Others believe
it may as well, if not better be dispensed withal. Now, there are I say, in
the Church of England men that teach all these contradictory doctrines, who yet
pretend to have had an express calling unto the Ministry from God,
extraordinary in respect to their Lay-brethren: They all style themselves Gods
Ambassadors to us, they tell us that Christ's words in Luke 10.16. are as
clearly to be understood of them and their successors in their respective
generations, as of the 70. Disciples themselves; to wit, He that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you despises me; and he that despises me
despises him that sout me: Thus does each of them inculcate the Divinity both
of their Ministry and Doctrine upon the people, because it brings in their
tithes, their maintenance, with such execrable threatenings, to those that will
not receive them, that they poor souls, having their judgments manacled by
superstitious fears, cannot choose but swallow them down unchew'd, untasted.

But since their Doctrines do appear so contradictory to such as are not hood
winked; since no one of them can prove his Ministry to be truer than the
others; nay, since it is agreed on amongst themselves that their Ministry is
one and the same, we cannot with any show of reason be required to believe
them otherwise, than all alike, that is, so far forth only as we can be fully
persuaded thereof in our owns hearts, Romans 14.5. which upon the very first
reflection must needs conclude, that, since the callings and doctrines of them
all canned possibly be sound, implying contradictions; so cannot the calling of
either of them i^ true, because they all have the self same calling; as is
evident by their come confession and demonstration.

But to be brief, Tithes, as I have proved, were not do until the Israelites
came into the land of Canaan, and that unto a Tribe of Levi, for particular
express purposes to wit, besides others, that they should give one tenth
thereof for a heave offering unto the High Priest, Number. 18.27, 28, 29. who was
to sacrifice in the Temple at Jerusalem, and the said Tribe of Levi was to
attend and do the service of the Tabernacle, Number. 3.7, 8. and was only
requlred to receive tithes of their brethren the Jews, the other eleven Tribes
which came out of the loins of Abraham, Heb. 5.7. and neither they the said
Tribe of Levi, nor the High Priest to have any other portion or inheritance
besides the tithes, Numb. 18 20.23.24. from whence amongst others, we may draw
these few observations.

1. According to the Leviticall law, the tithes of the land of Canaan only were
payable, and that in the land of Canaan only, and from the Jews their brethren
only; But these pretended Tithmongers lay claim to the tithes of all the
world, from all sorts of Nations, to be due unto themselves the Clergy.

2. The Jewish Levites were a peculiar Tribe, upon whom the tithes were
entailed from one generation to another, and by a Statute to endure for ever,
they were to have no other inheritance, Numb. 18.23. but were to rely upon the
Lord, who promised to be their portion: But these, who are no more of Levi his
kindred than the Great Turk, alluring unto their ways, not much unlike the
Jesuits, or rather Romulus, such of all Nations who are fittest for their
turns, by tricks and shifts, seducing whom they can, through a pretense of
superstitious zeal, lay claim, rob, and run away with the fifth part of all
their neighbors goods, wherein, notwithstanding, they have so little trust,
and less confidence in Gods promise, which was to be a portion unto the
Israelitish Levites, in whom there was no guile, that they lay up, hoard and
purchase, as if they knew their posterity were bastards, and not to be
provided for, neither by tithes, nor Gods providence: And

3. Whereas the true Levites were to give for a heave offering unto the High
Priest of the family of Aaron, one tenth of all their tithes, our English
Levites since their High Priest and head the Pope was banished out of England,
pretend to pay (when they cannot avoid it, for they are slow enough in
payments) unto the King: I know not what first buits instead thereof, and
indeed they made him so far forth their High Priest to bear their iniquities,
that what ever they have of late been questioned for, they cast upon his back.

I know the common scarcrow and objection which it made against an unsettled
maintenance, to wit, that most men are so backward to all good duties,
especially in matter of expense, that if they be not both rated and compelled
to pay, they will not pay at all, or not their shares proportionably; and that
if there be not both a certain and a round allowance, such as have hitherto
applied themselves to study for service of the Church, will grow discouraged,
betake themselves to other callings, and by this means the Gospel become
contemptible, through want of an able and learned Ministry: To this I answer,
that it is evident by experience that such Ministers of the Congregationall way
as have good parts, and are conscionable in their callings, although they leave
every one of their Congregation to contribute as God has enabled them according
to the purpose of their own hearts, not grudgingly, which was Paul's rule, 2
Cor. 9.5. I say, that such have a maintenance equal (if not exceeding) to what
the tithes produced in the Bishops times, or may do again hereafter if they
were to be continued. Secondly, for such as will not put themselves to study
for the Churches service, unless they be encouraged by maintenance; I say,
they are guilty of a sin surpassing symony, a namelesse sin, a sin so
infamous, as none were found in the Gospel-time so vile and desperate to commit
it, and give occasion unto a law at once expressly both to name it and
condemn it; Simon Magus his sin was not so great as theirs, he would have
bought the gifts of the Holy Ghost, these men would sell them if they had them;
Simon Magus thought so well of the Holy Ghost, that he would have purchased it
with money, Act. 8.18, 19. But these sons of covetousness are so basely
sordid, that they will not accept of it gratis, unless they may, at same time,
have a Grant, a Monopoly to impose the counterfeit gifts thereof upon the
people, at an enhanced, overgrowne excised rate. Thirdly, such men do plainly
by their practice declare to all the world, that there is no difference between
the calling of such hackney Ministers, and the calling of a Merchant, Cobbler,
or any Handicraftsman, but that it is indifferent, and all alike, free for
every one to betake himself to which of them he pleases, and thinks will
prove most gainsome and beneficial to him: And lastly, if tithes be the
Clergies due by Divine right, as is determitted by that great Casuist of the
Assembly, Dr. Burges, with sundry others of the same soul; then are all the
Laymen of England highly guilty of sacrilege, who withhold them by
Impropriations: but if by a mere humane, a Parliamentary-law, only they lay
claim unto them, then may it the better be repealed, since it so much
intrenches upon the subjects propriety in general, and upon the most tender
consciences of many in particular.

And when they are admonished to labor with their hands from Paul's example,
rather then be chargeable unto the people, 1 Thessalonians. 2.9. they answer, that
though Paul did labor, yet it was of his own good will and courtesy, there
was no obligation for it, and seek to prove it by those words of Paul's, where
he says, 1 Cor. 9.6. have not Paul and Barnabas a power, as well as the other
Apostles, to forbear working? to which I reply, that Paul and Barnabas had the
same power to forbear working, which the brethren had to forbear giving them
maintenance, the one could not be compelled to work, neither might the other
be forced to set meat and drink before them, or any others, much less if they
were persons addicted unto idleness.

But I presume it will not be pleaded in Paul's behalf, that he or any body
else might lawfully pass their time in idleness, especially since we find
that Paul's express command unto the Thessalonians, was, that if any would not
work, he should not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. So neither is it pretended that
Christians may lawfully refuse administering to the necessities of their
brethren, especially, of such as teach them spiritual things.

2. Paul cannot be said to require any other power of forbearing to work, than
what the other Apostles had, or made use of, and we may not imagine of them,
that they were idly given; doubtless they omitted no opportunity of employing
their time, as might be most advantageous and edifying unto the brethren, and
upon this supposition they were to spend the whole day, even all their days,
between providing for their own livelihood, their health, and the propagation
of the Gospel; now, besides modetate recreation, meat and drink was accessory
for keeping them alive, which they must have got by laboring with their own
hands, or else have been supplied therewith from the brethren, if the brethren
did supply Paul, with food and raiment, then might he have forborne to work,
as he insinuates, 1 Cor. 9.6. but then he must have spent so much more time
with laboring in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. for he must not have
been idle, as was said before, but by Pault practice it is evident he might not
forbear working, when his receiving maintenance, would have proved chargeable
to the brethren.

But to conclude; Our Savior it exacting of the Gospel-Ministery, lest his
Disciples, being ignorant how to demean themselves, should go about to carve
their own maintenance, when he first sent them out to preach the Gospel, he
charges them expressly, saying, freely yet have received, freely give, Matthew.
10.8. then, that they might not rest any ways perplexed through fear of want,
as such who might apprehend themselves altogether unprovided of necessaries, he
bids them cat such things as were set before them, Luke 10.8. and that they,
and their successors in the Ministry of the Gospel, might be the better
induced to rely upon the same providence ever after, being returned from their
Ministry, he asks them, saying, When I sent you without purse and scrip, and
shoes, wanted ye any thing, and they said, We wanted nothing, Luke 22.35.
whereunto I will only add, that for those who now term themselves Ministers,
and will not be contented with such wages and maintenance as Christ appointed
them, it is more then suspicious that they have no snare nor portion, neither
in the Apostles faith, Ministry nor Gospel.

After I had finished this short Discourse, there came unto my hands Mr.
Seldens History of Tithes, which I must needs say, I had not seen before, and
am confident it will not be ungrateful unto the Reader, if I here present him
with some Quotations which I bring from thence, and what I have observed, as a
brief abstract of the History it self.

Quotations.
PEter Damian complains of Pope Alexander the 2. about 10 60. that
Infeodations or conveyances of perpetual right of tither were granted to
Laymen. l. 1. ep. 10. l. 4. ep. 12. apud Seld. c. 6.

Leutardes (...). Rodolphus Gl^ben Hist. (...).

Wickles^ asserted that tithes were m^^l^ alms, and that (...) might (...)
which was condemned by the Council of (...).

Infeo^^tions of t^^es, such as were made unto Lay, men before the Canon
Prohibemus of the Council of Lateran held under Alexander the 3. ^^80, are to
this day (...) as other Lay-inheritances, although none can now be created in
France, etc. Seldom Hist. c. 7.

The Canon law of the Greek Church never commanded any thing concerning
tithes. Id. c. 7.

Theodore Balsamen Patriarch of Antioch advises Mark Patriarch of Alexandria,
touching the quantity of what was to be offered in the Eastern Churches, that
no certain quantity is appointed by the Canons, and that through the
inequality of men's estates (none of them giving any such part to the Church as
that it could discover their abilities) which permits not a regular certainty,
they were contented with what custom, and free bounty of the givers bestowed.
Respons. 57. inter monumenta Juris Graeco Romani.

Pope Gregory in his answer to Austin the Monk, tells him, that the custom is
generally to make a quadripartite division of all Church offerings, or tithes;
for the Bishop, for his Clergy, for the poor, and for reparation of Churches;
but admonishes him that in tenderness of the English-Saxon Church, he and his
Clergy should still imitate the Community of all things used in the Primitive
times under the Apostles. Seldom of Tithes. c. 9.

Disserences about Tithes were decided by the Sheriffs and Bishops in the
Saxons times, and afterward made determinable in the Bishops Consistory by
William the Conqueror. Id. c. 14. sect. 1. and seq.

Temporal Courts did notwithstanding judge of tithes even until Henry these
conds time, and in certain cases and manner of proceedings till Henry the
thirds time. Id. Ibid. sect. 4.5.7.

Epiphanius Bishop of Constance in Cyprus about the year 380. writing against
certain heretics of the Primitive times, speaking of the Tessaresderatitae,
or those which thought that Easter must needs be kept on the 14. Moon
according to the Law given the Jews. concerning the Passover, fearing that
observing of it otherwise might subject them to the curse of the law, says,
they might as well be liable to the same curse, for not circumcising, for not
paying tithes, for not offering at Jerusalem; which is an undeniable argument
that in those days, and in those parts, they paid no tithes, no more then they
did sacrifice, or circumcise, Id. Revew. of Chapter 4.

Observations.
THe Counsels for the first 600. years take no notice of tithes, but of
offerings and lands possessed with their Revenues.

All that was received in the Bishopric or Parish (for both words had but one
signification at first) by such as were appointed by the Bishop, was divided
into four parts, whereof one fourth was for maintenance of the Ministry, out
of which every Curate had his monthly salary; one fourth to relief of the
poor, sick and strangers; one fourth to reparation of Churches, and one fourth
to the Bishop of the Diocese or Parish; but this course was proper to the
Diocese of Rome.

Until the year 800. Laymen who were Patrons of Churches, shared with their
Chaplins, and such Incumbents as they put in of all such offerings as were
made, as appears by Counsels, and Imperial Capitulaties.

Toward the end of the 400. year, some few devouter people began to pay
tithes, or rather duties, no proportion being established, for relief of the
poor, which continued chiefly, if not only for their use, until about the end
of the 800. year, at which time they began to be devoted unto Churches, at the
sole disposition of the Clergy, not the Parson only, but of some fraternity of
Monks, at the Benefactors choice, yet so that the Doner might appropriate them
to what Church he pleased, though it were situate in an other Parish, or
precinct, then where the tithes were to be gathered. That of Lateran was the
first General Council which mentioned tithes about the year 1130. and no
Canon commanded the payment of tithes, till the Lateran General Council in
the year. 1215.

FINIS.

