Elijah's Mantle: OR, THE REMAINS Of that late worthy and faithful Servant of
Jesus Christ, Mr. JOHN TILLINGHAST.

Viz. I. The Conformity of a Saint to the Will of God. On Act. 21.14. II. The
will of God and Christ concerning Sinners. On Gal. 1.4. III. No Condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus. On Romans 8.1. IV. Christ's Love to his own. On
Joh. 13.1. V. True Gospel Humiliation. On Zach. 12.10. VI. The most effectual
means to kill and subdue sin. On 1 John 2.2. VII. The Advocateship of Jesus
Christ, a great ground of Saints comfort and support under sins and
infirmities. On 1 John 2.2. VIII. The only way for Saints to be delivered from
the errors and evils of the times. On I Tim. 6.11. IX. Of the Old Covenant,
from Gal. 4.30. being so far as the Author had proceeded, in a Treatise of
the two Covenants, before his death.


Published by his own Notes.

Rev. 14.13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, blessed
are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

London, printed for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold at the Crown in
Pope's Head Alley. 1658.

To the Reader.
THis dear Servant of Christ, the Author of these Sermons (who whilst in the
Body, lived much in and of the love of our Lord Jesus, and is now swallowed up
of that love which passes knowledge, who yet does (and I am persuaded will)
live in the love of many precious In London, Jews, Nudigate, Frasingfield,
Yarmouth, Walpoole, Walsham, Tru^ch, etc.
Saints, among whom he conversed here on earth) made it his great design (the
love of Christ constraining him) both by preaching and walking, to promote
faith toward Christ, and love to all Saints. He lived much by faith, and was
often in coming to the Father by the Son as a poor Sinner, as he usually
expressed it.

And here I cannot but take the opportunity to say that which I apprehend, the
Word of Christ, and also our experience do witness,

1 That the Act of Faith whereby we are looking to Jesus, coming to him, and
rolling upon him as the only way to the Father; it is indeed the great Act, it
is that which does honor God, and that which Christ does honor as a great
faith. After that poor woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. had endured many repulses, and
yet making after Christ, and hanging upon him, he says O woman, great is thy
faith; this was clearly a faith of dependence.

2 We are extremely averse to this duty; There is a great desire of evidence,
etc. but when we should look to, and stay on the Promise, or rather on God in
it, O what a difficult work is it! Indeed by thus believing, Romans 16.26. Heb.
11.2. we yield unto God the obedience he requires, without which we cannot
please him; and it is that for which the Gospel is sent among us; and hereby
we do indeed act Self-denial. Is it not a great part of Self-denial, for the
Soul which does naturally set up his own righteousness, and would not be
beholding to God for his, to renounce his right, that is so dear to him, Phil.
3.8, 9. Hereby also the Soul denies his Carnal reason, as Abraham, Romans 4. he
sacrificed his Carnal reason before he could enjoy or Sacrifice his Isaac. It
is no wonder that our hearts are so hardly brought up to such actings, there is
not only an inabillity to them, but enmity against them; as Christ has told
us, Ye will not come to me, Joh. 5.40.

3 We have no assurance and evidence, but in and by these acts of reliance; it
is possible we may have a true faith; and great faith of reliance without
evidence, -- but our assurance comes in this way, as we have not the reflection
of the Sun upon the wall, except the beams of the Sun flow forth.

4 Our Lord Jesus being the Author and Finisher, and also actor of our faith,
Heb. 12.2. Joh. 15.5. Phil. 2.13. (without whom we can do nothing) he that
works to will as well as to do in his people, and that freely, we cannot act
this faith but as we are acted by him; let us therefore expect all our fruits
from him. And because faith works by love, and the more the love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts, the more faith, etc. also the more faith the more
love to God; let us look much into the Gospel, which gives us so great
discovery of that love.

1 Behold there with admiration, God from Eternity freely purposing the
Salvation of the Elect in Jesus Christ, he has saved us, etc. not according
to our works, but according to his purpose, and grace, which was given in
Christ Jesus before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9.

2 After we had all fallen from God, in that fearful Apostasy of our first
Parents, under the Wrath and Curse of God, Romans 5.18. Ephesians. 3.2. behold, God
sending forth his dear Son, made of a Woman, etc. for the redemption of poor
sinners from this woeful state, -- and thereby not only delivering his people
from the depth of misery, but restoring them to the height of happiness; for
by the death of our Lord Jesus is a way made to bring us unto God, 1 Pet. 3.18.
by it we come to him, Heb. 7.25. all those that come to God come by him; we
come even to the Father, Joh. 14.6. No man comes to the Father but by me; here
is the true center of our immortal souls. Thus our dear Lord does bring us to
soul-rest, Mat. 11.28, 29. O what manner of love is this!

3 Behold here the will of the Father and the Son, both concurring in this
matter. Gal. 1.4. (which the heart of this Author was much taken up with.)

4 Here is a discovery of Christ as an overcommer actually, Rev. 3.21. It is
observeable, that the very first promise of Jesus Christ, Genesis 3.15. declares
him a Conqueror, and all the Saints for many Ages lived upon, and were
comforted in Christ, as he who was to overcome; and though this perhaps in the
weakness of their faith, the tempter might trouble them withal; but what if
their expected Messiah should not come? or, what if he should not overcome
their enemies, what would become of them then? Now there is no room for this
temptation, he has abolished death, 2 Timothy 1.10. I have overcome the world,
Joh. 6.33. and therefore says the Lord, Be you of good cheer, it is for you
and be ye comforted by it, there is virtue and strength in it for you, whereby
you shall be more than conquerours. And hereby may the Saints come up to that
difficult Piece of Self-denial, to submit to the will of God, who will have
some remainders of corruption yet in his people, as (in these Sermons is
mentioned, where) the Author does caution us not so to submit to, as not to
strive against corruptions, to mourn over them, and watch against them, etc.
but when we have done so, to submit to his will, who will have them remain in
us; this I say is the way to come up to it, the looking to Christ's victory over
them. It is granted, that the sight of Corruptions yet stirring in the soul, is
matter of very bitter mourning, but not of despairing; he that comes into the
Field and sees an Army of Enemies, if some be slain, some breathing out
their last, some bleeding, etc. has not cause to despair, though to mourn; so
here.

5 In the Gospel we have a sight of Christ, as engaged by way of standing
Office, to look to the keeping peace between God and his Children, 1 John 2.2.

6 We have a discovery of the Saints being seized of all the riches of heaven
and earth, by being seized of Christ the great Gift of God, and Gospel
blessing, Ephesians. 1.3. He that has given us his Son, how shall he not with him
freely give us all things, Romans 8.3^. and they have Gods Bond for performance,
yea all things put into their best Friends hand for them, He is head over all
things for them, Ephesians. 1.22. that they may look over all things and persons in
heaven and earth with comfort, so long as Gods security is good, and Christ
remains Lord of all things, they shall never want what is good for them here,
nor miss of glory hereafter, Psalm. 84. He shall give grace and glory. The
love of Christ in his blessed Gospel, which this choice Servant of the Lord had
tasted abundantly of, and the Spirit of Christ (who does take of Christ's, and
show it to his Saints, and so glorify Christ) had made so great an impression
on him, that as a dear friend of the heavenly Bridegroom, he was carried out
exceedingly with Saul (when converted) Lord, what will thou have me to do? and
did much in drawing poor Sinners to Christ, whereof there is good proof where
he lived; and also in laboring to unite Saints* and furthermore in studying,
and holding forth the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, not only in his Churches, but
over the Nations.

This being the design of Christ at this day, to possess his own right, to
take to himself his great Power and Reign; to cause the Kingdoms of this World
to become his own, Rev. 11.15.18. to set up in them his own Administrations
and Laws, instead of those Heathenish and Antichristian Laws, etc. that have
been, and are yet in a great measure in the Nations, and appoint his own
Officers over them. It is dangerous to hinder it in the least, you know what a
rebuke Peter met with from Christ, when he would (speaking according to Carnal
reason) have hindered the present work and design our Lord Jesus was about, Get
thee behind me Satan, thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the
things that be of men. How sad a thing is it then, when the Lord does so rebuke
us, as at this day? speaking very plainly, and knocking aloud at our door, by
various Judgments, by extraordinary Droughts, and immediately upon the removal
of them, by general Sickness all the Land over; by taking away many precious
Saints from among us in this Nation, of late, etc. his hand being yet stretched
out; that notwithstanding all these things, when the Lord does hearken and
hear, there is not a return to him that smites, but a revolting more and more
in all sorts of persons, from the highest to the lowest, a going back again by
those very steps the Lord in a more than ordinary way brought us up to, in this
poor Nation (appearing for us (while we were following him in some measure of
sincerity and singleness of heart) with such successes as made the very Heathen
and Antichristian World about us astonished) I say, a going back by those very
steps we had gained, toward Egypt again etc. Instead of following the Lord
fully, as Caleb and Joshua did, behold a consulting with flesh and blood, and
humane wisdom more than with the Word of God; let us mourn before the Lord for
these things, and labor to live by faith, and prepare for further sufferings.
And in order hereto, with plaineness of heart read these things, and read with
an intention that they may be read upon your conversation. The Author writ,
and preached, and walked the truth; look not after Notions so much as the power
of the truth, which the Lord give thee, and all of us, grace to do.

Peasen Hall, 29th. of the 9th. Month. 1657. John Manning.

To the Reader.
Reader:
IT is an Argument of unspeakable favor, and matchless condescension, that
the God of glory would vouchsafe to enter into the band of a Covenant with any
of the Race of sorry Man, and therefore the clearing up the Nature of the New
Covenant made with Believers in Christ (which is a great design of one of
these Treatises) must needs be of choice advantage to the Saints.

As estrangement from the Covenant is a depth of misery, Ephesians. 2.12. so a
special experimental acquaintance with it, is a height of happiness.

When the Ark (a sign of the Covenant) was taken, it was said of old, The
glory is departed from Israel; but when men have this Ark of the Covenant with
them, there are the approachings of the greatest glory to them.

He that is owned within the verge of the Covenant, has an everlasting hold of
God himself, to such a Soul it may be said, thy God, thy glory. Tossed tempted
Souls may find support and succor here; fainting, sinking Souls reviving;
drooping, dejected Souls, refreshment; yea when they have drawn, and sucked
the largest draughts out of these breasts of Consolation, yet they are still as
full as ever. It adds abundance of sweetness to any, even the lowest or
least enjoyments, if they can be discerned to have their conveyance in the way
of the New Covenant to him that has them, yea a froward, disquieted,
discontented heart will be sweetly bowed into a submission unto the Will of
God in the worst conditions, if it can but descry the face of a reconciled God
through a free promise therein.

And to help forward submission to the Will of God (which another of these
Treatises calls for) give us leave to add a few words by way of direction.

1 Keep a fixed eye upon God under the sharpest Dispensations; if thou eyest
the Rod more than the hand that uses it, thou will manifest thy self a froward
Child, under the gentlest fatherly Chastisements; but if thy eye be ehiefly
upon a Divine hand which smites, thou will more quietly stoop unto it, when it
carries with it the greatest show of enmity. Good old Eli, when such sad news
was sent unto him, as should make the ears of all that heard of it tingle, yet
he keeping his eye upon God, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, he freely submits
[Let him do what seems him good.]

2 Keep affections unto Christ very high, and to Creatures very low; heart
engagements to Creature enjoyments, render it double hard, to say Amen unto the
Will of God, when sufferings lie there; but the greater endearance of God and
Christ to a Soul, the more easily will it rise to a gracious submission, either
in the witherings and denials of, or parting with earthly things, 1 Corinthians.
13. verse. 4. Charity suffers long, verse. 7. bears all things, endures all
things. As when men, so also when God and Christ are the Objects loved, there
will be a patient bearing from their hands; things which if they came from such
as were not dearly loved, would hardly be endured. It was doleful news to the
Disciples to hear of Christ's departure, yet says he, John 14.28. If ye loved
me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father, so that love to
Christ (i. e. if strong) will carry out to, not only a free, but cheerful
submission unto Christ in the hardest things.

3 Eye much the manifestations of Christ's love and affection to you in the
various expressions of it; there may be a recollection of many former
experiences even of the Lords working up your hearts into a submission unto his
will in former straights, yea you may look upon such words or promises as have
a natural tendency to allay such disquiet of heart as you are under, and yet
these may but discover your duty, and you may feel no strength coming along
therewith enabling you to rise up unto it; but at last, by an eying the sweet
discoveries of Divine love in former experiences, or present afflictions, in
affording so many returns of prayer, you may be powerfully engaged unto a
willingness to do, or suffer any thing that the Lord shall see it meet to
exercise you with, that so you may return love for love, Heb. 12.5, 6. Nor
faint when thou art rebuked of him, for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth.
This does clearly evid^nce, that an eying Divine love in afflictions is a
choice preservative against Soul-faintings under them.

We shall add no more but this, that one of us was an ear-witness, that some
of the Sermons in the ensuing Treatises were preached by that Servant of
Christ, Master Tillinghast. And others, are as they were found in his Notes,
only a grain of allowance must be afforded for mistakes in transcribing and
printing. Thus desiring that a blessing from above way attend these labors, we
remain,

9th. Month, 6th. day, 1657. Yours to serve you in the work of the Lord: Sam.
Petto Sam. Manning, Sam. Habergham.


Errata.
PAge 24. line 17. make the comma at wherein, instead of at going, p. 25. l.
19. for at last, read and therefore. p. 53. l. 23, add, when it pleased God to
reveal, etc. p. 55. l. 32. r. tread on, p. 60. l. 11. for them, r. him, p. 61.
l. 19, 20. r. force for forces, cause for causes, set for sets.

Reader,
That thou might have a taste of the spirit of the Author, and some other
precious men, as to their asserting and pleading for this Cause of Christ, this
is added,

Sir:
YOurs I received, both which have been a refreshment to my spirit; I much
rejoice, that there is a remnant at this day even among us, that sympathize
with the suffering cause of Christ, and are kept faithful to their Lord, in
this hour of temptation; although my employments are so many, that time is very
precious with me, yet could I not upon the reading of yours, but make return of
a few lines, for this is the day in which Saints are called to speak often one
to another. God is trying his people with such trials, as they have never
before met withal: I mean in respect of the wonderful difficulty of judging
things and causes at this day; one thing has been a sore temptation to me
oftentimes about the Cause of Christ now, viz. the many passions and weaknesses
that have appeared in those who now among us stand up for it; I know not but
that it may have been the temptation of other spirits, I may say as to my own,
it has been the greatest of all.

I have had many times relief against it, from such like considerations as
these,

1 The Mercy approaching is a great New Covenant Mercy; New Covenant Mercies
call not for worthiness in the recipient, but are always so ordered as to be
given forth when the receiver is most unworthy.

2 That it has been a part of Saints weakness in former Ages to judge of
Causes by persons, God in this day would have his people to judge of his Cause
by his Light alone, laying aside the consideration of persons, the effect of
which ordinarily is in those that steer this course, a founding their faith,
not in the Word or Power of God, but in the wisdom or holiness of man.

3 That by how much the greater the Mercy expected is, by so much the greater
must the trial of faith fore-running it, be; now no trial of faith, to a truly
gracious conscientious soul, is greater than this.

4 That in case suffering Saints in this day, (and in this Nation more
especially, wherein Gods remnant is great) should bear forth their testimony,
with that eminency of Grace which Saints formerly have done in an ordinary way,
that stop which must be for a while to the work, for the bringing about the
all-wise and determinate Counsel of God, could not have been thus long, for
hereby Saints would have had their eyes open presently, and their eyes being
generally opened, such is their power this day in the Nation, that in an
ordinary way the wheel would turn.

5 The Kingdom of Christ could not (as it must) come without observation, if
eminent marks and characters of Holiness, were written on the faces of all
those that should plead or suffer for it.

6 Many must stumble and fall, be snared and broken, and taken, and that by
smiting against the stone, who being enlightened, would not dare to do it; were
not such things as these, viz. Saints weaknesses and passions laid before them
as stumbling blocks, to set their Natural Consciences at liberty?

7 David's Kingdom (the Tipe of Christ's) did arise, with manifest offense, in
respect of its followers, 2 Samuel 22.

8 Christ when he rides as King, chooses a Colt to ride on, an untamed and
unruly Creature; and the Colt of an Ass, a simple and uncomely Creature to the
eye. Saints failings have hitherto been blemishes to the cause, but God is
removing of them; and it is observable, that as late sufferers have gone with
more clearness into suffering, so the Lord has made them sensible of those
things in which their brethren have gone awry.


IN this Letter he writes some passages concerning three late Sufferers in this
cause.

One of those Worthies lately confined, his carriage with us was with so much
grace and humility, not knowing himself among us as to outward respects, and
withal carried it with such tenderness, as did rather tend to the allaying our
spirits, and making them more serious, than any way to the incensing of them,
and making them rash and furious against the present powers.

And as for the two others, I have coppied out part of a Letter received from
each.

NOw dear Sir,
I beg your prayers, that I may be kept in the hour of my trial, from the
evil of every temptation incident to such a condition, and may be enabled to
do or to suffer whatsoever the will of the Lord is. I am a poor Creature, and
when I look upon my self, I am ready to say, Surely the Lord will not make use
of such an unworthy Creature as I am, in any such Honorable work in the World,
as to be counted worthy to suffer or do any thing for his name. But when I
consider in whom persons and performances are accepted, and made worthy, I am
silent, and can only say, I am in the hand of the Lord, let him do with me as
seems good unto him. Indeed, I have an unruly Natural temper, that is ready
to be running out to wrathful ways, pretending the accomplishment of the
righteousness of God thereby, but I desire to look on it as my burden and
shame, and to bewail it both in my self, and others; in whom I judge I see too
much of it, especially some suffering Saints, both in their speaking and
writing: which is a sore blemish, making them much unlike our Lord and Master,
who when he was reviled, reviled not again; and when evil entreated,
threatened not; neither does it answer that blessed counsel, Psalm. 37.
throughout. O could we be found more in Christ's Lamblike posture in which he
overcomes, Revel. 17. we should also be more glorious, and speedy over-comers.
Faith and Prayer when joined with humility, meekness, and patience, seldom
miss an eminent success, whatever it be they contend against; this is a
portion my Soul wants, beg it for me, and exhort to it in others.


SIR:
I shall not detain you longer, but let you know that hitherto the Lord has
been with me, and I find that Christ's Sufferings have so large a present
allowance, that even besides the future wages of Glory which shall be revealed
in us, we are gainers of more than can be spoken, Love, Light, Freedom,
Power, and what not, that is good for us? and truly Gods choice has been so
clear both as to matter and manner of Sufferings, that were it to begin again,
I think we should be rather apprehensive of being over-set with the honor and
comfort, than to be sunk with fear or trouble; but whether the Baptism is
fully accomplished is yet to me a question; me thinks this is too casie for a
Crown, the drops of blood are yet to come, at least it must not be my will,
but the Lords; and if the remainder of wrath shall be restrained, it must be
from them that lie free among the dead, over whom the worldly life has no
power, no more than the second Death; so that if our Father sees we may be
without danger to our selves, or hazard to his own concernments, adventured a
while longer in this world of trouble and temptation, he may suspend taking us
to himself; and yet surely the fiery Chariot must be made ready, the Lord grant
that our faith fail not; if we boggle at the passage, we may come short of
the Kingdom, living testimonies of dying Saints for their Lord and Master, did
make a quick dispatch of worldly Principalities; Kings of Armies must flee
apace when God gives the word, and the company grows great that publish it.


The Contents of the ensuing Treatises.
1 The Conformity of a Saint to the will of God. On Act. 21.14. THe Text opened
and explained Page 1 Doct. That it is a great and special duty lying upon
Saints even in the most hard and difficult cases, to have their wills bowed,
and submitted to the will of God p. 2 The definition of Divine submission to
the will of God p. 3 opened, p. 2. to 8 The Division of this submission to the
will of God, p. 9. opened, p. 9. to 11 The Obligation lying upon the creature
to submit to this will of God, 12. This opened in many particulars to p. 14 The
Excellency of this blessed work set forth in several particulars p. 14. to 16
The Evil of not submitting to the will of God; the greatness of it set forth in
several particulars. p. 16. to 18 General Rules to bring us to, and further us
in this submission p. 18. to 20. Cases of Conscience about submission of our
wills to Gods p. 20. to 66
2 The will of God and Christ concerning Sinners. On Gal. 1.4. The Text opened
page 67, 68 Doct. That the Salvation and Sanctification of poor sinners is the
will of God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ p. 68 What Will of God is
here spoken of p. 69 That it is the will of God and Christ sinners should be
saved, proved p. 70 Christ's will manifested in two particulars ibid, God the
Fathers will showed in several particulars p. 71 to 75 Reasons why it must
needs be that God the Father is willing p. 75. to 81 Reasons why it must needs
be that Jesus Christ is willing, from p. 82, to 90 Object. If it be thus,
Then will it follow, that all sinners must necessarily be saved? This answered
p. 90, 91 Object. That God will have all men to be saved, answered p. 92
Object. But what encouragement does this afford to the faith of poor sinners,
to say, God and Christ are willing, etc. Answered ibid. Object. But if it be
not the will of God and Christ that all sinners should be saved, then I may
presume in laying hold on the Premise, because I may be one of those whom it
is the will of God not to save? Answered ibid. Object. But would it not be
better for the faith and comfort of poor souls, to say, that God would have, or
that God does will it, that all should be saved? Answered ibid. Use 1. Then
let poor sinners hence be encouraged, notwithstanding all the suggestions of
Satan, and cavils of their own hearts, to come to Christ for salvation p. 94,
95 Use 2. Comfort to the Saints, your salvation is sure, you have God and
Christ, the will of either engaged for you p. 96 Use 3. Duty to the Saints.
Then be you willing to do, or suffer any thing for God p. 97
3 No Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Proved in Seven Sermons,
on Romans 8.1. Sermon. I. The Text opened p. 98 Doct. Souls interessed in Jesus
Christ, are persons privileged, and exempted from Condemnation p. 99 What is
meant by Condemnation, opened p. 100 to 103 Why souls in Christ must needs be
freed from it p. 103, to 105 What that is which frees those which are in Christ
from Condemnation p. 105, 106 How great and glorious a Privilege this is,
showed p. 107, to 100 Objections answered p. 110, 111 Use 1. See then what a
vast difference there is, betwixt the condition of one that has interest in
Christ, and another man ibid. Use 2. How blessed is the condition of every one
that has interest in Christ ibid. Use 3. Then how great a sin, and how much
below their condition, is un^^leef in the people of God p. 112 Use 4. This
casts many persons, and brings most men under condemnation ibid. Use 5. This is
comfort to the Saints against the guilt of all sin whatsoever p. 114
Sermon. II. Doct. That our freedom from Condemnation comes from our in-being in
Jesus Christ p. 115 That Saints have in-being in Christ proved, p. 115. to 118
What in-being in Christ Saints have showed p. 119, 120 That by in-being in
Christ Saints are freed from Condemnation, proved p. 121, 122 Object. But I
fear I have no in-being in Christ, for surely had I in-being in Christ, I
should grow and thrive more than I do, etc. answered, p. 123 Object. But my
doubt is not so much about Gifts, as Grace, I do not find my self to grow in
grace, and this begets all my fears, answered p. 124, 125 Object. But I do not
only find a want of growth in grace, but I clearly find a declining in grace,
both in root and branches, etc. answered p. 126 Use. This shows us the glorious
privileges of all those that have in-being in Christ, they are freed from
condemnation p. 127
Sermon. III. What is meant by Flesh, and what by Spirit, showed in the general
p. 130. to 133. in particular p. 133. to 136 What is meant by Legal walking,
showed, p. 137. to 140 When a man's walk may be said to be such; a pure Legal
walking, or a walking after the Law as it is a Covenant of works, showed p.
140. to 145
Sermon. IV. Why Legal walking is called walking after the flesh showed, p. 147
to 150 That those persons who are freed from Condemnation, do not walk
legally, or after the flesh, showed p. 150. to 152 An Objection answered p.
153, 154 Use 1. This discovers to us, that there are abundance of
rotten-hearted Professors in the World, p. 155. to 158 Use 2. By this we may
also take a scantling of our actions as well as our persons, p. 159. to 161 Use
3. How sad and pitiful is the condition of Legal walkers, they walk after the
flesh p. 162
Sermon. V. What Gospel-walking is, showed p. 164. to 166 That the Moral Law in
Gospel Times is a rule to Believers, proved by eight Arguments, p. 167. to 172
That it is a rule only as it is in the hands of Christ, proved by several
particulars p. 172. to 174 Quest. But how, or in what way are we to conceive
of the Law as it comes in the hands of Christ? answered p. 174. to 178 That to
yield obedience to the Law as it is in the hands of Christ is Gospel-walking,
proved p. 178, 179 Two great mistakes corrected, p. 180, 181
Sermon. VI. When a man's walk may be said to be a Gospel walk, or a walking after
the Gospel p. 182 What is the Gospel Principle p. 183 Quest. How shall I know
whether the Spirit is the principle of my obedience? answered p. 184 What are
Gospel Motives p. 185. to 193 What are Gospel ends p. 193. to 201 Why Gospel
walking is called walking after the Spirit p. 201, 202 That all those that are
freed from Condemnation walk after the Gospel p. 203, 204
Sermon. VII. Use 1. Hence we may learn the excellency of a Gospel walk p. 205,
206 Use 2. This shows us why there is such a mystery in Gospel walking, that a
mere Natural man cannot conceive what manner of walk a Gospel walk is p. 207.
to 209 Use 3. This truth it a touchstone to try men's persons and actions by p.
210 Use 4. Hence let us learn not to put too much in any outward form p. 211,
212 Quest. But when may a man be said to put too much in an outward form?
answered p. 213. to 218 Use 5. Then you which are Gospel Saints follow the
Spirit ibid. Quest. But how shall I come to this, to follow the Spirit?
answered p. 219 Quest. But put the case the Spirit of God goes before me, and I
do not know the same, how shall I come to know it? answered p. 220, 221

4 Christ's love to his own. On Joh. 13.1. The Text opened p. 222, 223 Doct.
Christ's love to his own, is a choice and an everlasting love p. 224 Who are
meant by Christ's own ibid In what respects Believers are called Christ's own,
p. 225. to 231 That Christ has a love to his own, proved, p. 232 That this
love of Christ to his own, is a choice, and an everlasting love p. 233, 234
The Application. 1 Christ will not see his own want p. 234 2 Let wicked men
take heed how they wrong Believers p. 235 3 Let not Saints injure one another
ibid.
The second part of the Application. 1 A Saint can never fall from the love of
Christ, p. 236 2 How blessed is the condition of the poorest Believer ibid. 3
How then do the Saints injure Jesus Christ, etc. ibid. 4 Take heed of sinning
against this love p. 237 5 Serve God freely and without fear ibid. 6 Labor to
get a portion of this love ibid.

5 True Gospel Humiliation. On Zach. 12.10 The Text opened p. 240: to 251 Obs.
1. That the pouring out of the Spirit upon any soul, is the proper and peculiar
work of God p. 252 Obs. 2. In the last day's the pouring out of the Spirit
shall be very general p. 253 Obs. 3. All grace is from the Spirit of God, the
spirit of grace ibid. Obs. 4. The gift of the Spirit is the gift of Free Grace
p. 254 Obs. 5. One maine and special work that the Spirit of God puts souls
upon where it is, is the work of Supplication or Prayer ibid. Obs. 6. In the
last days there shall be a greater pouring forth of the Spirit than or dinary
p. 255 Obs. 7. The sins of Believers do pierce Jesus Christ p. 256 Obs. 8.
Christ must be looked upon as pierced by us before we can mourn ibid. Obs. 9.
When Christ is looked upon as pierced by us, then we shall mourn ibid. Obs. 10.
That mourning which arises from the beholding of a pierced Christ, is a very
bitter and grievous mourning ibid. Obs. 11. None can thus look upon Christ, or
mourn for him, but only those upon whom God pours his Spirit ibid. Obs. True
Gospel Humiliation does arise from a looking upon a pierced Christ ibid. That
it does not arise from any other thing, and does from this, proved p. 257 What
manner of looking upon Christ this is p. 258 How this looking upon Christ as
pierced for sin begets this true Gospel Humiliation p. 260. to 264
6 The most effectual means to kill and subdue Sin. On 1 John 2.2. The Text
opened p. 265 Obs. 1. That the end of Gospel revelation is to keep men from sin
p. 266 That this must needs be the end of Gospel revelation, proved p. 266, 267
Use 1. See hence what great obligations lie upon persons living under the
Gospel Administration, to be holy p. 267 Use 2. This shows how great is their
evil, who take occasion from the grace of God to sin p. 268 Obs. 2. That the
discovery of the Grace of God in the Gospel toward sinners, is the most
effectual means of killing and subduing sin p. 269, 270 The reasons of the
Point p. 271. to 280 Use 1. See how the grace of God is wronged in the world,
when men cry out, this is your preaching of Free Grace, what comes of it, but
to make a company of Hippocrites, to make persons loose and profane p. 281 Use
2. Then, would thou overcome thy sins? study the grace of God more ibid.
7 The Advocateship of Jesus Christ, a great ground of Saints comfort and
support under sins and infirmities. On 1 John 2.2. The Text opened p. 287 Doct.
The best and dearest of Gods Children are not privileged from sin whilst they
are here, p. 288 Quest. Why does God suffer sin to be in his people? answered
in several particulars ibid. Use. Be not discouraged at the sight and feeling
of sin in thee p. 290 Doct. The Advocateship of Jesus Christ now he is in
Heaven, is a great ground of comfort, and support to Saints, against, and under
all their sins and infirmities ibid. What the Office of an Advocate is p. 291
What manner of Advocate Christ is, p. 292. to 298 Whose cause it is that Jesus
Christ as an Advocate pleads ibid. What those things are that Jesus Christ
pleads for, p. 299. to 301 The manner of his pleading p. 301, 302 The
prevalency of Christ's intercession, p. 303, 304 Why Christ is a Saints Advocate
p. 305 How this makes for the Saints support and comfort, p. 305, 306 What we
way learn hence as our duty, p. 306, to 308
8 The only way for Saints to be delivered from the errors and evils of the
times. In two Sermons on 1 Timothy 6.11. Sermon. I. The Text opened p. 309 Doct. The
only and special way for a Saint to be delivered from the errors and evils of
the times he lives in, is, to have his heart as much as may be taken up with,
and his spirit exercised about high and spiritual things, p. 310. This proved
p. 310. to 313 What is meant by Spiritual things p. 313. to 319 Obj. Must a
Saint only be exercised about Spiritual things, are there not some external
things which a Saint must exercise himself in and about? answered p. 319. to
322 Obj. Will you deny all study of these things, may not I study them, at
least to get satisfaction if it may be had concerning them, or in case there
be any truth in them, if possible to find it out? answered p. 322. to 326
Sermon. II. The reasons of the Point p. 328. to 331 Use 1. Hence we may learn
what is the grand cause of all those errors and evils, which swarm and abound
in this our age p. 331, 332 Use 2. This tells us, That there are many who yet
are not humbled that stand upon slippery ground, and will tumble in time, if
they do not come off it p. 333 Use 3. Would thou be delivered from the
dangerous errors and evils of the times and places thou do live in? embrace
this remedy, get thy heart exercised in, and taken up with Spiritual things, p.
334 Motives to persuade to this p. 335. to 339 Quest. How shall I come to have
my heart taken up with spiritual things? answered p. 340. to 344

9 Of the Old Covenant, from Gal. 4.30. The Preface to the ensuing Discourse by
a friend to the Author p. 345. to 359 The text opened p. 360, 361 The Types
unvailed and opened p. 362. to 364 Some general Positions. Posit. 1. That the
application of Abraham's History, etc. to the two Covenants, is a thing that
stands upon Divine warrant p. 365 Posit. 2. That the two Covenants are two
diverse and distinct Covenants, not one under two Administrations ibid. Posit.
3. That the ground of this distinction does not lie in regard of time, etc.
ibid. Four Notes from this Position p. 366. to 368 Posit. 4. That the two
Covenants are not two diverse Covenants of Grace p. 369 Posit. 5. That the two
Covenants in the matters of our Justification, and Salvation, ought not to be
confounded or joined together, but to be separated at the greatest distance
ibid.
Quest. When are the Covenants mixed or joined together? answered p. 369, 370
Two things in the Text, a Definitive Sentence, the reason of it p. 371 Quest.
What are we to understand by the Old Covenant? answered p. 372. to 375 Quest.
Whether are we to understand this of the whole Law, or of a part only? answered
ibid. Eight Arguments to prove, that not only the Ceremonial and Political Law,
but the Moral also appertains to the Old Covenant p. 376. to 381 Obj. That by
proving the Moral Law to belong to the Old Covenant, and affirming the Old
Covenant is to be cast out, we have destroyed and made void the Moral Law,
etc. answered, p. 382 Quest. What is that of the Moral Law which does
appertain to the Bondwoman, and what that which appertains to the
Freewoman? answered p. 383 Quest. What was that which once was in the Moral
Law as the Old Covenant, which now by Christ's bringing the same into the New
Covenant, is no longer in it? Again, what is that that the Moral Law,
notwithstanding this its translation from the Old Covenant to the New, does
still retain of what it had before, etc. answered p. 385. to 390 Several
useful Lessons arising from this double consideration of the Moral Law. 1 We
may learn how to reconcile such Scriptures as seem to have opposition and
contradiction in them about the Law, p. 391. to 393 2 That the Moral Law does
still remain as a Rule to Saints even in Gospel times, this proved by Fourteen
Arguments p. 394 to 401 3 That the very same work or duty for the substance or
matter of it done by one, may be a legal work; done by another, an Evangelical,
p. 402, 403 4 That a true Believer, as he does not expect life, and salvation
from his obedience to the Law, so should he not fear death and condemnation,
either by his falling short in obedience, or by his disobedience p. 404
Obj. Such a Principle as this does open a wide gap to all manner of
licentiousness, answered p. 405, 406 Q. 2. What kind of Covenant this Old
Covenant is. That the Old Covenant cannot be a Covenant of Grace, proved by
thirteen Arguments p. 408. to 414 That it cannot be the same with the New,
proved by six Reasons p. 414, 415 That the Old and the New, cannot be two
distinct Covenants of Grace p. 416. Hence learn 1 That it is not safe for us to
take up Principles merely from men, though ever so good men and able p. 417 2
That Justification, peace of Conscience here, Salvation hereafter, is not
attainable by the Old Covenant ibid. 3 That whatsoever work may be in a man, or
upon him, by virtue of the Old Covenant, and the power that it has over
Conscience, is not a work of grace p. 418, 419
Qu. What kind of Covenant is this Old Covenant? answered, That it is a
Conditional Covenant, p. 420 The two great gifts of the Old Covenant, p. 421
The Blessings of the Old Covenant. 1 Outward and Temporal, 1 Blessings more
common in Seven particulars. p. 422, to 429 2 Blessings more special and
peculiar. 1 More generally, how the Father, Son, and Spirit are the gift of the
Old Covenant p. 430. to 433 2 More particularly, there is a resemblance in the
Old Covenant, of 1. Election. 2. Vocation. 3. Reconciliation and remission of
sins. 4. Adoption. 5. Union. 6. Communion, 7. Sanctification. 8. Glorification,
9. Special and peculiar Ordinances. 10. Special Gifts and Graces, etc. p. 434.
to 447
The condition required for attaining and keeping of these outward blessings p.
448. to 450
2 Blessings spiritual and eternal, this proved by several particulars p. 451.
to 455
Obj. This makes the Law or Old Covenant to be against the Promises, which the
Apostle expressly dis-ownes, Gal. 3.21. yea makes it to disanul the Promise,
which he tells us the Old Covenant cannot do, ver. 17, answered p. 456, 457 Q.
But what was the condition required for the giving forth the spiritual and
eternal blessings of the Old Covenant? answered p. 458. to 461 Obj. But why did
God establish the Old Covenant for life, and yet hold forth this life upon such
terms, as that the Covenant ordained to life could give life to none? answered
p. 462, 463.

The conformity of a Saint to the Will of God.
Acts 21.14. The Will of the Lord be done.


THese words are the issue or conclusion of a very great Combat betwixt Grace
and Affection, and they hold forth unto us a glorious Conquest obtained by
Grace over affection.

The Saints and Brethren at Cesarea, who after much wrestling utter these
words, were at present under a sore Trial by reason of Paul's intended journey
to Jerusalem, the Holy Ghost in all places testifying that there bonds and
afflictions did abide him. Affections hereupon in them tug hard to pull him
backward, the Spirit of God in Paul bears witness to his way and call, and
thereby presses him forward; at last when they perceive by the stedfastness of
his resolution that the thing was indeed of God, they straightway throw up the
Bucklers, surrender their beloved Paul, and their affections and wills also
with him to the sole disposal of Gods will: The will of the Lord be done.

Here is the close of the Battle, Affection is subdued, and Will with it; Grace
comes off the ground an absolute Conqueror.

This sweet and imitable practice of theirs learneth us this lesson.

That it is a great and special duty lying upon Saints even in the most hard
and difficult Cases, to have their wills bowed, and submitted to the Will of
God.

This (of theirs) was a hard Case, to part with Paul their Spiritual Father,
who was dearer to them than their lives, yea to part with him upon such terms
as not (for ought they knew) to see his face any more; yet if it be the Will of
God they will not withstand it, but Will and Affection shall freely give him
up, The Will of the Lord be done.

In prosecution of this necessary and useful Subject, I shall observe this
method.

1 Give the Definition (or Description rather) of the thing it self, What this
submission to the Will of God is.

2 The Division of it.

3 The Great Obligation that lies upon the Creature, to submit to this Will.

4 Wherein the Excellency of this blessed duty and Grace consists.

5 How great an Evil the contrary is.

6 How (in the general only) our wills may be brought to submit to the Will of
God.

7 Cases of Conscience, as touching submission of our wills to God.

I. The DEFINITION of it.
THis Divine submission to the Will of God, it is,

Ablessed frame of Soul, wrought within us by the holy Spirit, whereby the will
of the Creature is brought freely, quietly, and with a holy delight to lay it
self down at the feet of God, to be disposed of in all things according to his
Will, not its ^^^ne.

1 I call it a Frame, to note,

1 The setledness of the Act, it is not a hasty sudden motion, or resolution, I
will submit to Gods Will, which sometimes arises from a present flash of
conviction or affection, and dies again with that; but a settled habitual
Principle, causing a Soul, whether sense or affection ebb or flow, to be upon
a level in this respect, of having its Will conformed to Gods.

2 The way by which we come by it, and maintain it; which is not so much by
using force or violence, as by an orderly gentle motion; for violence breaks a
frame, and puts that thing out of frame which was in frame before. In framing
of a building, the way is not by violence to throw things together, that
produces confusion, and a heap, but no building; but by an orderly and gentle
motion directing each thing to its proper place, a building is produced: So
this submission to the Will of God is not attained, or kept by an offering
violence to the Will, plucking and haling it down forcible against the stream,
it shall submit, will it, nill it; but by an orderly gentle motion bringing the
Will about, turning the stream and current another way, making it hereby
willing to submit.

3 The easiness of the work (although in it self most hard) when once this
Principle is thoroughly implanted in the Soul, for it being a frame, motion is
more easy. An orderly frame conduces much to make any motion easy; take a
thing out of frame, as a Clock, Watch, etc. it moves hardly, and with
difficulty, but when in frame, the motion is pleasant and easy: So this
submission to the Will of God being a frame of Soul, the work as to all
particular acts, when once this is attained, goes on more easily.

Abraham's Soul being framed to it, it was easy work for Abraham to submit to
Gods will, God no sooner says, Abraham, leave thy Country, but he does it.
Abraham put the yoke of Circumcision upon thy own neck, and thy Families, and
Posterities, but he does it. Abraham, cast one Son out of doors, offer up thy
other, but he does it. The like was in Paul, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.

4 The confluence of Grace that must be to work this. There must be more than
one thing to make a frame, a Clock is framed of many wheels, a Building of
sundry materials; so this act is the result of the acting of many Graces.

Of Knowledge, that Gods Will is good, yea best for us.

Of Faith, to believe this.

Of Love, making us loath to go cross to God, and of the two to choose rather,
that God should be pleased than we.

Of Humility, making us willing to stoop, and vail our wills to God; a proud
will scorns to stoop.

Of Self-denial, causing us to lay our own desires and affections aside.

Of Patience, enabling us to take any thing in good part from God, without hard
thoughts, or words of, or against his Dispensations.

Of Contentedness, in suffering God to take any thing from us, yea though it be
our will, which the most of men had rather part with their lives than part with.

Secondly, I call it a frame, wrought by the holy Spirit, to distinguish it
from mere Natural and Moral frames, or those frames which may be in a man by
the temper and disposition of nature, or the exercise of morality Some persons
there are that either by natural a sposition, or moral exercise, have so
excel^ed in patience, meekness, temperance, etc. that a diligent observer of
them should rarely, in ^^po^t of these things, ever perceive them to be in the
excess; such have been among the Heathens formerly, and such (though they are
thin sown) may here and there be found yet; but these dispositions though they
seem so calm as not to be disturbed by any acts or changes of the Creature,
neither do nor can submit to the will of the Creator, as is evident hence,
because being despoyled of those Vices opposite to the aforesaid Virtues, they
have and do even thereby nourish and allow in themselves other Vices, as
Self-estimation, Vainglory, etc. as repugnant to the Will of God (yea rather
more) than any of the other.

Thirdly, I call it a frame within us, to note the seat of it, which is the
inward man. This submission to the Will of God it is a thing seated deep, in
the innermost parts of the Soul. Hence,

1 It is not always visible in that Soul in which it is.

2 It consists not in notion and speculation, (which is a thing more outward)
so much as in the exercise of the heart, and action of the Soul.

3 It can be only in those that are the true Children of God, and Members of
Jesus Christ, because in all others, not Gods Spirit, nor any thing of its, but
Satan the Prince of Darkness bears rule in, and possesses the inward man.

Fourthly, I call it such a frame, by which the will of the Creature is brought
freely, quietly, and with a holy delight to lay its self down at the feet of
God, to be disposed of according to his will, not its own.

1 Freely, this prostrating its self and its will at the feet of God, is (where
this grace of true submission to Gods will dwells) a free act. This
distingu^^^th it from that constrained submission found ^me. Some there are
that will say when a cross, an affliction comes, well, this is the Will of God,
I must submit to it; but this Divine submission is another thing, it makes the
Soul not to submit of necessity, but of choice. So far as this Grace acts
in any, the heart chooses to be, what it apprehends it is Gods Will it should
be.

2 Quietly, that is,

1 Without murmuring or repining at the thing. Though Israel followed the
Cloud, and therefore are said to go after God in the Wilderness, Jerem. 2.2.
yet they did not submit to Gods Will, but were Rebels, Numb. 17.10. chap.
20.10. because they were ever murmuring.

2 Without fretting (which is somewhat more than the former) the waspish Child
frets when the Father or Mother on it lets him have his will; but the towardly
obedient Child frets not when his Father denies him this or that thing, because
he wills to have nothing but what his Father will let him have.

3 Without charging God foolishly, i. e. complaining of his dealings, as though
he were hard, and over severe to us. This was a sweet frame in Job, chap.
1.22. yet here mistake not, I do not say that we should (especially when the
thing in which we are to submit, sits very close, and pincheth hard) make no
complaint to God, that were stupidity; but we are not so to complain as to
charge God, or lay any blame on him; I may in a sober submissive way tell him
how great my affliction is, how unable I am to bear it; but I must not blame
him for laying it on me.

4 Without striving and struggling against the stream, i. e. running cross in
our affections, desires, endeavors, to that thing which God is doing, or about
to do with us.

5 Without perplexing our selves about the issue. We ordinarily look to the
issue of Gods Actions concerning us, O what will be the issue? and we conclude
the worst; whereas our duty is, where we see his Will, to be quiet, and trust
him with the issue of his actions.

6 Without shifting and sharking to avoid Gods will. How did Jonas shark to put
off that work God sent him about? and Moses little less at first, when God was
sending him into Egypt.

7 Without providing our selves beforehand with shelters, to fence our selves
against that evil that we do forecast will come upon us, by giving our selves
up to Gods Will. Some will do Gods Will, but so, as that if danger befall
them, they will have their shelter ready, and be provided beforehand; whereas
this is an Argument of a distrustful unquiet spirit, my duty is, to do what I
apprehend is Gods Will, and trust God to shelter me.

8 Without risings, swellings, and boylings of heart against God, bringing
forth desperate speeches, such as was that, 2 King. 6. last.

3 With a holy delight, i. e. approving of the thing, and delighting in it,
whatsoever it be, so far as I see Gods Will therein; thus Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Thus also Hezekiah, Isa.
39.8. Good is the Word of the Lord.

Fifthly and lastly, I add. in every thing, i. e. in every thing so far as
God shall make known his Will in that thing, but not otherwise; for this
Divine submission, is to that thing that has Gods Will written upon it, and
not unto a blank.

II. The DIVISION of it.
THis submission to the Will of God is twofold.

1 GENERAL, which I take to be this; when the bent and inclination of the Soul
stands to that thing, whatsoever it be, which is the Will of God, when God
shall reveal and make known to me his Will to be in that thing. This may be
where particular acts of submission are not. 2 PARTICVLAR, which I understand
to be this; when the Will of God being revealed to me in this or that
particular case, whatsoever the case be, though ever so contrary to my own
will or interest, yet I strait way submit to, and close in with the Will of
God.
Upon this distinction I ground these two Positions.

1 That when the particular thing in which I am to submit, is dark to me, a
submission to the Will of God in general, is of God accepted, and accounted
submission to his Will. 2 That I may run quite cross to the Will of God in
this or that particular case, as touching which his mind is not as yet
revealed to me, and yet submit to his Will, if my will hold firm to Gods in
the general.
The Case of Abraham proves both these, his whole life (as is most evident from
the Story of him) was a submission to Gods Will; yet in a particular case
propounded to him by Sarah before yet he knew the Will of God concerning it,
viz. the casting out of Hagar and Ishmael, he takes it very hainously, and
opposes himself at first to that very thing which yet was Gods Will, and God
does no way blame him at all for it, only brings Abraham out of the dark, by
telling him what his Will was, and then he submits himself to Gods Will even
in that also.

Again, Particular submission to the Divine Will is twofold.

1 A submission to the Will of God in respect of things behind us, and already
past. 2 A submission to the Will of God in respect of things before us, and to
come.
The first respects Gods ways of Providence toward the Creature; the second,
the Creatures ways of obedience toward God.

Submission to Gods Will as it respects things behind us, and already past, is,

A quiet submitting frame of Soul under this or that thing that is befallen it,
though the thing in it self, or at leastwise in the apprehension of the Soul
has something that is evil in it (the evil of Punishment I mean, not of Sin)
as Sickness, loss of credit, estate, friends, etc. upon this account, that this
or that thing is befallen it, either through the agency or permission of Divine
Providence.

Here note, that the thing about which this submission of Soul, as it respects
Providential Acts is exercised, must be something that at leastwise has a face
and countenance of evil; for the act of the Soul in closing with that thing
which carries good in the face of it, is not properly submission, because good
is a thing which the Soul by a Natural propensity, or a kind of inbred
promptness, and readiness, closes with, and embraces.

Submission to the Will of God as it respects things before us, and to come, is,

A submitting frame of Soul unto that thing whatsoever it be, though never so
cross to its nature, interest, or principles it has formerly taken up, that
God makes known to the Soul to be any part of its duty, either toward him, its
neighbor, or its self.

This latter submission to Gods Will respects the way of our duty, and not
Divine Providence as the former; the reason why Providence comes not at all in
here, is, because the events and issues of Providence cannot certainly be
known till they are in being, now when once a thing is in being, it is then no
longer to be looked upon as a thing before, and to come, but as a thing
behind, and already past; and so the relation it has is not to this latter,
but the former. Though therefore in the general submission we are to submit to
God in the way of his Providence before we see it in being, yet can we not in
the particular, because we have not a certain knowledge of the issues of
Providence till we see them. Indeed we find in Scripture examples of Saints
that did submit with this particular submission to acts of Providence before
they were in being, as Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. Hezekiah, Isa. 39.8. but note, they
were assured of these things beforehand by an infallible Spirit, and in that
respect the things were as certain to them as if they had been in being; we
having not assurance as touching future acts of Providence that may befall us,
or Gods Church, by such a Spirit now, their example is not our rule.

III. The OBLIGATION lying upon the Creature to submit to this Will is
manifold, arising from,
1 THe Pattern Christ himself has left us, Matthew, 26.39.

2 The Pattern holy men have left us, as Abraham in three most difficult Cases.

1 Leaving his Country and relations, Genesis 12.1, etc. 2 Casting out Ishmael his
first borne, Genesis 21. 3 Offering up Isaac the Son of his old Age, yea of the
Promise, Genesis 22. of Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. of David, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. of
Hezekiah, Isa. 39.8.
3 The praying absolutely that Gods will might be done on earth, as it is in
heaven, Mat. 6.

4 The equity that is in the thing it self, that the inferior should submit to
the Superior, the Creature to the Creator.

5 The impossibility of altering or changing this Will, by offering resistance
or violence to it.

6 The confusion that would be in man, considering his own will is mutable,
and oftentimes contradictory to it self, in case there should not be some other
immutable will, which remains ever one and the same, for man's will to center
in.

7 The safety and security of our wills, whilst by centring in the Divine Will,
which is Omnipotent, they continually lie under the protection of it, so that
hereby no power of Earth or Hell can surprise them, steal them from us, make
use of them against us.

8 The certainty of having whatsoever we will, whilst we will nothing but what
is the Will of God.

9 The blessed rest and freedom of that Soul from all perplexed thoughts and
distractions, which has its will resigned to Gods, and its self committed to
his dispose in all things.

10. The certain and assured hope that Soul may have that nothing but good
shall or can befall it, whilst its will stands resigned to Gods, whose Will,
and every act of it, is absolutely, perfectly, and superlatively good.

11 The admirable perfections of this Will it self, which is,

1 An infinite Will, a will that knows no finite bounds or limits.

2 An immutable Will, which always wills the same thing, and in the same
manner, Psalm. 33.11.

3 A most wise Will, which wills nothing but with infinite Wisdom
foreseeing, and thoroughly knowing from Eternity every Action, and every
Circumstance belonging to it, that attends in time the thing it wills.

4 A most Omnipotent will, which by no Creative power can be compelled to act,
or hindered from acting.

5 A most Independent Will, which has no rule but it self, acts absolutely by
it self, and from its self, and according to its own counsel.

6 A most perfect Will, deficient in willing nothing whatsoever it be that is
necessary to the perfecting our Grace here, or Glory hereafter.

7 An eternal Will, never beginning to will what once it did not will, nor
ceasing to will what once it willed.

Lastly, A most righteous Will, which wills nothing but what is righteous, as
willed by it, and wills it in a righteous way.

IV. The EXCELLENCY of this blessed Work and Grace appears, in these things,
1 IT is one of the highest demonstrations of an One-ness with God. The Will
is the principal and the ruling part in man, whilst that is one with God, the
whole man is one with him. When a King makes a League with another, all his
Subjects make League with him; the Will is King, Lord, chief Commander in the
Soul, when that closes with God, the whole man closes; when the Will melts
into Gods Will, and is swallowed up in it, all the affections melt together,
and are swallowed up therewith.

2 It conduces greatly to a constant living in God, and to him; in improper
phrase we use to say, that a man is where his will is; if our wills be in Gods,
our life is there. Enoch is said to walk with God, but how? the Apostle tells
us, Heb. 11.5. He pleased God, i. e. in effect to say, he served not his own
will and desires, but Gods.

3 It is the nearest conformity that can be in us to the life of Angels; Angels
are perfect conformists to Gods Will, and therefore we are bid to pray, that
the Will of God by us might be done on Earth, as it is by Angels in Heaven.

4 It is the most acceptable Sacrifice we can offer up to God; Abels Sacrifice
found acceptance because it was of the fat, the will I may call the fat, for it
is the best part of man, when this is offered up to God, we offer up the fat.
Elies Sons made the Sacrifices of the People to be abhorred, because they took
the fat to themselves; our services though never so many and great will be
abhorred, if this fat be taken from them.

5 It is abundance of Grace in one lump, the exercise of much grace together,
or in one act, as before I have noted.

6 It is the most perfect imitation of Christ; the highest act (as I may so
say) of Christ's obedience, was his submission of his will to his Fathers,
therefore the Holy Ghost makes the whole of his obedience to lie chiefly in
this, Heb. 10.7, 8, 9. compared with Psalm 40.6, 7, 8.

7 It is better for us to submit to Gods Will than to have our own wills:
there is no grate acted in the one, much in the other; I am oft-times made
worse by the one, seldom or never better, but always bettered by the other;
Self-love is the root that the one grows upon, but love to God the root of the
other.

8 It is the way to have our Mercies given to us again, when we give them up to
God in a way of submission to his will; Abraham gives his Isaac to God, and God
gives him his Isaac again; Job takes it well at Gods hands in taking his Estate
from him, God gives him his Estate double again.

V. The EVIL of not submitting to the Will of God is very great, for,
1 IT is rebellion against the great God, as he is absolute Lord, and Sovereign
of the Creature. For a King to declare his Will by a Law, and the Subject to
say I Will not submit to it, is (among men) rebellion in him as a Subject; yet
this case falls short of ours, for no King is so absolute a Sovereign, as that
the bodies, lives, Souls of his Subjects are by right at his dispose; yet such
is God, who therefore may command all, and we are bound to submit.

2 It is against Saints relation to God as a Father, Christ as their Husband;
it is not fit for the Child to say when the Father says, do such a thing, I
will not do it; nor does it become the relation of a Wife to say, Husband I
will love you, only know this, I will not submit to you, when as it is the
great duty of her relation.

3 It thwarts our Christian Profession; Christian Profession declares us to be
the Servants of God, it is meet the Servant should be ruled by the Masters
will, not his own.

4 It fights against the life of Faith; what is the life of Faith, but a
constant reliance upon God, this reliance being the act of the will cease to
be, whenever the will starts aside.

5 It is to declare our selves wiser than God, whilst we submit not our wills
to his; for this is certain, God bids us to veil our wills to his in nothing
but what he judges best for us, for us therefore in this or that thing not to
submit, is in effect to say, Lord, in this or that thing, I know what is good
for my self better than thou do.

6 It makes our condition worse whatsoever it be; A man in a Quick-sand, the
more he struggles the deeper he sinkes; so it is with the Soul that struggles
against the will of God, his condition whatsoever it be is made worse by it.

7 It makes our whole life uncomfortable, and us weary of it, Jonas his stout
will made him at last even weary of his life, Jonah 4.3.9.

8 It renders us unthankful for mercy, for note, there is no dealing of God
with his but has mercy in it; now when in this or that dealing I cannot submit
to Gods will, I do neither see my mercy, nor am thankful for it.

VI. The RVLES IN THE GENERAL which may bring us to, and further us in this
submission, are,
1 SEt this always before thine eyes, and let it be thy Christian Motto, GODS
WILL IS BEST.

2 Forbear making conclusions as touching Gods dealings with thee, until such
time as God has given thee his light to judge of them, or thou art come to the
end of them. Men ordinarily make conclusions by the light of their own reason,
or whilst they are in the middle of a Dispensation. This confounds them, and
makes them to quarrel with Gods dealings, so as they can take nothing well.

3 Keep thy heart and affections loose from the Creature; if they are entangled
and engaged that way, they will draw in thy will with them, then must it needs
depart from the Will of God; that motion that lies toward the Creature is from
the Creator.

4 Take not hold of Christ's strength by fits, only to serve thine own turn
when thou art at a dead lift, but let him be thy daily strength, thy strength
to every action, thy strength in every condition; then shall thou in all
conform to the Will of God.

5 Apprehend thy will when it begins to start, and give thy heart charge with
it as with a run a-way. The Cockatrice is best crushed when in the egg; the
Serpent in the will when he first begins to stir.

6 Think not more hardly of God because of present dealings, than thou find
thou have cause to think of him for dealings past.

7 Confirm thy self as much as may be in those thoughts that thou art a fool,
and do not know in the least what is good for thy self; the more thou have
drunk in this opinion of thy self, the more willing thou will be to be at
Gods dispose.

8 Study the Covenant of Grace more, the light of that in the Soul will expel
the dark conclusions of carnal reason; which do ever oppose Gods Will. The
knowledge of this Covenant is the only foundation of all good thoughts of God,
and his dealing with us.

9 Reckon thy self never to be well disposed, but then when God has the
disposing of thee.

10 Labor for the grace of Self-denial, he that is without that can never deny
himself of his will, which is the hardest piece for a man to deny himself in,
of all that is called Self.

11 Remember this is the very way to have thine own will, yea even what thou will. What would many a man give or do that he might have his will? here is a
way for men to have their wills; submit thy will to Gods, and thou shall have
thy will continually. Christ says to the Woman of Canaan upon her believing, O
woman, be it unto thee even as thou will; so may I say to the submitting Soul,
Soul be it unto thee even as thou will. What sweet quiet flows hence into the
Soul, for what can displease a man when he has his will? such a man likes such
a thing very well, what is the matter? O say you, he has his will, and what
should trouble him? The very reason why we are frustrated many times of our
wills is this, because we do not submit them to the Will of God.

VII. Cases of Conscience about submission of our wills to Gods.
PUt the Case, I am in the dark or doubtful, as touching this or that thing
that I should do, this or that way, that I should walk in, how shall I therein
submit to the WILL OF GOD?

Ans. The Will of God may be considered (according to our former distinction)
either as relating to things behind us, and already past, or things before us
and to come.

Our question concerns not the first, because in things past, there cannot be
a doubt as touching the Will of God; whatsoever comes to pass is by his Will,
either permissively, or actively, for his will being omnipotent overrules and
swaies all actions, and nothing can be done without it; now whether Gods will
be in a thing permissively, or actively, it is to be submitted to in both,
because God being absolute Lord and Sovereign of the Creature, whatsoever he
does, it is reason the Creature should submit to the doing of it. Job was
stripped bare and naked of all, by the permissive will of God, God permitting
Satan for the trial of Job, to despoyl him of all that he had; to this Job
submits, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name
of the Lord.

Christ drunk that bitter cup of his Passion by the active will of his Father?
and therefore the Lord is said to bruise him, to put him to grief, to make his
soul an offering for sin, to lay on him the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6.10.
to drink this cup Christ submits, Matthew. 26.39, 42. so that consider the will
of God as permissive or active, in both it is to be submitted to, if it be in
such things as the will of God in them is clear, so as that no doubt remains
about it, for whether God will permissively or actively, when once that will is
clear and determined, the Creatures duty is to submit, therefore with things
past, in which remains no doubt of the will of God, our present Case and
Question medleth not.

It therefore looks to such things only as are before us, and to come, now of
these, some there are, yea most, which are manifenstly beyond scruple
determined, and so are to us as clearly and evidently Gods will as are things
passed.

Of this sort are all those things which are either expressly commanded, or
forbidden in the Word of God, I mean are commanded or forbidden by clear and
undeniable precepts and prohibitions, whose very look is to that very thing*
now observe, that whatsoever by a clear and punctual precept or prohibition
pointing at the very case, is commanded or forbidden, I am to conclude for
certain that it is the will of God, because Gods Word is his will written
out, and sent to the Creature, our present case therefore meddles not with
these neither.

To come to the point therefore, where the stress of this case lies, It
concerns such things only as being before us, and to come, are not by any
express precept or prohibition left us in the Word of God so determined, as
that we may whilst we stand betwixt two things or ways, by having recourse to
the unquestionable rule, resolve our selves which of them is to be chosen, upon
the account that this rather than the other, is the will of God.

As for instance, suppose I have a tallent to improve for God, and the question
arises, whether I shall improve it here, or there, though it is a thing
determined, that my tallent is to be improved, yet whether I am to make
improvement of it in this place or that, is a thing that the precept has left
me more dark in, and is therefore more hard to resolve.

Here then is the present Case and Question, how I shall in doing such things
as God has not left me clear and undoubted footsteps in his Word to go upon,
to find out his will in them by, so act, as that in my action I may conform
to his will?

For answer, take this as an undoubted certain Rule, that God does not require
thee to make his wilthy rule any further than he has given thee some certain
rule to know his will by; for should God do so, he must necessarily require
obedience without faith, for I can no further obey in says, than I know that
what I do in obeying, is agreeable to the will of God; but now as obedience
without Faith is in it self sinful, Romans 14. yea displeasing to him, Heb. 12.
and therefore is not a thing required by God. Nay further, obedience of this
nature cannot be any part of submission to the will of God, no though whilst I
thus run at a venture I do that very thing which is the will of God; for
submission to the will of God does necessarily require a knowledge of that
will, for how can I be said to do a thing with submission to that, which is so
dark to me that I cannot certify mine own Conscience whether the thing I do
have an harmony or discord with that thing, which my action is done in
submission unto, though therefore I do the very thing which is the will of
God, yet do I not do it as submitting to that will, because the will of God
not known cannot be a rule; now in the present case I not knowing it, neither
is my Conscience persuaded this way or that way upon this account, that this
way rather than that, is Gods will in such cases, therefore I may do the will
of God, yet not submit to his will.

2 Mind our distinction as touching submission to the will of God, laid down at
first, viz. There is a general and particular submission to Gods will; a
general, when the Souls bent is to do the will of God did it know it; a
particular, when the Soul does the Will of God in this or that thing so far
as it knows it; if therefore the present case be such, that thou can not
clearly and fully satisfy thy self as to the particular act of submission,
give up thy will to Gods will in the general, and this as I have said, is in such
cases accepted of God, and accounted submission to his will.

Obj. But the Soul not yet satisfied will say, can there be no rule in such
cases found out for me to go by, though I have not an express rule, yet have I
not a rule at least by consequence, or a rule that will help me thus far,
that when I stand betwixt two ways, or two things, that I may determine, that
I may choose this way, or this thing rather than the other.

Ans. Though there be not in this case a clear and punctual Rule, yet so much
there is as that all things thoroughly weighed together, he thing in conclusion
will amount to little less; now for direction herein mind what follows.

1 Observe narrowly which way that is, in going, wherein thou may expect to
meet with, and encounter most temptations, and shun that way; the Reason is of
weight, because the strength and subtilty of the Tempter being above and beyond
my wisdom and strength, I may not unless God put me upon him, rush my self on
him.

Indeed if I were assured that this, or that way were the way God wills me to go
in, then put case I clearly saw the Tempter stand upon the Road, I may venture
upon the face of him, because as it is clearly my duty rather to venture being
foiled, than to disobey God, so the strength and wisdom of God which Faith can
challenge as its own, whilst it has assurance its foot is in Gods way, is
infinitely greater than all the power and policy of the Tempter; and therefore
although it venture upon an enemy much stronger than it self, yet the power
with it is greater than that against it: But when the case is otherwise, that I
cannot see the will of God, I must be cautious how I venture into that Road,
where I see the Devil to stand, and lie in wait for me, lest I lead my self
into temptation, which I ought not to do: Therefore the very seeing the Devil
in this or that way, if I do not hear the Lords voice saying, Go that way, is
warning enough to bid me take heed how I come there.

But the soul may reply to it self, Perhaps, O my soul, thou do not like that
way, and therefore thou fanciest thou see temptation there, and so flyest it,
whereas if thou would make the venture, thou should find it otherwise.

I confess a man's heart may easily deceive it self, and suppose a temptation,
and therewith fright it self, when and where indeed is none.

At last it must be answered by the soul it self; For considering the
different Natures, Principles, and Dispositions, and different measures of
grace given, that may be a temptation to one man, which is none to another. As
for example, a soul weak in the faith, every cross providence, or the hearing
of a threatening read, is a temptation to him to question his condition; But it
is not so to him who is strong in the faith: Again, a man of an affable kind
sweet nature, the unkindness of one whom he dearly loves, is a temptation to
him, but not so to a man that is by nature ruff and rugged. So for principles,
one man has a principle, to join in communion with such only as are of his
opinion, another principle is to hold communion with Saints as Saints; if the
one meet with another, who is of a differing mind from himself, his own
principle is a temptation to him, not so the others. Therefore the soul is best
able to tell, after it has taken an impartial view of the measure of grace
bestowed upon it, whether more or less, its nature, principles, disposition, of
all which (a man considered from under the byas of this, or the other
temptation or corruption) is best judge himself: though yet, the Proverbial
saying is true, (understanding it no otherwise then as a man is under the byas
of some temptation, or corruption) that no man is a competent judge of himself.
I say therefore, when we have said all that we can, upon this ground, the
soul must make the conclusive answer.

Observe the tempations, and weigh them thoroughly, whether they are like to be
so to thee; For that may be a temptation to one, that in it self is none to
another. Here you must have recourse to the former Rules your principles,
disposition, nature, and measure of grace received. And when thou have in an
equal balance weighed all these, then because thou have in the present case
no other Rule, advise what Reason says: And if upon a through debate Reason
gives in its verdict, that notwithstanding in such a way an enemy does lie;
yet in an ordinary way his shot may not hurt thee; the weight of the case is
much lessened, yet do I not say it is answered, because that may be a
temptation to one, that in it self may not be to another; considering him
according to the present mould of his principles, disposition, etc. yet in case
there should be alteration in these, then may that which is a temptation to
another, be so to him also.

But now if contrariwise, Reason affirm, that upon a thorough pondering of all
it apprehends, its most likely, that by reason of the present constitution of
thy principles, etc. This enemies shot should reach thee, and it must be a
thing more than ordinary if it do not then etc.

Observe whether in such a way, temptations are visible to an eye of Reason; if
so, then it is not a fantasy, but a thing to be heeded: For we are now going
by the Rule of Right reason, and must diligently observe what it dictates; if
Reason therefore (in such a case as this is, in which the word says nothing to
me) tell me, there lies an enemy in ambush in such a way, I am herein to
suffer my self to be ruled by Reason.

Observe the General Rules left thee in Scripture, and see whether thou can
not out of them laid together, make up a rule, which shall be Scripture Proof,
which will solve the case; for know, that those things which have not the
particular Rules to order them, if they lie evidently within the compass of
this, or that general Rule, the will of God, in them, is thereby determined as
truly, though not so clearly (in my apprehension) as if I had a particular Rule
to determine the will of God by: For the only difference, betwixt general and
particular Rules; is this, particular Rules point at a thing directly, and so
are not subject to scruple or debate. General, by consequence, and so are
subject to debate, by reason of men's various constructions of the Rule, and
diverse applications of particular cases to it. But in case I have once found
the general Rule, and am so guided by the Lord, as rightly to understand it,
and apply the particular case to it, then will the conclusion thence drawn be
as sound and firm, as if I had a particular word to bottom it upon.

Object. But it may be yet the soul may say, notwithstanding all that is said
from the general Rules, I remain still in doubt, I am not yet satisfied, all
does not reach my case; Is there no other way yet to help me to a sight of the
will of God, or at least of that which is most expedient for me to do in such
a case?

Answ. If we have neither particular Rule, nor can find any such general
Rule, as will satisfy, then have we nothing which may bear the name of a pure
Scripture rule. There is no other Rule remaining, but only that which we call
the Rule of Right Reason, and the case being now come to this head, we must
be ruled by that, or by none. And it is very meet in the present case Right
reason should be our guide; for mark it, where I have not the word to walk by,
I must walk by my reason: Reason (though Gods gift) is the light of a man, and
where I want Gods light, God bids me use mine own, for therefore has he given
it.

Now that we may not be mistaken in the term of Right reason, but understand
what we are speaking of; Know, that Right reason in Divine things, is that
only which draws up such a conclusion, as is agreeable either to the
principles of Natures law, or the substance of the truth left us in the written
word: That Reason which makes up a conclusion that does contradict either of
these, is corrupt reason, not Right reason. The present case, therefore is to
be solved by principles applied to it, consonant to Natures law, or the
substance of revealed Truth, and principles that are founded upon either of
these, though they may not be warranted by any particular rule, nor easily
drawn from this, or that general, yet are they principles of truth; For Natures
law, though it be a thing seated in man, yet it is originally from God, and so
in it self is a divine unerring thing; and the word though it consists of many
pieces, yet by a wonderful harmony, all is so knit together, that it makes in
conclusion but one entire piece.

What therefore is rightly drawn from the whole body or substance of
Scripture-truth laid together, is as much truth as that which is drawn from
this or that particular text or piece of holy Writ. This premised, I now come
to give in my particular answer to the case.

Now there are diverse general Rules for us to have recourse to in this thing.

The first GENERAL RULE is, 1 Cor. 10. Do all to the glory of God.

The true sense and meaning of this Rule is, that Gods glory should be proposed
by us, as our great and ultimate end in all our undertakings.

The case we are upon, is, What it most meet for me to do when I stand betwixt
two things, or two ways, and must choose one, yet not able to resolve my self
in which the will of God is?

The solution of the case from this General Rule, is, That I am to choose that
thing or way, in, and by which, I may best reach the aforesaid ultimate end.
But now because, when the case is such, it is hard to know which thing or way,
will most conduce to the attainment of this ultimate end, therefore we are yet
in the dark, without something further added.

Let it therefore be considered, that there is a twofold glorifying of God.

1 A glorifying God in the intention of the Agent. 2 A glorifying God in the
nature of the act.
Which consists in shunning and avoiding such things by which God is
dishonored, and in our following and embracing such actions which have in them
a tendency to glorify him.

The first, viz. The glorifying of God in the intention of the agent; is not
indeed properly a glorifying of God, in case the other be not joined with it,
for a man through ignorance of the will of God, may do such an action as is in
it self evil, and tends to the dishonor of God, and that with a good
intention. Peter's intention was good, viz. to preserve his Master from danger;
and this sprung from his love and affection to him, when he dissuaded him from
going up to Jerusalem to suffer: Yet was his action evil, and tending much to
the dishonor of God.

In the latter therefore, but so as joined with the former, this active
glorifying of God, consists, when as together with my good intention to
glorify God, there is something in the nature of the act it self which I
perform, that has a tendency to glorify God.

Now as to the present case, would I know whether my going this way, or that
way, will most glorify God? Why then consider, not only the different ways,
but consider also thine own action; thy action lies in thy motion, as there is
a way, and a way, so also there is a motion in it, this or that way, in this
motion consists the nature of the act: Now if there be any thing in this
motion (consider it apart from the intention, for that is another thing) that
has a tendency either to strip God of any part of his honor, or contrariwise
to glorify him, then I may by it conclude which way I am to take: If in my
motion on one hand I entrench upon Gods honor in this or that point, then
whatsoever my intention is (though seemingly ever so pious) yet must I not
venture there, because there is an evil, and a dishonor to God in the nature
of the act; If on the other hand, I do not only intend Gods honor, but can
also carry it along with me, and visibly hold it forth in the way as I go,
then may I safely go there, yea that is the way I am to take.

To illustrate this in a particular case, Suppose I stand betwixt two ways,
and I cannot see that there is the will of God more in this than in that, I may
in that respect choose either. But the case is this, betwixt me, and this way
lies some promise, engagement, covenant, etc. so that I cannon enter this way
but I must go over the head of it; no such thing as to the other way, what
shall I now do?

Why, I must avoid, that way which I cannot come at, but must go over my
promise, engagement, etc. to reach it.

The reason is, because here is evil, viz. breach of promise in my very motion,
or the nature of the act, how good therefore soever my intention may be, yet
that will not help, because here is an evil in the very thing it self, and a
good intention may not byasse me to an evil thing; indeed were it clear and
manifest that this way and no other were the way of God, then my duty is rather
than to baulk Gods path, to be humbled for that Promise, engagement, etc. which
I made in mine ignorance, because I am rather to break my promise, the making
of which was but an act of mine own will, than knowingly to act contrary to
any part of the revealed Will of God.

But when neither this way, nor the other can be made appear to be that way,
that God in opposition to all other ways bids me walk in, then in case upon
the mouth of the one way a Promise or Covenant lie, that I cannot go into it
but must tread thereupon, and no such thing on the other, then am I from hence
to learn so much as to shun that way, and cleave unto the other.

A second GENERAL RVLE is this, Let all things be done to the use of edifying,

The true sense of the Rule is this, that I am to prefer the edification of
my Brother before any outward interest or advantage of mine own; or in a word,
before any thing wherein I may please my self.

The case is as before, what is most meet for me to do, etc. The solution of
the case from this General Rule is, that I am in my choice to prefer that
thing or way before another, which does mostly further my brothers edification.

Now that we rightly understand this thing, and may not, whilst our design is
to satisfy Conscience, involve it in greater and more intricate Snares, mind
this; That we are not now speaking of the means of edification, but of
edification it self.

1 If the Question were about the means of edification, then from this general
Rule, it will follow; that,

2 Saints who by walking together have greatly furthered each others
edification, must never part; Why? because these two cannot be separated from
each other, bur there will be an hinderance of edification, as to that
particular means; that edification which they had, the one by the other, is
hindered by their separation; but this cannot be, for then could not the
separation of Paul and Barnabas, who doubtless whilst they walked together did
edify one another, have been a thing lawful, because it had been against this
general Rule; nor can the separation of one Saint from another, which may be
justifiable upon the account of their mere outward employments, which may call
one this way, another that way (and yet this call be no more but civil)
according to this sense be accounted lawful; note therefore that we speak not
of the means, but of edification it self, I shall therefore here lay down these
two distinctions.

1 That there is a difference between the greatening and lessening of a
Brothers edification, and edification it self.

The means of a Brothers edification may be greater, when yet his edification
is less; and contrariwise, the means of his edification may be less, when yet
his edification is greater; this is a case so clear that it needs no proof; for
the hearts of many Saints will put their seal to this, that in a time when they
had less means of edification (perhaps not an edifying Sermon once in a month)
they were yet more edified, did more thrive and grow in grace, than since the
time that they had more plentiful means of edification; and the reason is,
because when Saints are kept more hungry, they feed more heartily upon food
when they can get it; but when they are full fed, such is the corruption of the
heart, that instead of feeding, it grows wanton, and plays with its meat, and
therefore it is and has been found a real truth in common experience, that
when Saints get but now and then a meal, or if they have it oftener, yet get it
with some hardship, they thrive best.

2 There is a difference betwixt want of all means of edification, and a want
of this or that particular means, which either is most easy to come by, or
which they have usually found most comfort and refreshment from; or take it
thus,

There is a difference betwixt the shutting up this or that particular door,
which either stands nearest to us, or through which most ordinarily we have
received edification, and the shutting up all doors by which our edification
has come in; this or that means which stands nearest to us may be removed, and
yet not our edification destroyed.

The thing destroyed is only our ease, we may have edification still, though
with more pains, in case other means of edification, but somewhat more remote,
be to be enjoyed.

Again, this or that means which we have received most comfort and refreshment
from, may be taken away, and yet not our edification destroyed, because God is
no where tied to give us comfort still by the same means, nor is there any
promise upon which we may expect it; nay let me say (and it is a truth,
although it will be hardly received) our edification may hereby be furthered,
and the reason is this, because the heart is very prone when it has received
comfort from this or that means, to make an Idol of it; and it is the common
disease of the heart, that the more edification it has, or does receive from
any particular means, the more it does dote upon it, growing by degrees from
edification to an admiration of Persons; now when the case is such, that the
heart is grown to make an Idol of the means, then God will either remove the
Idol, or else make it less fruitful to that soul.

And when once an admiration of Persons, (which is a thing that secretly creeps
upon us, and the more (I say) by how much we have received the more benefit
from a person) is gotten into the soul, that will lie as such a constant Core
at the bottom, as will hinder all true edification; Therefore I say, the
taking away of this, or that particular means, by which we have received
comfort and refreshment, may be so far from hindering, that it may be indeed a
help to our edification.

Now to apply the Rule unto our case:

If it be so, that the moving this way, or that way does only lessen the
means of a brothers edification, or deprive him of that means which either
stands nearest to him, suits most with his ease, or which he has received
most comfort, and refreshment from, it does not at all reach our present case,
nor determine it: But if by moving this way or that way, Edification it self is
hindered, and all outward means that can be had, removed, then does it come
into our case, and when the case is such, this General Rule determines, that I
am to cleave to that way, which by leaving the edification it self of a
brother, and all such outward means as may any way help it forward, are
destroyed.

The third GENERAL RVLE is,

Foflow those things that make for peace.

The true sense and meaning of the Rule is, That I am in my walking, and
acting, to have a special respect to those things that make for the peace and
unity of the Saints, or the mystical body of Christ.

The Rule is as before: The solution of the case from this General Rule is,
That I am to do that thing, choose that way, which tends most to keeping and
maintaining peace among the Saints:

Now that we may not fetter conscience instead of setting it at liberty; it is
necessary that we consider how far this Rule does oblige us, and how far not;
for General Rules, are but snares to conscience, if they be not warily laid
down with their due cautions and considerations: To bring this case therefore
into the light, I shall here inquire into, What that is I am to dispense with
in reference unto peace, and What not.

1 What I am not to to dispense with:

Answ. I am not to dispense with the parting from any one dram of clear truth:

1 The reason is, because that peace is an evil peace that does shut truth out
of doors, if peace and truth cannot go together, truth is to be preferred, and
rather to be chosen for a companion than peace.

And there is good reason for this also, because truth is a piece of Gods
nature peace is but one of our privileges; man's privileges must rather be
lost, than Gods nature suffered to be trodden underfoot, if therefore the
excellent privilege of peace, cannot be attained without intrenching upon the
limits of the more excellent thing truth, we must then give way to truth.

2 I am not for peace sake to dispense with any act that shall countenance
corruption in a brother. The reason is, because I am not to suffer sin to lie
upon a brother; it so, then not to countenance any evil in him, for that is
more; the one is a mere negative act, and yet sinful, because forbidden; the
other a positive, and therefore more sinfult: If therefore for peace sake I
shall humor a brother in his corruptions, as pride, passion, etc. When these
are evident, and apparent, I do that which I ought not; I should rather break
peace with a brother than contract guilt on mine own head.

3 I am not for peace sake to dispense with any palpable affront or injury
offered by a brother to the cause or truth of Christ. The reason is; because
Christ's cause and truth is better, and more honorable, and therefore rather
to be stuck to than man's peace; if therefore a brother speaks slightly of
Christ's cause, reproachfully of any part of his truth, I am in a Christian way
to vindicate it, if my vindication of it break peace in this case, let it.

4 I am not for peace sake to dispense with any superstitious custom and
practice of a brother, which may endanger the welfare of the souls of others.
The reason is, because the soul is of more worth than peace; peace if lost may
be recovered, the loss of souls is irrecoverable: Man's eternal being consists
in the welfare of his soul, his temporal well-being only is wrapped up in his
peace; I am to prefer man's eternal being, before his temporal well-being. If
therefore by the superstitious customs or practices of a brother, another soul
shall be endangered, I am to declare against those customs or practices,
although it be to the breach of peace.

5 I am not for peace sake to dispense with the shaking of a weak believer in
his faith. The reason is, Faith is the Root, peace is but the branch: If the
branch be lopped off, and the root remain unmaymed, the branch will recover
again, but if the root be maimed, root, and branch dye both; the shaking of
the root is therefore a greater evil, than the lopping off the branch, when
therefore the root faith is shaken, I am to relieve that, though it be with
the lopping off the branch of peace. Upon this account Paul, Gal. 2. does
openly oppose Peter, when he by complying with the Jews, and refusing to eat
meat with the Gentiles, did thereby hazard the weak faith, of the Gentiles.

6 I am not for peace sake to dispense with a designing spirit in a brother.
The reason is, whilst a brother designs upon me, he does never really intend
peace with me, though I do it with him; I am not therefore for peace sake to
dispense with that which has a necessary tendency to cut me short of mine
end: When Paul saw designing brethren coming in upon him, he would not give
place, no not for an hour, Gal. 2.11, 12, etc.

7 I am not for peace sake to dispense with a wilful spirit in a brother,
because with such a one I can neither make peace, nor keep it when it is made,
unless in every thing I subject my self to his will. Now it is better to stand
off from peace, than for the attaining and keeping thereof, to put my self
under the slavery of another will; For the loss of liberty to my self and
others hereby on the one hand, is greater than the gain that on the other hand
will redound to me: Therefore Paul who did oftentimes comply when he could
keep his liberty, would never comply when and where he must infringe it by
complying.

8 And lastly, I am not for peace sake to dispense with a lording domineering
spirit in a brother, or a spirit that affects pre-eminence. The reason is in a
manner the same with the former, because such a spirit will be a Lord, and he
must have others as his servants, or he will have no peace with them. Now to
make a league upon such terms is expressly against the Rule, which condemns such
a spirit, Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27 28. 1 Pet. 5.3. 1 Cor. 7.23. Diotrophes his
affecting pre-eminence was not to be born with out of respect to the Churches
peace, 3 Epist. of Joh. 9.10.

2 But what then, am I to dispense with in reference unto peace?

Answ. 1. I am to dispense with some things which are truths, as to this or
that season, etc.

2 I am for peace sake to dispense with a stiff and peremptory insisting upon
this or that particular thing supposed by me to be truth, in case it be in it
self doubtful. The reason is, because the maintaining of the thing, cannot be
a known duty, so long as the thing it self is not known to be a truth: But now
on the other side, breach of peace (if it be not upon due grounds and
considerations) is a known evil, and I may not commit the least known evil,
to perform the greatest unknown duty.

Nay, nothing in the world can acquit me of guilt in doing the least known
evil, but this, when I must either neglect some duty that is greater, and
weighs more heavy, or rush my self upon some evil of more dangerous
consequence, in case I neglect it; when the case is such, the Rule is, of two
evils I must choose the least: This is the case Romans 14. where the Apostles
whole discourse runs upon things which are doubtful, not determined.

3 I am for peace sake to dispense with mine own will, if nothing stand in the
way of peace but my will only, I am, rather than to hinder the free passage of
peace, to remove that; for the peace of the Saints is a thing of far greater
concernment, than my having my will; there is nothing of evil against God in
the one, but there is in the other; peace is a spiritual thing, man's will is
but a natural; natural things must give place to spiritual, the end of peace is
edification, the end of having my will is but to please my self. I must prefer
edification before the pleasing of my self.

4 I am for peace sake to dispense with many things, the particular interest of
mine honor, profit, etc. Abraham though the elder, for peace sake gives place
to Lot the younger, to choose before him the place of his habitation, upon so
doing for peace sake, he at once dispenses with honor and profit both: Peace
is a duty, our interests and advantages must give place to our duties; yet here
take this caution and limitation, if the case be such, that by my resigning my
particular interest and advantage, I shall disadvantage truth it self; I am
then to hold it, though it be with so great a hazard as the loss of peace; for
though I may not hold mine advantage upon mine own account to the prejudice of
peace, because neither my self, nor the thing in which my advantage lies, are
of worth equivalent to peace, yet I may upon the account of truth, because that
is of greater worth.

When Paul among the Corinthians and Galatians perceived truth it self to be
struck at through a sleighty esteem of his person, then he who in his heart had
as low thoughts of himself as they could have of him, yet now stands up
boldly, and pleads the point of his honor, preferring himself (though for
ought he knew he might anger Peter, James, and John, and so hazard a breach of
peace) before Peter, James, or John, or any of them all.

5 I am for peace sake to dispense with particular wrongs and injuries done to
my self. I speak not now as to civil injuries, that question appertains to
another case; but I mean such as are of a more spiritual nature, as censuring
me as touching my spiritual condition, branding me for an Heretic,
Schismatic, Dissembler, etc. endeavoring to set others against me, etc. I am
silently to put up many things of this nature, rather than to break the peace;
the reason is, because while I put these up, the wrong is only my own, but in
breaking the peace, I may injure myself, and many others also.

The putting up of these quietly for peace sake, is an act of self-denial, and
so a fruit of the spirit. The making a stir and coile about these things, till
peace is broken, is a pure selfish business, and so a fruit of the flesh; yet
take this also with two Cautions.

1 I must so put it up as not to do that in way of Self-denial, as may any way
allow of the act it self; for though the evil of the act is to be patiently
borne, yet the act it self being evil, is not to be allowed. 2 I must also
consider warily, whether there be not some thing in the action that brings Gods
Truth and Honor to the stake together with my self; if so, I may and ought to
take upon me my own rescue, not for the sake of my self, but of Gods Truth and
Honor engaged with me. I am to dispense with error in judgment in a Brother,
if it arise from weakness, and be not obstinately, and pertinaciously
maintained, because error of judgment is only a privative evil, breach of
peace, a positive.
Quest. But when may an error of judgment be said to be of weakness, not
wilfulness, or pertinacy?

Ans. 1. When a Brothers judgment is weak in all things else, which is easily
known by this, if he be readily drawn to this thing, or that, Ephesians. 4.14.

2 When a Brother seeing a man of more grace than himself, so or so
appropriated, subjects his judgment to the others grace.

Quest. When of wilfulness, or pertinacy?

First, When he will stablish any Principles though never so contrary to faith
and godliness, to hold up his error rather than suffer it to fall.

Secondly, When he cares not what other Principles of his own he pluck up by
the roots, so he may thereby keep that one Principle in which the error lies.

Thirdly, When a man pretends much Conscience as to that particular Principle,
but makes no Conscience of his practice in other things of greater and more
weighty concernment.

Now to apply our Rule to the present Case, if by doing this or that thing,
moving this or that way, I either do or shall dispense with any of those
things which I ought not to dispense with, or contrariwise shall not dispense
with any of those things that for peace-sake I ought to dispense with, then am
I by this general Rule to shun that way, and choose another.

The Fourth GENERAL RVLE, is,

Let your light so shine before men, etc. Walk in wisdom toward them that are
without.

The true intent and purport of this Rule is, that a Christian should so order
his steps in the way of truth and holiness, that poor sinners by beholding his
conversation, might not find cause to harden their hearts in their own ways
of iniquity, but might be won to a love of the ways of God, the case is still
as before.

The Solution is, That I am to choose that path by walking; in which I shall
take away occasion of hardening poor Sinners, and lay before them an occasion of
winning and drawing them to a love and liking of the ways of Christ.

Quest. Now would we know what that is which lays occasion of hardening before
Sinners, and what that is which on the other side wins them to a love and
liking of the ways of Christ?

Ans. One principal thing amongst many others by which Sinners are hardened is
When they see Professors making no conscience of such things as they themselves
(at leastwise they think so) would if they were in their stead make conscience
of.

When they see Persons pretending much more holiness than they, break those
bands of outward and civil holiness, which (their very Natural conscience lays
such an awe upon them, as) they dare not break; this is an exceeding great
hardening to sinners, especially the more refined sort of them, your Civilians,
or Morralists, who have partly by Natures light, and partly by the light they
have into things honest and just by the written Word, such a tie upon their
Conscience, that when they have an advantage, yet many times they dare not
transgress the Rules of equity and righteousness.

On the other side, this is a thing very taking with Sinners, and renders the
ways of Christ amiable in their eyes, when they see Professors conscientious
in smaller things as well as greater; such things wherein they are not
absolutely bound up, but have a kind of liberty left them by the Laws of God
and men, yet are as tender and conscientious least they should abuse this their
liberty, as though they were bound: of such Professors; you may hear the worst
say, we are persuaded that he is no Hipocrite, if there be one among them that
is what he makes show of, that is he.

Now when I am thus between two ways, or things, and must choose one, yet know
not in which the Will of God is, then observe, is there any thing in this or
that way that may tend (should I walk in it) to harden poor Sinners in their
own ways, and will my quitting of it make them have the better thoughts of
the ways of God, then I am bound by this rule to shun this way and choose some
other.

Our Fifth GENERAL RVLE is,

Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, think on these
things.

The true sense of the Rule is, That a Christian in his actions should have a
special respect to such things as are in themselves honest and just.

The Case is as before.

The Solution is, That I am to choose that thing, walk in that way, which is
nearest to the general Rule of honesty and justice.

The Question here will be, What the rule of Justice is?

Ans. 1. Not man's Principles; for these may be corrupt, and a corrupted
Principle may call that just which is in it self unjust, and that unjust, which
is in its self most just.

2 Not humane Laws; for these not having a respect unto the righteous Law of
God, are oft-times corrupt; and a corrupt Law may authorize those acts as just
which in themselves are sinful, and punish as unjust, even righteousness it
self.

3 Not my supposing my self willing that another should do by me as I do by
another. This is not the rule of justice, and the reason is, because man's heart
which is deceitful above all things, and so desperately wicked as none can know
it, does leave a person under manifold mistakes here, and a man does often think
that he is willing to be dealt by as he deals by another, when as indeed it is
not so. And there are these two things which cause this mistake.

1 A man does never take so deeply into his consideration that case which is
another, as he does and would do his own; If the case be another, an
overly and general view of it suffices him, but when it is his own, then will
he ponder the case it self in every circumstance, and if there be any thing
grating in it, he will view it in every aggravation; one while he will consider
the person that does it, if there be any thing which may aggravate it therein;
another while the time, if any thing may be found therein to aggravate;
another while he will be calling to remembrance other injuries, (if there be
any) and by these help to aggravate the present case.

Now supposing the case it self to be small, yet in the aggravations which a
man in his own case will diligently consider of, it may grow to be great; but
this a man will not do in another case, as he that does another work to make
quick work, and put himself to as little toil as may be, will post and slubber
it over; so he that considers another case.

2 A man's not knowing what indeed, and in truth he would be willing another
should do by him. We think we know our hearts in this business exceeding
well, but when it comes to the trial, we find that our hearts did but juggle
with us. And indeed, there is no man can tell what he would be willing
another should do by him till he is put to the trial; nor it may be then
neither, if he do not observe his own heart well, but give a cast of his eye
upon that which appears at the top only, not observing the secret boylings and
workings that may lie at the bottom.

And that no man knows what that thing is which he would be willing another
should do by him, will be clear to a man himself, let him but consider this,
it may be some time past, there was this or that thing that I thought I could
have been willing another should have done by me; and it may be since something
has fallen out either in that particular thing, or it may be in a less thing
that I have been so, and so dealt with by another: How have I taken it, why a
hundred to one, if I observe my heart, not in all things so willingly as I
thought I should.

And indeed man's heart is such, that if it would but speak out, and declare it
self naturally, it would not be willing that another should do that thing to
it, which has but the least of evil in it: And it is in this sense that
Christ who knew the frame and temper of the heart of every man did give forth
this rule, intending thus much in it, that we should not do to another that
thing which has in it the least show of evil, or injury, for our hearts if
they utter themselves in plain language, will not bear with it, that any such
thing should be done to us.

And this is the true interpretation of that rule which was laid down by him
who knew the heart, and so knew better what man's heart could bear, than man
himself does.

And if our Comment upon the Rule be according to Christ's sense, i. e. not to
do the least injury to another, because my heart in truth would not bear it,
that any by another should be done to me, then is it indeed a perfect and
universal Rule of Righteousnese* but if the Comment be according to our sense,
I Will do this, or that particular evil to another, but it is no more than I
would be willing another should do to me, it is then no Rule, but a deceit,
and my heart makes use of it only to juggle with me.

Quest. But what then is the rule of Justice and Righteousness?

Answ. The declared Law and Will of God left us in his word. What ever things
or actions (how ever they may be esteemed in the corrupt principles of men, or
how ever they may be judged of by the Laws of men, or what ever conclusions my
heart may make upon them) are there declared just, are so; or unjust, are so.

Now to apply this General rule, unto our particular case; If it be so that my
doing this thing, or that thing, my moving this way, or that way, does but in
the least entrench upon this, or the other thing, that any where in the word of
God is allowed of and commended to us as a thing honest and just. Then am I
bound by this General rule to shun that way, and choose another.

Our 6. and last GENERAL RULE, is, Whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, think on these things. The phrase of doing things
comely, relates also to this Rule.

The sense of the Rule is, That a Christian in ordering his conversation, is to
have a special eye to those things that have a beautiful aspect, and are
well-reported of by others.

The case is still the same. The solution is, that I am to walk in that way,
do that thing, in doing which my action shall become most beautiful, and be
best reported of by others.

This therefore is the application of our Rule, that when I stand betwixt two
such things as the case supposes, if there be good report following me if I
move this way, but evil if I move in that, then am I to shun that way, and
move in this.

Thus much for General Rules.

But here again, that we may not entangle conscience, and bring it into bonds
whilst we would set it free; mind it, That we are in making up our judgment
to look as well at the action in it self, as at the comely aspect and report
made thereof by others, because the viciousness of men is such, that thereby an
evil action, has sometimes a good name, and is set forth in a good dress,
and a good unblameable action an evil name, and set forth in a deformed dress.

As therefore an action when it is apparently evil, may not be ventured upon,
because it has a good report, and comely dress; so on the other side, an
action which is apparently good and justifiable, may not be shunned, because
of an evil report, or ill-favored dress. For mark it, there are two ways by
which that thing, which simply considered is good, may have an ill report, and
an unhandsome dress put upon it.

1 Through the common abuse of that thing by such as meddle in it, and with it,
in the work of Christ.

As for instance, Suppose a man moves out of one station into another, or one
place into another, and this his moving as the case may be, stands with his
outward advantage also, as well as with his work, because most men that thus
move, have carnal ends and designs in so doing, aiming more at serving
themselves than Christ. Hence it comes to pass that there is an ill report,
and an ill favored dress commonly put upon the thing it self, yet may the
action notwithstanding be good, and such, as a man may have a clear call from
God to do it.

2 Through forged accusation, that may be laid against this, or that thing. As
for instance, Suppose a company of Saints meet together often at such a house
to pray, a shameful report, (as it has been so with the meetings of Saints in
time past) goes about the Country as touching this meeting: Shall I therefore
suppose I now stood between these two things, either to go to my calling, or
such a meeting, and I may without breach of any particular and positive precept
do either; For though I am commanded to frequent the assembling of Saints, yet
no command binds me up, as to this or that time: I say in such a case shall I
say to my self, there goes an ill report abroad of that meeting, therefore I
will go to my calling; no, why, because though there is an ill report of the
thing, yet the thing in it self, is a thing good, lovely, and commendable.

But now when the case is such, that I stand betwixt two things, that are not
by any particular Rule in the word determined to be good or evil in
themselves, I am then to mind this General rule of good and bad report, and
thereby to choose or refuse.

As for example, for a Professor when his business calls him into an Alehouse,
etc. which a man upon his necessary occasions sometimes must do, the word has
no where determined how long he should stay there, as that its lawful to stay
so long, but sinful if longer; this the word says nothing to, therefore the
thing is not (in case he abuse not himself there) by any particular Rule,
good, or evil: But now because it is of an ill report, for a Professor
especially, when perhaps he has little to do there, to sit two or three
hours in an Alehouse, therefore by this General rule, his act is evil, and
he is to avoid such a thing.

Put case I do clearly see the will of God in a thing, but there are great
difficulties in the way, by which I find my self disheartened from going up to
that thing which I am convinced is Gods will: How shall I in this case bring up
my will to Gods?

Answ. It is most certain where Gods will is clear, we are to venture all to
get up to it; but the Question is how when discouraging difficulties lie in our
way, our wills may be brought to make this venture. Take these few Rules for
answer.

1 Consult more what thy duty is, than what the difficulty is. So did Abraham,
Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. Now the Lord said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy Country, and
from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers house, unto a land that I will show
thee, and I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless thee, and make
thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing, and I will bless them that bless
thee, and curse him that curses thee; and in thee shall all families of the
earth be blessed. So Abram departed, as the Lord had spoken unto him; and Lot
went with him, and Abram was seventy five years old when he departed out of
Haran.

And Paul, Gal. 1.16, 17. To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him
among the Heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood; neither
went I up to Jerusalem, to them which were Apostles before me, but I went into
Arabia.

2 Cast away all that of the difficulty, which is but supposed. We suppose when
we are called to a duty ten times as many difficulties as there are: How many
supposed difficulties did Moses set before himself when God was sending him
into Egypt, yet when he comes there, he meets with never a one of them
according as he imagined. Did we but throw away all our supposed difficulties
(which perhaps when it comes to, we shall never meet with) and take up such
only as are real, the burden of difficulties would not be half so heavy as
ordinarily it is.

3 Convert thy discouragement into an encouragement. Thy difficulties before
thee are thy discouragement, why now convert them into an encouragement, thus,
say to thy self, Surely, in yonder thing is either some great mercy for me, or
some great work for me to do, that there are so many difficulties in the way.
Temptations and difficulties are the constant attendants of opportunities of
mercy, or of doing service, 1 Cor. 16.9. For a great door and effectual is
opened unto me, and there are many adversaries, 2 Cor. 2.12. Furthermore, when
I came to Troas to preach Christ's Gospel, and a door was opened to me of the
Lord.

4. Consider that the quitting Gods way and will to shift difficulties, is the
very way to plunge thy self into the depth of difficulties. Jonah is brought
into the uttermost danger, whilst to shun danger, he flies from the Will of
God.

5 Make not the difficulty whatsoever it be, bigger than it is. As we suppose
difficulties that are not, so we ordinarily make those few that are, much
bigger in our representing them to our selves, than the difficulties in
themselves are. We look upon our difficulties most commonly through a
multiplying glass, and do in this case turn every molehill into a mountain, as
in some others we turn mountains into mole-hills. Thus did the Spies, Numb.
13.27. to the end. And they told him, and said, we came unto the land whither
thou sentest us, and surely it flows with milk and honey, and this is the fruit
of it; nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and the
Cities are walled, and very great, and moreover we saw the sons of Anake there.
The Amalekites dwell in the land of the South, and the Hittites, and the
Jebusites, and the Amorites dwell in the mountains, and the Canaanites dwell by
the Sea, and by the coast of Jordan. And Caleb stilled the people before Moses,
and said, Let us go up at once and possess it, for we are well able to
overcome it. But the men that went up with him, said, We be not able to go up
against the people, for they are stronger than we. And they brought up an
evil report of the land which they had searched, unto the children of Israel,
saying, The land through which we have gone to search it, is a land that
eats up the inhabitants thereof, and all the people that we saw in it, are
men of a great stature. And there we saw the Giants, the sens of Anak, which
come of the Giants; and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were
in their sight. A visible difficulty there was, but how do they multiply it,
and make a mountain of it, in giving in their report?

6 Make a venture over the head of difficulties to Gods will where thou see
it, and trust him in so doing for thy safety, tread thy difficulties, and trust
God to save thee from sinking. Christ upon Peter's desire grants him liberty to
come to him upon the water, Peter is sinking, so soon as he makes the venture,
but Christ will not see him sink, for streightway he puts forth his hand, and
saves him, Matthew. 14.28. etc.

Put case I am well satisfied as touching Gods will in a thing, but yet I find
my own will by some private interest, as pleasure, honor, profit, love of
friends, etc. biased another way, how, or by what means may the biasse of my
will be turned, and made to fall in with the will of God?

Answ. 1. Labor to find out that particular thing that chiefly holds thy will
upon the biasse from Gods will. Whether it be thy pleasure or profit, honor,
friends, or such like.

2 Having found it, then lay Gods will and that thing together, and then
consider with thy self, which of these two is most honorable that I serve, or
which have I most reason to serve? If it be most honorable for thee, O my
soul, or if thou have more reason so to do, to serve thy pleasures than God,
thy honors than God, thy profits than God, thy friends than God, and his will;
then go on, O my soul, and so do: But if it be more honorable for thee, or
thou have more reason so to do to serve God, than these; then, O my soul,
return, and give up thy self to the will of God.

3 Ask that thing whatsoever it be thou see thy will running after, this
question, Whether it have an eternal Crown to give thee?

4 Ask thine own will also this question, Whether or no the thing it serves be
more noble than it self?

Put case I greatly stand in need of such a mercy, and God gives it me, and
streightway takes it away again, how shall I submit to the will of God in that?

Answ. 1 Consider, That God was not bound to give it thee for any time,
therefore thou should rather be thankful that thou had it, though but for
a while, rather than murmr that thou have it not still.

2 Look back to the improvement thou made of it whilst thou had it. It may
be whilst thou had it, thou made little, or no improvement of it, if so,
then thou should rather be displeased with thy self for thy
non-improvement, then discontented at the dealing of God in taking it away.

3 Consider, That though thou stand in great need of this mercy, yet perhaps
thou stand in greater need of having thy will mortified. It may be God has
therefore taken away the one, that thereby thou may be brought to the other.

4 Consider, That the having of thy mercy was only an addition to thy comfort;
but the submission of thy will to Gods, is a great addition to grace: And
therefore by how much grace is better than comfort, by so much in case thou
submittest to Gods will in the thing, is thy condition bettered by the want of
thy mercy.

5 Consider, Thou art not the first of Gods children he has so dealt with.
Jonah had a comforting gourd overnight, and the next morning its taken from
him, Jonah 4.6, 7. And the Lord prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over
Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief.
So Jonah was exceeding glad of his gourd. But God prepared a worm when the
morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it withered. If God had
made thee a president to others, what would thou have said, in case thou
can not submit to his will, in a case wherein he has made others thy
presidents.

Put case God is pleased to cut me shorter, as to my comforts and enjoyments,
than he does others of his children, How shall I submit to the will of God in
that?

Answ. 1 If the case be so, consider, whether as thou art cut shorter in some
things than others are, thou have not also in some other things a more enlarged
portion than they have. Thou have not the sensible comforts, enjoyments they
have, but perhaps thou have a heart given thee to wait, which should their
comforts be removed, might it may be, be found wanting in them: And this
waiting heart is a better thing, than to feel comfort, the one is an act of
faith, the other but sense: Look therefore as well to what thou have which they
have not, as to what thou want which they have.

2 Time was thou had more comforts than they: If God gave thee thy portion
formerly, and they have theirs now, what wrong is done thee, unless this be a
wrong, thou was served first: Why therefore should thou not submit?

3 Consider, It may be thou art more grown, they are Babes but newly born;
because the little Babe is dandled, smiled upon, talked with more frequently,
than the son more grown, has he any just cause for this to take it ill?
Surely no.

4 Consider, That thou have any comfort at all, is more than thou deservest,
and therefore there is no reason, but thou should submit to Gods will, and
take it well, though thy portion be less than another.

5 Consider, That thou may have fewer smiles than another, and yet no less
of thy Fathers love than he has. The young child has always most smiles,
but the eldest as much of the Fathers love as it.

Put case I am continually, sorely oppressed by Satan, and buffeted through
manifold temptations; how shall I submit to the will of God in that condition?

Ans. 1. Consider, Thy condition is not worse than the condition of other
Saints has been, yea than Christ's himself was.

2 Consider, God has the disposing of Satan's rage, and his design in it.

3 Consider, That temptations in themselves are gainful things.

Hence 1. We are not to pray against temptation absolutely, because great good
may be in it.

2 We are commanded to count it all joy when we fall into diverse temptations.

3 A blessing is pronounced to the soul under temptation.

Quest. But wherein is this gain of temptation?

Ans. 1. Temptation makes discovery of that corruption that is in the heart,
which perhaps before we saw not. Peter was confident, and saw not that he was
weak, till upon a temptation he fell.

2 Temptations are preventions oftentimes to other sins; Paul's pride was
prevented by his buffeting.

3 Temptations make the soul more frequent in running to God, many a Prayer is
put up of him, which had been omitted had not a temptation driven them; Paul's
temptation makes him pray thrice, often.

4 Temptations make us keep closer to Christ our refuge; when a man knows an
enemy lies abroad, he will keep close to his Fort, or Hold; another that fears
no enemy will wander.

5 Temptations give a soul skill, make him a wise experimental Christian; often
engagements makes a skilful subtle Soldier -- Temptations skill a man in the
stratagems and method of Satan, when a man knows his enemies stratagems he can
prevent him, and in the methods and deceits of his own heart, whilst it
juggles with Satan, knowledge by temptation is learning dear bought, that a man
will keep.

6 Temptations make a soul vigilant and watchful; when men know an enemy is
near, they set Guards, keep Sentinels, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant,
because your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom
he may devour. If a man knew a Lion was in the Field, he would not as a drunken
man lie sleeping there.

7 Temptations show us where and in what thing we are weakest.

8 Temptations fit us to be a relief to others; old Soldiers skilled in feats
of War are fit to be Leaders and Commanders -- God lets some be tempted to
fit them to relieve others, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercies, and the God of all comfort, who
comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which
are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

9 Temptations rub off the rust of our Graces, by keeping them in continual
action; lay a thing by, it rusts, and we use it not, temptation puts us upon
necessity of using our Graces, when else perhaps we should lay them by, this
keeps them from rust; Temptations drive us to act faith, forces us to repent,
causes us to be low, humble, sets our love to God on work when we see his
pardoning grace.

10 Temptations make us live upon glory; in grace without, strength without, 2
Cor, 12.9 And he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength
is made perfect in weakness; most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.

11 Temptations make the groanings of the soul after Heaven greater, the
thoughts of Heaven the sweeter; We groan, says the Apostle, (2 Cor. 5. begin.)
being burdened, burdening causes groaning.

12 Temptations prepare for consolation; Christ after temptation has Angels
ministering unto him; but note,

1 That we must not expect the consolation upon the end of every particular
temptation, Christ had three great temptations; and in these three, temptations
of all sorts were wrapped up, and he passes through them all before his
consolation comes.

2 Nor must we expect the consolation suddenly within a little while, Christ is
tempted forty days, and nothing else but tempted, has no abatement all that
time, before his consolation comes.

Now consider, the great gain of Temptation, and this will help thee to submit
to the will of God, in case he suffers thee to lie under them.

But put case my condition be not only oppressions by temptation, but
temptation and corruption together, corruption creeps in with the temptation,
and prevails; what shall I do, how shall I submit in this case?

Ans. Before I give in my answer take these Cautions.

1 That the actings of Corruption being a thing contrary to Gods will, I am not
to understand submission to Gods Will, in case of corruption thus; as,

1 That I should give place to corruption. 2 Be contented with the breaking of
it forth. 3 Forbear praying against it; or, 4 Not be humbled for it; or, 5 Not
watch against it. 6 Lessen it, if overcome thereby.
But I am to understand it thus, viz. That since corruption could not act, were
it not the will of God to suffer it, therefore all the aforesaid things being
done by me constantly, and corruption notwithstanding prevailing, I am then
after this manner in such a case to submit to Gods Will. viz. Lay my self
before God, and say, O Lord, if it were not thy will to suffer it, this
corruption could not prevail against me; it does prevail, and I know not what
to do, but here I lie, I have deserved to be scourged with Scorpions, and if
it be so thou will whip me with the sharp rod of my corruptions, here I lie;
though I abhor the thing it self, yet as it comes in a way of deserved
punishment, so Lord here I am, if thou will beat me with it, here I lie.

Now having showed the nature of this submission to help us in the thing (for
this is the bitterest Pill of all other to the gracious heart) take these
things.

1 Consider that God in all the breaking forth of corruptions in his, has a
design that lies deeper than the Devils design, or the design of thy own
heart. The Devils design in putting forward some corruption; is to shake
faith, the hearts design to please it self; God has a design lies deeper, and
when the time of mercy is come, and the work ripe for God to put his design in
execution; Gods design which lies as a Mine at the bottom will spring, and
blow up the corruption, and the design of the Devil, and man's heart therein,
altogether. This is clear in the case of Peter, in his fall was a great design
of Satan, another of his cowardly heart; but Christ had a design lay deeper,
which afterward takes place, blows up the design of Satan, Peter's heart, yea
and his sin too; for mark how bold afterward is Peter above all, and how
fearful of being confident.

2 Consider, That as all things work together for good to Saints, so there is
gain comes to them in the end, and that by their corruptions. I might here
name all those I mentioned about temptation, but that I forbear to multiply.
There is this gain,

1 It keeps the soul humble.

2 Makes it look to strength without.

Put case my condition is clouded and thereby my whole life made discomfortable
to me, how shall I submit to the Will of God in that?

Ans. 1. Consider, thy case in this is not worse than has been the case of
Gods own Children, as Asaph, Heman, yea of Christ himself.

2 Consider, It may be thou did abuse comforts when thou had them; either,

1 By Idolizing them; or,

2 VVaxing wanton under them, as the Prodigal Son.

3 Consider, it may be thy clouding may but be a preparative to greater
refreshings, Joh. 17.19, 20, 21, 22. And for their sakes I sanctify my self,
that they also might be sanctified through the Truth, neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word, that
they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us; that the world may believe that thou have sent me, and the
glory which thou gave me I have given them, that they may be one even as we
are one.

4 Consider, That God does thee no wrong though he cloud thy condition, all thy
days here, whilst he gives thee Heaven hereafter.

5 Consider, That so long as thy soul in this condition is kept up from
sinking, it argues a secret supporting presence to be with thee; though a
sensible comforting presence is absent, submit to Gods Will to want one, whilst
he gives the other.

6 Consider, That it is a thing better that my condition should sometimes be
dark, than that it should always be clear.

1 Because by a man's being sometimes dark he knows how to prize light more. A
man that has lain in a dark Dungeon knows better how to prize the liberty of
the Sunshine than another.

2 Uncertainty of a man's condition puts a man upon search of his heart more
then it may be else he would; hereby discoveries are made of corruptions,
which it may be else he had not found out. Hereby he finds out it may be the
way by which he was led into this darkness, which is a thing of great use, to
others, and a man's self; as a man that has once sailed a dangerous Sea, and
found out the Shelves and Rocks, this knowledge attained is of great use to
himself and others.

3 By being sometimes in the dark, thou know how experimentally to have a
sympathy with others in that condition, Hebrews 5.2. Who can have compassion on
the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for that he himself also is
compassed with infirmities. A man that has been in misery knows how to pity
another in it.

4 By being sometimes in the dark, thou art taught this lesson; That
discoveries of Cods face and presence are all of grace, it is not in thine own
power to attain or maintain them, Psalm. 30.6, 7. And in my prosperity I said,
I shall never be moved; Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain to
stand strong, thou did hide thy face and I was troubled.

5 By being sometimes in the dark, God lets thee see something of the
difference here betwixt Heaven and Hell, and thereby thou come to see the
greatness of grace in delivering thee from the one, and keeping thee to the
other.

6 By being sometimes in the dark, many graces are tried which could never be
tried were thou always in the light; as 1. Faith. 2. Patience. 3.
Contentedness. 4. Love. 5. Self-denial, etc.

THE Will of GOD and CHRIST Concerning Sinners. IN ONE SERMON ON
Gal. 1.4. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this
present evil world, according to the Will of God, and our Father.


TWo great things are handled in this Epistle, as the principal parts thereof,
Justification and Sanctification: Both these the Apostle compriseth in this
verse, Who gave himself for our sins; here is Justification, That he might
deliver us from this present evil world, i.e. from all the evil and
corruption which reigns in this present world, and the children thereof, and
purify us to himself a peculiar people zealous of goods works; here is our
Sanctification. Both which, as they are willed and effected by Jesus Christ; so
also are they agreeable to the will of the Father. He gave himself for our
sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world; this was
agreeable to the will of the Father, according to the will of God, and our
Father.

In the words we have,

1 The close or harmony of the will of God, and Christ, in one and the same
thing: What Christ wills and effects, that is the will of the Father.

2 Two results or determinations of their wills thus closing:

1 That sinners should have their sins done away and be saved; The will of
Christ, who gave himself, i. e. to bring this about, he gave himself up to
dye. And this is likewise the will of the Father, According to the will of God.
-- 2 That sinners should be delivered from this present evil world, and be
sanctified. This is the will of Christ, he gave himself -- that he might
bring this about, it was one special thing he aimed at in giving himself for
our sins, and also the Fathers, according to the will of God, and our Father:
For the last clause, According to the will of God, -- has reference to all the
former, both Christ's giving himself for our sins, and delivering us from the
present evil world.
Doct. The great Lesson that lies before us in these words, is, That the
Salvation and Sanctification of poor sinners is the will of God the Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Quest. If you ask me, What will of God do you now speak of, when you say
thus, The secret will, or the revealed?

Ans. I answer, I speak of both, it is both the secret will of God, that
sinners should be saved, and the revealed also: Yea the Apostle in those words,
According to the will of God, intends both, as is clear in that he speaks of
that will by which the Lord Christ was designed to dye, that he might justify
and sanctify his people: Now this was the secret will and revealed will both,
for in either Christ was, and is designed to this work.

And indeed, although we make a distinction between these, yet are they not
two, but one will; whereof, that which we call the secret will, is properly
the act, and that which we call the revealed will, the publication or
declaration thereof.

Now as the enacting of a Law, and publishing of it, is not two Laws, but one:
So it is here. And hence it follows, that rightly understood they cannot be
contrary each to other, but must of necessity agree, because they are one, for
were they contrary they then should cease to be one. Yea, they should not
only cease to be one, but cease to be, contraries destroy each other, for
authority to enact a Law to be thus and thus, and contradict the same in the
publication thereof, makes both a nullity. So that our Conclusion is this, viz.

The Salvation and Sanctification of sinners, is the will of God the Father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

This General I shall branch out into two particulars.

1 That it is the will of God and Christ, sinners should be saved. It is the
will of God and Christ, sinners should be sanctified.
1 Both God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ are exceedingly willing, and
earnestly, and truly desirous, that poor sinners should be saved. This is
proved, Joh. 6.37, 38, 39, 40. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me,
and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. For I came down from
heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is
the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. And this is
the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes
on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day.
Where we have the will of God and Christ, set forth in several particulars.

1 Christ's will manifested.

1 By his resolvednesse to entertain all poor sinners coming to him, verse. 37.
-- I will in no wise (not, not) i. e. nothing in the world shall ever make me
cast out that soul.

2 By his great and long journey undertaken for, and about their salvation,
verse. 38. I came down from Heaven -- as to say, do poor sinners doubt of my
will to save them, I do faithfully engage my self to do it, yea let them but
consider what a long journey I have made about this work.

2 God the Fathers will is showed.

1 By his act of Donation, or giving of poor sinners to Christ, putting them
over into his hands to save them, verse. 37. All that the Father gives me. --

2 By his mission of Jesus Christ, verse. 38. But the will of him that sent me,
which is put rather upon God the Fathers will than Christ's, not as if Christ
had been unwilling, but only to convince poor sinners how much, and how
exceedingly the will of God the Father is in the thing, as well as Christ's,
Christ having before expressed his own willingness, now assures them that he
could not be more willing than his Father was; yea of the two (if any) he
would make them believe that his Fathers will was firstly and mostly in the
business.

3 By that double charge that the Father lays upon the Son at his sending of
him away.

1 That none of those be lost which he had committed to him, verse. 39. This is
the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I
should lose nothing; as to say, My Son I put over sinners to you, commit them
to your care and keeping, look you to it that none of those I commit to you be
lost, but that they be all forthcoming in the day when I shall require them,
for I give them to you, and I shall expect tale of them all from you again.

2 That to every one believing on him he should give eternal life, verse. 40.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have eternal life: As to say, My Son, I send you down on
earth among a company of poor sinners, and when you come there, you shall find
many poor sinners will believe on you, this therefore is that I would have you
to mind when you are gone, and think of it as my will, whosoever he is that
shall believe on you, give him eternal life, I charge you reject none, but
whoever he be, give him eternal life.

This will of God and Christ in the salvation of poor sinners we have also,
Heb. 10.7, 8, 9. Lo I come, here is the will of Christ, -- to do thy will, O
God, here is the will of the Father. When God said, Sacrifice and offering I
will have no longer, these will never satisfy my justice, nor thoroughly save
sinners, whom I will have to be saved, but I have prepared and fitted thee to
be a sacrifice, then says Christ, Lo I come; here am I Father, if sacrifice
and offering will not do it, here am I Father, take my blood, if that will do
it, or punish me as thou will, so that sinner may be saved.

To this agree those words of Christ to his Disciples. Joh 4.34. My meat (here
is the will of Christ showed in his delight) is to do the will of him that sent
me; here is the will of the Father: And upon what occasion were these words
spoken? why, upon occasion of the converting of a poor woman.

To our purpose likewise are those words of Christ spoken, Joh. 17. in his last
prayer to his Father, verse 24. Father I will (here is the will of Christ) that
those whom thou have given me; here is the will of the Father: And very
observable it is, that as God the Father gave the Son a charge and command when
he went down to the earth, that of all those which he had given him he
should lose none. Now Jesus Christ having done his work on earth, and thoroughly
saved them, he comes (as it were) in a way of commanding to his Father, as if
he should say, O Righteous Father, you gave me a charge when I left heaven,
that of all those you had given me, I should lose none, this command (O
righteous Father) I have obeyed, and of those which thou have given me, I have
lost none: And now, O Father, I come to thee, and this is my will, which I will
have to be done, that those whom thou have given me, may be with me where I
am.

Thus God and Christ seem as it were to command each other, as though there
were some unwillingnesse in either, which is not so, there being nothing that
the hearts of both breathe more earnestly after, than the salvation of poor
sinners; but only speaking by way of condescension to our capacities, to make
us poor creatures sensible how exceeding willing they are to have poor sinners
saved, they speak thus: The Father to show his willingness, lays a command
upon Jesus Christ, and does (as it were) hasten him out of heaven about the
work, though yet there was no need of this, it being the joy of his soul, and
his very meat and drink to save sinners.

The Son likewise to show his willingness, having done his work, he does as
it were give command to have heaven doors set open for poor sinners to come
in, though yet there was no need of this, heaven being prepared, and furnished
by the Father on very purpose for them to come thither. But both to show their
willingness and desire of the thing, speak thus; as also to confirm and
strengthen the faith of poor souls in coming to Christ. For suppose it should
be (which never will be) that there should be a time wherein the will of the
Son should decline the work of the salvation of poor sinners, yet is the
Fathers will so much in the thing, that he would (as it were) lay a command
upon the Son to do the work.

And again, suppose it should be (which never to all eternity will be) that
there should be a time wherein the Fathers will should draw back, yet then the
will of the Son is so much in this thing, that he would (as it were, give me
leave with reverence so to speak) lay a command upon the Fathers will, to bring
it up to the thing. The Holy Ghost using this manner of speaking, not as though
there were or ever would be any such thing, that either the Father or Son
should be unwilling, but only to speak to our capacity, who being poor finite
creatures, can no way conceive of these infinite mysteries of the Gospel, but
as they are by a certain kind of periphrasis, or circumlocution of speaking
(making us by several things and words to understand something of one thing)
unfolded to us, it expresses it self after this manner.

One place more I shall mention, and that is in Joh. 10.27, 28, 29, 30. where
we have the wills of either mentioned, together with an engagement of their
utmost power and ability in the Salvation of Sinners, the will of Christ, verse.
28. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Of the Father, verse. 29. My Father
which gave them me is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of
my Fathers hand. Of both conjoined, verse. 30. I and my Father are one; as if
Christ should say, My Father and I are not only willing to save Sinners, but we
are resolved to do our utmost against all those which shall appear enemies to
this work; we are not only willing to save them, but we will save them over the
heads of their Adversaries, maugre all opposition of men or Devils that shall
be made against this work; we will not only carry them to Heaven, but do our
best also against all such as shall attempt to snatch them out of our hands as
we are carrying them thither. Thus much for clearing the truth of our
Proposition, that it is so; I now come to give some reasons why it must needs
be so; In prosecution whereof I shall seemingly divide that which is most
entirely one, viz. the Will of God and Christ, showing you in several,

1 Why it must needs be that God, the Father is willing.

2 Why it must needs be that God the Son is willing that Sinners should be
saved.

1 For God the Father, of whose will is the greatest doubt with poor Sinners;
we look upon Christ as made up of Mercy and Love, but on God the Father as an
austere Man: to free us from such thoughts and jealousies of the gracious God,
I shall lay down some Reasons, to show why God the Father must needs be willing
that poor Sinners should be saved.

1 Because God the Father has decreed from all eternity to save Sinners, he
has enacted the same above, and made it a Statute Law in Heaven, that Sinners
should be saved; which clearly argues that he was willing; for what other thing
was there to bring forth this decree but his own Willingness -- He works
all things after the counsel of hit own will, Ephesians. 1.11. if therefore the
Father then were willing, then must he of necessity be willing, and as willing
still, seeing in Himself, and in his Decree which is Himself, he is immutable
and changes not; so that once having through the immutable counsel of his own
will decreed to save Sinners, he to all eternity (this decree being an
immutable Law, and an irrepealable Ordinance of Heaven) remains willing to
save sinners. To this decree for the confirmation of our faith, he has added
his Oath and Seal.

1 His Oath, Heb. 6.17, 18. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto
the Heirs of Promise, the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath,
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us; not that the Decree of God needed an Oath for the
confirmation of it, it being firm and unalterable in it self; but only to show
unto the Heirs of Promise the immutability of his Counsel; God to an immutable
decree adds another immutable thing, viz. an Oath, that so by two immutable
things we might have strong consolation; for should we suppose that the decree
of God should be broken, yet Gods Oath binds him to to be immutable.

2 His Seal, 2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure,
having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his. Gods decree of Election,
the foundation of the Saints happiness, it has a Seal, not (as I said of the
Oath) that it needs any Seal, it being as firm without the Seal as with it;
but to raise our faith the more, God binds his decree with an Oath; an Oath
for confirmation (in things among men) being an end of all strife; and he
ratifies the same with a Seal, an usual way of confirming Deeds and Evidences
amongst men.

2 Because the Covenant made between God and Christ requires it. This Covenant
we have expressed (as says the Learned Ames) Isa. 53.10. Yet it pleased the
Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief; when thou shall make his Soul an
offering for Sin, he shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Where the conditions on
Christ's part are, that he must be bruised, put to grief, his Soul made an
Offering for sin; on Gods part, that he should see his Seed (his Sons and
Daughters, the fruit of his Travel) prolong his days, and the pleasure of the
Lord should prosper in his hand. Now, such a Covenant being made, and Christ
having already performed his part thereof, it must needs be that the Father
must be willing poor Sinners should be saved, because otherwise he should break
his Covenant made with his Son.

3 Because the glory of several of the Divine Attributes calls for it; God
should loose abundance of the glory of his Attributes should he not save
sinners. As,

1 Of his Mercy and Free Grace; whereupon should he bestow the riches of his
mercy, should he not make poor Sinners the objects thereof? 2 Of his Truth, for
God having decreed to save Sinners, entered into a Covenant with his Son, passed
his Oath, and given his Seal for the confirmation of it, what high derogation
would it now be to the glory of his truth and faithfulness, should he not be
willing to save sinners. 3 Of his Wisdom; God in his infinite VVisdome having
contrived so glorious a way as is that new and living way by the Blood of
Jesus, for poor Sinners to be saved in, how would it derogate from his Wisdom,
if after the contrivance of such a way he should be unwilling to do that for
which he contrived it. 4 Of his Patience and forbearance; Where would the glory
of this Attribute be, if God should forbear, and forbear, and yet have no will
all this time to the Salvation of Sinners; yet do I not say, that God has a
will so save all those whom in his patience he forbears; or that God can have
no glory of this Attribute in any other way than this of the Salvation of
Sinners; for I think that God shall have glory of this Attribute in many, whom
yet he will never save, as Romans 2.4, 5. Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance; but after thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of Wrath, and revelation of
the righteous Judgment of God; but this is my meaning, against part, and
indeed the greatest, of the glory of this Attribute (which arises from Gods
showing mercy to Sinners after his patience has been long provoked) would be
lost, should not God be willing that Sinners should be saved. 5 Of his Justice;
one would think that if any Attribute of God should, or could shine in the
condemnation of the whole race of Mankind it should be Justice, but yet Justice
it self would be so far from gaining, as that it would have its glory
eclipsed, should not God be willing that poor Sinners should be saved; for it
is every whit as much for the glory of Justice to give a discharge upon
satisfaction received, as to require payment before satisfaction given, and a
failing in the one, cannot be without a breach of Justice, as well as in the
other; now Christ having given Justice satisfaction for a considerable number
of the Race of Mankind, should Justice now pass a Sentence upon all without
exception, it would be much to the dishonor thereof.
4 Because God the Fathers exaltation of his Son Christ at his right hand,
engages him to it; which will appear if we consider two things,

1 That God the Father has called Christ to Heaven, and set him down there at
his right hand for this very end, to be a Prince and a Savior to poor Sinners,
Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins; which
cannot but have much influence upon the Fathers will in this thing, for so long
as he sees his Son Jesus Christ sitting at his right hand, he is put in
continual remembrance of the end of his calling him thither, to wit, the
completing of that most glorious work of the Salvation of poor sinners. 2 That
God the Father has set him about a work there (put the case God should forget
it, yet) will continually remember him of it; which is the work of
Intercession, whereby Christ spreads that blood which once was shed here below
on earth, before the Throne of God in Heaven; by which God the Father is put in
continual remembrance of that Sacrifice that once here below was offered for
sins, and what engagements from thence lie upon him to be willing, that poor
Sinners should be saved.
5 Because the delight of the Father in this work, as it argues that he is
willing to have poor Sinners saved, so also that he must needs be so, because
otherwise a great part of his joy and delight, which is in this work should be
lost. This we have, Luke 15. where throughout the chapter by the joy of the Man
for his Sheep, the Woman for her piece of Silver, and Father for his Son, is
set forth the great joy and delight that God takes in the conversion of
Sinners; that the joy here spoken of is the joy of the Father, and not the joy
of Angels, is clear.

1 Because it is no wherein the Chapter called the joy of Angels, but joy in
the presence of the Angels, i.e. God rejoicing before the Angels, v. 10.

2 Because the third Parable, which is (as it were) a Comment on the other,
makes not so much mention of the joy of Servants, as of the Father for his Sons
return, the greatness of which joy in this third Parable we have set forth in
four or five particulars.

1 The Father runs to meet the Son, whilst yet the Son was a great way off, v.
20. the Son it may be goes flowly, but the Father runs to meet him 2 He falls
on his neck and kisseth him; Joseph's salutation to his beloved Benjamin, and
the rest of his Brethren, when he was so full of joy that he wept again for
joy. 3 He causes the best robe to be brought forth for him, with a ring on his
hand; when Pharaoh was exceedingly taken and delighted with Joseph, he arraies
him in rich attire, and puts a ring on his hand. 4 He makes a Feast, and that
of the best, not only the Calf, but fatted Calf, verse. 23. 5 He triumphs, his
joy was so great, verse. 24. all which serves to set forth the exceeding joy and
delight of God in the conversion of poor Sinners, to declare which (upon
occasion of Pharisees murmuring at Publicans and Sinners following of Christ)
is the main scope of this Chapter in all the three Parables.
2 For Jesus Christ his will is, and must needs be in it as well as the Fathers.

1 Because it is the will and command of his Father that he should save
sinners. This will of the Father Christ himself lays down as one great
argument which moved him to take this work in hand, grounding his own
willingness upon Gods, Joh. 6.37, 38. All that the Father gives me, shall
come to me; and him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out: For I came
down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.
As if he should say, I will not cast out any poor sinners coming to me,
because the Father has willed me I should not. Yea God the Father has not
only willed the thing, but given Christ an express command to go about the
business, which is somewhat more than bare willing; I may will a thing to be
done, and that such a one should do it, and yet not presently give an express
command for the doing of it. This command we have Joh. 10.18. where Christ
speaking of his care and love toward his sheep, expressed in his knowing,
owning of them, preserving them, bringing them to his fold, and laying down his
life for them, concludes all with this, This commandment have I received of my
Father. As if he should say, It is my Fathers Commandment that I should take
care of, own my sheep, bring them into the fold, dye for them. Now this will
and command of the Father, it cannot but have special influence upon Jesus
Christ to make him willing to save sinners, especially it we do but consider
two things.

1 That this command of the Father, it was a special command given to Christ as
he was Mediator, or as he was our second Adam. As the first Adam had one
special command (over and above the Moral Law which was written in his heart in
his first Creation) viz. of not eating the forbidden fruit, which was given him
(as godly men speak) over and besides all the ten Commandments, to be a
trial, a sign or symbol of his obedience to all the rest, so as that by his
eating, or not eating of the forbidden fruit, God would judge of all his other
obedience. So this command of dying to save sinners, it was a special Law given
to Christ as second Adam (over, and above the Moral Law) which is common to him
and us) to be as a sign or symbol of his obedience to all Gods other commands;
so that had Christ failed here, God would have accounted him obedient in
nothing: Yea God the Father lays this upon Christ, that look as he did expect
his love, he should be mindful to perform this his command; and therefore
from his obedience hereunto, he comforts himself in his Fathers love, that he
did love him, Joh. 10.17, 18. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay
down my life, that I might take it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay
it down of my self; have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
again: This Commandment have I received of my Father.

2 That this will or command of the Father, it remains, and is infull force
even to the last day, so long as there are any poor sinners whom the Father
has given to Christ unsaved, as Joh. 6.39, 40. And this is the Fathers will
which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. And this is the will of
him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him,
may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last day. Christ
cannot quit himself of this command until the last day, till such time as he
has brought all those souls whom the Father will have to be saved, into
Heaven.

2 Because not only his Fathers command, but his own interest is much engaged
in the salvation of sinners, and therefore he must needs be willing. Every
one is willing with that wherein his own interest lies.

1 The interest of his honor and advancement, he should lose much of his
honor should not sinners be saved: It is a dishonor to take a work in hand,
and not go through with it, it argues either want of ability, or
unfaithfulness; Christ has taken the work in hand. There is a twofold glory
that Christ has, a Personal glory, and a Mediatory glory, which undoubtedly
is, and shall be a very great addition to Christ's personal glory, of which
Christ speaks, Joh. 17.10. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am
glorified in them. As a Prince may have a twofold glory by noble birth, and
noble achievements, and the latter is a great addition to the former. Now
though Christ should have his personal glory, though sinners should never be
saved, yet his glory as Mediator, that should be lost.

2 Of his Pleasure, Christ takes abundance of pleasure in the salvation of
sinners, as Prove. 8.30, 31. Then was I by him as one brought up with him; and I
was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him, rejoicing in the habitable
part of his earth, and my delights were with the sons of men. Joh. 4.34. Jesus
says unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish
his work, Luke 10.21. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in Spirit, and said, I
thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes, even so Father,
for so it seemed good in thy sight; compared with 17. and 18. verses, And the
seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject unto
us through thy Name, and he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall
from heaven. Now should he not be willing to save them, all this should be
lost.

3 Of his gain, this should be lost, should he not be willing to save
sinners, because Christ can put his death to no other use: For a man to give
much for a thing, which can be put but to one use, and when he has it, not
to put it to that use, but resolve the contrary, is to throw his money on the
Dunghill. Now Christ can put his blood to no other use; it cannot be laid out
for the use of Angels, because it was a sacrifice offered up in another
nature, and not in theirs, Heb. 2.16. For verily he took not on him the
nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham; yea the good Angels,
though they are confirmed by Christ, yet is it not by Christ as Mediator, but
by Christ's personal mediation. Christ is head of Principalities and Powers, but
not as he is Mediator, so only he is head of the Church, but as he is the
second person, should Christ be head to them as Mediator, there would be no
difference betwixt Christ being a head to Angels and men. And as for the bad
Angels, they are excluded from it; so that Christ's blood can be put to no
other use.

4 Of his Fathers love; for his Fathers love seems to be linked to his
obedience in this particular, as Joh. 10.17, 18. Therefore does my Father love
me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again, etc. -- This
Commandment have I received of my Father. These four things wherein chiefly
men's interesses do lie, viz. their credit, honor, or advancement, their
pleasure, profit, and love of friends, Christ should lose all these, should he
not be willing that sinners should be saved.

3 Because the several offices of Christ would be in a great part frustrated,
should not Christ be willing to have poor sinners saved. As for the
Prophetical office, what use would there be of his teaching, either outwardly
by sending forth Messengers and Ambassadors, or inwardly by his Spirit, were
he not willing sinners should be saved, except it were to aggravate men's
condemnation only. For the Priestly office, what use would there be of
Christ's sacrifice of blood on earth, or intercession in heaven, were he not
willing sinners should be saved: Yea what need had there been of this, had not
Christ been willing? he might have spared all his labor and cost below, and
work above too, had it not been for this. For the Kingly office, what use would
there be of Christ's reigning in his Churches, in the hearts of his people,
mortifying their sins, quickening their graces, leading, ruling of them, were
he not willing sinners should be saved? all that part of his Kingly office,
which is exercised with his Scepter of love, would be useless. So that the
Offices of Christ would be almost wholly frustrated, were not Christ willing
sinners should be saved. Now do but consider, what great in fluence this must
needs have upon Christ to make him willing, for,

1 He is put into his Offices by his Father; First, made a Prophet by God,
Heb. 3.1. Wherefore holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider
the Apostle and high Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus. Secondly, A
Priest, Heb. 5.5, 6. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high
Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee. As he says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedec. Thirdly, A King, Psalm. 2.6, Yet have I set my King upon
my holy hill of Sion.

2 His Father has fitted him for these. To be a Prophet, he has given him a
tongue, Isa. 50.4. The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, that
I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary. To be a
Priest, he has given him a body, as Heb. 10.5. Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared me. To be a King, he has given
him a Scepter, and Anointing, and a Throne, as Psalm. 45 6, 7. Thy Throne (O
God) is for ever and ever; the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter; thou
love righteousness, and hate wickedness; therefore God, thy God, has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Now should Christ
after all this be unwilling to save sinners, this would highly displease the
Father.

3 Christ has accepted of these Offices; to take an Office, and never intend
to perform it, is high deceit: Now should not Christ be willing to save
sinners, he should do thus. The saving of sinners, is the very end of all
these Offices.

4 Because the sundry Relations that Christ stands in unto poor sinners, makes
him willing, yea argues he must needs be so, that poor sinners should be
saved? When I say Christ stands in Relation to sinners, I do not mean that they
are to be looked upon as sinners, as they stand in that Relation, but Christ
stands in Relation to them, who are in themselves sinners. There are diverse
Relations betwixt Christ and his people, as of a brother and brother, Master
and servant, Father and children, Husband and wife, King and subjects, Head and
members. Now these Relations cannot but much engage the heart of Christ to be
willing to save sinners, if we consider,

1 How that Relation it self is a great begetter and knitter of affections;
what begets such affection betwixt Father and child, Husband and wife?
Relation: And from hence the parties related are made to wish and endeavor the
good of each other.

2 That Christ stands in all these Relations: He is Master, King, Brother,
Father, Husband, Head, all these: If to be but in one of these Relations, as a
Father, or Husband, make a man so willing and industrious of the good of the
party related to, then much more to be in all: Now Christ is in all, and
therefore cannot but be exceeding willing.

3 That these Relations can never be broken: Earthly Relations may be, and
are dissolved, they are knots death unties; But now the Relation betwixt
Christ, and his (poor sinful creatures) can never be broken; and therefore if
Christ once stood related to them, and thereby became willing to have them
saved, he must of necessity be so for ever, because this Relation holds for
ever:

5 Because Christ having taken our nature upon him, makes him that he is, and
he must needs be willing to have poor sinners saved, if we consider three
things.

1 That Christ took our nature upon him for this as one main end, that he
might be made a merciful High Priest, Heb. 2.17. Wherefore in all things it
behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful
and faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation
for the sins of the people. Christ as God was merciful before, but his taking
our nature makes him merciful as man, as well as God, and willing to save
sinners. 2 No sooner had Christ taken our nature, but presently there was a
merciful disposition wrought in him, or an inclination to save sinners, as Heb.
10.5.7. Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared
me; then said I, Lo, I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me,
to do thy will, O God. No sooner has Christ a body prepared, but he has a
will and inclination to save sinners. This merciful disposition, or inclination
of his heart to save sinners, it is now natural to him as he is man, as well
as God. Now things which are natural to us, we cannot but be exceeding
willing and inclinable to do, nature is such a drawer. This we may see if we
do but compare Heb. 10.7. Then said I, Lo, I come, to do thy will, O God, with
Psalm. 40.7, 8. Then said I, Lo, I come: I delight to do thy will, O my God:
yea, thy Law is within my heart. Where this will of God to save sinners, is
said to be a Law within his heart.
Object. But if it be so as you say, That it is the will of God and Christ,
that sinners should be saved; Then will it follow that all sinners must
necessarily be saved, because what is the will of God, that shall and must of
necessity be effected?

Ans. I grant it, were it the will of God and Christ, that all sinners should
be saved, then indeed it would be so; but this we have never said. You cannot
draw an universal proposition from an indefinite, because the universal subject
in one is taken universally, but not so in the other. Now when I say it is the
will of God and Christ that sinners should be saved, I speak of sinners
indefinitly, not universally. Yea further, the Scripture speaks expressly, that
it is the will of God that some sinners should not be saved, as Romans 9.18, 19.
Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. Thou will say then unto me, why does he yet find fault? for who
has resisted his will? Where the Apostle (verse. 18.) makes the hardening of
sinners unto damnation to be as well the will of God, as the showing of mercy
to salvation; yea in propounding the Cavillers objection, verse. 19. he plainly
implies this, in those words, Who has resisted his will? Granting that it is
the will of God that some should be hardened. Therefore, I say, though it be
the will of God and Christ that sinners should be saved, yet is it not the
will of God that all sinners should, but the contrary is the will of God, that
some sinners should go on and be hardened in their sins, and so perish
eternally. But when the Scripture speaks of sinners indefinitly, it is (as I
have said) to notify the condition that those persons are in, viz. in a
condition of sin and misery, but not (as I have sometime since showed) to
signify that all sinners should be saved, or that it is the will of God it
should be so; persons in such a condition are those God will save, but not all
in that condition*

Object. But it is said, 1 Timothy 2.4. That God will have all men to be saved.

Answ. It is not meant of every man, but men of all sorts; for the Apostle
verse. 1. having exhorted them to pray for all men, and particularly (verse. 2)
for Kings and men in authority, lest some should say, Is there any hope for
Kings and such men, who mostly (in these days) were persecutors, and opposers
of truth; he to take off this, answers, That God would have all men to be
saved; that is, men of all sorts, Kings as well as others.

Object. But what encouragement does this afford to the faith of poor sinners,
to say, God and Christ are willing poor sinners should be saved, if it be not
meant of all sinners?

Ans. It is a great encouragement both to believing, and in believing; unto
both these, this thing, it is a great encouragement, for if it be the will of
God and Christ that sinners should be saved, then it is no presumption in me
a poor sinner, to lay hold of the promise for salvation, because it is the will
of God such should be saved. Yea in believing it is a great encouragement,
because from hence it God enable me to believe, I may assure my self that I
do the will of God in what I do; And is not this a great encouragement in
acting? when I know my acting is according to the will of God?

Object. But if it be not the will of God that all sinners should be saved,
then may I presume in laying hold of the promise, because I may be one of
those whom it is the will of God not to save?

Ans. Not so, for though God have never willed that all sinners should be
saved, yet in regard it is the will of God that sinners, persons in such a
state and condition, should be saved, and the way to this salvation is by
laying hold of Christ in the promise, and no other, unless I could certainly
show upon clear and infallible grounds that I am one of them whom God will not
have to be saved, I being in that condition that those persons are in, whom
God will have to be saved, and going in that very way which God will have all
those which are saved to go in, this is no presumption at all.

Object. But would it not be better for the faith and comfort of poor souls,
to say, that God would have, or that God does will it, that all should be
saved?

Ans. No, It would be so far from being better, that it would be worse,
unless we affirm, That all shall certainly be saved. For if it be the will of
God, that God really would have that all should be saved, and yet many are not
saved, then where would the foundation of a Saints comfort and assurance be?
Is not this the bottom of a believers assurance for heaven, that his eternal
salvation is founded upon the Will of God, which as it is unalterable in it
self, so also cannot be hindered from effecting what it self wills, by sin,
Satan, or any other thing from without, and therefore his salvation bottomed
upon this will cannot be hindered: But now if God did really will that all
should be saved, and many are not saved, then it will follow that somewhat
there is, which may alter the Will of God, or hinder that which he really
wills, from being put in execution; and if so, what assurance of salvation can
a Christian ground from the Will of God, when what he really wills may be
hindered?

Use 1. Is it so, That it is the will of God and Christ that poor sinners
should be saved? Then let poor sinners hence be encouraged, notwithstanding
all the suggestions of Satan, and cavils of their own hearts, to come to Christ
for salvation. What can be a greater encouragement than this, that God and
Christ are willing poor, sinners should be saved? Come therefore, O poor soul,
and roll thy self into the Arms of the Lord Jesus Christ: If a messenger
should come from the Prince unto a company of beggars, and tell them that the
Prince is willing that poor beggars should come to him, and he will give
entertainment to all that come, there needs be no more arguments used to draw
them flocking to his door; they would not stand objecting and querying, but
will he entertain me and me, etc. Behold the Lord of heaven is willing to
entertain sinners; do not now stand querying; but is he willing to entertain
me and me; No, but come, make a venture, as beggars in such a case will,
whether you speed or no: Have thou been a drunken Sot, a renter of the holy
name of God, an unclean person, and a prophaner of the Ordinances of God these
many years together: O poor soul, make a venture for heaven once before thou
dyest; Come, come, come, Coming is thy duty, receiving of comers is that which
God has promised, venture thou upon that which is thy duty, and leave thou God
to fulfill his own promise.

Have thou been a great sinner, and does this make thee afraid to come?
Consider who they are that Christ invites to his wedding Supper; why, highway
men, Matthew. 22.9, 10. Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye
shall find, bid to the marriage. So those servants went out into the
highways and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good,
and the wedding was furnished with guests. Now who are they which usually
frequent the highways, why beggars and blindemen, and lame-men, and Thieves,
and Robbers, and Murderers, such they are that Christ invites, the worst of
sinners. When Christ passed through Jericho, and was crowded and thronged with
a company of holy devout persons, Christ looks over all these, and spies out
one Zacheus a Publican, a notorious sinner, an extortioner, and him Christ
imbraceth and lays hold of. Come poor soul, though thou have been as vile as
the vilest, yet Christ will embrace thee coming to him. Read over the Promise,
Joh. 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Christ is willing poor sinners should
come, be thou, O sinner, willing to come: As be is a willing Savior, so
should we be a willing people, and who would not be willing to be saved,
when God and Christ are willing to save. As the father of the Prodigal met his
Son coming, so Christ will meet thy soul above half way. In a word, if thou will not come thou will be damned for ever; There is no other name under
heaven given among men whereby thou can be saved, but by the name of Christ.
He that believes on him (which is the coming I speak of) shall be saved, but
he that believes not shall be damned.

Use 2. Comfort to the Saints, Your salvation is sure, you have God and Christ,
the will of either engaged for you: If the Divine will be irresistible, as it
is, then your salvation is firm and everlasting, because it is grounded upon
this will: A man's affections are hardly overcome, but his will is harder to be
overcome; you may overcome the man, when you cannot the will; the will is such
a thing that most men if they can have their will, they will have it. Now
Saints, the will of God and Christ is engaged for your salvation, God and
Christ should not have their wills should you miss of Heaven; Who has (or
can) resist his will?

Hence likewise learn for your comfort, That you shall never want what shall
be for your good here; If it be the will of God and Christ to give salvation
to you, then surely are they willing to give you all things necessary for your
temporal well-being of sustentation here; if it be their will to give Heaven to
you, then surely nothing needful for you between this and Heaven shall be
wanting to you: Think you that they are willing to give the greater, and not
the less: O trust then for the one, as well as the other.

Use 3. Duty to the Saints, Are God and Christ willing to have you saved? Then
be you willing to do, or suffer any thing for God: Does the Lord lay out
himself for your good? lay out you your selves for his glory; be you as
willing to glorify God here, as God is to have you glorified hereafter: Think
not any thing you have or can do too much for him, who has not thought
himself, or any thing he could do, too much for you.

No Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, proved in Seven SERMONS
SERMON I.
Romans 8 1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus.


IN the former Chapter Paul sets forth the great Combat that he found in
himself betwixt the Flesh and Spirit, the Old and New Man; the law of his
members, and of his mind; the one delights in doing good, the other hates it:
the one wills to do it, the other resists the doing of it: one serves the Law
of God, the other the Law of Sin. This Combat grows so high, and the worser
part so prevalent, that verse. 24. Paul as a poor Prisoner in Bonds, cries out,
O wretched man that I am -- In this his low condition in comes the Lord Jesus
Christ to his rescue, and then presently the day is his, and he obtaines a
glorious victory, verse. 25. whereupon he celebrates this Christian Triumph in
our text* There is therefore no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

The words are a blessed Triumph, founded upon that confidence a Christian has
in, and that experience he daily has of the strength and power of Christ
rescuing him from Sin, the Law, Hell, the Devil, and all the enemies of a
Believers Salvation; without mincing of them, they afford us this truth.

Doct. Souls interessed in Jesus Christ, are persons privileged and exempted
from Condemnation.

1 They are freed from Condemnation at present, Joh. 3.18. He that believes in
him, is not condemned, i. e. are not for the present under any Sentence of
Condemnation as others are.

2 They are also freed for future, ^oh. 5.24. Shall not come into Condemnation
-- that is, no sentence of Condemnation, or execution thereof shall hereafter
pass upon them.

In prosecution of which blessed comfortable truth, I shall show;

1 What is meant by Condemnation, which a Saint is freed from. 2 Why souls in
Christ must needs be freed from it. 3 What that is which frees them. 4 How
great and glorious a privilege this is. 5 Answer some Objections, and then
apply all.
As touching the First (not to speak of the Word, which has various acceptions
in Scripture, but of the thing it self) Condemnation, holds forth three things.

1 The passing a Sentence of Death upon a Malefactor, this is a part of
Condemnation; now in Adam all men sinned, and Gods Justice passed a Sentence of
Condemnation upon all; upon Adam himself actually, and all his Posterity
vertually, as in his loins. This sentence the Law of God passes upon every
individual man actually at his first coming into the World, and so all
(according to the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.3.) are borne children of wrath, and all
men, from the first man to the last, are under an actual sentence of
Condemnation. 2 The effects of the Sentence passed, which are punishments
inflicted on Soul and Body, out of wrath, and for satisfaction of Justice.
Before the Fall, man lay under no punishment, but the whole man had the Divine
Image stamped upon it; the Soul was endued with those Divine properties and
perfections of Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness, the Body free from
sufferings, and immortal. Man falling, God out of wrath strips him of his
Image, the Soul in a great measure is deprived of those glorious perfections of
Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness, the Body becomes passible, and
subject to Mortality, so that the Excellencies of Soul and Body are lost, and
these are but the effects of the Sentence, which the Justice of God did
immediately pass upon Man so soon as he was fallen. 3 The final execution of
this Sentence, and that is the heavy and insupportable Wrath of God lighting
upon Soul and Body in Hell hereafter.
Taking Condemnation for either, and all of these, a Soul interessed in Christ
is freed from it.

1 From the Sentence passed; true, a Sentence was vertually passed upon him in
the fall of Adam, his common person, but this was reversed in the standing of
Jesus Christ the second Adam, and his common person; so actually also the Law
of God passes a Sentence upon him at his first coming into the World, which is
again actually reversed at his conversion; so as that a converted Soul stands
free from any sentence arising either from Adams guilt, or his own.

Obj. But how can the Law in Equity and Justice pass an actual Sentence upon a
man, who before his coming into the World is justified in his common person?

Ans. Though a Saint be justified long before in Christ, yet the Law may pass
an actual Sentence of Condemnation upon him notwithstanding this, because
though in Christ he be justified, yet he is not absolved until such time as he
has his particular Pardon, as for example; A company of Persons for Rebellion
against their Sovereign are actually proclaimed Traitors, and if taken, are by
the Law adjudged to dye; the young Prince desirous to save the lives of some of
these, gives his Father a Ransom for them; the persons ransomed known only to
the Prince, and his Father are now pardoned, and so esteemed in sight of the
Prince and his Father, yet because the names of these Persons are concealed,
and it is a secret to whom this belongs the Law therefore (which proceeds not
upon secret, but known grounds) takes no cognizance thereof, but (though many
of them be justified, and the Princes Son has a general Pardon in his hand for
them, yet in regard the particular Pardons are not given forth) the Law (not
acknowledging them pardoned, because in a Legal way they are not) follows the
general Sentence upon all without exception, until such time as the particular
Pardon is produced, and then as each has his particular Pardon produced, so
the Law actually acquits him, and not before. This is the Comparison, the
Application is, In Adam's Fall we all were proclaimed Traitors, and adjudged to
dye; Christ willing to save a certain number of these condemned persons, gives
his life a ransom for them, which God accepts and hereupon Christ has a
general Pardon given to him, by virtue of which all these persons (considered
in the Lump, as in him their common Person) are pardoned; yet because it is a
secret known to God and Christ alone, who they are which are pardoned, the Law
of God therefore, which proceeds not upon secret, but manifest things, takes no
notice of this, but follows the general Sentence of Condemnation upon all,
until such time as each one has a particular Pardon drawn out of the general
given an applied to him; so that a man may vertually be justified in Christ as
his common Person, and yet justly under an actual sentence of Condemnation from
the Law.

2 From the effects of that Sentence, viz. Punishments here on Soul and Body,
as they flow from Divine Wrath, and are for the satisfaction of Justice, not
that Souls in Christ are freed from all sufferings in Soul and Body, for they
suffer through Adams Fall in both as well as others: but these their sufferings
are Fatherly Chastisements, not legal Punishments, inflicted out of wrath to
satisfy Justice, which for them is already by Christ satisfied; yea, Death it
self which they with others suffer, is not a Legal punishment, but a
translation to a better life. Now, punishments are the effects of this
Sentence, only as they are Legal punishments, all which they are freed from,
and so from all the effects of this Sentence.

3 From the Final execution thereof, viz. the Condemnation of Hell: this, such
as are in Christ are freed from also, 1 Thessalonians. 1. last.

2 But why must this be so?

Ans. 1. Because a soul in Christ is one actually united to him, and one with
him, and being so, no Sentence of Condemnation can fall upon him, but the same
must light upon Christ himself, who is one with him; As a Woman after Marriage,
though she owe ever so many Debts, yet the Arrest does not light upon her, but
upon her Husband.

2 Because the Law which should condemn him has satisfaction given; now, to
condemn after satisfaction received were unjust, and illegal.

3 Because such a one has a pardon given him. Now after pardon there is no
sentence of Condemnation, though before there might; now they have a Pardon,
and such a one as is,

1 With satisfaction to the Law, therefore not a forced or constrained Pardon,
but a most just one.

2 Purchased, and therefore due by debt; though not to us, God owes us nothing;
yet to Christ he is in debt. As the Pardon respects us, it is all Free Grace,
free grace in God to accept of Christ's payment for us, he might have made us
paid the Debt our selves: As it is the courtesy of the Creditor to accept a
Surety, he might make the Debtor pay himself; Free Grace, when he has
accepted of it, to give forth the Pardon to this or that Soul rather than
another; another might have had it, and thou and I have wanted it; yet as the
Pardon respects Christ its Debt, he paid dear for it.

3 Sealed with Blood; the New Testament which brings this pardon is sealed with
the blood of the Testator; now after such a pardon there can be no condemnation.

4 Because he is by a public act of God acknowledged a just and righteous
Person; I do not say he is accounted an innocent person, because once he was
guilty; but a just and righteous person. because though once guilty, yet not
now. Now this public justification of him has more in it than a bare pardon,
for that only remits Sin, and takes away unrighteousness; this conferres grace,
and gives righteousness; so as that such a person is now no longer looked upon,
not only as no sinners, but as a righteous person that has obeyed all the
commands of God. And this Justification is such, that as none can be more
legal, so none is of more force to keep off Condemnation; he being justified
both by the party offended, and the Judge himself, for God is both these, and
it is God that justifies, Row. 8.33. and what can be more for any man's
justification.

5 He is in the hands of two omnipotent Keepers, who as they have power
sufficient to defend him, so are resolved never to deliver him up to Justice,
Joh. 10.28, 29. God and Christ. But what if the Keepers differ within
themselves, then he may be delivered up? No, (says Christ) no fear of that,
for I and my Father are one, verse. 30.

3 But what is that which frees those which are in Christ from Condemnation?

Ans. 1. NEGATIVELY, Not the righteousness of old Adam, although the
unrighteousness of old Adam brought Condemnation upon us, yet the
righteousness of old Adam cannot free us from it; the best of old Adams
righteousness since the Fall is marred by his unrighteousness, so that
although once it were sufficient to bring us to glory, yet now it is lame, yea,
through the Fall sinful, and altogether imperfect, that which will help forward
our Condemnation instead of freeing us from it; so as that though a man should
never in all his Lifetime commit any part of the unrighteousness of old Adam,
yet such now is his righteousness, that in following of that, he might hasten
his condemnation.

But secondly, and POSITIVELY, Our freedom is through the righteousness of
Christ the new Adam, Romans 3.20, 21, 22. chap. 5.18, 19. which righteousness is
twofold, Active, Passive; the Active gives us Title to glory, the Passive
frees us from condemnation; as our Justification to life eternal has respect
to Christ's active obedience, so our justification from death eternal has
respect to his passive, Romans 5.10. Christ's Passive obedience, viz. his death
and sufferings, is that frees us from condemnation; for herein he bare the
curse of the Law, and was condemned for us. So that all the free dome poor
souls have, from that guilt which is brought in by sin, and the consequence
thereof, viz. a sentence of condemnation here, with its effects, and the final
execution thereof hereafter, is by the death of Christ, his blood, his passive
obedience, 1 John 1.7. Rev. 1.5.

Hence these, and such like Scriptures which attribute justification to the
blood, death, and sufferings of Christ, speak not of justification fully, but
only of a part of it, viz. Justification from death eternal.

Hence also we learn how exceedingly every Saint is beholding to Christ for
dying, for had he not dyed, we had been all to this very day under the
fearful sentence of condemnation with all the effects thereof, and should have
been under the final execution thereof for ever in hell hereafter; and also for
fulfilling the Law of God actively for him, which had he not done, though his
death shoud have freed him from hell, yet could he not have had an entrance
into Heaven.

4 But wherein does it appear that this freedom from condemnation, is such a
great and glorious privilege?

Answ. 1. Is it not a great and glorious privilege for a man to have all his
accusers mouths stopped? This is the privilege of those who are freed from
condemnation: Suppose a Malefactor under sentence has a pardon, that very act
stops all his accusers mouths, as to that thing for which he was condemned.
So the act of Gods pardoning grace stops sins mouth, consciences mouth, the
Devils mouth. As there can be no legal condemnation, without a precedent
accusation; so there can be no accusation as touching things remitted, after
pardon. When Satan accused Joshua, Zach. 3. begin. Christ stops his mouth, Is
not this a brand plucked out of the fire? So when the Devil accuses any soul
which he has delivered from condemnation, Christ stops his mouth; is not this
Satan, one whom I have freed from condemnation? Have not I plucked him out of
the fire? Are not his sins pardoned? Why then Satan do thou rake up these
old businesses again?

2 Is it not a great and glorious privilege to be freed from that which to
be under, would make one unspeakably miserable for ever? Souls freed from
condemnation are so; under condemnation, and under the wrath of God, which
burns like devouring flames of fire. I Under condemnation, and under all the
plagues and judgments of God, under the weight of all thy sins, each of which
will one day weigh like a mountain of lead, under all the dreadful curses of
the Law; under the sting and biting of a tormenting conscience; under the power
of the Devil; under all afflictions, as legal punishments for sin, etc.

3 Is it not a great and glorious privilege to have ground to believe that I
shall enjoy an eternal life with God in glory, after this short life is ended?
This is the souls that is freed from condemnation, Christ would never have
freed him from the one, but in order to the other: He would never have plucked
him out of hell, but in order to the putting him into Heaven, and therefore
once freed from hell, and thou art safe for ever returning thither again, Joh.
5.24. There is a passage from death to life, but none back again.

4 Is it not a great privilege, to be in such a condition, wherein I can
triumph over all my enemies spiritual and temporal? Souls freed from
condemnation are in this condition; they can triumph over sin, because they see
the guilt thereof taken away, and have the promise and strength of Christ to
mortify it in them; over the Law, because the curse is gone, Gal. 3.13. over
the Devil, because they see principalities and powers spoiled; over death,
because its but an entrance into life, and so far as there is evil in it, its
swallowed up into victory; over hell, because Christ has delivered them from
wrath to come; over the malice, reproaches, contumelies of the world, because
Christ has overcome the world; and also they behold all the malice of the
world bound up in a chain, and that chain to be at the disposal of their
Father.

5 Is it not a great and glorious privilege to know assuredly, that although
through infirmity I fall into sin, yet sin shall never be laid to my charge?
This is that souls also which is freed from condemnation, Romans 8.33.34.

6 Is it not a great and glorious privilege to have a share and propriety in
all that is Christ's? this is their's: they are heirs of God, and coheires with
Christ; and so Christ's life, death, riches, wisdom, righteousness, strength,
grace, glory, all is theirs.

7 Is it not a great and glorious privilege, to have all our afflictions and
crosses turned into blessings and mercies? This also is their's; they meet with
no affliction but it is a mercy to them; if in poverty, their poverty is a
mercy; if in sickness, if in temptation, under reproach, under losses, yea
death it self, yet it is a mercy.

8 Is it not a great and glorious privilege, to have God, and the whole
Creation at peace with a man? This likewise is theirs. God is at peace with
that soul, Col. 1.20. and all the creatures (which are at war with others) are
at peace with him. Such are in Covenant with God, and being so, God makes a
Covenant for them with all the creatures, as Job 5.23. Hos. 2.18.

9 And lastly, Is it not a great and glorious privilege, to have all things
working together for our good? Health if we can have it, strength, parts,
riches, honors, if we can have them; Satan's temptations, Gods hidings, etc.
all things conspiring (as it were) our good: This is the privilege of called
souls, who are freed from condemnation, Romans 8.28.

Object. O but will some poor soul say, Were I freed from condemnation, surely
the Devil would not be so busy with me by his temptations. I should not be
so under his power, as I am.

Answ. 1. It is one thing to be under the power of Satan by way of Divine
permission, God permitting Satan to have a power over thee; another, by way of
voluntary subjection, Christ was under the power of Satan by way of Divine
permission when his body by Satan was transported from place to place. So also
Peter when he was left to be winnowed by Satan, and Paul when buffeted; yet
none under Satan's power by way of voluntary subjection.

2 Thy temptations rather argue that thou art freed from condemnation, than
otherwise. Satan does not use to trouble his friends, but those that are his
enemies, or in a way to be so.

Object. But I find corruption strong within me, which surely would not be,
were I freed from condemnation.

Answ. 1. It is one thing to have the guilt of sin removed which brings under
condemnation, and another to have the being and acting of sin removed; Paul had
the guilt removed, yet not the being or acting, Romans 7.

2 It is one thing to be under sin as sins captive, another as sins servant.
Thou art under sin, but is thy will against it? The evil that thou do, do
thou hate and count it thy burden, and hell, desiring as earnestly the
mortification as pardon of it? thou art then not under sin as sins servant, but
only as its captive, as Paul was, Romans 7.24. and yet he triumphs, There is no
condemnation.

Object. O but were I freed from condemnation, I should have more life in
Duties, Ordinances, than I have.

Answ. 1. There is a difference betwixt the having of life, and the feeling of
it; do not say, because thou do not feel life, therefore thou have none.

2 Thy feeling the contrary, to wit, a want of life, argues thou have it, for a
dead man feels nothing.

Use 1. See then what a vast difference there is betwixt the condition of one
that has interest in Christ, and another man's; the one is freed from
condemnation, the other is under it. There is as much difference, as is betwixt
one man going up the gallows to be hanged, and another going from the gallows
with a pardon in his hand to the Court, there to sit at the Princes Table.

2 How blessed then is the condition of every soul interessed in Christ! Such
are freed from condemnation. David, Psalm. 32. says, Blessed is he whose
iniquities are forgiven. Why? because such a one is freed from condemnation;
take away the cause, you remove the effects; so take away sin, and condemnation
cease; the blessedness therefore lies in this, that such are freed from
condemnation. O who would not then seek an interest in Christ; what Drunkard,
Swearer in this Congregation but would do it, when the condition of such is so
blessed? A man when frantic, or mad, though condemned to dye, yet he thinks
his condition as good as the best; but when he comes to himself, and sees
where he is, then he cries out, O that I were in the condition of such a one,
and such a one. So when men are mad after their lusts, and besotted with them,
they think their condition good, though under a sentence of condemnation; but
when such shall at the hour of death, or judgment come to themselves, and see
where they are, then shall they cry out, O that I were in such a ones
condition, and such a ones. Balaam when he came to dye, would dye the death of
the righteous. So when men come to dye, O then that I were such a one; whom if
they could they would have hanged while they lived.

3 Then how great a sin, and how much below their condition, is unbeleef in the
people of God? Soul, has Christ freed thee from condemnation, and will thou
distrust him for salvation? And does Christ say as much to thee, and will thou
by unbeleefe give Christ the lie? Deal not thus, O soul, by thy loving
Savior.

4 This casts many persons, and brings most men in the Countries, Towns, and
Parishes of the world, under condemnation: Why? they have not interest in
Christ, and such, and only such are freed, therefore all others are under it
still.

1 Art thou one who live and walk in profane courses, a Drunkard,
Swearer, unclean person, etc. thou art one cast by this doctrine; for as yet
thou have not interest in Christ, 1 John 1.6. If we say that we have
fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. If
such have not fellowship with Christ, then no actual interest in him; communion
flows from union, if it be a lie to say they have communion, much more to say
they have actual interest, and consequently union.

2 Art thou a moral man, and restest here? thou also have as yet no interest in
Christ. Heathens, many of them did excel in Morality, yet knew not Christ. The
Scribes and Pharisees came behind none of our Moralists, yet hear what Christ
says to them, Matthew. 5.20. For I say unto you, that except your righteousness
shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no
case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

3 Art thou a Religious man, or an outward Professor resting here, in thy
outward Profession, and the performance of some external duties? Stand thou by
too, thou have not as yet interest in Christ, Romans 2.28, 29. For he is not a
Jew, which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in
the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of
the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men,
but of God.

Object. But though I have not interest in Christ, is there no hope for a soul
in this condition?

Answ. No, continuing in it; but mistake not, hope there is thou may yet
come to Christ, and so come out of it; and so although for the present thou
have not interest in Christ, yet possibly coming to Christ thou may have it,
and then there is hope for thee. I say soul, which soever of these conditions
is thine, there is hope thou may come to Christ, and in this way there is
hope for thee. Art thou a profane sinner, a persecutor? read 1 Timothy 1.15. This
is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Mark. 3.28. Verily I say
unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies,
wherewithsoever they shall blaspheme. Art thou a moral man? so was Nicodemus,
Joh. 3. Art thou an outward professor only, and so an hypocrite indeed? read
Isa. 65. verse. 2. with 5. I have spread out my hands all the day unto a
rebellious people, which walks in a way which was not good, after their own
thoughts; which say, Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier
than thou; these are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day.

5 And lastly, This is comfort to the Saints against the guilt of all sin
whatsoever: Are souls in Christ freed from condemnation? Then poor soul thy
sins shall never condemn thee; they may rob thee of thy peace and comfort here,
but shall never of thy Crown and glory hereafter; they may bring corrections
upon thee, but never condemnation, for thou art freed from that. Amen.

SERMON II.
ROMANS 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation --


THree Observations I have raised from these words:

1 That it is a Saints privilege to be freed from Condemnation. 2 This comes
from our in-being in Christ. 3 Those who are freed from Condemnation are such,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
I handled the First the last day, now for the Second, viz.

Doct. That our freedom from Condemnation comes from our in-being in Jesus
Christ.

In the prosecution of this point I shall show,

1 That the Saints have in-being in Jesus Christ. 2 What in-being in Christ
Saints have. 3 That in-being in Christ frees Saints from Condemnation.
Of the first, Saints have in-being in Christ.

1 If Saints have in-being in the Covenant of Grace, then also in Christ with
whom this Covenant is made; but Saints have in-being in the Covenant of Grace,
Heb. 8.8. for finding fault with them, he says, Behold, the days come (says
the Lord) when I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the
house of Judah. The Parties to whom this Covenant of Grace belongs are the
house of Israel, and the house of Judah, i.e. all the Saints. The Covenant is
made with Christ, as Psalm, 89.3. I have made a Covenant with my chosen; but for
them, that is, they are the persons to whom all the privileges and benefits of
this New Covenant do belong, if therefore all the privileges of the Covenant
of Grace belong to Saints, then have they in-being in the Covenant of Grace,
and so in Christ, with whom the Covenant is made.

2 If Saints are renewed after the Image of Christ, then have they in-being in
Christ; no renewing by Christ, but from in-being in Christ; no depravation but
from our union with the old Adam, no renovation but through our union with the
new Adam. But Saints are renewed after the Image of Christ, Col. 3.10.
Believers are said to be renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that
created him, i.e. after the Image of Christ. There is a knowledge that men have
from their union with the old Adam, i. e. natural light, and natural
understanding; this knowledge though it were in man's first Creation very
perfect, yet now it is very imperfect, and in a great measure lost; Natural
light, and the Copy of Natural knowledge being much blotted by the Fall of man;
now Saints, they are by Christ renewed in knowledge. How? not so much in a
Natural way, not in that knowledge which was a part of the Image of the first
Adam, but they are renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created
him, i. e. the knowledge that Saints have by Christ; it is Spiritual knowledge,
such knowledge as is a part of the Image of the new Adam, so that Saints in
their knowledge are renewed after the Image of Christ, they have a knowledge
for kind though not for degree, the same with that Christ has; and as in their
knowledge they are renewed after the Image of Christ, so likewise in their
righteousness and holiness, which are the other parts of the Image of the new
Adam; they have such a righteousness as Christ has, and such a sanctification
or holiness as Christ has, now this being so, that Saints are renewed after
the Image of Christ, it must follow, that they have in-being in Christ, for
renovation comes from union, and in-being.

3 If Saints may lay claim to Christ, and what is Christ's, as their own and
proper right, then have they in-being in Christ; for in things of this nature,
propriety, whereby I may challenge a thing for my own, comes from possession;
no possession, no laying claim to a propriety. But Saints may lay claim to
Christ, and what is in Christ as their own, they may lay claim to Christ's
Wisdom, Riches, Righteousness, Strength, Grace, Glory, and all as theirs, and
therefore they have in-being in Christ.

4 If Saints are crucified with Christ, quickened, raised up, and made to sit
together in heavenly places with Christ, then are they in Christ; for it is by
virtue of in-being that they are quickened together with him, raised up, and
made to sit together in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Even when we were dead
in sins has quickened us together with Christ, and has raised us up together,
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

5 If Saints partake of daily supplies of life, grace, and strength from
Christ, then are they in Christ; for there is no participation but from union,
the branches partake of the juice of the root from union with the root, members
partake of the life of the head from union with the head, but Saints partake of
daily supplies of grace, life, and strength from Christ, without which constant
supplies they grow dry and wither, yea can do nothing; as Christ says, Joh.
15.5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing;
therefore have in-being in Christ.

6 And lastly, If Saints can never fall finally, or perish everlastingly, then
have in-being in Christ; for it is not hanging on the our-side of the Ark, but
being within, which keeps from drowning; it is not the branches lying by the
Vine, but being in it that preserves it from withering. But Saints can never
fall finally, Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my
word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemration, but is passed from death to life, Chapter 10, 28, 29. And I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand; my Father which gave them me, is greater than all,
and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand, therefore they have
in-being in Christ.

2 But what in-being in Christ have the Saints?

Ans. There is a Threefold in-being in Christ that Saints have.

1 A Vertual in-being in Christ, as Christ is the common Person, or
representative of all Gods Elect, and this comes merely from Gods Election,
there being no other reason of it; God has elected them to Salvation, and
therefore has given them to Christ, who is become their common person.

2 A mystical in-being in Christ, as Saints are members of that true Spiritual
invisible Body whereof Christ is head; this comes chiefly from regeneration.

3 An actual in-being in Christ (not but that the former which I term
mystical, is actual too, but I distinguish it from that, because that is such
an in-being as chiefly tends to make the Body of Christ perfect, this is such
an in-being as does chiefly tend to the making of their particular persons
perfect in him) whereby every Saint in particular has actual union with
Christ, and is actually in this blessed Person of the Lord Jesus, and by being
in him made perfect, and actually justified from all sin; now this is through
faith and regeneration.

Obj. But have not Saints actual union before Faith, is Union the fruit of
faith, or faith of union?

Ans. Actual union is Two fold, either Christ's actual uniting himself to us, or
out being actually united to Christ; You in me, I in you; there is an actual
union on Christ's part, and on our part. Actual union on Christ's part, that is
before believing, and is then effected, when Christ first comes into us by his
Spirit to draw us to his Father, and this is wrought precedent to any good in
us, and all good comes from this: Actual union on our part, that is by
believing; and is then effected when I am said to come to Christ, and the
Father by him. As in our Reconciliation, there is Gods Reconciliation to us,
and ours to God spoken of, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. And all things are of God, who
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the
ministry of reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed
unto us the word of reconciliation; Now then, we are Ambassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God. God's reconciliation to us, that is, before faith, before
ever we hear a word of faith, and that by Christ's offering up himself to his
Father; our reconciliation to God, that is, by believing, when we hear and
embrace the word of reconciliation. So Christ's union to us, that is, before
faith, and does not at all depend upon our believing as any fruit thereof, but
rather our believing flows from thence. We love him, because he loved us
first; we are actually united to him, because he is acutally united to us
first; but now our union with Christ, that is, by believing.

3 That by in-being in Christ, Saints are freed from Condemnation.

1 That which removes all our sins from us, frees us from condemnation, for no
sin, no condemnation; but in-being in Christ removes all our sins from us, it
takes sin from our backs, and lays it, upon the back of Christ. Sins are
debts, the debts that we owe to God, all these debts after once we come to have
marriage-union with Christ, are transferred over to him, so that they are no
longer our debts, but his debts; neither are we now liable to pay them, but he
must answer for them, and see Gods Justice satisfied, and the Debt-book crossed.

2 That which gives us a right and title to Salvation, that frees us from
condemnation, but out in-being in Christ does this; for by virtue hereof we are
Gods Heirs, yea joynt-heirs with Christ, and so have as true a title, though
not so large a title to Glory and Salvation as Christ himself has; though we
have not for the present actual possession, yet our title is good, firm and
certain; as an Heir in Minority has not actual possession, yet his title is
as good as afterward.

3 That which makes void and null all impeachments and charges whatsoever,
frees us from condemnation, but this does our in-being in Christ; for being in
Christ no charge or Impeachment can be drawn against us, but the same has
been drawn against Christ in our stead, and he has answered the same at the
Bar of Gods Justice, and is come off clear and acquitted. So that now all
impeachments and charges are void and null, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.

4 And lastly, That which makers the Law, Jury, and Judge of a man's side, frees
him from condemnation; but this does our in-being in Christ.

1 It makes the Law of our side, for the Law it is a rule of Justice and
Equity, it requires equity should be done to every one, now it would not be
equity to take satisfaction, and not to acquit the Party for whom it has
received it; now the Law has taken satisfaction for all that are in Christ,
and therefore the equity of the Law requires they should be absolved from the
sentence of condemnation; so that the Law is of the side of those persons.

2 It make the Jury of Conscience of a man's side, for says Conscience, does
the case lie thus, that I am in Christ, then not guilty, not guilty; though
once I was guilty, yet Christ has taken the guilt away, and therefore now not
guilty, not guilty.

3 It makes the Judge of a man's side, for says God the Judge, is it so that
this party is in my Son Christ, then is he a member of my Son, then is he
married to my Son, and I am a Friend to all such for my Sons sake, for what he
has done and suffered, I own, love, and respect, and therefore he shall never
be condemned.

Obj. But I fear I have no in-being in Jesus Christ, for surely had I in-being
in Christ, I should grow and thrive more than I do, living Branches in the
Vine grow, and certainly were I a living Branch in Christ, I should grow more.

Answ. Thy doubt poor Soul is, thou do not grow, what growth is that thou
look for? is it growth of gifts only, or is it growth of grace? does thy
doubt arise hence because thou can not pray, talk of Divine things, open and
explains Scriptures as another can; or because thou art not so humble,
mortified, self-denying, conformable in all things and conditions to the will
of God, as thou see another Saint is? If thy doubt arise because thou have
not such gifts, then let me tell thee, that as gifts of themselves, though a
man did ever so excel in them, are no evidence of a man's being in Christ
(though a man had the gifts of an Angel yet no evidence, for herein he has no
more than the Devil has, who is an Angel) so the want of gifts; if this be
all thy doubt, does not at all evidence the contrary; I pray, what excellency
of gifts are there in Babes and Sucklings, in comparison of the gifts of the
wise and prudent, and yet Babes and Sucklings are in Christ, when the wise and
prudent are not? What gifts in the foolish things of the world, and base
things, and things that are not, i.e. of no account at all in the eye and
esteem of man? and yet these has God chosen, and they are in Christ, who of
God is made unto them, wisdom, etc. When the wise things of the world, and the
Scribes and disputers of the world are set by, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29, 30.

Object. But (says the soul) my doubt is not so much about gifts, as grace, I
do not find my self to grow in grace, in humility, mortification, etc. and
this begets all my fear.

Answ. To this I answer, Poor soul.

1 There is a twofold growth, a growth in the branches, and a growth in the
root, as a tree grows sometimes upwards in branches, sometimes downward in
root: So thy grace grows sometimes in branches, as in love, humility,
brokenness of heart, etc. sometimes in root, as when thy faith grows more, and
roots it self in Christ, and the promise more. Now how is it with thee soul?
Thou do not grow in branches as once thou did, that is, thou do not find
such a lively heart, such strong affections, such a flowing of heavenly
desires, so much brokenness of heart, love to the brethren, etc. But do thou
grow in the root, does thy want of these things cause thee to root thy self
more in the free promise? so as that now thou do more and oftener go out to
God upon the account of the general promise, then it was usual with thee to do
when thou had and foundest in thee these things; then soul believe it thou
do grow, and though thy growth is not so much to sense as it would be, did
thou grow more in the branches, yet is it a better, a surer growth. That tree
stands fastest that grows much in the root.

2 Thou complainest thou do not grow, Look soul upon thy growth in the right
season of growing. There is a season of growing, come to a tree in the Spring
or Summer, and you shall see it all over green, full of sap, leaves, and fruit,
but come to that tree in the Winter, and you see none of all this, but the tree
looks as though it were dead and withered; Why, so the Spring and Summer is the
season of growing, but the Winter is not the season. So, etc.

3 Take in a pretty distance of time when thou would judge of thy growth: My
meaning is, when thou would pass a judgment upon thy growth of grace,
whether it be little or much, do not compare thy self to day with what thou
wast yesterday, or a week ago, but take in some years, and then thou will see
thy growth better. In Nature growth is not suddenly discerned* no more is it in
Grace. Take a living child it grows every day, yet is not this growth
discerned in a day, or a week, or a month, but it must have a longer time. Take
a tree it grows daily, but come to it to day, and again to morrow, you see no
growth, yea it may be, come to it a year or two years after, the growth is
hardly discernable, but come to it now, and again seven years hence, you will
see growth.

Object. But I do not only find a want of growth in grace, but I clearly
find a declining in grace, both in root and branches, as I thinks, I cannot
believe, nor have confidence as formerly I thought I did, neither am I so
humble, mortified, self-denying, as once I think I was, and therefore I fear I
have no in-being in Christ.

Answ. Thou find a declining in grace, why then that have grace, how else
could thou decline in grace: Light decreases, therefore there is light, how
could it decrease else, by thine own confession, therefore thou have Grace,
and if Grace, then in-being in Christ.

2 Thou find declinings in grace, but art thou not at present in a
distemper? or have thou not been in one of late? no wonder to see a man's
spirits and strength decreasing when there is some feavourish distemper upon
him, or that has been lately upon him.

3 Thou find declinings, but did thou never in all thy life time find
declinings in grace before, and yet find also that grace did rise up out of
these declinings with advantage? As we see a corn of wheat falls to the ground
and dies, but rises with advantage, an ear for a corn; So when thy grace has
seemed to be dead as it were for a while, yet have thou not at last seen it
sprouting up with advantage? more faith, more love, humility, mortification, at
the rising of grace after such a declining time than thou saw in thy self
before? O yes says the soul, I must confess I have many times thought now I am
quite gone, my grace is dead, and yet after all this I have seen a greater
shooting and springing up than ever before in my soul. If so, then assure thy
self poor soul, thou have in-being in Jesus Christ, by virtue of which all thy
wintertime, the seed of grace is maintained alive in thy soul, and when the
springtime comes, sprouts up with advantage.

Use 1. Is this so, Then this shows us the glorious privileges of all those
that have in-being in Christ, they are freed from condemnation, what a blessed
privilege is this, freed from condemnation, and freed from the wrath of God;
freed from condemnation, and freed from the guilt of all sin, from the dreadful
curses of the Law, from the heavy charges of Satan, from the stingings of a
tormenting conscience, from the slavery of the Devil, from all afflictions, as
legal punishments for sin, from the fear of man, from the violence of the
creatures, etc.

O blessed condition! the poorest Gray coat and Lether coat that has in-being
in Christ, is in a more blessed and happy condition than the silk gown, the
plush and scarlet coat, that has not in-being in Christ. The one though he
make not such a bravado in the world, yet being in Christ, heaven, salvation,
and all is his: Others though they brave it out for a time, and must have elbow
room where they go, and be come to with conge and cap in the hand, yet they are
under condemnation, from which if God do not by bringing them home to himself,
release them here, they will be miserable in hell for ever hereafter.

Use 2. This casts many persons, and brings most men in the Countries, Towns,
and Parishes of the world under condemnation; Why? they have not in-being in
Christ.

1 Art thou one who live and walk in profane courses: Art thou a
Drunkard, Swearer, an unclean person, etc. assure thy self thou art one cast by
this doctrine, for thou have not as yet in-being (I mean actual in-being, which
is that frees from condemnation) in Christ, 1 John 1.6. If we say that we
have fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie. If such have not
fellowship with Christ, then no in-being, communion flows from union; if it
be a lie to say they have communion, much more to say they have in-being or
union.

2 Art thou one who art an enemy to Christ and his people, a persecutor, a
scoffer, etc. thou have not in-being in Christ. Christ speaking of such
persons, Joh. 16.3. says, These things will they do, because they have not
known the Father, nor me. If such do not in a saving way know Christ and the
Father, then have they not in-being in Christ. Scoffer, thou proclaimest to all
the Town, and to all thy neighbors, that thou art one who have not in-being in
Christ.

3 Art thou a moral man, and restest here, then have thou not in-being in
Christ. The Heathens many of them did excel in morality, yet knew not Christ.
The Scribes and Pharisees came behind none of our Moralists, yet hear what
Christ says to them, Matthew. 5.20. For I say unto you that except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

4 Art thou outwardly Religious, and a Professor, and do thou rest here,
contenting thy self with an outward profession, and the performance of some
external duties, stand thou by too, thou have not in-being in Christ, Romans
2.28, 29. For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.

Object. But though I have not in-being in Christ, Is there no hope for a soul
in this condition?

Answ. No, there is no hope for thee in this condition; that is, continuing in
this condition; but (mistake not) there is hope thou may yet come to Christ,
and so come out of this condition; and so though for the present, thou have not
in-being in Christ, yet possibly by coming to Christ thou may have it, and
then there is hope for thee. I say, Soul, which soever of these conditions is
thine, there is hope thou may come to Christ, and then there is hope. Art
thou a profane sinner, read 1 Timothy 1.15. Mark. 3.28. Art thou a persecutor, so
was Paul; Art thou a moral man, so was Nicodemus; Art thou an outward professor
only, and so an hypocrite indeed, read Isa. 65. verse. 2. compared with the 5.
Therefore I say, poor soul, though there is no hope for thee in this condition,
thou have not at present in-being in Christ, and so art under condemnation; yet
hope there is thou may come out of it, and be freed from condemnation.

What Legal walking is.

SERMON III.
Romans 8.1. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


HAving already spoken from this Text to the Saints privileges, viz. Freedom
from condemnation, and the rise thereof, viz. In-being in Christ: I now come to
the last and principal thing contained in the words, and that which moved me
to choose them for the subject of my Discourse, having hastened over the other
thing that I might come to this; and that is, the distinguishing character of
those persons, who enjoy this privilege to be freed from condemnation; and
that is, Walking not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Not a man, nor
woman in the world has any right unto, or do enjoy this blessed privilege,
but those who have this character upon them, of walking not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit.

There is abundance more in these words than at the first blush there seems to
be in them, the marrow and sweetness of these words lies in the breaking of
the bone, or in the explication of the terms, what is meant by FLESH and what
by SPIRIT.

FLESH and SPIRIT are very general terms, and of a large extent in holy
Scripture, taking in betwixt them both, all the motions, actions, thoughts,
inclinations, wisdom, reasoning, doing, of mankind; all being either flesh
or spirit, there is not a thought, nor an inclination nor a reasoning, nor an
action, good or bad, but it is one of these two, either Flesh or Spirit.

In which large extent, FLESH comprehends whatsoever is contrary unto, or is
not of the Spirit of God: Whatsoever thought, reasoning, or action, whether it
be a good moral action, or an evil sinful action, that is contrary unto, that
is not of, springs not from the Spirit of God, that is Flesh.

Again, SPIRIT comprehends whatsoever is contrary unto, and is not of the
Flesh: Whatsoever imaginations, inclinations wisdom, reasoning, righteousness,
that is contrary unto, that is not of the Flesh, that is Spirit: Or as a Godly
man (Mr. Cradocke upon Romans 8.4.) (as it seems to me does better express it
(though in substance the same with what is spoken) thus: Flesh (says he) that
takes in whatsoever is of old Adam; Spirit whatsoever is of new Adam. These two
Adams being as he says, the two roots, beginnings, beings, or principles from
whence all the motions, proceedings, actions, wisdom, righteousnesses of
mankind do flow, and (further as he says) as two springs in a hill, do
convey their streams to two Rivers, so these are the springs from whence arise
all the thoughts, purposes, reasonings, doings of mankind, good, or bad, all
coming from one of these two (which two were the only public persons that
ever were in the world) either Adam in Paradise, natural Adam, or the Lord
Jesus Christ the spiritual Adam. So that by Flesh is meant, whatsoever is, or
comes of old Adam, whether that natural or moral good which he had before his
fall, some relics of which we partake of, or that sin which he drew upon
himself, and all his by the fall, all is but Flesh, well his natural, moral
wisdom, and righteousness, as his sin and unrighteousness, is but Flesh; so
that all the thoughts, intents, reasonings, wisdom, doings of old Adam,
whether natural, moral or sinful are flesh; and comprehended under the word
Flesh.

By Spirit is meant, whatsoever comes and springs from the new Adam Jesus
Christ, or the Spirit of Christ within; what ever motion, purpose, thought,
inclination, wisdom, reasoning, righteousness, doing, comes from Christ, grows
upon the root of Jesse, that is Spirit.

Only here I would exclude from Flesh and Spirit, in the general sense it has
been laid down, all those motions, and actions, which are purely natural,
having neither any thing of Religion nor sin in them, but are in their own
proper nature neither good, nor evil; as for me to think, or resolve whether
I will do such a thing to day, or to morrow, there being nothing which does
necessitate or require me to do it now, rather than then, or then than now; to
resolve whether I will sit or stand, go out of the door, or stay within; these
and such like motions, and actions in a simple consideration, have neither good
nor evil in them, and therefore are not in the sense of the Apostle here used,
either Flesh or Spirit.

The upshot, or conclusion of the matter in general is this, To walk after the
flesh, is when a man's thoughts, motions, reasonings, his wisdom,
righteousness, his ways, proceedings, practices, run all, in the very path and
footsteps of old Adam, either Adam in Paradise, or fallen Adam: And to walk after
the Spirit, is when all these go in the pathway or steps of the new Adam,
Jesus Christ.

Thus much in the general; now for a more particular inquiry into the meaning
of these words of FLESH and SPIRIT. I do conceive they have some reference unto
what the Apostle had discoursed of, in the foregoing Chapter.

Two things he had been speaking of, first, Of the Law, and Gospel, showing a
believers liberation or freedom from the one, and present station by virtue of
Christ's death, and his marriage to Christ under the other. Secondly, Of the old
and new man, showing that great and continual conflict that is betwixt these
two in every believer, and the happy victory which believers in the end through
the strength of Christ get over the old man; the discourse of which he
continues to the very end of the Chapter. Now as touching either of these, it
is usual in Scripture Language to give the name of Flesh to the one, and Spirit
to the other.

The Law is called Flesh, Romans 4.1. compared with 2. What shall we say then,
that Abraham our Father, as pertaining to the Flesh has found? for if Abraham
were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God, Phil.
3.4. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh, if any other man
thinks that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more. Comp. with
the 6. v. concerning zeal, persecuting the Church; touching the righteousness
which is in the Law, blameless. The Gospel is called a Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. Who
also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but
of the Spirit: Both are together under these names or titles, Gal. 3.2, 3. This
only would I learn of you, received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or
by the hearing of faith? Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are
ye now made perfect by the flesh? What he calls works of the Law, and hearing
of faith, in verse. 2. he calls Flesh, and Spirit in the third.

Again, the old man is called Flesh, Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the Flesh are
manifest, which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness;
etc. compared with Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin.

The new man is called Spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you,
and a new spirit will I put within you, etc. both together are under these
names, Romans 7. last. So then, with the mind I my self serve the Law of God,
but with the Flesh the Law of sin, Gal. 5.17. For the Flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, Matthew. ^6.41. The spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak.

Now that there is good reason why we should take both these, and not one to
he here meant, I think the scope shows us, for the Apostle having spoken of
both these things in the former Chapter, and proceeding onwards to a glorious
triumph in this, he takes the rise of this triumph from the consideration of
the premises, and that of both of them; for one alone (as may by good reason be
made to appear) had not been a sufficient bottom for such a triumph; as if he
should say, These things being so, that through Jesus Christ (as has been
cleared) we are delivered from the dominion of the Law, and also from the
tyranny of the old man in us, there being now no longer any reigning Law over
us, nor reigning old man in us, I therefore do conclude, That there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; there being no enemy that can do
it, the Law without, and the old man within, which only were able to do it,
having now no condemning power over them; which persons, that he might give an
infallible note and character of, he (still keeping the scope) describes them
to be such, Who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, i.e. They are
such persons, who being by Christ set free from the Dominion of the Law and
Tyranny of the old man, do not walk after the one, or the other; and on the
other side, being by Christ brought under the power of the Gospel, and regiment
of the new man, they do now walk as becomes (in some measure) Gospel Saints,
and new creatures.

These things being laid down, and premised, we are to understand the words
thus, Walking after the Flesh, i.e.

Either first, Legal walking, to walk after, or according to the Law.

Or secondly, Corrupt walking, i. e. to be wholly and constantly swayed,
ruled, or lead by the principles, dictates, or motions of the old man, or
unregenerate part.

Walking after the Spirit, i.e.

Either first, Gospel-walking, to walk after, or according to the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

Or secondly, Renewed walking, to walk according to the rule, principle,
motions, and dictates of the new man, or regenerate part in a Saint.

Now in saying that these two are to be understood by Flesh and Spirit, I do
not exclude any of those laid down in the general explication of the words; no,
I do think that by Flesh the Apostle may mean all those, viz. man's wisdom,
reason, understanding, outward privileges* etc. and the contrary to these by
Spirit. But I name these two only with their contraries, because I think that
although the other are included in Flesh and Spirit, as general terms, yet
here these are chiefly intended, being most agreeable to the Apostles scope,
and what he had said in the former Chapter, which gives rise to this verse.

I shall therefore begin with the words as they lie in the first sense, to be
understood of Legal and Gospel-walking, and so we have in them two
Propositions.

1 Legal-walking, is walking according to the Flesh. 2 Gospel-walking, is
walking according to the Spirit.
1 Legal-walking, is walking according to the Flesh. In the opening of this, I
shall show,

1 What I mean by Legal-walking, or what it is to walk Legally. 2 When a man's
walk may be said to be such, that is, a pure Legal-walk. 3 Why Legal-walking
is called Flesh, or walking according to the Flesh. 4 That those persons who
are freed from condemnation (for such our Text imports) do not walk Legally, or
after the Flesh, in this sense. 5 Answer an Objection; and
Lastly, conclude with Application.

Of the first, viz. What I mean by Legal-walking, or what it is for a man or
woman to walk legally?

Answ. Legal-walking in the sense we are now to speak to, it is this, To make
the Law, as the same is a Covenant of works, the rule of our lives and actions,
and the alone touchstone to try our conditions by. To walk after the Law, or
according to the Law, as the Law is a Covenant of works, that is Legal-walking.
That so we are to understand here, I prove thus, because Legal-walking is here
called Flesh, and the Law is no where in Scripture called Flesh, but as the
same is considered under this notion, as it is a Covenant of works. If you take
the Law in its self, that is, for the matter of it, the substance of those
things the Law requires, so the Apostle says the contrary of the Law, Romans
7.14. The Law is spiritual, the matter or substance of the Law is spiritual,
injoyning spiritual duties, requiring spiritual performance, and designing to
make the creature spiritual; so that the Law in its self, is not Flesh, but
rather it is a spiritual, and an everlasting rule of righteousness. But now
look upon the Law whenever it is spoken of under this notion, as it is the
old Covenant, or a Covenant of works, and then it is called Flesh. I will give
you but a few places, in Gal. 3.2, 3. (before quoted) when the Galathians were
gone from the Gospel to the Law, from the Covenant of grace, to the old
Covenant of works, to look for life and justification: The Apostle then calls
the Law Flesh. So in Chap. 4 21, 22, 23, etc. The Apostle speaking exprefly of
the two Covenants, the New and Old, or of Grace and Works, whereof one, viz.
the old Covenant was Hagar the bondwoman, the other Sarah, the freewoman, he
in plain language calls Hagar the bondwoman, i. e. the old Covenant, Flesh.
verse. 23. and 29. So also Romans 7.5. we have a place pertinent to our purpose,
When we were in the Flesh, i.e. when we were in, or under the old Covenant,
and did walk by the Law, as it was a rule of the old Covenant, there were by
the same continually occasioned risings and stirrings of sin within us; here
the Apostle in plain terms calls the old Covenant Flesh, as before.

Now that the Apostle does here speak of the old Covenant, is clear from the
next verse, But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead, wherein we
were held; as if he had said, now we who are believers, are delivered from the
Law as it is a Covenant of works; Why? because the Covenant of works it self by
which we were held once, and bound to the performance of the Law, is dead;
What was it that we were held by? why the Law, as a Covenant of works, as Gal.
3.23. But before faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up unto faith,
which should afterward be revealed. Now that wherein we were held is dead,
therefore the old Covenant is -- that is the meaning, so that here he speaks of
the old Covenant -- So also in the next words, that we might serve in newness
of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter, i. e. that all our obedience
which now we perform to God might be inward and spiritual, according to the way
of the new Covenant we are under, i. e. arising from new Principles put into
us, new thoughts, and new apprehensions of God begot within us, new strength
and assistance given us, new ends in our working, and not in that way of
outward and litteral performance, which was the way of the old Covenant; here
he speaks plainly of the old Covenant, showing the difference betwixt that
obedience which that produces, and that which the new Covenant brings forth;
therefore what he calls Flesh in the former verse, by weighing the scope, can
be no other but the old Covenant which he speaks of in this.

I could bring many other places, but these may suffice to show us, that when
the Law is called Flesh, we are to understand the Law as it is the Covenant of
Works, the Law of the old Covenant; which being so, by legal walking in this
place which the Apostle calls Flesh, we are to understand walking, according
to the way of the old Covenant, walking after the Law, as the same is a
Covenant of works.

2 But when may a man's walk be said to be such, a pure legal walking, or a
walking after the Law, as it is a Covenant of Works?

Answ. 1. When a man's obedience arises from, and is drawn out merely by the
Law; when the Law is principle, motive, and all in a man's obedience; when a man
does this good, avoyds that evil, from no other principle, upon no other ground
or motive, but because the Law says, do the one, avoid the other.

There are three things in the Law which do draw forth that obedience which is
purely legal.

1 There are Commands and Prohibitions in the Law; commands of Holiness,
prohibitions of Sin. 2 Threatenings of punishments. 3 Promises of reward annexed
to these commands and prohibitions of the Law; now when I do a thing barely
because the Law commands me to do it, or promises me a reward in or for my
doing thereof, or threatens with some penalty to be inflicted in case I
neglect it; and contrariwise, when I forbear a thing barely because the Law
forbids it, and promises me a reward in, or for forbearing, and threatens me
if I do not forbear it, this obedience is purely legal, and an obedience to a
Covenant of works; upon this score Adam in Paradise had he stood should have
obeyed.
First, there was a Prohibition, Eat not; then a Threatening, In the day thou
eatest thou shall dye; which did include in it the promise of the contrary
good, that in case he did not eat he then should live, all which obedience of
Adam's had he never fallen, could have been no other but obedience to a
Covenant of works, he being under no other Covenant. So I say, Put case a man
should be never so exact and punctual in his obedience, laboring to walk up to
every command of God, and to avoid every sin, yet if the root, principle, or
motive of this his obedience be the Law, the Command, the Promise, and
Threatening of the Law, if there be no other principle or motive but the Law, if
the Law be the root and rise of all, though he should strive to live like an
Angel, pray ten times a day, fast, and weep, and mourn for his sins till he can
mourn no longer, watch against, and resist sin with the utmost care, industry,
and diligence, strive to be as holy as passes, yet all this his obedience
would be but legal, a walking after the flesh, a yiedling obedience to the law,
as it is a covenant of works.

2 When a man in all his obedience proposes life, justification, salvation to
himself as his end in what he does; then does he walk legally, after the Flesh,
and according to the rate of the covenant of works. In the first making of the
covenant of works with Adam in Paradise, Life was proposed as his reward, and
had Adam stood and obeyed according to the promise and tenor of that Covenant,
the fruit of life would have been his end. And how men did look upon the same
in the renewal thereof with Moses upon Mount Sinai, is very evident from the
rooted principles which were in those persons with whom this covenant was made;
an example whereof we have in the Pharisees, Scribes, and others of those days
wherein they lived, who did expressly affirm and maintain, that Justification
and Salvation was attaineable by the works of the Law, and therefore they were
so zealous for the same, and gave themselves up to the observance thereof, to
the end they might be justified and saved; which very principle of theirs, is
that the Apostle both in our text, and in many other places in the Romans and
Galatians, calls Flesh; so that a man then walks legally according to the
flesh, when by his obedience to the law, he seeks to obtain Life, Salvation,
and Justification.

When a man because he prays, and hears, and mournes, and laments for his
sins, and strives against them; maintains an opinion in himself, that because
of these things God loves him, that he will justify him, give him life and
salvation; yea that God because of these his duties; his prayers, his tears,
his fastings, his humiliations, his lamentations, his leaving of sin, and doing
of good, stands engaged (as it were) to give him Heaven and Salvation, he then
walks legally; when the course and stream of his life and actions runs this
way, that all his prayers, humiliations, resolutions, covenants, resisting of
sin, etc. is to this very end, that God hereby would be moved to pardon his
sins, justify him, give him Heaven, and eternal life, which had he not some
hope to procure by these things, he would neither pray, nor hear, nor mourn
for sin, nor do any thing else: he then most certainly walks legally after the
flesh.

3 When a man in his obedience has altogether respect to the external or
outward part of the Law, contenting himself if that be but done, never looking
to the internal or spiritual part thereof; his walking is legal, and after the
flesh. In this manner* did the Scribes and Pharisees (those great Legalists)
apply themselves to the keeping of the Law; by a litteral observance of what it
required, accounting it kept, when the external works which the Law required
should be done was performed, or the outward act of sin shunned, which the Law
willed them to forbear. Upon which ground (according to the principles and
practices of the Pharisees) Paul says of himself, that he whilst he
continued a Pharisee, was touching the righteousness of the Law, blameless,
Phil. 3.6. upon this ground likewise do the Papists assert their Opus
operatum, the work done, as sufficient to Justification and Salvation, never
regarding how the same is done. Now whenever a man in Prayer, hearing the
Word, or any other Duty, has only respect to the external part, contenting
himself with that, if that be done, never looking to the spiritual performance
thereof, he walks legally.

4 When a man blesses himself in his obedience, and pronounces himself happy
because of that; he walks legally. Thus Paul whilst he was a Pharisee, did
bless himself in his way, Romans 7.9. I was alive without the law once i. e. so
long as I gave up my self to an outward observance of the law, being without
the law in respect of the true spiritual meaning thereof, I was alive in my
own conceit, I thought all was well with me, and that I was a happy man. Thus
likewise the proud Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus
with himself, God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican, I fast twice in the week, I give
tithes of all that I possess; how does he bless himself in his way of works,
and crow it over the poor Publican, because he was a Sinner, and had no works.
When therefore a man blesses himself in his obedience, and thinks himself some
body, pronouncing himself happy because of this, as many men will say, I thank
God all is well with me, I have no doubt about my Salvation, I am not, nor
never was I a Drunkard, or Swearer, etc. I was never given to cheat or cosen,
as others my Neighbors will do, but I pray, and read good Books, and hear
good Sermons, etc. a man then walks legally after the flesh.

5 When a man performs his obedience ever, and altogether in his own
strength; the law as a covenant of works it calls for obedience, but it gives a
man no strength but what he has of his own to do it. Hence it is called a
voice of words, Heb. 12. and a killing letter, 2 Cor. 3. because it requires
obedience under penalty of death, and knows the creature has no strength to
obey, and yet gives him none; and so by its very command it kills all those
that are under it. Now, when a man sets himself to keep the law in his own
strength, neither finding, nor knowing, nor feeling, nor looking after, nor
desiring any other strength to enable him to do his duty then his own, he
then walks legally after the Flesh, and all his obedience is obedience to a
covenant of works. Thus much of the Second particular, what remains I leave
unto the next opportunity.

Why Legal walking is walking after the Flesh.

SERMON IV.
Romans 8.1. Who walk not after the flesh.


We are now upon the Character of those Persons who are freed from
Condemnation, they are such who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
Flesh and Spirit in this place, by the acception of the terms in other places,
and the consideration of the scope of the Apostle in this, are (as I told you
the last day) to be understood, either of the Law and the Gospel, or the old
and new man.

Walking after the flesh, that is, either legal walking, or walking after the
corrupt principles of the old man.

Walking after the Spirit, that is, either Gospel walking, or walking after the
renewed principle of the new man.

I began with the words in the first acceptance, as they hold forth Legal and
Gospel walking, and so I laid down these Propositions, viz,

That Legal walking, is walking after the flesh.

Gospel walking, is walking after the Spirit.

Concerning the first I have showed,

1 What I mean by Legal walking. 2 When a man's walk is a Legal walk. I now
proceed to the third. 3 Why Legal walking is called walking after the flesh?
Ans. 1. Because there is nothing of the Spirit of God that goes along with a
legal walk; The Spirit was not given by the Covenant of works, and therefore so
long as a man walks in the way of that Covenant, there is nothing of the Spirit
of God that goes along with him. Now we usually call that flesh that has not
Spirit in it; take a man when he is dead, we say he is flesh, nothing but
flesh, because the Soul and Spirit is gone; so take a legal Walker, he is
flesh, his walking is flesh, because there is nothing of the Spirit of God in
him, nor his walking; he prays, but there is nothing of the Spirit of God in
his prayers, and therefore though he pray days, and weeks, and months
together, all is but flesh; he mourns, and humbles himself for sin, resolves,
vows, and strives against it, but doing all this in a legal manner, there is
nothing of the Spirit of God in all this, and so all is but flesh.

2 Because Legal walking is walking in the way of Nature; the Covenant of works
was given to Adam as out common person, and sois in the Nature of every man,
Romans 2.14, 15. For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the
things contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law unto
themselves; which show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing,
or else excusing one another. Now in Scripture phrase Nature is called flesh,
Joh. 3.6. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh; i.e. that which is borne
of mere Nature can be no more but Nature; for this reason legal walking may be
called Flesh.

3 Because of the weakness of such walking; Flesh is put in Scripture for
weakness, so Isa. 31.3. Now the Egyptians are men, and not God, and their
Horses Flesh, and not Spirit; when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both
he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and they
all shall fail together. Spirit has strength in it, but flesh without spirit
is a weak thing; the more any man's spirit decaies, the weaker he grows. Now
legal walking may be called a walking after the flesh, in regard of the
weakness of those persons who walk in a legal way, they are pittious poor weak
Creatures, there is nothing (as a godly man says) in such but wishing, and
woulding, and covenanting, and promising, and protesting, and vexing, and
fretting, no strength at all; one day they vow they will leave their sins, and
the next day they run into them; one day they will weep, and mourn, and howl
for the neglect of such a duty, and the next day they will neglect it again:
thus they tugge and pull, and worry and weary themselves, but are never the
near, nothing comes of all this, they wish and would, and have good desires,
etc. but walking legally all is but flesh, and flesh is weak; so as that after
all, they are by all their toyling, and laboring, and the ado they keep to
mend their hearts, and tame their lusts, as far from the attaining the one or
the other, as when they began; as far from their journies end after many days,
months, and years travells, as when they first set out,

4 And lastly, Because the Flesh, or unregenerate part, is in a manner
maintained alive by such walking; my meaning is, the more any man walks or acts
in a legal way, the more active sin is, and the stronger his lusts grow, and
the more does sin get ground of him. As the Gospel will take an advantage to
bring a Soul which walks after the Gospel, to be more holy and believing by his
very slips, sins, and infirmities; so the Law does take an advantage from the
very outward holiness of those who walk after the Law, to make them more
profane and licentious than otherwise, did they not press after some outward
holiness and conformity to the Law, they would be. This the Apostle clearly
teaches us, Romans 7.8, 9.10, 11. Without the law sin was dead. How, dead? what
had sin no life in it till the Law came? did the law put life into sin, which
was not in it before? No, not so, but the meaning is, that sin did not show
that liveliness that was in it (although it were there before, and not
begotten by the law, yet) till the law came up close to it, it did not appear,
but sin lay as though it had been dead, being not so vigorous and active when
it saw no law to restrain it, as afterward it grew to be when it saw it self
restrained by a law; when sin saw the Commandment come to lay bonds upon it,
then sin which lay as though it had been asseep, or dead, revived, started up,
and broke all the bonds of the law to pieces. Says the Law, Sin, I will have
you bound and curbed; aye, but says Sin, I will not be bound, and because you
will go to bind me, I will stir and act the more; then the Flesh or
unregenerate part accidentally gets strength by the law, and therefore legal
walking may well be called, walking alter the flesh.

4 That those persons who are freed from Condemnation (being such as my text
speaks of) do not walk legally, or after the flesh.

1 If such are dead unto, and delivered from the law as it is a Covenant of
works, then do they not walk after the law as such, for a man cannot be said
to walk after that which is both dead unto and delivered from. But now those
persons who are freed from Condemnation, are dead unto, and delivered from the
law as it is a Covenant of works; for this see Romans 7.4. Wherefore my brethren,
ye also are become dead to the law by the Body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should
bring forth fruit unto God. How are Believers dead to, and delivered from the
law? Not as the same is a rule of Christian life, for so the Apostle afterward
speaks for it, ver. 12, 14. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment
holy, and just, and good, for we know that the law is spiritual. In this sense
he consents to it, verse. 16. I consent unto the law that it is good, yea
delights in it, verse. 22. For I delight in the law of God after the inward man;
yea serves it, and conformes himself thereto, verse. 25. So then, with the mind
I my self serve the law of God, but as the same was a Covenant of works,
holding forth Life and Salvation by doing, which was the very sense that those
whom the Apostle in this Chapter disputes against, did put upon the law, and
the works thereof, as is clear from Acts 15.1. And certain men which came
down from Judea, taught the Brethren, and said, except ye be circumcised
after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved; and therefore the Apostles
exclusion of the law from believers, must needs lie in that sense which they
would have enforced the same upon them, viz. as a Covenant of works, or as a
way or means (by observance of which) they might obtain life, justification
here, and eternal salvation hereafter.

2 If such have the Spirit of God in them, and are led, guided, and governed in
their ways and walkings thereby, then do they not walk after the law as a
covenant of works. Where is Legal walking is nothing of the Spirit, because the
Covenant of works gives not the Spirit, but now such have the Spirit of God in
them, Romans 8.9. But ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that
the Spirit of God dwell in you; now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ
he is none of his; and in their walkings are led and acted thereby, verse. 14.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God;
therefore do not walk after the Law, altering but a word or two, and the
Apostle from the very same premises makes my conclusion for me, Gal. 5.18. But
if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law.

3 If the obedience of such persons be true Gospel obedience, then do they not
walk after the law as a Covenant of works; for then their obedience should be
legal, obedience to a Covenant of works being legal; But the first is true, as
I prove thus, either there is no Evangelical obedience in the world, or if
there be, it must be found in those who are not freed from condemnation, in
those that are; that there is Evangelical obedience none will deny, that this
is, or can be found in persons actually not freed from condemnation none will
affirm, therefore it must be in those who are freed from condemnation.

4 And lastly, Such do not walk after the Law as it is a covenant of works,
because did they, they could not be freed from condemnation as they are; for it
is a contradiction to say a man walks after the law, i. e. observes the law,
and is subject thereunto as he that walks after it is, and yet to say that the
^aw cannot condemn him if he disobey or break it; what is the law if it cannot
condemn, take away the penalty and you make the law a nullity; the force, and
power, and terror of the law lies in the penalty, it inflicts upon Offenders,
take this away and it remains a law in name, not in force or power any longer.

Obj. But are there not some who cannot in charity but be looked upon, as
having an interest in Christ, so consequently are exempted from Condemnation,
who yet notwithstanding seem to be very legal in their walking; they have an
eye much to themselves, and to their own comfort and happiness in their
duties, and when they go about a duty they act much in their own strength,
and also are very prone when they have done any good work, to rest upon it, and
to draw comfort therefrom; now if it be so that those who are freed from
Condemnation do not walk Legally, what shall we judge of such persons whom we
cannot but believe are gracious, and yet have so much legality in them?

Ans. It is one thing for a man to walk legally after the way of the old
Covenant, and it is another thing for a man to walk by the light and direction
of an Old Testament spirit; an Old Testament spirit though it have much
legality in it, yet is it not a pure legal spirit; and for a man to walk with
an Old Testament spirit, though there be much legality here and there in his
walking, yet is not his walk a pure legal walk. For opening of this, consider,
that the people of God in the days of the Old Testament were under a Twofold
Covenant at the same time, viz. the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, and a
Covenant of works given forth at Mount Sinai by the hand of Moses to the Nation
of Israel.

Now being under both these Covenants at once, the Covenant of Grace, and a
Covenant of Works, both which had influence upon their spirits, their actions
were oftentimes mixed, being neither purely Gospel, nor purely Legal; so much as
they kept their eye upon the Covenant of Abraham, so much they were of Gospel
Spirits, and their works were Gospel works; and on the contrary, so much as the
Covenant of Moses had command over them, and did reach their spirits and
Consciences, so much their spirits were legal, and their actings legal; so that
there did plainly appear something of Grace and Legality in the Spirit, and
actings of most of the Old Testament Saints, and yet notwithstanding though
there was somewhat of legality in their spirits and actings, by virtue of their
being under the old Covenant, yet were not their actings purely Legal, nor
their walk a pure Legal walk; because they had in their walking and acting
respect too, unto that other Covenant made with Abraham, which was a Covenant
of Grace. Now although this old Covenant was abrogated upon the coming of
Christ, and is now of no longer force to the Saints in the New Testament, yet
in regard this Covenant is more natural to us than the other, and also was once
in being in the times of the Old Testament, and the disannulling thereof is not
presently made clear to a Soul, especially which has but a little Gospel
light; it therefore comes to pass that many of the people of God in the New
Testament times, following too much the natural way and reading of the Old
Testament, of such a kind of Covenant that once was in being, and not having
light enough in the Gospel to see that the same is abrogated and done away,
they by poring upon these things, and considering of them have an Old
Testastament spirit begotten in them; than is a spirit much like unto the
spirit of Saints who lived under the Old Testament, by reason whereof those
actions and duties which flow from them are like theirs, being neither purely
Gospel, nor purely Legal, but partaking somewhat of either. Hence sometimes
slavish fear, sometimes much self-love is discernable in their actions, which
things are common in Old Testament Saints; and yet notwithstanding, as those
were, so may these be true Saints, only they are of an Old Testament spirit,
by reason whereof something of the Law and Old Covenant does stick and cleave
to their walkings and actings, and there is also something, though it may be
under much darkness of the New Covenant also in these, which makes them that
they are neither pure Gospel-walkings, nor pure Legal, but (as it were) a
mixture of either. They are in short, Gospel Saints, but in an Old Testament
garb, New Testament Saints, but of an Old Testament spirit.

Use 1. Is it so that Legal walking is walking after the Flesh? Then this
discovers to us, that there are abundance of rotten-hearted Professors in the
world. How many persons are there who walk after the Flesh, I mean who are pure
Legal walkers. Should we come to those who are Professors, the general bulk of
Professors, who walk in a way of duty, and search them narrowly, we should
find ten to one to be Legal walkers: All their Religion, their duties, their
prayers, tears, repentance, etc. it springs from the Law, the Law is principle,
and motive in their obedience, the great and only wheel and engine that turns
all, and carries them to all that they do. Such a man prays in his Family, is
a frequenter of Sermons, etc. But why? Alas, he dares not do otherwise, the
Law overrules him, the Law has got command in his conscience, so that should
he not pray, etc. and do some good, and avoid some evil, he should have no
peace, nor quiet within, his conscience would be his tormentor, and
continually lash him; and therefore he does these things, not out of any love
to the thing he does; no, he hates them, counts them his burden, and
intolerable task, and would gladly, could he find a way to avoid hell, and
get heaven, without doing of any of these things throw off all; but because he
knows no other way, he therefore goes on, though fore against his will, moving
heavily, as the Egyptian Chariots when they had lost their wheels, in a track
of duty. And therefore you shall observe that such persons, when they come to
hear of the free grace of God, and the Gospel-way to salvation by Christ
without the works of the Law; if a Minister come and tell them, that would they
go to heaven and be saved, the way is not to work, and work, and work, but
to believe on Christ who has purchased salvation for poor sinners, and gives
it out freely without any merit or desert of theirs, they make this use of it
to throw off all: If God will save them, which is all they have a care for,
they will do nothing now for God, or the glory of God.

As it is with young trees, in the transplanting of them, usually most of them
wither, and come to nothing. So take a company of Legal walkers, and go about
to transplant them, bring them from the Law to the Gospel, and there are but
few of them that will not miscarry and come to nothing in the removing: When
the Law is gone, and the fear of Hell is off their hearts, they will do nothing
for the love of God, or the glory of God.

I have read of a man that was so exact in duty, that he would never go forth
in the morning, but he would first go to prayer by himself, and when he had
prayed he would say to himself, Now Devil do thy worst, and all the day long
would haunt the Alehouses, Taverns, and Whore-houses, and come home again at
night and go to pray. Take the generation of Professors throughout the world,
and their Religion is such a kind of Religion as this man's was, though I will
not say they are so profane as he (every legal conscience is not so large)
yet usually they go on in a track of duties: They will serve God morning and
evening, and if this be done, though the world and Devil have their hearts all
the day besides, yet they think all is well, and that by their morning and
evening prayers, they make God amends for all their sin, their pride, their
worldliness, wantonness, uncleanness, all the day besides.

There are some Papists (they say) that always carry a Crucifix about with
them, and when they have been drunk, or unclean, or blasphemed God, etc. Their
manner is to take their Crucifix and kiss that, and howl over it a while, and
when they have so done, they will return to their sin again. So there are many
Professors, who though they have not their Crucifixes, yet somewhat they have
which serves them instead thereof, which ordinarily is some outward duty, and
when they have committed any sin, they run to their duty, and there lick
themselves whole, and having so done, back from their duty, to their sin again.
You therefore that are Professors, look to your selves, I say, look to your
selves, for (as a godly man says) there are many hundred Professors which bear
forth a broad profession, and make a glorious show in the eyes of the world,
who will be found to be sons of Ishmael at the last day; bare Legal
Professors: And with this kind of Profession a man may, and many there are
which do, go bravely through the world with top, and top gallant up, carrying
the applause of Town and Country where they dwell, for men of excelling
godliness, and honesty, and yet be strangers to Jesus Christ, and true
Gospel-holiness for all this.

In good earnest therefore, look to your selves, Professors, and consider
seriously the ground you stand upon, whether it be Legal, or Gospel-ground,
lest after you have traveled many miles as you come heavenward, you are found
to be nearer hell, then when you first set out.

Use 2. By this we may also take a scantling of our actions as well as our
persons: We may know what they are, and what worth they have in them. To know
the worth of our actions, we are not to judge by the outward plausibleness of
them, but the principle whence they flow, if the principle be a
Gospel-principle, though the action be ever so poor, weak, and mean in it
self, and despicable in the eyes of others, yet the action is good, and
accepted of God; If the Law be the principle, though the action be ever so
glorious, yet it is Flesh, and abominable to God, Why does the Apostle, Heb.
11. so highly commend the works of the godly Patriarchs, many of which for the
outward act were poor, and low, and mean, but because the principle whence they
did flow was a Gospel-principle, they sprang from faith; the worthiness of the
principle makes the action, though ever so poor and low in it self, worthy. And
why are the howlings of Cain, the tears of Esau, the humiliations of Ahab, the
confessions and repentance of Judas, so branded in Scripture, but because the
principle whence they did flow was Legal, the principle being Flesh, though
ever so shining and glorious otherwise, to be filthy and abominable to God.

The Apostle tells us, Romans 8. Those that are in the flesh cannot please God.
So let me say, There is never an action which is an action of the Flesh (as
every pure Legal action is) that either is or can be pleasing to God. Yea, the
actions of Saints themselves having Flesh in them, would be abhorring to God,
did not Christ the High Priest of the Saints, separate between the precious and
the vile in their actions, and present only the precious to his Father. So
displeasing is Flesh to God, that even the actions of those whom he loves as
the apple of his eye, would be a stinking smell to him were there any thing of
Flesh in them when they come before him. Why is it said of Paul at his
conversion, Behold he prays? why then? he prayed before, he was a
Pharisee, and the Pharisees used to make long prayers, they made a trade of
praying; why, because though he prayed before, yet so long as he was a
Pharisee, and walked Legally, all his praying was but a little of the Flesh,
and God will not own it by the name of praying: But now when there was a beam
of Gospel Light darted into his soul, and a little of the Spirit of God in his
prayer, God streightway owns it, Behold he prays. Paul made many prayers
before whilst he was a Legalist, and God will not own one of them; and now he
makes but one, with a little of the Spirit, and God streightway owns that.

So there is many a man and woman that says over a prayer sometimes, and
thinks God indebted to him, when alas poor soul, when the reckoning day comes
wherein he expects his reward for his work, he shall find to his woe, that
God will not own any of these his prayers, but God will say to him as to those
hypocritical fasters the Prophet speaks of, When ye fasted, fasted ye at all
to me, even to me, says the Lord? So will God say, Man, woman, thou have
prayed, but did thou pray to me, at all to me? were not all thy prayers
because thou wast afraid of hell, or because thy conscience whipped thee to it,
or thou had a design hereby to get credit amongst thy friends, and
neighbors? etc. Is this praying to me? Or, will God say to them, as Christ
said to those, Mat. 7. who come to him with Lord, Lord in their mouths, we
have prophesied in thy Name, we have done thus and thus for thee; but what
says Christ? Depart from me, I know you not, ye workers of iniquity. So it
may be thou will come one day with thy crowd of Legal works to Christ, Lord,
behold at such a time I prayed, at such a time did such a duty, at another time
resisted such a sin; Away will Christ say, I know you not, I know none of your
works, neither will I own them, ye did nothing for me, your works are works
of iniquity, and you are workers of iniquity, and therefore away, be gone,
here is no room for you, nor your works, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity.

How came it about that the poor Publican, who could speak but one word was
accepted, whereas the proud Pharisee which made a long Oration of his own
doing; worth, and excellency was sent going as he came, but only hence: The
poor Publican, though he could speak but one word, yet it was a Gospel-word,
and so there was Spirit in it; the proud Pharisee though he spoke many words,
yet all were Legal and so but Flesh. Now there may be many a poor soul in the
world, who like the poor Publican, when he comes to a duty can hardly speak
ten words to God, yet because there is in that little he speaks somewhat of the
Gospel and Spirit, it therefore is well-pleasing to God; and again, there are
others who can come, and make a brave flourish for an hour, two or three hours
together, and yet all being but the fruit of the Law, or natural abilities,
both which are Flesh, is odious to God. It concerns us therefore to look to our
actions, whether the root or rise of what we do, be the Law or Gospel, Flesh
or Spirit.

Use 3. and last. How sad and pitiful is the condition of Legal walkers; they
walk after the Flesh; and what is the doom of Flesh? Why this, Flesh and blood
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. They walk after the Flesh, and so are
under condemnation; as there is no condemnation to those who walk after the
Spirit; so on the other side most certainly there is to those who walk after
the Flesh. It is a peremptory sentence of Paul, Row. 8. If ye live after the
Flesh ye shall dye. As a condemned Thief or Traitor, has no way, but to the
Gallows; so there is no way with the Fleshly walker, he who lives and dies
such a one, but to Hell.

Quest. But put case I have heen a Legal Fleshly walker, is there no hope for
such?

Answ. Yes, renouncing the way of the Law, and embracing the Gospel; renouncing
thine own righteousness, and closing with Christ's. Paul was as great a Legalist
as any, who for his zeal to that way persecuted the Churches of God, and the
way, of the Gospel; yet (says he) I obtained mercy, and so may thou. O
make a close with Christ this day poor soul, and then thy disobedience, and the
sin of thy Legal obedience, all shall be done away, and thou shall be blessed
for ever. Amen.

What Gospel walking is.

SERMON V.
Romans 8.1. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Sprit.


THe Phrases here used, of Walking after the Flesh, and after the Spirit, I
told you the last day, that they hold forth one of these two, either, 1 Walking
after the Law, or after the Gospel. Or 2 Walking after the old, or new man. I
have begun with the words in the first sense, as they hold forth Legal and
Gospel-walking, and so the Propositions I laid down were,

Legal walking, is walking after the Flesh.

Gospel walking, is walking after the Spirit.

I have spoken to the first. Now I come to the second, viz. Gospel walking is
walking after the Spirit. Here our first Question will be.

Quest. What Gospel walking is?

Answ. Gospel walking is to yield obedience to the Commands of God, as they are
handed to us by Jesus Christ: or, To make the Law of God, as it is the Law of
Christ, the rule of our lives and actions.

By Law I understand the Moral Law, taking in the spiritual exposition thereof
by Christ, and his Apostles in the Gospel; for those precepts to holiness that
we read of throughout the New Testament, are but the spiritual exposition of
the Moral Law, as is clear from Matthew. 5. where Christ himself in expounding
the Moral Law, lays down many Spiritual, and Evangelical duties; yea all the
commands of the New Testament, may be summed up under these two heads, Either
loving God, or our neighbor as our selves, both which in the spirituality of
the performance, are required in the Moral Law, as Christ teaches, Mat. 22.37,
to the 41. The Moral Law is as it were the Text the Doctrine of Christ and the
Apostles, the explication and opening of it: The Moral Law is the basis, or
foundation of all duties of holiness, the teaching of Christ and the Apostles,
the structure, or rather the completing, and filling up of the building. So
that by Law, I do not understand another Law distinct in matter or substance
from the Moral Law, but the Moral Law it self for the matter and substance
thereof. Now the Moral Law comes under a double consideration, either as it is
the matter or substance of Moses's Law, what Moses commanded, and so the
substance of the old Covenant, or else, as it is the matter and substance of
Christ's Law, what Christ in the Gospel, or new Covenant requires of Believers.

Hence in reference to the first part of the distinction, it is frequently in
Scripture, called the Law of Moses, believers are said not to be under the
same, Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not
under the Law, but under grace, Gal. 5.18. But if ye be lead of the Spirit,
ye are not under the Law; yea, to be dead to it, and delivered from it, Romans
7.4.16. Wherefore my brethren, ye are also become dead to the Law by the body
of Christ, etc. but now we are delivered from the Law, etc. its said to gender
to bondage, Gal. 4.24. Which things are an Allegory, for these are the two
Covenants, the one from the Mount Sinai which gendereth to bondage, which is
Agar.

In reference to the second, its called the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. Bear ye
one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. Bearing one another
burden is a spiritual duty which comes under the second Table of the Law of
loving our neighbors as our selves, and this is called a part of Christ's Law.
Believers are said to be under it, 1 Cor. 9.21. To them that are without Law,
as without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ) etc.
It is called a Law of liberty, Jam. 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they
that shall be judged by the Law of liberty. And the Apostle speaks plainly
there of the Moral Law, as from the verses above appears. It is called the
Royal Law, (...), the Kingly Law, or the Law of Christ, as King of Saints. This
distinction Christ teaches us, Mat. 5. where repeating and opening of the
Moral Law, he says, it was said of old thus and thus, i. e. thus Moses said,
thus the Law as it was Moses his Law said, but says he, I say unto you, i. e.
thus the Law as it is my Law says unto you. This Paul well knew, and
therefore, Romans 7. handles the Law under this two fold consideration; as Moses
his Law, he says we are dead to it, delivered from it, and have nothing to do
therewith; as Christ's, he says, he did approve of it, delight in it, and
endeavor to conform thereto. So Romans 8.2. For the law of the Spirit of life
in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and death; he makes a
clear distinction betwixt the Law as it was in Moses his hand, administering sin
and death to those under it, and in Christ's, giving spirit and life; and he
says, that believers by being under the Law as Christ's, are freed from, as
Moses's. And in Gal. 2.19. For I through the Law am dead to the law, that I
might live unto God. He tells us that by virtue of being under the Law as it is
in the hand of Christ; he tells us, he was dead to it, as in the hand of Moses.

These things laid down, I say, Gospel walking is to make the Law of God (i. e.
the Moral Law) as it is the Law of Christ, the rule of our lives and actions.

For the making out of this, three things are to be proved.

1 That the Moral Law in Gospel Times, is a Rule to Believers, else making it
our Rule cannot be Gospel-walking. 2 That it is a Rule only as in the hand of
Christ. 3 That to obey and observe the Law as it is in the hand of Christ, is
truly and properly Gospel-walking.
The first I make good by these Arguments.

Argument 1. If the coming of Christ does not destroy the Law as a Rule, but
fulfill, or complete the same, then is the Law in Gospel Times a rule to
believers. But the first is true, Matthew. 5.17. Think not that I am come to
destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. What
fulfilling is the fulfilling here spoken of? Not so much Christ's fulfilling the
Law for us as our common person, though this be a truth, as the perfecting or
completing of the Law; I came to fulfill the Law, that is, to complete the
Law, to fill up the Law which the Jews took by halves, or peece-meals, and
this (...) does properly signify to replenish, perfect or fill up a thing,
being (as some say) a Metaphor taken from a Ship under sail, whose sayls are
filled with wind; and this, Christ's own speaking to the end of the Chapter
clearly shows, he going on to declare the spiritual sense and meaning of the
Law, beyond what the Jews understood thereof, or Moses had discovered to them.
Therefore the latter.

Argum. 2. If the Moral Law be a perpetual and everlasting Rule to Saints in
all Ages, then to Saints in Gospel Times. But the first is true, Mat. 5.18. for
Verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be fulfilled. As long as Heaven
and Earth remains, so long does the Law remain, and the fulfilling thereof
remain. Here observe by the way, that the Greek word translated fulfilled, is,
(...), which does not signify as the word (...), used in the precedent verse,
to perfect or fill a thing up, but to do or perform a thing. Now there is a
twofold fulfilling or performing of the Law, a fulfilling or performing
thereof in Christ as our Head and common Person, this was perfectly
accomplished by and in Christ when he was here; and there is a fulfilling or
performing of the Law in us the Members, this because it is imperfect, and
wrought by degrees, goes perpetually on increasing till we come to be wholly
like our Head; and this I take it, is that which is here spoken of, which shall
remain as long as Heaven and Earth remain, i. e. as long as Heaven and Earth
stands, Saints shall go daily on fulfilling of the Law, till in the end their
obedience comes to be perfect as Christ's was.

Argum. 3. If the preaching of Faith does not make void the Law, but establish
the same, then does the Law still remain as a Rule to Believers in
Gospel Times. But the first is true, Romans 3.31. Nay we establish the Law, i. e.
by the preaching of the Gospel we do not over-turn the Law, make men
Libertines, and free them from the obedience of the Law, no, but we establish
the Law, set it upon a better and surer bottom than it stood on before, and
bring men to a more free, full and spiritual observance thereof, than they will
be brought any other way; therefore the latter.

Argum. 4. If the substance of those things which are required in the Moral Law
are commanded in the Gospel, promised to Gospel Times, then does the Law
remain a Rule to Believers still. But the first is true; as for example, Does
the Law in general require of us to love God with all our heart, with all our
soul, with all our might, and with all our strength, and to love our neighbor
as our selves? and does not the Gospel every where command these things? Does
the Law require of us to love, serve, and obey one God, and the true God; and
does not the Gospel do this? Does the Law require us to worship God in his
own way, forbidding all Idol worship; and does not the Gospel do this? 1 Cor.
10.20, 21. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. does the Law require us to sanctify Gods
Name; and does not the Gospel too, Jam. 5.12? Does it require the sanctifying
of the Sabbath; and is not this promised to Gospel Times? Ezekiel. 44.24. in the
purest Gospel, which shall be when the Jews are called, they shall hallow Gods
Sabbath; and I take it for this reason, the command of keeping the Sabbath is
mentioned both in the Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial Law; in the Judicial Law,
to teach us, that the keeping holy one day of seven is natural; in the Moral,
to teach it is Moral; and in the Ceremonial Law, to teach us the command of the
Sabbath is Evangelical, the Ceremonial Law being but the Gospel under Types and
Figures. Does the Law require obedience to Superiors, and does not the Gospel?
yea, is not the Fifth command in express words commanded, Ephesians. 6.2? Does the
law forbid Murder, Adultery, Theft, False-witness-bearing, coveting another
goods and right, and are not all these forbid in the Gospel, Romans 13.9?
therefore the law remains a Rule to believers under the Gospel.

Argum. 5. If Christ as a common person did yield obedience to the Moral Law,
then is the same our Rule under the Gospel; for look what Christ as our common
Person did actively without us in obeying the law of God, that for the kind is
by his Word and Spirit wrought and effected in time within us -- Christ's
obedience to the Law does not free us from obedience in the same kind, but in
the same way or degree; Christ obeyed the Law as it was a Covenant of works and
obeyed it perfectly; now for so much as relates to the way or degree of
obedience, Christ's active obedience has freed us from, but not from obedience
in the same kind; as for example, Christ prayed, this does not free us from
prayer; Christ repented, this does not free us from Repentance; Christ was
thankful to his Father, this don't free us from thankness; Christ was meek,
lowly, patient, humble, Self-denying, submissive to his Fathers will, -- this
does not free us from the like Duties and Qualifications, it frees us that we
are not bound to perform these things perfectly, or in the way of a Covenant
of works, but not at all from the things themselves, but rather the obligation
is greater, by how much we have not only the law, but Christ's Life, which is
the pattern of ours (as Mat. 11.29. Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23.
Ephesians. 5.1, 2.) obliging us hereunto.

Argum. 6. If the Moral Law in the substance of it is no other than the law of
Nature, then is it a Rule in Gospel Times; for it would be absurd to say, the
Gospel sets us at liberty from the law of Nature, so as that it is no sin to
violate Natures law, to neglect that which Natures law teaches to do, and to
do that Natures law teaches to abhor; and the first is true, Romans 2.14, 15.
For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law; these having not the law are a law unto themselves, which
show the work of the law written in their hearts, etc. the Gentiles doing by
nature the things contained in the Law, showing us that the very things of the
law are in nature; -- the Moral law, it is only a written external copy of the
law of Nature.

Argum. 7. If it be a sin and offense in Believers under the Gospel to do
contrary to what the Moral law requires, then is it a Rule to them; for where
there is no Rule, can be no offense, where is no law, is no transgression. But
who in his right wits would not say, that put case a believer should commit
Adultery, blaspheme God, profane the Sabbath, be a Murderer, Thief,
Adulterer, etc. that he does not sin; if he sin he transgresses a Rule, and
if so, then the Moral Law, which forbids these things is a Rule to him.

Argum. 8. If Saints in Gospel Times are bid in an especial manner to remember
the Moral Law, then is it a Rule in Gospel Times. But the antecedent is true,
Mal. 4.4. Remember the law of Moses my Servant, which I commanded unto him in
Horeb for all Israel, with the Statutes and Judgments. In verse. 2. he speaks
of Christ's appearing in the glory and luster of his Righteousness, with his
bright Sunbeams in the Gospel, and of the Saints embracing of his light and
flourishing under it, and after all bids them remember the law of Moses; why
after this discovery of these things does he call upon them to remember the law
of Moses, but to show that the Moral Law given by Moses (though not as given by
him) should remain a Rule to Saints in the purest and brightest Gospel Times;
therefore the consequent.

2 Though the Moral Law is a Rule, yet only as it is in the hand of Christ.
That it is not a Rule to believers under the Gospel as given by Moses is clear.

1 Because as such, they are (as has been showed) dead to it, and it is dead
to them, therefore cannot be their rule.

2 Then their obedience should be a fruit of fear, for in Moses's hand it came
with terror, in Thundering and Lightning to beget fear, and accordingly in
those who were under the same did produce it. But now the obedience of Saints
under the Gospel is not a fruit of fear, but of faith, Luke 1.74, 75. That he
would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies
might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all
the days of our life, 2 Timothy 1.7. For God has not given us the spirit of
fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind.

3 Then believers must unavoydably be under a curse, Gal. 3.10. For as many as
are of the works of the Law are under a Curse, for it is written, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law, to do them. It is not said, as many as are under the reigning or
condemning power of the Law, but the Works of the Law; if a man be but under
the mandatory power of the law as given by Moses, he is under a curse.

4 Then should a Believer be bound over to personal performance of what the law
requires, I prove it thus: Whatsoever the Law says ( i. e. as given by Moses)
it says to them that are under the law, Romans 3.19. Now we know, that what
thing soever the law says, it says to them who are under the law. But the law
says, do all this, do it in thine own person; therefore if a Believer be under
it as such, he is bound to personal performance; and if so, how will he escape
condemnation, seeing in his own person he cannot according to the obedience it
requires, obey the same.

5 Then Believers should be under the commands of a Covenant of works; for the
law in Moses's hand was a Covenant of works; for it is set in direct opposition
to grace, Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not
under the law, but under grace; which could not be, were it not a Covenant of
works, and it requires works for justification, as does the Covenant of works,
Gal. 3.10.

6 Then their obedience should be Legal, not Evangelical, for obedience to a
Covenant of works, can be no other.

7 Believers are under the command of the New Covenant, and therefore the
commands of Moses, being the commands of the Old, are not their Rule.

But now this Law as it is in Christ's hands, is a believers Rule.

Quest. But how, or in what way are we to conceive of the Law, as it comes in
the hands of Christ?

Answ. This is the great Question, without opening whereof, all we have hitherto
said comes to nothing: For answer therefore hereunto, we shall consider, how
the Law came in the hand of Moses, when it came as the Rule of a Covenant of
works; which opened, will help us in the consideration of the other, how it
comes in Christ's hand, as it is our Gospel rule.

If you would know how the Law came in Moses. his hand, if we look into
Scripture, it tells us three things concerning it.

1 It came with bare commands: It had commands, Do this and live; and these
commands were bare commands, commands without any life or power, and therefore
it is called a voice of words. Heb. 12. 2 It came with fearful threatenings and
terrible denunciations of wrath to the disobedient, to scare men from sin, Gal.
3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written
in the Book of the Law to do them. 3 It came with alluring promises of life
and salvation to the obedient, Romans 5. For Moses describes the righteousness
which is of the Law, that the man which does those things shall live by them.
Thus the Law came, as it came in the hand of Moses, and was the Rule of a
Covenant of works; but now as it comes in the hands of Christ, and is our
Gospel Rule (I mean the Rule of Saints under the Gospel, for to other men the
Law still remains in force as it was given by Moses) to it comes without either
of these.

1 It does not come with bare commands as Moses his Law did, it has commands,
and more spiritual than the Law had in the hands of Moses, but these are not
bare commands, commands without any life or power, no, but there is a power and
efficacy that goes forth with every command of the Law as it is in the hands of
Christ, there is an exceeding aptness of power, inabling the soul to do what it
commands; so that a poor soul receiving the Law from the hands of Christ, is
not left lame and dead, unable to follow the voice of the Law, but it finds
life and power coming in with the command: It bids the soul pray, and gives the
Spirit, to enable to cry Abba Father; it bids it avoid evil, and do good, and
inables it to do the one, and the other: Thus the soul is not left liveless,
and strengthless, it does not go about, wishing and woulding; O that I could
obey, O that I could keep the Law, O that I could leave sin, be more holy,
etc. and find no strength to any of these; no, but it finds inward life and
strength, so that it no sooner hears the voice of the Law, but it finds some
power to yield obedience to that voice. Thus, I say, though Christ's Law, as
well as Moses's has commands, yet these are not bare commands, a voice of
words, but commands with power, the word, and the power going together.

2 It does not come with terrible threatenings and denunciations of wrath; it
does not say, Man, Woman, do this, or thou art damned, avoid that, or thou art
damned, it has no such language: But the Law as it is in the hands of Christ,
it says thus, O thou believing soul, here is work for thee, I come to bid thee
work, thou must pray, read, and meditate of the word of God, love God with all
thy heart, love thy neighbor as thy self; do good to all, as thou have
opportunity, avoid all sin, etc. but I do not tell thee, that put case thou
failest, either in neglecting any thing, I command thee, or doing any thing I
forbid thee, that thou shall be damned, I tell thee not so, but know the
contrary, that though through weakness and infirmity thou should fail in the
one, or the other, yet thou shall never be damned; damnation is gone, Christ
has delivered thee from that, thou shall never be damned; But yet I say unto
thee, do as I bid thee, because thy Father takes pleasure to see his child
(which thou art) dutiful and obedient, and it will grieve him should thou do
otherwise; yet however, though thou failest (which yet take heed of because of
grieving thy Father) yet know this, thou shall never be damned, my curse shall
never light upon thee, for it has been already upon the head of Christ thy
Surety, who has born it: All therefore I have to say to thee is, to show thee
what thou should do, and how thou should walk, but I have no curse for
thee, I cannot curse thee though I would.

3 It does not come with alluring promises of life and salvation to the
obedient: The Law in the hand of Christ it does not come with a voice, Do this
and live; It does not say, Soul, if thou will obey me thou shall have heaven;
But says the Law, thou poor sinner who have closed with Christ, know for
certain, Heaven is thine already, salvation is sure to thee, thou had the
grant of this, and it was made sure to thee by an unchangeable deed of gift
from thy Father upon thy believing day, and therefore should I promise thee
this, in case thou would hearken to my voice, I should promise thee nothing
at all, because I should promise thee no more than what thou have already, and
none can ever deprive thee of, for all this is thine; yea, as I cannot promise
thee this in case thou should obey me, so need thou not fear losing of
this, if through thine own weakness, or the prevalency of thy corruption, thou
should fall, and disobey me: But this is that I am thee Messenger of, there
is another ( viz. the Gospel) which has been before me, and assured thee
heaven is thine, but that I am the Messenger of, is only to tell thee, how it
becomes thee, being a child of God, and an heir of heaven, to walk, and how
thou should express thy thankfulness to thy Father for his unspeakable love,
which thou shall abundantly do, if thou will endeavor in all things to observe
me, and therefore poor soul, be thou now an obedient child, do thy Fathers
will, because he has proclaimed to thee in the word of his grace, that he
has given heaven to thee: O therefore serve him, and behold here I show unto
thee, and point out the way in which he would have thee do it. Thus the Law as
it comes in the hands of Christ, it has not bare commands, nor threatenings,
nor curse, no promises of life and salvation in it, but it comes without any of
these.

3 That to yield obedience to the Law as it is in the hands of Christ, is
Gospel-walking.

1 To walk in the way of the New Covenant, is Gospel-walking, for the Gospel,
and New Covenant, are the same. But to yield obedience to the Law as it is in
the hands of Christ, is to walk in the way of the New Covenant, for the Law as
it is in the hands of Christ, is a part of the New Covenant, the thing that the
Law (as such) requires of believers, being there promised, and given to them,
therefore it is a part of the New Covenant.

2 To serve God without fear, and from love, is Gospel-walking, Luke 1.74, 75.
2 Timothy 1.7. 2 Cor. 5.14. But to yield obedience to the Law it is in the hands
of Christ, is such; for what is there in the Law to cause fear? if we look
upon it in the hands of Christ; there are no terrors, threatenings, no curse, no
noise of death, hell, and damnation, though I break the same, all these things
being gone; And on the other side, is there not much to cause love, heaven,
eternal life is given before ever I strike a stroke, do one action that the Law
requires of me, set one step in a way of obedience, all my sins are pardoned
in Christ, and through him, before ever I commit them; is not here much to
beget love, and to make me out of love to yield obedience to the holy Law of
God who has pardoned my sins, made me an heir of life eternal, and all
without my merit, or desert; therefore I say, this obedience having not slavish
fear in it, but arising from love, must needs be Gospel-walking.

3 That obedience which is the fruit and effect of the working of Gods holy
Spirit in us, is Gospel-walking; for not the Law, but the Gospel or New
Covenant gives the Spirit, which helps us to obey: But now all obedience to the
Law, as it is in the hands of Christ, is such; for to such, as take the Law of
Christ, Christ first gives his Spirit, then his Law, as Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put
my Spirit within you; What then? And I will cause you to walk in my ways.
First the Spirit to enable to obedience, then the Law, and they do obey it.
Therefore all such obedience is Gospel-walking.

Other Questions there are behind, which I cannot reach at present, I shall
only mind you of this, that what has been before spoken, serves to correct
two great mistakes;

1 A MISTAKE of some men of the one hand, who are so much for the Gospel, and
do so cry it up, that they throw the Moral Law quite out of doors, as though
there were no room for that in the Gospel Temple. They think that grace and
good works are so inconsistent one with the other, that they can never stand
together, and therefore that grace may be all, the Law and good works shall
be nothing at all; whose mistake is corrected, from what has been said and
proved, that the Moral Law remains a Rule to Saints in Gospel Times.

2 A MISTAKE of some others on the other hand, who out of zeal for the Moral
Law, do hand over head urge and press the same as the Rule of Saints, never
considering how, or in what sense the same remains a Rule, and by so doing,
they bring the glorious Sons of Sion, the freeborn Saints of the Gospel, under
the power and commands of a Covenant of Works ere they are aware: Whose
mistake is corrected by distinguishing of commands, as they are Moses's and
Christ's; In the first sense, the Law is not a Saints Rule, and it is dangerous
so to make it; in the latter it is, and it is sweet and comfortable so to
receive it.

Therefore you that are Saints and Believers, hence learn two things.

I Not to reject the Moral Law as a Rule to order your lives and conversations
by, but with love, delight, and cheerfulness, approve of, embrace and obey the
same.

2 Not to take the Moral Law for your Rule as it comes out of Moses his hand,
for then you bring your selves under the power of a Covenant of Works, and
your souls will be continually filled with terror, fear and trembling,
covered over with darkness, lying under apprehensions of wrath, and altogether
weak, and unable to do what is commanded; But take it out of the hands of
Christ, and then with Paul you will say, The Law if holy, just, and good; I
consent to the Law that it is good, I delight in the Law of God after the inner
man, yea with my mind, I my self do serve the Law of God. Which
Gospel-walking the Lord bring you and I daily more and more unto, Amen.

When a man's walk may be said to be a Gospel walk.

SERMON VI.
Romans 8.1. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


BY this time you know the meaning of these Phrases, which you have often heard
to be meant either of Legal, or Gospel walking, Walking after the Old, or New
man.

I have spoken or Legal walking, and am now upon Gospel walking. The last day I
showed you what Gospel walking is. I now proceed to another Question, viz.

2 Quest. When may a man's walk be said to be a Gospel walk, or a walking
after the Gospel?

I answer I. When the Rule of a man's obedience is a Gospel Rule, i.e. the Law
as it is in the hands of Christ. Of this having spoken at large the last day, I
shall wholly wave it now.

2 When the principle of a man's obedience or walking is a Gospel principle.

Quest. But what is the Gospel principle?

Answ. This Gospel holds forth two great things, viz. a crucified Christ to be
believed on, and the Pouring out of the Spirit of Christ into the hearts of
believers. The first respects our Justification, the latter our Sanctification,
or our obedience and walking. Now as Christ crucified is the great Principle in
the business of our Justification, whence alone that flows from the knowing and
believing on a Crucified Christ; so the Spirit of Christ in the hearts of
Saints, is the great Principle in the matter of our obedience, whence that
flows. Hence Romans 8. the Sons of God are said to be lead by the Spirit of God,
i.e. the Spirit does not only teach a believer what is his duty, but does as
it were take him by the hand and lead him to it, help and guide him in it.
There is more held forth in the word leading, than in teaching: I teach another
when I write him a copy and lay it before him, and tell him how he should hold
his pen, and order and guide his hand, but now when I do not only do this, but
take his hand in mine, and write therewith, I may be better said to guide or
lead him: So the Spirit of God teaches a believer, when it makes discovery of
any truth to him he was ignorant of before, and shows him what duty that truth
calls for from him; but when it does not only do this, but also inables the
soul to receive this truth, and to walk up to what this truth calls for,
conforming the soul to the truth or will of God, then does it exercise its
leading power in the soul: And therefore Ezekiel. 36.27. God says, I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my ways, etc. In the Gospel or
New Covenant; the Spirit of God put into a believer, is the causing,
constraining principle to obedience and holy walking. As in the Old Covenant,
though the fruit seem never so glorious, yet the principle or root of all
obedience is Flesh. So in the New Covenant, though the outward fruit seem never
so mean and weak, yet the principle or root is the Spirit. All Gospel graces
and works are fruits of the Spirit, as Gal. 5.22, 23. But the fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith?
meekness, temperance. All that obedience therefore which has not the Spirit of
God for the principle, the root, or rise thereof, though ever so glorious, is
not Gospel-obedience, nor Gospel-walking.

Quest. But how shall I know whether the Spirit is the principle of my
obedience?

Answ. I shall say no more hereto at present, but only this, do thou find
a contentedness of heart in thy obedience, mingled with pride, self-estimation,
etc. i. e. when thou have performed any duty, do thou find thy self
contented and satisfied in having done the same, and art thou proud and
arrogant, accounting thy self some body, because thou have done it? Or on the
other side, do thou find a spiritual rejoicing of heart in that thou have
been enabled to perform thy duty, and this mingled with humility and
mortification; my meaning is, when thou have been obedient in any one
particular; do thou rejoice in God, and bless his name, in that he has
enabled thee so to do, and considering it was not in thine own proper strength
to obey God in any thing? Art thou by and under this obedience kept humble,
having thy pride and self-estimation more mortified in thee than thou did
find it before. If the first, then does not thy obedience arise front the
Spirit, because it takes from the Spirit, which no works of the Spirit does; if
the latter, then assuredly the Spirit of God is the principle, the root of thy
obedience, because it gives to the Spirit of God, as every work which is by,
and from the holy Spirit does.

3 When our Motives to obedience are Gospel Motives.

Quest. But what are Gospel Motives?

Answ. Such as these:

1 The will and command of our heavenly Father. You know the difference betwixt
a servant and a son in working; a servant will not do any work for his Master,
unless there be a compact and agreement betwixt his Master and him, his
Master must give him so much wages? and he will do him so much work: But now
when a Son is to do any work for his Father, he does not capitulate, with his
Father, if you will give me so much I will do your work, but if not, I will
not; no, but the Father says to the Son, Son do me such a piece of work, and
presently the Son hearing the command of his Father, goes about it, the Fathers
will is his Motive. So take a legal man or woman, and let God command such a
one a duty, and streightway he goes to capitulate with God, I hope Lord, if I
do this, thou will pardon my sins, I hope thou will give me heaven, I shall
never go to hell; thus the Legal soul will be upon terms with God, or will do
nothing for God, he will know what he shall have for his work, or will not
work at all: But now take a Gospel soul, he does not stand upon terms, what
shall I have? Shall I be saved, or shall I be damned? These are not his
questions; but says the Gospel soul, God I know is my Father in Jesus Christ,
and I am the Son and Child of God by adoption, now it is becoming a Son to do
the will of his Father; I am the Son of God, and such and such things I have
read and heard of, and know to be my Fathers will, and because they are so,
that I may do as becomes an obedient child, and show my self that I am such a
one, I will therefore endeavor to conform my self, so far as I am able, to
what I know of my Fathers will.

And therefore whereas it is grievous to another to read or hear of his duty,
because he serves as a hireling, and therefore cares not so he may obtain the
hire, how little work he does; this Gospel soul with joy and delight, can take
the Book of God, where his Fathers will is revealed, and turn it over, and
search it leaf by leaf, and line by line, and is glad when he finds any piece
of work, or part, or parcel of his Fathers will, which he was ignorant of
before, because he does not what he does upon the account of hire or reward,
but upon this account, that it is his Fathers will; The will and command of his
Father is both the Rule and reason of his obedience. Hence Paul urges Holiness
in the general, and thankfulness in particular, 1 The. 4.3. For this is the
will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication; and Chap. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the will
of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. Upon this very reason or motive and no
other; as if he should say, you are Sons, and therefore I need not use many
Arguments with you, it is enough to tell you it is the will of your Father you
should be holy, you should be thankful.

2 The powerful and efficacious workings of the new nature that is within every
Saint or Son of God. The promise of the Gospel, or New Covenant is, that God
will give to his Children a new heart and spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26. i.e. put a new
nature within them, whereby they shall be naturally inclined and disposed to
the doing of that which is his Will, which in other places is called the
Writing of his Law in their hearts. This new Nature is put into every Saint,
though in the actings thereof, in some more, in others less, and being in every
Saint, every Saint is naturally inclined and disposed to the doing of that
which is wel-pleasing unto God. As the old nature does naturally move, incline,
and carry on the Soul to the doing of that which is contrary to the Will of
God; so this new nature does naturally incline, incite, and provoke the Soul to
those things which are agreeable to the Will of God. Hence a Gospel-soul is
moved to obedience, because there is a new nature within, which answers to the
Law or Word of God without, which requires obedience of him; and all
disobedience is as contrary to this new nature within, as to the Rule without.

3 Love and filial affection. The bond of love is natural betwixt a Father and
a Son, a Father has a Natural affection to his Child more than to another,
and a Child a natural affection to his Father more than to another man; and
love (though there be no other reason) will make the party loving, do much for
the party loved. Now I say, there is a tie of love upon a Son which is not upon
a Servant, or Hireling; come to a Servant, or Hireling, and ask him, why he
toyls, and moyls, and sweats from morning till night, all the year long for his
Master; my Naster (says he) gives me wages, and therefore I do it; but come
to a Son, who it may be is as hard, or harder at work than the Servant, and ask
him, Why do you toil and moyl your self thus? why (says the Son) it is my
Fathers work I am doing of, and I love my Father. So come to a Gospel-soul who
has this Son-like disposition wrought within him, and ask him, Why do you
pray so often, and read the Word, and spend so much time in running to Sermons,
and are so exact in your walking and conversing with men? Why, says a
Gospel-soul, all this is my Fathers work, and I love my Father. Love is the
great Gospel-motive, as Fear the great Legal.

4 The manifestation or discovery of the love of God to the soul. As the
Son-like disposition which is natural, moves a Saint to obedience and holy
walking; so the manifestation, or discovery of the great love of God without,
toward him whilst he was a miserable sinner, and rebel against God, is very
efficacious in a poor Soul that sees and beholds the same, to bring him to
obedience and holiness of life and conversation; for hereby his love is set on
work, love is the begetter of love, the love of God to us the begetter of our
love to him, We love him because he loved us first. A poor sinner that was
yesterday, the last week, or month, in his sins, hanging over Hell, in the
fetters of the Devil, God comes to him, and by the word of his grace lays hold
of him, snatcheth him out of his sins, out of the Devils fetters, and sets him
out of the reach of Condemnation; and then says God, now O Sinner, behold and
see what a miserable condition the last week or month thou wast in, and what a
blessed condition through my love toward thee thou now art in; the Soul seeing
this, stands amazed, and says the Soul, Lord, seeing thy love toward me has
been and is so great, behold here I am, now will I be thy Servant for ever;
whereas I have all my days hitherto been at the command of the Devil, and mine
own Lusts, now Lord, behold I am at thy command, command me what thou will.
This Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. 5.14. For the love of Christ constrains us; as if
he should say, Would you know the reason why we which are Believers do not live
to our selves, serve the World, our Lusts and Pleasures, as you see others do?
O there is all the reason in the world for it, for when we were Rebels,
Traitors, Enemies to God, dead in sins, God then out of his infinite love gave
his Son, and Christ out of his infinite love dyed for us, and the thoughts of
this so great and unspeakable love, does so constrain us, that we cannot but
judge it the most equal and meet thing in the world, that henceforth we should
not live unto our selves, but solely and alone to him that dyed for us.

5 The certainty of the blessedness of a Saints eternal condition; This is a
very prevailing motive, to know and believe that our eternal condition already
taken care for by our Father, and made so sure and out of doubt, that neither
Heaven nor Earth, Men or Angels can ever deprive us of the blessedness
thereof. When a poor Soul called to a duty, comes to see that now the question
is not about his Salvation, whether God will save him or not, for that is
determined already, God having chosen him, and called him to be an Heir
thereof, and given him the seal or earnest thereof in his own heart, but only
about his dutifulness, whether he shall be a loving dutiful Child, and please
his Father, or an undutiful, and grieve him; O then says the Soul, does the
question indeed lie here? Is there no question at all about my Salvation, but
has God and my Father so provided for that, that that is out of doubt? Is this
the question whether I shall be a dutiful Child or no? and O shall I not be one?
Should I not be a Wretch indeed, and worse than a Beast, if for all this
unspeakable love, I should return nothing but unkindness to my Father? Has
God taken care that I shall not be punished in Hell, and shall not I take care
that he be not grieved in my heart? Has he taken care about my eternal good,
and shall not I about his glory? I dare say, were we much in actual
contemplation of this, and our thoughts did but roll hereupon, that we stand
reconciled to God in Christ, Heaven is ours, etc. did we but when ever we are
called to any duty, or tempted to sin, take a little time before we close with
either, to recollect our selves of the love of God in this thing, and to get
our faith a little upon the wing, and our hearts warmed herewith, we should
never demean our selves so basely and unworthily toward God, and in the
things of God as often we do; our hearts would never be so lively to sin, and
dead to duty as they are.

I am persuaded, that put the case a poor Soul were much over-mastered with the
prevalency of some Lust or Corruption, if when he felt it stir he could look
the same in the face, and in faith say to it, O my Corruption, though I should
now yield to thee, yet this is certain I shall never perish, for the business
of my Salvation is not now to be cared for, but that is past and over, done,
and cannot be reversed; I say, I am persuaded, that this very saying this by
faith would give a more deadly blow to sin, than all the terrors of Conscience
and the Law, the fears of Hell and Damnation, Legal promises, Vows and
Covenants, either will or can do; and this, were he able at such time in
faith to say it, he should know and feel by experience. So, put the case a
Believer were under some violent Temptation, could he look Satan in the face,
and say, thou wretched Devil, thou would tempt me to this and the other
evil, to grieve God, but what a fool art thou, for should I yield unto thee,
thy end would never be accomplished, for thou shall never have me, I shall
never perish; the saying this in faith, would more silence the tempter, and
suppress temptations, than can be done in any other way.

This therefore is a strong motive to Gospel-Holiness, and such a one, that I
dare boldly say, that the Soul that has found his love and obedience at any
time flowing from hence, i. e. has had a firm persuasion in his Spirit, that
Heaven was his, and from this persuasion has been stirred up to do the will
of God, and has gone about the same with more cheerfulness and delight than
at another time, may conclude that his obedience is a fruit of the Gospel, and
walking after the Gospel; for how can it be legal, seeing,

1 Here is no working from slavish fear; for what servile fear can there be
when I know beforehand that my condition is sure, it does not hang upon my
working, when I know beforehand that I am delivered from wrath; and because I
am delivered from wrath, therefore I do obey; yet put the case I should not
obey (though being delivered from wrath I shall obey) yet cannot my
disobedience bring me under wrath, for I am delivered from it; What slavish
fear is here?

2 Here is no working for Heaven, or the reward; for how can a Soul be said to
work for Heaven, when he knows and firmly believes that Heaven is his before
he works -- If a Father make over his Estate to his Son by Deed of gift, and
put him in possession thereof, and the Son after he is possessed of his Fathers
Estate, does more for his Father than ever before; will you say he does it that
his Farther might give him the inheritance? No, that he has, and his Father
cannot now take it from him, therefore all that now he does is from ingenuity.
That Holiness therefore which arises from this motive must needs be
Gospel-walking, because it is free of those qualifications which are necessary
to a legal work, and legalwalk,

4 And lastly, When our ends in our obedience are Gospel-ends.

Quest. What are Gospel-ends?

Ans. Such as these,

That I might testify my thank fullness to God for his love toward me; What
shall I render to the Lord (says David) for all his benefits toward me, Psalm.
116.12. God has done great things for me, O what shall I do for God again?
This is the language of a Gospel-soul, What shall I render to the Lord? I was
under such a Temptation, desertion, God has delivered me, O what shall I
render to the Lerd? I wanted such a Mercy, and sought God, and he gave it me, O
what shall I render to the Lord? I was some months, years ago in a sore
outward affliction, and God delivered me, O what shall I render to the Lord?
Not long ago my condition was such, as that I thought as certainly Hell was my
portion as ever it was Judases, or the portion of any of the Damned there; and
I went about crying out, I am undone, I am Damned for ever, and now God has
not only freed me from these Horrors which made my life a burden, and earth a
Hell to me, but also filled my soul with joy unspeakable, by showing me that he
has loved me in his Son with an everlasting love, and that nothing shall ever
be able to separate me from his love, but come life, come death, come what
will come, come what can come, all shall further my eternal good, O what shall
I render to the Lord? O what shall I render to tht Lord? How shall I ever walk
worthy so great love? what shall I do for this God who has done so worthily
and gloriously for my soul?

2 That I might recover the Image of God again; The first man lost the Image
of God by his disobedience, this Image of God we recover again in Christ our
second Adam, who was obedient; now the more enlightened any soul is, the
believing and holy, the more does he recover of this Image of God, which
consists in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness. Now, says the
believing Soul, my intent is to recover the Image of God, which the first man
lost by his disobedience, and therefore do I seek to know, and in all things
to obey the Gospel, because in conforming my self hereunto, I shall recover the
Image of God, for as I lost this Image by partaking of the disobedience and
pollution of the first Adam, so shall I recover the same by partaking of the
obedience and holiness of the second Adam; which obedience the Gospel holds
forth unto me. Hence I exercise my self in duties of Holiness, because I know
the more holy I am, the more shall I be like God, who is Holy, and Holiness
it self, and the more shall I recover of this Image which consists in perfect
Holiness.

3 That I might imitate Jesus Christ; Christ in the Gospel proposes his
Holiness to believers, as the pattern of theirs: Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart. Love one another at I have loved you. Now the believing
Soul reading these things over? says to himself; it is my duty as much as may
be to imitate Christ, to walk as he has walked when he was here upon earth.
Now, how did Christ walk? why Christ was humble, meek, lowly, he prayed to his
Father, was thankful to his Father, went about doing good? was full of
compassion to poor Sinners? denied himself in his reputation and honor with
men, and willingly took up the Cross, the shame and reproach of the World, was
in all things submissive to his Fathers will? contenting himself therewith, was
not impatient in his Sufferings, but took all well and in good part from his
Father; was not revengeful toward Instruments, for when he was reviled he
reviled not again, being falsely accused, buffeted, condemned, nailed to the
Cross, he threatened not, but committed all to him that judges righteously:
being persecuted, cursed, he returned blessings for cursings, and prayers for
persecutions, yea he fulfilled all the righteousness of the Law. Now says the
soul, It is my duty to follow Christ, and to draw out my life by the copy of
his, and therefore to the end I might imitate Christ, and be like him, I obey
and love God, for I know Christ did so; love my enemies, and pray for them,
because Christ did so; do good to all as I have opportunity, because Christ did
so, despise the honor and reputation of the world, because Christ did so;
continue in prayer, because Christ did so; desire of God humility, patience,
meekness, thankfulness, submissiveness to the will of God, and contentedness
therewith, because I find all this was in Christ; strive to be holy in all
manner of conversation, and if it were possible to be perfect, because I know
Christ was so. All this I press after to the end I might be like Christ, that
if it were possible there might be nothing in me but what was in Christ,
nothing done by me, but what Christ would have done, nor left undone by me,
but what Christ would have left undone.

4 That I might keep up my communion with God. Although the union which Saints
have with God by means of Christ, depends wholly upon that which is without,
viz. their being married to Christ and clothed with his righteousness, yet the
communion which Saints have with God by means of the Spirit, has much
dependence upon a Saints walking: So that let a Saint walk carnally and
loosely, though he shall not break the marriage knot, and loose his union, yet
he shall grieve the Spirit, and loose his communion: And on the other side,
let a Saint walk spiritually, and as becomes the Gospel, as his union remains
so shall his communion also be kept up fresh, and in the life and sweetness of
it he shall feel the same in his own soul. Yea experience tells a Saint, that
when as at any time he has walked as an obedient child, observing and doing
with delight, and in simplicity his Fathers will, he has then held up much
sweet communion with God; and contrariwise when he has been vain and wanton;
and given too much liberty to his own heart therein, though it may be at that
time he could through faith say, notwithstanding all my sin, I am the child
of God, yet has he not felt in himself, that sweet and spiritual communion
he had with his Father at another time, and good reason for it, he has
walked at a distance from God, and therefore though God loves him still and
acknowledges him for his child, yet to the end he may better learn to know
himself, and to know his Father, God will for a time walk at a distance from
him; As when a child has been stubborn and disobedient to his Father, though
his Father loves him still as his child, and will not dis-inherit him for all
this, yet the Father to make the child know himself, and know his Father, will
carry it at a distance for a while, and he will not be so loving in his look,
and familiar in his discourse with his child as at other times. So when a
Saint walks, loosely, and unsaintlike, not as a child to his Father, though
God loves him still, yet he shall not have those smiles and loving looks, and
lappings, and dandlings, and sweet embraces, and familiar discourses, that he
had with his Father at another time.

Now how sweet this communion is, appears, if we consider the esteem a Saint
has of it when he feels it, and the price he puts upon it in want thereof.
What high language does the Spouse in the Canticles speak of her Beloved, and
the ravishments of her heart by his love, whilst she found and felt this her
communion, and mutual embraces, and love-songs, and change of voices passed
between her, and her beloved; and how sorrowfully does she speak, and how
mournfully does she walk, when as any thing did interpose between her, and her
beloved, and hinder those mutual embraces and kisses of love.

The sweetness of this communion made a heavenly Galeacius Carracciolus, the
Italian Marquess.
man which had great preferments and vast sums of money offered him to forsake
the Gospel, say, Let their money perish with them who esteem all the wealth in
the world worth one hours communion with Jesus Christ. Now this being so, that
the communion a Saint has with God, is so unspeakably sweet, as there is
nothing like it, and this having much dependence upon a Saints walking, that
accordingly as he demeans himself toward God either in a way of duty, or
disobedience, he shall have more or less thereof; hence he labors to walk as
a Saint should; for says the Soul, though I know my sin shall never deprive
me of Heaven hereafter, yet if I walk carnally, I shall loose my communion
with God, and that is my heaven here.

5 The profiting of others, is another Gospel-end which runs along in the
stream of their obedience, who walk after the Gospel. Now the gracious walking
of a Saint may be profitable to others two ways.

1 To those without, by way of convincement. Let there be a whole Parish made
up of Drunkards, and Swearers, etc. and let but a spiritual holy-walking Saint
come amongst them, and he by his holy walking will convince them, and make their
conscience condemn them all: Therefore Christ exhorts his, Matthew. 5. to let
their light shine before men that they may see their good works; and Paul bids
the Thessalonians walk honestly toward them without.

2 To those that are within, by way of provocation, Heb. 12.24. And to Jesus
the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks
better things than that of Abel, 2 Cor. 9.2. For I know the forwardness of your
mind, for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a
year ago, and your zeal has provoked very many. When a poor soul that has
been for a great while very carnal and dead, comes into the presence of another
spiritual Saint, that is lively and active for God, and hears him speak; and
sees his walking, he is hereby provoked: He thinks with himself; O what a
block am I, what abundance of life has such a one, and O what a block am I;
and this making him ashamed of himself sets him on work, and so becomes a means
to put life into that heart, which was dead, carnal, cold and frozen many
days, weeks, and months before. And truly this is a blessed provocation, and a
Saint who indeed labors and endeavors to walk with God, making it his design
to be holy, both may, and shall do God much service in this way.

6 And lastly, The beating down of the body, and bringing it into subjection.
Idleness (we say) is the mother of all iniquity: We know by experience when a
man is idle, and not employed in spiritual things, the flesh through that
natural depravation that is in the whole man, will incline and draw a man into
evil and rebellion against God: When the Spirit is not acting in that which is
good, and bringing the flesh under, the flesh will take advantage to act in
those things that are evil, and so bring the the Spirit under. Now a Saint
knowing and feeling that natural depravation that is in him, and the pronenesse
of the flesh, in case it be not held under, to captivate him thereby, he
exercises himself in those duties of holiness, which concern his general and
particular calling, knowing that by keeping a yoke upon the neck of this Rebel,
he shall in time weaken him, and make him the more unable to do him an
injury, at least deprive him of his advantage to do it. The flesh is like an
unruly Beast, which through rest and idleness grows wild and Masterless, and
there is no way to tame him, but by working him hard; so the way to hold the
body under, is to keep up the soul as much as may be in the exercise of
Holiness. This seems to have been Paul's practice, and to be the meaning of
that place, 1 Cor. 9 last. But I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection; lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a castaway.

3 Quest. But why is Gospel-walking called Walking after the Spirit?

Answ. 1. Reason is, because The Spirit of God has a principal hand in all the
actings and walkings of a Gospel Saint, I mean such as are according to the
Gospel, does he pray, the Spirit of God helps his infirmities in prayer, Romans
8.26. is sin mortified in him, the Spirit of God does it, Romans 8.13. is he
quickened, the Spirit does that, Joh. 6.63. The Spirit of God is all in all in
his walking, and in his working.

2 Because of the spiritualness of a Gospel-walke, above a Legal-walk. Every
thing in the Gospel has more spirituality in it than under the Law: Ordinances
are more spiritual; under the Law they had abundance of Ordinances and
Institutions, but the Apostle calls them Carnal Ordinances, Heb. 9.10. and
Carnal Commandments, Chap. 7.16. and Beggarly Elelements, Gal. 4.9. We under
the Gospel have fewer Ordinances (I mean outward Ordinances) and those we have
are more spiritual. Gospel Worship is one step nearer to Heavenly than Legal
worship. Persons are more Spiritual, Saints of the Old Testament (excepting
some few who were the Penmen of the Holy Ghost) had but a little of the
Spirit, the Spirit then being not powered down, then the promise of the pouring
out of the Spirit being made to Gospel times. Precepts are more spiritual,
compare the ten Commandments of Moses with the Precepts of the New Testament,
and see how spiritual the one are in regard of the other. Promises are more
spiritual, abundance of their promises did relate to outward and temporal good
things, we under the New Testament have but few promises of outward and
temporal things, but abundance relating to spiritual and eternal things;
therefore says the Apostle Heb. 8.6. The New Covenant (that is the Gospel) is
established upon better promises than the old was. Yea the whole
administration, take it in the bulk, is more spiritual; and therefore when the
Apostle compares the two Administrations, he calls the one the Letter, the
other the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. Moses or the Legal Administration is the Letter,
Christ's or the Gospel Administration, the Spirit. So also the conversation or
walking of Saints under the Gospel, is more spiritual by far, then theirs was
under the Law, and therefore it is called a walking in heaven, Phil. 3.20.

3 Because There is a mighty power that goes along with a Gospel-walk. The
Spirit is called Power, Luke 24.49. Now take a Gospel Saint, and he has more
power than five hundred Legal persons. I can do all things (says Paul) through
Christ that strengthens me.

4 Quest. But do all those that are freed from condemnation, Walk after the
Gospel?

Answ. Yea, though here (that there may be nothing laid as matter of
temptation before scrupulous and troubled souls) consider that there are two
sorts of persons that are freed ( i.e. actually freed) from condemnation.

1 There are some are freed from condemnation, but being but newly come to this
their freedom, and having been all the time of their life before trained up
under the Law, in the School of the Law, and been Apprentices to the Law, they
can hardly believe it (the thing seeming strange to them that they should be
from under their other Master) that they are freed, and therefore though they
are indeed freed from condemnation, yet not believing it, or with difficulty
believing it; And on the contrary being with ease persuaded that they are still
under the command of their old Master, their walk (which has much dependence
upon the knowing or believing this their freedom) is not a pure Gospel-walke,
but rather an Old Testament walk, a walk much like unto the walk of the Saints
in the time of the Old Testament, which as I have formerly showed, was neither
purely Gospel, nor purely Legal, but partaking of either: So that in these
persons, although there is somewhat of the Gospel at the bottom, yet may there
be much of the Law at the top, much doubting, darkness, fear, terror, etc. and
yet for all this they may be true Saints, and Gospel-walkers, as the Gospel is
at the bottom of their actions, the Spirit of God at the bottom, though
darkness, fear, terror, etc. at the top.

2 There are others who are not only freed from condemnation, but enjoying and
believing this their freedom, and knowing that the Law their former husband
has now nothing to do with them, but they are only under the commands of
Christ, who is their King, Lawgiver, and Husband; their walk is a pure
Gospel-walke, i.e. there is not that darkness, doubting, fear, self-love in
their walking as in the walks of the other, but their actions do spring from
pure love to God, to the glory of God, love to their neighbor, etc. Now the
things that I have before spoken of as touching Gospel-walking, do chiefly
relate to these latter sort of persons.

Thus much for the opening of this Truth, the Application I shall leave to the
next opportunity.

The Application.

SERMON VII.
Romans 8.1. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


WAlking after the Flesh and Spirit, (as you have heard) holds forth the one of
these two, either Legal, or Gospel-walking, or walking after the Old, and New
man. I am upon the words in the first sense, as they hold forth Legal and
Gospel-walking, and so I have laid down these two Propositions:

Legal walking is walking after the Flesh.

Gospel-walking is walking after the Spirit.

Of Legal walking I have spoken, the last day I made an end of the Doctrinal
part of the other, viz. Gospel-walking, I now proceed to Application.

Use 1. Is it so, that Gospel-walking is walking after the Spirit, then hence
we may learn the excellency of a Gospel-walk; every thing the more of Spirit it
has in it, the more excellent it is. Now Gospel-walking, is a walking after
the Spirit, there is much of the Spirit in it, the whole walk of a
Gospel-Saint, so far as he walks according to the Gospel is directed by the
Spirit, and therefore it is of all others the most excellent walk.

This Gospel-walk it excels a pure Natural walk, or a Legal walk; in a pure
Natural walk there the Principle is Natural light, and Natural conscience; in a
Legal walk there the Principle is fear, and apprehension of wrath; but now in a
Gospel-walk the principle is the Spirit; now by how much the principle is more
excellent, by so much the action, duty, the walk is more excellent; -- As, let
a man have two Servants, one serves him out of love, and from a principle of
ingenuity, because he has received some favor from the hand of his Master;
the other serves him for fear, or in hope to receive somewhat from his Master;
he does the most excellent service that serves him out of love, and from
ingenuity, because the principle is most excellent, whence that he does,
arises. Gospel obedience is excellent obedience, there is a stamp of Divine
excellency upon that, which is upon no other obedience in the world; and the
more any Christian comes to this, to walk and to obey according to the Gopel,
the more excellent Christian he is. A pure Gospel-walking it is the highest,
sublimest, the most excellent walking on this side the walk of glorified Saints
in Heaven, which should be a mighty encouragement to us all to press after
this Gospel-walk.

Use 2. This shows us, why there is such a Mystery in Gospel-walking, that a
mere Natural man cannot conceive what manner of walk a Gospel-walk is, why,
because Gospel-walking is a walking after the Spirit. The Natural man (says
the Apostle) perceives not the things of the Spirit, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned; though a Natural man has
knowledge and insight into the things of Nature, and the things of Morality,
because these are within the sphere of his reason and natural understanding,
and also into the things of he Gospel in a notional way, as he takes up these
things by relation of others, and believing and giving credit to those
Principles which from relation he has received, he is able by his parts and
reason, and Natural understanding to deduce, and infer from these, other
Principles and Conclusions, whereby in a Notional way he may by mere parts of
Nature attain to a competent measure of Gospel-knowledge, yet the things of
the Gospel as they are the things of the Spirit, i.e. things made out to him
not by relation of others, but by the inward revelation, inspiration, and
teaching of the Spirit of God, are Mysteries to him; they are things out of his
sphere, which his reason and natural understanding cannot reach; and therefore
he is blind in these things.

A blind man we know can guess at things when he has them declared to him by
relation of others which have their sight, and see those things, but though he
guess at them, yet he cannot pass a right judgment upon them; his
conceptions are dark and cloudy, various, and too and fro, and not those clear
and steadfast conceptions which another man which has his sight, and sees, and
beholds these things, has of them. So a Natural man, when he hears the things
of the Spirit discovered to him by another which sees and enjoys these things;
he though he have not the Spirit, yet by his reason and parts he can Divine,
and guess at these things; but in respect of clear and certain conceptions
he has them not, so all these things are Mysteries and Riddles to him.

And hence it is, because the Natural, man neither does know, nor can know
(wanting the true inward Spiritual light) what manner of things the things of
the Spirit are, nor what manner of walk this Gospel-walking, or walking after
the Spirit is; therefore is he incapable of passing any right or true judgment
upon the actions of the Spiritual man, or Gospel-walker. I say, a natural man
cannot pass a right judgment upon the actions of one that is a Saint, or Son
of God; and led by the Spirit, because they are things beyond his sphere, and
out of the compass and reach of his understanding. As (says a godly man) (
Valdesto, Consid. 95.) take a Worm that is bred of the corruption of the
Earth, this Creature is not able to conceive of the Generation of the Sons of
men, how one man is generated of another, nor of the actions of Mankind,
because all these things are things alienated from her generation; yea, put the
case one worm should understand this, and go about to make other worms
capable thereof, yet could she never do it, because these are things alienated
from their generation; so take a Natural man, he is altogether unable to pass
a right judgment upon the actions of the Sons of God, which they do as led
and guided by the Spirit, because these are things altogether alienated from
that which he in a Natural way does? feels, knows, or experiments in himself;
yea should one Natural man be able to pass a right judgment upon the actions
of a Spiritual man, yet could he not make others capable thereof, because the
judgment of Spiritual things is a thing alienated from their generation:
Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. ^.15. The spiritual man judges all things,
etc. that is, the spiritual man he can see quite through another man, he can
see through his actions and designs what he can do, and whither all tends;
he can see through the Principles of another what they are, what good there is
in them, and how they will hold, but he himself is judged of no man, that is,
no man which has not the Spirit is able to judge of him, his actions,
principles, etc. wherein he is guided by the Spirit; the walk and actions of
the Spiritual man are a Mystery and Riddle to other men, whereas their ways
and walkings are clear to him. And truly the consideration of this has
oftentimes made me afraid, to pass a judgment upon the principles or actions
of such men whom I have seen to have more of the power of the Spirit than my
self had.

Use 3. This truth is a Touchstone to try men's persons and actions by; would
we judge of men, would we judge of actions, what in deed or in truth they are,
the judge of them by what there is of the Spirit in the one, or the other?

1 For Persons, the great difference all along the New Testament betwixt Saints
and Sinners is this, and only this; one has a Spirit, the other not; Saints
have a Spirit, Sinners have not the Spirit. We have the Spirit, says Paul; and
again, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his. He makes the
great business of judging persons whether they be right or wrong, sincere, or
hipocrites; sound, or rotten; to lie in this, the having or not having of the
spirit. In the Primitive times, when Christians came together, they used to ask
one another, Have you received the Spirit? they did not judge of men as we do
now, such a man is a good man, he prays, hears, etc. no, but has the Spirit;
there are a hundred things which men look upon, and call godliness, which
indeed are no part of it; for a man to pray, and perform some Moral duties
which Natural Conscience may compel a man unto, this does not make a man a
godly man, but this is that which makes a man a godly man indeed, and
distinguishes him from all the Sinners of the World, the having of the Spirit;
therefore Christ when he speaks of sending of the Spirit, ( Joh. 14.) he says,
I will send the Spirit whom the world cannot receive; this is that wherein a
Saint out-strips, and goes beyond all the world besides, he has the Spirit
which the world cannot receive.

2 For actions; would we know whether such a man's actions are right or wrong,
look to this, do they come from the Spirit? one man may do the same things
for the outward work as another does, and yet one may be right, and the other
wrong; one may be a Gospel-work, the other not, because one may come from the
Spirit, the other may be only flesh springing from Natural Conscience, or
Natural parts gathered up together; Judas repented as well as Peter, but Peter's
coming from the Spirit, and Judasses not, his was a Gospel-act, and not the
other. It is not the outward walk, but the inward principle that makes the
difference of walking.

Use 4. Then hence let us learn, not to put too much in any outward form; I am
not of their mind who are against all forms; for out ward forms there are as
well as duties of Christ's own institution; but this I say, since Gospel-walking
is walking after the Spirit, let us not put too much in the form. Some men
there are that put too little in the form, and so they throw it by; others put
too much in it, making that the maine, laying the stresse of their whole
religion there. Now I desire this may be considered of us all, that the maine
Gospel-walking is the Spirit, and though I am to walk in outward forms so
far as they are of Christ's institution, and to use them, yet the maine of
Christian Gospel religion lies not so much in the outward form as in the
inward spiritual worship. Therefore Paul speaking of Gospel Worship, makes in
principally to consist in this, as Romans 1.9. For God is my witness, whom I
serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, etc. and Chap. 2.28, 29. For he
is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly, and circumcision
is that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not
of men, but of God; and Phil. 3.3. For we are the circumcision, which worship
God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh; and so Christ himself opposing the Legal and Gospel worship, Joh. 4.21,
22, 23, 24. shows us that Gospel worship is chiefly and mainly worship in
spirit: Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour comes when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father; ye
worship ye know not what, we know what we worship; for salvation is of the
Jews. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship
the Father in spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
truth. And therefore in Psam 45. which is a Prophecy of the Church of the New
Testament: it is said, that the Kings daughter is all glorious within; showing
us, that the Saints of the New Testament, their glory should be chiefly in
inward graces. This is the difference betwixt Old Testament worship, and New
Testament; in the time of the Old Testament their worship did lie mostly in
outward things, outward observations of times and places, etc. the inward
worship, it was veiled under the, outward. So in the New Testament, the maine.
worship is inward worship, in spirit, and the outward in many things seems to
be veiled under that, yet as then the outward worship did not exclude the
inward, but the inward was required, and without in the outward was nothing; so
now the inward worship does not exclude the outward, but the outward is also
required; and where it may be performed and is not, I may say, without it the
inward is little or nothing, as to Gods acceptance thereof. Therefore I say,
let us not put too much in the outward form, though were are not to despise
it, yet let us not put too much therein.

Quest. But when may a man be said to put too much in an outward form?

Ans. 1. When a man's whole religion lies in that; when a man has nothing to
show him to be religious, or to make him so, but some outward form. Many there
are which go with some outward form upon their backs, and do but strip them
of this their garment, and they have no more Religion than the most irreligious
man living; they have nothing to show them to be religious, or to difference
them from other men, who have no religion at all, but live without God in the
world, save only this, they are in such an outward way, or they do now and
then perform such an outward duty. take them out of their way, and from their
duty, and they have no more religion than a Horse; all their religion it lies
in the outside, they have as little in their heart, though they seem to have
much on their backs as any other men. And indeed it is a very usual thing with
many persons who feign would be rellgious, and love to be so accounted, and
have no stock within to trade with, to drive on a trade for a while as long as
they can in this way. Now I say, when all a man's religion lies in the outward
form, it is evident such a one puts too much in it. Thus it was with the Jews
in Christ's and the Apostles times, their whole religion lay in this, that they
were the Sons of Abrcham, and circumcised, etc. but see what Paul says to
them, Romans 2.28, 29. For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is
that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God.

2 When a man's love and charity is bounded up within the line of his own form,
or the way he is in, or opinion he holds. When a man has no charity to spare
for any but those that jump with him in his own way, or opinion, or if he have
charity for them, yet because they do not fully accord with him in every thing,
he can allow them but a little of his love, or of the exercise of this his
charity. I have known some my self, who have been so high against baptising of
Infants, that their charity would not allow that man one grain of grace, who
could not set his seal presently to this their opinion. I speak not this to
throw dirt in the faces of any, but only to show how that some men there are
who put too much in Forms. Paul, undoubtedly you will all grant it, had as much
cause to be confident of the truth of those Ordinances and Traditions he
delivered to the Churches, as any man now living, has of his own way or
opinion, and yet he had so much charity as to allow him to be a brother which
did not come up to his Traditions, 2 Thessalonians 3.14, 15. And if any man obey not
our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he
may be ashamed; yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

3 When a man is so addicted to his own way, or form, that he cannot with
patience hear what in a way of Christian love or humility is, or may be said
against it. I speak of such things as are disputable, where godly men have
somewhat to say pro and con, as we say; now when a man is so set upon some
outward form that he walks in, or has taken up, as that he cannot without
flying out, and showing much passion, much of man, hear a word against any
thing or principle by him taken up, it argues he puts too much in that outward
form, though he may be in the right as to the thing, yet this argues him to
put too much in it. Thus the Jews in the two and twentieth of the Acts, they
gave Paul audience till he came to those words, Depart, for I will send thee
far hence unto the Gentiles; and they gave him audience unto this word, and
then lift up their voices, and said, away with such a fellow from the earth,
for it is not fit that he should live, verse. 21.22. This because it did
derogate from their outward privileges, and their way of a National Church,
that now the Gospel should go from them unto the Gentiles, they can bear no
longer, but passionately cry out? Away with such a fellow from the earth, for
it is not fit that he should live.

4 When a man's glorying and boasting lies chiefly in that, when a man makes
this the great matter of his glorying and boasting, that he is in such or such
a way, as many poor souls will do, they boast of this, that they are for, or of
such a way, of those that hold such an opinion, etc. When a man makes any
outward thing the matter of his glorying he puts too much in that. This Paul
would not do, and therefore when the false Apostles made a glorying in outward
things, as Circumcision, etc. he says, Gal. 6.14. God forbid, that I should
glory save in the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified to me, and I unto the world, he makes spiritual things, as the
Cross of Christ, the Death of Christ, and his being crucified with Christ, and
dying with Christ, and that in opposition to outward things, as Circumcision,
etc. which the false Apostles gloried in, the only matter of his glory, showing
us that when we make our greatest boast, and glorying of outward things, we put
too much in those things, and also that the great glorying of a Christian
should be in inward things, his being crucified with Christ, being like
Christ, etc. Yea such glorying in outward things, he calls a glorying after
the Flesh, 2 Cor. 11.18. Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory
also; the best of outward things, when we come to glory in these, and make our
boast of these, our glorying and boasting will be found but a carnal fleshly
boasting.

5 When a man likes that truth, which otherwise he loves, the worse, because it
comes not to him fully in his own way; it argues he puts too much in that
outward way. As suppose, two godly men deliver the same Truth, one in an
Independent (as they say) the other a Presbyter, and put the case I were a
Presbyter, I dislike the Truth because it is an Independent, one of another way
speaks it; another is an Independent, he dislikes because a Presbyter speaks
it; both these show that they put too much in their own way, because they love
the Truth, which only is to be loved and embraced for it self, the better, or
the worse, because it comes in, or out of their way. Truth was truth in Apollos
his mouth, and Aquila and Priscilla heard him, when he preached in the
Synagogue, yet it is said that he knew only the Baptism of John, and had but
a dark and confused, not a perfect knowledge in the way of the Lord till
afterward, Aquila and Priscilla took him, and expounded the way of God to him
more perfectly, Acts 24.25, 26. From which instance, I conclude this, that a
man may, and it was the practice of Primitive Saints, to hear those who were
not Members of visible Churches, but strangers to them, if so be the things
they taught were truth; for Aquila and Priscilla Church Members, hear Apollo,
who was either a stranger to them, and if so, then it was an use to hear
strangers; of it known to them (which is most likely he was not till
afterward) then did they know that he knew only the Baptism of John, and was
not clear as yet in his principles for the way of the Lord, and yet they heard
him.

Use 5. Then you which are Gospel Saints follow the Spirit; the mistakes of the
Saints do not arise from the want of the Spirit to teach them and guide them,
so much as from their not observing the way of the Spirit, and following of it;
Saints have the Spirit promised to teach and lead them, but they do not follow
their Leader; and hence grow all those mistakes and errors that are in
Believers, from their not following their Leader. Had we but so much heavenly
wisdom and grace as observe the goings of the Spirit, and to follow him in his
own way or path, we should not miss the will of God so frequently as we do;
seldom does a Saint mistake but he shall find, if he do but look back where
his mistake began, that there he did cease to follow his Leader; either he did
turn aside to pride, curiosity or somewhat which he should not have done, and
there the Spirit which* before sensibly went along with him, left him, so that
he went about groping after that truth; which before he saw by another inward
secret light, only by the light of his own reason and natural understanding;
so that sometimes a Soul which is taught by the Spirit, can say, here and here
I left to follow my Leader, and ever since I have been in the dark; whilst I
went along humbly seeking after truth and the will of God, as God should make
out the same to me, I saw thingsclear, and with much evidence and inward light
things were made out to me, but at such a time I remember after I had got a
little light into such a truth, I grew proud, and self-conceited, and wanton
with what I had attained, and there I sensibly found the Spirit left me, and
ever since I have been seeking after that truth, but have not had that inward
light to direct me, nor than evidence nor clearness concerning the things I
have found out as before I had.

Quest. But how shall I come to this, to follow the Spirit?

Answ. 1. Observe, when the Spirit of God goes before thee, either in the
discovery of any truth, or helping thee in any thing that concerns thy
practice; sometimes the Spirit of God goes so manifestly with a Believer,
either in the helping of him in the knowledge of some truth, or performance of
some duty, that a Believer can say, Now I know of a truth that the Spirit of
God is with me, and here and here he has helped me. He beholds himself to see
things with another light than at other times he has done; and such a light,
as though he would give a world for the same yet can he not attaint it when
he would; and he feels himself to be helped, and assisted by another
strength, so as that he can say, I know now I have light from the Spirit, and
strength from it; the Spirit of God is with me, goes before me, hitherto it
has helped me. Now observe, such times as these are, when the Spirit of God
goes before thee.

Quest. But put the case the Spirit of God goes before me, and I do not know
the same, how shall I come to know it?

Answ. There are three things, or three ways by which thou may know it:

1 By the present light and life it brings with it; First, if it be in matter
of teaching that it goes before thee, it brings light; which is an inward
discovery in a way of Spiritual reasons, and demonstration of the thing it
teaches to the Soul, carrying with it a strong and powerful conviction of the
truth, and certainty of the thing it teaches, unto the Soul that is taught, so
as that, that very thing which the Soul formerly sought oftentimes after, by
Natural light and reason, and yet remained in the dark, and could come to no
certain conclusion about it, is now in an inward and secret, and spiritually
rational way made clear to it, so as that the Soul can say, I now see, and
know, and believe that such a thing is, and how it is truth; this inward light
is much better seen and discerned in that Soul where it is, when it is, then
either then or at another time can be expressed by that Soul. This light in
Scripture is called Revelation, Matthew. 11.27. No man knows the Son but the
Father, neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever
the Son will reveal him, 1 Corinthians. 2.10. But God has revealed them unto us by
his Spirit, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of glory, may give unto you the spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
knowledge of him, the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints. And the inspiration of the Almighty, Job 32.8. But
there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. To difference the same from that light which is from Natural
reason, or relation of others.

Christ's Love to his own. One SERMON on
Joh. 13.1. Having loved his own which were in the World, he loved them unto
the end.


THese words are brought in by the Evangelist as the result or issue of Christ's
actual thoughts of leaving this World, and going to his Father; Jesus knew that
his hour was come -- Christ was now pondering in his mind that the time grew
near, the hour was come that he must now depart out of this World to the
Father, and leave his poor Children behind him in the World; his heart now
seems to be wholly possessed and taken up with such thoughts, my time is come, I
must depart out of this World, I must go to the Father, I must leave my poor
Disciples behind me in it; and what does such cogitations revolved to and fro
in his mind produce? why, new actings of love, fresh yernings of bowels
toward his, that he was now to leave, having loved his own which were now in
the World, he loved them unto the end -- he had love before to his own, but
now these cogitations raise his love, sets all his love on work; that as his
heart thought of nothing so much as this, I must now leave the world; so it
vents forth it self in nothing so much as in this, love to his poor Children
that he was to leave behind him, and therefore if from hence to the hour of
his death ye trace Christ, ye shall see nothing but the actings of love, the
greatest love that can be.

1 He does them a service of love in washing their feet.

2 He institutes and administers an Ordinance of Love, the Supper of the Lord.

3 He preaches a long Sermon of love, and

4 He makes a prayer of love, chap. 17.

Nothing but love now appears in Christ to his, he forgets all their faults,
their doubtings, etc. and he can think and speak of nothing but love.

And let me but a little reminde you of the time when this love did work so
strongly, it was just then when Christ was going to dye; one would have thought
now Christ should have been taken up about himself, pondering upon what he was
to suffer; no, he forgets himself in a manner, and can think of nothing but
his Children? and therefore all his care is, not how he might get through his
Sufferings, but how they might live comfortably when he should be gone, Having
loved his own, he loved them to the end. What blessed dying thoughts were
here in Christ, not malicious thoughts, not revengeful, not murmuring nor
repining, because he was to dye; not roaring and blaspheming, but thoughts of
love to his.

Doct. Christ's love to his own is a choice and an everlasting love.

In the handling of this point I shall show;

1 Who are meant by Christ's own. 2 In what respects they are called Christ's
own. 3 That Christ has a love to his own. 4 That this love it is a choice
and an everlasting love.
1 Who are meant by Christ's own?

Ans. 1. Not all men, it is clear from the Text; for,

1 It is said he loved his own in the World, not all the World his own;
Christ's own that his love runs out unto, are clearly distinguished from the
world, being not called the world, but a people in the world.

2 His own here are such and such only as are loved with an everlasting love,
for having loved his own, he loved them unto the end; but so Christ has not
loved all the World, for then none should ever perish, but so he has loved all
that are his own.

2 By own here, we are to understand Believers, receivers of him, such as for
the present did, or for future should believe on him, as Joh. 17.20. Neither
pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through
their words.

But in what respects are Believers called Christ's own?

Ans. 1. They are his own by Donation, or gift of his Father; what a man has
by gist is his own, Christ has Believers by gift of his Father, Joh. 6.37.
All that the Father gives me shall come to me; therefore comers or believers
are the Fathers gift, John 10. 27, 28, 29. My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which
gave them me, is greater than all, John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for
the world, but for them which thou have given me, etc. And who are they? Ans.
Believers, as verse. 20. which shall believe on me through their word.

2 They are Christ's own by purchase; Purchase gives a right, Christ has a
right in his by purchase, Acts 20.28. Take heed -- to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood.

3 They are Christ's own by powerful conquest, Christ has not only purchased
them of his Father, but he has fought for them, and won them by conquest.
There are five or six potent enemies that Christ pitched field with for the
gaining of his own, and has won them by conquest out of the hands of them all.

1 Divine JUSTICE and displeasure; Man was no sooner fallen from God, but he fell
into the hands of Justice, Justice having the Creature in bonds will not
release him without satisfaction made. Christ's own (who were in the bulk of
fallen Mankind) being now with the rest in the hands of Justice, Christ goes
and surrenders up his own life in the stead of theirs, and by dying conquers
Justice, and so wins those which were his own, (for whom lie dyed) out of
Justices hands.

2 SIN. As man by the fall was a prisoner to Justice, so a subject to Sin.
Christ's own being in this vassalage with the rest, under the guilt of sin, and
power of it, Christ that he might ransom, and redeem his own, incounters this
enemy likewise, giving a deadly blow to it, as Romans 6.6. Knowing this, that our
old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin; and by this his engagement he gains his
own out the hands of sin, from under the guilt of it, and the dominion
likewise. This remarkable conquest of Christ over sin in the behalf of his own,
we have recorded, 1 Cor. 5.55, 56, 57. O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law. But thanks be to God which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Where we have a list of those potent enemies that Christ by conquest
has rescued his own out of the hands of, three of them being brought in
together; the first is Death, which through Christ's Conquest is swallowed up
into victory, verse. 54. The second is Sin. The third is the Law; over all which
Christians through Christ have the victory, verse. 57. and may boldly triumph, O
death, where is thy sting?

3 Which is one in die former List, and none of the least or weakest, is the
LAW. Man fallen from God falls under the curse and condemnation of the Law, the
Law curses him, and condemns him; darts down all its thunderbolts upon the head
of the sinner. Christ now seeing his own among the rest lying under a curse, a
sentence of condemnation; that he might regain his own, he puts himself under
the Curse, and says, Curse me, O Law, but deliver, and let go my own; the Law
streightway bends all its power against Christ, and turns the edge of its
curses upon him, but falling upon a mighty one, the Law is vanquished, and
overcome, and all its Curses being plucked out of its hands, Christ takes up
his own, and in a triumphant manner carries them away from under the curse of
the Law. This is lively set forth, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, cursed is every
one that hangs on a tree.

4 The WORLD. Christ's own in the Text are said to be in the world; how in the
world? in the world as a friend? No, but in the world as a mortal enemy, that
hates, malignes them, would if it could eat them up, Joh. 15.19. If ye were of
the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Christ
seeing his own in the hands of such an Enemy, ingageth this Enemy likewise, and
will not quit the field till he has got the Conquest, and broken the power of
this Enemy, and so redeemed his own, as Joh. 16. last. These things I have
spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace; in the world ye shall have
tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.

5 The DEVIL. The Devil is the Laws and Justices Jailer. Man by his falling
from God, coming under the power of the Law, and Justice, falls into the
hands of this Jailer. Christ seeing his own in the crowd among the rest, now in
the hands of this powerful, and cruel Jailer, that he might ransom his own,
he falls upon this Jailer, pitcheth a field with this potent Prince of
darkness, and having given him a total foil, he carries his own away as the
glorious and triumphant spoils and trophies of his victory. This Conquest is
set forth, Col. 2.15. And having spoiled principalities, and powers, he made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them in it.

6 And lastly. HELL. Hell is the Devils prison; Christ's own among the rest
through man's fall, and the enmity of Satan the Jailer, were in danger to be
cast into this prison: Christ seeing this, assaults the Jailer, breaks open the
prison doors, and in token of victory has the Keys of the prison delivered
into his hands. As when a General conquers a City or Castle, the Keys in token
of victory are delivered into his hands; So Christ having conquered the Jailer,
and broken open the prison, has the Keys delivered to him. And hereby Christ
frees his own from all fears of being cast into this prison, for the Keys are
not now in the hands of Satan the Jailer who is their enemy, but in the hands
of Christ who is their loving friend, and has therefore gotten the Keys into
his hand, that they might not be cast in, Rev. 1.18. I am he that lives and
was dead; and behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen, and have the Keys of
Hell, and of Death.

Lay all together, and it will evidently appear, that Christ has a right, a
glorious right unto his own by Conquest, for he has fought for them with many
potent enemies, and by the strength of his Almighty Arm, wrested them out of
the hands of them all, who therefore now himself alone, and no other has the
right, the only right to challenge them as his own.

4 They are Christ's own by Compact, or Covenant, The Father having by Covenant
put them into Christ's hands: They are not only given (as before) but given by
Covenant, for when Christ stood a common person, a Covenant was drawn up
betwixt the Father and him; in which Christ Covenanted on his part to satisfy
the Fathers Justice, the Father again Covenanted to give to Christ a seed, this
is expressed Isa. 53.10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him
to grief: When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his
seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
in his hand. This Covenant (as says a godly man of our times) is Dialogue-wise
expressed, Isa. 49. where Christ at the first and second verses, begins showing
his Commission and Qualification, and asking what he should have for so great
a work? God answers verse. 3. and offers low, only the Elect of Israel. Christ
who was now making his bargain, thought these too few, and therefore says, If
that were all, he should labor in vain, verse. 4. yet tells God he would do
his work, though it were but for these, comforting himself in this, his reward
should be with God: Hereupon God comes off more friendly. Is is a light thing
that thou should be my servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the preserved of Israel; as to say, that is not worth the dying for, I
value thy sufferings more than so, I will give thee for a salvation to the ends
of the earth, So that Christ struck up a Covenant with the Father in behalf of
those he saves, and all that are his own, they are his by Covenant.

5 They are Christ's own by Jointure or Inheritance. What a man has as a
Jointure, or an Inheritance may be called his own; Believers are Christ's own
in this respect, Deuteronomy. 32.9. For the Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the
lot of his inheritance, Zach. 2.12. And the Lord shall inherit Judah his
portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.

6 They are Christ's own by a resignation of themselves, and all they have, and
a subjection to him. When a man has resigned himself, and all he has to
another, and subjected himself to be wholly ruled and governed by him,
acknowledging all homage and obedience due to him, he may be called that
other, and not his own. Thus Believers are Christ's own, believing they embrace
him for a King, as well as for a Savior, Rev. 15.3. King of Saints.

7 They are Christ's own by possession. Possession (the Proverb says) is an
eleven points of the Law; the meaning is, that a man that has possession will
lay a great claim to right, especially if a man have possession in a just and a
legal way, then possession is a double right. Christ has believers for his own
in this respect, for he dwells in them by his Spirit, 1 Cor 6.19. What, know
ye not that your body is the Iemple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which
ye have of God, and ye are not your own. By faith, Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by faith.

8 They are Christ's own by Marriage-union. Christ has linked believers to
himself in the bond of spiritual marriage, he having betrothed them to
himself, Hos. 2.19, 20. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea I will
betroth thee unto me in righteousness, in judgment, and in loving kindness,
and in mercies. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou
shall know the Lord. So that as when a man and woman are married, the husband
may say to his wife, Thou art my own, and the wife to the husband, thou art my
own; each challenging propriety in one another: So Christ and believers, Christ
may say of the believer he is my own and the believer of Christ, and thou Lord
art my own.

9 They are Christ's own by membership, being members of that spiritual
invisible body of which Christ is head, which is set forth under the Parable of
the Vine and branches, Joh. 15. and as the head may say of every member, this
is mine, that is, a member belonging to that body of which I am head; so may
Christ say of every believing man and woman, this man and woman is my own, for
he, she is a member of that body to which I am head.

3 That Christ has a love to his own, appears

1 From the very nature of propriety, which loves that thing I have a propriety
in above other. A Father loves his child above another: Why? he has a
propriety in it, it is his own. The husband loves his wife, she is his own.
Propriety is a begetter of affection.

2 From that special respect he has to them above others.

1 He has special pity and compassion toward them in all their sufferings,
Isa. 63.9.) In all their affection he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them; in his love, and in his pity he redeemed them and be
bare them, and carried them all the days of old. Heb. 4.15. For we have not
an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin, Chap. 5.2.
Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way,
for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity.

2 He has a special eye over them to see to it that none hurt them, Psalm.
105.12, 13, 14, 15. When they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and
strangers in it. When they went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom
to another People, he suffered no man to do them wrong; yea he reproved Kings
for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

3 He has a special care of them to see they shall not want.

4 That this love of Christ to his own, is a choice, and an everlasting love.

1 It is a choice love, for,

1 It is Father-like love, Psalm. 103.13. Like as a father pitieth his children,
so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.

2 It is a conjugal love. What love more choice than Marriage-love, it is to
be loved as a man loves himself, Ephesians. 5.28. So ought men to love their wives
as their own bodies. Christ has married believers, his love to them is
Marriage-love.

3 It is dying love. Such love as makes him dye for the party loved. This is
the greatest love of all, Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man than this, that
a man lay down his life for his friends. If greatest love be dying love, then
Christ did not dye for all (as some will have it) for he does not love all
with the greatest love.

2 It is Everlasting love.

1 Love arising from an everlasting cause, where the cause is everlasting, the
effect must be so too. What is the cause why Christ loves believers? Why,
merely his good will and leisure, he loves because he will love. This cause
being everlasting, the effect must be also everlasting.

2 Love supported by everlasting Pillars.

1 The Pillar of his Unchangeablenesse, Heb. 13.3. Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Mal. 3.6. For I am the Lord, I change not.

2 The Pillar of his Truth and Faithfulness. Christ is the true and faithful
one. It is a part of unfaithfulness to love a while, and then to cease to
love; Christ is no such lover.

3 The Pillar of his everlasting remembrance. Isa. 49.15.16. Can a woman forget
her sucking-childe, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her
womb? yea they may forget, yet will not I forget thee. Behold, I have graven
thee upon the Palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me.

FOR APPLICATION. As there are two things mainly held forth in the Text, both
which I have in the doctrinal part spoken unto. 1 That believers are Christ's
own. 2 That Christ loves his own with a peculiar and everlasting love. So in my
Application I shall speak someching to both.

For the first, Is it so that believers are Christ's own? Then,

1 Christ will not see his own want. Will a Father see his child want, when it
lies in his power to help him? Will a loving husband see his wife want, when it
lies in his power to supply her? He will not, she is his own; the child is
the fathers own; the wife is the husbands own; And think you will Christ see
his own want? Is his care less than a fathers? love less than a husbands? Do
thou want inward, outward wants, go to Christ and say, Lord I am thy own, and
will thou not provide this and that for me?

2 Let wicked men take heed how they wrong believers. Though a father can bear
to see another child wronged, yet not his own; a husband another woman abused,
yet not his own wife, this provokes him, he cannot bear it, but cries out, Why
do you wrong my child? Why do you abuse my wife? Christ will not bear it to
see his own wronged, but those that wrong them shall pay dearly for it. When
God brought Israel out of Egypt, Israel was Gods Son, Hos. 11.1 When Israel was
a child, then I loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt. Amaleck as Israel
was in the way falls upon him, God gives Amaleck a crushing blow at present,
and observe it, four hundred years after God thinks of this, and destroys
Amaleck for it, 1 Samuel 15.2, 3. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I remember that
which Amaleck did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way when he came
up from Egypt. Now go and smite Amalecke, and utterly destroy all that they
have, and spare them not, but slay both man and woman, infant, and suckling,
ox and sheep, Camel, and Ass. Yea observe Mat. 25. Christ at the last day
will pass sentence for, or against men, as they have behaved themselves to his.

3 Let not Saints injure one another. If a Father have many children, and the
one wrongs the other, he takes it ill, Why? because all are his own, and he
will not see his own wronged by his own; so Christ will not take it kindly at
the hands of those Saints who wrong and injure their brethren, because they are
all his own, and he will not see any of his own wronged by any whomsoever;
David was a man after Gods own heart, yet an injury done to Uriah a godly man,
cost him dear. Aaron and Miriam were both Saints, yet but for speaking against
Moses in an unbeseeming manner, the anger of the Lord was kindled against them,
and Miriam is smitten with the Leprosy, Numb. 12. For the second, Is the love
of Christ to his own, a choice and an everlasting love? then,

1 A Saint can never fall from the love of Christ; though he may fall so as to
loose the manifestation of it, yet never the love it self, which is
everlasting. If a Soul once in Christ's love might fall from it, how should his
love be everlasting?

2 How blessed is the condition of the poorest believer; he is a man beloved of
Christ, every believer may be called Jedidiah, the beloved of the Lord, one
loved with an everlasting love. Is in accounted a privilege among men to have
the love of a great man, whose love is like himself, fading and changeable? O
what is it to have the love of Christ, King of Kings? whose love also is as
himself, immutable, everlasting. Christ's Favorites are never cast out of
favor.

3 How then do Saints injure Jesus Christ?

1 By calling his love upon every turn into question; I fear Christ does not
love me, such a time, such a day, in such a duty, I had his love, but now I
fear I have lost it. What injury is this to the love of Christ? He says, my
love it everlasting, Soul, I will love thee freely, and I will love thee for
ever, for ever; thou say, once I had his love, but now I have lost it.

2 By measuring his love by theirs; When I make my love to Christ a measure, to
measure. Christ's love to me by. If I love Christ much, then I think Christ
loves me much; if I love Christ a little, then I think he loves me but a
little; and if I love Christ not at all, then I think he loves me not at all.
What a dishonor is this to the love of Christ, to hang it upon my love, as it
the same were greatned or lessened by my love, were much, little, or not at
all, as mine is. I confess, in respect of the manifestation of love it is so
oftentimes, but for the love it self that is not so changeable? for it is
immutable and everlasting.

4 Take heed of sinning against this love; If Christ's love be everlasting, sin
not against everlasting love, grieve not everlasting love by sinning. You think
perhaps the thing you commit is but little, O know this, the less the thing is
for which you grieve everlasting love, the greater is your sin, that for so
little a thing you will grieve everlasting love. Consider Saints, Christ says
(as it were) to you, Souls if you will sin, you shall sin against everlasting
love, you shall trample my love.

5 Serve God freely, and without fear, out of pure love; if Gods love did
depend upon our walking, then we might fear, but when it does not so, but is
everlasting, what hinders but that we should serve cheerfully without fear.

6 Labor to get a portion of this love; Sinners, Sinners, would you have
portions? seek a portion of this love; Do want a portion for thy self, art
poor, etc. beg a portion of this love; say, Lord, though I have nothing else,
I shall have enough if thou will give me a portion of this love. Fathers,
Mothers, do you want portions for your Children (and it may be damn your Souls
to get them) O seek a portion of this love for them; a Child which is left
here with such a portion though he have nothing else, is better than that
Child which is heir to ten thousand pounds a year. Mothers, go home now and
tell your Children, Children, I have heard of the love of Christ, O that thou
would seek this portion, Child. And poor Servants, and people that work all
the week long, go now together and say, we have heard of the love of Christ,
where is everlasting rest, O that we had that for our portion, good Lord give
us our portion there.

Quest. But is there any hope of attaining this love?

Answ. Yes, this love is a free love, Hosen 14.4. I will heal their
backsliding, I will love them freely; etc. say, why not I have it?

Q. But is this free to Sinners?

A. Yes, Romans 5.8. But God commends his love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners Christ dyed for us; would Christ give his life for Sinners,
and will he not give his love to Sinners? Nay, it was his love made him give
his life.

Q. But how shall I come by this love?

A. I say no more but this, Go to Christ for it, go ask Christ for it; say,
Lord give me thy love, I have heard so much that I am taken with thy love,
Lord give me thy love. I say, come to Christ, cast thy self upon Christ in the
Promise; say, Lord, thou have said thou will love freely, and why not me
freely; and for encouragement, let me leave that sweet word with you, Joh.
6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that comes to me
I will in no wise cast out. Him that comes I will in no wise cast out,
whatsoever he comes for.

True Gospel Humiliation. One SERMON on
Zach. 12.10. And I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they shall look
upon him whom they have peirced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns
for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in
bitterness for his first borne.


THis whole Chapter is nothing else but a bundle of precious Promises laid down
in a Prophetical manner, of great and glorious things to the Church and people
of God in the last days. It tells us what God will do to, and against the
enemies of his Church, and what God will do for, and in his people; and
therefore if you observe it, the Prophecy of this Chapter, verse 1. it is
called, the burden of the Lord for Israel, Mal. chap. 1.1. calls his the burden
of the Lord to Israel, because what he spoke was mostly against Israel, in way
of reproving them for their sins, and so it was directed to them; this is the
burden of the Lord for Israel, because what is here spoken, it is either
something that God will do against his enemies in the behalf of Israel, for
Isreal's sake; or somewhat which God in a way of Grace and Mercy will do to
Israel, or bestow upon Israel, though I take it, it is called the burden of the
Lord for Israel in the first respect, in respect of what God in the last days
will do for Israel against his enemies, for if we take it for what God in a
way of Mercy will do to Israel, it cannot so properly be called a burden; now
here we find God in verse. 1. being now to appear for Israel against his
enemies, coming forth in the greatness of his power, be comes forth (as the
Psalmist speaks) like a Giant refreshed with wine, and (as Esaias says) as one
that would work and none should let it; the first sight we have of him, we
behold him in the greatness of his power, says the Lord, which stretches
forth the Heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth, he comes as one
traveling in the greatness of his strength, mighty to save; and as he
appears in the greatness of his strength, so of his Wisdom too, that forms
the spirit of man within him, as to say? his Wisdom is far beyond the
wisdom of any man, or of all men put together, for whatever is in any man or
men it is from him, he has put it in them, he foreth the spirit of man within
him. Thus God comes forth, being to march against his enemies in the behalf of
his people, in the greatness of his Strength and Wisdom, as one that is able
to do it, and will carry the day; and to the end that all his Adversaries
might quake and tremble at the very news and noise of such an enemy, so
wonderful in power and policy coming against them.

But you will say, What does God do now he is up? why, as he arises in the
greatness of his power and wisdom, so being up, he does great and wonderful
things, and therefore at the very beginning he calls for a behold from his
people, verse. 2. Behold -- denoting that he would have his people in an
especial manner to attend unto, and observe the things he was at present doing,
and about to do. Now what are they? why you find in the following words and
verses, some things that he would do against his enemies, and some things for
his people.

As first, he would make Jerusalem a cup of trembling, etc. As a man that
drinks up a cup of Poison, through the operation of that within him, is
inwardly filled with trembling, the Natural spirits and vitals, whilst they are
in combat with the Poison, do tremble; so all those which should head, and be
gathered together against Gods Judah and Jerusalem, thinking to drink up
Jerusalem, and to devour her, they shall find Jerusalem to be unto them like a
cup of Poison, it should set them all on trembling, and instead of ruining
Jerusalem they should be ruined by her.

And again, verse. 3. In that day (i.e. in the last days, as I shall clear
afterward) will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone? -- as a man that offers
to take up a great stone too heavy and weighty by far for him to bear;
sinkes down under the same and is crushed to pieces by it; so those, whosoever
they be, though all the earth be gathered together, which shall make War
against Gods Jerusalem, thinking to dispose of and carry her about at their
pleasure, shall find her to be so weighty a burden, that they shall even
sink down under her, and be crushed in pieces by her.

And again verse. 3. I will smite every horse with astonishment, and his Rider
with madness, and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah. Horse and
Horsemen we know are the strength of an Army. Now when a Horse is filled with
astonishment, we see he flies back, and instead of offending the enemy, he
destroys friends, and so proves the ruin of those who march out with him: And
when a Horse is blind, he is of no use at all to do any service in a way of
offense or defense. And when a man is mad, and has lost the use of his reason,
he can make no more difference than a very beast betwixt friends and foes, but
falls upon all alike, and ever upon those that are next to him: So that it is
as if God should say, In that day when multitudes of wicked men, and the
enemies of my Sion shall be gathered together against her, thinking to destroy
her, and root her out for ever, then will I do this, I will open my eyes --
i.e. I will cast a gracious and a merciful eye upon my Judah; and for her sake
I will make Horse and Horsemen, i.e. the whole strength and power of the enemy
altogether unserviceable for the doing of any hurt or prejudice to my Sion, or
for the defending of themselves from Sions stroke, which shall fall upon them,
and serviceable only for the ruining and destroying of themselves, and of one
another.

And again verse 5. Here we have a Prophecy concerning the Governors of
Judah, as concernig Judahs enemies in the former verses; and what is it? Why
this, The Governors of Judah shall say in their heart -- it seems to me, from
this verse, and likewise from the seventh, that the first glorious appearing of
God at this time, it shall be amongst the common people, the tents of Judah,
as verse. 7. i.e. such as have not sumptuous Palaces to dwell in, but are right
Jacobs, plain men dwelling in Tents, poor people, or the meaner sort of people;
not the poorest of all who have no Tents, no place of habitation, but are very
vagrants and beggars; nor the richest, who have their Palaces and royal
houses, but a middle sort of people, living in a plain, but an honorable and
comely way, as the way of living in Tents was, these shall God first gloriously
appear amongst; and the reason seems to be given in the seventh verse, That
the glory of the house of David -- i.e. that such as are of Princely and noble
blood, dwelling in Courts and sumptuous Palaces, or depending upon such
places, may not magnify themselves against, i.e. may not (as all along from
the beginning of the world to this time, it has been an usual custom, for
noble men, great men, learned men, to magnify themselves against, and despise
others) exalt themselves above poor, meaner, ignoble, unlearned men, thinking
themselves better than they, and despising of the other in their eyes: no, but
that they may clearly see, that what these want in other things which they
have, God has over, and above made up to them in his glorious appearances
amongst them, and discoveries of himself to them. Now I say, God shall first
begin to work not upon the Governors themselves, but upon the common people,
or the middle sort of people, which shall be under their rule and government,
Gods first glorious appearances shall be amongst these, which shall dwell in
Tents, and the Governors they seeing this, how wonderfully God does appear for
this people, and owns them, shattering all that do but lift up a hand against
them to pieces, and brings all plots and counsels against them to nothing, they
shall be so strangely convinced, that they shall say in their hearts, i. e.
privately, it may be either for shame, or for some other carnal by-respect,
they shall not own them publicly, any farther than as they are Magistrates, to
use means for their defense, or as they clearly see them to be loyal subjects,
so to allow them as subjects their liberty to serve and worship God according
as they are convinced his will is, and they ought to do; but yet they shall say
in their hearts* the inhabitants of Jerusalem my strength (for this ( shall
be) is but put into the Text) in the Lord of Hosts their God; as to say, Well,
now we plainly see where our strength lies, this is the very people we must
own and stick too, or assuredly we go down, for this we clearly behold* that
the Lord of Hosts is their God, and if we do but stick to this people, we
shall have their God going along with us, and therefore without any longer
controversy here lies our strength, we stand or fall, in owning or disowning
this people.

Again verse. 7. We have somewhat more spoken concerning the Governors of
Judah by way of Prophecy, and that is, Gods glorious appearance for them, and
in their behalf, they no sooner come to own the people of God, though it be
but secretly, to say, surely these are Gods people, here lies our strength, we
will therefore stick to these, but presently God sticks to them, and appears
for them, and makes them terrible to all theirs, and his peoples adversaries
(no sooner does any state own Gods people, but he owns them.) Now what is it,
is spoken of the Governors of Judah? Why this, I will make the Governors of
Judah like a hearth of fire -- You know, take ever so much wood and lay it on a
hearth of fire, and the hearth of fire makes away with it, and it is consumed:
And take a sheaf or stack of corn, though ever so great, and put but a torch
into it, and that will consume it all immediately; so says God, shall the
Governors of Judab be, they shall consume and devour all the people, on the
right hand, and on the left, etc. we see here (by the by) what is the way to
make a state or a Kingdom happy, to make them prosperous and terrible to all
Gods enemies, why, to own the people of God.

In verse. 8. We have a precious Prophetical promise made to the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, as of Gods protection over them, In that day shall the Lord defend.
-- So likewise of his wonderful blessing that shall in the last days be upon
them, in the abundant increase of their gifts and graces: God will not only
preserve their bodies from the rage and fury of wicked men, but he will
exceedingly enrich their souls with the heavenly blessings of his Grace and
Spirit; He that is feeble among them at that day, shall be as David, -- that
is, poor, weak, feeble Saints shall at this time have as much knowledge, and
grace as David, i.e. as the most eminent of all informer ages, for David was
the most eminent in his age, And the house of David shall be as God, -- that
is, such as before were eminent in gifts and grace, shall now have their gifts
and graces so exceedingly increased, that they shall seem rather like Angels
than men.

In the following verses to the end of the Chapter, we have a repetition of
what went before, in which, that which had been more largely treated of in the
foregoing verses, viz. Gods preservation his people from their enemies, and
ruining of his enemies, is but briefly touched verse. 9. and that which had been
but touched before, viz. of the pouring out of the Spirit in verse. 8. is now
more fully opened and handled, in the verse of the Text, and the following
verses.

And I will pour upon the house of David -- The Text (as the whole Chapter) is
a glorious Prophecy made to the last times. In it we have,

1 A promise of a gracious effusion or pouring forth of the Spirit, wherein we
have,

1 Who poures and that is God. I will pour.

2 Upon whom, i.e. The house of David, by which may be understood men of a
higher rank; the house of David was the Royal house, and those that came there
of were of the Blood Royal. -- And the inhabitants of Jerusalem, i.e. men of a
lower rank; the meaning is, God will in these days pour out his Spirit upon
all sorts, high and low, Prince and people, as Joel says, Chap. 2. end. All
flesh. These words literally they are spoken of the Jews when they shall be
converted, spiritually they belong to Christians.

3 What he poures, the Spirit, which has here two things attributed to it, or
two titles given it. First, A Spirit of grace, so called, either because it is
the original, or begetter of all grace in us, or because it is given us of
grace: The gift of the Spirit, is a gift of free grace. I rather incline to
this than the former, because so it is more distinct from the next, of
supplications, because prayer or supplication is one special grace of the
Spirit; which if we take the first, the Spirit of Grace, that is so called,
because it begets grace, then the latter, viz. Supplications, which is one
special grace begotten by the Spirit in the hearts of Saints, is included in
it, unless we shall take the first of grace, for the habits of grace which are
first wrought in the Soul by the Spirit; and the latter or Supplications, for
the actings of those graces, one Spiritual work wherein much grace is
exercised, being put for the exercise of all grace.

4 When he pours; this though it be out of the text, yet it is a necessary
question, and it is answered in the foregoing verse, where the time in which
God will do this is called that day. It is a phrase which is much used in the
Prophets, no less than forty times (as I take it) in Isaiah, and near twenty
in this Prophet; and it is called that day for eminency sake, because this time
when it shall come, it shall be a very eminent and remarkable time, such a time
for peace, joy, plenty, and prosperity, glory, and liberty to the Saints, and
bondage and captivity to the enemies of Gods people as the World never saw, and
therefore it is called that day.

1 Noting an eminent glorious day, far excelling all days that ever had gone
before it; and when it is called a day, we are not to understand it a Natural
day, i. e. consisting of twenty four hours; nor of an ordinary Prophetical day,
that is, a day for a year; but of an extraordinary day, such a day as Peter
speaks of, 2 Epist. 3. One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day. Now, the time which is set forth in Scripture by
this phrase of speech, that day, is sometimes taken for a larger, sometimes for
a stricter time; sometimes it is taken so strictly that it may contain not
much more time, if so much, as a mere Natural day, and so we have the day of
that great Battle of Armageddon, often called where it is spoken of, that day,
Rev. 16.14. and Joel 3. and other places; sometimes it is taken strictly, but
not so strictly, and then it is put for the whole time of Christ's Kingdom here
on earth, from the time that he sets up his Kingdom to the end; and this is so
frequently spoken of in the Prophets that I need name no place, only I will
turn you to one, because not far from the text. Zach. 14.6, 7, 8, 9. And it
shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not be clear, nor dark;
But it shall be one day, which shall be known to the Lord, not day nor night;
but it shall come to pass that at evening time it shall be light, and it shall
be in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem, half of them
toward the former Sea, and half of them toward the hinder Sea; in summer and in
winter shall it be, and the Lord shall be King over all the earth, in that day
shall there be one Lord, and his name one. Here we have Christ's Kingdom set
up, and the whole time of it is but one day, and that one day is all along
called that day; sometimes it is taken more largely, not only for the time of
Christ's Kingdom after he sets the same up, but for the last days also, the
days immediately before that time, wherein many glorious things, as the
spreading of the Gospel, the ruin of Antichrist, and the call of the Jews,
which if it be not before, yet it shall be just upon Christ's setting up of his
Kingdom, and so may have reference to the time before, or after the last
days, or the time of Christ's Kingdom; and in this sense it is here to be
taken as I conceive, for the time just upon Christ's setting up his Kingdom,
when Gods peoples enemies shall be ruined, the Jews called, and mourn, as here
we read of.

2 A glorious effect, following this effusion, or pouring forth of the Spirit,
which is twofold.

1 Upon the Senses, They shall look upon me whom they have peirced; which
words literally are spoken of the Jews, who at the time of their Call shall
behold that Jesus Christ whom their Nation have peirced. Spiritually, it is
true of all Believers looking upon that Christ by faith whom their sins have
peirced.

2 Upon the Affections, They shall mourn* which mourning is set forth by the
greatness of it, it shall be such a mourning, as when a man mourns for his
only Son, no grief or sorrow goes so near, as grief for loss of an only
Child; Ah! will a man say, had I lost of my estate it would never have
troubled me, but it is my Son, my only Son, I have never another, and then it
shall be bitterness; you know the nature of bitter things, things which are
bitter the taste of them will remain a great while, it sticks by a man; but
now bitterness, that is more, and denotes a higher degree than bitter, as the
abstract is more than the concret; so that this expression shows, that it
shall be an exceeding great mourning, and that so too as it shall stick by
them it shall not lightly pass off their spirits and glide away, and so be
forgotten, and there is no more of it, as other sorrow does, but it shall be
an exceeding great, and a remaining mourning, of which more is spoken in the
next verses.

The words thus opened, yield us several useful observations.

Obs. 1. That the pouring out of the Spirit upon any soul, is the proper and
peculiar work of God; it is not Men, nor means, nor Ordinances that can effect
this, but God alone, and therefore it is still attributed to him, Joel 2.28.
And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all
flesh, etc. Isa. 32.15. until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high, etc.
Christ himself as a Man had the Spirit poured upon him by the Father, Isa.
42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights; I
have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.
How many poor Souls are there that have good education, godly friends, and
Parents, sit under means and Ordinances, and yet are strangers to the Spirit;
many there are who all the year long come hither and hear the Word, and there
is no change in them, they were Drunkards, Swearers, etc. at the beginning of
the year, and so they are still; God has not poured down of his Spirit upon
them. O poor Souls, would you ever have the Spirit beg it of God*

Obs. 2. In the last days the pouring out of the Spirit shall be very general
-- on the house of David, inhabitants of Jerusalem, high and low: Joel says,
all flesh, chap. 2. end. Sons, Daughters, Young men, Old men. In the times of
the Law God gave his Spirit but only to some few extraordinary men, as
Prophets, etc. in the beginning of the Gospel, God poured it down upon many
more, upon Apostles, and many Brethren, but not all; but now in the last days
upon all flesh (for I take it, that this Prophecy of Joel relates to the last
days, though in the beginnings of it it was fulfilled in the Apostles time)
add so Ierem. 31.34. And they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall shall know me,
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord; speaking of
the last days it is said, They shall all know me. So Isa. 65.20. The child
shall dye an hundred years old, i. e. in knowledge, very Children shall have
the Spirit poured down upon them. O what a glorious time will this be, when
all the Saints shall be filled with the Spirit, when you cannot go to a Saint
but you shall find Gods Spirit breathing in him; and how should this stir up
every one of us upon whom these last days are coming, if not come, to labor
after the Spirit? Is it not a shame that the nearer this time comes, the more
Carnal instead of Spiritual we should be?

Obs. 3. All grace it from the Spirit of God, the spirit of grace -- we have no
grace in our Nature, but all is from the Spirit, as the fruits thereof, Gal.
5.22, 23. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance.

Obs. 4. The gift of the Spirit is the gift of Free Grace. This is taken from
those words, the Spirit of Grace, interpreted in the latter sense.

Obs. 5. One maine and special work that the Spirit of God puts Souls upon
where it is, is the work of Supplication, or Prayer -- and Supplications -- the
Spirit coming from God, it loves much to be carrying out those Souls where it
is to God; Prayer, it is a Natural work to that Soul where the Spirit is; and
as the Spirit of God puts Souls upon Prayer, so the Spirit of God acts the
Saints in Prayer; or as the Apostle says, Romans 8. Prays in them, sometimes by
enabling them with words, sometimes by filling them with groans unutterable,
i. e. a Soul that prays by the Spirit, he has inward groanings for many
things more than he can utter, it may be he speaks one Petition, and at that
instant groans for twenty; the groanings of the spirits in the Saints hearts
whilst they are in prayer, being far more large and extensive, than the
expressions of the mouth are, or can be; and which may be a matter of
abundant comfort to us, the answer of God is not according to the expressions
of our mouth, but the desires and groanings of his own Spirit. O would we know
then how to pray as we should! let us labor for the Spirit, we shall never
pray without it, perhaps we may speak good words, and fine expressions, as many
can, who yet never prayed in their lives, and know no more what Prayer means,
than I know the way to Rome; but alas, prayer does not lie in these things, in
speaking good Language, and putting up fine Petitions, if that be all; no,
Prayer is another thing, it is the breathings of the Spirit in the hearts of
the Saints after God, and to God; many times that soul prays, and that
excellently* powerfully, who perhaps is not able to speak a word, or if he do,
he is not able to speak ten words true sense together, when as another which
speaks fluently, and orderly, and that for hours together, perhaps prays not
a word all that time.

Observe. 6. In the last days there shall be a greater pouring forth of the
Spirit than ordinary. This I gather from the last thing in opening the words,
viz. the time when this shall be, that day. -- Hence the word pouring is much
used, when the giving of the Spirit in the last days is spoken of, denoting an
abundant measure of the Spirit which shall at this time be given forth, for
what was formerly, wherein God did as it were drop his Spirit, now he poures
it forth, and the reasons are because God has greater works to do in the last
days, and the Church comes nearer to man's estate, and the people of God have
more and greater enemies to encounter with than in former times they had, and
therefore God gives them more of the Spirit; what a mercy then is it to be
brought forth and to live in the last days? And how does it call upon us all,
the nearer these times draw on, to be the more spiritual?

Thus much for the Observations from the first part of the words, I come now to
the second; the effects of this pouring forth of the Spirit, They shall look on
him whom they have pierced. --

Observe. 7. The sins of believers do pierce Jesus Christ. This is implied, in
that they look upon him whom they have pierced.

Observe. 8. Christ must be looked upon as pierced by us before we can mourn.
They do not mourn, nor shed a tear till then.

Observe. 9. When Christ is looked upon as pierced by us, then we shall mourn.
They look on him, and do mourn.

Observe. 10. That mourning which arises from the beholding of a pierced
Christ, is a very bitter and grievous mourning. And they shall mourn for him as
one mourns for his only Son.

Observe. 11. None can thus look upon Christ, or mourn for him, but only those,
upon whom God pours his Spirit. I will pour out my Spirit -- and they shall
look -- and they shall mourn. --

I shall wave all these, and pitch upon one Observation from the latter part of
the words, which is this, viz,

Observe. True Gospel-humiliation does arise from a looking upon a pierced
Christ.

In the opening of this point, I shall show,

1 That it does not arise from any other thing, and does from this.

2 What manner of looking upon Jesus Christ that is, which does beget true
mourning, or Gospel-humiliation.

3 How this Gospel-humiliation is begotten in the soul, from a looking upon
Jesus Christ.

Of the first, That it does not arise from any other thing, and does from this.

1 It does not arise from nature: There is a kind of humility in many a man by
nature, but this is not Gospel-humility; and there is too, a natural sorrow,
but this is not Gospel-humiliation. This is an herb that grows not in Natures
garden; any other humiliation saving Gospel-humiliation may grow there.

2 It does not arise from imitation of others; the examples of others. Some
things which are not natural, are done by imitation, as an Ape will do many
things by imitation, which are not natural; but this does arise from hence,
seeing another humbled, and imitating him.

3 It does not arise from a sense or discerning of sin in a man. Many there are
who see their sin, and will acknowledge the same (natural light convincing
thereof) and cry out of it, and yet are strangers to Gospel-humiliation: Many a
one cries out of his Drunkenness, etc. and resolves against it, I have been so
and so; O but I think I will never do so more, I will turn over a new leaf,
etc. and yet are not humbled. Cain saw his sin, and run mad upon it, and Judas
saw it and hanged himself, and yet were not humbled. So men may sin till they
run mad, hang and drown themselves, and yet not humbled.

4 It does not arise from looking on the Law, and the threats thereof, and
pressing these on the soul. Some there are, who hearing of repentance, and
Gospel-humiliation, would fain get a repentance and humiliation of their own,
and hereupon they run to the Law, and read over and over the Threats, Curses,
and Damnations of the Law, thinking by this to do the deed, when alas poor
souls, they do but knock a flint to get water out of it, none comes, and they
knock, knock, knock their hearts, and the Law together, to bring forth the
water of repentance, and all to no purpose, none comes.

2 What manner of looking upon Christ is this, that does beget this
Gospel-humiliation?

Answ. It is not a looking upon Christ with the outward and bodily eyes. Thus
many saw Christ when he was here below; yea, thus they beheld Christ who yet
crucified him, and yet this did not beget Gospel humiliation in any that beheld
him only thus: And thus likewise every one shall see him when he comes, as
Rev. 1^7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they
also which pierced him; yet we read not that this shall humble any, who are
not otherwise humbled; indeed men's hearts shall fail them for fear, men shall
be gastered, and at their wits end; when the Drunkard and Sabbath-breaker, and
he that comes hither now to scoff and flout and jeer, shall see Christ coming
in flaming fire to take vengeance on him, they shall be at their wits end;
men's hearts shall fail them, the Captain, and the sturdy valiant Soldier
which now have hearts like Lions and Tigers, and will not be startled though
they meet with men or Devils, who have lived here profanely, drinking, and
swilling; their hearts who never failed them shall at this day when they shall
see Christ coming to take vengeance on profane persons, fail them, and shake
and quiver within them like an ashen leaf, and they shall cry to the mountains
and rocks to fall on them, etc. -- and yet for all this they shall be far from
having any work of Gospel-humiliation upon them, therefore it is not looking
upon Christ with the bodily eyes does it.

But that looking upon Christ which begets this true Gospel-humiliation, it is
looking upon Christ with a spiritual eye, an eye of faith, that is, looking
upon Jesus Christ not as if he were a man only like other men, walking here;
but as one that God the Father sent into the world to dye for the fins of poor
sinners; and who, when he was here did suffer death to this end, that he
might take their sins away; and by dying he has washed me, a poor foul
filthy sinner, and cleansed me from all my sins: When a poor Drunkard, etc.
who has lived like a Swine twenty, thirty, forty years, looks thus upon
Christ, he is ashamed of himself, and mourns bitterly for his sins; when he
can say, I have been such a vile Drunkard, such a Sot, such a Whoremaster, as
there has not been such another in the Country, and yet Christ dyed for me,
and has washed and cleansed me, this humbles thoroughly, this begets
Gospel-humiliation.

3 But how does this looking upon Christ as pierced for sin, beget this true
Gospel-humiliation?

Answ. 1. By clear convincing a man of sin; There is nothing in the world which
brings such clear and strong convictions of sin as this does; the Law has no
such convictions, as grace has, and beholding of Christ brings: the Law,
though it come and tell a sinner of a thousand sins he is guilty of; here, and
here, and here thou have failed, at such and such a time thou have been drunk,
been with thy Queans, yet the Law presently puts a man upon doing, which being
a very natural way, the poor sinner which had a wound quite through but even
now, comes and claps a duty or two on, and so all is healed up, and the man is
as whole as a fish, and now he thinks himself no sinner at all; and therefore
observe where ever the Law is most preached and urged, there men are beaten
into a road of Civility, and there is no men in the world that bless themselves
more, that they are in a good estate, and without sin, than these men. But now
looking upon Christ, that does fully and clearly convince a man of sin; when a
poor soul looks upon a pierced Christ, O says the soul, what a vile wretch am
I, I was drunk at such a time, profaning the Sabbath at such a time, and
suffering my children to do it at such a time, and behold, this sin, I see it
piercing of Jesus Christ; I was sleighty, formal in duty, proud, unbeleeving,
envious against my brother at such a time, and behold, yonder I behold those
very sins piercing of Christ. This convinces the soul of all sins; and it so
convinces, as the soul sees there is no other way in the world, nor help for
it, but to run to Jesus Christ, and to fly to the blood of Christ: O says the
soul, I am such a sinner, and I see there is no help, nor releef in the world
for me, but yonder bleeding Christ.

2 By exceedingly aggravating of a man's sins. The Law cannot aggravate sin as
looking upon a pierced Christ will and does; O this wondrously aggravates sin.

1 It shows that every sin I commit, is against a loving Father; O says the
soul, thus, and thus have I done against God, and behold what a loving Father
he is to me, yonder I behold his Son, his only begotten Son hanging upon the
Cross, and he is whipping and wounding of him for what I have done, beeause
otherwise I must have been whipped and wounded for it to all eternity: O the
greatness of his love, and O the greatness of my rebellion; O that ever I
should be such a wretch, and walk thus as I have done. --

2 It shows that every sin committed it wounds Jesus Christ, and goes to the
heart of Christ. When it looks upon Christ as pierced, then it sees such a sin
I committed at such a time, that comes and gives him a blow; and such a one,
and such a one, that comes and runs him in the side; then the soul looks upon
it self, and says, O what a wretch am I, the other day I was light and wanton,
and behold now I see that very sin wounding Jesus Christ; the other day I was
got with my merry companions in such a Chimny-corner with my Fiddle, my Pot and
Tobacco-pipe, singing and making merry and jovial, and behold that very sin
then committed, it thrust a spear into the side of Christ; O vile creature
therefore that I was, that ever I did thus; the other day I sat dressing, and
trimming, and pricking up my self, curling, and laying out my hair by
handfulls three hours together, and altogether neglected prayer, etc. and now
I see that sin, wounding Jesus Christ; The other day I was with my Queans in
such a corner, etc. railing at these Roundheads, Independents, Sectaries, etc.
and now I see this also wounding Jesus Christ; The other day I was speaking
evil of my brother, grudging against him, proud, arrogant, etc. and now I see
this piercing the side of Jesus Christ.

2 By bringing a pardon in hand to the soul; looking upon Jesus Christ brings a
pardon in hand to the soul. Now a man being convinced of sin, and then his sin
aggravated to the highest, and then a pardon brought, this will break his very
beart for his sin, to think that eyer he should do thus. When a man comes
to think thus, I am the vilest sinner that has been in all the Country, O but
yonder Christ he has been pierced for my sins, and behold I see him; And to
assure me that he is pierced for my sins, behold God the Father through the
wound that was made in his side, has given me an Acquittance, and here I have
my pardon in hand: which though it has cost me nothing, yet Christ has paid
dear for it; and thinking and believing thus, he reflects upon himself and
his sins, and his heart melts all into tears; and O (says the soul) that
ever I should do thus, that ever I should do thus, and now it calls it self
Wretch, and Fool, and Devil, it has walked so toward God; and it is so
incensed against his sins that were they flesh and blood, to be fought with,
as we fight with men, it would presently try its life with them.

4 By assuring him of a Crown and Inheritance that God has laid up for him.
The Soul looks upon Christ as pierced, and as it is convinced of sin, has
sin aggravated, and a pardon brought; So also by looking upon Christ, it has
assurance given it of a Crown it shall one day enjoy. O (says the soul) now
I behold that very thing, viz. my sin, which kept me from enjoying of a
Crown and Kingdom, Christ has taken it away.

A Crown from all Eternity was prepared for me, and nothing is in the way to
keep me from possessing of it, but this, I have been a filthy, sinful, and a
foolish creature, and have both forfeited my Crown to Gods Justice, and given
the same to the Devil: But behold yonder Jesus Christ has bought this Crown
again for me, satisfying Gods Justice, and by force has taken the same from
the Devil, and he gives it me freely, though he has paid his dearest blood
for it: When the soul looks upon this, and considers the infinite love of
Christ in it, and its wretchedness, that it should cause Christ to suffer thus
much, it is even melted and broken to pieces.

The most effectual means to kill and subdue Sin. One SERMON on
1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous.


IN the former Chapter the Apotle lays before Believers, that plenteous
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, and the precious virtue and merit of his
Blood to cleanse poor Sinners from their sins, verse. 7. But if we walk in the
light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood
of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin; and also what riches of
pardoning grace and mercy are in God to poor sinners.

In the first verse of this Chapter he makes use of these things to stir up
to holiness of life and modification of sin in all Believers -- These things
write I unto you that you sin not -- as if he should say, I do not write these
things that now you might live as you lift, and sin boldly, because Christ's
Blood is so efficacious, and Gods Grace so free, no, nothing less; but I write
these things, that from such considerations you might be more provoked to
holiness of life, and the mortification of sin in you; the end of these
discoveries, and the use you should make of them is, purity, not profaneness;
holiness, not licentiousness; These things write I that you sin not. By the
way observe two things.

Obser. 1. That the end of Gospel Revelation is to keep men from sin, 1 John
3.8. He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the
beginning; for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil, Acts 26. ^^. To open t^eir eyes, and to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they
may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith that is in me, Romans 8.3, 4. For what the Law could not do,
in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son, in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh; that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit. And this must needs be the end of
Gospel-Revelation, because.

1 God sent Christ to this end, Tit us 2.13, 14. Looking for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

2 The Gospel is preached to this end, Acts 14.15. We also are men of like
passions with you, and preach unto you, that ye should turn from these
vanities unto the living God, etc. --

3 The Spirit is given to this end, to make us holy.

4 It was the end of all Gods administrations, it was the end of the Legal
administration, Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the Law? it was added because
of transgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the promise was made,
etc. which administration being weak, and not able to do it, as Romans 7.9, 10,
11. For I was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came sin
revived, and I dyed; and the Commandment which was ordained to life, I found
to be unto death, for sin taking occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and
by it slew me, Chap. 8.3, 4. For what the Law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
spiit, Heb. 7.19. For the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing of a
better hope did; by the which we draw night unto God. God brings in another
Administration to effect that which the other could not; as the above
Scriptures show.

Use 1. See hence what great obligations lie upon persons living under the
Gospel Administration to be holy; otherwise one end of this Administration is
frustrated in such. If those who lived under the Law, and Old Covenant, had
great obligations laid upon them, then surely ours must needs be far greater
--

Use 2. This shows, How great is their evil who take occasion from the grace
of God to sin; when sin took occasion from the Law, it was so aggravated, it
became hereby exceeding sinful, Romans 7.13. let such know,

1 They pervert the Gospel.

2 They have never learned Christ aright, Ephesians. 4.17. to the 22. This I say
therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other
Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind; having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart, who being past feeling, have given
themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanenesse with
greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that you have heard
him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus. That ye put off
concerning the former conversation the Old Man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts.

3 It is a sad sign of Reprobation, Jude 4. For there are certain men crept
in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation; ungodly men,
turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

4 They will daily be more hardened in sin, Acts 28.25, 26, 27. And when they
agreed not among themselves they departed, after that Paul had spoken one word,
well spoke the Holy Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet unto our Fathers, saying, go
unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand;
and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive; for the heart of this people is
waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they
closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.

5 They will be more inexcusable, Joh. 15.22. If I had not come, and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin.

6 Heathens will rise up in Judgment against them.

7 Their Condemnation will be just, Romans 3.8. And not rather, as we be
slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil, that
good may come; whose damnation is just. Greater than others. Joh. 3.19. And
this is the Condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.

Obser. 2. That the discovery of the grace of God in the Gospel toward
sinners, is the most effectual means of killing and subduing sin.

Reason (I mean Carnal reason) makes us believe that this opens a Flood gate
to all licentiousness, and hence the wise men of the World lay the
profaneness and lewdness of persons living where the grace of God is
preached, upon the back of Gods Free Grace, as if the preaching of that to
Sinners were the cause why Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath Breakers live as they
do; and hence they say, No wonder Hearers are so profane, when their Teachers
have found out such a sweet and easy way to Heaven; but the Holy Ghost
condemns this opinion of Humane Wisdom, as scandalous to the Grace of God,
yea altogether false and untrue, and tells us, that there is no such way in the
world to curb sin, to change the hearts and lives of sinners, as is this
preaching of the Free Grace of God, and therefore the Apostle having revealed
the Grace of God, presently says, These things I write that you sin not; as if
he should say, if there be any Doctrine in the world will mortify sin, keep
you from it, it is this that I have written to you, I know no more powerful and
efficacious means than this is; and therefore I have written these things for
this very end and purpose, that those sins which lived and reigned in you
formerly, might now hereby be slain and mortified.

This likewise the Apostle teaches us, Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have
dominion over you. for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace; as if he
should say? Whilst you were under the Law sin reigned in you, and were you
still under the same, sin would reign in spite of you, but now says he, you
are not under the Law; but under grace, and therefore sin shall not reign over
you, Grace will curb and kill it, though the Law could not do it.

So likewise. Titus 2.11, 12. For the grace of God that brings Salvation,
has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. As
if he should say, do not say, because the Grace of God appears, and is
preached in the world to poor Sinners, therefore men will be profane, and live
in all ungodliness, no, no, the grace of God teaches all those who hear and
receive the same another lesson, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts;
whereas before they were as others, Drunkards, Adulterers, etc. now they deny
these things, and are by hearing and embracing the Grace of God, become
professed enemies to what before they loved. So that you see the preaching of
Grace it is no enemy, but a real friend to holiness of life and conversation;
it is so far from giving life thereto, that it quite kills and destroys sin.

I shall give you a Reason or two, why the Grace of God is so effectual a means
of the subduing of sin.

I Because the Grace of God, it begets a kind of Spiritual ingenuity in the
Soul of that sinner that hears and receives the same. The more ingenuity a man
has, he is of the more yielding nature to those things which in themselves are
good, just, and honest, an ingenuous man is more inclinable to be drawn to
things which are Naturally, and Morally good than another man is; you may work
more upon an ingenuous nature with a word, than you can upon another with
threats, or blows. Now, Grace makes a man ingenuous, it first puts a Principle
of ingenuity in him, which being put in he is now more easily led to
whatsoever the Grace of God commands him, and from whatever the Grace of God
forbids him. A stubborn Child must be cudgelled to do what his Father would
have him do, or avoid what he would have him forbear; but an ingenuous Child
is led with a word speaking, Grace makes a wild and untamed nature to be an
ingenuous pliable nature; and therefore a man being now made Spiritually
ingenuous, no sooner does Grace say to him, go, but he goes; come, but he
comes; do this, avoid that, but he does the one, and avoyds the other.

The Law does not put such a Principle of ingenuity in a man, and therefore
persons under the same, one day they are threatened, another day they feel the
Whip and Rod for their sins; another while they resolve; vow, and covenant they
will sin no more, and yet still they go in the old track, they sin and vow,
and vow and sin, and all because there is not a spiritual ingenuity wrought in
them, as Grace works in all those that hear and receive the same; but now
Grace, that makes a man so ingenuous, that considering what God has done for
poor Sinners, what Christ has suffered to take away sin, how free and willing
God is to receive him, make him a Son and Heir here, give him Heaven and glory
hereafter, he would not now lie swilling and sweltering in his old sins, and
lusts, though he might; the Soul needs not now to vow and covenant a twelve
month together against such and such sins it is addicted unto, no but it hears
the voice of Gods grace telling it, what Christ has done for it, how willing
God is to pardon all his sins, and bidding it do this, avoid that, and
presently it is made inclinable to obey the voice of Gods grace; what says
Paul, Romans 6.1. Shall we sin because grave does abound? no, God forbid; we have
more ingenuity in us than to do thus, because God loves us, and is willing to
pardon cur sins here, and to glorify us hereafter, shall we therefore do what
we can to grieve him, to offend and trouble him? no, God forbid, we are more
ingenuous than so: nay, we cannot do it, our very hearts are against it, and
our souls hate and abhor the thoughts of it; we would not for a world be
found to require the Lord thus. So, 2 Cor. 5.13, 14, 15. For whether we be
besides our selves, it is to God; or whether we be sober, it is for your Cause,
for the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one dyed
for all, then were all dead; and that he dyed for all, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them,
and rose again; As to say, whether we be mad, or sober, judge of us as you
please, yet have we so much ingenuity as to judge thus, that if Jesus Christ
dyed for us, we should now live to him; if he came and purchased an everlasting
life for us, our ingenuity makes us reason that it is a fit thing that we
should live this our temporal life to him, and consecrate it wholly to his
service.

What is the reason that many a poor Soul sits all the week long at the
Ale-pot, Swears, and Whores, and yet now and then he vows and resolves
against such courses, and yet cannot for his heart and blood (as we say) leave
them, but the Law when he has done such things whips and stings him, and this
hardens him; whereas did but such a poor Soul see that he is by Jesus Christ
delivered from wrath to come, freed from the Law, Sin and Satan, did but God
let him to see the hope of his calling, and what a happy and blessed estate he
is by Christ brought into, there would be such an ingenuity wrought within
him, that he needs not vow and covenant to be Drunk, and Swear, and Whore no
more; no, but his heart would abhor to deal so basely and unworthily with a God
so infinite rich in love, and abounding in Grace and mercy toward him.

2 Because the grace of God it has more full, and clear precepts to holiness
than the Law has; the Law, that has ten Commands, but the grace of God, that
has many hundred Spiritual commands, wherein it injoynes spiritual obedience
and newness of life; and then the commands of grace, they are, as more, so of a
more spiritual nature; whatsoever the Law commands, Natures light teaches, and
a man may by Natures light convince a man of these things; but now the precepts
of grace are spiritual, and supernatural, such as a Natural man by Natures
light cannot perceive. The precepts of grace are called, the things of the
Spirit, l Cor. 2. Which the Natural man cannot perceive, but they are
foolishness unto him, because they are spiritually discerned. Where the grace
of God is preached and received, there does the Spirit of God go, who is a
teaching Spirit, and teaches the Soul infinite more commands, and with more
clearness and demonstration does it discover truth, than any Natural or Moral
man by his Natural light, or study of the Law can ever find out: the Law
discovers to a man the outward actions of sin, and forbids these, but when
grace comes with its precepts, it makes discovery of the first risings,
motions, stirrings, and concupiscence of these things in the Soul, and forbids
these; and hence by reason that the grace of God (or the Doctrine of the
Gospel, for that I understand by the grace of God all along) has more full,
higher, and more Spiritual instructions than any the Law has, makes further
discoveries of sin than the Law barely considered can do, it comes to pass
that it is the most effectual means of killing and subduing sin.

3 Because there is a power in grace for the subduing and killing of sin; The
Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 3. that the Law it is a killing letter, that is, it is
only a bare letter without any power, bidding us to do this, and avoid that,
but contributes no assistance to us, yet tells us, if we do not obey it we
shall be damned; and so it is a killing letter, that is, to us, it kills us,
instead of killing our sins; but now the Gospel gives life, that does not only
command but gives power to do, and so is a word of life. So Heb. 12. he
calls the Law a voice of words for the same reason, because it did command and
forbid things under the penalty of Death and Damnation, and it saw the poor
Creature to be weak, and altogether unable to do either the one or the other,
and yet gave him no power at all, and so was only a terrible voice of words to
him. The Law (as one says) it does teach just as the Commandments written
upon the walls do, a poor man comes in and reads them over, and yet his heart
is never the warmer, never the more fit to obey any of them because he reads
them there; but now the Gospel, on the grace of God, that brings power along
with it; a poor Soul which before lived in sins, and thought it impossible that
ever he should leave them, or have them subdued, now finds a power within him
killing and subduing those sins of his; hence it is called, The power of God
unto salvation, Romans 1.16.

4 Because a Soul never comes to see sin in its proper colors, until the grace
of God is discovered to it. Take a poor Soul that is convinced of his sins by
the Law, yet does he not see the foul, filthy, and odious nature of his sins,
and how exceedingly every sin he commits is aggravated, and how sad by reason
of sin his condition is; as does another poor Soul, who sees his sins, and
himself a sinner in the Gospel, and by the Gospel. A poor Soul that sees his
sins through the vail of the Law, never comes to see the odiousness of sin, nor
to hate sin for it self, nor the aggravations of his sin, as does that Soul
which beholds the same in the Blood of Jesus, in the glass of the Gospel. A
poor Soul that sees his sin by the Law, does not see in what a miserable and
undone condition he is in by reason of his sin; he sins to day, and he sees
and knows it, and knows too that he has deserved thereby eternal death, and
perhaps his Conscience gripes him for it; but to morrow he runs to his
praying, and vowing, and covenanting, and here he licks himself whole again,
thinks to make God amends by future obedience for former disobedience; and when
he has been drunk, wanton, unclean, cheated his Neighbor, etc. presently he
runs to praying, and confessing, and resolving to change his course of life,
and do thus no more, and then he thinks all is well, and the scores are
crossed between God and him. Thus the poor Sinner conceits no danger, but
blesses himself that he has done God no injury, and therefore God means him
no ill, and so all is well, and he is happy, when alas (poor soul) he is
merely gulled, he feeds on ashes (as the Prophet speaks) a deceived heart
has turned him aside, so that he cannot say, Is there not a lie in my right
hand.

Whereas when a poor Soul comes to have the grace of God discovered to it, or
the Gospel opened unto it, and it embraces the same, it then comes to see the
odious and filthy nature of its sins, how every sin peirced Christ, wounded
him, made him who is blessed for evermore to lie under a Curse; how exceedingly
every sin it commits aggravated, being committed against grace and mercy, etc.
O then it sees that there is no way in the world to be delivered from its sins
but by Jesus Christ, no righteousness will stand it in stead but Christ's;
whereas before, it thought its praying, and reforming, the works of its own
righteousness would have saved it; now it sees that all is nothing, sin is of
so deep a dye that there is nothing in the world will, or can wash it out, but
the blood of Christ.

5 Because there is nothing of a more contrary nature to sin than the grace of
God is; the best way to destroy a contrary, is to oppose its contrary to it; if
you would put out Fire, throw water upon it; if you would have your Chamber
free from Darkness, open the Window and let in the Light; contraries fight and
endeavor to destroy each other, and the more contrary things are, the more do
they endeavor to do it. Now, there are no greater contraries than Sin and the
Grace of God are; Sin is the greatest darkness, the grace of God is the
greatest light; and therefore these two are in continual fight, and labor to
destroy each other; in which Combat the Grace of God ever prevails, as the
light of the Sun being the greatest light does ever expel darkness when ever
it comes, let it be ever so much. All light is contrary in its nature to
darkness, yet if the light be but small, and the darkness great, we see in
will not expel it. So may I say, the Law is in its own nature holy, just, good,
spiritual, contrary to sin, yet because it is but a little light in comparison
of the grace of God, as it were the shining of a Candle to the Sun, and sin
being the greatest darkness, it does not therefore overcome and expel the same.
And hence the discovery of the grace of God is the most effectual means to kill
sin, because it is of such a contrary nature to sin, that either sin must
destroy it, or it will destroy sin; but sin never being able to do the one, it
will and does in all those Souls which hear, and receive the same, by degrees
do the other.

Use 1. Then see how the grace of God is wronged in the World, when men cry
out, this is your preaching of Free Grace, what comes of it, but to make a
company of Hypocrites, to make persons loose and profane; when indeed this is
altogether false, and an abominable slander of the Free Grace of God; the grace
of God is the greatest motive and means to holiness that is in the World, and
if that will not mortify sin, to be sure nothing else will do it. Men may
talk of the Law, and the terrors thereof, and the thunderings of Hell and
Damnation, as the only means to kill sin; but sure enough if the grace of God
will not do it, these never will; it is one thing to have sin killed, another
thing to have it bridled; the Law may put a bridle upon a man's sins and lusts,
but it never kills them; but grace, that kills sin. Therefore it is an injury
offered to the grace of God to say of it, that it makes men Sinners, it makes
them loose, etc. for it does the contrary, Shall we sin because grace
abounds, no, God forbid: Thus grace reasons.

Use 2. Then, would thou overcome thy sins? study the grace of God more; the
more God lets the light of his grace into thy Soul, the more shall thou find
thy sins to dye. Many poor Souls there are which strive against their sins,
and labor to keep up their hearts in ways of obedience, etc. and yet little
fruit comes of all their toil, and sweat, and tiring themselves, why, because
they weary themselves out in a way of works, to get that, which is to be
obtained only by grace; they seek after Righteousnesie, and Justification, and
Holiness, and Sanctification, not by faith, not from the grace of God, but as
Israel did by the works of the Law, and so doing, it fares with them as with
Israel, they do not obtain that which they seek for. Poor Souls, you cry out,
O my sins, my sins, I cannot subdue them, such and such a lust is too hard for
me; and what is the cause? why this, you think to get the mastery of your sins
by your works, and this will never do it.

Let me tell you a little the road you go in to mortify and subdue sin, you
find sin struggling within you, and overcoming you; well, now says the soul,
by Gods help, I will overcome this sin hereupon thou take up a resolution to
change thy course of life, and to avoid all occasions whatsoever that should
draw thee to sin; This resolution it may be does not hold, thy sin masters
thee, and thy resolution too; but say thou, well, yet sin, I will overcome
thee, then thou fallest to praying thy self against it, and gettest others to
pray for thee, and runnest to this Minister, and the other, and ^readest thy
case before him, and ask his advice what thou should do in it;
notwithstanding all this, thine own endeavors, or any help they can afford
thee, thy sin is still too strong for thee; well then, When there is no other
way thou know left, thou fallest to keeping of Fasts, make vows and
covenants, and do as good as swear to the Lord of heaven and earth, that
henceforth thou will be as godly as passes, and never sin against him more,
nor do as thou have done, and then it may be before two days, or a week come
at an end, thou breakest all, and art now in a worse case than ever, and even
at thy wits end.

O poor souls, This is the way you go in, to get holiness, to have your sins
mortified, and this is the fruit of it, after all your striving and struggling,
tugging and pulling to fetch your sins out by head and ears, they abide there
still; and the reason is, because you go about it in a way of working, whereas
you should look for all from Grace, and so study the Grace of God more.

Sin it is like Sampson, bind them with ever so many iron fetters of the Law,
it will snap them all to pieces. Though in some these fetters chain sin, which
is because sin is willing to be chained, that so hereby they may be lulled
asleep in a good opinion of themselves, and thereby deceive their own souls;
yet others whom God out of love will not suffer to be gulled in this manner,
find it otherwise, they see and know by woeful experience, that all these
fetters are but like so many twine threads; bind a Lion with a twine thread,
and what do you, you were as good, and better sit still and do nothing, for
he will but tear and rent you the more: So sin, by all this, does but rage the
more. The Apostle excellently sets this forth, Romans 7.8 9, 10, 11. But sin
taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence, for without the Law sin was dead; For I was alive without the
Law once, but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed, and the
Commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death; for sin
taking occasion by the Commandment deceived me, and by it slew me. Sin taking
occasion -- Sin made an advantage of the Commandment to be more insolent --
Without the Law sin was dead -- Sin lay still, and did not show that
liveliness which was in it, till the Commandment came to restrain it, and
then it began to bestir it self, the Commandment would have laid bonds upon
it, then sin which lay asleep, and as it were dead before, gets up; says the
Commandment, you shall be curbed and bound; nay, but says Sin, I will not be
bound; says the Commandment, you shall not do thus; nay, but says Sin, I
will do it, and the more because you say I shall not.

Therefore poor Soul, have thou been toyling, and sweating, and tiring thy
self with thy Vows and Covenants one year after another, to master thy sins,
and is all hitherto to no purpose? then poor Soul take another way, for
hitherto thou have been out of the way; labor to get a sight of the rich grace
of God to poor sinners, and then thy heart will from a holy ingenuity say,
What, is there such abundance of grace in God to poor sinners, is he willing
to pardon me a poor Sinner, give me Heaven and make me blessed for ever, and
shall I be such a Wretch as to nourish such a deadly enemy to him in my
bosom, as this my sin is? O no, no, i will never be so base and unworthy, and
deal so ungratefully with so good a God. I tell thee poor Soul, that such
considerations as these are, will more weane thy heart from sin, and beget a
hatred thereof within, then ever all the thunderings or terrors of the Law
either will or can do.

The Advocateship of Jesus Christ, a great ground of the Saints comfort and
support under sins and infirmities. IN One SERMON on
2 John 2.2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous.


THe last opportunity I read these words unto you, but was then besides my own
intention when I pitched on them, taken up in the way that nothing was spoken
to them. I come now to the words, wherein the Apostle seems to prevent an
Objection, which some poor souls from what he had said before would be ready
to make? thus,

Object. You tell us that these precious Gospel Truths which now have been
declared to us, are revealed for this very end, that we should not sin; if so,
what will become of us, who have heard these things over and over, and yet
still, do what we can, we fall into sin, and are ever and anon overcome
thereby, sure we are of all most miserable, we are undone for ever.

Answ. If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father; as if he should
say, Poor soul, would thou not sin because the Grace of God is so free, and
yet do thou sin? For all this be not discouraged, do not throw away all thy
hope, for put the case we do sin, yet there is remedy, We have an Advocate
with the Father.

In the words we have,

1 The SVPPOSITION of anevill, If any man sin, which we are not to understand;
as though the thing spoken in way of supposition were a thing which might
possibly be, or not be; for it is not so, the thing is a certain thing, that
every man does sin, none is, or can whilst he is here be exempted from sin,
and so indeed it is not a supposition, or a thing supposed to be, but a thing
which really is. As if the Apostle should say. Well, grant it that you sin, for
there is none in this world exempted from sin, any man may sin, as well those
which are Fathers, as you which are children, it is not said have sinned, but
do sin, relating as well to sin pre sent, and yet to come, as sin past.

2 The prescription of A REMEDY, and that is Christ Jesus our Advocate and
Propitiation, -- We have an Advocate with the Father -- or rather these words
are laid down as a bottom or foundation, for the faith, comfort, and support
of poor Saints, against, and under all their sins and infirmities.

Of the first, viz. the evil supposed.

Doct. The best and dearest of Gods children are not privileged from sin
whilst they are here. Sin is a leprosy that cleaves to us all, more or less,
whilst we are in this world: We never read of a Saint so holy in Scripture,
but look him over, and we shall find some spot upon him here or there; Noah,
Abraham, David, Peter, Paul, none of them were without their failings in one
thing or other. It is a divine maxim, there is no man that does good and
sins not, All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. Jew and
Gentile (says the Apostle) are all under sin.

Quest. But why does God suffer sin to be in his people?

Answ. God has many gracious ends in it, as

1 To keep them humble. Paul had a thorn in the flesh that he might not be
exalted above measure. Spiritual pride is one of the Saints greatest enemies,
God therefore suffers sin to be in his, that so they might be kept low, that
they might always see something in them as a ground or matter of humiliation;
something that they might be continually reflecting upon to keep them low.

2 To teach them to live by faith: Should there be no sin in us, there would
not be that need of faith, and of living by faith, that by reason hereof there
is. The more a Christian falls, the more he is taught to live by faith: When I
see righteousness in my self, I am prone to rest too much upon, and to live
upon that; but when I can see no righteousness at all, but do instead thereof,
see daily, and hourly a great deal of unrighteousness, I am led hereby to live
out of my self upon another righteousness, and hereby faith is kept in daily
exercise.

3 To prevent security. The more enemies a man has about him, and near him,
the more watchful he is thereby made. Now God suffers these enemies to abide
in his children, that they may hereby be continually awakened by the hourly
alarms of these enemies, and thereby kept from security.

4 To exalt his own grace toward them. The more sin is in those that are
saved, the more grace appears in their salvation, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. Who was
before a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and injurious, but I obtained mercy,
because I did it ignorantly, in unbeleef. And the grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant, with faith, and love, which is in Christ Jesus.

5 To show forth more of his power in them: 1 In strengthening them against
sin. 2 In upholding them under their falls. 3 In mortifying sin in them.

6 To make them the more compassionate of their fellow-brethren, under the like
infirmities, Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which
are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self, lest thou also be tempted, Heb. 5.2. Who can have compassion on the
ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for that he himself also is
compassed with infirmity.

7 To make them more to long to be dissolved.

8 To permit wicked men hereby to be stumbled and offended at the ways of God.

Use. Then be not discouraged at the sight and feeling of sin in thee, but
seek God that he would work, and wait upon him for the accomplishing of these
and such like gracious ends in thee thereby.

Thus much in a word of the first thing in the Text, viz. the SUPPOSITION, If
any man sin. --

I come now to the second, viz. The REMEDY prescribed, or what that is which
may support and comfort Saints notwithstanding this sin that dwells in them,
and that is the Advocateship of Jesus Christ, We have an Advocate. --

Doct. The Advocateship of Jesus Christ now he is in heaven, is a great ground
of comfort and support to Saints, against, and under all their sins and
infirmities.

In the opening of this I shall show,

1 What this office of an Advocate is.

2 What manner of Advocate Christ is.

3 Whose cause he pleads.

4 What he pleads for.

5 The manner of his pleading*

6 The prevalency of it.

7 Why Christ is a Saints Advocate.

8 How this makes for our comfort and support.

9 What we may learn hence as matter of our duty.

1 What is this office of an Advocate?

Answ. The word Advocate is in Scripture no where used but in this place,
therefore to find out what it is, we must look to the first rise of it. Now
it is a borrowed speech taken from the Civil Law, in which those are called
Advocates, which we in the Common Law call Counselors. Now in Law the office
of an Advocate is this, to plead in a way of Justice, and from principles of
equity and justice, another cause, who is not so well able to plead it
himself. Christ's office then as an Advocate is this, to plead the causes of
poor sinners who cannot themselves plead them, and that in a way of Justice.
Here is the great difference betwixt Christ's pleading and ours: Whenever we
plead, we plead but as petitioners, but when Christ pleads he pleads as an
Advocate. A petitioner he brings his cause to the foot of mercy, and leaves it
there, he dares not appeal to Justice, lest he be cast; but now an Advocate
he pleads in a way of justice, he brings his cause to the bar of Justice, and
is willing it should be tried by Justice, and stand or fall there. When we
come with our causes to God, we must as petitioners throw them down at the
foot of mercy, and stand to the verdict of mercy; but when Christ takes up our
causes, he goes boldly to the bar of Justice, and pleads them there, he makes
appeals to Justice, and says, Do but speak, O Justice, whether it be not a
fit and requisite thing that this poor sinner should have the cause go of his
side. I have dyed, satisfied for him, purchased this, is it not a just and
equal thing that it should go well with the poor sinner and his cause; I will
be tried even by thee, O Justice.

2 What manner of Advocate is Christ?

Answ. 1. He is an Advocate in the superior Court. An Advocate in the superior
Court, is better than in the inferior, because there may be an appeal from the
inferior, and a sentence there passed is not determinative, because it may be
reversed above; but now the Laws and Decrees of the superior Court, they are
binding and determinative, there can be no appeal thence, but whatsoever is
ratified there, carries the authority and force of a Law with it. Now Christ is
an Advocate in the superior Court, he is an Advocate with the Father, as in
the Text; and so Heb. 9.24. it is said that Christ is not entered into the holy
places made with hands, but heaven it self; -- the High Priests under the Law
when they were to plead (which was a part of their office) they entered into the
holy places made with hands, they pleaded here below; But now Christ our High
Priest and Advocate, he is gotten into heaven it self, and there he pleads in
Gods presence, at the highest bar, he pleads. So Heb. 4.14. We have a great
High Priest which is passed into the Heavens; Heaven now is the place where
Jesus Christ is Priesting of it, and where Christ is pleading with the Father
for us. And hence it comes to pass, that whenever Jesus Christ gets any
sentence to be passed for the poor sinner, it is definitive, there can be no
alteration of it, nor appeal from it, because it is the sentence of the highest
Judicature, a sentence passed in the highest Court, which no subordinate power
can change or alter.

Hence likewise in this respect, Jesus Christ is of all other Advocates the
most useful, because he pleads in such a place, where if he do procure by his
mediation an act to be but once passed in the behalf of the poor sinner, whose
cause he pleads, there can never be any repealing of that act, but it remains
like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, irreversible. In our Courts of Law a
man may have a sentence passed for him to day, and against him to morrow, and
one Court repeals what another enacts, yea the Laws and Ordinances of the
superior Courts, are subject to mutation and alteration; but now Christ pleads
as an Advocate in such a Court where every Law is binding for ever, sentences
passed are unalterable; O poor sinner, if through the mediation of Christ, thou
have an acquittance given thee of all thy sins and debts thou owe God, it is
unalterable; If a grant of any favor, it is unalterable; If a right or title
to any inheritance afterward to be enjoyed, it is unalterable: What poor
sinner is there that would not now run to Christ as an Advocate, for the pardon
of his sins, grace, heaven? etc. which if once granted to him, shall be his
surely, unchangeably for ever, even for ever.

2 He is an Advocate that is gifted and qualified for the work. Many times a
just and righteous cause suffers through the weakness of him that has the
mannaging of it; But now Christ is an able Advocate, a gifted Advocate, one fit
for the work. See Isa. 42.1, 2, 3, 4. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine
Elect in whom my soul delights: I have put my Spirit upon him; he shall
bring forth judgment to the Gentiles: He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor
cause his voice to be heard in the streets. A bruised reed shall he not
break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench: He shall bring judgment
unto truth. He shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set
judgment in the earth. See how God has fitted him: God upholds him, puts his
Spirit on him, etc.

But there are two things in a more especial manner, which speak his fitness
and qualification as to the work.

1 He shall manage all his causes very tenderly, and so as he will be sure
they shall not be the worse by his taking them in hand, verse. 3. If it be a
poor bruised cause which will hardly hold together, he will be sure so to
manage it, as that it shall not be broken. If it be a pitions cause that
has abundance of evil in it, but a very little that can be said for it to
make it good, he will be sure he will not let that little be lost. 2 He
will be undaunted notwithstanding all the opposition he meets with; and all
the flaws he finds in the cause he pleads, and never give over till the
judgment goes of his side; and hence Matthew. 12.20. A bruised reed shall he
not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth
judgment unto victory. What is here read truth, is there victory; noting that
whatsoever difficulties or discouragements he meets with, he will not be
daunted, nor give over till he has gotten victory in judgment, obtained to
have the sentence passed on the sinners side, be the cause ever so poor, or
tottered, or bruised that he pleads. Many times when an Attorney or
Councellor, resolving to be just, sees the cause so ill, that he thinks he
shall make nothing of it, he is discouraged, and will not undertake it. But
now Christ will not be daunted, nor discouraged at the oppositions and
discouragements he meets with, but will proceed till he has gotten victory
in judgment.
3 He is an Advocate that has a lawful call to the Bar. In our Common and
Civil Law, there are degrees of Lawyers, we have our students at Law, our
Counselors, and Sergeants, and sometimes it so falls out, that a studient of
the Law is better able to plead the Clients cause than a Sergeant; yet because
he has not his degree upon him, he is not called to the Bar, and so being
not called to the Bar, he cannot plead. Sometimes perhaps such a one stands
by, and he sees a poor man's cause through the weakness of him that mannageth
it go to the wall, and he could help him, and would willingly do it, but now
because he has not a call to plead at the Bar, he may not. Now Jesus Christ
is such an Advocate which is not only gifted and able, but has also a lawful
call to the Bar to plead, Heb. 5.4, 5, 6, 10. And no man takes this honor
unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron; so also Christ
glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but he that said unto him?
Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee; as he says also in another
place, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, verse. 10.
Called of God an High Priest after the order of Melchisedeck. God called him
out to the work, he is Christ, i. e. anointed to it; yea, he is alone called to
it, there is no other joined with him, as Co-partner with him in this Office,
which makes his call to the Bar of Gods Justice, to plead there in the behalf
of poor Sinners so much the greater, because the Cause it self of poor Sinners
must wholly fail, if he do not undertake the mannaging of it.

4 He is a faithful Advocate; Advocates among men are unfaithful oftentimes,
the poor Clients cause oftentimes perishes, not so much from the
unskilfulnesse or weakness, as the unfaithfulness of him whom he entrusts it
with. But now Christ is a faithful Advocate, and therefore in the text, as he
is called an Advocate; so he is also called the Righteous. And so Heb. 2. he is
said to be a faithful High Priest, he is such an Advocate as will not deceive
his poor Clients. Thou may O poor Soul trust thy Cause with Christ, he will
not deceive thee; it is a great jealousy many times a poor man has (and
perhaps from ground enough) that his Lawyer deceives him. Put thy case over to
Christ, thou shall be freed of this jealousy.

5 He is an Advocate that has the Law and Justice on his side; Many times a
good Advocate loses his Cause, because the Law is against him, and it would be
injustice should he carry it; Law and Justice are above the Lawyer. But now
Christ is such an Advocate as has Law and Justice for him, they are both of
his side; here the Lawyer (if I may so speak) is above the Law, and here it is
Law because the Lawyer says it; in others, the Lawyer therefore says it,
because it is Law, but here it is Law, because he says it. If you should have
a Cause upon the trial, and should have assurance of these three things; First,
That you have the ablest and most faithful Counselor to manage your business
that the whole Kingdom does afford. Secondly, That the Principles of Justice
give the Cause unto you; and, Thirdly, That the Law in the whole and every part
of it, is of your side, how confident would you be that you should carry it?
Sinners, there is never a Cause that you entrust the Lord Jesus Christ with,
but you shall have assurance of all these things; first, that you have the
best, the mostable and faithful Advocate which Heaven or Earth affords; and
then that both the Principles of Justice and the Law are for you; for whatever
cause it is Christ pleads, be has both these of his side.

6 He is such an Advocate as has the Judge of the Court of his side; it is no
little privilege to have the Judge of a man's side, a Counselor befriended may
speak when another shall have his mouth shut. Jesus Christ has the Judge of
the Court where he pleads on his side, being his Father, and therefore Christ
is befriended; when the Devil shall be commanded silence, and have his mouth
stopped, then Christ shall have free liberty to speak, and plead his Cause.

7 He is a prosperous and successful Advocate; such an Advocate as ever has,
and does carry his Clients Cause. Should you hear of an Attorney, or Counselor
that never took Cause in hand but carried it, what flocking think you would
there be from one end of the Country to the other to such a man; such a one
should not want practice. Beloved, Christ is such an Advocate, which never yet
took up Cause but carried it, and therefore he is Jesus a Savior, such an
Advocate as has, and does save his Clients harmless. O let him not want
practice, bring, O bring your Causes to him.

3 Whose Cause it is that Jesus Christ as an Advocate pleads?

Ans. 1. Not the cause of all men, John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for
the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine. Though
there are Advocates for a Town or Corporation, of County, yet never was there
such an Advocate heard of, as was to plead the Causes of all the World, Christ
is no such Advocate. But.

2 The Causes Christ pleads are the Causes of the Elect, these whom the Father
has given Christ; now, the Elect of God are either such as are for the present
in their unregenerate estate, yet in Gods secret Decree of election, or else
such as are regenerated; the Causes of both these Christ pleads, such of Gods
Elect which are not regenerated he pleads for them, that they might be
converted, and by reason of this intercession of Christ, the patience of God
bears with them all the time of their unregenerate condition; such as are
regenerated he pleads for them, and by virtue of this intercession they are
preserved, their Graces are quickened, their Corruptions mortified, they
comforted, strengthened, etc. both these are set forth in that place of John
17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on
me through their word. First, He prays for Disciples converted; Secondly, for
those that were to be converted.

4 What those things are that Christ intercedes for.

Ans. 1. He pleads for his Church and people in general.

1 He pleads for the peace, welfare, and prosperity of his Churches, Zach.
1.12. Then the Angel of the Lord answered, and said, O Lord of Hosts, how long
will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against
which thou have had indignation these threescore and ten years. The Church was
at present in a low condition, in the bottom, as verse. 8. the Enemies of God
did ride the backs of the people of God; Christ in this condition pleads for
his Church, verse. 12. and what he pleaded for you may perceive by the answer
he has, verse. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And the Lord answered the Angel that talked
with me with good words, and comfortable words; so the Angel that communed with
me, said unto me, cry thou, saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I am jealous
for Jerusalem, and for Zion with a great jealousy; and I am very sore
displeased with the Heathen that are at ease; for I was but a little
displeased, and they helped forward the affliction. Therefore thus says the
Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies, my House shall be built in it,
says the Lord of Hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem;
cry yet, saying, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, my Cities through prosperity
shall yet be spread abroad, and the Lord shall yet comfort Sion, and shall yet
choose Jerusalem.

2 He pleads for the union of his Saints and Churches, Ioh. 17.21. That they
all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be
one in us; that the world may believe that thou have sent me. How should this
stir up Saints in divided times to union! does Christ plead for union above,
and shall we wrangle below? Does he endeavor it with his Father, and shall not
we endeavor it with one another?

2 He pleads for particular Souls.

1 He pleads for Gods forbearance of them in an unconverted estate, Luke 13.8.
And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall
dig about it, and dung it.

2 He pleads for their conversion, Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do.

3 He pleads that they might be delivered from the evils of the World, John
17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
should keep them from the evil.

4 He pleads for upholding Grace in temptation, Luke 22.31, 32. And the Lord
said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift
you as Wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.

5 He pleads for the Comforter to be given to them, Joh. 14.16. And I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter.

6 He pleads for his continuance with them, Joh. 14.16. That he may abide with
you for ever.

7 He pleads for their perseverance, Joh. 17.11. And now I am no more in the
world, but these are in the world, and I am come to thee holy Father, keep
through thine own Name those whom thou have given me, that they may be one
as we are.

8 He pleads for their Sanctification, verse. 17. Sanctify them through thy
truth, thy Word is truth.

9 He pleads for their glorification, verse. 24. Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory
which thou have given me.

5 The manner of his pleading.

1 He presents the persons of his Saints before his Father; says Christ, such
a thing I plead for, and behold here is the Person, see what he is, in how
near relation to me; they are those that thou have given me, they are mine, and
they are thine; see Lord, they are no other I speak for.

2 He presents all the wants of his Saints; he spreads these before God, Lord,
they want preserving grace, persevering, sanctifiing, etc. --

3 He presents his own merits and righteousness before his Father; Lord,
says Christ, is there no righteousness in this poor sinner, behold here is
righteousness; Does thy Justice require satisfaction, behold here it is. I have
glorified thee, it may be Lord these sin, and dishonor thee, but I have
glorified thee.

4 He mannageth their cause as his own, in his own Name. He takes up their
cause and says, Lord, their cause is my cause; it is the cause I am engaged
in, and have dyed for, Joh. 17.10. I am glorified in them, as to say, Lord, if
it were only for them, indeed thou might deny me, but their cause is my
cause; their cause and mine, their glory and mine, is linked together.

5 He uses arguments with the Father; he does not barely plead, but uses
arguments. What arguments in John 17. (the pattern of Christ's Intercession in
heaven) does Christ use with his Father, verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. He
answers all the Objections that Satan brings against poor souls. See Zach. 3.1,
2. And he showed me Joshua the high Priest standing before the Angel of the
Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him. And the Lord said
unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen
Jerusalem, rebuke thee, is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?

6 He uses authority in pleading, Joh. 17.14. Father I will -- he lays a
kind of heavenly command (as I may say) upon the Father, he leaves his
petitions as his will which must be fulfilled.

6 The Prevalency of Christ's Intercession.

1 The person pleading is a great person, Heb. 4.14. a great High Priest, --
and that in a threefold respect. First, great indignity, such will be heard,
he is King of Kings. Secondly, great in power, and so able to give whatsoever
he pleads for, and therefore undoubtedly will not let his prayers be lost.
All power is given to me. So Joh. 14.13, 14. And whatsoever ye shall ask in
my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye
shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it. If anything in heaven or in
earth be useful for Saints, he can command all. Thirdly, great in favor with
God; long acquaintance makes persons great in favor, Christ was from eternity
brought up with the Father; near relation makes persons great in favor, and
Christ is the only child of God. A man that is great in favor will prevail
when another cannot.

2 The person he pleads with, is his Father; He is Gods Son, his only Son,
the pleading of a Son is very prevalent with his Father. This the Apostle makes
use of, Heb. 4.14. Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is passed
into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. Yea
he is such a Son as was ever obedient to his Father, and he pleads this his
obedience; Had you a child that never angered you, and he should come and say,
Father I never angered you, I pray do not deny me such a request, could you
deny him? when all the servants in the house cannot procure such a thing to be
done, the Son does but come and say, Pray Father let it be done, and it is
done. Jesus Christ cannot but prevail, because it is his Father he pleads with.

3 The cause he pleads, is a cause of Justice. Many times when a great person,
or one in near relation to the Judge pleads, though his cause be unjust, yet
he carries it; what then, will Christ's pleading do, who is so great, in so
near relation to the Judge, and has a just cause too, think you? Will not he
prevail?

4 The person he pleads with is our Father, which further shows the prevalency
of Christ's Intercession. If a Father have a child he loves dearly, a little
entreating will make him willing to do any thing for his good: But now if
another dearly beloved Son should come and plead for this child with his
father, and the childs Father too, how prevalent would that plea be?

5 God has appointed him this as his office, to plead. He is an Advocate
called by God, Heb. 5.4, 5. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself, to
be made an high Priest Psalm. 2. Ask of me -- God would never have put Christ
into this office, were he not willing to be prevailed with; whenever Christ
pleads, God remembers that he put Christ into this office, and this makes his
pleading very prevalent.

6 God is as willing to give those things he pleads for, as he is to plead
for them. If a man be but willing to give, there needs not much argument to
prevail; says Christ, Joh. 16.26, 27. I say not I will pray the Father for
you, for the Father himself loves you; as to say, I do not say that you shall
have all merely because I pray, as if the Father were unwilling, and my praying
made him willing; no, nor so, The Father himself loves you, and is willing to
give you mercy, though I pray not, as to say, I need not to pray for any want
of love that is in the Fathers heart to you, or willingness to give mercy, if
that were all, I need never pray: How willing then must he needs be when I
pray?

7 Why Christ is a Saints Advocate.

1 Reason, Because it is a part of his office, viz. his Priestly office, and
Christ will not have any of his Offices lie vacant.

2 Because it is much for Christ's honor, that the whole work of our salvation
from first to last, should be so managed, as that he should still have a
hand in it, and every part thereof.

8 How this makes for our support and comfort, against, and under all our
sins and infirmities.

Answ. In these three things.

1 By Christ's Advocateship, God the Father is put in continual remembrance of
that full and satisfactory sacrifice which was once offered for sin. Hence
Christ who intercedes for ever, Heb. 7. his blood is said to speak, Heb.
12.24. And to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of
Abel. How did Abels blood speak? Not with an audible voice, but by a teal
representing Cains sin before God the Father. 2 By Christ's Advocateship, there
is a continual application of pardon to the soul. Christ's death did purchase,
his intercession does apply: and the application of pardon, although it were
perfected at once, yet it is reiterated over and over; every new manifestation
being as it were a new application. 3 By Christ's Advocateship Satan our enemy
has his mouth stopped above. The Devil is busy in accusing of Saints, but now
Christ comes, and says he, Lord, this is an enemy, what he speaks is false,
and he speaks it out of malice. Just as we see it sometimes at Sessions, or
Assizes, such a one comes and lays an accusation against such a one, but in
comes some Councellor that is very great and inward with the Judge, and says,
May it please you my Lord, such a one is a very honest man, I know him well,
and yonder is a base fellow that accuses him out of spleen, and what he says
I will evidence to be false, and hereupon the man has his mouth stopped.
Lastly, What we may learn hence as our duty.

1 Come to Christ poor soul, not withstanding all thy sins and infirmities.
Thou have committed such and such sins against Christ, and therefore art afraid
to come to him: Consider Christ is an Advocate on purpose for the comfort and
encouragement of thy foul against sin, the Apostle lays down Christ's
Advocateship here as a refuge against sin. Come, Christ will sue thee out a
pardon: I do not say that this is all Christ is an Advocate for, to deliver
from the guilt of sin; no, Christ is an Advocate too, to plead for all grace
for thee. But I say this is one special end of Christ's being an Advocate, and
the great end laid down here in the Text, to secure thee from guilt. The
ability of Jesus Christ to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7. is put upon this
Office of being an Advocate.

Object, O but I fear Christ does not intercede for me, were I sure of that I
should come.

Answ. He intercedes for those that come, and therefore come, and thou may
be sure he intercedes for thee.

2 Do thou find at any time the Spirit inabling thee to pour out thy soul
with groans here below, then assuredly Christ prays for thee above.

Object. But though Christ intercede for me, yet will he continue to
intercede, Will not my sin make him give over interceding?

Answ. He intercede always; he ever lives to make intercession, it is the
work (as I may say) he lives in heaven to do, it is his calling, and Christ
should be out of his calling should he not do it. Intercession is as much his
work in heaven, as dying was on earth.

Object. 3. But I eye my own salvation much in coming to Christ, will he
intercede for such a comer?

Answ. He intercedes for those that come, to him for salvation: He lives to
make intercession for them.

2 Duty. Let us hold fast our profession, Heb. 4.14. Seeing then that we have
a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let
us hold fast our profession. And Chap. 10. verse. 23. Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering, for he is faithful that promised.
Does Christ own us above before his Father; let us own him before men.

3 Duty. Let us love Christ more, and mind his glory more. Is his love such,
as that he here on earth did lay out himself for us, and in Heaven he is
laying out himself for us; Then let us love him more, and mind his glory, and
his honor more.

4 Duty. Let us be frequent in our addresses to God by Christ.

1 Let us come with more boldness, seeing we have such a one to speak for us.

2 Let us come with more confidence.

5 And lastly, Let us improve this Intercession of Christ. First, Improve it in
all our wants. Secondly, In all our doubts and fears. Thirdly, In all our
duties. Fourthly, In all our falls. Fifthly, In all our temptations. Sixthly,
In the busling of all our corruptions.

And in it, Let us improve first, The continuance of it, i.e. There is no time
wherein Christ does not intercede. Secondly, The perfection of it. Thirdly, The
prevalency of it. Fourthly, The continual acceptance of it.

The only way for Saints to be delivered from the Errors and Evils of the
Times. IN Two SERMONS on
1 Timothy 6.11. But thou, O man of God, flee these things, and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.


IN the former verses the Apostle discovers and condemns the evil practices and
opinions of sundry false reachers crept in amongst the Churches in his days.
In this, he warnes Timothy (and in him all Christians, for the words are not
spoken to Timothy as a Minister only, but also as a Christian, it being the
duty of all Christians, though of those in such place more especially) to shun
and avoid these men, their principles and practices. But thou, O man of God,
flee these things, -- which that they might do, he sets them about work of
another nature, Follow after righteousness, godliness, etc. What is the meaning
of this? I shall not explain the several terms and things, only this learn,
they are all spiritual things, and of another nature to those things the false
teachers cried up: So that in general the meaning is, Follow spiritual things:
Would thou escape the Errors and Evils of these men? Then do not (as they
do) stand doting about empty questions, but follow after, pursue high and
spiritual things, make it thy work and business to mind and speak such things.

I shall speak only of the latter part of the words, and of them only as they
are a direction (though more is in them) given to Timothy, and all believers,
how they may escape the Errors and Evils of false teachers. Follow after
righteousness. --

Doct. The only and special way for a Saint to be delivered from the Errors,
and Evils of the Times he lives in, is, to have his heart as much as may be
taken up with, and his spirit exercised about high and spiritual things. I
shall prove this point from

1 Timothy 4. Where the Apostle having foretold the dangerous errors of the latter
times, verse. 1.2, 3. presently minds Timothy of spiritual things, as the only
preservatives against distempers of this nature. Verse. 7. and 12. Exercise thy
self rather unto godliness. Be thou an example of the believers, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.

2 Timothy 2.22. But follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that
call on the Lord out of a pure heart. Having certified Timothy of the dangerous
errors, and fearful miscarriage of Hymenaeus and Philetus, he straightway
gives him in charge to mind spiritual things; as if he had said, Had
Hymenaeus and Philetus laid aside their vain bablings, and minded these things
more, they would never have miscarried as they have done.

So 2 Timothy 3. Having foretold of those perilous times which should be in the
last days, verse. 1, 2. -- and given Timothy to understand that some there were
already abroad, whose temper and manners were like them, which in after times
should arise, yers. 6, 8. he presently minds him of the spiritualnesse of his
own conversation, as a pattern for him to imitate, verse. 10. stirring him up
thereto, verse. 14. But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and
have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them.

So also to Titus, having in Chap. 1. marked out, and warned Titus of a
dangerous sort of men, verse. 10. and 16. In the two next Chapters he puts
Titus on to mind and follow spiritual and practical matters, But speak thou
the words which become sound doctrine, Chap. 2. verse. 1. etc.

In Romans 14.17. When there were contentions in the Church, about observing
days and eating meats, he labors to withdraw them from questions of this
nature, to the minding and attending of things more spiritual, as not to offend
their weak brethren, verse. 13. and to mind righteousness, peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost, verse. 17.

So when there was strife in the Churches of Galatia about Circumcision and
legal Ceremonies, some being brought to believe and practice these things, the
Apostle recalls them to spirituals, Chap. 5.6. and Chap. 6.15. telling them
that in Christ, or in the days of the Gospel, these were not the things to be
minded, but the new creature, and faith which works by love.

In Coloss. 2. When many were drawn to strange and sottish errors and
practices, that others (who were yet pure) might not be defiled and led a way,
as he says, verse. 4. he calls them to mind spiritual things, verse. 2, 3, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. telling them that the only cause of others miscarriage, was the
neglect of these, verse. 19.

Yet farther, in Heb. 13.9. The Apostle having admonished believers to beware
of errors and strange doctrines, he gives them this rule for a preservative,
to labor that their hearts might be established with grace.

To end, in Jude 20.21. The Holy Ghost having deciphered in the former verses
the false Apostles, and given them their doom, he exhorts to this very duty,
as the best remedy against such evils. But ye beloved, building up your
selves, on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in
the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
life.

All which Scripture allegations (wherein I have been more large than is usual,
by reason of the usefulness of this truth, and sutableness thereof to these
times) argue the truth of the Doctrine, viz.

That the only and special way for a Saint to be delivered from the Errors
and Evils of the Times he lives in, is, to have his heart as much as may be
taken up with, and his spirit exercised about, high and spiritual things.

In the further carrying on of this I shall handle two things.

1 What I mean by spiritual things. 2 Why the exercising the heart in these, is
such a special way, to preserve a Saint from the errors and evils of the times
he lives in.
Concerning the first, By spiritual things, I understand such things as either
tend to the glory of God, the edifying my brother, the winning of souls, the
begetting and increasing of my own peace, the mortifying of sin in me, the
quickening of grace, etc. Such things as these I call Spiritual, and all
principles and practices whatsoever which produce these, or such like effects,
I may term spiritual truths, and spiritual works: And on the other side,
whatsoever opinion or practice it is, which does not produce such like effects,
but the contrary, I may justly exclude from the name of Spiritual. Thus you
have a general notion of what I mean by spiritual things; but now for our help
in the exercising of our hearts about spiritual things, it is very needful that
we have yet a more distinct and particular knowledge of those spiritual things
our hearts should be exercised about, which things though they are many more
than I am able to speak of, or if I were, have time to do it, yet for the help
of those who for want of matter, are at a loss what to exercise their hearts
about, and so usually take that which comes next to hand, which oftentimes
turns to their undoing; I shall therefore, having a large field before me,
glean together some few handfuls of spiritual things, which may serve for
matter for us to exercise our hearts about.

As to begin with that in finite eternal, incomprehensible love of God to poor
sinners; how freely God loved them, when as yet there was nothing lovely in
them, yea how this love was toward them from all eternity, and continues to
eternity again: And also how fruitful this love and grace of God toward them
has been, appearing, as in electing and choosing them in his Son Christ, from
all eternity, to be vessels of glory, and heirs of salvation, who naturally
were of that very lump whereof many become vessels of dishonor, and heirs of
damnation; so also in the fullness of time in sending his only begotten and
beloved Son, who was foreordained to be a Prince and a Savior, out of his own
bosom into the world, there by him to accomplish his own eternal decree
concerning the salvation of his Elect. This is a thing our hearts should be
much taken up with, and our thoughts exercised about.

Again, How that this Jesus Christ the only begotten of the Father, being sent
into the world, did willingly part with for a time, all the glory that he was
right heir unto, and possessor of above, and took upon him (that so he might
accomplish the work of our redemption) our nature, being made man, and born of
the seed of David, according to the flesh, so exceedingly honoring humane
nature, far above the nature of Angels (which he took not) by uniting it to
the Divine.

Again (which our hearts should be much exercised about) how that together
with this our nature, he took upon him the infirmities and miseries thereof,
being poor, hungry, made a reproach, persecuted, and tempted, etc. that he
might be in all things like unto his brethren, and be made a merciful, and
faithful High Priest, and such a one as might be touched with a feeling of our
infirmities, and might sympathize with us, in, and under them all; and how that
after he had finished all things which were to be done by him for our good,
he last of all offered up himself a sacrifice for us, bearing our sins in his
own body on the Tree, together with all the wrath of his Father due to us for
all our sins, whereby pouring out his soul unto death, and making it an
offering for sin, he gave full satisfaction to his Fathers Justice for the
transgression of his people, whom by his death he delivered from wrath to
come, blotting out the handwriting that was against them, and contrary to
them, taking it out of the way, and by this one offering, perfecting for ever
all them that were sanctified, or set apart by the Father.

Again farther, How that having dyed for our sins, he is risen again for our
justification, declaring himself to have gotten the day of the Law, Sin, Hell,
and the Devil, and all the enemies of our salvation; and likewise alluring us
hereby that we are already in him acquitted, God having forgiven us all our
trespasses, and shall assuredly one day rise (as he is risen) to live with him
in glory hereafter, when this our corruptible shall put on incorruption, and
this our mortal shall put on immortality, and death shall be swallowed up
into victory.

Again (which our hearts should be much taken up with) How that Jesus Christ
being now risen, he as the common person of the Saints, and as a glorious
Conqueror is ascended up into heaven, herein triumphing over Principalities and
Powers, which he by his death had spoiled, making a show of them openly, and
leading captivity captive? where being arrived, he is sat down at the right
hand of the Father, upon the Throne of Majesty in the heavens, having Angels,
Principalities and Powers made subject unto him, and all his enemies under his
feet, himself being invested with Majesty and Glory, Sovereignty and Power,
Authority and Judgment, all which he improves for the good of his Saints.

Again farther, How that the Saints as considered in him their common person,
are quickened together with him, and raised up together, and made to sit
together in heavenly places, being sharers and partakers with him in his life
and death, in his humiliation and exaltation, he personating them in both,
having his wisdom, righteousness, riches, holiness, made over to them; so that
they are complete in him, and of his fullness do receive grace for grace.

Again yet farther, how that Jesus Christ being now in the heavens, is there
employed in making preparation, and providing mansions for his Saints against
they come thither; and is continually ready to, and busied in presenting the
wants and petitions of his people to his Father; he also himself in all our
exigencies, and under all our infirmities making intercession for us; so that
we are for ever safe and secure from all fear and danger, he ever living to
make intercession for us: From whence, when all his Elect of Jew and Gentile
shall be called home, he shall gloriously come attended with his mighty
Angels, and ten thousands of his Saints; when as the Spouse being arraied in
fine linen, clean and white, he shall take her to himself, and celebrate his
glorious Marriage, and having done justice upon all her enemies here below, and
judged quick and dead, shall triumphantly carry her with himself into his
Fathers Kingdom, where she shall for ever be with him where he is,
beholding the glory the Father has given him, and enjoying with him fullness
of glory, fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore.

Again yet farther (the thoughts whereof our thoughts should be exercised
about) how that in the mean time, that his people might be gathered together,
and made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, he
has, and continually does send forth his Spirit (the great promise of the
Father) together with Messengers and Ambassadors having the everlasting Gospel
in their mouths, whereby those which everlasting love did in the beginning
choose out of the world, and predestined to the adoption of Sons, are in time
through grace called, and actually, and personally having precious faith given
unto them, justified from all their iniquities, united to him, made children,
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, sanctified by the Spirit, and
through the applying of the blood of Jesus, have their consciences purged from
dead works to serve the ever living and true God, daily going on from faith to
faith, and strength to strength, till in the end they attain the Resurrection
of the dead, and come to behold God in Sion.

Finally, seeing and considering what glorious things are, through grace,
wrought and prepared for us, and which are in part, and shall be in Gods time
fully given to us, it should be the continual exercise of our hearts, and that
which we should be much taken up with, how we may come to attain, and enjoy
these things, so as may make for the glory of God, the good of others, and our
own comfort more: It should be our continual querying, O how shall I come to
know more of Christ, more of the love of God in Christ? How shall I come to
believe in Christ more, to live by faith more, to enjoy the fruit, and comfort
of my election through grace, my redemption, justification by Christ, adoption
in him, union with him, more? How shall I come to be more sanctified by the
Spirit, made more conformable to him, have. more of his Image imprinted upon
me, feel him more in his Death and Resurrection have more fellowship with him
in his sufferings? O how shall I come to have corruption in me daily more
mortified, my pride mortified, my unbeleefe mortified, my corrupt affections
and passions mortified, my luke-warmness, earthly-mindedness, deadness,
formality in duty mortified? How shall I come to have my graces more quickened,
my faith, love, godly-sorrow, humility, self-denial, patience, thankfulness,
contentedness. quickened? O how shall I have a heart carried out more to
glorify God in the place, calling I am in, time, opportunities I have? How
shall I have a frame of heart to go about the service of God more freely,
willingly, cheerfully, and to act in it more purely, sincerely every day than
other? Such things and questions as these are, I call Spiritual things, and
they are the things our hearts should be exercised about?

Object. Must a Saint only be exercised about Spiritual things, are there not
some external things which a Saint must exercise himself, in, and about?

Answ. Yes, there are outward Civil employments, which a Saint as a man, is
with moderation to be exercised about: And also there are outward Ordinances
and institutions of Jesus Christ, which a Saint as he is a Christian, out of
obedience to his Masters command, so far as the same is made clear to him, is
to be exercised in, and about; in exercising himself in which, though the
things themselves are external, yet he injoyes much inward and spiritual
communion with Jesus Christ, therefore I do not oppose spiritual things to all
things external, neither would I be so understood: For though the Kingdom of
God does not consist in meat and drink, yet meat and drink are useful in their
place, and men in an ordinary way cannot live without it. But now when I speak
of a Saints exercising himself in spirituals, I oppose spiritual,

1 To things expressly forbidden, which are simply in themselves evil and
sinful, being things not convenient, nor becoming Saints, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. But
fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints, neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor
jesting, which are not convenient. Profane courses become no man, but worst of
all a Saint.

2 To things light and frivolous. Things indeed unworthy the thoughts of a
Saint, and below him: Such things, as though a man should attain what he aims
at, and would have in them, yet are not worth the breath or wind which is spent
in speaking of them, or the time lent for the study of them; things better
suiting with Infants in grace, who must have their toys and rattles to play
with, though nothing come of it, than those that are men grown, and of age.
Such as are ten hundred empty questions both in natural and divine things,
which the former times have been, and the present age is fruitful in; many of
which should I name, the ridiculousness of them would be an answer to them.
Things that nothing in the world is gained by, but an airy head, and an empty
heart; and therefore I call them light and frivolous; Things indeed below and
unworthy a heart, that has so many precious spiritual things, as would take up
his time should he live twice Methuselahs age to exercise himself about, as
has every Saint, and Son of God; and such variety too of these both for
pleasure and delight, as that he needs not for recreation-sake to have
recourse unto the other: Yea, things, which though they had no other evil
attending of them, yet this they have, I converse in old Adam, and walk after
the flesh, whenever I meddle with them (as were it not out of my way, I could
demonstrate at large) now this we know, that it is the character of a Saint or
Son of God, to walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; and this we
likewise know, that so far as we converse in old Adam, so far we bring our
selves under the curse, there being since the fall a curse pronounced against
all of old Adam, whether good or evil; so that as his evil destroys us, so
his good cannot help us; yea his good by laboring after it in the way of old
Adam, that is, by our own strength and wisdom, and not in the way of the new
Adam; that is, by the strength and wisdom of the Spirit, becomes evil unto us,
and is abominable unto God.

3 To things dark and doubtful; such things about Religion (I mean the
Circumstantials thereof) as are not, neither can be found to be clearly
determined, so as to give satisfaction to the diligent and rational Inquisitor
from Scripture; which things, that some such things there are, I know none but
acknowledge.

Now about these there is verily a fault, when men have their hearts exercised
day and night in making enquiry after them, as if time and reason were given
them to be wholly spent in searching after that, which it may be God would
not have them know, and which would make nothing for their spiritual advantage
being known; it cannot but be a great evil, when God has left us so many
things clear and determined, that we should run out so much of our precious
time and strength, as many do about dark and doubtful things.

Obj. But may some say, what, will you deny all study of these things, may not
I study them, at least to get satisfaction if it may be had concerning them;
or in case there be any truth in them, if possible to find it out?

Answ. I deny not but thou may study these things, so it be done with these
Cautions.

1 That thou be moderate in thy time about studying of them; allot as little
time as may be (though some thou do) to such things, considering always
that thy time is given thee for other work, for greater employments, wherein
thou may be more useful for the glory of God, the end of thy Creation, and
more serviceable to thy present Generation, and more further thine own peace,
and the edification of such as belong to thee, than ever thou can, or art
like to do in following these things.

2 Take heed thy heart be not so taken up with these things as to neglect
greater, and more spiritual things. It is a thing very ordinarily found amongst
Christians, that they lose a great deal of their spiritualnesse by overmuch
meddling, and exercising themselves in things of this nature; so many questions
about doubtful things (this Circumstance, and the other) crowd in, that the
maine spiritual things are thrust out, there is no room for them in the soul.
And truly this is a very sad and spreading evil in our days, wherein things
questionable are altogether in credit and esteem, and things unquestionable
are laid by, and out of date; we more talk of those things wherein we differ
from others, than of those wherein we agree, though the one be but a trifle,
and the other matter of greatest concernment, and here is all the fruit that
comes of it, which every one of us if our trading lie this way, shall by woeful
experience find, we lose our spiritualnesse by so doing.

I am of the mind of that godly man, (Mr. Cradock in his Christian Liberty,
Sermon. 1.) who takes this to be one reason why Christ has left many things
about his Worship in the New Testament so dark and doubtful, whereas every
thing to a tittle, the snuff of a Candle, and Ilet-hole was clearly determined
in the days of the Old Testament, because the design of God in the New
Testament was to bring his Saints to be more spiritual; and therefore as he
has left them (clear) fewer external Laws by far than they had in their
Worship; so those he has left are of a more spiritual nature than theirs were.
Christ was as faithful in his house as Moses in his, and he could have made
us hundreds of little Laws about external things, and tied us up to
Punctillio's as Moses did his Disciples, yea would have done it, had this been
the only or great matter wherein he was to have been faithful; but Christ had
another design in the New Testament, viz. to bring his Saints to be more
spiritual, and therefore though he gives us Laws and Rules for outward
worship so far as concerns the substance, yet he is not so exact and punctual
in laying down Rules touching every Circumstance as Moses was.

3 Take heed thou make not an agreement, or disagreement in things of this
nature, the ground of thy love to Saints, or a rule to judge of Saints by. It
is an evil too common among men to take up some one circumstantial Point, and
(when they have done) put so much stresse upon it, that they will hardly love
any, or own them for Saints which do not presently close with them in it, or
which seem but to oppose this their opinion, though ever so sound, solid, and
gracious otherwise. Will thou study these things? labor then to have, and keep
thy heart in such a frame, as that thou may dearly love a Saint, and own
the grace of God in him, though he should altogether, and always stand off
from thee in this particular.

4 Take heed of making thy own faith and conceptions in things of this nature,
binding to others Consciences; This is an evil something worse than the former,
when men do not only study Niceties, and make Laws for themselves, but when
they have so done, will make Laws for their Brethren, -- and bind their
Consciences to those Laws which they themselves have made. Now, will thou
exercise thy self in things of this nature, take heed then thou make not thy
Conscience the rule of thy Brothers, neither make Laws over him in such things
as thou can not assure his Conscience Christ has made them; I had rather
yield in a hundred things of this nature to a Brothers weakness, than by an
absolute Law of his making to be bound up to one.

Let Saints therefore be wary of tying their Brethren hand and foot in such
things wherein Christ has left them free, for Saints if tied, will not do
that, which if they were left to their liberty, they ought to do, as I
remember Luther says to the Papists about eating their meats, and observing
their days; leave us, says he, to our liberty, we will cat your meats,
observe your days, but bind us hereto, and we will do neither.

5 And lastly, Take heed thy spirit grow not hence by degrees to an affectation
of novelty, or new things. Many there are, who first take delight to pry into
dark and curious questions, and when they have gone on thus a while, there is
nothing will please them but new things, and curious things, they grow out of
love with old truth, and spiritual heart matters, these are fet by, and it must
be some fine new tickling question, that is fit matter only for their thoughts
and meditations; and as for all things else, they account them but low things,
and those that hold them and press them, men of lower light, and of a lower
form, as they say. I am almost confident of if, that most of the errors this
day broached, or on foot in England, or elsewhere, do grow out of this root,
viz. A neglect of exercising the heart about spiritual things, and a desire to
be always prying into dark things, from whence, by degrees there creepes into
the Soul a love of novelty and new matters, which no sooner is in any, but the
heart is as prone and apt to suck in error, as a sponge water, and of all
spirits in searching after truth, I should desire the Lord to keep me from
this, a spirit delighting it self in, and affecting novelty, and new things.

The Reasons of this Point, with the Application, I shall leave to the next
opportunity.

The Second SERMON ON
1 Timothy 6.11. Follow after righteousness, godliness, etc.


THe last opportunity I had in this place, I told you, that the Apostle gives
these words, as a direction to his Scholar Timothy, and in him to all
Believers, how to escape the dangerous errors and evils that then were, or at
any time should be abroad; the direction is, to follow after righteousness,
godliness, etc. as if he should say, employ thy self and thy heart about
these things, and there is no fear of receiving hurt by the other. In General I
told you, the things he mentions are all spiritual things, whence I laid before
you this observation, viz.

Doct. That the only and special way for a Saint to be delivered from the
errors and evils of the times he lives in, is* to have his heart as much as
may be taken up with, and his spirit exercised about high and Spiritual things.

I proved it then unto you, and also showed you what I did mean by Spiritual
things.

I now proceed to the Reasons, why the exercising the heart about Spiritual
things is such a preservative against the errors and evils of the times we
live in.

Reas. 1. Because such a heart as is exercised about Spiritual things finds
not leisure to run out after those poor low things which others trifle away
their time, and lose themselves about. Many there are in the world of whom it
may be said, as Pharaoh once said of the Israelites, Ye are idle, ye are
idle; who are very Idlers, and do nothing at all in Spirituals, by reason
whereof their hearts have a great deal of leisure, which because they would be
doing and find nothing to take too, they busy themselves just as Children and
Boys do when they are idle, about this toy and the other, such a querk and
such a query their time and thoughts are busied about, and they are continually
fancying and inventing new Notions, and Chymaera's, and this bears the Bell,
and is all in request to day, and this to morrow, and thus they strangely lose
themselves, running from one fancy unto another, till in the end they have
outrun Reason, Religion, and all.

Whereas now a Saint which has his heart exercised about spiritual things is
like a man which is in great dealings and trading, which has many weighty
affairs under his hand together, and is by reason hereof so full of employment,
that he cannot find time to beat his brains about this querk, and the other
query, all the time that he has is little enough, and too little, to follow,
so as that he may not be a looser of his greater employments, he finds that
had he two days whereas he has but one, time would be too little for him to
busy himself how he might enjoy more communion with God, understand more of
the great Mysteries of Godliness, get his heart more mortified, his graces
more quickened, etc. though he should allow other things no time at all.

Because to a heart that is exercised about spiritual things, other things are
dry and empty; such a heart neither finds relish in them, nor satisfaction
from them; a spiritual heart delights in things, and relisheth them as they are
spiritual; that which much relisheth a carnal heart, is very dis-relishing to
the Spiritual man. As, take a Carnal ear, that loves to hear things where
there is a great deal of curiosity, and of the varnish of Humane wit and
Wisdom; but now take a Spiritual ear, that delights to hear such things as
have in them evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and power, and finds a
dis-relishing of other things. So take a Carnal eye, that delights to behold
such things as please the Natural sense, and delight the Fancy; but now, a
Spiritual soul, that delights to behold such things as may elevate the Soul,
and raise the affections more toward Heaven; so take a Carnal heart, that is
well pleased when it is exercised about toys, this vain needless question and
the other; but now a Spiritual heart, that can take no comfortable relish in
things of this nature, but they are dry and empty unto it, and therefore it
shuns and avoyds them, and so escapes the danger that comes by them.

3 Because such a heart as is exercised in, and taken up with Spiritual things,
lives (as I may say) in another world, whither these vapors which make the
brains of many men giddy, and their conversation unstedfast, do not ascend;
he lives in the heavenly world, and is a Citizen of Jerusalem above, where he
is free, and not annoyed with such things as others are who live below; the
air that he breathes in is pure, and not infected with such vapors; the food
that he feeds upon turns to Spiritual nourishment, and does not beget
crudities and ill humors in the Soul; and by reason of this wonderful change
of place, air, and food, there is likewise such a change wrought in his temper
and constitution, as that his nature will not away with, or brook the
principles and practices of men who live here below, and speak and act as
children of this world.

4 Because a heart exercised about Spiritual things, has ends and designs
which he finds he can never accomplish in such ways. His ends and designs
are, that he may glorify God, edify his Brother by what he says and does,
and have the peace and comfort of it in his own Conscience; that through his
knowledge his Corruptions may be mortified, his Graces quickened, etc. now he
finds, that he can never accomplish his ends and designs by studying quaint
and curious Notions, but rather is set further off, his own corruptions by but
looking toward them, gathers strength, and overtops Grace upon the sudden;
instead of bringing honor to God, God is dishonored; his Brother, instead of
receiving edification, is in danger of being seduced and carried together with
him out of the way of truth, and all his solid Soul-humbling inward peace
degenerates into a kind of fantastic and self-conceited joy; so that of
necessity he must let fall his design, and take up a worse if ever he go in
this way, the fore-fight and consideration whereof, makes him shie and averse
thereunto.

Use 1. Hence we may learn what is the grand cause of all those errors and
evils which swarm and abound in this our age; why, Christians hearts are not
exercised in spiritual things. Should one come and ask me a reason of the too
strange and lamentable mistakes, and fearful miscarriages, so palpable and
common amongst many, professing themselves to be Saints in these our days;
how it comes to pass, or what is the reason that those who formerly were one,
should now be so many; who loved with the most entire affections that could
be, should now hate one another; who were so lively and active, should now be
so dead and sleepy; who thought they could never do enough, should now cast
off all; I can assure you, I know none more probable than this, Christians
hearts are not so exercised about high and Spiritual things as once they were.
Christians that once were taken up with spiritual things, as Prayer, Reading,
Hearing, meditating of the Word, watching and observing their own hearts, and
these too in a Spiritual manner, have now either laid these aside, or are grown
more cold and formal in their exercising in them.

I have observed it amongst Christians in our days, that one day such an
opinion being abroad you shall have one tampering with that, and there he drops
a little of his spirituality; by and by with another, and there he drops a
little more; then another, there too he drops a little more, till in the end
his spirituality (I mean that spiritual frame of heart which before he had) is
quite lost; which being gone, he is like another man, as peevish, foolish,
light-spirited as any. And if I mistake not, it is one of the Devils greatest
designs in the bringing in of opinions, by degrees to eat out that power and
life of godliness in the hearts of Saints, which by force and violence of
temptation he could never work out; herein dealing like a politic Warrior,
who finding a place too strong to attempt by open force, by secret and subtle
undermining gets into it.

It fares in this case with Christians as with a man that touches Pitch, let
him touch it ever so lightly yet somewhat of it will stick to him; so whilst
Christians are tampering with opinions, though ever so lightly, yet a tincture
remains, something thereof cleaves to their spirits, and steals from them
something of their spirituality; as for example, it is some men's opinion, that
a man need never pray except in private ejaculations; now though perhaps your
hearts cannot fully own it, yet is there not some tincture of it, some dust
cleaving to your spirits? And as for this one, so also there are opinions
abroad against all Ordinances, your hearts cannot close with such things, and
yet perhaps by hearing these things, and talking with persons this way, some
tincture hereof cleaves to you, so as that you grow more slighty in hearing,
reading, meditation, and every other Ordinance than formerly you were.
Something of your former spirituality hereby is lost and extinguished.

This (as I have said), as far as I am able to judge, is the grand cause of all
the errors and evils that are amongst Christians, the Devil by degrees steals
away their hearts from exercising in spiritual things; and having so done, then
they grow like other men, this toy which once they would have thought unworthy
of their time or thoughts, takes up both; and this practice which once their
hearts would have abhorred and trembled at, they now embrace, making no bones
of it, and the root of all is, a neglecting of spiritual things.

Use 2. As this shows us the cause of the fall and Apostasy of many persons, so
also this tells us, That there are many who yet are not tumbled that stand upon
slippery ground, and will tumble in time if they do not come off it. Art thou a
man or woman, which time has been, have had thy heart warm to spiritual
things, and spiritual works, and does thy heart now grow cold to things of this
nature, and art thou warm to every curious notion, and new opinion, thou art
the person I speak to, and Soul let me tell thee, thou art upon slippery
ground, if thou come not off, thou will tumble. You know how it is with a
horse that goes roughcast upon the Ice, a little time he goes well, but within
a while the Ice wears off his rough-cast, and he grows smooth, and then down
he tumbles. So thou art one who have had some favor, and art rough-cast, and
thou walk abroad into opinions, and brave conceits which please thy fancy,
and a while thou stand, because there has been some favor, some
spirituality upon thy heart, which has rough-cast thee, but in time walking in
this way, thy rough-cast is by degrees worn off, and thou growest smooth, and
then down thou tumblest. Take heed, come off this slippery ground before thy
rough-cast be worn away; for if thou do not, assuredly so soon as that shall
be, thou will fall, and if God of his great mercy do not set thee on thy legs,
thou will never get up so as to stand and walk again.

Use 3. Would thou be delivered from the dangerous errrors and evils of the
times and places thou do live in? then in the third place, Embrace this
remedy, get thy heart exercised in, and taken up with spiritual things. I need
say no more by way of motive, than to repeat over the Doctrine, viz. That the
way for a Saint to be delivered from the errors and evils of the times he
lives in, is, to have his heart as much as may be taken up with, and his
spirit exercised about high and spiritual things. Yet because our hearts are so
dull of hearing, that a great deal said moves them but a little, I shall
therefore besides the Doctrine, lay some few other motives before you to stir
up to this, to have our hearts more exercised in, and taken up with spiritual
things.

1 Consider, This is the way, a special way to maintain peace in thine own
soul. Were a man's abode in the upper region of the air, he should neither be
troubled with storms or cloudings, because he should be above all. So soul,
were thy heart and mind always taken up with spiritual things in a spiritual
manner, we should be more free from storms within, more free from the
cloudings of Gods face than now we are; we should have more inward calm, and
Sunshine of Gods love in a day, than now perhaps we have in a month.

2 This also is the way to end divisions amongst Saints. The way to cure a
disease is to take away the cause: What is the cause of divisions amongst
Saints, but the not exercising of our hearts about spiritual things. The root
of our divisions is our carnality, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. For ye are yet carnal: For
whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal, and walk as men? For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am
of Apollo, are ye not carnal? When Christians who should be one, divide
themselves and make parties, one party setting themselves might and maine
against the other, it is a sign that they are carnal; but now as Saints come
to be more spiritual, and more taken up with spiritual things, they come to
see their own folly and childishness in these things, they come to look upon,
and have fellowship with Saints as they are Saints, as they have the Image of
God upon them, Christ in them, The spiritual Christian loves what God loves,
and where God loves; now God loves his own Image in all, and all as they have
this Image upon them. Thus the spiritual Christian who is taken up with
spiritual things, loves, and has fellowship with Saints as they are Saints;
whoever they are which he sees to be such (if there be not some eminent blot
either upon their conversations or judgments, which after admonitions
remaining, so as that the glory of God, and the honor of the Gospel, calls
aloud for withdrawing communion from them) he dares not but to love them, own
them, and have fellowship with them as God does, and as he himself hereafter
in heaven shall do, Now this exceedingly heals, and makes up breaches amongst
the Saints.

3 The exercising of the heart about spiritual things, is the way to
dis-enamour a man's heart of the world. The way to dis-enamour a man of a base
and vulgar person, is to have his heart enamoured with a person of great worth
and excellency. So the way to dis-enamour our hearts of low, carnal, and
earthly things, is to have them enamoured with high spiritual, and heavenly
things. Paul says, Col. 3.1. If you be risen with Christ, seek things above
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Christ's sitting at the right
hand of God, is a motive to us to seek things above; as if he should say,
Would you have your hearts spiritual, be much in cogitation of this, Christ is
above, he is at the right hand of God; and say, What is my head above, my
husband above, my Savior, my all above, and shall I mind things here below?

O Christians were you busied in spiritual things, you would be less busy
with the world; Were your hearts and thoughts more taken up about your union
with Christ, your justification, your inheritance you are called to, etc. you
would not root in the world as ye do. Moles root themselves in the earth, but
Birds do not, because they fly aloft; they are much above, and take no delight
to root in the earth: Be as the Bird, but not as the Mole, Christians.

4 The exercising of the heart about spiritual things, begets a sweet
disposednesse of spirit both to, in, and after every duty; It disposes the
heart to a duty, such a heart is in a frame to pray at any time, to speak a
spiritual word at any time, when he sees a call thereto; other Christians they
have a heart to a spiritual work to day it may be, but find not a heart for a
week together at another time: When they are to go to a duty, they have a great
deal ado to get their hearts up to what they are going about, their hearts are
in the world, in their profits and pleasures, and as their duty calls on one
hand, these call on the other, and not without much ado do they bring their
hearts from these to their duty, whereas this heart that is taken up with
spiritual things, is ready for the duty when ever it calls.

And as to a duty, so also it does sweetly dispose the heart in a duty. It is
said of Mr. Bradford, that he never came off from a duty without enjoying
somewhat of God therein: A spiritual heart injoyes more of God many times in
one duty, than another does in twenty.

And so after a duty, a spiritual heart walks sweetly and bravely after a duty:
You shall have others come, and get up a little comfort in a duty, and when
they have got a little comfort, they will walk basely, they will run themselves
head and ears into the world, until they have quite lost all that comfort and
communion that they had with God in the duty. But now a spiritual heart (if
yours and mine were such) after he has been at a duty, and met with God
there, his conversation is like Moses face when he came off the Mount, it
shines; his behavior, speeches, actions, his carriage toward Saints and
sinners shines, there is a luster, a beauty, a glory upon them; as it was said
of Peter and John, seeing their boldness and undauntedness, and considering
they were unlearned, and ignorant men, they took notice of them that they had
been with Jesus. So the carriage and words, and behavior of a spiritual heart,
after he comes off from a duty where he has met with God, is such, that by
speaking with him, and hearing of him, you may say, there is a man, a woman
that has been with Jesus, he walks, he talks as one that has met with Jesus.

5 By exercising the heart about spiritual things, a man shall be brought up to
a blessed composedness, and stayednesse of heart upon God, in all the
alterations, changes, and turns of things here below; turns in the World,
change of Dispensations do often times put another man out of his course. But
now, take a he^rt that is exercised about spiritual things, and let ever such
great changes and alterations come, he still keeps on in his way, though
States, and Kingdoms, and Empires are turned upside down, yet he is not moved.
The Psalmist speaking of such a man, Psalm. 112.7. says of him, He shall not be
afraid of evil tidings; Why? his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. What a
blessed frame of spirit was there in David, when as Ziglag was burnt, his Wives
and Children taken Prisoners, the people spoke of stoning him, he encouraged
himself, says the Text, in the Lord his God. David in the midst of this
hurly-burley, this tumult and tempest (which would have made another man at his
wits end) has a blessed composed quiet frame of spirit staying himself on God.

6 And lastly, The exercising of the heart about Spiritual things, will make a
man contented with all conditions whatsoever befall him in outward things. Paul
by having his heart exercised in these things, had learned in every condition
to be content, he knew how to be full, and how to be hungry; how to abound, and
to suffer want: when our hearts are taken up with Spiritual things, with God,
communion with God and Christ, let Sickness come, Poverty come, reproach,
persecution come, yet nothing comes amiss; a man will have something to
delight himself in, or else he will never be content; now when the delight
of the Soul is in Spiritual things, when the Soul enjoyes these, and possesses
these, though the Soul want many outward things, yet it can be content: says
the Soul, true, I have not the pleasures of this World, the Dignities and
Honors of this World, the Riches of this World as others have, but I have
better Pleasures, better Honors, better Riches than any this World can afford,
and therefore why should I not be content?

Quest. But how shall I come to have my heart taken up with Spiritual things?

Ans. 1. Be much in the study of the Gospel; the Gospel that gives the Spirit,
it holds forth and preaches the Spirit, it makes discovery of the things of
the Spirit to us; now, would thou have thy heart taken up with Spiritual
things, get a clear sight of this Gospel, where these things in the beauty,
sweetness, glory, and excellency of them, are revealed and made known.

2 Thou must of necessity be born again; By Nature thou art no other but
flesh, and flesh will never be delighted with the things of the Spirit, for
they are contrary unto it.

3 Pray to God to give thee of his spirit; it is the Spirit of God dwelling in
us that makes us to be delighted with Spiritual things. The natural man (says
Paul) that is, the man that has not the Spirit, he perceives not the things
of the Spirit, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Would thou know, and have thy heart taken up with spiritual
things, pray to God then to give thee of his Spirit, to make thee a Spiritual
man.

4 Associate thy self with the most spiritual Saints. Take dead Coals and lay
them to dead coals, and one does not warm nor kindle the other, but take a dead
coal and lay it to a live coal, and the live coal will kindle the dead
coal. So take a company of Saints that are dead and lay them together, and
there will be little warming of one another; but take a dead Saint and put him
to a lively Saint, and he that is lively will warm the dead Saint; the seeing
of his life, and zeal, and love, and spiritualnesse, will provoke the other,
and set him all in a flame; for when a dead-hearted Saint sees the life of
another he is ashamed of himself, and will be restless with God till in some
measure he has attained that life that he saw in the other.

5 Let not a day pass over, but at one time or other of that day, hold thy
heart close for some time to some Spiritual work; either Prayer by thy self,
Meditation, Self-examination, or the like. You know, things that are hard at
first, through use and custom become habitual; so, did thou use thy heart
daily to be employed about some spiritual work, thou would be more easily
brought to an exercise in spirituals. Often neglects and disuse make a thing
hard, let a man neglect a spiritual work one day, it will be harder to bring
his heart to it the next, than it was that.

6 Keep thy heart heated and warmed as much as may be with the love of God and
Christ; whilst Iron is hot it is easy to beat it into this or that form; but
when it is cold it will not work, and so nothing will be done; whilst the heart
is warmed with the love of God it is easy to bring it to this as that
spiritual work, but when it is cold and dead it will not work.

7 Watch all opportunities that offer themselves to thee, whereby thou may
increase thy delight in spiritual things, or have thy heart more warmed to
things of this nature; sometimes a Christian has an opportunity offered to
speak a Spiritual word to some, or do some spiritual work, and taking the same
he has his heart more spiritual, and in a sweeter frame to go about any
spiritual work for a week after than it was before.

8 Be most humble when thou art most spiritual; the policy of Satan is, when he
cannot hinder the Soul from minding spiritual things, to make it proud of its
spiritualnesse, knowing thereby he shall rob it thereof; and I am persuaded
the Saints do not loose a spiritual frame of heart oftener by any one device of
Satan than this. Therefore would thou keep up a spiritual frame of heart,
look to it, that thou ever walk most humbly, when thou art most spiritual.

9 Take heed of these things.

1 Of being discouraged to a Spiritual work by thine own deadness; oftentimes
out deadness discourageth us to a Spiritual work; I am dead, and therefore
discouraged to pray, to speak to another, it may be I think I should but play
the Hypocrite in doing these things, and so I am discouraged to that which is
my duty; take heed of this, when a Saint goes over the head of such a
discouragement, many times to his duty, his heart is made alive in it.

2 Take heed of all curiosity; There is not a greater enemy to spirituality in
the World than curiosity is, the more of curiosity is in our Preaching, I dare
affirm it, that there will be the less spirituality in the Preachers heart,
the less fruit of his preaching; if a man have a design to be curious, there
will be so much Carnal fear lest things should not be taking with others, so
much pride when he thinks they are, as let him do what he can, he shall not
keep up a spiritual heart in his work; now there is a threefold curiosity.

First, of Notions, when I am curious of this, ever to deliver some fine new
Notions.

Secondly, of Method, when I tie my self so to the rules of Method, that I will
not digress a hair whatsoever good may come of it.

Thirdly, of Expressions, when I strive to cloth what I deliver, in brave
curious taking Language; neither of these wore in Paul, and in whomsoever they
are, he shall not for his heart be spiritual.

3 Unnecessary Disputes, Luther says, by Disputing he had lost many a
spiritual frame of heart. Though we come off Conquerours, yet yet seldom do
we come off better, but many times worse from a Dispute, than when we went to
the same. Paul bids Timothy and Titus for this reason avoid these, 1 Timothy 6.4,
5. He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and strifes of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that
gain is godliness, from such withdraw thy self. And verse. 20. O Timothy, keep
that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane, and vain bablings, and
oppositions of Science, falsely so called. And Chap. 1.4. Neither give heed to
Fables, and endless Genealogies, which minister questions, rather than godly
edifying which is in faith, 2 Timothy 2.23. But foolish and unlearned questions
avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes:

The Preface to the ensuing Discourse, concerning the Old Covenant, by a Friend
to the Author thereof.
IT is recorded of Moses, that he dyed, that the Lord buried him, and no man
knows of his Sepulcher unto this day, Deuteronomy. 34.6. Whereby, as the Lord did
honor him, so he did provide against that undue honor which Israel might
superstitiously give unto him: But the Devil who wished Moses dead when alive,
Exodus 17.4. would have him live when dead, Jude 9. Hereby in a figure another
thing is transferred unto us, viz. That the Law being dead (and the Seed being
come, the Law is dead) it should be sought after no more, be mentioned, or
magnified no more, that Jesus who is the true Joshua may live alone, and reign
alone; But the Adversary who opposes the Law in the Lawless, for whom it was
made, exalts the Law in the righteous, who are delivered from it, persuading
those that a little service, a little obedience is enough, and these that all
is too little, that loosnesse may destroy those, and that these, if possible,
might perish through bondage.

Whose heart does not ache to consider the diversity of Opinions found amongst
the professing Disciples of the Lord Jesus? Yea, whose heart would not bleed,
seriously considering the diversity of Religion also, whilst men remove from
him that calls into the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel? Gal. 1.6.

1 Who seek righteousness unto faith, a present to appease an angry God, that
afterward they may see his face, who send their duties before them, as Jacob
sent his Droves, when he went to meet Esau his brother, saying, These are to
find grace in the eyes of my Lord. But do not seek faith unto righteousness,
that they might say, If now I have found grace in thy sight, accept my present
at my hand.

2 Who seek righteousness for a foundation, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us?
Why, because we have prophesied in thy name, etc. Matthew. 7.22. But have no
foundation for their righteousness, being as the house built upon the sands,
Matthew. 7.26.

3 Who bless themselves in themselves, that they are not as other men, but
never bless themselves in the Lord, that he is not as other Lords. It is one
thing to be a Protestant, another to be a Christian; one thing to be
reformed upon the same root, another thing to be made altogether new; Papists
may become Protestants, and Popish Churches obtain another name, but what is
Antichristian in Constitution, cannot be Christian in Reformation; reform a
Beast, yet though tame, gentle, better ordered every way, it is a Beast still.

It is therefore the greatest concernment upon earth for a Christian to prove
himself legitimate by the Fathers, and also by the mothers side: The Jews were
blind, who said, they were Abraham's seed, and never in bondage to any man,
Joh. 8.33. yet in bondage to the Romans at that time; and though naturally they
were from Sarah, yet mystically from Hagar, a seed to be cast out.

Have inquired (Reader) who is thy Mother upon the account of the new birth;
thou say God is thy Father, but by whom? by the bondwoman, or by the free?
by the old Covenant, or by the New? The following discourse may help thee in
thy discoveries thereabout: The Author was (in the eyes of many) as an Angel
flying through the midst of heaven, in a great measure mighty in word and deed,
who having the mind of Christ, had also his work of witnesse-bearing to his
Kingdom, Joh. 18.37. yet did he not so converse in the outward, as to be a
stranger to that within, nor as Balaam, who did advertise Balack what Israel
should do unto his people, himself yet abiding in the tents of Moab. He was a
witness of truth in truth, living the use and application of what be taught,
whose gifts made him desirable, grace more, humility most of all, when his face
did shine he knew it not, when he had most of works in his building (for he
used them much) he could endure none in his foundation, who would say Old
Covenant ground is rotten, what is builded thereupon will fall.

Let his resolves concerning the Old Covenant be improved unto Conclusions
touching the New, and thou will say looking from Hagar unto Sarah, as sometimes
Abraham when he saw Egyptian faces, Now I perceive thou art fair; and surely
thou had seen her much more fair, had she been presented in that light which
the worthy Author was furnished with, but that is translated, to shine in this
world no more: Accept therefore of a few words from a stammering lip,
supplementi gratia, and know,

The New Covenant was not in its constitution after the Old, but before it.
Adam in the day of his creation was under it; and although it was Adams duty
from the will of God imposing a Law thereunto, to expect his standing in favor
from his standing in obedience; yet it was also Adams unseen privilege, from
the will of God disposing of events, to be accepted from everlasting to
everlasting in Christ Jesus. It is called therefore New, respecting the Old,
not in the Constitution, but Revelation thereof.

2 Consent and acceptance is not necessary to the constitution of the
Covenant, as Gods Covenant with every living creature that he would drown the
world no more, Genesis 9.10. was not founded in the consent of the creature, but
in the will and purpose of God. So also Gods Covenant for calling, justifying,
and glorifying the Elect. There is a Covenant-rule, Israel, To. 11.27. a
Covenant with Israel, Israel ignorant thereof, and a stranger thereto, as Ephesians.
2.12. for Israel is no Covenanter until faith, nor can receive the end of the
Covenant, but according to the connection of means and end, the fruit also of
the Covenant and effect of the grace thereof.

3 The New Covenant in its constitution has not Mankind for its object, but
the elect remnant, who are in it, not because they believe, but who believe
because they are in it, Heb. 8.10. This is the Covenant I will make with the
House of Israel after those days, etc. not that the Covenant is made after
those days, but fulfilled, yet because in the promulgation Christ is tendered,
Repentance and Faith required in him, with assurance that whosoever believes in
him shall not perish; therefore are all to adhere to that revelation, not
perplexing themselves about secret intention, which cannot be known unto
submission, but after it.

4 The New Covenant, is a Covenant of Grace, not in a large sense only, for so
the Old Covenant was of Grace, the Lord did no more owe unto man a Covenant
than Creation; but in a special sense, and distinguishing from the old
Covenant, viz. in freeness, in fullness, in firmness.

1 The New Covenant is a free and absolute Covenant, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10.
where the terms are not, I will if ye will, but I will, and ye shall, the
Lord being the only taking party, and active in making the Covenant, man being
passive, and taken into it, long before he takes hold upon it, or upon Christ
in it; it is called therefore the New Testament, it being the nature of a
Testament to dispose of good things, without the concurrence of any precedent
act as necessary thereunto, to be performed by them, to whose advantage those
good things are disposed of; moreover, it is the New Testament in the Blood of
Christ, the Head of the Covenant, and Surety thereof; had Adam fulfilled the
Condition of his Covenant, it had not remained conditionally to his Seed, but
they had enjoyed Paradise though not without works, yet without works as the
condition of such enjoyment. In like manner, Jesus Christ having performed the
condition of the Covenant of Reconciliation, his Seed has peace though not
without faith, not without works, yet without them as the condition thereof.

It is a famous question, whether Faith be the condition of the New Covenant,
as Works were the condition of the Old, and argued with much seeming strength
on both sides, although with: many it is (...), were it not for the Word there
would be no strife, intending by a condition but medium fruitionis, means of
enjoyment of the end of the Covenant, or qualificatio faederalis the
qualification of a Covenanter, necessary unto an actual claim, and title to
the blessings thereof, in which sense the thing is granted, but not the
expression.

The New Covenant is pure and absolute in respect of condition, many good from
first to last being founded, not in the will of man, but of God; consider it in
the Decree, that is absolute, and inconditional, and according to the good
pleasure of God, Ephesians. 1.5. a purpose of God which does stand not of works,
but of him which calls, Romans 9.11. Who has mercy on whom he will have mercy,
verse. 15. If the Decree were conditional, it were no deceiver till after the
Condition; did God decree to write Names in his Book upon condition they
believe, repent, and persevere, none are written till then, not till the
exhalation of their last breath, which is the utmost of perseverance the
condition thereunto, which is contrary to the Scriptures, Ephesians. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1.9.
Tit. 1.2. Rev. 13.8. Consider it in the execution, that is, absolute also, and
inconditional, as the Decree is: If the Decree of life be antecedent to the
Decree of faith in order of nature, then faith is no condition unto life in the
execution, though no man does live without faith; or thus, If the Decree of
glorifying of grace in the salvation of the creature, be antecedent to the
sanctification thereof, then sanctification is no condition in the execution,
though no man not sanctified, be glorified for the Lord peremptorily decrees to
sanctify, and save; God does not one thing for another, though one thing after
another, therefore vocation is free, Romans 8.30. Matthew. 11.25, 26. Jam. 1.18.
Justification free, Romans 3.24-4. 5-5.18. Sanctification free, Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel.
36.27. Glorification free, Romans 9.21.23. The Kingdom of Christ is a dew from
the Lord which waits not for men, nor tarrieth for the sons of men, Mic. 5.7.

What place then has faith in the doctrine of the Covenant? We may say of
faith, as Tertullus of the Governor, Act. 24.2. By thee we enjoy much
quietness; yet in all things Jesus Christ must have the pre-eminence, Col.
1.18. It is a temptation and a suare when souls study faith more than Christ,
believe in faith more than in Christ, and reason more for, or against
themselves from some work in them, than from the word and promise of the
Father; consider therefore,

1 Faith is needful not unto the procurement of New Covenant blessings, but the
enjoyment thereof, not any grace is purchased, but much grace is possessed
thereby, Joh. 3.36. When a man is called unto a dinner, coming is needful, not
unto procurement, but enjoyment.

2 Faith gives no man a right to Christ, or in Christ, but receives a right.
The ransom of Christ, and acceptance thereof, is not mine, because I believe,
but because it was intended for me, is given unto me, as the bread I eat is
not mine, because I eat it, but upon some other former account; it is in vain
to give hope a reason for life, unless hope have a reason.

3 The Covenant is constituted in the whole without faith, but not so executed;
The Elect, non-convert are the children of the Covenant according to the
Constitution, but not according to the Execution, being afar off in the region
and shadow of death, and yet loved before the world was, free from the curse
which was wholly and only as to them upon the head of the Lord Jesus, Gal.
3.13.

Wherefore faith being the fruit of the Covenant, and but subordinate and
secondary means unto the actual fruition of the blessings of it, it cannot
properly be called the Condition of the Covenant, or have any higher respect
then that order and way in which the fullness of Christ, who is the life, is
communicated and received unto life eternal, a consequent of the Covenant,
though antecedent to salvation, as also prayer is, Romans 10.13. which yet is not
the condition of the Covenant.

What danger is there in making faith the condition of the New Covenant, as
works were of the old?

Answ. Much danger many ways.

1 The condition of the Old Covenant was the matter of justification, by which,
and for which a man was justified, but faith is no such matter, therefore no
such condition, 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 5.19. The obedience which is the souls
righteousness, is the obedience of one, but the obedience in believing, is the
obedience of many, even of as many as do believe, therefore that obedience is
not the souls righteousness.

2 Faith is a Law-duty, and the work of faith a Law-work, though the object of
faith be of Gospel-revelation; now if a Law-work be the condition of the New
Covenant; It is not a Covenant of grace, but works, Romans 11.6. If it be of
works, it is no more grace, else work is no more work.

3 A man might stay upon Old Covenant works, because the condition of his
Covenant, as Hezekiah did, 2 King. 20.4. and Abijah did, 2 Chronicles. 13.12. But a
man may not stay upon his faith, nor entreat favor for his faiths sake, but
for Christ's sake. The Old Covenant made premises unto performances, the New
Covenant makes promises of performances: Many promises indeed are made of
comfort to them that mourn, of rest to them that are weary, of pardon to them
that confess; but not because they mourn, are weary, or confess: In promises
of this nature, faith finds footing not in a condition, but in a connection, as
also when the promise says, The barren shall bring forth, I will pour water
upon dry ground; here is no condition, for barrenness and dryness is none,
but here is a connection unto faith, a heart full of groans, an eye full of
tears, a life full of reformation may be good signs, but bad grounds, faith
knows nothing but Jesus Christ.

4 The condition of the Old Covenant was to be performed in the power of him
that was in Covenant, and was no part of the Covenant to be given of God, in
which respect it is compared unto Pharoahs Taskmasters, who required the whole
tale of Brick, but gave no straw; Faith is no such condition, because the work
of God, wherein he is mindful of his Covenant and Engagement, though not to
the creature, yet to himself, and to his Son on the behalf of the creature, 2
Cor. 4.13. Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19 -- 2.8. Hagar has seed but in a natural way, an
Ishmael, who was of the Law, of Works, after the flesh: Sarah also has seed,
but in a supernatural way, an Isaac who was of promise, of faith, of the
Spirit, Gal. 4.29. Works were the condition of the Old Covenant, and not Fruit:
Faith is the fruit of the New Covenant, and not the condition.

5 What is properly conditional in the constitution, is certainly uncertain in
the event, all the good covenanted for, hangs upon the condition, as that which
may be enjoyed or lost. The Old Covenant was so, according to the tenor
whereof Ishmael the child thereof is cast out. But the New Covenant is not so,
not a Covenant which way be broken, Heb. 7.22.-9.15, 16, 17. being of the
nature of a Testament, Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25. therefore not a Covenant
properly conditional, or having faith for a condition as Works, were in the Old
Covenant.

I shall add no more under this head, lest I be reproved for furnishing so
large a Porch to so little an house.

The New Covenant is a Covenant of Grace distinguished from the Old in the
fullness thereof.

The Old Covenant had but the shadow of good things, but the shadow of
Election, Vocation, Justification, etc. The High Priest was but a shadow. So
the Temple, the Sacrifice, the Peace, Heb, 10.1, 2. None fully purged, or fully
pardoned, or furnished with a full answer to every charge and challenge of the
Law, Heb. 9.9. But the New Covenant has the substance, being full of Christ,
it is full of grace and truth, For by one offering, he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. Under this Covenant no more conscience of
sin, Heb. 10.2. not that a man is past sinning, or past feeling, but because
he is past charging, Romans 8.33, 34. No more conscience of sin as transgression
of the Law, which is a Law of sin and death, Romans 8.2. No more conscience of
sin as a debt to that Law, and so needing new Sacrifice, but as Christ made
satisfaction once, and at once, Romans 6.10. Heb. 7.27. 1 Pet. 3.18. so he is
made righteousness.

The Old Covenant was a weak Covenant, not in commanding or condemning power,
it is able to damn a whole world for disobedience, but in helping a poor
miserable undone creature, Romans 8.3. What can the Sun do for a blind man, a
Physician may help nature, but cannot give it; the Old Covenant is like unto
those Physicians upon whom the woman that had the Bloody-issue waited twelve
years, and spent all her substance, being never the better, but the worse. The
New Covenant is like unto Christ, if we touch but the hemm of that Garment,
there is healing, which does not only declare a Law for the heart, but also
write it upon the heart, not impose a duty only, but dispose unto obedience,
administering not only the letter, but the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6.

The Old Covenant is like unto Moses the Minister thereof, who could not lead
the people into Canaan. The New is like unto Joshua a Type of our Jesus, under
whom the Tribes received their Inheritance. Compare the times of Moses and
Joshua, and you will find a fullness of grace in Joshuahs time. Compare the
times of the Old and New Covenant, you will find a fullness of grace in the
New Covenant time, exceeding fullness, comparative with the former time.

1 Moses his Spies brought up an ill report upon the good Land, Numb. 13.32.
but Joshuahs returned with glad tidings, Jos. 2.23. Under Moses, the Land is
seen as a Land to be obtained by warlike performances, and the enemies being
mighty, they are discouraged. Under Joshua the Land is seen as a Land of
Promise to be given unto them in faithfulness. Reformations under the Old
Covenant commonly miscarry, men are discouraged, and run from Moses back again
into Egypt, when corruption and temptation show themselves, men say as the
Prophets servant, Alas what shall we do? Under the New Covenant man's eye being
open unto the Lord, they can say with the Prophet, There are more for us, than
be against us; and with the Apostle, We can do all things, Jesus Christ
strengthening of us.

2 Moses led the people toward the Land, within sight of it, and left them,
Joshua led them into Canaan. Under the Old Covenant men may be toward the
Kingdom, and nigh unto it, but under the New, they enter it, and possess it.
Agag may be taken prisoner, and bound under the one, but he is hewn in
sunder, and destroyed under the other.

3 Under Moses, Circumcision was neglected during the time that Israel was in
the Wilderness. Under Joshua it was renewed, Jos. 5.5, 9. So under the Old
Covenant men are driven from iniquity by fear of punishment, or dragged on in a
way of duty by hope of reward, the heart not yet set against that, nor for
this. Under the New Covenant the heart is circumcised to love the Lord, and
thereby sweetly drawn after him.

4 No Jubilee was kept by Moses, nor by the people in his time, but under
Joshua it had its observation: In like manner the Old Covenant can bind, but
it cannot loose; can declare and offer liberty, but never give: Hagar is in
bondage, and her children, But Jerusalem which is above is free, Gal. 4.26:

I might enlarge Discourse upon this head, but it would not be suitable to the
nature of a Preface.

The New Covenant is a Covenant of grace distinguished from the Old in the
firmness of it. This conclusion stands clear in the light of the former,
because free, and full, therefore everlasting, every supposed breach inferring,
either a failing in the condition on man's part, and so the Covenant is not
free, or a failing in the creation on Gods part, and so it is not full, in
either assertion is the destruction of the glory of the first Covenant.

1 The New Covenant is the will of God, not only imposing or approving
something to be done by us, which will is terminated upon duty, but also
disposing and ordering us, and all that is to be done in us, for us, by us, or
upon us, which will is terminated upon event. The will of God in the former
consideration may be resisted and broken, Luke 12.47. the will of God in the
latter sense stands for ever, Romans 9.19. Isa. 46.10. in which will is that
Covenant, Genesis 9.11. to which the New C^venant is compared, Isa. 54 9.

2 The New Covenant is confirmed in Christ, Gal. 3.17. as there is no standing
but in him, so we may be bold to say, There is no falling but with him (if so
be, we are found in him) his mercy is ours, Isa. 55.3. his blessing ours,
Ephesians. 1.3. his inheritance ours, Romans 8.17. we dyed in him, rose in him, were
with him in his welcome from the grave, when the Father said, Thou art my Son
for ever. See Psalm. 89.4. etc.

3 The New Covenant is the subject matter of Christ's Intercession, who is our
Melchisedeck a Priest for ever, and he ever lives as a Priest to make
Intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. If Christ intercede he is heard, Joh. 11.42.
If he intercede for Covenant-grace he is heard for it. If he intercede for
ever, he is heard for ever, and that which he intercedes upon, abides for
ever. Sometimes Christ did intercede as a man for himself in the pure and
spotless self-love; for his neighbor in that love which did lead him to seek
good for another as for himself; but then his intercession were conditional,
either expressly, as Father if it be possible let this cup pass away; or
implicitly, as when he prayed for his persecutors, saying, Father forgive
them, etc: He did intercede also as a Mediator, Joh. 17.9. and such
intercessions were always absolute, and absolutely fulfilled, in which he was
not as a Petitioner barely, but an Advocate, having Law and Justice on his side.

Such as inquire into this grand Charter of Christian privilege, know, that
much more might be said to each particular, and with much more evidence and
clearness of conviction, for it is not every ones portion to be able to
furnish out a tall ship, if a poor Fisher boat, if a plank or board may help a
tossed soul into the bosom of the New Covenant, I have my end. Let the Lord
whose strength is made perfect in weakness, have all the glory.

Of the Old Covenant.
Gal. 3.30. Cast out the Bondwoman and her Son, for the Son of the Bondwoman
shall not be Heir with the Son of the Freewoman.


THese words are by our Apostle quoted from Genesis 21.10 being taken out of
Abraham's. History, whether by referring them we shall soon see their literal
meaning.

Abraham (as the Apostle tells us) had two Sons, one by Hagar, a Bondwoman,
another by Sarah a Freewoman. Of these two, Ishmael the Bond-womans Son,
mocking at Isaac the Free-womans, is adjudged; First, by Sarah the Freewoman,
after that by God himself, to be cast out. Cast out, etc.

The words then Originally are but the substance of what Sarah did motion to
Abraham concerning the Bondwoman and her Son, viz. That it was a thing very
meet, and fit, and deserved on their parts, considering that the Son of the
Bondwoman, nursed up under his Mother, was become a Scoffer, that Mother and
Son both should be casheered Abraham's Family. This motion though at the first
it touch Abraham to the quick, to think of parting with his Son, his beloved
Son, his firstborn; yet (to show that sometimes the weaker may see Gods mind
and will, whilst the same remains hid from the stronger) God himself approves
of Sarahs motion, and by declaration of his own will in the thing, ratifies
it; which thing, (though so grievous at first, yet) so soon as Gods will
appears to be in it, Abraham straightway puts it in execution, Hagar the
Bondwoman, and Ishmael the Son of the Bondwoman are both cast out.

This is the literal meaning of the words, but our interpretation is not to
rest here, but to look further, viz. to that great and glorious Mystery that
lies couched in them, for as one principal way of Gods Dispensation of truth to
his people in Old Testament times was by Types, so the Apostle tells us
plainly, Gal. 4.20. that these things were an Allegory.

To find out therefore the Mystery wrapped up in the History, it will be
needful that we take a particular view of the several Types themselves, which
conjoined do make up this beautiful Allegory.

These unvailed, the coast will be clear, and a way open for observation.

Now for the better understanding hereof let us consider, that as Hagar the
Bondwoman, and Ishmael her Son were Types on the one hand, so Surah the
Freewoman, and Isaac her Son were Types on the other. Again, as there was
something Typical in Ishmaels seeking to be Heir, or at least to be Coheir
with Isaac; so also was there in his being cast out thereupon, and the sole
inheritance being devolved upon Isaac.

The Types unvailed speak thus:

Hagar the Bondwoman signifies the Old Covenant, or the Covenant of Sinai;
this is the Apostles own interpretation, Gal. 4.24. These are two Covenants,
the one from the Mount Sinai, which gendreth to bondage, which is Hagar.

Ishmael the Son of the Bondwoman, the Seed, Children, or Offspring of the
Old Covenant, i. e. such as are begotten, nourished, and brought up by the
force and efficacy of the Old Covenant.

Contrariwise, Sarah the Freewoman signifies the New Covenant, which thing
must of necessity so be, because Hagar and Sarah are in the Apostles sense the
two Covenants, of which Hagar is the Old, it therefore remains that Sarah must
be the New.

Isaac the Son of Sarah, the Children or Offspring of the New Covenant, i. e.
such as are begotten to God, nourished and brought up by the virtue and
efficacy of the New Covenant.

Again, Ishmaels seeking to be Heir, or at leastwise Coheir with Isaac, did
signify, That it is a thing natural to the Seed of the Old Covenant to make
after the inheritance by the right of the Old Covenant, i. e. by the works of
the Law; and in case they see themselves by this right to fall short, then to
endeavor the sharing to the right of the Inheritance betwixt the Old Covenant
and the New, i.e. lay the right to the inheritance, partly upon the promise,
partly upon the works of the Law, and by virtue of this divided right to thrust
themselves in as Heirs in part, though they will not, yea cannot lay claim to
the whole, This we may see clearly fulfilled in those Children of the Old
Covenant, who went about seducing these Galathians and other Churches, Acts
15.5. There arose up certain of the Sect of the Pharisees which believed,
saying, it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the Law
of Moses, and mind it; this their needful, extends it self as far as
salvation it self, verse. 1. Except ye be circumcised after the manner of
Moses ye cannot be saved. Here we may see a manifest dividing of the right to
the inheritance, part of it they allow to be given to the New Covenant, or the
Promise, and therefore they believe for that; the other part they give to the
Old Covenant, or the Works of the Law, and thereupon press keeping of the Law
of Moses, as necessary even to salvation it self.

Lastly, the casting of Hagar and Ishmael out hereupon, and the sole Heirship
falling to Isaac did signify, That notwithstanding the Old Covenant considered
in its self may be and is of use, as Hagar was in Abraham's Family, yet when the
Children of the Old Covenant shall seek the inheritance by the right of their
Mother the Old Covenant, or in case seeing themselves not to be admitted upon
that single right, shall attempt to share the inheritance betwixt the Old and
New Covenant, and so come in as Coheirs, i. e. seek the obtaining of life and
justification, partly by their own works, and partly by the Promise, that then
the Old Covenant it self, with its seed and offspring are to be cast out, as
those who have no right at all to the inheritance, and Isaac only (the promise
alone) is to have entertainment as the true Heir, to whom the whole inheritance
is entayled, and upon whose head the Heirship is fixed, Gal. 3.18. this needs
no other proof, but only to read over the very words of our text.

Thus we see the terms and phrases of the Text cleared by the explication of
those several Types our text has reference unto.

The true sense and meaning of the whole, take in this short Paraphrase upon
the Apostles Allegory, it being in enffect as if he should say:

O ye Galathians! ye desire to be under the Law, or Old Covenant, and to be
justified by it; but tell me, do you not hear the Law? for have you never read
how that Abraham had two Sons, the one by a Bondwoman, the other by a
Freewoman, the two Mothers being Types of the two Covenants, their Sons Types
of the Children of each Covenant; And further, have you not read what the
Scripture says concerning the Son of Hagar, the Child of the Old Covenant,
that he should be cast out, and Isaac the Son of the Promise should alone be
Heir? Why then do you so contend for the Law, and labor to bring in again
the Bondwoman and her Son that God himself has cast out, to make the son of
the bondwoman a Coheir with the son of the freewoman?

Before we enter upon the particulars of the words read and opened, take (by
way of premisal to our whole Discourse) these few general Positions.

1 POSITION; That the application of Abraham's History so far as it concerns
Sarah and Hagar, Isaac, and Ishmael to the two Covenants, is a thing that
stands upon Divine warrant; it is the Apostles Comment upon the History, not
ours; As none (had not the Apostle led the way) might have been so bold to have
put such an interpretation upon this History, so none, the Apostle being in
this the Holy Ghosts Penman, may take upon them to correct, or condemn it.

2 POSITION; That the two Covenants are two diverse and distinct Covenants, and
not one and the same Covenant under two administrations; for Hagar and Sarah
are not one and the same, but two distinct persons, yea so distinct as that
they admit not of a reconciliation, for Hagar is a Bondwoman, Sarah a
Freewoman; now bondage and liberty are contraries which can never be
reconciled.

3 POSITION; That the ground of this distinction betwixt the two Covenants does
not lie in regard of time, as if so be this were the bottom of the
distinction, that the Old Covenant related to Old Testament times, and the New
to New Testament, for Hagar and Sarah do both exist in the time of the Old
Testament, and though they are contrary to each other, yet they both continue
together in Abraham's Family, from the first day of their entrance until the
Seed is come, to which the Promise is made. In like manner the Old and New
Covenant both had being even in the Church of God, until the fullness of time
was come in which Christ the true Seed was borne into the world.

This duly weighed frees our former Position from such charges as might
otherwise be brought against it, and does also help us to the knowledge of
some very useful truths; for note hence,

1 That Saints of the Old Testament were not saved one way, we another; they
by the Old Covenant, we by the New; for they had Sarah, the New Covenant with
them, as well as we have, and all the claim they had, or laid to the heavenly
inheritance was by virtue of Sarahs right, not Hagars.

2 That Saints of the Old Testament, as they were saved in the same way with
us, so also had they the same communion with God, and blessings that we enjoy;
for they had Sarah with them, therefore the blessing of Sarah, and communion
with God by Sarah was their portion then, as well as ours now; only with this
difference, because Sarah, the New Covenant, all that time, though she had the
promise of fruitfulness had not brought forth as now she has, therefore
their communion with God chiefly lay in hope of a Seed to come, ours in faith
of a Seed come; they lived in continual expectation of a glorious blessing
which by faith in the Promise they clearly foresaw to come, and to be
exhibited; we in actual enjoyment of the blessing come, and exhibited.

3 That the Doctrine of the Old Testament furnishes us with New Covenant
truth: and New Covenant Principles as well as the New; because Sarah existing
all that time as well as Hagar, Sarah gives commands, makes promises,
pronounces threats as well as Hagar.

Hence the matter of the Old Testament is not wholly legal, but it contains
in it pure Gospel matter as well as the New. As that Doctrine which is no other
but a mere voice of words, or the sound of a conditional Covenant, whether you
find it in the Old Testament, or the New, belongs to the old Covenant; so that
Doctrine which is a word of spirit and power, holding forth a free and absolute
Covenant, whether it be in the Old Testament or New, belongs to the New
Covenant.

This shows as the Authority, so also the usefulness of the Old Testament,
even in New Testament times, and to such as are the Seed or Offspring of
Sarah, the Children of the New Covenant, for a great part of the will of Sarah
their Mother is there laid down.

4 That the Saints of the Old Testament were under a twofold Covenant, the Old
and the New both; Hagar, until the appointed time is come that Sarah has
brought forth, continues with Sarah in Abraham's Family, and Abraham has to do
now with Hagar, then with Sarah. So Saints throughout the time of the Old
Testament stood under either Covenant, the Old and the New, and sometimes in
the matters of their faith, their comfort, and obedience, they had to do with
the one, sometimes with the other.

Hence it comes to pass that ordinarily the faith, comfort, and obedience of
Old Testament Saints was more legal, more built upon the condition of their
walking and working, than we find the faith of the New Testament Saints (who
lived after Christ's Resurrection in the time of the Apostles) to be; because
the first having to do with Hagar and Sarah both, did as well partake of
Hagars bondage, as Sarahs freedom, but the latter knowing Hagar now to be an
outcast, and thereupon having to do with Sarah only, felt not (as the former)
the bondage of Hagar.

This consideration helps us with the maine and principal difference betwixt
the Old and New Testament. All the time of the Old Testament, whilst yet Sarah
has not brought forth her Seed, Hagar and Sarah both dwell together in
Abraham's Family, and Abraham (the Believer) has a kind of dependence on both,
an affection to both. But in the New Testament administration, when Sarahs seed
is come forth, then Hagar and her seed are cast out of the Family, and now
Abraham (the true Believer) has nothing to do with Hagar or her seed any
more, as once he had, but his sole dependence is upon Sarah, and the all of
his affection to her seed.

4 POSITION; That the two Covenants are not two diverse Covenants of grace, for
if so, then the Children of each should be Children of grace; but Ishmael, the
child of the Old Covenant is not a child of grace; outward blessings, and not
inward grace, is his portion, Genesis 17. ver. 18, 19, 20, 21. Although a true
child of grace may have to do with the Old Covenant, as Abraham the Father of
the faithful went in unto Hagar; yet the Child of the Old Covenant cannot be
a child of grace, as Ishmael the Son of Hagar was not.

5 POSITION; That the two Covenants in the matters of our Justification and
Salvation ought by no means to be confounded, mixed, or joined together, but to
be separated from each other at the greatest distance that can be, for God
himself has made this separation.

1 By commanding the old Covenant to be cast out.

2 By totally dis-inheriting the seed thereof, i. e. declaring that the seed of
the Old Covenant shall never inherit the Fathers inheritance either in whole
or in part, shall never be admitted as sole Heirs of life and salvation, no nor
as joynt-heirs with the seed of the New.

Quest. But when are the two Covenants thus mixed or joined together?

Answ. When works, qualifications, or conditions in the Creature, which are the
special things required in the Old Covenant, and the grace of God, which is the
maine thing held forth in the New, are made con-causes of our Justification; or
to express it better, when Condition, which is a thing proper to the Old
Covenant and grace, which is peculiar to the New are so shufled together that a
poor soul can see his justification only through the performance of some
condition in such manner, that so long as such or such a condition is presents,
he can and does conclude himself to be a person justified by grace, but when
absent, he concludes the contrary, that he is a miserable sinner, ungodly,
wholly void and destitute of Justification.

This shuffling of the Old and New Covenant together, is the very seed of all
doubting, and the greatest enemy that can be to the life of faith, repugnant
to a Gospel-state in which these two are separated, and contrary to the word of
the New Testament which commands the separation of these, and the New Testament
Ministry, which are those only that are made able rightly to divide the word
of truth, i.e. distinguish betwixt the Law and Gospel, the Old and New
Covenant. And therefore the Apostle Paul proves himself to be an able Minister
of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. not from his learning or parts, or his being
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, but from hence, because he had a clear
distinct knowledge, not of the things of the Letter, or the Old Covenant only,
but also of the things of both Letter and Spirit, i.e. Old and New Covenant
both; being hereby able to judge of the things of either, and distinguish
rightly betwixt them. And indeed what accomplishment soever a man may have
other-wayes, yet is not that man fit to preach the Gospel, who knows not how
to distinguish betwixt the Law and the Gospel, the Old and the New Covenant.

These things observed upon our way, which indeed are worth our taking notice
of: I now come to the words themselves, in which we have,

First, A definitive sentence passed by God, that the Bondwoman, and her Son,
i.e. the Old Covenant with its Offspring should be cast out, Cast out the
Bondwoman, and her Son.

Secondly, The reason of passing this sentence, that hereby (the seed of the
Bondwoman being excluded) the sole inheritance might fall to the seed of the
Freewoman, i.e. that the Seed and Offspring of the New Covenant, and none but
they, might be admitted, as the just and legal Heirs, unto the possession of
the Fathers Inheritance.

These two parts afford us two great truths.

1 That the Old Covenant, together with its Seed, or Offspring is to be, yea
must be cast out. 2 That the Seed of the New Covenant, is the true and only
Heir of the heavenly Inheritance.
I begin with the first, which concerns the Old Covenant, and its Seed; and in
prosecution thereof shall treat:

First, Of the Old Covenant it self.

Secondly, Of the Seed of the Ott Covenant.

My first Question upon the first is:

Quest. What are we to understand by the Old Covenant?

Before I come to give in my answer, give me leave to say, That in case any
should inquire (which yet is not a thing material) why we style this the Old
Covenant? my answer is, Because the Apostle speaking of the two Covenants in
another place, viz. Heb. 8.13. calls the one Old, the other New; and would we
know the reason of the Apostles so doing; not to multiply, I take it to be
this, because the Old Covenant, whether we consider it in reference to its
Type, or in reference to its solemn Promulgation (as touching the first-being
of the one Covenant, or the other, our Question here is not) yet in both it did
Antecede, or fore-run the New, and may in either of these respects be said to
be more ancient, than the New: For,

1 Look upon it in the Type, Hagar (the Type of the Old Covenant) is fruitful,
and has a Son before Sarah.

2 Look upon it in its solemn Promulgation. The solemn Promulgation of the
Old Covenant is upon Mount Sinai, at the time when God brings Israel, his
adopted Son out of Egypt. But the solemn Promulgation of the New Covenant
(which is promulgated upon Mount Sion, as the Old was upon Sinai) is not till
many ages after, namely, in the time in which Christ the Head-seed comes into
the world, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.5. who having here offered up himself for our
sins, and being risen again, sand ascended to his Father, as the immediate
consequent of this ascension of his, he poures forth of his Spirit, in the
light and power which the New Covenant is promulgated to the Sons of men. And
for this reason the Apostle speaking of the New Covenant, Heb. 9.15, 6, 17. and
that under the name of a Testament, makes it not to have beginning, that is, in
respect of this solemn Promulgation (for in respect of being it took beginning
in the first promise made to man after his fall) till after the death of Christ
the Testator.

This word laid in by the way, I now come to the Question proposed.

Quest. What are we to understand by the Old Covenant?

Answ. The Apostle Paul (whose this distinction, betwixt Old and New Covenant
is) is best Expositor of himself, who tells us expressly, That the Old Covenant
(of which Hagar the Bondwoman was a Type) was from Mount Sinai in Arabia,
verse. 24, 25. was made at the time of the coming out of Egypt, Heb. 8.8, 9.
compared with verse. 13. was that which did fitly answer and agree to the carnal
Jerusalem, i.e. such of the Jewish Nation that were in bondage under Works, and
Ceremonies, Gal. 4.25. was that whose Sons did at that present time persecute
the Sons of the New Covenant, verse. 29. giving us in these so four places
four notable marks or characters to know the Old Covenant by.

1 Taken from the place where it was given, Mount Sinai. 2 From the time when,
upon Isreal's coming forth of Egypt. 3 From the sutablenesse of it to the state
and wills too of carnal Jerusalem, Jerusalem that for that present clave to
their Works and Ceremonies, and did reject the Gospel. 4 From the persecution
that by the Sons of it was then on foot against the Seed of the New Covenant.
Now let us but inquire, and find out what thing that is to which these four
Characters both do, and must agree, and then have we found out what this Old
Covenant is, and what we are to understand by it.

What was that which was given upon Mount Sinai?

Answ. The Law, Exodus 19.20.

What Covenant was that made with Israel upon their coming out of Egypt?

Answ. The Law; for Abraham's Covenant was four hundred and thirty years before,
Gal. 3.17.

3 What thing was that which did most suit with the state and temper of carnal
Jerusalem?

Answ. The Law: For,

1 There is nothing more suitable to the state or condition of persons
rejecting Christ, than the Law, for the Law is made for such as are Lawless and
disobedient to the word of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10, 11. Now such was carnal
Jerusalem, or Jerusalem that then was.

2 Nothing could more suit with the tempers, dispositions, and wills of the
Jews then living when Paul wrote, then the Law, this being the thing they were
so zealous for, and sought justification by; as the scope of Paul's preaching in
the Acts, and of his three Epistle s to the Romans, Galatians; and Hebrews
directed against this principle and practice of theirs, does plainly evidence.

4 What was that which the Professors of it did at that time persecute, the
Sons of the New Covenant?

Answ. The Law. The Zelots of the Law persecute Stephen, and are the cause of
his death, Acts 6.13, 14. The Zetots of the Law persecute Paul and Barnabas,
and drive them from Antioch, Act. 13.50, 51. The Zelots of the Law stir up the
people against Paul, Act 21. 27, 28.

If then the Old Covenant be that which was given upon Mount Sinai, that which
came forth at the time of Isreal's coming out of Egypt, that which did most
fitly accord with the state, temper and disposition of carnal Jerusalem, that
whose Professors did at time persecute the Sons of the New Covenant: And it all
these Characters agree to the Law and nothing else, then may we safely and
warrantably conclude that by the Old Covenant we are to understand the Law, and
no other thing.

Quest. But here another Question will arise, viz. Whether are we to
understand this of the whole Law, or of a part only? Whether of the Ceremonial
and Judicial Law only, or of the Moral also?

Answ. Of the whole Law, as well that which is Moral, as that which is
Ceremonial and Political; as is clear by very many Arguments left us in Paul's
Epistles: Only ere I produce any let this be noted, That by Moral Law, I do
not understand the bare words or syllables of the Ten Commandments only, but
also all those commands or prohibitions which we find elsewhere that may be
reduced unto these, or are comprehended under them; unto which the Ten
Commandments serve as a Text, and they to them again as a full and ample
Comment upon the Text. If this be not noted by straitning the word Moral, to
Moses Ten Precepts only, we may halve the truth.

Now the Arguments enforcing the former conclusion, That not the Ceremonial and
Political Law only, but the Moral also, appertains to the Old Covenant, are
these.

1 Arg. That Law by which the Galatians sought justification is that here
commanded to be cast out under the name or title of Bondwoman, or Old
Covenant. But this was not only the Ceremonial Law, etc. but the Moral also:
For the false Apostles (their Seducers) did as well press it, as Circumcision,
Act. 15.5.

2 Arg. That Law which the children of Israel brake, and were rejected for
breach of, is of the Old Covenant, as is clear, Heb. 8.8, 9. with verse. 13. But
this was not the Ceremonial Law only, but the Moral also, which therefore is
expressly called the Covenant made with Israel, Deuteronomy. 4.13. And he declared
unto you his Covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even Ten
Commandments, and he wrote them upon two Tables of stone. And indeed who ever
observes the story of their going into Captivity, shall find the cause was
chiefly for sins committed against the Moral Law; as Idolatry, Oppression, etc.

3 Arg. That Law which stands in a direct opposition to the Law written in the
heart, must belong to the Old Covenant, for Heb. 8.9, 10. The Apostle opposing
the Old and the New Covenant together, makes the opposition or the New
Covenants part to lie in this as one principal thing, I will write my Laws in
their hearts, therefore the Law which stands most opposite unto this Law of the
heart must be a part, yea a main part of the Old Covenant. But this is the Law
written and engraven in Tables of stone, and that is die Moral Law. And that
indeed the Law written in Tables of stone does in Paul's sense stand in direct
opposition to the Law of the New Covenant written in the Tables of the heart,
is evident, 2 Cor. 3.3. where the Apostle himself has set these two in direct
opposition each to the other.

4 Arg. That Law which is a killing letter; and a ministration of death and
condemnation is of, and belongs to the Old Covenant which is dear, because the
Apostle tells us, it was to be done away, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. i.e. God in the first
institution of it had an intent to abrogate it for future, yea is done away,
verse. 11. i.e. abrogated to believers now under the Gospel. But now God
instituted nothing with purpose and intent to abrogate it for future, nor is
there any thing once instituted by God now abrogated, but what is of, did
belong to the Old Covenant, therefore such must that Law be which is a killing
letter, etc. But this is no other but the Moral Law, ergo.

5 Arg. The Moral Law is expressly declared to be a part of the Old Covenant.
This we have Heb. 9.1. with verse. 5. The first (or old Covenant) had in it
both Ordinances of divine Service, and the Tables of the Covenant, i.e. Moral
Law, and Ceremonial both.

6 Arg. That Law which the Apostle Paul disputes against in the seventh of the
Romans, is of the Old Covenant, because the Apostle declares that Law that he
disputes against to be abrogated, verse. 4.6. But nothing (as I have said) is
abrogated but what is of the Old Covenant. But the Law the Apostle does there
dispute against is no other but the Moral Law; for he speaks of that Law that
makes discovery of sin, which is the Moral Law, yea makes particular mention of
the last Precept of the Law, Thou shall not covet, verse. 7. Therefore the Moral
Law, as well as the Ceremonial and Political is of the Old Covenant.

7 Arg. That Law which the Apostle disputes against throughout this Epistle,
proving that we are not, nor cannot be justified by it, is the Old Covenant,
as is evident, because he brings in this Allegory of Hagar and Sarah, as the
close of his disputation^, strengthening all his former Arguments by it, as by a
most convincing demonstration to this effect, Hagar the Old Covenant is
commanded of God to be cast out, therefore the Law cannot justify. Now in
case the Law the Apostle had been disputing against had been one thing, and
Hagar the Old Covenant another, there could have been no conclusion, these two
therefore must be one and the same. But now the Law the Apostle disputes
against throughout this Epistle, is not the Ceremonial only, but the Moral
also; For,

1 The Apostle disputes against that Law that the Galatians sought
justification by, but this was not the Ceremonial Law only (as is proved in my
first Argument) but the Moral also.

2 The Apostle disputes against that Law which would frustrate the grace of
God, and render Christ's death in vain, in case righteousness were attainable by
it. For this is one of his Arguments, Chap. 2.22. I do not frustrate the grace
of God, etc. But in case righteousness were attainable by the Moral Law, it
would as much frustrate the grace of God, and render Christ's death in vain as
it could do, though the same were attainable by the Ceremonial. Therefore the
Moral Law, as well as the Ceremonial is the Law the Apostle disputes against,

3 That Law the tenor whereof runs thus, Do this and live, is the Law the
Apostle disputes against, as Gal. 3.12. where the Apostle sets that Law, which
says, Do this and live, in opposition unto Faith, which is the thing he
pleads for. But this is the tenor of the Moral Law, Deuteronomy. 5.33. Levit. 18.5.
ergo.

4 That Law which pronounces a dreadful curse, and brings all those
unavoidably under this curse that stand under it, is the Law the Apostle
disputes against, as his urging the curse of the Law as a mighty Argument
against justification by it, Gal. 3.10. does clearly prove. But this is no
other but the Moral Law, ergo.

5 That Law which Christ's death was ordained to satisfy for the breach of it,
and thereby to remove the curse of it from believers, is the Law the Apostle
disputes against, as verse. 13. makes appear. But this was the Moral Law, ergo.

6 That Law which is so opposite to the Promise, that in case the inheritance
were by it, it could not be by the promise, is the Law the Apostle disputes
against, which his Argument urged, verse. 17, 18. proves. But this cannot be
the Ceremonial Law, which in it self carried no contrariety to the promise, but
maintained a sweet concurrence and harmony with the promise, being indeed no
other but the promise veiled, the promise clad in Types, and figures, therefore
must be the Moral; which therefore is the Law the Apostle disputes against,
ergo.

7 That Law which was added because of transgressions, and ordained by Angels
in the hand of a Mediator, is the Law the Apostle disputes against, Chap. 3.19.
for lest they should think that by his former Arguments he had wholly
destroyed the Law, and made it useless, he therefore brings in these words as
an answer to the Question, what use the Law ordained by Angels could be put to
if it, could not justify, so that it is plain the Law here mentioned is the
very same with that Law he had before bent his Arguments against. But the Law
added because of transgressions, and ordained by Angels in the hand of a
Mediator, none do, or can deny to be the Moral Law, ergo.

8 That Law which was a Schoolmaster to Gods people under the Old Testament to
teach them duty, and correct them for their faults, is the Law Apostle disputes
against, as is clear, because upon the coming of faith, he casts the
Schoolmaster out of doors, verse. 24.25. i. e. abrogates the Law of the
Schoolmaster. But now the Law which was the Schoolmaster to teach Gods people
under the Old Testament, and correct them for their faults, was not the
Ceremonial Law (which was unto them a help, comfort, and relief against their
faults) but the Moral, ergo,

9 And lastly, That Law which requires of us that we should love our neighbor
as our selves, is the Law the Apostle in this Epistle had been disputing
against, for he brings in those words, Chap. 5.14. as an exposition of that
Law, which they stood so much for, and yet did so grossy abuse and mistake;
therefore the Law of loving our neighbor is for substance tile very same Law
with that his disputation had run upon. But the Law of loving our neighbor as
our selves is the Moral Law, for these words are the sum of the second Table
thereof, Matthew. 22.39. ergo.

8 Arg. My eighth and last Argument, I take from the Apostles Allegory, out of
which I have taken my Text, and it is this, That Law which was given upon Mount
Sinai is the Old Covenant, for says the Apostle, Hagar is Mount Sinai in
Arabia. But the Law given upon Mount Sinai, was not the Ceremonial only, but
the Moral also, ergo.

The Conclusion is, That by the Old Covenant we are to understand the whole
Law, as well the Moral part, as the Ceremonial and Political.

Objection. But here arises a great Objection upon us, viz. That by proving
the Moral Law to belong to the Old Covenant, and affirming the Old Covenant is
to be cast out, we have destroyed and made void the Moral Law, yea not the
Ten Commandments of Moses only, but moreover by our large acception of the
word. Moral, we have made null, and overthrown all manner of Duties
whatsoever.

Answer, Not so, and that it may appear that it is not so; Mark well what I am
to say, That as there is something in the Moral Law that appertains to Hagar,
is a part of the Old Covenant; so also something there is in the Moral Law that
appertains to Sarah is a part of the New Covenant, for the Moral Law is Hagars
rule and Sarahs both.

Now all our discourse hitherto upon the Moral Law has run upon it no
otherwise but as the same is the Law of Hagar, a part of the Old Covenant, and
taken in this sense, it is no injury to the holy Law of God, to say, it must
be cast out: But if we take the Moral Law as it is Sarahs rule, it is then a
most ungodly and profane assertion to say it must be cast out: For observe,
though the Bondwoman is to be cast out, and all that appertains to her, yet
there is no casting out of the Freewoman, nor of any thing that appertains to
her. Whatsoever therefore that is of the Moral law which appertains to the
Bondwoman, the, Old Covenant, all that we may, yea ought to cast out, but
contrariwise, whatsoever that is that belongs to the Freewoman (is a part or
piece of the New Covenant) that must we by no means meddle with, there is no
casting out of that, for though the servant abides not in the house for ever,
yet the Mistress abides for ever.

The Question here will be, What is that of the Moral Law which does
appertain to the Bondwoman, and what that which appertains to the Freewoman?

Answ. The Moral law consists of three parts. 1 The mandatory or commanding
part. 2 The Minatory or threatening part. 3 The Consolatory or promising part.
In every of which the Old Covenant or Bondwoman has a share as well as the
New Covenant or Freewoman: For note, The Old Covenant has promises, as well
as commands and threatenings, for which reason the Apostle speaks of Covenants
of promise in the plural number, Ephesians. 2.12. noting that the old Covenant as
well as the New, has promises, and tells us that the New is established upon
better, promises, Heb. 8.6. showing that the Old, is established upon Promises
too, but not so good promises as the New built upon.

Again, the New Covenant has Commands, and Threatenings also, if we wax
wanton under the grace thereof, as well as promises; and hence it is that the
Gospel, the blessed word of the New Covenant, is so full of heavenly precepts,
and threats of fatherly chastisement, therefore I say, both Old and New
Covenant share in either of the three foregoing parts.

Now out of these three to divide to each their proper portions, giving the
Bondwoman hers, and the Freewoman hers, will clear up to us what is to be
cast out, and what to remain, for (as I have said) that which belongs to the
Bondwoman is to be cast out, and that which is the Free-womans is to continue.

Now for the clearing our way into this partition, or division, take this
general and certain rule to steer by, viz. That look whatsoever that is of the
Moral Law, or any part thereof which is not now by Jesus Christ brought into
the New Covenant, and become a part thereof, all that is a part of the Old,
belongs to the Bondwoman, is to be cast out; and contrariwise, look whatsoever
that is, which is now by Jesus Christ brought into the New Covenant, and become
a part of it, that appertains to the Freewoman, and we cannot without
offering high indignity to the blessed Gospel, the Covenant of Grace, yea to
Jesus Christ himself who is Mediator of this Covenant, and has sealed the
whole with his blood, cast that out.

Here then the question will be, and this answered, brings us into the light.
What was that which once was in the Moral Law, as the same was the Law of the
Old Covenant, which now by Christ's bringing the same into the New Covenant is
no longer in it? Again, what is that that the Moral Law notwithstanding this
its translation from the Old Covenant to the New, does still retain of what it
had before, or has by this change of its station gained, which before it had
not?

If once we come to see what the Moral Law by Christ's transplanting of it has
lost, or on the contrary still retains, or has gained, we shall therewith
see what we are to disowne and cast out, and what to love, cherish, and
entertain.

To solve this Question, I shall take a more particular view of the Moral Law
in the three parts thereof, as it is a commanding Law, a threatening Law, a
promising Law, and give out of each Hagar the Bondwoman her portion, Sarah the
Freewoman hers.

1 For the Mandatory part; The Moral Law as the same is Hagars Law, or the Old
Covenant from Mount Sinai had commands, but these commands were barely a voice
of words without power, Heb. 12.29. a bare letter without the Spirit, 2 Cor.
3.6. but now as the same is Sarahs Law, or the New Covenant given from Mount
Sion, so it has commands too, but they are of another nature, such command, as
have efficacy, power, and spirit going along with them, for the New Testament
administration is a ministration of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. which gives life
and power to those under it, verse. 6. Hagar did all, conceived, brought forth
by mere natural strength, Sarah by supernatural strength given to her from
Heaven. Hagars Law commands us to be fruitful, but contributes no more
strength toward the bringing forth of this fruit than what Hagar had, viz. the
mere strength of nature; Sarahs Law bids us to be fruitful, and that we may be
so, it holds forth to us the strength of Sarah, viz. supernatural strength,
help from Heaven.

Now mind it, the Commands of the Law as they are Hagars commands. i.e. as
they come to a poor Soul, only as a terrible voice of words without power, as a
killing letter without the quickening spirit, so they are to be cast out by all
the children of the New Covenant; for Hagar is to be cast out, and therefore
has nothing now to do in Abraham's Family, nor may she there command and dame
it over Isaac. But on the contrary, the commands of the Law, as they are the
commands of Sarah, the New Covenant; i.e. as they come to a poor Soul with a
promise of strength and assistance, a power and efficacy to enable to obey, so
every child of the New Covenant is to stand with arms and heart wide open to
receive every of them, and should say, Come, come, O Law, with all thy
Commands, I love to hear thy voice, I delight to obey it, for though Hagar the
Bondwoman may not take upon her to Dame it over Isaac, because she is a
Servant, and therefore beneath him, yet Sarah the freewoman may, for she is
his Mother, and therefore above him.

For the Minotory part; the Moral Law, as the same was Hagars Law, a Law
bearing rule over Hagars seed, so had it threats as well as commands, which
threats were a dreadful curse, and denunciation of eternal rejection to every
one that should disobey it, though but in one particular, Gal. 3.10. whence the
Apostle argues, that no man could be under the very commands of the Law, as it
was the Law of the Old Covenant, but he is, yea must be under a curse. But
now, as the same is Sarahs Law, the Law of the New Covenant, although in a
mild way it declares, that in case I will be a stubborn child, and will not
hearken to it, nor be ruled by it, my Father will be grieved and offended, and
I shall for so doing feel the rod, though not of wrath and eternal rejection,
yet of love and fatherly correction; yet does it no where threat the seed of
Sarah, that in case they disobey they shall be eternally rejected, Ishmael
that was the child of the Old Covenant, and under Hagars Law, commits but one
fault that ever we read of, and for that he is utterly rejected without
remedy, thrown out of his Fathers house and presence, never to see his face
more. Isaac the Son of the New Covenant, who stood under Sarahs Law, doubtless
had his faults, yet is he for none of them cast out of his fathers house.

Now observe, the threats of the Law as they are Hagars threats, i. e. as they
are threats of eternal death and damnation in case of disobedience, so are they
not to be hearkened unto, nor regarded, but to be cast out by the Sons of the
New Covenant, for Hagar is an outcast, and though she has her Ishmael with
her, and she may still threat him, yet Isaac out of her reach, and does not
regard her threats, for he is safe and secure in his Fathers Family; but now
the threats of the Law, as they are Sarahs threats, i. e. as they are sweet,
loving motherly warnings, telling me, that in case I be wanton or stubborn,
and will not hearken to her, nor obey her, that my Father, though he cast me
not out of doors, yet will he be displeased, and I may suffer angry looks,
yea a whipping for it; so I am to have them in special regard, to bend my ear
diligently to them, and to stand always in a holy filial awe and fear of them,
because though Hagar being but a servant, and now thrown out of the Family has
nothing to do with me, yet Sarah has, for she is my Mother, and Mistress of
the Family, and I am still under her power.

3 For the Promissory part, the Moral Law, as the same was Hagars Law, or the
Law of the Old Covenant, had also a promise of life in the doing or keeping of
it, Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12. But as the same is Sarah's Law, or the Law of the New
Covenant, though it have also a promise of life, yet is not this life promised
to Sarahs seed upon condition of their keeping this Law, but the promise is
absolute made to the seed without any condition to be performed on their part,
so that as the inheritance is not gained by their obedience, so can it not be
lost by their disobedience, Ishmael the Son of Hagar, that stood under Hagars
Law, and had no right to the inheritance, nor any part of it, but only what was
conditional in case he carried himself well, and as he ought to do in his
Fathers house, he not being able to keep the Law; i.e. demean himself in all
things as he ought, could not obtain the promise, he transgresses and is
for ever rejected, and an outcast, that must have no part in the promised
inheritance. But Isaac the son of Sarah, that stood under Sarabs Law, which
gave not the inheritance in this conditional way, but as an absolute deed of
gift, entayling the same to Isaac so soon as ever he was borne, so as that his
right thereto was neither more nor less by virtue of any future carriage or
demeanor of his, he (though he was not doubtless without his failings, yet)
could not be dis-inherited, but let him do or not do, obey or not obey
(though yet obey he does, for Isaac is a dutiful child) he must be, and is
possessed of his Fathers inheritance.

Now then, the promises of the Law as they are Hagars promises, giving a right
to life and Salvation, no otherwise but upon condition of obedience; so Sarahs
children, the seed of the New Covenant, are not to mind them, but to cast them
out, for Hagar is an outcast, and Isaac claims not the inheritance by any
right she gives him, but by another right, viz. that of Sarah; but now the
promises of the Law as they are Sarahs promises, giving the inheritance by
absolute deed of gift, entayling it to the seed so soon as ever they are borne,
so that their right thereto is neither more nor less, by virtue of their
walking or governing themselves, so they are to be loved, prized, received,
greatly honored of all the children of the New Covenant; for though Isaac may
very well slight and contemn that right that comes in by Hagar, because it is
below him, and he claims by a better and surer right; yet is it not comely
that he should despise the right that comes in by his Mother Sarah, but rather
it is his duty ever to think highly, and speak honorably of that right, which
all the true children of the Freewoman will, but those which are the seed only
in outward appearance do otherwise.

Hence note by the way (as a thing worth observation) that Ishmael is not
rejected for despising his Birthright, as Esau afterward, because Ishmael was
borne of the Bondwoman, who had no absolute right, and could therefore convey
none to her seed, but Esau of Rebecca, who was a Freewoman, had a right to
convey, which Esau despises.

Upon this Principle another follows, viz. That carnal and slighty Gospel
professors, of which Esaias was a Type, do prove to be worse, and more vile
than mere legalists, of which Ishmael was a Type; for observe, Esau having
despised his Birthright degenerates into a profane person, Heb. 12.16. but
Ishmael not so, for after that he was cast out of his Fathers Family, he was
yet very strict, as I shall show hereafter.

By what we have said it is now clear enough, that the Moral Law as it is
Sarahs Law, the Law of the New Covenant; so it is not to be cast out, because
it belongs to the Freewoman, who must not be rejected. But for so much of the
Moral Law as belongs to Hagar, i. e. is a part of the Old Covenant, and not
brought by Christ into the New, all that is to be cast out, for it belongs unto
the Bondwoman, and what says the Scripture, Cast out the bondwoman, etc.

From this double consideration of the Moral Law, as it is the Law of Hagar,
the Old Covenant, and as it is the Law of Sarah, the New, several useful
lessons do arise.

1 Hence, we may learn how to reconcile such Scriptures as seem to have
opposition and contradiction in them about the Law, as namely, Romans 7. where
the Apostle tells us, verse. 4. We are dead to the Law, and verse. 6. delivered
from the Law, yet says verse. 12. The Commardement is holy, just, and good,
verse. 14. The Law is spiritual, verse, 16. I consent (says he) to the Law, that
it is good, verse. 22. I delight in the Law of God after the inner man, verse.
25. with my mind I my self serve the Law of God. How may we reconcile these,
does not the Apostle speak contradictions? Not so, for in verses 4.6. he
treats of the Law as it is the Law of Hagar, the Old Covenant, and so he says,
we are dead to it, delivered from it; in the following verses he treats of the
Law as it is the Law of Sarah, or of the New Covenant, and so he calls it
spiritual, holy, just, and good, consents to it, delights in it, serves it, etc.

So Gal. 2.19. I through the law am dead to the law, i.e. the Law has set me
wholly free from the Law; Is not this a contradiction; No, for the Apostle
speaks of the Law under its twofold consideration, as it is the Law of the old
Covenant, and as the Law of the New, and so his meaning is this, I through the
Law, through receiving, embracing, or having to do with the Law, as it is the
Law of the New Covenant, am dead to the Law; that is, am set wholly free from
the Law, and have nothing to do with it as it is the Law of the Old.

Of the like interpretation are those words, Romans 8.2. For the Law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death,
i.e. By the Law of the New Covenant, or the Law as it is the Law of the New
Covenant (which the Apostle calls the Law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, because the New Covenant-ministration is a ministration of the Spirit, a
ministration that gives life, 2 Cor. 3.6.8. and has Christ for the Mediator
of it, Heb. 8.6. chap. 9.15. chap. 12.24. and the Blood of Christ as the seal
or ratification of it, Heb. 9.16, 17, 18.) I am freed or delivered from the Law
as it is the Law of the Old Covenant, which as such is called, A law of sin and
death, because sin is discovered by the Law of the Old Covenant, but not
mortified by this discovery, but rather enlivened, and the soul finds it self
inwardly more provoked to it, Romans 7.5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Hence the discovery of
sin which is by the Old Covenant, not killing sin, but rather making it to
increase, it consequently kills the soul, and so it becomes a Commandment unto
deaths, a law of death, a ministration of death, 2 Corinthians. 3 7.

So also, Romans 6.14. the Apostle speaking of Believers, says, We are not under
the law, but under grace; yet, 1 Cor. 9.21. speaking of himself who was a
Believer, he says, he was under the Law to Christ; Are not these
contradiction? No, because in the first place, the law is spoken of as it is
the Law of the Old Covenant, administered by Moses; so Believers in Gospel Times
are not under it; in the latter, the Law is spoken of, as it is the Law of the
New Covenant, administered by the Lord Jesus; so Paul himself, and all Believers
who are willingly subject to Christ, are also willingly subject to his Law.

Again, 1 Timothy 1.9. it is said. The law is not made for a righteous man, i. e.
the righteous person is one that has nothing to do with the Law, nor the Law
with him, so that in effect the Law is made void to him, it is to him as though
it were nothing, and he to it as though there were no Law in the world; yet
Romans 3. last, it is said, Do we make void the law through faith, nay, we
establish the law; what may we judge of these expressions? The answer is still
what I have said. The Apostle in the former place confiders the Law, only as it
is the Law of the Old Covenant, in which respect he says it is not made for
the righteous man, i. e. he has nothing to do with it, he is not under it; in
the latter only, as it is the Law of the New Covenant, and in this respect the
preaching of faith does not null the Law to the Believer, but does rather
establish it, as I am coming to show.

Thus we see, how this distinction about the Moral Law, both does, and will
bring all those opposite Scriptures which concern the Law, to a sweet concord
and harmony one with another.

2 Hence we may learn, That the Moral Law does still remain as a rule to
Saints even in Gospel Times; for mark it, the Moral Law is Sarahs Rule as well
as Hagars, now though Hagar the Servant, in Gospel Times is an outcast, yet
Sarah the Mistress still remains in the Family, and governes there. The Moral
Law therefore as it is Sarahs Rule remains in as full force even in Gospel
times as ever. Now because some (not understanding this distinction) have
weakly and unadvisedly cast the Moral Law wholly out of doors, as being a
thing of no use to Believers under the New Testament (as there are others that
hand over head will bring it in) I shall therefore establish this Position,
that the Moral Law is, yea must be a Rule to Saints even under the New
Testament, and that by these following Arguments.

Arg. 1. If the coming of Christ does not destroy the Law as a Rule, but rather
perfect it, then is the Law a rule to Saints even in Gospel Times. But the
first is true, Matthew. 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the
Prophets, I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill, or to fill it up or perfect
it (as the Original word properly signifies) i. e. to complete the Law, by
adding that to it which the Scribes and Pharisees by their Traditions had taken
from it; and to this the whole scope of Christ's discourse in this Sermon
agrees. Therefore must the latter also.

Avg. 2. If the Moral law be a perpetual and an everlasting rule to Saints in
all ages, then to Saints in Gospel Times. But the first is true, Matthew. 5.18.
Verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. As long as heaven
and earth remain, so long does the Law remain, and the fulfilling of it remain.
The word here rendered fulfilling, signifies a performing or doing, and so it
does not respect a doctrinal fulfilling, as does the word translated fulfill in
the former Argument, but a practical. Now the Law practically is fulfilled, 1.
In Christ as head and common person of this Children; this fulfilling had its
perfect accomplishment when Christ was here on earth. 2 In the Saints which are
his members: This because it is imperfect and wrought by degrees, goes
perpetually on, increasing till we come to be wholly like our Head: And this
latter I conceive to be that which shall remain as long as heaven and earth
remains, the meaning whereof is, Saints shall daily go on fulfilling of the
Law till in the end their obedience come to be perfect as Christ's was.

Arg. 3. If the preaching of faith, does not make void the Law, but establish
the same, then does the Law still remain as a rule to Saints even in
Gospel Times. But the first is true, Romans 3.31. Do we make void the Law
through faith, God forbid, nay we establish the Law, i.e. by the preaching of
the Gospel we do not overturn the Law, make men Libertines, but establish it,
i.e. set it upon a better and surer bottom than it stood on before, and bring
men to a more free, full, and spiritual observance thereof, then they can be
brought unto any other way, ergo, the latter.

Arg. 4. If in Gospel Times it be a manifest Argument of a carnal mind not to
be subject to the Law of God, then surely it must needs be a duty incumbent
upon Saints, and such as are spiritually minded to be subject to it. But the
first is true, Romans 8.7. ergo the latter.

Arg. 5. If love which is the substance of the whole Law be a duty incumbent
upon Saints in Gospel Times, then is the Law even in Gospel Times a rule to
Saints. But the antecedent is true, Romans 13.8. Owe no man any thing, but to
love one another; for he that loves another has fulfilled the Law, Gal.
5.14. For all the Law is fulfilled in one word even in this, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. Hence Christ sums up Moses Ten Commandments into
two, whereof the first is love to God; the second love to our neighbor, Matthew.
22.37, 38, 39. ergo, the Consequent.

Arg. 6. If the Moral Law in Gospel Times be given forth to Saints as the Law
of Christ the great King of Saints, then are Saints in Gospel Times to submit
to it as a rule; for we are commanded to yield obedience to the Law of Christ,
Joh. 14.15. Gal. 6.2. And Paul tells us that himself was under the Law to
Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. yea it were unreasonable to think that Christ being a King
should not have a Law to give forth to his subjects, which they ought to obey.
As upon the translation of the Priesthood out of the hands of the Typical High
Priests into the hands of Christ the true High Priest, there is made of
necessity (as the Apostle argues, Heb. 7.12.) a change or translation also of
the Law: So may I say, upon the translation of the Scepter out of the hands of
those Kings and Governors of Israel which were only typical of Christ, into
the hands of Christ, the great King of Saints and Nations, there is made of
necessity a translation also of the Law, for he being a King, he must have a
Law to rule by. But the Moral law in Gospel Times is given forth to Saints as
the Law of Christ, for love which is the fulfilling of this Law, Christ gives
forth as his great Commandment, Joh. 13.34. Chap. 15.12, 17. And hence the
Moral Law is called the Royal Law, i.e. the Kingly Law, or the Law of Christ as
King, Jam. 2.8. Therefore is it a rule to Saints in Gospel Times.

Arg. 7. If the Moral law be not inconsistent with Gospel-liberty. then is it
a rule to Saints in Gospel Times, for there is nothing abrogated under the
Gospel, but what is inconsistent with Gospel-liberty. But the Moral law is not
inconsistent with Gospel-liberty, the reason is plain, because in Gospel Times
it is called a Law of Liberty, Jam. 2.11.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they
that shall be judged by the Law of liberty, which it could not be, were it
inconsistent with the liberty of those time. Therefore the Moral law is a rule
to Saints even in Gospel Times.

Arg. 8. That rule which considered in it self, is spiritual, holy, just, and
good, cannot be abolished to Saints in Gospel Times; for if so, then should
God abolish something that is spiritual, holy, just, and good. But such is the
rule of the Moral law, Romans 7.12, 14. ergo.

Arg. 9. That cannot be the liberty of Saints under the Gospel, which never
was any part of the bondage of Saints under the Law; but subjection to the
Moral law as a rule, was never any part of their bondage, but rather indeed
their free-dome, their joy, their delight, I mean consider the Moral law simply
and nakedly as a rule. This is clear, Psalm. 119.14. I have rejoiced in the way
of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches. verse. 24. Thy testimonies also
are my delight, and my counselors. verse. 45. And I will walk at liberty, for
I seek thy Precepts. 46. I will speak of thy testimonies also before Kings,
and will not be ashamed. 47. And I will delight my self in thy Commandments,
which I have loved. 72. The Law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of
gold and silver. 97. O how love I thy Law, it is my meditation all the day. Yea
every verse almost throughout this long and sweet Psalm, speaks the very same
language with these.

Arg. 10. If the most eminent and enlightened of Gospel-Saints, have approved of
the Law, delighted in it, served it, then is it a rule to Saints in
Gospel Times. But the first is true, and found in Paul, Romans 7.16. I consent
unto the Law that it is good, verse. 22. I delight in the Law, verse. 25. I serve
the Law, etc. Therefore the latter is truth also.

Arg. 11. If the substance of those things which are required in the Moral law,
are either commanded in the Gospel, or promised to Gospel Times, then does the
Law remain a rule to Saints even in Gospel times. But the first is true.

To give particular instance.

Does the Law in the general require of us to love God with all our heart,
soul, might, strength, and our Neighbor as our selves? And does not the Gospel
every where command these things?

Come to the first Table.

Does the first Commandment require of us to love, serve, obey one God, and
the true God? Does not the Gospel require this?

Does the second Commandment require of us, that we should worship God in his
own way, forbidding all false Idol-worship? Does not the Gospel also do this? 1
Cor. 10.20, 21. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17.

Does the third Commandment require sanctification of Gods Name? and does not
the Gospel even this also? Jam. 5.12.

Does the fourth Commandment enjoin us to keep holy the Sabbath; and is not
this promised to Gospel Times, yea the purest times of the Gospel, Eze. 44.24.
and I take it for this reason the Command of the Sabbath is mentioned both in
the Moral, the Ceremonial, and Judicial law; in the Judicial law to teach us
that the keeping holy one day of seven is natural; in the Moral, to teach us it
is Moral; in the Ceremonial, to let us see that it is Evangelical, the
Ceremonial law being but the Gospel in Types and Figures.

Come to the second Table.

Does the fifth Commandment require obedience to Superiors? And have we not
the very words of it, Ephesians. 6.2.

And as for the other five, we have them all summed up together, Romans 13.9.
Therefore must the Law be a rule in Gospel Times.

Arg. 12. If the Moral law in the substance thereof, is no other than the Law
of nature, then is it a rule in Gospel Times; for it would be absurd to say,
the Gospel sets us at liberty from the Law of nature, so as that it is no sin
to violate the Law of nature, either by neglecting what it teaches to do, or
acting what it teaches to abhor. But the antecedent is true, Romans 2.14, 15.
The Gentiles doing by the light of nature the things contained in the Law, does
prove this, that the very things of the Law are in nature; the Moral law being
as a written external copy of the Law of nature. Therefore the consequent.

Arg. 13. If it be sin in a believer under the Gospel to do contrary to what
the Moral law requires, then is the Moral law a rule to him; For where there is
no Law, there is no transgression, Romans 4.15. But who in his right wits would
not say, that put case a believer should commit Idolatry, blaspheme God,
profane the Sabbath, be a Murderer, These, Adulterer, etc. that he does not
sin, if he sin he transgresses a Rule, and it so, then the Moral Law which
forbids these things, is a rule to him.

Arg. last. If Saints in Gospel Times are commanded in an especial manner to
remember the Moral law, then is it a rule to such in Gospel Times. But the
antecedent is true, Mal. 4.4. why after the rising of the Sun of righteousness,
and Saints thriving and flourishing under his bright and warm beams, are we
commanded to remember the law of Moses? but to show that that very same Moral
law which was once given forth by the hand of Moses, was to remain a rule to
Saints even in the purest and brightest Gospel Times.

The conclusion is, That the Moral law, or the Law of the Ten Commandments,
does still remain as a rule to Saints in Gospel Times.

Hence it follows, that by abolishing the Moral law as Hagars rule, the rule of
the Old Covenant, we have not abolished it as a rule, nor lost any iota of the
substance of the Moral law, but rather confirmed the whole in Sarahs (the New
Covenants) hands.

In a word, the sum of my Discourse hitherto about the Moral law, amounts to
this, viz. That the Moral law is now by Christ the great King and Lawgiver of
his people transplanted from a more barren, into a more fruitful soil; from an
Old Covenant into a New and better Covenant, which Covenant because it is
everlasting, therefore the Law being now therein is become permanent and
everlasting also. Yea to the end that the Law might be stable and continue for
ever, it was therefore necessary it should be transplanted hither, the
Covenant in which it was before being (as the Apostle tells us) decayed and
waxen old, yea ready to vanish away, Heb. 8. last. So that we may truly say
with the Apostle: Do we make void the Law through faith, God for bid, nay we
establish the Law.

3 Hence we may learn, That the very same work or duty for the substance or
matter of it done by one, may be a Legal work, done by another; an
Evangelical. The difference betwixt Legal and Evangelical works, is not a
material, but a formal difference, Hagars children keep the same Law, and do
the same works for substance that Sarahs do. Hagar holds forth the Moral law to
her children, and says, this is my rule, obey it: Sarah likewise holds it
forth to her children, saying, And this is my rule, obey it. So that there is
no difference betwixt the seed of Hagar, and Sarah, as to the substance or
matter of that rule they walk by; for both have materially one and the same
rule proposed to them, and both strive and endeavor a conformity to that rule
yet the action of the one is but a Legal work, the action of the other an
Evangelical. The reason of this difference lies in what has been formerly
said, Hagar proposes her rule to those that are her seed, as a bare rule,
telling them only what is their duty, and pressing them to the doing hereof by
severe Threats on the one hand, in case they be found defective but in a
tittle, and alluring promises of reward on the other, in case they prove
obedient in all things to her commands, but gives them no strength to walk up
to that rule, so as that they may either escape the evil of the threat, or
obtain the good of the promise. Hence Hagars Children, in case they could
perfectly obey, yet their obedience could be no more but a pure legal
obedience, that is, obedience springing from themselves as the efficient cause
and motive, terminating in themselves as their ultimate end, or to speak more
plainly, obedience done in and by their own strength, to and for their own
benefit, either to avoid some evil feared, or procure some good desired, which
is properly pure legal obedience, when what a man does, he does by himself,
and to himself.

But now Sarah, though she propose the same rule to her seed, yet in a
different way, or manner, for together with the rule she gives to her
Children strength to keep it, cutting off withal from this rule the threat of
death in case of disobedience, and the promise of life upon condition of
obedience, by assuring her seed (in giving forth this rule unto them) that they
are already most certainly freed from death, and possessed of life, and that
therefore she gives not forth this rule unto them, to be as a way or means,
through the observance of which they may escape the one, or obtain the other,
but only as a declaration of their Fathers will, and their duty, that by it
they may be instructed how they ought to walk, and to please God.

Hence the obedience of Sarahs Children (so far as they are subject to their
Mother Sarah only, receiving their Law out of her hand) is pure Gospel
obedience, i. e. obedience springing from the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them
as the principal efficient cause, from love and thankfulness to-their Father as
the moving cause, from an earnest desire that their Father might have some
service from them, and glory by them as the final cause, and this is pure
Gospel obedience, when God is Agent, Motive, and End in all we do.

4 Hence we may learn, That a true Believer as he does not expect life and
salvation from his obedience to the Law, so should he not fear death and
condemnation, either by his falling short in obedience, or by his disobedience.
This Position will sound harsh in some cares, and be accounted a leavened
Principle, but do but observe how naturally it flows from what has been laid
down and proved; for if the promise of life and salvation upon condition of
obedience, and the threat of Death and Condemnation to the disobedient, be
proper to the Law, as Hagars Law, and if the Law, as Hagars Law, be now cast
out, then has a Believer nothing to do with the Law, as it is a law promising
life to the obedient, or threatening death to the disobedient; and if so, then
cannot he expect life and salvation from it, though he should obey it; nor
need he fear death though he disobey it. This necessarily follows, that which
he has nothing to do with is dead to, delivered from, etc. he can neither
expect good, no nor fear evil from. But the Law as Hagars Law, he has nothing
to do with, is dead to it, delivered from it, therefore he can neither expect
good, nor need he fear evil from it.

Obj. But it will be said, Such a principle as this does open a wide gap to all
manner of licention nesse?

Ans. Not so, but contrariwise, it is co a gracious heart the most powerful
motive, and the greatest help that can be to holiness; for as there is
nothing moves such a one so strongly as does this persuasion upon the heart,
that whatsoever it has is of the free love of God only, and that this love is
such as that nothing can separate from it; so nothing affords the Soul more
firm help and relief against sin, and temptations to sin than does the
knowledge and assurance of this, that sin and temptation though it should
conquer cannot condemn, for so long as the Soul looks upon a possibility of
being condemned by sin, if vanquished by it, he is in continual fear, and
therefore whenever he finds the motions of sin, or temptations to sin
stirring in himself, he presently grows weak and faint through this fear, I
shall be vanquished, and so condemned; and as a fainting man is not in a
capability to stand up against an enemy assaulting him with full strength; so
this fainting Soul, whose strength through fear is gone before it is assaulted,
sinkes down presently under the assault, and is without any great resistance
made a captive to that thing it hates; which thing the Apostle Paul had large
experience of in himself, when he said, Sin taking occasion by the
Commandment wrought in me all manner of concupiscence; for without the law
sin was dead, for I was alive without the law once, but when the Commandment
came sin revived, and I dyed, and the Commandment which was ordained to life,
I found to be unto death, for sin taking occasion by the Commandment deceived
me, and by it slew me, Romans 7.8, 9, 10, 11. But now when a Soul apprehends
this, that Hagars condemning Law has nothing to do with him, and can from the
clear knowledge of this, say beleevingly to sin, and temptation, when he
feels it beginning to stir, O sin, O temptation, though I should now yield
to thee, which is the thing thou would have, yet know this, that thou shall
never condemn me, which is the thing thou seek! hereby he does (as I may
say) disanimate the strength of sin and temptation, and mightily encourages
himself, and so adds to his own strength, that whereas be ever before
encountered sin with disadvantage, he does now encounter it with advantage, and
fights with the greatest resolution that can be, and without
faint-heartednesse, which faint-heartednesse comes in by the door of this
fear, if I am conquered I am undone, but if this fear be removed from the
heart, and the Soul once thoroughly persuaded of this, my condition does not
depend at all upon the event of this Combat, but whether I conquer or am
conquered that is the same, then shall it find its hands made strong to fight,
and its heart also mightily resolved.

Such a state or condition as this I am speaking of there is, but it is known
only of those whom God has brought out of Hagars School, and who are in the
School of Sarah; my meaning is, such as God has enlightened to see, and enabled
to receive, in the love of it, this blessed truth, that rigid servile Hagar is
an outcast, and has no longer rule over them, having neither punishments to
inflict, nor rewards to bestow upon them; but mild and loving Sarah is their
only Mother, and has the sole government of them, whose Children, though they
may be corrected with gentle rebukes, yet can they never become outcasts, and
be disinherited as Hagars may. Till we come into Sarahs School we cannot
learn this lesson, yea Sarahs Children whilst they continue in Hagars School
will be offended at it.

Thus we have done with the First Question, viz. what we are to understand by
the Old Covenant.

I come now to the Second, viz.

Quest. 2. What kind of Covenant this Old Covenant is?

Ans. This is indeed the knotty Question, and if there be any piece of the
Doctrine of the Covenants, that seems to have perplexing difficulties in it,
this is it.

Before I can deliver my thoughts hereof positively, it is necessary that
something be laid down Negatively in opposition to that common principle
which holds this Old Covenant to be a Covenant of Grace, and to differ from
the New only in respect of administration, so making the Old and the New not to
be two diverse Covenants, but two administrations of one and the same Covenant,
the one more dark, the other more clear, but the Covenant to be for substance
the same, and a Covenant of Grace in both.

This Principle so generally received, seems to me to have been as a
remaining cloud upon the Gospel, and that very thing which (by confounding the
one with the other) has hid from the eyes of most, the knowledge of the
Covenants, which is in a manner the hinge the whole Scripture turns upon; and
in opposition unto it, I lay down this Position:

That the Old Covenant cannot be a Covenant of Grace.

The Reasons of it are,

1. Because Hagar the Old Covenant, is a Bondwoman, and gendreth to bondage,
Gal. 4. 22 23, 24. but thus does not the Covenant of Grace, for it redeemes
from bondage, Gal. 4.3, 4, 5. calls to liberty, chap. 5.13. instates, in
liberty, verse. 1. Sarah the New Covenant is a freewoman, Gal. 4.22, 23. and
the children of Sarah are free, verse. 31.

2 Because if the Old Covenant were a Covenant of Grace, then should the
children of it, i. e. those that are begotten thereby, be children of Grace,
for as the Mother is, so the seed; as the root, so the branch; the children of
the Covenant of Grace are children of grace, Gal. 3. 28, 29. chap. 4.26, 28.
having blessed promises of grace made to them* Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. but such are
not the children of the Old Covenant, Hagars son is not a child of grace, Genesis
17. ver. 18, 19, 20, 21. but Ishmael the son of Hagar is a fruit of the stesh,
Gal. 4.23.

3 Because if the Old Covenant were a Covenant of Grace, then must it be
everlasting, for the Covenant of Grace is an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17.19.
2 Samuel 23.5. Ezekiel. 16.60. Heb. 13.20. But such is not the Old Covenant, for the
Apostle speaks of it as decaying and vanishing away, Heb. 8.13. yea as done
away, 2 Cor. 3.11. yea further tells us plainly, that God never intended it in
the first making of it for an everlasting Covenant, but a temporary only, and
therefore the glory of Moses countenance, which according to the Apostle was a
Type of the glory of the Old Covenant administered by him, though for a while it
shone so as Israel could not steadfastly behold it, yet was it a fading thing,
showing that all the glory of this Covenant was temporary only, and to be done
away, 2 Cor. 3.7. which he also confirms by saying that Believers under the
Gospel are not under it, Romans 6.15. dead to it, chap. 7.4. delivered from it,
verse. 5. Hagar is in the Family but for a time.

4 Because if the Old Covenant were a Covenant of grace, then should it have a
power to pardon the offenses of its Children, for this has the New Covenant,
Heb. 8.12. what a full and large pardon does the New Covenant give forth, but
the Old Covenant has no power to pardon any one offense in its Children; Hagar
could not give a pardon to Ishmael for his mocking, though we read not that
ever he offended in any way but that only, and in that, only that once; yet (I
say) she could not pardon him; if he offend he must suffer, Hagar has no
relief for him.

The Old Covenant was delivered upon such terms as these, that in case they,
viz. Israel, to whom it was given forth, did obey Gods voice, and not provoke,
he would then be an enemy to their enemies, and an adversary to their
adversaries, but in case of disobedience and provocation, he would not pardon
their transgressions, Exodus 23.20, 21, 22.

Indeed the Old Covenant (as I shall show hereafter) can relax the outward
punishment due to the offense, and the inward also for a t^me, but it cannot
remit or pardon the offense it self.

The Old Covenant considered as the Old Covenant, neither does, nor can
dispense with one offense, Gal. 3.10. Jam. 2.10, 11. therefore cannot be a
Covenant of Grace, for that can dispense with many, The words of the Second
Commandment, Showing mercy to thousands, and some other places of a like
import, which seem to oppose this will fall of themselves, when the positive
part of our Question shall be handled, what kind of covenant this Old Covenant
is.

5 Because if the Old Covenant were a Covenant of Grace, then should there be
a manifest contradiction in the Covenant of Grace; and the Covenant of Grace,
as it is the Old Covenant should fight against it self, as it is the New; for
as none can deny Sarah, or the New Covenant to be the Covenant of Grace, so
mark it, there is a manifest contradiction betwixt Hagar and Sarah, and an
enmity betwixt the two Mothers, and the two Seeds; Hagar is a Bondwoman, Sarah
a Freewoman; Hagar so soon as she has conceived despises Sarah, Sarah
thereupon deals hardly with Hagar; Ishmael Hagars Son mocks Isaac, Sarah the
mother of Isaac; thereupon moves and effects the casting out of Hagar and
Ishmael both; so that there is a manifest enmity betwixt the two Mothers, and
the twol Seeds, therefore cannot Hagar the Old Covenant be a Covenant of
grace, unless we will make the Covenant of grace which is most entirely one,
and at perfect unity with it self, to be in perpetual war, and discord, and
to fight with it self.

6 Because if the Old Covenant be a Covenant of grace, then might the Old
Covenant convey the Fathers inheritance to the Seed thereof, for this can the
Covenant of grace do to its Seed. Sarah conveys the inheritance to Isaac, but
the Old Covenant cannot do thus; Hagar can neither convey the whole, or any
part of the Fathers inheritance to Ishmael, but notwithstanding Hagars right,
Ishmael without any wrong done to him, is cast out of the whole.

The gift of the Inheritance is not the gift of the Law, or Old Covenant, but
the gift of the promise or New, Galat. 3.18. Therefore the Old Covenant is not
a Covenant of grace.

7 Because if the Old Covenant were a Covenant of grace, then might the
Children of the Covenant of grace be outcasts, and for ever rejected, for
such is Ishmael Hagars son. But now Isaac Sarahs son, the Children of the New
Covenant cannot perish, or become outcasts for ever, because the Covenant made
with Isaac is an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17.19. Now how can this Covenant
be everlasting to the Seed, if we suppose them in a capability of being cast
out of the inheritance. Therefore the Old Covenant is not a Covenant of grace.

8 That Covenant which does not confer the Spirit, is not a Covenant of grace,
for it is one great promise of the Covenant of grace, I will put my Spirit
within you, Ezekiel. 36.27. But this does not the Old Covenant, Gal. 3.2. The
Saints indeed in Old Testament times had the Spirit, but not by virtue of the
Old Covenant, but the New, which run down together with the Old throughout
these times.

9 That Covenant which is weak, insufficient, unprofitable either to purge
conscience here, or procure salvation hereafter, cannot be a Covenant of
grace, for the Covenant of grace is effectual to either; it is the only sure
foundation of consolation here, called therefore a Covenant of peace, Isa.
54.10. salvation hereafter, 2 Samuel 23.5. Titus 2.11. Ephesians. 2.8. But the Old
Covenant is such, Heb. 7.18, 19. Chap. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. said in this respect not
to be faultlesse, Chap. 8.7. and because of the weakness of it Christ is
sent, Romans 8.3. Therefore cannot be a Covenant of grace.

10 That Covenant which pronounces a curse of death to the breach of it, a
blessing of life to the keeping of it, cannot be a Covenant of grace, for this
is directly contrary to the tenor of the Covenant of grace. But this does the
Old Covenant, for the curse, see Gal. 3.10. Cursed be he that continues not
in all things written in the book of the Law to do them. This has reference to
that Covenant given forth by Moses, which was the Old, and therefore the Text
is but a citation of his words taken from Deuteronomy. 27. last. For the blessing, we
have Romans 10.5. Moses describes the righteousness of the Law, that the man
that does them shall live in them, the Apostle speaks clearly of Moses
Covenant, and not the Covenant made with Adam, the like we have, Gal. 3.12.
Therefore cannot the Old Covenant be a Covenant of grace.

11 The Old Covenant cannot be a Covenant of grace, because the establishing
of it as such a thing had been altogether needless: The reason is, because the
Covenant of grace was in being before it; for the Covenant of grace had being
immediately upon Adams fall, in that great promise, Genesis 3.15. in which promise
was laid the foundation of the Covenant of grace for all Ages and Generations
that were, to come. Afterward the Covenant of grace comes forth again in the
renewal of Adams promise with Abraham, Genesis 12.3. And this was a long time
before the Old Covenant was given forth upon Sinai, so also before the Old
Covenant was as yet come forth in the Type, viz. before ever as yet Abraham
knew Hagar. Now when as the Covenant of grace had being already, what need was
there after this of establishing the Old Covenant as a Covenant of grace.

Nay, Whether or no the establishing of it as such a thing would not
necessarily have derogated from the Covenant of grace, and seemed to render the
Covenant of grace weak and insufficient, that after it in away of promise was
come forth into the world, there should be yet need of establishing the Old
Covenant as a Covenant of grace.

The Apostle makes the Old Covenant weak for this reason, because after it was
given forth, there was yet need of the coming forth of another Covenant, Heb.
7.18, 19. Chap. 8.7. viz. of the New, not in respect of its first being, for so
(as I have said) it was from the beginning, and long before the Old, but in
respect of the publication of it, in its full luster and glory. Now whether by
the same reason do not we render the New Covenant weak, in case that after it
had being in the world, we bring forth the Old as a Covenant of grace?

12 Arg. If the Old Covenant were a Covenant of grace, then should it be the
same with the Covenant made with the Fathers, viz. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, for
the Covenant made with these, was a Covenant of grace. But the Old Covenant is
not the same with the Covenant made with them, Deuteronomy. 5.3. ergo.

Lastly, If the Old Covenant be a Covenant of grace, then must it either be
the same Covenant with the New, or there must be two distinct Covenants of
grace.

1 The same Covenant with the New it cannot be.

1 Because Hagar and Sarah are distinct, yea so distinct, as that Hagar can
never be Sarah, nor Sarah Hagar.

2 Because if the Old and New Covenant are the same, then should the Children
be the same, but the Apostle makes a manifest difference betwixt the Children,
Gal. 4.23. calling Hagars Son a Son of the flesh, Sarahs, Son of the promise.

3 The Old Covenant and the New have distinct Mediators. Moses is Mediator of
the first, Deuteronomy. 5.5. Christ of the second, Heb. 8.6. Therefore are they
distinct Covenants.

4 The Old Covenant and the New have distinct promises, the promises of the
first are conditional, Exodus 19.5, 6. Of the second inconditional, I will be
their God, and they shall be my people; in which respect the New Covenant is
said to be established upon better promises, Heb. 8.6.

5 Because the Old Covenant is clearly distinct from the Covenant made with
Abraham, which as our foregoing reason proves; so is it also proved at large,
Romans 4. Gal. 3. where is showed that Abraham was not justified by this
Covenant, but by the Covenant of grace made with him four hundred and thirty
years before. Now had this Old Covenant been the same with that, then Abraham
in being justified by that, had been justified by this also. But now the
Covenant made with Abraham was the New Covenant, therefore cannot the Old
Covenant and the New be the same.

Lastly, The Scripture wheresoever it mentions them, speaks of them as
distinct, Gal. 4.24. the Apostle calls them two Covenants, not two
Administrations of one and the same Covenant. So Heb. 8. they are called a
first and a second, verse. 7. a New and an Old, verse. 13. a better, and a worse,
verse. 6. though the term worse is not expressed, yet its opposite better, does
necessarily imply it.

The Old Covenant therefore cannot be the same with the New.

2 That the Old and the New are two distinct Covenants of grace cannot be.

1 Because then should not Gods grace and mercy which is his great and glorious
Attribute be one, but divided, and so consequently God should not be one,
because his grace and mercy is himself. 2 Because then of necessity there
should be two distinct ways of salvation, for the Covenant of grace, or
Gospel Covenant, is the way of salvation so called, Act. 16.17. the sending of
it forth, and preaching of it, the sending forth, and preaching of salvation,
Act. 13.26. Chap. 28.28. Romans 1.15.16. Isa. 52.7. Heb. 2.3. It is a Doctrine
that carries salvation in it, Tit. 2.11. Ephesians. 1.13. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. All which
clearly argue salvation to be in that Covenant, and it to be a way of
salvation; it therefore the Old Covenant and the New be Covenants distinct,
and yet both Covenants of grace, then does it necessarily follow, that Saints
in Old Testament times, who lived under the Old Covenant, were saved one way.
We another, expressly contrary to Po^, words, Act. 15.11. and Paul's, Heb. 4.2.
The Fathers of the Old Testament, had the Gospel or New Covenant preached to
them as well as we.
The Old and New Covenants, therefore cannot be two distinct Covenants of
grace.

The final Conclusion is, That the Old Covenant is not a Covenant of grace.

Hence 1 Learn, That it is not safe for us to take up principles merely from
men, though ever so good men and able. It any one principle, that yet will not
stand with the truth of the Scripture, may plead the number and worth of its
Patrons and Friends, this may. Let us learn to give honor to whom honor is
due, and reverence and respect to holy men, and to their holiness so far as the
same is due, but let the ability or holiness of no man, or men, be the
standard of our principles, for it is not any thing within, but the blessed
word without that is the only sure foundation to truth, bottom to our faith.
Paul commended the Bereans for not taking up what he delivered upon trust, but
searching the Scriptures, whether the things were so, or not, Act. 17.10, 11.
How would such a spirit grace the Ministry at this day? And how much cause have
we to lament the want of it?

2 Hence, learn, That justification, peace of conscience here, salvation
hereafter, is not attainable by the Old Covenant. The reason is, because all
these flow from grace, 1 Justification flows from grace, Romans 3.24. Titus 3.7.
2 Peace of conscience flows from that, and therefore consequently from grace,
Romans 5.1, 2, 3. Yea peace of conscience is Gods gift, Romans 15.13. 2 Thessalonians.
2.16. Everlasting consolation is given, and given through grace. 3 Salvation is
of grace. Ephesians. 2.5.8. 2 Timothy 1.9. But now the Old Covenant is not a Covenant
of grace; Therefore neither of these which are all effects of grace, are
attainable by it.

3 Hence, Learn, That whatsoever work may be in a man, or upon him, by virtue
of the Old Covenant, and the power that it has ever conscience, is not a work
of grace. A man under the Old Covenant may through the terrors of it upon his
conscience do much, he may repent as Ahab and Judas did; confess his sin to
others as Saul did to David, pray and deny himself as Ishmael did, Genesis 21.17.
Chap. 25.9. reform many things as Herod did, be very zealous in his way as the
Jews were, Romans 10.2. and Paul before conversion, Gal. 1.14. Phil. 3.6. I say,
he may be outwardly very strict, yet not have one dram of grace, because the
Old Covenant is not a Covenant that gives grace.

Hence, we may see what a great Mistake many poor souls lie under, about their
own condition, and the condition of others, whilst they bless themselves, or
others, as being the people of God, because some Legal works through the
terrors of the Old Covenant have passed upon them, they have repented and
mourned, and been, humbled, and are reformed, etc. Truly all this a man may
be, and yet (as Christ says) a Publican and Harlot may get into heaven before
him. All this, if there be no more does not evidence a dram of grace, for all
this may be by the Old Covenant, which is not a Covenant of grace, nor does
convey grace. The Old Covenant (as I shall show hereafter) can do glorious
things, it can make a man work till he ^weats again, so reform as that one
would think that man which the other day was a notorious sinner, were become an
Angel, it would give a man comforts and joys, and ravishments in his duties
and obedience. Now many when they feel an Old Covenant work passed upon them,
or see it in others (which men may have, and drop into hell notwithstanding,
yea thousands are there which have had it) they presently cry out, Well I am a
Saint, a child of God, such a one is a child of God, my condition, and his,
is doubtless good, we are happy men, etc. when as alas poor souls they are
merely deluded, they feed on ashes, a deceived heart has turned them aside,
and though now they will not believe it, because they are loath to be
troubled, by thinking otherwise of themselves then that all is well, and also
because others think well of them; and so as the stony ground they have their
root not in themselves, but in another, i. e. the root of their comfort is laid
in another judgment of their condition, and the good opinion another has of
them, yet the day will come, when to their woe, they will find it, namely in
that day when many shall come and say, Lord, Lord, have not we done thus and
thus, been thus and thus, and shall receive this answer, contrary to their
expectation, Depart from me, I know ye not, ye workers of iniquity; Come ye
to me (will Christ then say) with your works, you have done thus and thus,
away with you, and your works too, for I account no better of your works than
as they are, works of iniquity, nor of you any better for them, then as you
are, a company of workers of iniquity. When this day comes men's eyes will be
open, and they will find that truth which now they will not believe; then shall
the children of the Old Covenant when they come upon this stage be known from
the children of the New. Here will be the separation indeed betwixt the Goats
and the Sheep, but of these things more hereafter.

Thus much as touching the Negative part of our Question.

That the Old Covenant cannot be a Covenant of Grace, I come to the positive.

The question now is.

Quest. What kind of Covenant is this Old Covenant?

Ans. The most proper name that can be given to it to express its nature, is
to style it a Conditional Covenant; a name that suits excellently well with the
nature of the Old, and does also better than any other distinguish it from the
New, which according to name and nature both, is a Covenant absolute, and
inconditional, as shall ( the Lord assisting) be made appear when we come to
treat of the New Covenant.

If you ask me wherein, or in what things does this conditionality of the Old
Covenant appear?

I answer, in the whole of it, whatsoever the Old Covenant holds forth, or
gives to those under it, it holds forth and gives in a conditional way.

The Old Covenant is rich, has its hands full or mercies and blessings, but
will give forth none but upon condition. As there is nothing in the New
Covenant so great, but that Covenant gives it forth freely, so there is nothing
in the Old Covenant so small, which it will part with, or let go without the
performance of some condition, by him who would enjoy its gifts.

This will better appear, if we consider how that this Old Covenant has two
great gifts to bestow.

1 A gift of blessings, which it gives forth upon condition of exact and
perfect obedience to all those things that those under the same did by virtue
either of Moral or Judicial precepts stand obliged to perform. 2 A gift of
Grace, by which in case their blessings through disobedience either to any of
the Moral or Judicial commands should become forfeit or lost, and themselves
brought under the contrary Curse, they might again recover their Blessings,
and be delivered from the Curse; but this also was upon condition of their
flying for refuge to the Ceremonial Law, doing that thing which the said law
did require to be done of such, who having transgressed against any of the
aforesaid commands, would have atonement made for them, and their sin forgiven
them, joining herewithall repentance for their offense, and reformation of it.
Under these two Heads, viz. the blessings of the Old Covenant, and the grace
of it, is comprehended the whole of the Old Covenant, and therefore I shall
treat of each severally. Concerning both which, I may say as the Apostle when
he was about to treat of the Melchisedaical Priesthood, Of which we have many
things to say, and hard to be uttered.

First, for the Blessings of the Old Covenant, they were of two sorts.

1 Blessings outward and Temporal. 2 Blessings Spiritual and Eternal, but both
upon condition.
First, for those Blessings that were outward, and temporary, they were also of
two sorts, either,

First, Blessings more common, by which I understand such Blessings, as though
Israel, with whom this Old Covenant was made, did enjoy them by virtue of the
Old Covenant, yet were they not peculiar to the Children of the Old Covenant,
for even others besides them did oftentimes enjoy them by virtue of common
providence. As they were Blessings given by Covenant, they were peculiar to
them, but as Blessings, they were common, and of such a nature that others who
stood not under this Old Covenant as they did, did yet notwithstanding through
the mere bounty of common providence oftentimes partake of them.

Now these were,

1 Long life in the Land of Canaan. This was given upon condition of obedience,
and therefore wheresoever we have it promised, the condition of obedience is
also annexed, Exodus 20.12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may
be prolonged in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee, i. e. in so doing
thou ^ait have long life in Canaan, Deuteronomy. 5.33, 33. Ye shall observe to do
therefore as the Lord your God has commanded you, you shall not turn aside to
the right hand or to the left, you shall walk in all the ways which the Lord
your God has commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with
you, and that ye may prolong your days in the Land which ye shall possess,
chap. 11.8, 9. Therefore shall ye keep all the Commandments which I command
you this day, that ye may be strong, and go in to possess the Land whither
ye go to possess it; and that ye may prolong your days in the Land, etc.
verse. 21. That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children,
in the Land which the Lord swear unto your Fathers to give them, as the days
of heaven upon the earth, Chap. 25. 15. chap. 30.20. chap. 32.47. Set your
hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall
command your children, to observe to do, all the words of this law; for it is
not a vain thing for you, because it is your life, and through this thing ye
shall prolong your days in the Land which ye go over Jordan to possess.
This Blessing was forfeited upon their disobedience, Deuteronomy. 4.25, 26. When thou
shall beget children, and childrens children, and shall have remained long in
the Land, and shall corrupt your selves, and make a graven Image, or the
likeness of any thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to
provoke him to anger; I call heaven and, earth to witness against you this
day; that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto to ye go
over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall
utterly be destroyed.

Hence also on the contrary we have those phrases, Ye shall dye, the man that
does so, and so, shall surely dye; so frequently denounced (in the Books of
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy) against the disobedient; which we are
not to understand of death eternal, because a man might make forfeiture of his
life through breach of this outward Covenant, as did Moses and Aaron, and many
others of those who fell in the Wilderness, and yet be a person saved from
Wrath eternal; nor are we always and in all cases to understand it of Death,
as a punishment inflicted by the Civil Magistrate upon Offenders deserving it;
but we are to understand the phrase, the man doing thus and thus shall dye,
very frequently, if not most frequently, of Death inflicted by the hand of God
for breach of that Covenant, which kept and observed, would cause that their
days should be prolonged, but broken and violated, did cut them short.

2 Multiplying of them as a Nation, Deuteronomy. 6.3. Hear therefore O Israel, and
observe to do it, that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase
mightily, etc. chap. 8.1. All the Commandments which I command thee this day,
shall ye observe to do, that ye may live and multiply, etc. Deuteronomy. 30.16. I
command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to
keep his Commandoments, and his Statutes, and his Judgments, that thou may
live and multiply, etc. So chap. 11.21. Chap. 13.17. with others. Now as this
promise of multiplication was conditional, upon condition of their keeping the
Covenant; so no sooner did they break Covenant, but presently they fell under
the contrary Curse, Deuteronomy. 28. verse. 15. compared with 62. But it shall come to
pass, if thou will not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to
do all his Commandments, etc. -- ye shall be left few in number, whereas
ye were as the stars of Heaven for multitude, because thou would not obey
the voice of the Lord thy God. So Chapter 4. verse. 27.

3 Advancing them above all other Nations, yet still upon condition of their
obedience, Deuteronomy. 28.1. And it shall come to pass, if thou shall hearken
diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his
Commandments which I command thee this day, that the Lord thy God will set
thee on high, above all the Nations of the earth. verse. 13. And the Lord will
make thee the head, and not the tail, and thou shall be above only, and shall
not be beneath; if that thou hearken unto the Commandments of the Lord thy
God, which I commanded this day, to observe and do them. So chap. 26.19. Hence
whenever they became disobedient, immediately they did forfeit this mercy, and
came under the contrary curse, Deuteronomy. 28.15. But it shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his
Commandments, etc. What then? see verse. 37.43, 44. Thou shall become an
astonishment, a proverb, and a byword among all Nations whither the Lord shall
lead thee; the stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very high,
and thou shall come down very low, he shall lend to thee, and thou shall not
lend to him; he shall be the head, and thou shall be the tail. They are
rich, honorable, advanced above others whilst they obey, but if they disobey,
their riches is turned into poverty, their honor into reproach, they who
before were the Head, now become the tail.

4 Blessing them in the City and Field, in the fruit of their Body, their
Ground, their Cattle, in their Basket and Store, in their outgoings, and
in-comings, in their Storehouses, and all they set their hands unto, Deuteronomy.
28.1, 2, 3, etc. And it shall come to pass, if thou shall harken diligently
unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his Commandments
which I command thee this day, blessed shall thou be in the City, and blessed
shall thou be in the field; blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the
fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy Kine, and
the flocks of thy Sheep, blessed shall be thy Basket and thy store, blessed
shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be when thou go
out The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy Storehouses, and in
all that thou set thine hand unto, etc. So Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13. Wherefore it
shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments to keep and do them,
that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant and mercy which he
swear unto thy Fathers, and he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply
thee; he will also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land,
thy corn, and thy wine, and thy oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep, etc. It is evident enough that these mercies were given forth
upon condition, and therefore so soon as ever they were found wanting in the
condition, their mercies were turned into judgments, their blessings became
curses, as Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, 17, etc. But it shall come to pass, if thou will
not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, etc. Cursed shall thou be in
the City, and cursed shall thou be in the field. Cursed shall be thy basket
and thy store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy
land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Cursed shall thou
be when thou come in, and cursed shall thou be when thou go out, etc.

5 Giving them victory over their Enemies, yet still upon condition, Deur.
28.7. verse. 1. If thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, etc. What then? See verse. 7. The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise
up against thee to be smitten before thy face, they shall come out against thee
one way, and fly before thee seven ways, Levit. 26.3. with 7, 8. If ye walk
in my Statutes, and keep my Commandments, and do them. Ye shall chase your
Enemies, and they shall fall before you by the Sword. And five of you shall
chase a hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight, etc.
But no sooner do they rebel; but the contrary curse is upon them, Levit. 26.14.
with 17. But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
Commandments, I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before
your Enemies, and they that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall fly
when none pursues. Deuteronomy. 28.15. with. 25. But it shall come to pass, if thou will not bearken, etc. The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine
Enemies, thou shall go out one way against them, and fly seven ways before
them, and shall be removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth. So verse. 47,
48, 49. etc.

6 Giving them rain and fruitful seasons, Lev. 26.3, 4. If ye walk, in my
statutes, etc. Then will I give you rain in due season. This mercy as obeying
they did enjoy it, so disobeying they lost it, Deuteronomy. 11.13, 14, etc. And it
shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my Commandments,
which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God, and to serve him, etc.
That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain,
and the latter rain, ver. 16, 17. Take heed to your selves that your heart be
not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and, worship them. And
then the Lords wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that
there be no rain, etc.

Lastly, putting far from them the Pestilence, and all manner of sicknesses and
diseases, the Sword, evil noy some Beasts, Famine, Captivity, etc. But this
upon condition, in case they did obey, they should be freed from all these,
but if they did rebel and disobey, they should come under them.

Deuteronomy. 7.12. with 15. Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these
judgments, and keep, and do them, the Lord will take away from thee all
sickness, and will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt (which thou
know) upon thee, but will lay them upon all them that hate thee. Lev. 26.6.
And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make
you afraid, and I will rid evil Beasts out of the Land, neither shall the
Sword go through your Land, if ye walk in my Statutes, etc. as verse. 3. Deuteronomy.
28.15. with 21.22. But if thou will not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy
God, etc. The Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have
consumed thee from off the Land whither thou go to possess it. The Lord
shall smite thee with the Consumption, with a Fever, and with an Inflammation,
and with an extreme burning, and with the Sword, verse. 27. The Lord will smite
thee with the Botch of Egypt, and with the Emerods, and with the Scab, and with
the Itch, whereof thou can not be healed: The Lord shall smite thee with
madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart, verse. 35. The Lord shall
smite thee in thy knees, and in thy legs with a sore Botch that cannot be
healed, from the sole of the foot to the top of the head, verse.60, 61. Moreover
he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt which thou wast afraid of,
and they shall cleave unto thee. Also every sickness, and every Plague which
is not written in the Book of this Law, them will the Lord bring upon thee
until thou be destroyed. For Famine, see verse. 53.54. And thou shall eat the
fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons, and of thy daughters, in the
siege and straitness wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee. For
Captivity, see verse. 41. Thou shall beget sons and daughters, but shall not
enjoy them, for they shall go into Captivity. F^^ ^vill Beasts, read Lev.
26.21, 22. And if ye walk contrary to me, etc. I will send wild Beasts among
you, which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your Cattle, and make
you few in number, and your high ways shall be desolate.

These Blessings and others of a like nature are also frequently inculcated in
the Prophets, but still with a Condition annexed to them, Isa. 1.19, 20. If ye
be willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of the Land. But if ye refuse
and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the Sword.

Secondly, Blessings more special and peculiar. By these I understand such
blessings, which although for nature they were but temporary, because upon
breach of Covenant they might be lost, yet they were such as were peculiar to
Israel who stood under this Old Covenant. No other Nation might, or could come
in and share with them in these, though oftentimes they were by the bounty of
Gods providence made sharers with them in the other. Yea such they were as were
a resemblance of the special and peculiar blessings of the New Covenant: As,

1 MORE GENERALLY; a resemblance there was in this Old Covenant of that great
gift and blessing of the New Covenant (which is inclusive of all other gifts
and blessings) viz. Gods Donation of himself to a people. The great and
principal blessing of the New Covenant is this, Gods Donation of himself, Heb.
8.10. I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. A
resemblance there was of this in the Old Covenant, for God by virtue of this
Old Covenant gives himself in an outward and conditional way to Israel, with
whom he made this Covenant. And this outward gift extends it self to the
whole Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

1 The Father gives himself to them to be their God. Hence almost every where
in the books of Moses and the Prophets, God in reference to this people, and
this outward Covenant made with them goes under this Title, The Lord thy God.
Yet observe, The Father by virtue of this Old Covenant, is so their God, as
that in case they brake Covenant with him, he would be their God no longer,
therefore Gods being their God is always spoken of either in the present
tense, I am the Lord thy God, Exodus 20.2. i.e. so long as you keep Covenant
with me, I am your God in Covenant with you; or else in the future tense, with
laying down the Condition, as Lev. 26.3. with 11.12. If ye walk in my
statutes, and keep my Commandments, and do them, I will set my Tabernacle
amongst you, and I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall
be my people. Hence Israel who had this privilege, lost it, Hos. 1.9. Ye are
not my people, neither will I be your God. And this gives us the reason why
the Lord thy God, which of all other is the most sweet and amiable Name, as
this Name comes in the New Covenant is called a fearful Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. why?
because it is a most fearful thing to have God our God no otherwise but upon
Condition, as the Old Covenant holds him forth in such sort that he who is our
God to day, may turn against us, and be our Enemy to morrow.

2 The Son is likewise given to them to be their Redeemer in a way of outward
Redemption. This outward Redemption which they by virtue of the Old Covenant
were made partakers of, was no other but a Redemption from outward evils, from
the outward part of that curse which the Old Covenant did inflict on those that
brake it. This Redemption they had by the blood or their Sacrifices, which
Sacrifices of theirs, were no other but a shadow of Christ his Sacrifice (that
in the fullness of time was to be offered) and that Redemption that was to come
by him. This outward Redemption is expressed in the Preface to the Ten
Commandments by Redemption from Egyptian bondage, which Redemption was
outward, Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land
of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. This Redemption many had who yet were no
whit benefited by it, as those that came out of Egypt, afterward perished in
the wilderness, Jude 5. and those that had been delivered, God says of them
that he would deliver them no more, Judges 5.8. Many by the blood of their
Sacrifices were so far purged, as that the outward punishment of their sin was
remitted, who yet notwithstanding had the guilt of their sin remaining upon
them, and did in the end dye and perish in their sins. This is the Redemption
we read of Hos. 7.13. Though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies
against me.

3 The Spirit is given to them to be their Conductor or Leader. This I take it,
is meant by Gods presence, Exodus 33.14. which is called the Angel of his
presence, Isa. 63.9. which they rebelling against, are said to rebel against,
and vex his Holy Spirit, verse. 10. holding forth thus much, That we are not by
the Angel of his presence, to understand the Son (who is set forth unto us by,
and under those other expressions, verse. 8, 9. He was their Savior. In all
their affliction he was afflicted, in his love and pity he redeemed, them,
etc. and the Angel of his presence is clearly spoken of, as distinct from him)
but the Holy Spirit; which so long as they did obey, saved them, was a safe
Leader, Conductor to them, but so soon as they did rebel, became their enemy,
and fought against them. So that in this Old Covenant the Spirit was given
forth to be a Conductor, Leader, etc. But this gift of the Spirit was but
outward and conditional, so long as they did perform the condition of the
Covenant, they had this outward presence and tuition of the Spirit, but
breaking the condition, their Guardian turned against them, and became their
Enemy. And therefore as God does assure Zerubbabel, Joshua, etc. when they fell
to their duty, and were obedient, that his Spirit according to the word he
Covenanted with them when they came out of Egypt, did remain among them, Hag.
2.5. So on the other side, the Rebels (but now mentioned) which for a time had
the tuition of the Spirit, by their rebellion lost it, and the Spirit their
Guide and Protector, becomes their Enemy, Isaiah 63.9, 10.

Thus the gift of the Father, of the Son' and of the Spirit, which are the
great gift, and principal blessing of the New Covenant, were given in an
outward and conditional way even by the Old Covenant.

2 And MORE PARTICULARLY; a resemblance there was in this Old Covenant of
ELECTION, which lay in that outward election of the people of Israel; Gods
picking, choosing, selecting of that Nation (which choice included particular
persons also as members of the body) to be a peculiar people to himself, in
such sort as no other Nation under Heaven, nor any particular persons in, and
of other Nations (confidered as such) were, or could be the people of God. As
God by virtue of this Old Covenant gave himself to them in a peculiar way to be
their God, so also in a peculiar way he chose them to be his people. Hence God
is said to choose Israel, Ezekiel. 20.5. and Israel is called his chosen, Psalm.
105.6. hence also this people are called a peculiar treasure, Exodus 19.5. a
peculiar people, Deuteronomy. 14.2.26.18. a people of inheritance to him, Deuteronomy. 4.20.
a people established to himself, Deuteronomy. 29.13. yet such was this election, as
that in case die condition by which it was given were not by them observed, it
presently became void, and was as if there neither were, nor ever had been any
such thing at all, therefore when Israel cast off God, and chose new gods, God
presently casts off them, will not own them as his people, deliver them any
more, Judge. 5.8. They chose new gods, then was war in the gates; chap. 10.13.
Ye have forsaken me, and served other gods, wherefore I will deliver you no
more, go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in
the time of your tribulation; therefore the elected people are called,
Loruhamah, i. e. without mercy, one to whom no mercy is to be extended; Loammi,
i. e. not my people, a people disowned, cast off by God, Hos. 1.6.9.

3 A resemblance there was in this Old Covenant, OF VOCATION, which did consist
in that outward calling of Israel out of Egypt, the house of bondage, place of
sin and darkness. This we have, Hosea 11.1. When Israel was a child I loved
him, and called my son out of Egypt. In this respect Israel is styled, Gods
called, Hearken to me O Jacob, and Israel my called, Isa. 48.12. But this
Vocation did them no good any longer then they were obedient, for (as I have
observed already) Gods called ones out of Egypt. transgressing the Covenant
dye in the Wilderness; their Vocation, though they were thereby separated from
the gross ignorance and open Idolatry of Egypt, yet in respect of the benefit
thereof was but temporary, for so soon as they rebel against him that called
them; they are cut off by a stroke of Wrath, their calling will not relieve
them.

4 A resemblance there was in this Old Covenant of RECONCILIATION AND REMISSION
of sins, this the whole body of their Sacrifices did look unto, but the proper
place to treat of this is our second Head, namely the grace of the Covenant,
whether therefore I transmit the enlargement of this particular.

5 A resemblance there was in this Old Covenant of ADOPTION, this did
principally lie wrapped up in Gods taking the whole body of that people, with
whom this Old Covenant was made, into the relation of a Son, and particular
persons of that body, into the relation of children. Hence God speaking of the
Body of this Nation, entitles them his Son, Hos. 11.1. and of particular
persons in this Body, his children, Isa. 63.8. yet such this adoption was, as
that God did no longer own these adopted ones for his children, then they did
act toward him as dutiful children toward a father; therefore when Israel did
rebel and cast off God, God straight way cuts them off this privilege, and
will no longer own them as children, but calls them Children of Whoredoms,
Hosea 2.4. strange children, chap. 5.7. likens them to the children of the
Aethiopians, with whom God never made Covenant, threatening withal, that
notwithstanding this relation he would destroy them, Amos 9.7, 8.

6 A resemblance there was yet further in this Old Covenant of UNION; this that
relative union that we read of betwixt God and that people with whom this Old
Covenant was made does hold forth, Jerem. 31.32. -- My Covenant they brake,
although I was art Husband to them. But this was conditional, so long as they
kept Covenant with God, and were chaste and faithful Spouses to their Husband,
but no longer. Hence the Apostle Paul quoting these words of Jeremy, Heb. 8.9.
for those words, although I was an Husband to them (which he leaves out) puts
in these, and I regarded them not, says the Lord; intimating, that although
God was a Husband in this Covenant, yet such a Husband as would no longer
regard them then they kept Covenant with him, they must look for no conjugal
love, no embraces, no communion with God as a Husband, any longer then they
kept themselves chaste Spouses. Therefore when Israel played the harlot, God
immediately disownes them as to this relation, Hos. 2.2. Plead with your
mother, plead, for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband; let her
therefore put away her Whoredoms out her sight, and her adulteries from
between her breasts; and gives them a bill of divorce, Jer. 3.8. Isa. 50.1.

7 From this conjugal union by virtue of this Old Covenant did flow another
great blessing, viz. COMMUNION; the Wife has communion with her Husband, and
so had Israel whilst they continued a faithful Wife; and this communion was
such as was a resemblance of that TRVE COMMUNION, the children of the New
Covenant do enjoy. Notable to this purpose is that place we have, Exodus 24.9,
10, 11. where we read, that after Israel had given their assent to the Old
Covenant, verse.7. All that the Lord has said will we do, and be obedient;
and hereupon the Covenant betwixt God and them ratified, and sealed by the
sprinkling of blood, verse. 8. immediately hereupon, whilst as yet they had not
by any act broken this Covenant; it is said, Moses, and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu,
and seventy of the Elders of Israel went up into the Mount, and saw the God of
Israel in his glory, and did there eat and drink; noting wonderful
familiarity, and intimate communion which they had with God by virtue of this
Covenant now struck up betwixt them. But, observe this communion, as it did
depend wholly upon the condition of their keeping Covenant, so the mercy is not
long lived, for before forty days are over, Israel. makes a Calf; now is the
Covenant broken, God hereupon (who but a little before was so familiar with
them, feasted them with his presence and comforts) turns to be their enemy,
and says to Moses, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, that
I may consume them, Exodus 32.9, 10. All their communion now is gone, so that
this communion was but conditional, and so temporary, it lasted no longer than
they did obey, nor could it exempt those that did enjoy it from Gods Wrath, or
in the least keep them from sin for future; for observe, Aaron who was next to
Moses in enjoyment of this communion, before forty days are run out,
notwithstanding the strength received from it, is so weak as that he cannot
resist a temptation, but tempted, by the people, sins most foulely and
hainously, makes Calf, by which sin of his the very Covenant it self is broken;
and also Nadab and Abihu (next to Moses and Aaron in the enjoyment of this
privilege) within a very little time after transgressing, fall into the hands
of God, and are cut off by the stroke of his wrath; yea of all the four
Worthies who had greatest share of this communion upon the Mount, not one
enters Canaan (the Type of the heavenly rest) but all dye in the Wilderness;
holding forth thus much, that men may have much communion with God in the way,
and after the rate of the Old Covenant, and yet fall short of heavenly glory,
perish in their sins notwithstanding this; such was, and is that communion that
comes in by virtue of the Old Covenant.

8 A resemblance there was in this Old Covenant of SANCTIFICATION, which lay in
an outward observation of meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
Ordinances imposed on those who stood under the first Tabernacle, as the
Apostle tells us, Heb. 9.8, 9, 10. in reference to which Sanctification Israel
go under the titles of a holy people, a holy Nation, etc. But this
Sanctification as it was an outward thing, sanctifying no further then unto a
purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9.13. so was it conditional, and they were no
longer a holy Nation, Gods holy people, than they did obey God, and keep his
Covenant; their holiness when and wheresoever it is spoken of, is ever laid up
in the performance of the condition of the Covenant, as Exodus 19.5, 6. Now
therefore, if ye will obey my voyee indeed, and keep my Covenant, ye shall
be unto me a holy Nation, Deuteronomy. 28.9. The Lord shall establish thee a holy
people unto himself, as he has sworn unto thee, if thou shall keep the
Commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways, Deuteronomy. 26.16. with 19.
This day the Lord has commanded thee to do these Statutes, and Judgments,
etc. -- that thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy God.

9 This Old Covenant had also in it a resemblance of GLORIFICATION, which was
figured in that outward glory and happiness promised to Israel, and (whilst
they were obedient) enjoyed by them in the possession of the promised Land; but
chiefly in that presence of God, communion they had with him in the Holy of
Holies; but this also was conditional, for breaking Covenant they are cast out
of their Land, and their Paradise is turned into a Wilderness; yea, their Holy
of Holies (their Typical Heaven) is destroyed and broken down, and hereby all
that presence of God, and communion with him, which was by virtue of it
enjoyed, is lost to them.

10 This Old Covenant had also lodged up in it SPECIAL AND PECVLIAR ORDINANCES
(as the New has) through which the aforesaid blessings were conveyed, the
sweetness and comfort of them enjoyed, Heb. 9.1. Then verily the first
Covenant had Ordinances of Divine service, and a worldly sanctuary. These
Ordinances were committed to Israel with whom this Covenant was made, and hence
the Apostle says, that to them did partaine the service of God, Romans 9.4. i.
e. the exercise of true worship did appertain to them, they were by God made
Keepers of his rich Cabinet of precious Ordinances, in which respect they are
styled. a Kingdom of Priests, Exodus 19.6. i.e. a Kingdom of Worshippers, for
Worship was the Priests work. This blessing also was conditional, therefore
observe, they are a Kingdom of Priests, but it is upon condition, If ye will
obey my voice indeed, then shall ye be unto me a Kingdom of Priests; no
longer then they obey are they a Kingdom of Priests. Hence, as Judah in the
time of the Babylonian Captivity, were for their rebellion cut off this
privilege, so likewise it is pronounced against Israel for their Spiritual
Adultery, or Idolatry, that they should abide many days without a Sacrifice,
without an Ephod, Hos. 3.4. i. e. they should for their breach of Covenant be
deprived of this privilege of the Covenant, viz. special Ordinances.

11 A resemblance there was in this Old Covenant of those SPECIAL GIFTS AND
GRACES, which are the peculiar blessings of the New Covenant. For,

1 By virtue of this Old Covenant there was a kind of FAITH wrought in those
that stood tinder it, for look as it is in the New Covenant, which holds forth
an absolute Election, an absolute Donation of God himself to a Soul, an
absolute union of the Soul with Christ, out of which do flow a faith that can
never fade. So in this Old Covenant, there being an outward and conditional
Election, Donation of God, Union, etc. there does thence also spring a faith,
but this faith is of the nature of the thing it springs from, viz. Conditional,
and Temporary; it is a faith built either upon Duties, or Ordinances, or
outward Privileges, or Experiences, or Providence, or a hanging upon, or
cleaving to in an outward way, or for the obtaining some outward mercy, some
promise of Gods, or else built upon some extraordinary incomes, or appearances
of God, either in a way of particular words given in, or Revelations, Visions,
etc. from things of this nature, which the children of the Old Covenant were
capable of attaining, and which being attained they did strait way (finding
such things in themselves) conclude a right in the forementioned blessings of
the Covenant, there did arise a thing very like true faith, and it is not
amiss if we call it, a faith of the Old Covenant.

1 For this Faith, as it did spring from Duties, we read of the righteous man
trusting to his own righteousness, Ezekiel. 33.13. here is a trust and
confidence laid in Duties, a man's own righteousness; but observe, If he
commit iniquity all his righteousness shall not be remembered, but for his
iniquity he has committed he shall dye; mark the issue, he dies. What good
now does his trust do him? he trusts in his own righteousness, has faith,
confidence grounded upon it; thinks because of it I am surely the child of
God, shall be saved, etc. but no sooner does he commit iniquity but he dies
for all this, this faith-trust can neither preserve it self alive, nor him from
death that has it.

2 For Ordinances, the Old Covenant (as I have said) had Ordinances in it; now
much faith was by many reposed in these. We have a notable text, Jer. 7.14.
Therefore will I do unto this house which is called by my name, wherein ye
trust, as I have done to Shiloh. The Temple (Gods House) was Gods own
Ordinance and appointment, and a visible sign of his presence; and hence the
Jews did put much confidence in the enjoyment of their Temple, therefore verse.
4. the Prophet brings them in crying out, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these, they thought surely they must needs
be happy, so long as they had the Temple of the Lord, an enjoyment of
Ordinances among them. But yet, this confidence was but a lying confidence, and
therefore says the Prophet, Trust not in lying words, saying, the Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, etc. and further tells them, verse. 14. that
they should not have this trust long, for the Temple wherein they did so much
trust, God would destroy, and where then would their trust be?

This trust in Ordinances was so great, as that they did under it shroud
themselves in iniquity, Micha 3.9, 10, 11. They commit all manner of iniquity,
and yet lean upon the Lord, trust in him, conclude for certain he was
amongst them, no evil should befall them; What makes them conclude thus? O they
had the presence of Ordinances, though they did sin and rebel, yet they had
their Temple among them, and could offer up Sacrifices for their rebellions,
and this they thought made amends for all; therefore when God will destroy
their false trust, he threatens them with the ruin of their City, and their
Temple, the place of their worship, verse. 12. And because of this horrid abuse
of their Sacrifices and Offerings, making them (by reposing their trust in
them) a most abominable Idol, God speaks disdainfully of their Sacrifices,
though yet they were things of his own appointment, Hos. 8.13. They sacrifice
flesh for the sacrifice of my offerings, and eat it, but the Lord accepts
them not: Now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins; as to
say, Do they indeed sacrifice? no such matter, they only bring me a little
flesh, which I regard not, but will punish them for it. So Isa. 66.3. He that
kills an Ox is at if he slow a man, he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he
cut off a Dogs neck, he that offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines
blood, he that burns Incense, as if he blessed an Idol. I count (says God)
your Sacrifices no other but as so many most abominable and detestable
iniquities.

Memorable is that of Abijah, 2 Chronicles. 13. whose faith rises very high, verse.
12. Behold God himself is with us for our Captain, O children of Israel, fight
ye not against the Lord God of your Fathers, for you shall not prosper. And by
this faith a most glorious victory is obtained, verse. 18. Thus the children of
Israel were brought under, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they
relied upon the Lord God of their Fathers. But what was this faith built upon,
why in great part (though not wholly) upon Duties and Ordinances, as see verse.
10, 11. But as for us the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him, and
the Priests which minister unto the Lord are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites
wait upon their business: And they burn unto the Lord every morning, and every
evening burnt Sacrifices, and sweet Incense, the Shewbread also they set in
order upon the pure Table, and the Candlestick of gold with the Lamps thereof,
to burn every evening; for we keep the charge of the Lord our God. Obedience to
the Commands and Institutions of the Lord, and the presence and enjoyment of
Ordinances, are two principal things upon which these high expressions of faith
are grounded. And observe notwithstanding the faith of this King did rise to so
great a height, yet was it not a true faith? for of the same person it is said,
1 King. 15.3. That he walked in all the sins of his Father, which he had done
before him; and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as the heart
of David his Father. So that there may be great faith springing from Duties,
enjoyment of Ordinances, which yet notwithstanding is not true faith, it is the
faith of the Old Covenant, but not the faith of the New.

3 For Outward privileges, what confidence did the Jews lay in this external
privilege of being Abraham's seed, Joh. 8.33. yet John Baptist tells them
plainly, that the foundation of their faith was an empty thing, and would prove
but a lying vanity, Matthew. 3.9. Think not to say within your selves we have
Abraham to our Father, as to say? do not boast of this, lay not your confidence
here, for I tell you it will deceive you, you will find a lie in it.

Such a confidence we read of, Ezekiel. 15.16. But thou did trust in thine own
beauty, and playedst the Harlot. God having by crowning Israel with many
outward mercies and privileges, made them a Renown among the Heathen, and very
beautiful in the eyes of all, through his comeliness put upon them, verse. 14.
they presently lay a trust, build a confidence upon this, But thou did trust
in thine own beauty, and what followed? and playedst the Harlot. False trusts
do but open the door, and lead to sin.

Notable is that place, Isa. 48.1, 2. Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which
are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of
Judah, which swear by the Name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of
Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness. For they call themselves of the
Holy City, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel. Observe here is a very
great confidence laid upon an outward privilege; God by virtue of the Old
Covenant, gives himself (as I have formerly said) to Israel to be their God in
a peculiar way, so as that he was not so the God of any other people; this was
a very great and glorious privilege, though no other (as has been observed)
but a conditional mercy, which might be forfeited and lost. They ate too so
taken with this, that (says the Prophet) they make mention of the God of
Israel, i.e. boast much of this God as their God; yea (says the Prophet) They
stay themselves upon the God of Israel, i.e. build much faith upon this, that
they are Israelites, and God is the God of Israel, therefore surely God loves
us, we must be happy; yet observe, all this boasting and believing was but a
counterfeit, They make mention of the God of Israel, they stay themselves upon
the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness.

4 For experiences and faith built upon them, the example is famous, Psalm.
106.11, 12, 13. God works a very glorious deliverance for Israel, the waters
cover their enemies, not one is left. What then? What does the experience of
this miraculous deliverance work in them, why see verse. 12. Then believed they
his words, they sang his praise. Now they believe, yea so believe, as that
their hearts are filled with joy, their mouths with praises; but observe, this
faith built upon experiences soon dies, as in the following verses; They soon
forgot his works, they waited not for his Counsel: But lusted exceedingly in
the wilderness, and tempted God in the Desert. And he gave them their request
but sent leanness into their souls. Mind it, Those that but just now had fat
flourishing souls, they believe, sing praise, their souls are presently lean.
Such is all the fatness and flourishing of the Old Covenant, a dying, fading
thing.

5 For Providence, what faith does Saul build upon a Providence? 1 Samuel 23.7.
He is hot in persecuting David, David flying from place to place, enters
Keila^ a walled Town, Saul hears of it, presently cries out a Providence, God
has delivered him into my hand, as to say, I have hitherto feared God was
against me, and on David's side, I see now it is otherwise, God takes my part,
has shut up my enemy for me. A Providence seeming to smile upon him in his
way, makes him conclude God to be his Friend, when it was nothing to.

Thus much for the Outward blessings themselves.

The Condition required for the attaining and keeping of these, was a diligent
observance of what things the Moral and Judicial Laws, considered only
according to the Letter, did require. If they did what in the Letter of these
Laws was commanded, as in case they set up no other gods in their Land, made no
graven Images to worship, did not take Gods Name in vain, nor profane his
Sabbath, nor behave themselves disobediently toward their Superiors, nor were
guilty of the acts of Murder. Adultery, Theft, etc. And so also for the
Judicials; by this Litteral obedience they came to have a right to all those
blessings and mercies (whether more common or special) which were but merely
outward and temporary; that is to say, They should in doing these punctually
and exactly, as was required in the Letter of the Commandment, be blessed
with long life in the Land of Canaan, multiplication of their Nation,
advancement of them above other Nations, have blessings attending them in City,
Field, fruit of their bodies, ground, cattle, in their basket, store, in their
outgoings, in-comings, in their Storehouses, and all they should set their
hands unto, have the victory and rule over their enemies, be freed from
sicknesses, diseases, Famine, Captivity, etc. Also they should so doing, be
Gods peculiar people, and he would be their God, a Father, Husband to them,
make them a holy Nation to himselfes crown them with peculiar dignity, honor,
etc. To the attainment of all these things, a bare, litteral obedience was
sufficient, and obedience of this nature was true obedience to the Old
Covenant, so far as the same was a Covenant, giving and dispensing Outward
mercies, and Privileges only.

And indeed that such an obedience there was is clear, because as outward
mercies of peace, plenty, etc. were promised to Israel upon condition of their
obedience, so were these mercies oft-times enjoyed by them. But now should we
conceive a spiritual obedience to the Law, to be the condition upon which
these were enjoyed, then because obedience of this nature they were never able
to give, it would have been impossible for them to have enjoyed these at any
time. Such therefore must the condition be for outward mercies as they might
perform, which performing they had, and did keep their mercies, and not
performing, did lose them, and come under a curse, unless they did immediately
upon every act of transgression (which it were a thing impossible for them to
do, had the Condition I say, been Spiritual obedience, in which acts of
disobedience are multiplied hourly) fly for relief to the Ceremonial Law,
their City of refuge.

And because there was such an obedience as this required in the Old Covenant,
upon the due performance of which, men might even upon the terms of the
Covenant, lay claim to outward mercies, therefore I take it, does holy Hezekiah
(he having kept the Old Covenant according to the Letter thereof) when he was
to plead for an outward mercy, viz. continuance of life, urge his obedience,
Isa. 38.3. As also good Nehemiah spreads his obedience before God, Neh. 13.14.

And this obedience (I conceive) the young man meant and no other, when he
said to Christ, All these have I kept from my youth, for had he looked upon
the Law in the spirituality of it, neither he, nor any man living could ever
make such a boast.

This likewise was the obedience Paul had in his eyes when he says of
himself, before his conversion, that he was as touching the righteousness of
the Law, blameless, Phil. 3.6.

The opinion therefore of the Jews, that outward literal obedience was true
obedience to the Law was not false, only it was short; it was true obedience
as to the attaining outward blessings, only it was not the all of obedience the
Law required. And therefore Christ, Mat. 5. where his large discourse upon the
Law by way of exposition of it was dawn forth by the Pharisees abuse of this
opinion, does not in the least condemn the opinion it self of litteral
obedience, as if there were no such kind of obedience at all, sufficient for
the attainment of any thing, but only condemns their abuse of it, and that
improvement they made of this, viz. That a man might enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, and be saved by it, this he shows could not be but in case they
sought salvation from the Law, another kind of obedience than this must be
given to it.

Secondly, The Old Covenant had as well blessings spiritual and eternal, as
outward or temporary; but yet so, as that these were not (as the former)
attainable by this Old Covenant, as I shall show presently.

Now that the Old Covenant had a Spiritual and eternal blessing held forth in
it, is manifest.

1 From the contrary, viz. a curse of eternal death coming in upon the breach
of it, Gal. 3.10. It is observable (as I have formerly noted) that these words
relate to Moses his Covenant, and are therefore quoted thence; now if Moses
Covenant did hold forth death eternal to the breakers of it, then must we also
suppose on the contrary life eternal to be held forth to him, or them that
should keep it.

2 That opposition betwixt the Law and the Gospel, the Old, and New Covenant,
which the Apostle in his Sermons and Writings, especially in the Epistles to
the Romans and Galatians does speak so much of, plainly declares this; for
wherein lies this opposition, but herein, viz. That in the one, life,
justification, salvation is held forth upon condition, in the other freely and
absolutely. Herein I say lies the opposition, that the very same blessing is
held forth in one, one way, in the other, another.

And that the Law which the Apostle in his Epistles does set in opposition to
the Gospel, is to be understood of Moses his Law, and not the Covenant of
works made with Adam in Paradise, is clear, because he quotes (as I have said)
the very words of Moses curse, speaks of the Law which was four hundred and
thirty years after the promise made to Abraham, which was given upon Mount
Sinai, which was the Schoolmaster, Tutor, and Governor of Gods people under
the Old Testament, that Law which the false Apostles did teach and cry up,
which was not Adams Covenant, but the Covenant made by Moses; all clearly
showing that the Law standing in opposite terms to the Gospel was (according
to the mind of the Apostle) the Law of Moses; if so, then the ground of the
opposition betwixt them lying in this, that the Law gave life and salvation
upon condition, the Gospel freely, it does necessarily (unless we destroy the
opposition it self, by taking away the ground of if) follow, That Moses his Law
did hold forth life and salvation.

3 The manifold Scripture-phrases and sentences (especially in the New
Testament) which hold forth life in, and by doing, confirm this; as,

Matthew. 19.16, 17. Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may inherit
eternal life? Note, the Question is about eternal life. What is Christ's answer?
Why, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. Now if the Law did
not hold forth such a thing as eternal life to those that should keep it, men
should the answer of Christ be false, for the matter of it.

Now although it is true, Christ had it in design to convince the young man,
and to make him see that indeed he neither had, nor could keep the
Commandments though he boasted of it; yet must we not think, that Christ to
do this, did use indirect means, speak that which for the very matter of it
was false, to convince him of that, which was a truth.

Romans 2.13. For not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers
of the Law, shall be justified; importing plainly, that the Law can, and does
give forth justification to him whosoever it be that gives it its condition of
doing, viz. perfect obedience.

Romans 7.10. The Commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto
death. It is clear the Apostle does here speak of Moses Law throughout the
Chapter, and he says expressly, it was to life, ordained, instituted to life,
which fully, and in terms speaks the thing asserted.

Romans 10.5. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of the Law, that
the man which does those things shall live by them. It is evident from the
words of the Apostle, that Moses Covenant is here spoken of, and as manifest
from his scope (he being treating of Justification) that the life mentioned is
life eternal, which two things make good our Assertion.

Gal. 3.12. The Law is not of faith, but the man that does them, shall live in
them. The Law here is the same Law with that pronouncing the curse, verse 10.
and that Law is Mosesses, the life promised is the same life with that the
justified person lives, as the connection of these words with the words of the
precedent verse does make appear, and that life is life eternal. Therefore it
necessarily follows that Moses Law, or the Old Covenant, does promise lire
eternal to the obedient in their obedience; that is, in obeying it perfectly,
and eternally, they shall have Eternal life.

And for this reason (as I conceive) does the Scripture here, and elsewhere
use this phrase of living in them, not living by them, to show that though the
Law, or Old Covenant hold forth a blessing of-life, yet it holds it forth no
longer then they continue in perfect obedience: So long as their obedience is
perfect, life is held forth, and given by this Covenant, but whenever they
faulter, all former obedience is forgotten, and the blessing of life presently
removed, and the curse of death is inflicted, according to that, Ezekiel. 18.24.

Lastly, To say no more, if the Old Covenant did not hold forth blessings
Spiritual and Eternal, as well as outward and temporal, how could Christ's
active obedience to the Command of the Law, or Old Covenant, have a causal
influence into our Justification?

Christ (as the Apostle tells us, Gal. 4.4.) was made of a woman under the Law,
or Old Covenant; being under it he did as the common person of all his elect,
perfectly obey it for them, and in their stead, Matthew. 3.15. compared with Romans
8.4. By this obedience of his they are made righteous. Romans 5.19. As by the
disobedience of one, many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous; i. e. Christ's active obedience has a causal influence
into the justification of his seed, as Adams active disobedience had a causal
influence into the condemnation of his seed, as Adam brought guilt upon his
seed by his disobedience, so Christ brings righteousness upon his seed by his
obedience. Upon which account, Romans 10.3. Christ is said to be the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that believes, i. e. the very thing which
the Law as its end requires, viz. perfect obedience for the obtaining of
righteousness or justification; Christ in the behalf of all his has given it,
and so the Law has its end, viz. perfect righteousness performed by Christ
their Surety and common person, and by his so doing the righteousness of the
Law comes to be fulfilled in them, as Romans 8.4. and they come to be the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Now I say, in case the Old Covenant did hold forth no such thing as life
eternal, how could Christ's obedience thereto have been influential into our
justification, which yet it is most clear it was; could Christ by obeying it
obtain more from it then it had to give? certainly no, yet Christ by obeying
it, did obtain spiritual and eternal blessings from it, therefore it must
needs be that the Old Covenant has such to give.

Obj. It will be said, This makes the Law or Old Covenant to be against the
promises which the Apostle expressly disownes, Gal. 3.21. yea makes it to
disanul the promise, which he tells us the Old Covenant cannot do, verse. 17.

Ans. Not so, seeing this Old Covenant though it did hold forth life, yet did
it not hold it forth to this end to give it, but for other ends, and therefore
it holds it forth in such a way, and upon such a condition, as that it was a
thing impossible for any to have life by it though they would, but all that
would have life must, notwithstanding any help it could afford them, fly to the
promise, or perish forever.

Now though it did hold forth life, yet so long as it gave none, but rather
held it forth in such a way, as that the attainment of life by it was a thing
altogether impossible. Hence the ordaining of it as a Covenant for life, was
not contradictory to the promise, nor could the establishing of it as such a
Covenant, in the least, disanul the foregoing promise; had indeed life been
attaineable by it, it would have destroyed the promise, because then life
should have been attained in two distinct and contrary ways, of which one must
necessarily have destroyed the other. But the holding of it forth as a Covenant
for life, but not to this end to give life, but for other ends, yea in such a
way too as that it could not give life though a man should seek it thereby, was
no contradiction at all to the promise, seeing there was still but one way for
the attaining of life, viz. by the promise, whether all that will have life
must fly, notwithstanding the Old Covenant.

And therefore mind it, when the Apostle had moved the question, Is the Law
against the promises? he does not in answer say thus, No, God forbid, for if
there had been a law ordained for life, verily righteousness should have been
by the Law, but thus, if there had been a Law given that could have given life;
he does not at all deny the Law as ordained to life, but elsewhere (as I have
noted already) expressly affirms it to be a truth, but the only thing he denies
is the Laws giving of life, the Law though ordained to life could not give it,
and upon this very reason the Apostle proves it not to be against the
promises, because it could not give life; if it could have given life, it would
have disanulled the promise, but though it was ordained to life, yet so long as
it neither did, nor could give this life to any Soul, in was not against the
promises; so that indeed from the very words of the text rightly opened, all
the strength and force of the objection falls of it self.

From what has been said it appears, That the mistake of the Scribes,
Pharisees, and the generality of the Jews in Christ's and the Apostles times,
in the great Article of Justification had not this for its ground, viz. a
looking upon Moses Covenant, to be a Covenant holding forth life eternal, for
that was a truth, and so far they were in the right, but their mistake lay in
this, viz. A supposition that life eternal was attaineable by it, which their
unacquaintednesse with the condition of this Old Covenant, making it to be all
one, both in respect of temporal life, and eternal, (viz. a mere literal
obedience) did rush them into; they took the blessing of the Covenant in its
full and whole extent, as reaching both things temporal and eternal, but the
condition they halved, taking that part which was most easy for them to
perform, and by so doing, made up that most false and dangerous conclusion, so
much opposed by the Apostle Paul, viz. That Justification and Salvation was
attaineable by the works of the Law. Had they rightly understood the condition
upon which spiritual and eternal blessings were given forth, as they did that
condition which gave them a right to temporal, this opinion of
Self-righteousnesse would in them have dyed of it self, as it did in Paul to
soon as ever he came to this understanding, Romans 7.9, 10.

Quest. But what was the condition required for the giving forth the spiritual
and eternal blessings of the Old Covenant?

Ans. A most diligent, exact, and constant observance of those things that the
Moral and Judicial Laws did require, not only according to the Letter, but the
spiritual meaning of them.

Now that the Law (as the same was the Law of the Old Covenant) did require
spiritual obedience as well as literal, is clear from these Scriptures, Deuteronomy
6.5, 6. Chap. 10.12.16. Chap. 11.13. Chap. 26.16. And this Christ's Exposition
both of the Law Moral and Judicial, Matthew. 5. does clearly hold forth, for
first, Christ falls upon the Moral Law, and spiritualizeth it, showing that the
transgression of the heart in respect of any of the things commanded in that
Law, was as real a breach of the Law as transgression in act. Then upon the
Judicial Law, showing, that under those Judicial Statutes which were but as the
shell, were contained more spiritual precepts, which they stood as much obliged
to (if they would have righteousness by the Law) as the other.

And that this was the condition of the Law for life eternal, is clear, because
the Law pronounces the Curse of death eternal unto all those that should not
continue to do whatsoever was written in the Book of the Law, Gal. 3.10. now
it was not only written in the Book of the Law thus and thus thou shall do,
but also (as the fore-quoted Texts do prove) that thou should do thus and
thus, keep Gods Commandments, Statutes, Judgments, with all thy heart, with
all thy might, and with all thy soul; if therefore a man did according to the
Letter keep every Command (which was sufficient to procure outward mercies, and
avert outward Judgments) yet if he did not do this constantly, and that with
all his heart, with all his might, and with all his soul, (i. e. perfectly) he
could not be freed from the curse of death eternal, because (I say) so much is
not done as is required in the Book of the Law. This perfect obedience to the
Law therefore, not only according to the letter, but the spiritual meaning of
it, and perseverance herein, was the condition upon which the spiritual and
eternal Blessing of the Old Covenant were given forth.

Now because no man living since the fall of Adam, was ever able to give such
obedience to the Law as it requires, but all have done, and do offend against
it spiritually, in thought, word, and deed. Hence the Apostle concludes, no man
can be justified by the works of the law, Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.16. chap. 3.11. but
rather indeed all men are guilty, convinced of sin, and cast by it, and
therefore he says, By the law is the knowledge of sin, and every mouth by it
is stopped, and all the world are become guilty before God, Romans 3.19, 20. yea
by the works of the law the Curse is upon every man that stands under them,
Gal. 3.10. and therefore he calls the Law or Old Covenant, a killing letter, a
ministration of death, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. and a Law of sin and death, Romans 8.2. i.
e. in stead of justifying and giving eternal life, it does no other but
condemn, kill, and inflict eternal death upon those under it; which also the
Apostle found true in his own experience, Romans 7.10. for which cause he
affirms the Law, or Old Covenant to be abolished for the weakness and
unprofitablenesse thereof, Heb. 7.18, 19. i. e. because it was altogether
unable to give eternal life to any that stood under it, or to make them perfect
in the business of Salvation, and therefore there was a necessity of
abolishing it, and bringing in instead thereof a better hope.

Yet that none in this great business may lie under mis-apprehensions, let it
be here considered, that this inability of the law to give life, which the
Apostle makes the reason of abrogating or disannulling thereof, did not arise
from any weakness that was in the law it self, but rather from the weakness
of those to whom the law was given to perform what it required. The law
considered in its self was thoroughly able to have given life, could they have
obeyed it, but the weakness was in them that could not, by reason of the
imperfection of corrupted nature obey it, nor give the law its own terms for
life. Hence the Apostle, Romans 8.3. says, that the law could not justify, give
eternal life, etc. because it was weak through the flesh, the weakness lay not
in the law it self, but in man through the fall made weak, corrupted, and
depraved, and rendered altogether unable to give the law its terms; but yet
what the law could not give to man for himself, because he being a lump of
flesh could not give it its terms, it could and did give to Christ for man (as
the words compared with the following verse hold forth) he being able to give
it its own terms, which plainly speaks, that the defect lay in man, not in the
law, he is unable to give the law its terms, not the law unable to give him
life. So Heb. 8.7, 8. he speaks of the first Covenant as being faulty, i. e.
short, unable to justify or save; yet to prevent mistakes, he strait way in
the very next words, adds, that the fault was not in the Old Covenant it self,
but in them to whom it was given; for finding fault with them, he says, Behold
the days come says the Lord -- the fault is found in them, not in the
Covenant it self.

So that the truth is, the Old Covenant it self was ordained for life, able to
give it, yet could it not give life, because they with whom this Old Covenant
was made, were not able to perform the condition of it, give it those terms
which it must have, and without which it could not dispense life.

Obj. But it will be said, But why did God establish the Old Covenant for
life, and yet hold forth this life upon such terms, as that the Covenant
ordained to life could give life to none? This seems to be but a mockery in God.

Ans. Not so, for it must be considered what I said before, that the Old
Covenant was not established for life, to this end, that life should be
attained thereby, but for other ends and designs. Now, God having other ends
and designs in the holding forth life eternal in this Old Covenant then the
giving of life, which indeed was no end of Gods at all, it was therefore no
mockery in God for the accomplishment of those other ends to establish it as a
Covenant for life eternal, which was the best way it could be established in
for the attainement of those ends; now the ends why it was by God established
as such a Covenant, were such as these.

1 Because it was a thing of absolute necessity, to the end that the
righteousness of the Law, or Old Covenant, might be fulfilled in us, as Romans
8.4. that the same should be perfectly obeyed either by us, or by our Surety in
our stead. Now, though God knew full well that we could not obey it, yet to
the end that our Surety might stand under it as a Covenant for life, and his
obedience to it as such a Covenant might be imputed to us, therefore does God
institute it, or ordain it as such a Covenant.

And to set forth this, the twofold giving forth of the Old Covenant does
excellently accord.

As the Old Covenant (as has been formerly noted) did consist of three parts;
1 The Moral Law. 2 The Ceremonial. 3 The Judicial; so it is a thing observable
that either were twice given forth from the Lord unto Moses, who was the
Mediator of this Covenant.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Livewell Chapman at the Crown in Popes
head-Alley.
MR. Greenhils Exposition on the first nineteen Chapters of Ezekiel, in three
Volumes, Quarto.

Mr. Greenhils Sermons on Christ's last Discovery of himself, Octavo.

Mr. Cottons Exposition on the 13. Chapter of the Revelations, Quarto.

Mr. Raworths Jacobs Ladder, etc. Octavo.

Mr. Can's Truth with Time, proving none of the Seven last Vials are yet poured
out, Quarto.

Mr. Can's Time of the End; a Treatise about the last Apostasy, the Little
Horn, and the Beast hat slays the Witnesses, Octavo.

The Holiness of Church Members, Quarto. By John Cotton.

Singing of Psalms a Gospel Ordinance, quarto. By John Cotton.

An explicit Declaration of the Testimony of Christ, according to the plain
sayings of the Gospel, etc. Quarto. By Tho. Moor, senior.

A Treatise of the Person of Christ, etc. Quarto. By Tho. Moor senior.

An Antidote against the spreading Infections of the Spirit of Antichrist in
these last days under many vizards; Being a Discovery of a lying and
Antichristian spirit in some of those called Quakers, etc. Quarto. By Tho. Moor
junior.

The Knowledge of Christ, etc. Wherein the Types, Prophesies, Genealogies,
Miracles, Humiliation, Exaltation, and the Mediatorial Office of Christ, are
opened and applied. By John Davenport of New Haven in New England.

The Legislative power, Christ's peculiar Prerogative. By William Aspinwal.

A Presage of sundry sad Calamities yet to come. By William Aspinwal.

The Abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath, or the Sabbath of the seventh day of the
week. By William Aspinwal.

Arrows against Babylon. By John Pendarves.

Sigh's for Sion. By John Penderves.

The Fear of God, what it is, and exhorted to; a Sermon preached by John
Pendarves.

The voice of the Spirit: A Discovery what the witnessing work of the Spirit
is; How the Spirit witnesses; Who are capable of attaining the witnessings of
the Spirit; How a soul may know its enjoyment of them. By what means a soul may
attain them. By Sam. Petto.

A Voice from heaven, a Testimony, the Remainders of Antichrist yet in England.
By Gualter Postlethwaite.

Christ and Moses Excellency, A Triplex Treatise distinguishing the two
Covenants. By Vavasor Powell.

Saving Faith, set forth in three Dialogues. By Vavasor Powell.

Generation-work in three parts.

1 Part, showing what Generation-work is, That Saints in their several
Generations have the peculiar works of their Generation. That its of great
concernment for a Saint to attend to, and be industrious in it, wherein the
work of the present Generation lies. How a man may find out that part of it
which is properly his work. How it may be so carried on as God may be served.

2 Part, being an Exposition of the seven Vials, Rev. 16.

3 Part, an Exposition of the Prophecy of the two Witnesses, from the 11, 12,
and 14 Chap. of the Revelation. To which is added a Key to unlock the mystical
Numbers of Daniel and the Revelations. By John Tillinghast.

Mr. Tillinghasts eight last Sermons, viz. The Fifth Kingdom founded on the New
Covenant. The Signs of the Times. Christ the only Foundation. The promise of
the Father. The Evil of the Times. Look to your aims and ends. The Idols
abolished.

Six several Treatises, viz. The promises made and fulfilled in Christ.
Absolute promises made to sinners as sinners. The life of faith, in
Justification, Sanctification, Expectation. The Saints Anchor rightly cast.
Christ's new Command. Of Offenses. By John Tillinghast.

Knowledge of the Times, or a resolution of the Question, how long it shall be
unto the end of Wonders. By John Tillinghast.

FINIS.

