TO HIS Most Sacred Majesty, CHARLES THE SECOND, By the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. The
Humble Congratulation of the Nobility and Gentry of the County of Rutland.
IT having pleased GOD so miraculously to preserve your Person from such
imminent danger, and at length to restore your Majesty to your just Dominion
over us, after so long a detention of your Rights, We (who have never made a
public Application to any pretended power) cannot but express our thankful
acknowledgement of his goodness in so great a Blessing accomplished without
effusion of Blood; And assure your Majesty, that we shall according to our duty
bear true Allegiance to your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, and shall
upon all occcasions evidence our selves to be

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects Duke of Buckingham. Earl of Exeter. Lord
Campden. Lord Roos. Lord Sherard. Philip Sherard Esquire. Sir Tho. Mackworth.
Sir Francis Mackworth. Sir Tho. Hartopp. Sir Rich. Wingfield. Sir Eusebius.
Pelston. Sir Wingfield Bodenham. George Sherrard Esquire. Francis Sherard
Esquire. Hen. Sherard Esquire. Edward Heath Esquire. Samuel Brown Esquire. Abel
Barker Esquire. William Palms Esquire. Henry Mackworth. Robert Mackworth.
Neall Mackworth. James Digby Esquire. Peregrine Mackworth. Alexander Noell.
Andrew Noell. Edward Faulkner. Rich. Fancoute. Charles Wing. Francis Wingfield.
John Wing. Jervice Day. Henry Foster. William Hartopp. George Sheffield. Willam
Hide. Benjamine Bodenham. Haslewood Palkington. William Cheseldine. William
Iepson. Charles Dale. Thomas Trollop. George Heath. John Heath. Robert Heath.
Francis Heath. Ezekiel Johnson. Daniel Johnson. Rich. Hallford. Charles
Hallford.

This Congratulation was presented Tuesday the 26. of June, by the hand of the
Honorable Philip Sherard, Esquire; to whom his Majesty in a very gracious
manner was pleased to express his acceptance of this their humble and loyal
congratulation.
Printed by S. Griffin for Robert Pawley and are to be sold at the Rainbow in
Fleetstreet, 1660.


