To his Highness OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, with the Territories thereunto belonging. The humble
Petition of the Land-holders and other well-affected people of this Common
wealth, whose names are hereunto subscribed.
SHOWING,
THat whereas by the Fundamental Laws of England, every Land-holder (as a
member of the whole body politic of the Nation) ought to hold his Lands, of
some Superior or other till it be handed up to the chief Magistrate as Lord
Paramont, or head of the body (lately distinguished by the title of KING) who
has been in times past armed with power and revenue to defend and protect the
peoples Estates against all enemies foreign and domestic. And the King and
People have been mutually engaged to each other, He to Govern them according to
the Laws and Customs of the Realm, They to do Homage, pay Rents, and other
Services to him, whereby there was a certain trust and assurance one in the
others constant help and assistance in times of danger.

And whereas the Inheritance of the whole Realm being thus vertually in the
Head, all particular Inheritances must depend mediately or immediately upon the
Head.

And the late King was undoubtedly the Head of this Body, and was engaged by
Oath to govern it according to Law, and had from us the honor, allegiance and
support due unto him. But by His warring against us, He and His Posterity and
Race (not without His own Royal assent) have been made incapable of future
Government over us: Since which, these Nations are become headless, every
Inheritance being legally endangered or drowned in default of a LORD PARAMONT,
from whom we may justly challenge protection of our Lives, Liberties and
Estates, upon that ancient and lawful consideration of Homage, Rents, and
Services which are now unpaid: And there is no voluntary, or legal engagement
from your Highness to the People, or from them to your Highness, in the
present Government. But (as it seems to many) either Party (without breach of
trust, or clog of conscience) may desert the other in times of danger.

And forasmuch as your Highness is actually The Person of most eminency under
GOD in our deliverance from the said late King and His Party at home, and the
Dutch and other Foreign enemies (arisen as it were out of His dust) from
abroad.

Therefore we are resolved (as much as in us lies) to establish You in the same
power, and to do unto you the same homage and fealty the said late King and
His Ancestors had: It being (as we conceive) our most probable assurance to
reap the crop that has cost so much labor and charge in plowing and sowing.

And the Petitioners are necessitated hereunto, out of our doubt and
dissatisfaction of safety under the present Government (as it is Elective) and
the sense we have of the many dangerous Plots from thence emboldned to be put
in execution against your Highness, not only by CHARLES STVART who (though
disabled as aforesaid) is most apt and vigilant to improve every defect, or
pretended miscarriage in Government, for his own advantage, and hopes of
restitution (when any opportunity or change shall be) and by many other
sequestered, and discontented persons, from whom no better is to be expected:
But by some of those that have engaged with Us in the same Cause, and had the
same Deliverance, and therefore ought to be alike thankful; Yet have seduced
many into an opinion, that the Legislative power is wholly lost and
extinguished, and cannot be exercised any more; because by the late Instrument
of Government, it was conferred on your Highness and Council, to continue
till the meeting of the first Parliament, and the first Parliament having since
met, your Highness power, say they, is thereby determined. And do hence
pretend a necessity of laying down the ancient and legal Government, and
constitution of these Nations, that this Politic body may be altered wholly
into an Ecclesiastical body, under the notion of a fifth Monarchy. When as in
all men's Judgments there is the same necessity of Moneys to be raised, and of
Laws and Ordinances to be made for the Peace and welfare of these Nations, now
as before that Assemblies meeting. And there ought to be the same Power for the
same purposes still. And if the former Ecclesiastical power (although limited
by civil Magistracy) did nevertheless in all Ages eclipse the power of the
greatest Kings and Emperors, and occasioned many Persecutions and troubles in
the Church of GOD, and their Dominions: How much more will the like power in a
little time, tyrannize and persecute without mercy, if it may reign without
limits? For the Petitioners do find, that the spirit of Persecution is in
many so vigorous, that where it cannot work in the old way by a coercive power
in Courts Ecclesiastical; It breaks forth in all Courts of Civil Justice in
these Nations, more especially upon persons of most tender consciences. With
what violence are many harmless people persecuted, who lest they should be
found to maintain a false worship (and for no other cause) dare not pay
Tithes; If any one refuse to pay the poores rate, the Overseers can distreine,
and must return the overplus. But in cases of Tithes, although the Law gives
treble the value, yet the Courts of Chancery and Exchequer (leaving their
proper quality, which should be to mitigate and assuage the rigor of the Law)
use greater extremitities then the Law it self, and do daily enforce the
expense of 30 or 40. times the value, before the Defendants can be admitted to
make any defense, and at last must order an active obedience (more grievous
then all the expense.) Instances may be of poor Handicrafts-men, that being in
arrear but 2 or 3 s. for Tithe, have been put to take the Copy of a Bill in one
of these Courts, of 40 or 60 and sometimes 100 sheets of paper.

And whereas by the fundamental Laws of England, no man's liberty may be
impeached at the suit of a common person, till first he be summoned by an
original Writ, (wherein the true cause of action, and the certain debt and
damage demanded is expressed, and the plaintiffes exorbitant demands are
limited, by giving caution to prosecute, before a Capias should be awarded;)
Yet what grievous oppressions befall many innocent persons, by the granting
forth a Capias before the Summons, like an Attachment before a Subpoena? And by
the frequent, and almost constant use of feigned and false Process, the Bill
of Middlesexe, Latitat and clausum fregit, whereupon any persons, as well
Creditors as Debtors are daily arrested, upon pretense of vast sums of money
owing, (even for ten or twenty thousand pounds, as cheap as for ten shillings)
and detained in Prison for want of bail, till they be ruined in their Estates
and Credits? Many thousands have been so served, some not indebted a penny,
others no more then upon a legal summons, they could, and would have paid, had
not sudden and unexpected arrests for so great sums without cause, totally
disabled them to pay a penny, by reason of the excessive charge of
Imprisonment. And (as things now stand) every man is subject to this kind of
oppression, whenever his adversary out of design or malice shall think fit,
and yet the party damnified, is wholly remediless of reparation.

How merciless are some toward their poor Debtors, whom they suffer to perish
in Prison, when as they find, and are convinced, that Imprisonment puts an
impossibility upon them, either to satisfy their debts, or to serve their
generation? and what inequality is there in the dispensations of the Law, that
Merchants and Tradesmen becoming insolvent, and Imprisoned, shall be (as it
were) sold with their Wives, Children and Estates, till they pay the uttermost
farthing: While Gentlemen and others by yielding themselves Prisoners many
times do, and may secret and secure their Estates, and live more plentifully
within the prison, then their Creditors can without?

And what abuses are usually put upon the people by that feigned Writ of quo
minus, whereby men dwelling one hundred, or two hundred miles distant from
Westminstaer, are commanded there to appear personally, sometimes for mere
vexation, but often for five or ten shillings, on purpose to draw from them
moneys never due, rather then to be at the charge and trouble of so long a
journey, and a suit much longer?

These injuries, and many others of the like kind, by ill-disposed persons,
are (more frequently now then ever heretofore,) obtruded upon peaceable and
honest people, by reason of that opinion, that your Highnesses power is too
short to help the oppressed, and to regulate so great abuses. But your
Petitioners doubt not but the same Legislative power that was heretofore in
King and People, is still as rightfully and naturally in your Highness, and
the People (on your side) as he and his Ancestors had it under the title of
William the Conqueror: And since your Highness is already under an oath as our
chief Magistrate to defend Us, there wants nothing to fix and make the body
complete and visible now, as it was then, and to prevent the hopes and
expectations of all gainsayers, and evill-doers, but the reciprocal
engagements of the People to your Highness, by their doing homage and fealty,
for want whereof, many thousand common persons, purchasers of the Lands of the
late Kings, Bishops and Delinquents, are become absolute and independent Lords,
which the Law abhors, and is inconsistent with their own safety.

And since the late Instrument of Government by declaring your Highness Lord
Protector of this Commonwealth for your life only, has obstructed Legal
homage (which cannot be given or taken by any that have less then an Estate in
fee) and That obstruction may endanger the health (if not the life) of the
whole body, unless it be removed, and cannot be removed, unless that
Legislative power now recumbent, and as it were, hidden in your Highness, and
the People, be speedily awakned and put in execution.

The Petitioners do therefore humbly pray, that your Highness will be pleased
to secure us in our doubts, ease Us of our burdens, regulate the proceedings in
Law, and to rectify all other things that any ways endanger our peace and
welfare, according to the several Declarations of the Army.

And in order thereunto, That your Highness will forthwith choose and empower
some persons of honor, piety, and wisdom, to reform the proceedings in Courts
of Justice, and in particular, to ordain and speedily establish, --

I. That all incu^sions of Arbitrary powers or Ecclesiastical censures, that
in any new shape, or by-waies may possibly creep into practice, to persecute
the consciences, infringe the liberties, or incumber the outward estates of the
people, be speedily prevented and suppressed.

II. That no person or persons whatsoever, for any cause, at the suit or
prosecution of any person, or by any Sheriff, Bailiffe, or other Officer or
Minister of Justice, be hereafter sued, arrested, detained, or imprisoned, till
first the Defendant ha^h been summoned according to the ancient course of Law.

III. That no Officer of any the Courts at Westminster, or of any Cities,
Corporate Towns, or other privileged places (wh^re by prescription or Charter
they may sue or implead for debt or trespass) shall hereafter presume to make
out any Process, Bill of Middlesex, Latitat, Capias, quo minus, or other
Precept to arrest, trouble, or convent any person or persons whatsoever, till
first an original Summons be granted forth, and returned to warrant the same.

IV. That all the several Officers that make the Summons, do take care that
the true cause of action, and the certain debt or damage in demand be
expressed in the said Summons, and that the same ways, pledges, and
restrictions to limit the excessive demands of the Complainants, be used and
taken as has been anciently done heretofore. And that the said Officers may
make the said Summons in personal and mixed actions returnable in the
Upper-Bench-Court, or in the Exchequer, (or elsewhere, as the parties desire
the same) as well as in the Common Pleas. And that all Attorneys and other
Officers of any of the said Courts, do take care that the said Summons be duly
filed, the want of which shall be allowed as a good cause of error, to stay
proceedings, or reverse judgment in all Courts alike.

V. That after Summons (if no payment or compounding the debt be) or after
Imprisonment two months for debt, any person that is no Merchant or Tradesman,
may be prosecuted in like manner to all intents and purposes as a Tradesman
may; And that some able, prudent, and skillful persons be appointed as constant
Commissioners or Judges to put the Laws in execution, in London, Middlesex, and
all Counties, to examine the Causes of all persons now Imprisoned; And in all
cases where they shall find extremities used, that either the Debtors have
voluntarily done what is in their power to pay their Creditors, or that the
Creditors have already seized their Estates, and yet keep their Debtors in
Prison; or if the Debtors shall and will submit to be examined upon Oath before
the said Judges, and upon their Examinations shall discover, and as much as in
them lies, deliver their Estate for the use of their Creditors, and in other
such like cases, where Judgments have been gotten by su^prize; It shall and may
be lawful for the said Judges to discharge such Prisoners from their
Imprisonment, though they lie in Execution, so as such Prisoners will give
their own Bonds to pay the remainder of their Debts (not gotten by surprise)
when they shall be able; which ability the said Judges shall have power to
discover by the Examination of the parties themselves, or any others whom the
Creditors shall (at any time afterward) produce for that purpose.

VI. That in all cases where Prisoners for debt are obstinate, and will neither
be Examined upon oath, nor discover, nor deliver their Estates for payment of
their Debts, to the end they may be enlarged; the Prisons may not be Palaces,
but Workhouses, where the Debtors shall be enforced daily to work and labor
according to their abilities, toward payment of their debts.

VII. And the better to enable and empower your Highness herein, We do hereby
freely and cheerfully, not only constitute, ordain and establish You our chief
Magistrate, and Lord Paramount in the place of the late King, yielding, giving
and granting unto You, your Heirs and Success^rs, the same Honor, Obedience,
and trust He lawfully had; humbly praying your Highness to accept thereof, and
forthwith to be so Proclaimed and published throughout all these Nations, and
in all Grants, Process and other things, to express the year of your
Government, as it has been accustomed: But we do for the present (till a
Parliament may be conveniently called) constitute, and ordain you Highness our
Representative, authorizing You to exercise the Legislative power for the
purposes aforesaid. And in consideration of Your acceptance hereof; We do
hereby promise with all convenient speed, by writings under our respective
hands and seals to grant unto your Highness, your Heirs, and Successors, some
Rent as an acknowledgment out of our respective Lands and Estates, and to do
homage and sealty unto You, and mutually to assist You and Your Heirs in all
times of danger and trouble, so as no such tenure of your Highness in chief,
do any ways captivate our Lands to be liable to Wardships, but that all our
lands be absolutely free from that encumbrance, as if they were held in Soccage.

VIII. And the Petitioners do further desire, that Commissioners be authorized
in all Counties to take the said several Grants and Recognitions, and to
certify them into the Exchequer: And having so done, that your Highness will
be pleased by your Writ under the Great Seal of England, to engage your Self,
your Heirs, and Successors respectively to the Petitioners (and others
desiring the same) to warrant and defend their Estates real and personal,
against the late King, and other the said Delinquents, and their Heirs, and
against all other persons claiming under them, their or any of their Titles or
Estates, and therein to insert a short Pardon for offenses past, all for a
moderate Fee payable only to your Highness (except for labor and wax to the
Writer and Sealer.) And that all such Freeholders and others so qualified as
aforesaid, and none else, be capable of choosing or being chosen Knights or
Burgesses to serve in Parliament, or to be Jurors at Assizes or Sessions, or of
having benefit by such Grant or Pardon.

IX. And lastly, The Petitioners do further pray, that as soon as these
Nations are in a fitting posture, and the people qualified according to the
settlement before intended; That your Highness will be pleased to call a
Parliament, by whose advise and assistance, these, and all other things
needful for Reformation, may be confirmed and established, Taxes and other
burdens may be eased. And such other ways for raising of Moneys for the Army
and other Public uses, may be found out as shall be most agreeable to Justice
and Equity.

And the Petitioners shall daily pray for your peaceable and happy Government
over us long to continue.

