TO SIONS VIRGINS: OR A SHORT FORM OF Catechism of the Doctrine of BAPTISM,
In use in these times that are so full of Questions.

By an Ancient Member, of that long ago gathered Congregation, whereof Mr.
Henry Jacob was an Instrument of gathering it, and the Pastor worthy of double
honor, Mr. John Lathroppe succeeding him, now pastor in New England; and the
beloved Congregation, through Gods mercies sees her teachers, waiting when God
shall give more liberty and Pastors according to his own heart, praying the
Lord of the harvest to thrust forth laborers into his harvest.

Printed in the year 1644.

To the Reader.
Hear, and thy soul shall live; look on him whom thou have peirced, see him
crucified in the s^ales, and thou shall be confirmed and comforted. Christian
Reader, in the use of the Ordinance eye Christ; and let thy faith carry thee to
that form as holds forth Christ crucified, setting him forth in his
excellency: Try all things, cleave to that which is good, have out of Babell,
see where Christ is held forth in the purity of the Ordinances, eye the
Congregations that abide steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship,
mind where the root of Jesse is set up for an Ensign, where He reigns in
the congregations that exercise the power that Christ has left them; taking in
what is serviceable, casting out what is offencive, separating the precious
from the vile, choosing out from among themselves such Officers as are comely.

Beware of the tail of the Beast, that must draw the third part after him; I
wish our godly friends would mind it, that so easily embrace old errors new
furbushed as new truths; it is hard to avoid an error, the godly take up for
conscience and not for fear: But Antichrist coming down, the Beast will
pluck hard to draw the godly; if it were possible to deceive the Elect,
certainly truths are not so easily embraced as errors; for we are dull of
hearing, line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a
little, and we have a spirit of fornication that easily closes with error;
mark those that make devision and avoid them, the letter is a killing letter,
a dead litter if it speak not Christ; the form is a dark light, if it hold
not forth Christ crucified, as whole wafers and whole water, no pouring, nor no
breaking. What I have received by hearing and seeing, I desire to manifest in
defense of the Baptism and form we have received, not being easily moved, but
as Christ shall more manifest himself, which I cannot conceive to be in the
dipping the head, the creature going in and out of the water, the form of
baptism does more or less held forth Christ.

And it is a fad thing that the Citizens of Sion should have their children
borne forreiners not to be baptized; but as those that be called afar off,
the Gentiles being grafted into the Jews, shall not there seed as Olive plants
be round about the Table, and trained up in the house of God as it were at the
feet of Christ as Paul at the feet of Gamaliell?

But what shall we say, great stars must fall, and some of the just shall go
through the flames for their purging.

But here is our comfort, these signs shall follow believing and believers, 1
out of their bellies shall flow rivers of waters of l^^e through Christ. 2.
They shall cast down the fiery temptations as devils through him. 3. Thirdly,
they shall remove their corruptions as mountains. 4. And if they drink any
gross errors as deadly poison it shall not hurt them, but be for their
purging: wherefore take heed of railing, mocking, persecuting, for though the
just fall, they shall rise again, but the wicked shall fall to destruction;
Baptism declares Infant to be virgins, the Supper declares believers to be
spouses.


QVERES CONCERNING BAPTISM.
1. QVest. Why are Infants to be Baptized?

Answ. 1. Because they are of the Kingdom that are dehorted from fear. 2.
Because they are of the many Nations that are to be sprinkled. 3. Because they
are of the spouse that is washed in the blood of Christ, Esa. 52.15.
as the Infants of old were of the vine that was brought out of Egypt, and
baptized in the cloud and in the Sea. Psalm 80.8. etc.



Q. Who baptized Israel of old? 1 Cor. 10.2.


A. God shook out a plentiful rain, whereby he did confirm his heritage
when it was weary unto Moses, who was a Type of Christ. Psalm 68 9.


Q. Why is to Baptize under the Gospel?

A. The Spouse of Christ by her Officialls in the name of Christ.

Q. Why is baptism to be done in the name of Christ, and not unto the name of
Christ?

A. Because unto, is Christ's own work; In the name of the three is the
Churches work by the power of Christ, as an inferior Officer comes in the
name of the King, and by his authority.

Q. Why is it said then that they that are baptized unto Christ, have put on
Christ?

A. Yea, they that are baptized by the Spirit, which is Christ's own work has
put on Christ, but not all that are baptized by water, the work of an
inferior Officer to Christ.

Q. What form is to be used in baptism?

A. The Minister is to dip his hand and to power clean water, sprinkle and
wash the sinner, and so it is fully baptized.

Q. Is not dipping of the head full baptism?

A. No, not without pouring, sprinkling, and washing, no more then giving whole
wafers in the supper, there was bread, but no breaking showing forth Christ's
sufferings, so whole rivers, Esa. 63.3.
shows not forth Christ's sufferings pouring him out like water besprinkling
all his raiment. Psalm. 22.11.


Q What is it for the sinners to go into the water themselves, and come out
themselves to show forth death and burial?

A. A lying sign, to make a figure of the creature, for we must see Christ in
the employment of the Officer and use of the water, pouring, sprinkling,
washing, there must be a dipper dipping his hand, but not a dipped, but in
Christ himself who by his own power puts into himself the Rock and
fountain. The seeing eye and the hearing ear, God has made them both. Pro.
20.12.


Q. What do we hear in the Gospel?

A. Glad tidings.

Q What do we see in the Seals?

A. Christ crucified.

Q. How is Christ crucified in baptism?

A. Christ was powered out like water, water issued out of his side when he was
pierced, Psalm. 22.14.
so shall he sprinkle many nations.

Q What speaks baptism to believers? Esa. 52.15.


A. It speaks better things then the blood of Abell.

Q What speaks pouring out of water?

A. 1. It speak Christ powered out like water. 2. It speaks Christ pouring out
clean water upon believers washing away filth. 3. It speaks pouring out the
spirit, so that out of the belly of believers may flow rivers of water of life.
Ioh. 7.38.



Q What speaks washing?

A. It speaks washing from filthiness and clensing from sin.

Q. What speaks sprinkling?

A. 1. It speaks sprinkling the conscience from dead works. Heb. 9.14.
2. It speaks our high calling being called to the blood of sprinkling.


Q. Why are Infants Baptized?

A. Because they are of the Kingdom.

Q What is it to Infants that they are baptized and so received into the
visible congregation?

A. Much every manner of way, 1. they are under the prayer of the Church, 2.
they are under the care of the Church. 3. of them is ingrafted into Christ, so
received into the visible vine to live under the dropping of the Sanctuary as
growing plants in the house of God, Psa. 92.13, etc.
to flourish in old age as tender sprigs, Psalm. 128.
4. in the vine to bring forth grapes in due time, 5. as Olive plants round
about the Table, Lo thus art thou blessed that fear God.


Q. What may the children of the Church be likened unto?

A. Unto the Virgins, without number. Cant. 6.8.


Q. How is faith and confession of sin acted in the baptizing an Infant?

A. As the faith of others carried the Palsy man to Christ to be healed,
believing his Alsufficiency, Mat. 92. Mar. 2.3, etc. Luke 5.18, etc.
so the faith of the Parents carries the Infants to the ordinance presenting
it to the congregation, 1. confessing original sin, 2. believing God is
there God and the God of their seed, 3. showing the need they have of Christ;
so leaving the Infant in the House of God, to grow up in his Courts at the
sole of Christ's feet.

Q. How is the faith of believers in the congregation confirmed in the washing
of an Infant?

A. Much is their confirmation, 1. they see the need they have of Christ as
the Infant, 2. they see their inability to embrace Christ, as the infant, but
as Christ imbraceth them, as the infants, 3. they remember Christ's everlasting
love before the foundation of the world, washing them, pouring clean water
upon them and their seed, Esa. 52.15.
and seeds seed to thousand generations. 4. Believing the promise, Psalm. 80.8,
etc.
they see Christ powered out like water suffering for them and their seed. 5.
They see Christ calling us to the blood of sprinkling by sprinkling from dead
works. 1 Cor. 10.2. Psalm. 68.9.



Thus learning Christ we are to meditate upon him in the use of Baptism, what
ever the Gospel publishes the seals holds forth, so they that have a hearing
ear, and a seeing eye, shall behold Christ crucified in the use of the
Ordinances.

Q. How is Christ taught in Baptism by the seeing of the eye for the
confirmation of believers beholding Infants baptized?

A. Christ is taught in his Natures, in his Attributes, in his Name and in his
Offices.

Q. How do believers see Christ's Name in baptism?

A. Christ's Name is an ointment powered forth, seen in pouring water on the
sinner, as oil on the head of his Priests running down to the skirts of the
garments.

Q. How is Christ's Attributes seen in baptism?

A. Christ's everlasting love is seen in washing, he loved his Elect before the
foundation of the world, and washed them in his blood, so is his Wisdom,
Power, Mercy, and unchangeablenesse seen in its restoring lost mankind.

Q. How is Christ's Nature held forth, seen in baptism?

A. As he was man he suffered, and water issued out of his side, he was powered
out like water; As he was God he washes and purges us, sprinkleth us with his
blood, holding his elect by the right hand of his power in Adams fall.

Q. How is Christ's Offices held forth and seen in baptism?

A. As he is our high Priest he offers up himself; (seen as I take it
submitting to better judgment) in lifting up the water to power it one the
baptized; As Christ is a Priest, he dips his hand to wash and sprinkle, seen
in pouring, washing and sprinkling water on the sinner.

Q. How is Christ seen as our Prophet to teach in baptism?

A. By these Rites Christ teaches believers. 1. What he has done for them,
washing them before time. 2. What he has done for them at the fullness of
time, being powered out like water. 3. What he does in them, pouring out his
spirit upon them. 4. What he will do for them when he gives up his Kingdom to
the Father presenting them without blame, having purged them, washed them for
dead he will bring them to glory.
This Christ as he is our Prophet teaches by baptism.

Q How does Christ show his Kingly Office by baptism?

A. He takes the Dominion of his Elect, and receives them into his Kingdom,
being received into the visible congregation by baptism.

Q. What does Christ teach believers seeing water and Washing?

A. Christ teaches believers to see their own filthiness, and their need of
Christ.

Q. What does Christ teach believers by pouring water on the baptized Infants
or other.

A. Christ teaches believers to power out their souls to him, he having
powered out his Spirit upon them giving them power to be his Sons and
Daughters, so there is great use to eye Christ in the use of the ordinance as
once to be baptized.

Q. What is held forth of Christ in dipping the Baptized?

A. To dip an Infant there is a dim light of Christ, as in the whole wafer no
showing forth Christ his suffering; but for a creature to go in and out of the
water, the dipper to dip down the head is no showing Christ at all as I can
see, I have not so learned Christ.

Q. How are we buried by baptism with Christ?

A. When he was buried by baptism sweating water etc blood, he was buried by
baptism being under the wrath of the Father all his wa^es were over him, then
were the Elect buried with him having communion with him in his death, when
Mary came aforehand to bury him, it being manifested to believers when they are
baptized by the spirit dying unto sin, and rising unto newnes of life, but when
Christ was buried by Nicodemu^ in the dust, there is no need of showing forth
that burial, nor his resurrection seeing he was seen after his Resurrection:
So by his power shall natural man rise, yea such as shall have no Communion
with him in his divine death and burial as he was God and man, making
satisfaction for mankind.

On the goodness of God published in the Gospel seen in the seals let them
that have a hearing ear, hear and obey, let them that have a seeing eye, see
Christ crucified look one him whom we have peirced and be comforted.

Q. Why may it be said that believers have communion in Christ's divine death?

A. Not in that any part of Christ's divine nature dyed or suffered, but as he
was man he dyed, having communion with the Father, by his divine nature he
overcame death, who in the days of his flesh offered up strong cries and
tears and was saved from death in that he feared. So the Elect have communion
with Christ in his sufferings, manifested to them by the baptism of the
spirit, being made partakers of the Divine nature they dye to sin, and rise
to newness of life, Christ dyed for sin and rose again for our
justification.

So believers die to sin and rise to newness of life, justifying themselves
to others that they are risen with Christ.

The receiving the water in Baptism, does not show forth what Christ has done
and suffered, but the employment of the Officer dipping his hand, so flesh is
dipped, and the body washed, the principal part for the whole.

So washed by dipping the hand, baptized fully, washing, pouring, sprinkling,
shows forth Christ suffers.

The receiving bread and wine and eating does not show forth Christ's death, no
more then the receiving of the water in Baptism: But breaking bread and
pouring out wine shows forth Christ's death.

He was broken for our transgressions, his soul made an offering for sin,
seen in breaking of bread, he powered out his soul for us, and sitts at the
right hand of the father making intercession, showed forth in pouring out wine.

The two seals under the Gospel are of one nature, but washing makes us
capeable of eating.

So Circumsition makes them capeable of eating the Passover.

Q. Then says such as be called Anabaptists, why do not children eat the
Supper?

Ans. Children were not capeable of eating the passover before they were
capeable of Instruction, asking the Parents what it meant; So the children of
the Church are not capeable of the supper before they can examine themselves;
wherefore let such as deny Infants baptism, and go into the water and dip
down the head and come out to show death and burial, take heed they take not
the name of the Lord in vain, more especially such as have received baptism
in their Infancy.

It is in vain to baptize them again, let them take heed that teach, these
new truths as they call them, these new forms or newly taken up.

Let them take heed they be not the tail of the beast, for the Prophet that
teaches lies is the tail, Esaias 9.15.

FINJS.

