A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT: For the
Protection of Sir George Chudleigh, Sir John Northcott, Sir Samuel Roll, and
Sir Nicholas Martyn, in the County of DEVON, who have lately been Proclaimed
Traitors by his MAJESTY.
WHereas his Majesty has set forth and commanded to be published in the
County of Devon, diverse printed Papers in the form of Proclamations, whereby
Sir George Chudleigh, Sir John Northcott, Baronets, Sir Samuel Roll, Sir
Nicholas Martyn, Knights, persons well-affected to the public, are without any
Process of Law or judgment proclaimed Traitors, who have carefully performed
their duties in assisting the Parliament, and opposing those wicked Counselors
and Cavaliers about the King, which endeavor the destruction of our Religion,
and desolation of this Land, The Lords and Commons in Parliament do Declare,
that the said printed Papers in the form of Proclamations, and the publishing
thereof are against the Laws of this Kingdom, and that such persons as have
been, or hereafter shall be proclaimed Traitors by the said printed Papers, or
any others of the like nature, shall be defended and protected by the power and
Authority of Parliament, from any damage or prejudice to their persons, or
Estates, by reason or color of any such printed papers, or proclamation
heretofore published, or which shall be hereafter published or contrived
against them, And the said Lords and Commons, do hereby strictly forbid the
publishing of any such printed papers or Proclamations, and do Authorize and
require all Officers, and others his Majesty's good Subjects, to apprehend and
to bring in safe Custody to the Parliament, and to seize the goods and profits
of the Lands, to be accomptable for the same to both Houses of Parliament, all
such persons as have already published, or which hereafter shall publish, any
such printed Papers or Proclamations, to the end, they may receive due
punishment for their Offenses.

Die Martis, 20. December. 1642.
IT is further Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That
this Declaration be forthwith Printed, and Published in all Parish Churches,
and Chapels, in the County of Devon, by the Vicars, and Curates thereof.

John Brown Cler. Parliament.

December. 21. London Printed for John Wright in the Old-Bayly. 1642.


