TO THE HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT:
The Humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons
of the City of London, in Common Council Assembled.

May 26 / LONDON, Printed by Richard Gotes. 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE the HOUSE of COMMONS Assembled in High Court of PARLIAMENT:
The humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons
of the City of London, in Common Council assembled.
OUR duty, in the first place, does lead us to begin all our Addresses, as we
most heartily and humbly do these, with all due and humble acknowledgement of
the great Labors and endeavors which this Honorable House has, these many
years, employed, in Reformation both of the Church and Commonwealth, and in
preservation of both, with the humble tender of our constant devotion to serve
the Parliament, according to our Covenant made before Almighty God.

In the next place, we do most humbly crave pardon, although woe do presume
to return again unto this Honorable House, and humbly, yet plainly, lay open
the sorrowe^ ^^d fears of our hearts, even in this season, when as God has
^^^sed your Armies with the greatest successes, and that Man might persuade
himself that the War is almost at an end.

Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, page 19.
For first, when we remember that this Honorable House has long since
declared it to be far from their purpose or desire to let loose the golden
Reins of Discipline and Government in the Church, or to leave private persons,
or particular Congregations, to take up what form of Divine Service they
please, when we look upon what both Houses have resolved against Brownisme,
and Anabaptisme, properly so called, when we meditate on our Protestation and
Covenant.

The Parliaments Declaration, upon his Majesty's Declaration after the Battle
at Edghill. p. 659.
And lastly, when we peruse the Directory, and other Ordinances for
Presbyteriall Government, and yet find private and separate Congregations
daily erected in diverse parts of the City, and elsewhere, and commonly
frequented (and Anabaptism, Brownism, and almost all manner of Heresies,
Schisms, and Blasphemies, boldly vented, and maintained, by such as, to the
point of Church Government, profess themselves Independent) we cannot but be
astonished at the swarms of Sectaries, which discover themselves every where,
who, if by their endeavors, they should get into places of Profit and Trust,
in Martial or Civil affairs, it may tend much to the disturbance of the
Public Peace both of the Church and Commonwealth. And we cannot but be
thoroughly awakened, when we consider, how the said Sectaries do encourage
themselves, by their misconstruction of that expression in the late Declaration
concerning tender Consciences, to expect a Toleration (contrary to the
National Covenant (as we humbly conceive) which must needs be a very great
hinderance to that happy agreement of all the differences in matters of
Discipline and Government of the Church, endeavored by the wisdom of both
Houses of Parliament, and which has been so long prayed, and hoped for by us.

And in pursuance of that noble Resolution of this Honorable House for the due
observation of the Covenant, and their expectation of the conformity of the
People of England thereunto, expressed in the late Declaration, we do resolve
by the grace of God, not to receive impression of any forced construction
thereof, being already fully satisfied in our Consciences from the very Letter
of the Covenant, of the true meaning and intention thereof, and in this
particular of Gods Worship, and the Discipline and Government of the Church,
without any further exposition, clearly convinced; That Noblemen, Barons,
Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospel, and Commons
of all sorts, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, are
sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of God, to endeavor in
their several Places and Callings, the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches, and are to endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity, in Religion, Confession
of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship, and Catechizing,
that we and our posterity after us, may, as Brethren, live in Faith and Love,
and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us; and in like manner
without respect of persons, to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to
be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, lest we partake
in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and
that the Lord may be one, and his Name one, in the three Kingdoms; And
therefore from the bottom of our hearts, seriously profess before Almighty
God, that we do not conceive it in the power of any humane authority to
discharge or absolve us from adhering thereunto, and endeavoring in our
several Places and Callings to maintain and defend the same.

We also cannot but call to mind what Vows we have made to God in the same
Covenant, as well as our former Protestations, to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to
preserve and defend the King a Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and Defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with ^our Consciences, of our Loyalty, and
that we have no though or intentions, to diminish His Majesty's just power and
^nesse, and do humbly rest in the assistances we ha^^ ^ved in the many former
Declamations of both Houses, ^ning their intentions toward his Majesty, his
Royal Posterity, and the Peace of this Kingdom.

And further we humbly acknowledge the particular assurance this Honorable
House has again given the whole (...), in their late Declaration, to lay hold
on the first opportunity of procuring a safe and well grounded Peace in the
three Kingdoms, which we doubt not but this Honorable House will pursue with
all speedy dispatch of Propositions to His Majesty, now whilst God does so
mercifully and miraculously go along with your Armies in all the parts of the
Kingdom.

We may not in the next place forget our Brethron of S^^^land, how first they
were invited to engage with this Kingdom in Gods Cause, when yet they were at
Peace at home, in what Covenant this Nation is mutually linked with them, at
what time, in relation both to the weak c^ndition of our Forces then, and the
season of the year, they adven^^^^^ upon an Enemy warmly lodged* and well (...)
(...) and; what they have fince suff^^ed for (...) Kingdom, how successefulle
(...) God has (...) F^^ces in suppressing the Common (...) Natures, and what
present hopes we have of a well (...) continue in this mutual Amity; And then
ca^^ (...) the many j^^lousies which the Enemies of our Peace, (...), and good
Government, do now ^lve to beget between both Nations, and tremble at the sad
effects thereof, if not ^ly prevented by the wisdom of the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms.

We cannot also, but with reverence look upon this Honorable House, as trusted
with a great share of the supreme power of this Kingdom, and as it is the
representative of the whole Nation, out of which, and by whom, the Members
thereof are chosen, do fix our hearts the more upon the same, and do by the
mercy of God, so long as this Kingdom does adhere to our Covenant, promise our
selves now and in all future a^^^, great blessings and assurances from the
endeavors and labors of this Honorable House; and in regard of this dignity
of Trust, we have and do submit to all Privileges of Parliament; yet because
it may now become a Tenure for life, if this privilege should be so made use
of by such Members of Parliament as owe great sums of Money, and protect
diverse under them as Servants, Attendants, Officers, yea, and their Servants,
if all these should be exempted from course of Law, how many Citizens of
London, and other Subjects of this Kingdom may be undone? We do therefore
with all Duty and Thankfulness put this Honorable House in mind, that in a
Remonstrance to the Kingdom, 15. December, 1642. we find this expression;
viz. That for the matter of Protections, the Parliament is so sensible of it,
that therein they intend to give whatsoever ease may stand with Honor and
Justice, and are in a way of passing a Bill to give satisfaction concerning the
same.

And now that the Kingdom is almost reduced, by which means the Revenue^ of
the Kingdom will be unburthened, and the Customs and Excise increase, and the
public charge of the Kingdom decrease, now that Delinquents do daily come in
and compound, and now that the Enemy has but few Holds left, we hope that the
great and extraordinary Taxes and burdens on this City and their Trade, shall
be in the future abated; that the Debts owing to the City and Citizens of
London, either by particular Assurances of the Parliament, or upon the public
faith of the Kingdom, be taken care for and discharged, as well as those
assigned upon the Excise, and may not be diverted from the uses appointed by
former Acts and Ordinances.

And we cannot but with all due acknowledgement remember what this Honorable
House has lately declared concerning the extraordinary ways the Parliament
has been put upon for procuring of Money for their many pressing occasions;
and hereupon we presume to present to the consideration of this Honorable
House, the Committee at Haberdashers-hall, as being one of the greatest
grievance^ of this City, and which, so long as it is co^d, does hinder the
concourse of people thereunto, and tends much to the destruction of the
Trade, and Inhabitants thereof.

And now also we doubt not but God will give the Parliment some better means
and opportunity for the relief of our bleeding Brethren in Ireland, and the
suppressing of those horrid Rebels, and reducing of that Kingdom, wherein,
besides the public and common interest, we are particularly concerned.

Lastly, we should have much to say for this City, if we could imagine that its
fidelity and constant services and devotion to the Parliament could either be
questioned or forgotten, that little we shall express on the part of the City,
is, not to repeat how zealous we have been in the cause of God, and this
Parliament, how we have spilt our blood, and laid out our selves and Estates in
maintenance thereof; how many public acknowledgements we have by us of the
favorable acceptance of them, and promises to leave Testimonies thereof to all
future ages; but only to beseech this Honorable House to consider how much
our hearts may justly be dejected, now that God has followed your endeavors,
and our prayers, with so many successes, and brought the War to a probable
period, as to the sense of Man, that this City should yet in us receive so
great a mark of the displeasure of this Honorable House, as that the Letter
sent us from the Parliament of Scotland should still be detained, though
Petitioned for, as if this Honorable House were doubtful of our fidelity. That
although in the last Propositions to his Majesty at Vxbridge, the power of the
Militia of this City was fully represented; that it should now be reassumed
and endeavored to be altered, to the endangering of this City, and the Parts
adjacent, as if we now deserved less Trust from this Honorable House, then a
twelve Month ago. That some late Petitions of this City presented to this
Honorable House, should yet lie unanswered. That Quarterman a notorious
Sectary, one whom the City not long since cast out for his misdemeanors, should
presume, in the contempt of the privileges and Government thereof, to enter
the City, and to make Proclamation with Trumpet, without acquainting the Lord
Major therewith; the like of which (to our best knowledge) in no age, when the
City was most neglected, was ever so much as attempted.

And lastly that after the present Lord Major had so faithfully behaved
himself in his Office, and with the testimony of the City, so carefully
discharged the same, that yet he should be suspected and questioned upon
general informations, which (it may well be doubted) might be designed to
divide between the Parliament and the City.

We could add much more of the daily invectives against us from the Pulpit,
and other places where the Bowtefew's of these Sectaries are admitted, the
scurrilous and seditious Pamphlets daily broached against, and in the City: And
the great contempt of, and discouragement unto the Ministers of the Gospel, who
adhere to the Presbyteriall Government: But we shall conclude with this brief
and humble representation of our Petitions and desires to this Honorable House
in the name of the whole City.

I. That some strict and speedy course may be taken for the suppressing of all
private and separate Congregations. II. That all Anabaptists, Brownists,
Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and all such Sectaries as conform not to
the public Discipline established, or to be established by Parliament, may be
fully declared against, and some effectual course settled for proceeding
against such persons. III. That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdom, so all
may be equally required to yield obedience unto the Government se^ forth, or to
be set forth by the Parliament. IV. That no person disaffected to the
Presbyteriall Government set forth, or to be set forth by the Parliament, may
be employed in any place of public Trust. V. That this Honorable House will
please to hasten Prepositions to his Majesty, for settling of a safe and well
grounded Peace amongst us, after so long and unnatural a War. VI. That this
Honorable House, according to the Covenant and Treaties, will please to study
all means to preserve the Union between the t^o Nation^ of England and
Scotland, and to remove all (...) which may endanger our mutual agreement.
VII. That this Honorable House will please to consider of some means whereby
the privilege which its Members their Servants and others enjoy by being
protected and exempted from being proceeded against for their Debts, may be so
qualified, as that the Subject may be able to recover his own in some due
time. VIII. That all public Revenues and Receipts may be employed to public
uses, that so the Taxes of the City may be abated. IX. That the Estates and
Compositions of the Delinquents, may, according to the engagements by
Ordinances of Parliament, be applied to discharge the great sums owing to
this City and Citizens. X. That the Plymouth Duty may be taken off the Trade,
especially now the West is reduced. XI. That the Committee at Haberdashers-hall
may be presently dissolved; or at least so limited and regulated, as that the
City may have no cause of complaint. XII. That the reducing of the Kingdom of
Ireland may be taken into consideration, before the good party there be too
far wasted and discouraged. XIII. That the Original Letter of the Parliament
of Scotland to this City may be returned. XIV. That the City may enjoy the
Militia fully, as it was presented at the last Treaty at Vxbridge. XV. That
Quarterman may be brought to some exemplary punishment, for the affront done by
him to the Privileges and Government of this City. XVI. That the Lord Major of
this City may be fully vindicated. XVII. And lastly, and above all, That this
honorable House will please not to look upon any expressions of this our
Remonstrance and Petition, as charging any thing upon this Honorable House, or
as intended to entrench upon any privilege thereof, but favorably to accept
thereof, and so to interpret the same, as from a single and humble heart it is
sincerely, and without any by-ends, or to comply with any Party whatsoever,
intended and breathed forth from the sad heart of the Petitioners, who are
overwhelmed with many fears on all sides. And who call God, the Searcher of
all hearts, to witness, that according to their Covenant and duty, their
zeal, devotion and obedience, is as fervent and prostrate as ever to serve the
Parliament with their Lives and Estates, against all the Enemies of our Peace,
to conjoyne the City more and more to the Parliament, and to maintain the
Union of both Nations against all Opposers whatsoever.
All which we humbly submit unto the wisdom of this Honorable House.
FINIS.

