TO The honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT. THE HVMBLE PETITION OF THE Inhabitants
of the Cities of London and Westminster, And the Borough of Southwarke, in the
behalf of themselves, and of Millions in this Kingdom distressed in point of
Conscience.
WHereas your Petitioners having formerly contributed, freely and liberally to
the King and Parliament in conjunction, do now refuse further to contribute or
pay, conceiving them in opposition; as by reason His Majesty's person was
invaded in battle at Keinton (contrary to the many Declarations of taking up
Arms for the safety of His Majesty's person) so in regard there is no express
care of His person and honor in your late Ordinance, for the assessing the
Twentieth part in London, nor in your Declaration for leavying of money in the
Countyes.

And whereas this their refusal is merely out of Conscience, according to
that information they have Concerning the Divine Constitution of particular
Kings in their several Kingdoms, and of Subjection to them both Active and
Passive, and of the Damnablenesse of Resisting; from

First, The word of God: Dan. 4. 17. and 25. 32. where thrice in one Chapter it
is said, That the Kingdoms be Gods, and he gives them to whom he will. 1 Samuel
26. 9. Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be
Guiltless. And the same blessed spirit which calls David the Lords Anointed,
Psalm. 89. 20. does call Cyrus a Heathen Prince the Lords Anointed also. Esa.
45. 1. Romans 13. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is
no Power but of God; The Powers that be are ordained of God, whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. (yea we acknowledge in our Book
of Common Prayer, that King CHARLES is Gods Minister, and that he has Gods
Authority, and so fighting against him, we fight against God himself.

Secondly, Mr Calvin and other Protestants, their exposition on Romans 13. and 1
Pet. 2.

Thirdly, The Harmony of Reformed Churches concerning Magistracy.

Fourthly, The Doctrine of the Church of England in the books of Homilyes
delivered, concerning civil obedience.

Fifthly, From the Laws of the Land, which declare it to be Treason to Leavy
War against the King in this Kingdom, and to encounter in fight, and kill
such as are assisting to the King, or come to help him, or to aid in those
cases.

And the Action of the Earl of Essex was adjudged Treason, though he pretended
nothing but removing evil Counselors from the Queen. Now that which is evil
in its own nature cannot be the subject of any Command, nor induce any
obligation upon any man by any Authority whatsoever. Remonstrance, May 19. And
we may not do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3. 8.

Sixthly, Also in regard of the late Protestation, relating to the said
Doctrines, and to His Majesty respectively, which Protestation, you have bound
your selves to maintain, and all those that do any thing in pursuance of it.

You would at least be pleased in your present undertakings for Religion, and
for the Law of the Land and the Liberty and Property of the Subjects, to
proceed in the way of Religion without violence to the Conscience, in a case
that concerns no less then Salvation or Damnation (As you profess your
tenderness of the Conscience even in matters of Indifferency) And that first
your Authentical Divines (Dr Burgess, Mr Marshall, etc.) may publish
something for the resolving of Conscience in this way clearly out of the word
of God, and home to the Action at Keinton, taking notice also, That His Majesty
took up Arms for the maintenance of the Laws, concerning the public
worship of God, and for the privileges of and freedom of Parliament,
notoriously invaded by Brownists and Separatists; and that now He continues
them also for the necessary defense of His Person, manifestly in danger since
the battle at Keinton. To which (satisfying the Premises) your Petitioners
(far from contemptuousnesse and obstinacy against the clear word of God and
Lawful Authority) shall ingenuously condescend; and readily make payment of
these several Rates accordingly.

And pray for etc.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1643.


