To his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL And to the rest of the Right
Honorable the COUNCIL of STATE, PATRIOTS and DEFENDERS of the Common-Laws and
Liberties of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of many thousands of Prisoners for Debt, in several
Prisons of a^l the Counties of England and Wales, remonstrating the Illegallity
of Arrests, Out-lawries and Imprisonments for Debt, being the saddest
Grievance, and of the most considerable concernment to all the free People of
this Nation:
Shows,
THat by the Common Law of England the body could not be arrested, Mag. Cart.
29.
imprisoned, or outlawed for debt or dammage^, either before or after judgment,
nor the Lands taken in Execution, but the goods and chattels and the profits of
the Debtors lands by two writs ordained for that purpose and still in force,
viz. A Fieri facias of the goods and chattels only; and a Levari facies of the
Corn and present profits that grew upon the lands.

And the Reason of the Law, Cooks Instit. 2, part fo. 394.
that the body in case of debt or damage should not be detained in Prison was
that the Person should always be at liberty, not only to follow his own
affairs and business, but also to serve the Commonwealth when need should
require; nor the possession of the Lands in that case taken away, Sir. Will
Herb. Case Cook lib. 3.
for that would hinder the following of tillage, which is so beneficial to the
Commonwealth, which Law continued inviolate for the space of 250. years after
the Norman conquest, until the Statute of Westminster, the 2. Chap. 11. which
first gave a Capias and Process of Outlawry against fugitives and fraudulent
Accomptants only; And after the same Statute of Westminster, the 2. Chap. 18.
gave an Elegit of the moiety of Lands, which was the first Act that made Lands
subject to execution upon a Recognizance or Judgment. West. 2. cap. 11. West.
2. cap. 18. 25. Ed 3* cap. 17.


That afterward by the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. chap. 17. It was accorded that
such process should be made in a Writ of Debt and detinue of chattels, as was
then used in a writ of account, which was indeed a short but a very sharp and
c^uel law; yet it is to be observed that such punishment was not given in debt
as in account by that Law.

That those Laws were afterward repealed by the general Statute of 42. 42.
Ed. 3. cap. 1 Cooks Instit. 2. part. 23. 85 42. of Ed ^.
Ed. 3. which in judgment of law declared all former or subsequent Statutes
(made against the great Charter) to be void and holden for none.

That notwithstanding this Golden Law which restored the Peoples Liberty to the
full again, yet that short intervall of time betwixt the said 25. and the 42.
of the same King Ed. 3. (being not above 18. years,) had so bewitched their
minds, and captivated the judgments of such officers and persons as received
profit by imprisoned or bayled debtors, as Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Sergeants at
Mace, Attorneys, Sollicitors and other Officers and Attendants in Cities, and
Towns Corporate in several Offices (which were newly created and erected in
those times) with the gain that proceeded by the Fees of Writs, Bayles,
Outlawries, and other numerous ways extorted from the persons arrested,
outlawed, and imprisoned or bayled for debt* that never since could that evil
Spirit be cast out of the generation of such Craftsmen and Persons, (otherwise
eminently learned in the Law,) that for lucre sake, after the repeal of those
aforesaid cruel Iron-Laws, the evil and unlawful practice of the same unto
this day continued against all Persons, but the Peers of the Land.

And either by misconstruction or inadvertancy of the true and genuine sense of
the Common Law it self; And of the said general Statute of 42. Ed. 3. and
contrary to thirty Acts of Parliament since made in affirmance of the Great
Charter of the Liberties of the people of England, the same evil use of
Arrests, Outlawries and Imprisonmeut for debt, and other civil causes, and the
extent of lands by Elegit continues to this very day, to the utter ruin of the
persons and estates of the freeborn people of England, Quo jure, Quavae
injurae; We humbly submit to your Excellencies and your Counsels better
judgment.

For redress whereof, 13. Ed 1. 25. Ed. 3.
and in respect that all subsequent Statutes whatsoever made to enthrall the
person by arrests and Outlary, have relation unto the said repealed and void
Acts of the 13th. of Ed. the first, and of the 25. Ed. 3. and they must by all
reason be as void as thse Acts to which they are related; And for that there is
no positive Statute Law in force at this day for the continuing of the Capias
and Exigent against the Persons in debt, and merely Civil causes, since the
Repeal of the said Laws, 42. Ed. 3.
by force of the 42th. year of the same Ed. 3.

May it please your Excellency, and the rest of your Honorable Council
considering the Illegallity of arrests, outlaries and extents, as well for the
common good of all the Freeborn People of this Nation. As for the poor
Prisoners cause; that the ancient liberty of the person may be restored, and
vindicated by your Justice from the Tyranny of those Laws and Times which
imposed the said yoke of Imprisonment and Outlary upon the People in civil
causes.

And that the ancient and laudable forms for recovering of just debts may be
by Original Writs out of the Chancery, and for not-appearing a Distress
infinite; which course is more beneficial far to the Commonwealth in general,
and more remedial to the Plaintiff in particular then either the Bill of
Middlesex, Latitat, Clausum fregie, or Capias Vt-legatum can be; and also that
all judicial writs may be executed upon the Defendants lands and goods, by the
Levari facias and Fieri facias, and not by Extent upon the Elegit, or Capias ad
satisficiendum upon the body; as the modern practice is in destruction of the
Defendant, all debts and damages recovered, being most properly, and by
Intendement of the Common Law, to be levied upon the profits of the lands and
goods and chattels only, and not upon the Person.

And that all Prisoners for debt whatsoever may be discharged of their
imprisonment, and the Creditors left to resort to the Debtors lands and goods
for satisfection of their just debts, by judicial, and no new Arbitrary
proceedings (now in attempt) against the Free People of this Nation by
malevolent Creditors, and oppressing Usurers, in Opposito of the ancient way,
and true legal forms of Justice.

So will the Common laws revive and flourish, the multiplicity of vexatious
Suits be abated, Tyllage and Trading advanced, the estates of all persons
preserved to their Families and Posterity; malice and envy taken away,
oppression and wrong repressed, peace and love established in this Nation,
(which is manifestly intended, and aimed at by your Excellencies late
Declaration) And your Excellencies good name for so Pious and admirable a Piece
of Justice be recommended with Honor, to the present and future freeborn
People of England.

The Petitioners further humbly beseeching your Excellency and Honorable
Council, that they may be admitted by themselves or Agents (in case of
opposition or obstruction) to exhibit additionalls in defense and maintenance
of their desires.

And that your Excellency and Council, will be graciously pleased in the mean
time (until the said Errors and evil customs now in ure, can be reversed and
reformed by the new Representative) to permit all Prisoners in Execution in the
Fleet, or else where, to go abroad by Baston, to follow their business, (as
until the Statute of the first of Rich. 2. was accustomed, constantly after
the Stat. of 25. Ed. 3.) Or otherwise to have their Writs of Habeas Corpus
gtanted them Gratis, 1. Rich. 2, 25. Ed. 3.
out of any the four Courts of Westminster, without contradiction of their
Creditors or any of them.

And as in all Duty bound, your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Signed by Sir
William Smith K. in the behalf of himself, and the Prisoners aforesaid.


