To the Honorable the House of Commons, Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The Humble
Petition of the Inhabitants of VVATFORD, in the County of HERTFORD.
Shows,
THat the Petitioners having with all duty and affection taken notice of
Certain Propositions of both Houses of P^rliament concerning the raising of
Horse, Horsemen and Arms, for the defense of the King and both Houses of
Parliament; And being assured that whatsoever shall be brought in, shall not be
employed upon any other occasion, then To maintain the Protestant Religion, the
Kings Authority, and his Person in his Royal Dignity, the free course of
Justice, the Laws of the Land, the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Privilege of
Parliament, against any Force which shall oppose them:

The Petitioners, (although but a small handful) mindful of their late
Protestation, do, in all humility and rervencie of affection, offer to this
Service 1270. li. in Money and Plate, (the greatest part whereof is already
brought in, and the rest shall forthwith be made up) and likewise have provided
50. able and serviceable Horses and Riders ready to be Listed; Not intending to
rest in these proportions, but resolving to part with all they have, if need
be, in pursuit of their said Protestation; Which as they seriously considered
of, before they took it, so they resolutely prepare themselves to make it good
to the last drop of their bloods: And they neither do, nor can desire better
security for what they now or hereafter shall bring in, then The Public Faith
of both Houses of Parliament.

They therefore most humbly pray, That this Honorable House would vouchsafe to
accept of this Present of their Duty, and to take into your grave Consideration
the Propositions and humble Desires of the Petitioners hereto annexed, and to
recommend them likewise to the most Honorable House of Peers, if in your
wisdom you shall think fit to grant the same: And that you would move their
Lordships to concur with this Honorable House herein, for the encouragement of
the Petitioners, and of all others that shall desire to follow, or rather to
out-goe them in this necessary Service.

And they shall ever pray, etc.
Propositions humbly offered by the Petitioners.
1. THat in consideration of the great sum already advanced, and the hope of
enlarging it, there may be complete furniture of Saddles, Bridles and Arms for
such Horse and Horsemen as they shall enroll, and cannot be furnished and armed
by themselves; And the same Furniture and Arms to be delivered to John
Leonard, and Zachary King, Gentlemen, who shall be responsall to both Houses of
Parliament for them, at all times, upon reasonable warning, unless the same
happen to miscarry in any Service appointed by the said Houses.

2. That you would give the Petitioners leave to recommend unto You John Bird
Gentleman to be Captain of the said Horse, and that they may nominate the rest
of the underofficers thereto pertaining, and that they may be admitted to
exercise the same so long as they shall behave themselves worthy of that trust
and service.

3. That for the better satisfaction of both Houses of Parliament in the
exercising and preparing of the said Troop of Horse for the service intended,
you would please to receive into your present pay a Lieutenant, and one
Corporal that have had experience in service, and are expert in their duties,
who shall be recommended to you by the said Master Bird, and the rest of the
Petitioners, if you shall find no cause to refuse them.

4. The Captain and the rest of their officers may recover their pay so soon
as moneys shall come in to defray that Charge.

5. That the said troop of Horse may continue at Watford (it being not distant
above 15. miles from Westminster) and be trained and exercised there, or near
thereabout, until both houses of Parliament shall please to command their
service elsewhere.

Die Veneris 1. Julii. 1642.
AFter the Petition had been read, and the Propositions assented unto, one of
the Petitioners was called in, and Master Speaker by command of the House told
him, Your Petition has been read and well accepted, and all your Propositions
assented unto. That this liberal offer and subscription of a business so
nearly concerning the safety of the King, Religion, and Kingdom, is an
acceptable service to the Commonwealth. Therefore this House has commanded me
to give you thanks for your Zeal for the public, and the good service you
have done herein, and desire you to return their thanks to the rest of the
Petitioners who have given so ample Testimony of their good affections.

Die Veneris 1. Julii. 1642.
ORdered that the Petition of the Inhabitants of Watford, in the County of
Hertford, this day read and approved of by the House of Commons, be Printed,

H. Elsynge
Cler. Parl. Do. Com.
Printed at London for JOHN BELLAMY and RALPH SMITH. 1642.


