TO HIS EXCELLENCY General Monck.
The Humble PETITION of the LADY LAMBERT,
SHOWS,
THat being Alienated from John Lambert Esq-through his faint heartedness, who
(like unfortunate Jack) has lost one thing after another, and having notice of
your Excellencies advance, your Dejected Handmaid would be humbled before you,
and submissively lie down in any posture, Nature or Aretine has invented. The
Whorish variety and inconstancy of Fortune by which your Petitioner has been
dallyed, whilst the Coy Gipsy reserved her last favor to another, has now
twice Lambertized her in the attempt of Sovereignty, and has made her so
Green-sick of the conceit, that she has scraped down most of the Walls of
Wimbleton House to feed Her crazy Appetite, before the Parliament do sell or
dispose of it.

Now so it is may it please your Excellency that your Petitioner does also most
Exceedingly Long after some Scotch Oatmeale out of your own Pockets, (for She
has understood it is the custom of that Nation to March so furnished) and She
will make you as good Bonny-Clapper as ever was in King Harry the Fight his
Court, and far exceeding the French Barley Broth in Bloomsbery.

And that your excellency may not deem this a presumption, She dares assure
you, She has been more Familiar with Oliver, out of whose Breeches she had the
Instrument of Government: But what Fascinating power has so strongly obliged
her Affections to your Person, since She never Loved any that Loved a
Parliament, Mrs Peele cannot inform Her. To spea^k Ingenuously, to see such
fine things as Glory and Honor, and Highnessing, as it were Ravished from me
in my sight, would make an Honest Man a Whore, much rather a frail and Imbecile
Woman: And therefore let not your Famed Chastity be offended while your
Petitioner-sollicites thus for her self, for so did that Renowned Lady
Elizabeth Claypoole, and old Potiphers Wife, and so do the Wiser and Gallanter
sort of our Sex. Your excellency has already laid my Husbands Courage, 'twill
be easy Work to cool Mine.

Your Suitor Humbly prays your Excellency, not to put Her to the needless,
frivolous, and dangerous delays of a treaty, for so you fooled Her Husband, nor
dispute of Praeliminaries when the Entrance is open; She will yield upon any
terms, take Bag and Baggage. Come then and see a fine Picture at Wimbleton
(which would make even General Blake himself a Woman-lover) for She is as
unacquainted and discommoded with the private retreats of Whitehal as your
Excellency: and that there may be no manner of Obstruction to so good a work,
She will procure a Dispensation from Pope Jone.

In Jovi^ Consideration of the Premises, may it please your Excellency to make
your Petitioner Mistress of requests according to the Pattern of Jane Shore in
the Reign of Edward the Fourth: and upon Solemn days as your entertainment
Feast in London (it is an Aldermans Opinion) to hold up your Ladys Train, for it
being like to be Durty it will save Rubbing Brushes; and to admit her to be of
Her privy Council, and chief Woman of Attire, to make her Mind as well as her
Dress Fashionable and Conformable to her Greatness

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Henry James.


