THE HIDDEN TREASURES OF THE Art of Physic; Fully Discovered: IN FOUR BOOKS. 1
Containing a Physical Description of Man. 2 The Causes, Signs, and Cures of
all Diseases, incident to the Body. 3 The general Cure of Wounds, Tumors, and
Ulcers. 4 A general Rule, for making all kind of Medicines; with the use and
Nature of distilled Waters, Juyces, Decoctions, Conserves, Powders,
Elestuaries, Plasters, etc.
To which is added three necessary Tables, 1 Shows the Contents of the Four
Books. 2 Explaineth all the Terms of Art which are used in Physic and
Surgery. 3 Explaining the Nature and use of Simples, what they are, and
where they grow.
A Work whereby the diligent Reader may, without the help of other Authors,
attain to the knowledge of the Art abovenamed.

By John Tanner, Student in Physic, and Astrology.

London, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the sign of the Bible on
Lud-gate-Hill. 1659.

To my truly honored, and worthily respected Friend, Mr. William Beal, of
Little Missenden, in the County of Buckingham;
J. T. Wishes all Health, Happiness, and Prosperity in this Life, and Eternal
Glory in the Life to come.
Honored Sir,
THat which (for the most part) emboldeneth men, to dedicate their Labors unto
any Personage, is the affinity between the matter of the Work which they
present, and the Mind of him to whom it is presented. I have here swerved from
this custom, being altogether too weak to present you with a Work, suitable to
your far more excellent parts: Yet when I considered my Design, viz. to serve
my Country, and to instruct the unlearned, in this so excellent and necessary
a Science; I thought none so fit to patronize and encourage a piece of this
nature, than one who heartily desires the public good; which public Spirit,
and charitable Principle, I have (in a more than ordinary manner) observed in
you; and your poor Neighbors (to their comfort) are daily sensible of. Sir, I
need not tell you, how useful, a subject of this nature, may prove to the
Commonalty, whose ignorance of their own condition, whilst they are sick, and
want of strength of body or purse, to confer with a Physician, proves fatal to
many a poor Christian in this Nation. I shall leave this to the consideration
of the Reader, and humbly crave your favorable acceptance, of these my weak
endeavors, and First Fruits of my few years hard study: Which if I obtain; my
Book, though a Stripling, and very impotent of it self; yet under your
favorable protection, I am confident, will manfully obvert and defend it self
against the venomous Bitings of Slanderous Tongues, from which it must expect
not a little opposition. I hope, nay confidently believe that this poor Infant,
though but meanly clad, will find your encouragement, being an honest man's
Child, no Vagrant. I beseech you, Sir, excuse my confidence, who dare thus rush
into your presence; and demand, without any merit of my own, your favorable
protection.

But it is your good Nature, of which I am an Admirer, that has so far
emboldened me. Had Nature been more liberal to me in Expressions, or had tipped
my Tongue with Eloquence; yet I durst not make use of it to you, for I know you
delight not in it; nor is my self therewith affected: Therefore, in all
humility, sincerity, and plain Language, I subscribe my self,

Your most affectionate Servant, John Tanner.

TO THE READER.
IT is not vainglory (Courteous Reader) arrogance or presumption, that has
put me upon this Design, viz. publishing this Tractate of Physic: But for some
years (having abandoned the hunting after all glistering shows of happiness) I
have applied my Mind to the study of Nature; and finding nothing in the World,
that God, the Great Creator, has kept to himself, but made subject to the
industrious Capacity of man's soaring Brain. And that the same God, that
infused into man a conceiveable Mind, to understand the Mysteries of Nature;
also gave a Tongue able to express his Conceptions to another, and a Hand to
write it for the benefit of Posterity. As there is nothing can make a man
approach nearer to the perfection of Nature, which he lost in his Fall; then
painful searching into the Secrets of Nature: so there is nothing in Nature can
make a man more glorify his Maker, then communicating what he has found by
Search and Industry, to Posterity. These considerations put me upon the
Enterprise, not forgetting the saying of Plato, and the Stoics, Non nobis
solum nati sumus, ortusque nostri partem patria vendicat, partem parents,
partem amici. Quae in terris gignuntur, ad usum hominum omnia creari, homines
autem hominum causa esse generatos, ut ipsi inter se aliis alii prodesse
possent: We are not born for our selves alone, but partly for our Country,
partly for our Parents, and partly for our Friends: What ever the Earth has
produced, was created for the use of Man; Man also was created for Man's sake,
that they might among themselves profit one by another. These considerations (I
say) moved me to pursue this Design; which (though it will not satisfy every
detracting Critic, and self-conceited Practitioner) I hope will find
acceptance among those, for whom I principally intended it.

Courteous Reader, I have collected, out of the Works of most of the Ancient
and Modern Physicians now extant among us, this Compendium or Abridgment of
Physic, much of which I have sealed, and confirmed by the Probatum est of my
own Experience, as Providence has given me occasion. I have not put thie to
view, in competition with the Works of so many more grave and Learned Raboies;
but for the good of those that want such helps, and are unacquainted with the
Latin Tongue; but more particularly for these Reasons:

First, because many industrious Students have not a Purse to purchase so many
Authors. Secondly, others have not a Brain to peruse such lage Volumns; but are
at first better able to apprehend much, lying in a little compass; the use of
which (as an Introduction) will give them light to pass thorough larger Volumes
with more ease. Third'y, that People void of Learning, and of mean Capacities,
may be better able to judge of a Disease by the Symptoms, and give a better
Information to an absent Physician, then to set him to juggle in the Piss-per.
Fourthly, Ladies and Gentlewomen, who are wont to help their poor sick
Neighbors, may be the better enabled, and be forewarned by dangerous
Symptoms, to haste to the Learned Physician. Lastly, that all Women may the
better understand the Physicians Directions, and with more Prudence govern the
Sick.

The first Book was the Fruits of my wandering Meditations, which I once
intended not for public view. Much of the second was my Daily Collections,
which my Practice lead me to. In the Theory, I interlaced the Judgments of
Authors, making choice of that which seemed most consentaneous to Reason, and
my own Experience. In the Practique part, I have quoted Medicines from several
Authors, as left by them: Some I have somewhat altered, and that for two
Reasons: First, some I have altered to make them more strong and efficacious.
Secondly, others I altered, when I was enforced to use (for want of one
Ingredient) another of the same nature. This Book swelled to such a bigness,
that I was forced to contract my self in the two last, and to be somewhat
briefer then I intended.

Thus, courteous Reader, I have, for thy sake, exposed my self to the dangerous
and sharp Teeth of the envious Detractors, which is a great hazard, especially
in this polished Age, among so many fine and curious Wits, who scarcely can
approve of any thing, though never so judiciously composed. Yet if it find
acceptance with thee, I have my end, and shall receive sufficient
encouragement, to undertake somewhat more for thy benefit: which I shall
suddenly do, if I find this give content. If any fault, committed by my Pen,
or the Press, pass uncorrected, excuse it. Accept it with a cheerful heart; and
as I freely impart, so do thou, what ever profit or knowledge thou gainest
thereby, freely for the good of thy Neighbor, to the honor of God, and praise
of this Laudable Science; and for the further encouraging of him who now is,
farther to be

Thine, in all Offices of Love, J. TANNER.
From my Lodging, at Mr. Cambridge's house, next door to the Sign of the
Kings-Arms, in Kings-street, Westmin.
A general Table of all the principal Contents of this Book.
The Table of the First Book.
CHap. 1. A Physical Description of Man Page 1 Chap. 2. A more particular
Description of Man p. 4 Chap. 3. A Description of the Head p. 6 Chap. 4. Of the
parts belonging to the Head p. 11 Chap. 5. Of the Stomach, and its faculties p.
19 Chap. 6. Of the Heart p. 21 Chap. 7. Of the Lungs, Liver, etc. p. 25 Chap.
8. Of the Reins and Kidneys, p. 29 Chap. 9. Of the Generative Parts, p. 32
Chap. 10. The Conclusion, p. 36
The Table of the Second Book.
CHap. 1. Of the nature of Physic, and Office of a Physician, Page 39 Chap. 2.
Of Diseases of the Head; Cephalaea and Megrim, page 42 Chap. 3. Of the Frenzy,
page 48 Chap 4. Of Madness, page 52 Chap. 5. Of the Apoplexy, Lethargy, and
Sleepy Disease, page 56 Chap. 6. Of the Vertigo, page 62 Chap. 7. Of the
Palsy, page 67 Chap. 8. Of the Convulsion, page 71 Chap. 9. Of a Catarrh, or
Defluxion, page 75 Chap. 10. Of Diseases of the Eyes, proceeding from
obstruction of the Optic Nerves, page 83 Chap. 11. Of a Cataract, page 88
Chap. 12. Of the enlarging, or straitening of the Pupilla, page 94 Chap. 13. Of
the Pin and Web, page 107 Chap. 14. Of the Inflammation of the Eyes, p. 108
Chap. 15. Of the Cancer, and Rupture of the Cornea, page 116 Chap. 16. Of
Diseases of the corners of the Eyes, and Eyelids, page 118 Chap. 17. Of
Diseases of the Ears, page 124 Chap. 18. Of Diseases of the Nostrils, page 134
Chap. 19. Of bleeding at the Nose, page 142 Chap. 20. Of the Diseases of the
Tongue, page 146 Chap. 21. Of the Diseases of the Teeth, page 150 Chap. 22. Of
Diseases of the Gums, page 165 Chap. 23. Of the Ulcers of the Mouth, page 167
Chap. 24. Of a loose and inflamed Columella, and Diseases of the Tonsils, page
169 Chap. 25. Of the Quinzie, page 171 Chap. 26. Of the Asthma, page 175 Chap.
27. Of the Pleurifie, and inflammation of the Lungs, page 179 Chap. 28. Of
Empyema, page 183 Chap. 29. Of spitting of blood, page 185 Chap. 31. Of the
Consumption, or Ptisick. page 189 Chap. 32. Of the Palpitation of the Heart,
page 194 Chap. 33. Of Swooning, or Syncope, page 197 Chap. 34. Of want of
Appetite, page 201 Chap. 35. Of a depraved Appetite, page 205 Chap. 36. Of the
Thirsty Disease, page 208 Chap. 37. Of Evil Digestion, page 210 Chap. 38. Of
the Hiccough, page 213 Chap. 39. Of Vomiting, page 215 Chap. 40. Of Cholera,
page 218 Chap. 41. Of pain in the Stomach, page 220 Chap. 42. Of the
Inflammation, Ulcer, and Imposthume of the Stomach, page 229 Chap. 43. Of the
Chollick, page 223 Chap. 44. Of the Illiack Passion, page 230 Chap. 45. Of the
Lientery, and Caeliack Passion, p. 233 Chap. 46. Of the Flux Diarrhaea, p. 235
Chap. 47. Of the Dysentery, or Bloody Flux, p. 238 Chap. 48. Of the Tenasmus,
p. 243 Chap. 49. Of the Flux of the Live^, p. 244 Chap. 50. Of the Worms, p.
247 Chap. 51. Of the immoderate Flux of the Hemorrhoids, p. 251 Chap. 52. Of
the pain of the Hemorrhoids, p. 254 Chap. 53. Of a hot distemper of the Liver,
p. 257 Chap. 54. Of the inflammation of the Liver, p. 259 Chap. 55. Of the
obstruction of the Liver, p. 264 Chap. 56. Of the Schirrhus of the Liver, p.
268 Chap. 57. Of the Jaundise, p. 269 Chap. 58. Of the Dropsy, p. 272 Chap.
59. Of the obstruction, inflammation, and tumor of the Spleen, p. 279 Chap.
60. Of Hypochondriack Melancholy, p. 281 Chap. 61. Of the Scurvey, p. 285 Chap.
62. Of the Stone in the Kidneys, p. 288 Chap. 63. Of the Stone in the Bladder,
p. 294 Chap. 64. Of the inflammation of the Reins and Bladder, p. 296 Chap. 65.
Of the Ulcer of the Reins and Bladder, p. 299 Chap. 66. Of extraordinary
pissing, p. 302 Chap. 67. Of involuntary pissing, p. 304 Chap. 68. Of the
stoppage of Urine and Strangury, p. 306 Chap. 69. Of the scalding of the Urine,
p. 309 Chap. 70. Of pissing of blood, p. 311 Chap. 71. Of the Green Sickness,
p. 314 Chap. 72. Of the stoppage of the Terms, p. 317 Chap. 73. Of the
immoderate Menstrual Flux. p. 320 Chap. 74. Of the Whites. p. 323 Chap. 75. Of
the Mother, p. 326 Chap. 76. Of the inflammation, ulcer, and hard swelling of
the Womb, p. 333 Chap. 77. Of the swelling of the Womb by wind or water, p. 337
Chap. 78. Of the falling down of the Womb, p. 341 Chap. 79. Of Barrenness, p.
343 Chap. 80. Of Miscarriage, p. 349 Chap. 81. Of hard Travel in childbirth,
p. 351 Chap. 82. Of the Gout and Sciatica, p 356 Chap. 83. Of the one day
Fever, p. 363 Chap. 84. Of the Fever Synochus non putrida, p. 365 Chap. 85.
Of continual putrid Fevers, p. 366 Chap. 86. Of the Hectic Fever, p. 375
Chap. 87. Of the Tertian Ague, p. 377 Chap. 88. Of the Quotidian Ague, p. 380
Chap. 89. Of the Quartan Ague, p. 381 Chap. 90. Of the Pestilence, p. 386 Chap.
91. Of the Small Pox and Measles, p. 394
The Contents of the Third Book.
CHap. 1. Of a green Wound, p. 398 chap. 2. Of a contused wound, and a Bruise,
p. 404. chap. 3. Of Wounds by biting, or stinging of any creature, venomous or
not. p. 407 chap. 4. Of a Wound in the Nerves, Tendons, Ligaments, Veins, and
Arteries. p. 409 chap. 5. Of Luxations and Fractures, p. 413 chap. 6. Of
accidents happening to wounded persons, p. 417 chap. 7. Of Sanguine Tumors, p.
422 chap. 8. Of choleric Tumors, p. 429 chap. 9. Of Phlegmatic Tumors, p. 432
chap. 10. Of Melancholy Tumors, p. 439 chap. 11. Of Ulcers. p. 444 chap. 12.
Rules for Vomiting and Purging, p. 448
The Contents of the Fourth Book.
CHap. 1. Of Distilled Waters, page 452 chap. 2. Of Syrups, p. 464 chap. 3. Of
Decoction and Juyces, p. 484 chap. 4. Of Lohocks, p. 486 chap. 5. Preserves,
Conserves, Sugars, and Lozenges, p. 489 chap. 6. Of Troches, p. 493 chap. 7. Of
Pills, p. 501 chap. 8. Of Powders, p. 510 chap. 9. Of Electuaries, p. 519 chap.
10. Of Oils, p. 534 chap. 11. Of Ointments, p. 534 chap. 12. Of Plasters, p.
539
CHAP. I. A Physical Description of Man.
THe omnipotent and wise Creator, having created all things out of nothing, and
out of a rude and undigested lump or mass (according to his will, and by his
word) brought all things into a decent frame, and comely structure: out of a
confused nothing wrought the Heaven and the Earth, out of that which was dark
and void he created light, he separated the Waters from the Earth, and gave
bounds to the unruly waves; and endued the dry and barren Earth with a
prolificall virtue, richly adorning it with grass, herbs, and Fruit Trees; he
made the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to divide the light from the darkness, to
enlighten and rule both day and night, to be for signs, to distinguish
seasons, days and years; by his word he created every living thing that
moves in the Sea, and in the Earth. Having thus far I say proceeded in his so
excellent and admirable workmanship of Creation, he made Man, a Summary of the
Worlds Fabric, a small draught of the Divine Nature: he was made after other
Creatures, not only as the most perfect, but as the super-intendent and master
of all things created, Qui dominetur in pisces maris, et in volucres coeli, et
in pecudes, and in universam terram, atque in omnia reptilia, reptantia super
terram, to rule over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Foul of the Air, and
over the Cattle, and over the Earth, and over every Creeping thing that
creeps upon the Earth.

In man he closed up, and ended his work; on man he stamped his Seal, and figne
of his power, on him he has imprinted his image and superscription, his arms
and his portraiture. Dixit deus, Faciamus hominem ad imaginem nostram, secundum
similitudinem nostram, God said; Let us make man in our image, after our
liknesse: In the Creation of man, God seems to deliberate and take Counsel
with himself, how to epitomize, and gather together all his works in so small
a compass, to contract his (so large) book of Creation, into so small a volume.

He is called the Microcosm, or little World, the recapitulation of all things,
the ligament of Angels and Beasts, Heavenly and Earthly, spiritual and
corporal things: the perfection of the whole work, the honor and miracle of
nature. He created him naked, being a pure neat and delicate Creature, made up
of thin, subtle, well tempered and seasoned humors; innocent, and far more
beautiful than the rest. He was created upright, but-little touching the
Earth; quite opposite to the vegetable Plant, whose root is therein fixed; far
different also from the beast, who is a mean between a Plant and himself, and
goes downward; his two extremes tending to the bounds of the Horizon: This
upright gate belongs only unto man, as the holiest, and most Divine Creature,
his head tending to the Heavens, on which he looks, and there beholds himself
as in a glass according to that of Ovid. Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque
videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
Which I English thus. He gave man lofty looks and upright gate,
To view the Heavens, and thereon contemplate.


His body being thus formed of pure, subtle Earth, as a house and habitation
for the Soul, God breathed in him the breath of Life, and he became a living
Creature: So in the ordinary generation, and formation, which is made of the
seed in the Womb, nature observes the self same order; the body is first
formed, as well by the Elementary force which is in the seed, and the heat of
the matrix; as by the Celestial influence of the Sun: according to the Adagy,
Sol and homo generant hominem, the Sun and Man do engender man: which is don
(according to the opinion of most) in such order, that the first seven days
the seed of the man and woman, mingle and curdle like cream, which is the
beginning of conception: The second seven days, the seed is changed into a
formlesse bloody substance, and concocted into a thick and indigested mass of
flesh, the proper matter of the Child. The next seven days, out of this Lump
is produced and fashioned a gross body, with the three most noble parts, viz:
the Liver, Heart, and Brain. The fourth seven days or near thirty, the whole
body is ended, perfected, joynted, and organized, and becomes a body fit to
entertain the soul, which invests it self into the body (as some think) about
the seven and thirtieth or fourtieth day: at the third month, or there abouts,
the Infant has motion and sense; at the ninth Month, is brought forth. These
times cannot be so exactly prefixed, but that by the strength or debility of
the seed, or matrix, it may be either hastened or prolonged. But I shall
forbear further discourse of the soul, it not being my task to act the part
of a Divine; and come to a more particular description of Man, yet not so, as
to act the part of an Anatomist.

CHAP. II. A more particular description of the Body of Man.
THe body of man consists of above two hundred bones, and as many Cartilages,
which are as the basis, and upholding Pillars of the whole building; the joints
are compacted with many Ligaments, and clothed with innumerable membranes, the
members are supplied with above thirty pair of sensitive Nerves as with little
Cords; and all besprinkled with as many arteries, like water-pipes, conveighing
vital spirits to all parts. The empty places are filled up with almost four
hundred Muscles, and flesh of diverse sorts, as with flocks; all covered over
with skin. In him are the temperament of all Creatures; Some there are, who
have the stomach of an Ostrich, others the Heart of a Lion, too too many have
the Heart of a Dog, not a few conditioned like a Sow; and many by nature very
like to the Ass.

Man for whom all things was made, is nourished by the Balsamic Spirits of
Vegetables Animals and Mineralls; and therefore does consist of all these
faculties, that spring up as a token of health or sickness: Balm, Violets,
and Germander, produce fruit in man, viz: the Spirits of the Heart, Brain, and
Liver: Likewise the nettle, Aron, and Crowfoot; as Scabs, Sores, and Pushes:
Mineral seperations also may appear in man, of vitriall Alum, Salt, and
Tartar, etc: as the leprosy, Elephantiasis, Morphew, and Cancer: Nor is man
free from mineral Generations, as Gold, Silver, Tin, Copper, Iron, Lead: The
Heart, the Brain, Liver, Reins, Gall, and Spleen: In the body of man is
likewise to be sound quarries of stone, viz. in the Bladder and Kidneys, which
serve not to build, but to destroy the Fabric.

The Celestial Planets has a dukedom in this little world: the moistuing
power of the Moon is represented by the marrow, which flows from the Brain: In
the genitall part is Venus seated; Eloquence and comlynesse is the effects of
nimble witted Mercury, the Sun has a near affinity to the Heart: Benevolent
Jupiter has his seat in the Liver; the Fountain of nutritive Blood: The fiery
fury of Mars is lodged in the Gall: the spungy and hollow Milt, the seat and
receptacle of melancholique humors, is a perfect representation of the cold
Planet, Saturn. Indeed the Spirits of the body, do manifest and hold forth the
quintessence of all things, the four humors in man answer to the four
Elements; choler, which is hot and dry, represents the fire, hot and moist
blood, the air; phlegm cold and moist, the water; cold and dry melancholy,
the Earth.

I may yet proceed further in declaring the harmony between the great and
little World: the belly of man may fitly represent the land or maine continent:
The Vena Cava the Mediteranean Sea, the Bladder, the Western Sea, into which
the Rivers of the body do all run and discharge themselves: his mouth answers
to the East quarter of the World, his Fundament to the West, his Navel to the
South, and his Back to the North: The Body of Man you see, is an admirable
Creature; The measure of all things; the pattern of the universe, and Epitome
of the World; The horizon of Corporeal and incorporeall things: I shall
conclude with the saying of Zoroastres, O Man! the workmanship of most
powerful nature, for it is the most artificial Masterpiece of Gods hands.

CAAP. III. A Description of the Head.
THe Head of a man seems to offer it self, as the first thing to be
considered; it does possess the highest place in the body, and represents the
uppermost, and Angelical region: It is the fort of man's mind, the seat of
reason, the habitation of Wisdom, the shop of memory, judgment, and
cogitations. It contains the Brain, cold and spongeous by nature, enclosed
with two skinns, the one more hard and thick, joining it self to the Brain
Pan, called Dura matter; the other more thin and easy, wherein lies the Brain
enclosed, called pia matter; it is soft and tender to the Brain, and nourishes
it, as a loving mother does her young and tender Babe, From Pia matter, does
issue the sinews and marrow that descends and falls down into the Reins of
the Back. In the Brain, is the seat and throne of the rational Soul, in which
are a very great number of Veins and Arteries planted, ramesying (or branching)
themselves through all the substance thereof, administering to the Brain, both
Spirit and Life, vital and nutrimentall nourishment, which is raised, by the
aforesaid small Veins and Arteries, from the Heart and Liver: and concocted,
and reconcocted, elaborated, and made very subtle, passing through those woven
and interlaced, turning and winding passages, in which labyrinth the Vital
Spirit often pas;sing and repassing, is perfected and refined, and becomes
animal.

It is not lost labor if we consider, how the pia matter divides the substance
of the Brain, and lappeth it into certain Cells or Divisions; viz: the
substance of the Brain is divided into three ventricles, of which the foremost
contains the most, the middlemost less, the hindermost the least. In the
foremost part of the brain imagination is seated: in the middlemost judgment,
in the hindermost memory: imagination is hot and dry in quality, quick and
active, from whence it comes that Frantic men, and such as are sick of hot
and burning maladaies, are excellent in that which belongs to imagination: many
upon such a distemper have been excellent in poetry and divination; It never
sleeps, always working, whether the man be sleeping or waking; and by the
vapors that come from the Heart, forms variety of cogitations, which, wanting
the regulation of judgment, (when man steepeth) becomes a dream.

Hence it appears that subtilty, promtitude, and that which they commonly
call Wit, belongs to a hot imagination. It is active, stiring, undertaketh
all, and sets all the rest to work, it gathers the kinds and figures of
things; both present, by the service of the five senses; and absent, by the
Common sense.

Judgment is seated in the midst of the brain, there to bear rule over the
other faculties, it is the judge of the little World, the seat of the rational
soul, and the judge of men's actions. If you would know the mean, whereby it
knows and judges of things, Aristotle and many others have thought that the
Spirit knows by the help of the senses, and that the understanding without
the senses is but as white Paper. Nil est in intellectu, quod non fucritprius
in sensu. There is nothing in the understanding, which is not first in the
sense.

This opinion is false, because the seeds of science, and virtue are insinuated
into our Spirits: else is the state of the reasonable soul, worse then the
vegetative or sensitive which of themselves are able to exercise their
functions. It were absurd to think that so noble and Divine a faculty, should
beg assistance, of so vile and corruptible as the senses, which apprehend only
the simple accidents, not the natures nor essence of things. Again, were it
so, it must follow, that they that have their senses most perfect, should be
most witty; whereas we many times see the contrary.

Yet let no man think, that the Spirit has no service from the senses: for in
the beginning, discovery, and invention of things, the senses do much service
to the Spirit: but the Spirit depends not upon the senses.

Some are of opinion, that it is hot and moist in quality, others say, that a
dry temperature is proper to the understanding, whereby it comes to posse, that
aged persons excel those, in understanding, that are young, because as years
increase, moisture does decrease in the brain: hence it comes to pass that
melancolique persons, that are afflicted with want, and fast much, are wise and
ingenious; for heaviness and fasting are great driers: Splendour siccus, animus
sapientissimus: vexatio dat intellectum, heat and drouth resineth the wit,
affliction gives understanding: and that is the reason that great persons,
that feed highly, and take little care, and seldom lie under vexation or
affliction, for the most part are none of the wisest. Beasts that are of a dry
temperature, as Ants, Bees, Elephants, etc: are wise and ingenious: on the
contrary they that are of a moist constitution, are stupid, and without Spirit,
as are Swine. Memory is seated in the hinder cell of the brain, as the grand
accountant, or register of the little world, whose office is to record things
past, present, or to come. Some say its temperature is cold and dry, and that
is the reason that melancolique people have good memoryes; others that it is
most, because Children have better memories then old men: Men are more apt for
memory in the morning by reason of the moisture gained by sleep in the night:
the common people do more esteem of memory, and delight more in it than of the
other two; it makes a great show in the world, and they judge those that have
a good memory to be very wise; esteeming more of science, then of wisdom; but
of the three it is the least, and that which sooles do many times enjoy, for
seldom is an excellent memory joined with understanding and wisdom: for their
temperatures are contrary: hence comes that ill course in the instructing of
youth, viz: to make them have by heart all they learn: and so stuff and gorge
memory with other men's good, and starve the understanding. We see those that
have all Aristotle, and Cicero in their heads, yet are the veriest sots in in
the world.

Many have been very excellent in this faculty, Seneca repeated 2000 names as
they were first spoken; he also hearing 200 verses, rehearsed them, and began
at the last. Cyrus and Scipio knew every Soldiers name in their Armies.
Mithridates learned the language of two and twenty Nations: Esdras the Priest
had the whole Jewish doctrine by heart. Julius Caesar would dictate to four at
the same time: and that which is more strange, Pliny would dictate to one,
hear an other, and read at that instant. As these were so excellent and acute
in memory, others were as dull: Atticus could never learn the letters of the
Alphabet by heart: others could not count above four: It is said, that Theodore
Beza two years before he dyed, as he languished, his mind grew so Feeble that
he forgot things present, yet held those things, which were printed in his mind
before time, when his understanding and memory was good. What shall we say of
Messala Corvinus; who forgot his own name? Or Franciscus Barbarus of Athens, a
very learned man in the Greek tongue, having received a blow on his head with a
stone, forgot his learning, which he had spent the greatest part of his time
upon, yet remembered all things else? These things are brought to pass (without
doubt) either by the strength or debility of men's genitures, and from
directions, and accidents thence proceeding. Wit and understanding, and all
the faculties of the soul depends on a certain temperament: and hence it comes
to pass (and that oftentimes) that those that are acute, and wise in some
things, are stupid and dull in other some. But I have too far digressed, I must
return to my rode again.

CHAP. IV. Of the parts belonging to the Head.
HAving given you a brief and general description of the Head, and of the
intellective faculty of man; it is meet now to treat of the sensitive part,
which will lead me to describe the particular parts of the head.

The sensitive faculty has its residence in the pia matter, it is that which
gives virtue to all the particular senses, and keeps a harmony among them: they
are five in number, viz: Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling: Although
these are all united in one in the brain, yet operatively they are
distinguished in their feverall seats, and places of residence.

The sight resides in the eyes, and particularly in the Crystalline humor, they
are two in number, and collateral, planted in the highest stage as Centinells,
they are the luminaties of the Microcosm; Galen says, the brain and the head
were made for the eye, that they might be in the highest as a beholder in a
Tower, they are next in nature unto the Soul; for in the eye is seen and known
the disturbances and griefs, gladness and joys of the Soul, as Love, Wrath,
and other Passions; they be compounded and made of seven Tunicles or Coats,
and three humors, they proceed out of the substance of the brain, and comes
through the pia matter, of whose substance they take a panicle, to defend it
from annoyance. They meet and are united into one sinew, about half an inch in
length, before they enter the skull, and after divided into two, each goes
into one eye, they are called Nervi Optici, the Optic Nerves, and through
these, are brought the visible Spirits to the eye. These are the most noble
outward parts of the body, in beauty, utilitie, mobilitie, and activity. They
are to the visage, that which the visage is to the body, they are the face of
the face; and because they are tender, delicate and precious, they are fenced
and rampaird on all sides, with skins, lids, brows, and hair. The object of
the eye or sight is color (according to the common opinion) which is an
adherent quality in bodies, whereof there are six simple, as white, yellow,
red, purple, green, and blew: the compounds are infinite; to speak more fully,
the true object is light; which is never without color, and without which the
colors are invisible.

The sense of Seeing excels all the rest in many things; it apprehends
farther off, and extends it self even to the Stars. It is certainly
reported, that Strabo had such acute eyes, that from Lilybaeum, he could
discern ships, going forth of the Carthagenian Haven, and could number them,
the distance was 135. miles. It has more variety of objects, for to all things
and generally in all, there is light and color the objects of the eyes, as I
hinted before. It is most exquisite; for it is most exact, in the least and
finest things that presents it self. It is more prompt and sudden, for it
apprehends even in a moment and without motion, when the other senses require
motion and time. It enjoys a liberty incomparable to others: the eye sees,
or sees not, and therefore has lids to open or shut: it is active, all the
rest purely passive. But that which is most noble in this sense is, that the
privation of the object thereof, which is darkness, brings fear and that
naturally, because then a man finds himself robbed of so excellent a guide:
the sight, in the light, is instead of company, wherein man much delights.

It would fill a large volume, to describe the Eye in every particular, but
that which I have said thereof, is sufficient, it being not my task to write
an Anatomy. Hearing is the next sense to be considered, whose residence is in
the ears, it is in quality cold and dry, under the dominion of Saturn. They
are placed on the outside of the head, in the self same hight as the eyes are,
as the Scouts of the body, Porters of the Spirit, the Receivers and Judgers of
the sounds, which always ascend. They have their entrance oblique and crooked,
that so the sound may not enter all at once, whereby the sense of hearing might
be hindered, and not so well able to judge: and again that the sounds being
fugitive, might there lurk, and abide under his shadow, till the instruments
of hearing has gotten possession thereof. The Sinews that are the organs of
hearing, spring each from the brain, and when they come to the hole of the
Ear, they are writhed together; the end is like a worm or little teat, into
which is received the sound, and from thence carried, to the common wits to
distinguish. The object of the ear or hearing is a sound, or noise proceeding
from the encounter of two bodies: A pleasant and melodious sound sweetneth and
appeaseth the Spirit, consequently the body too, and drives maladies from them
both: the sharp and penetrant, does trouble and wound the Spirit. This sense
has many singularities; for the service of the body, the sight is most
necessary, but for the Spirit, hearing has the superiority. It is spiritual,
the agent of understanding: many that have been blind, have been great and wise
Philosophers, but never any that were deaf. In brief, science, truth, and
virtue, has no other entrance into the Soul, but by the ear. Christianity
teaches that if faith comes by hearing, which the fight does tather hurt then
help. Faith is the belief of those things, which are not seen; which belief
is acquired by hearing. For all these reasons and many more that might be
inserted, the wisest have so much commended Hearing, the pure guardian from all
corruption; the health of the inward man,

Smelling is seated in the Nose, governed by Mars, and is hot and dry in
quality; and therefore Martial Creatures, or such as are hot and dry of
constitution, excel in this faculty, as Dogs, etc: From the brain commeah
two Sinews to the holes of the brain pan, where begins the concavity of the
Nose, and these two are the proper Organs or Instruments of smelling, they have
heads like paps, into which is received the virtue of smelling, and presenting
it to the common sense. Over these two Organs, is placed Colatorium, or the
nostrills, which concavity or ditch was made for two causes; first that the
air, that brings the Spirit of smelling, might rest therein, till it were
received by its proper Organs. Secondly that the excrements of the Brain might
be hidden under it, till it be fit to be ejected. From this concavity goes
two holes into the mouth, of which we may take notice of three conveniences:
First that when a man's mouth is closed, either by eating or sleeping, that then
the air might come through them to the Lungs: else a man must be forced to
hold his mouth open always. Secondly they are helpful to a man's speech, for
when one or both of those passages are stopped, a man speaks in the Nose, as
we commonly say. Thirdly, they are useful in the cleansing of the concavities
of the nose, either by snuffing, or drawing it through the mouth. The object of
Smell is an odor, or sent, which is a fume rising from an odoriferous object,
ascending to the nose, to the ventricles of the brain: the strong and violent
hurts the brain, the temperate and good, does rejoice, delight and comfort.
This sense is oftentimes very useful, in discovering meats or drinks of an
evil odor, which otherwise would much prejudice the stomach, and work evil
effects in the body of man.

Much more might be said, touching the shape and form, matter and composition
of the Nose, but my design is to distinguish the parts in a general way.

The Taste is hot and moist, and under the influence of Jupiter; this Sense
has its residence in the pallat of the mouth, and tongue. Its office is to
discern what food is congruous to the stomach, and what not. The skin of the
palate of the mouth is the same, with the inward part of the stomach; and the
same with the way of the meat into the stomach; and hence it comes to pass,
that when a man is touched upon the Pallat of the mouth, it tickleth the
stomach, and so much the nearer to the throat, so much more the stomach
abhors. The object of Tasting is a savor or smack, whereof there are six
simple kinds; as Sweet, Sour, Sharp, Tart, Salt, Bitter; the compounds are
many. And being led to the mouth, it is not a miss, if I speak a few words to
the composition thereof. In the mouth, are five parts to be considered; the
Lips, the Teeth, the Tongue, the Uvula, the Pallat of the mouth; of the which I
have already spoken: A word or two of the rest. The lips are made of a
musculous flesh, their office is, first, as the door to the House to keep the
mouth close, till the meat be chewed, Secondly they help to pronounce the
speech. The Teeth the hardest members, fastened into the mandible; their office
is first to grind the meat before it goes into the stomach, that so it may the
better digest; Secondly, that it might be a help to the speech, for they that
want any of their Teeth are defective therein. The number is uncertain, some
have more, some have less; they, who have their full number have thirty and
two. The tongue is a carnuous member, compound and made of many Nerves,
Ligaments, Veins and Arteries, ordained principally for three causes: First
that when a man eats, the tongue might turn the meat, in the mouth, till it
be chewed. Secondly by the Tongue, and the Pallat of the mouth near the root of
the tongue, is received the taste of sweet or sower, and thence presented to the
common senses to pass judgment thereof. Thirdly and principally the tongue is
ordained for the pronunciation of speech, of which faculty I must crave leave
to insist on, and that as briefly as may be. Speech is an excellent present,
and very necessary; given only unto man, animi index and speculum: it is the
interpreter and image of the soul; the hearts messenger: the gate, through
which does pass all that lies within the dark and hidden corners of man; by
this the Spirit becomes visible. Of all the external and visible parts of the
body that, which comes nearest to the heart is the root thereof; and that which
comes nearest the thoughts is speech, Out of the abundance of the Heart the
mouth speaks. It is a powerful Mafter, an Imperious Commander; it stirs
up, animateth, exasperateth, appeaseth, makes sad, merry, it imprinteth what
ever passion it handles: feeds the soul of the hearer; it makes him blush,
wax pale, laugh, cry, tremble, mad with choler, leap for joy, what not? It is
the great huckster, and intermedler, by it we traffic, peace is handled,
affairs are managed, it is the band of humane society: hearing and speech
answer, and are accommodated the one to the other: by these two the souls are
poured the one into the other: so that if these two gates be shut, (as it is in
those that are dease and dumb) the Spirit remains solitary and miserable.
Hearing is the gate to enter; by it the Spirit receives all things from
without: speech is the gate to go out, through it the Spirit sends forth that
which was within. From the communication of these two, as from the stroke of
two flints, there comes forth the fire of truth; and so by the polishing and
rubbing of these two, knowledge comes to perfection. But Hearing is the first
and principal, for there can nothing come forth, which has not first entered;
and therefore he that is dease altogether by nature, is also dumb.

I might much more enlarge my self in the description of the Head: but my
purpose being to declare nothing, but what may be pertinent in the
manifestation of the human faculties and virtues; I shall conclude this
Chapter with a word or two of the sense of Feeling which is of no particular
quality, but of all, hot, cold, dry and moist, it is deputed to no particular
Organ, but is spread abroad over the whole body: it is the Index of all
tangible things: its object then must be heat or cold, dryth or moisture;
things pleasant and polite, sharp and smatting, motion, rest, tickling. It is
well known that man, and other Creatures live without some particular sense; It
is the opinion of most, that a man cannot live without this sense of Feeling,
being only necessary unto life: yet Augustine proves the contrary, in the 14.
book de Civitate dei; by example of a Presbyter, that lay as though he were
dead, and did not feel those, that pulled him, nor would he stir, though
they burned him with fire, yet he confessed that he could then he are men
speak, (if they spoke aloud) as though they were far from him; by which it
appears, that this he did, not by resisting, but for want of the sense of
feeling which afterward was restored to him again: I shall pass by, what the
English History relates of one Elizabeth Barton, a maid of Canterbury who
oftentimes was deprived of her senses, by reason of a disease she had.

I shall also wave disputes, concerning the number of the senses, some
supposing there are no more in nature then are apparent in us. There may very
well be more, yet greatly to be doubted that there are; it is impossible for us
to know them, to affirm them, or to deny them, because a man shall never know
the want of that sense, which he never had, one sense cannot discover another;
and if a man want one by nature, yet he knows not which way to affirm it. A
man that is born blind, and has not heard what sight is; cannot conceive that
he sees not, nor desire to see. So man, being not able to imagine more then
the five that he has, cannot know how to judge, whether there be more in
nature, who knows whether the difficulties, that we find in many of the works
of nature; and the effects of many Creatures, which we cannot understand, do
proceed from the want of some sense that we have not? There are hidden
properties, which we see in many things; and a man may say that there are
sensible faculties in nature, proper to judge, and apprehend them, yet must
conclude, we have them not: who knows whether it be some particular sense,
that discovers the hour of midnight to the Cock, and moves him to crow; or
how beasts are taught, to choose certain heaths for their cure, and many such
like wonders? None can affirm or deny, say, This it is, or that it is.

CHAP. V. Of the Stomach and its faculties.
THe Stomach is a member, compound and Spermatick, Sinewy and sensible, wherein
is made the perfect first digestion of Chile; It is a necessary member to the
body, for if it sail in lts operation, the whole Fabric is corrupted. It is
in the little world, the same as the terrestrial Globe is in the great world:
In it, is expressed the sublunary part of the world; in it, are contained the
parts that serve for nutrition, concoction, and procreation. And this leads me
to discourse of the administering virtues in man, which are here seated; and to
wind up all with a touch of the office of the Microcosmicall Stars, with as
much brevitie as may be. The Stomach is framed of two pannicles, the outer is
Carneous, the inner Nerveous, from which is stretched to the mouth Isofagus, or
the way of the meat, by which the stomach draws to it self meat, and drink,
as with hands. By the virtue of the subtle will, which is in this Musculus
Longitudinall, is made the attractive virtue: which is hot and dry; by a
quality active, or principal, which appears by the Sun, the Fountain of all
heat, which is of an attractive quality, which is evident by his attracting,
and exhaling the humidity from this inferior Globe, into the airy region, as
into the neck or higher part of an Alimbeck; and being resolved into water, (by
reason of their weight) fall down again upon the earth, which is the vessel
receiving: So through continued distillations, by sublimation of the water, by
cohobation; by drawing of the liquor, being often powered on, and fortified by
the influence of the Celestial, and Centrall Sun, the body becomes endued,
with a concoctive, nutritive, and procreative virtue. So in the Stomach, by the
active quality of the Microcosmicall Sun, his benevolent rays, and freindly
heat, meat and drink is desired, and attracted into the stomach, for the
nourishment of the whole body.

We can do no less then give Mars a share in the dominion of the attractive
faculty, being hot and dry by nature, this is reason: experience tells us
that Martial men, or men of a Choleric constitution, are none of the worst
trencher-men; and at the pot incomparable.

In the Stomach is a Transverse Muscle, to withhold or make retention: by this
retentive virtue, those things that are brought into the Stomach, are kept and
withholden, until nature has wrought his kind, and every faculty has
executed his office. It is in quality cold and dry, cold because the nature of
cold is to compresse, or hold together, as you may see in Ice: dry, because it
is the nature of dryness, to keep and hold what is compressed. It is under the
influence of Saturn, and that is the reason, why, for the most part, men that
are cold and dry of temperature, or, as Astrologers say, Saturnine people, are
covetous and tenacious: and that is the reason, that old men, are naturally
covetuous, because Saturn rules old age; and by the decay of nature, the
temperature becomes cold and dry.

It has the Spleen, the representative of Saturn, lying toward the left side,
and furnishes the Stomach, with humors necessary to fortify the retentive
virtue.

The digestive faculty, (which is the chief and most principal, (the other,
like Handmaids, attending it) is hot and moist; Natures, Cook, and principal
workman, the Archaeus, and centrall fire, which in this Philosophical Vessel,
viz: the Stomach, digesteth the victuals into a Chaos, or confused Mass, that
so a natural separation may be made. It is under the influence of Jupiter, who
furnishes it with freindly heat and moisture, by the Liver, (the
Microcosmicall Jupiter) chasing and beating the right side of the Stomach.

The Stomach has also a Latitudinall Muscle or will, which makes the expulsive
faculty: It is naturally cold and moist, cold to compresse the superfluity,
moist to make the matter slippery and fit for ejection, also to work a suitable
disposition in the body. It is a necessary operation, by it, after the
separation of the pure from the impure, the Elements from the Caput Mortuum, or
rather foeces; is removed, and carried away all that is needless or
prejudicial to nature. It is under the dominion of the Moon, (with whom you
may join Venus, being of the same nature) whose Epitome, or Microcosmicall
substitute, viz: the brain, sends a branch of Nerves to the Stomach, and
thereby furnishes it with humors cold and moist, fit for expulsion.

I shall now hasten, to give you a short description of the Heart, Liver,
Spleen, and Kidneys, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of the Heart.
I Now come to speak briefly of the Heart, who is the principal of all other
members, and the beginning of life, he is set in the midst of the Breast, by
himself as Lord and King of all the Members. And, as a Lord or King ought to
be served of his subjects, that have their living of him; so are all the
Members of the body, subjects of the Heart: they receive their living from him,
and in many ways they do him service. He is the same in the little world, as
the Sun that glorious Lamp of Heaven is in the great world. It is called Sol
Corporis, as the Sun is called Cor Coeli, because their operations are so like.
The vital Spirit has its residence here; why then should antiquity with
ignominy be brought to the Bar, and condemned, for saying the Heart lives
first, and dies last: he being the Fountain and beginning of life, it must
needs follow, that it is the first thing in man that lives, and the last that
dies.

Here is to be noted that the heart has blood in his substance, whereas all
other members have it in their Veins and Arteries. It is bound to the back
part of the breast by certain Ligaments, which Ligaments though they touch not
the substance of the Heart; yet in the over part they spring forth of him; By
which he appears to be King of the members, and Center of the Mocrocosmicall
planetary Hiarchy.

Moreover the Heart has two Ventricles or Concavities, and the left is higher
than the right; the cause of its hollownesse, ^s to keep the blood for his
nourishing: and ^e to abate and temper the great heat which is included, and
shut up in the Concavityes.

As he is Sol Corporis, and Center of the rest of the members, and ruler of the
family, he communicates to them Life and Motion: yet by his heat he attracts
what is needful for himself, from the other members as a subsidy or tax
imposed upon his subjects. And therefore to the right Ventricle of the Heart,
comes a Vein from the great Vein called Venakells, which receives all the
substance of the blood from the Liver; this Vein I say passes from Venakelis
to the right ventricle of the Heart, and brings a great portion of the
thickest and purest blood to nourish the Heart. The residue that is left of
this, is made more subtle through the virtue and heat of the Heart, and then
sent into a concavitie or pit in the midst of the Heart, between the two
Ventricles: therein it is made more hot, and pure; and from thence it passes
to the best Ventricle, and there is engendered in it a Spirit, that is clearer,
brighter and subtiller, then any Corporeal or bodily thing, which is
engendered of the four Elements; for it is a mean between the Body and the
Soul: Wherefore of the Philosophers it is likned more to heavenly than earthly
things.

And here I shall taket leave to digress, and tell you of some things
wonderful, touching the Heart: If we credit Avicenna. Some have wanted a
Heart: and to this purpose I could recite other men's opinions; but I shall not
trouble the readers head with such things, which seem to my self impossible.
Valerius Maximus speaks of one Aristomanes Messenius, who killed 300.
Lacedaemonians, who had a hairy Heart. Beneventus reports the same of a certain
thief. Columbus observed a young man that wanted the pericardium, (which is a
thin skin involving the Heart as in a purse) and he was much troubled with
swoonding fits. It has been the opinion, that a man cannot live a moment
scarsely, who has received a wound in the Heart: And good reason too, seeing
the life depends upon the safety of the Spirits, the Heart being the shop and
making thereof; when the Heart is wounded, it is necessary that the generation
of the Spirits cease. Yet Nicol. Malerius relates a History of one Andreas
Hasevanger, who was one of the Lifeguard of Count William of Nassaw governor
of Frisia, etc. who received a wound in the Breast by his fellow Soldier, Anno
1607. on the 22 of August, in the evening, and died the 8th. of Septemper
following, one hour after Sunrising; his body being opened to search for the
wound, by the aforenamed Nicol. Malerius, and two other Chirurgions, in the
presence of several Soldiers of note; they found that the wound had entered
the right cavity of the Heart, and that part of the Heart was almost consumed;
the left part remaining entire, which is the chief habitation of the vital
spirits. By this means he lived 16 days, which had been impossible; if the
left ventricle had been wounded.

But to proceed; from the left Ventricle of the Heart, springs two Arteries,
the one having but one Coat, and therefore is called Arteria Venalis, which
carries blood from the Heart to the Lungs, which blood is vaporous, and fit
for its nourishment; and carries back air from the Lungs to refresh the Heart,

See here the Harmony and freindly Agreement between the Microcosmicall Sun and
Mercury; the first affords of his own nutriment to nourish the other, whilst
the other rewards him with air to refresh him. The other Artery has two
Coats, it is called Vena Arterialis, or the great Artery, of which springs
all the other Arteries, that spread to every member of the body, which carries
the Spirits, which are the treasures of the Souls virtue. Thus it passes till
it come to the brain, and be made an animal Spirit, as you have heard before
in the third Chapter; at the Liver it is made nutrimentall; and at the
Testicles generative. Thus by the Heart is made a Spirit of every kind, and
(like the Sun in the Heavens) by his royal presence, he does confer life and
liberty to his suppliants.

I might here tell you, why these Arteries have two coats, namely because one
is not sufficient, to withhold the vital Spirits, carried in them, their
motion being so violent. Again the thing carried about being so precious a
treasure, it had need of the better keeping. This Artery is called the
pulsative Vein. I might here frame a large discourse of the pellicles of the
Heart, which open and shut to receive the blood: Also the two little ears by
whom comes in and passes out the air: I might say much of the pannicles,
which as some think have their original from dura matter, as namely,
pericardium, called of some Capsula Cordis, which springs of the upper
pannicle of the Midriffe, and covers the Heart: of the which springs
another called Mediastinum, which parts the breast in the midst, and keeps
that the Lungs fall not over the Heart, (such a rule, has the Architect Spirit
given to each part (as Stars to move in their several Orbs) There is another
pannicle that covers the ribs, of whom the Midriffe takes its beginning. But
this being beyond my intended scope, I will put an end to this Chapter of the
Heart.

CHAP. VII. Of the Lungs, Liver, etc.
THe Lungs is made of a substance very soft and spongeous; supple, to draw and
to enforce from, like a pair of bellows: it is an instrument of respiration,
whereby the heart is refreshed, drawing unto it the blood, the Spirits and the
air, and disburthening it self of those fumes and excrements, which oppress
it, It is naturally cold and dry, accidentally cold and moist: naturally cold
and dry waying about the Heart, abateing his beat, by its refreshing blast; it
is accidentally moist, by reason of Catarhs and Rhewmes, which it receives
from the Brain.

There are three principal parts in the Lungs considerable, one is a Vein
coming from the Liver, which brings with it, the crude and undigested part of
the Chile to feed the Lungs. Another is Arteria Venialis, coming from the
Heart, bringing the Spirit of life to nourish the Lungs. The third is Trachia
Arteria, that brings air to the Lungs, and it passes through all the left
part of them to do its office.

The Lungs is divided into the five portions or pellicles, three on the right
side, and two on the left side; if in case any impediment or hurt should happen
any in one part, the other should be ready to supply the office.

But I forbear any further description of the Lungs, and come to the Liver,
which is a principal member, in the little world, representing the Planet
Jupiter, Quasi juvans pater, hot and moist, inclining toward the right side,
under the short ribs. The form of the Liver is Gibbous or Bunchy on the back
side; on the other side hollow like the inside of an hand: that it might be
pliable to the stomach; (as a man's hand is to an apple or any thing that is
round,) to further its digestion: for his heat is to the Stomach, as the heat
of a fire is to the pot which hangs over it. It is the Storehouse of the
blood, the Fountain of the Veins, the seat of the natural nourishing
faculty, or vegetative soul, engendered of the Blood of that Chile which it
draws from the Meseraique Veins, and receives by the Vena porta which
enters into the concavities thereof, and afterward is sent and distributed
through the whole body by the help of Vena Cava, which arises from the bunch
or branches thereof, which are in great numbers as the Rivers from the Ocean.

The natural and nutrimentall faculty has its residence in the Liver, and is
dispersed through the whole body, with the Veins, from which are bred four
particular humors, viz: Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy.

It is so excellent and necessary a member, that I dare not give credit to
their opinions who say it may be wanting in a man; as some say it was in one
Mathias Ortelius a Merchant in Antwerp.

Blood is made of meat perfectly concocted, in quality hot and moist, Jupiters
darling, the most perfect and necessary humor, (the other three being
superfluities, yet necessary too). The blood thus concocted, is drawn out by
the Vena cava, whose branches ramefying upwards and downwards, carries and
conveigheth it to all other members of the body, for their nourishment, where,
by a third digestion, it is transmuted into the flesh.

Choler is made of meat more then perfectly concocted, it is the spume or
froth of blood: it clarifieth all the humors, heats the body, nourishes the
apprehension. It is in quality hot and dry; it fortifieth the attractive
faculty, as blood does the digestive; it moves man to activity and valor, it
is under the planet Mars, whose residence is in the Gall: which is an official
member, a purse or pannicular vesicle, placed in the hollownesse of the Liver,
whose office is to receive the Choleric superfluities, which are engendered in
the Liver as aforesaid. Which Purse or Bag has three holes or necks; by the
first it draws to it self the choler from the Liver, that so the blood be
not hurt by the choler. By the second it sends choler to the bottom of the
Stomach, to fortify the attractive faculty. And lastly it sends choler
regularly to every gut, from one gut to another, to cleanse them from
supersluities and dross.

Phlegm is made of meat not perfectly digested, it fortifieth the virtue
expulsive (what it is, and what tho other faculties are, you have heard in the
fifth Chapter) and makes the body fit for ejection, it is kind to, and
fortifieth the Brain by its consimilitude with it, it is antipatheticall to
the apprehension, and does much injure it, therefore phlegmatic persons have
but weak apprehensions; It is cold and moist in quality, its receptacle is in
the Lungs, it is governed by the Moon and Venus: Therefore it qualifies
choler, cooles and moisteneth the Heart, (as you heard before in the
description of the Lungs) thereby sustaining it and the whole body, from the
fiery effects, which continual motion would produce.

Melancholy is the sedement of blood, it is cold and dry inquality: it makes
men sober, solid and staid, fit for study, or any serious emploiment: It curbs
the unbridled toys and fooleries incident to the sanguine complexion: it
stays wandering and idle thoughts, and reduces them home to the Center: It
is like a grave Counselor to the whole body. It is governed by the Planet
Saturn, it strengthens the retentive faculty, and its receptacle is in the
spleen, which in the body is placed on the best side, transversly linked to the
Stomach.

Hollerius reports that a woman at Paris, was found without a Spleen: And
Pliny, in his natural History, says that in Cawnus men are born without it:
and hence the common people thought, that it might be safely cut out of Footmen
and Horses, and as it has been wanting in some, so it has abounded in others:
Fallopius observed three that lay one upon another. One was seen so great that
it weighed above 20 pounds, Colum. Anatom.

Another had a Milt weighed 23, pound. Where it increases, the body
decreaseth, because it sucks away too much Chilus from the Liver. Therefore
fitly did Trdjan liken the Spleen to the Treasury; for as that grows rich,
the common people grow poor: So, as the Spleen increases, the other parts
decay.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Reins and Kidneys.
NOw I come to a few words of the Reins and Kidneys, which are placed within
the region of the Nutrites, backward; and they are ordained to cleanse the
blood from the watery superfluities: They have two passages; by the one is drawn
the water from Venakelis by two Veins, which are called Venae emulgentes, the
Emulgent Veins, and by the other is sent the same water to the Bladder, and
this is called Poros Urithedes.

The Kidneys are made of a hard substance, and full of hard concavities, and
therefore the sores of them are hard to cure, they are harder in substance then
any other fleshy member, and that for two causes; the first is that they be not
much hurt by the sharpness of the Urine.

The other is, that the Urine that passes from them, might be the better
cleansed by them. The Heart sends an Artery to convey to them blood, heat,
Spirit and Life. And from the Liver there comes a Vein, which brings
nutriment to all blood. Their fatness is as of the other members, made of thin
blood congealed and cradded by cold; there is ordained the greater quantity in
this place, because it should temper the heat of the Kidneys, which they have
of the biting sharpness of the Urine.

The next thing that offers it self to our consideraon is the Bladder, which
is compounded of two nerveous panicles, in complexion it is cold and dry, whose
neck is carnous and has two Muscles to withhold and to let go: in man it is
long and is contained with the yard passing through peritoneum, but in women it
is shorter, and is contained with the Vulva, the place of the Bladder is
between the share bone and Longaon, (commonly called the Arse Gut). In women it
is between the aforesaid bone and the Matrix. In the Bladder is implanted the
Ureters, which bring the Urine or water from the Kidneys thither; and privily
enters into the holes and pannicles thereof, which is don by a natural
motion between Tunicle, and Tunicle; till the Urine finds the hole of the
nether Tunicle, where it enters privily into the concavity. And the more the
Bladder is filled with Urine, the streighter be the pannicles compressed
together: The holes be not set one against the other, so that if the bladder be
never so full, none can go back again,

This is the Micocrosmicall Ocean, into which all the Rivers of the body
discharge themselves. There must needs be more then a watery substance in it:
for many times in dileases, it is plentifully made, though the patient drinks
little or nothing. And it is observed that Creatures that drink nothing will
make water. Physicians oftentimes foretell many things by their color,
thinness, and thickness. Salt you know is hid in meats, and that plants have
very much Salt in them, you may find by distilling them: And it is very well
known, that, by the Chymicall art, many kinds of Salt may be fetched out of
Urines. The artificial Chrysocolla is made of Urine. Nitre is made of earth
moistened with the Urine and Dung of living Creatures. The Urine has a
sympatheticall relation to the constitution of the body. The Arabians say,
among the rest Abenzoar, that a man that is bitt with a mad dog, in his Urine
the picture of Dogs may be seen: but this is attributed to the force of the
Venom, which changes a man's constitution, and makes it like to a dogs.
Sennert us himself says, that it does so much corrupt the humors, that
little Creatures like Puppies are bred in the body. If we credit the writings
of wise, honest, and learned men (which not to do were uncharitable) we shall
find, that worms and many kinds of living Creatures have been bred in the
Bladder: We read of a Woman that voided one, that way, a span long; and a Maid,
many as big as Woodlice. One voided one like a Magpye, another who had the
Stone in the Bladder, voided two with Horns, sharp head, back and belly crusty,
black, and like a Tortoise, only their belleys were red. Another voided a
living Scorpion, and another shellfish. The passage of the Urine from the
Bladder, all know; yet sometimes men are known to void their Urine another way.
The Son of one Boninus urined, a little beneath the Glans. A maid at the Hague
of a noble family, made water at her Navell. One, by an Ulcer on his Buttock,
and another by the Belly. For my own part I have known two young men, who
urined between the Testicles and the Fundament: read Fernelius. l. 6. c. 13.
who affirm the same thing. I need not tell you that stones are bred in the
Urine of a faeculent matter, mingled with Salt and stony juice sometimes small,
and sometimes great, of several shapes and forms: sometimes, like the Sea
sand, sometimes like peebles, sometimes like Salt, and sometimes they are found
ragged and branching, lively and excellently resembling the stock and branches
of Coral: few or none are ignorant of this. Thus have I, with as much brevity
as may be, described this Microcosmicall Ocean.

CHAP. IX. Of the Generative parts.
I Shall herein use as much brevity as may be; and shall write nothing, but
with a mind that is modest, and with such a mind, I desire, it may be read. The
instruments of generation are of two sorts, Male, and Female; their use is the
procreation of mankind; the operation is by action and passion: the Agent is
the seed, the patient the blood. Although this comes to be spoken of in the
last place, yet it might have deservedly been put in the first; for nature
regards not only the conservation of its self, but to beget its like, and
conceive its species. Venus has the principal government of the members of
generation; In which members there are many parts considerable, but I shall
only epitomize them.

First of the genitalls of men: The first thing to the considered is, that
which Anatomists call, vasa preparantia: or preparing vessels, which bring
blood and vital Spirits to the Stones: they are fout in number, and before
they come to the stones, they make a curious implication, intertexture, or
twisting the one with the other, the Arteries into the Veins, and the Veins
into the Arteries: which Physicians call Corpus Varicosum; some call it
Pampiniformis. This interweaving reaches down even into the substance of the
stones; their use is to mix the blood and vital spirit together, that so the
Stones may have a fit matter to work on.

The Testicles or Stones are of a white soft and spungy substance, full of
small Veins and Arteries; or else, when humors flow to them, they could not
swell to such a bigness: their form is Ovall of their bigness, few are
ignorant. Each stones has a Muscle which the learned call Cremaster, which
serves to pull up the stones in the act of Generation; as its name in the
Greek signifies that so the vessels being flockned, may better avoid the seed.

The seed being thoroughly concocted by the Testicles or Stones, there are two
other small pipes, called vasa deferentia, they are also called (...),
spermatick pores: their office is to carry the seed to the seminary vessels,
who are to keep it till need requires its expulsion. From the stones they
arise, very near to the preparing vessels, into the cavity of the belly; then
turning back again, they turn to the backside of the bladder, between it and
the right gut. There they are joined to the seminall Vessels, which are soft
and spungy, somewhat like kernells, through which passes the Urethra, or common
passage in the yard both for seed and Urine.

Histories make mention, and experience evidenceth; that some are borne without
stones, some with one* Philip, Landgrave of Hassia, had three: he was so full
of seed, and prone to Venerious actions, that his Wife could not suffer him so
often as necessity urged him to it; he otherwise being chaste and honest: He
relating his mind to the Priests, with the consent of his Wife, took a
Concubine.

It would be too tedious, if I should take upon me to describe the yard, and
all the parts thereof, it would make my book swell too big, and I should run
beyond my first intention, viz: only to give a breife touch of the most
considerable parts.

I now come to the Generative parts of women: and shall be silent in what is
visible, and declare only the internal parts for brevity sake, and first of
the Clytoris, which is a sinewy and hard body, much like the yard of a man, and
suffers erection and falling; causes lust in women, and gives delight in
copulation. Avicenna calls it the Wand, or Albathara, and Albucasis calls
it Tentigo: and Fallopius says, that this has sometimes grown so bigg, that
women would copulate with others like men. This observe, that the passage of
the Urine is not through the neck of the Womb: Near the passage of the Urine
are four Caruncles or fleshy knobs, they are called Myrtiformes, because they
resemble Myrtleberryes. The uppermost of them is largest and forked, to receive
the neck of the passage of the Urine: the other lie below this on the sides,
and are to keep back the air or any hurtful thing from the Womb. In Virgins,
these knobs are joined together by a thin skin, interlated with many small
Veins, with a hole in the middle, about the bigness of ones little finger,
through which passes the menstruous blood: This skin is a note of Virginity:
for the first act of copulation breaks it. I believe that this was that note
of Virginity which God gave to the Hebrews: These knobs joined together do much
resemble a Rose not quite blown, therefore called a flower, thence came the
word to deflower a Virgin. If I should take upon me to declare the opinions of
Authors, it would prove (almost) an endless task: This I shall add, that I
conceive it not a certain note of Virginity, because it may be broken without
the act of copulation, as namely by applying of pessaries, to provoke the
Menstrues, or by a defluxion of sharp humors, etc: but it is probable that the
Jewish Virgins were more chary of it, their reputation depending thereon.

The Womb in figure is almost perfectly round, in Virgins about the bign esse
of a walnut, yet when a woman is conceived with Child, it dilates it self to
such a capacity that it is able to contain the Child; the mouth of it no
bigger then to receive the Glans of the Guard: yet at the delivery makes room
for the Child to come out be it never so big. This made Galen admire, and it
may be a great admiration to all: If we consider the wonderful works of God in
the Creation of man. He who knows himself may know there is an All powerful
God. And therefore it was engraven with letters of Gold, over the Porch of the
Temple of Apollo, the God (according to the Panims) of knowledge and wisdom,
this sentence, Know thy self, as a salutation unto all, signifying, that he
that would have access unto that Divinity, and entrance into that Temple,
must first know Himself.

But I return to my intended discourse: The Womb before conception is small,
because the Seed, being but little in quantity, might be close embraced and
cherished. It has but one cavity, though it is the common, approved opinion,
that it has seven Cells, and of this opinion was Galen, the truth is the
matrix in women differ much from beasts, and Galen never saw a woman Anatomized.

Women have Testicles or Stones as men have, but they differ from men's in these
particulars. They are within the Belly in women, in men without. They are not
so smooth in women, as in men. They are less then the Stones of men. They are
not staid by muscies, but by Ligaments. As men's are Ovall, theirs are flatish.
They have but one skin, men's have four, because they are without the body, and
exposed to the cold. They are more soft, and colder then men's are.

But they are ordained both in men and women for the same use, viz: to concoct
seed: and though Aristotle denied seed in women, yet Hippocrates, one of the
Ancients of Physic was of this judgment: reason and experience confirms it.

The vasa praeparantia, the preparing Vessels, and vasa deferentia, carrying
Vessels, are of the same nature, and office as they are in men: They differ
only in this, that they are somewhat shorter, having a shorter way to go, the
Testicles being with in the Belly in women: but lest the shortness of the
passage should hinder their operation, God and nature has so provided, that
they are more twisted and interweaved than they are in men, that they may the
better mingle the blood and vital Spirit, as you have heard before.

CHAP. X. The Conclusion.
THus have I given you a breife description of Man, the masterpiece of Gods
workmanship; I have only given you an Epitome or Breviary of him, who is a
small draught of all things, in the universe: should any attempt a particular
description of the body and faculties of man, he would fall short in his
expectation; it being an Herculean task, for the most acute Genius: This I
will add, not to say that the world would not contain the books, that might
be written of him, the life of man would be too short to perfect it. Not to
recapitulate, what I have formerly delivered; In man, as in a perspective
glass, may our Mother Earth, with her innumerable of spring, be discovered; in
him may the unruly, and restless waves of the Ocean be delineared. Nor does he
only epitomize the Elementall world, but also the Celestial: In him are
discovered the prudent majesticall, sumptuous, magnificent, honorable,
affable, and humane, So lar quality. The unstedfast, timorous, soon-daunted,
oftchanging, and shifting temper among men, answer to the various motions of
the low and oft-changing Luna. Others in profoundity of imagination,
reservednesse of words, austerity of actions, etc: are a fit pourtrait of the
melancholy Planet Saturn. There are yet a few in the world, who are faithful
Lovers of fair dealing, beneficient to all men doing glorious, honorable, and
religious actions; just, wise, prudent, virtuous, etc: of the temper of
Benevolent Jupiter. There are (in our apprehensions) too many of the martial
temper, who are Valiant, Lovers of War, frays, and commotions, subject to no
reason, bold, confident, willingly obeying no body, etc: Nor is Venus excluded
those peoples affections, who love mirth in words and actions, musical,
delighting in Venery, drinking, and merry meetings: who trouble not themselves
with State-affaires, nor are inquisitive after Armies or Navys, unless they
bring good News from the Canaries. Nor is Mercury without his party among us,
who are subtle and politic, excellent disputants and Logicians, sharp witted,
and able to learn any thing, men of unwearied fancys, and sit for any
employment, yet unconstant. The Planetary influence in the good or ill
disposition of the air, is lively represented in man. A healthy sanguine
constitution, or a delicate composure of heat and moisture; answer to a serene
temperate air, with seasonable moistening dews, and showers, which are the
sweet influence of the Sun, Jupiter and Venus. The feverish, hot and parching
distempers of the body, answer to the hot and scorching weather occasioned by
the fiery beams of Mars. Nor is the cold, chilly, melancholy, weeping, and
lamenting disposition of many people, less represented by the melancholy,
dark cold and wet weather proceeding from Saturus influx. I could much dilate,
but I forbear. The intellectual world has also in man its portraiture:
witness the soaring contemplations of the Soul of man: which cannot (like the
body) be confined to any place, but in a moment, surrounds this terrestiall
Globe: nor there content, but as soon mounts it self to the Heavens, and
searches their secret corners: nor there satisfied till he comes to the
highest, for by his contemplations, (having his Original from the uncreated
light) he reflects thither, viz: to the divine Majesty. To conclude, God has
made all things in man; he has made all things for man; for man's sake he made
himself man, to redeem man to himself: to whom be all honor, glory and
praise for ever.

The End of the first Book.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Physic, and the Office of a Physician.
GOd in his Power, having created all things; in his Wisdom, by Nature,
governs and preserves them all: by her, are the variable motions, and
revolutions of the Sun, Moon, and Stars harmonically preserved: in her hands,
are the mutations and Catastrophes of times: she is the moderator of the
sourging Ocean: This immensity of things she governs in a certain, and
immutable order. There is nothing in the universe, but yields obedience to this
Law: whatever are contained in the Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral Kingdoms, are
wisely governed, and providenially preserved, by the Will of the Divine
Architector, in the Government of Nature.

But to steer our course nearer to our intention; the little world, or body of
man, is subject to natures government whose Deputy or Representative is
Physic; Naturae legibus esse medicinae leges consentaveas: The Laws of physic
are agreeable to the Laws of Nature: Physic imitates Nature, its design is to
preserve the body in health, defend it from infirmities, to strengthen, and
corroborate the weak, to raise the dejected, in a word, to keep the body in
health and comfort, till the approach of death, to whose yoke all must yield:
whose Laws, the greatest Monarchs, Kings, and Princes, cannot resist. To this
one Law all people of every Country, Nation, quality and degree become
obedient; as to a Law, most necessary, most excellent, sound pure and just;
being grounded upon, and drawn from the purest and most wholesome fountains of
Nature. It is not strict nor rigid, but mild and gentle; it succoureth,
refreshes, and restores those that have languished by reason of tedious
diseases: health of body is all the comfort a man has in this troublesome and
turbulent world: this is that, which makes humane actions to flourish: she is
the most excellent chamber companion, she is the richest treasure; for she is
more precious then gold, the best of all earthly goods; to say all, Without it,
no earthly thing is a blessing.

Hence it comes, that the Art of Physic has gained a reverend esteem in all
Ages: and the Physicians sometimes, more than humane honor. Aesculapius
transported this Art from Egypt into Greece: the Greciaus (thinking he could
raise the dead) honored, and worshipped him as a god, and his two daughters as
goddesses. Indeed the difficulty of Medicine brings the more honor and dignity
to a good Physician, which generally is thus described: A good Physician ought
to be a man learned, honest, gentle, diligent. He ought to trust in God, more
than in his own skill. He ought to know what he would do, and be able to put it
into practice, because the health and life of mankind is committed into his
hands. And, as he imitates Christ who cures the soul, the Physician the body;
so he ought to imitate him in a holy and unblameable conversation. He ought to
deny himself, and to be very tender of the poor. He must not be ignorant in
Divinity, well skilled in Anatomy, in the knowledge of Simples, and making up
of compound Medicines: And (says Galen) if he be ignorant of the Mathe
maticks, he is a murderer.

Hippocrates in his Aphorisms describes a Physician thus; He ought in discourse
to be witty and solid: and so let him behave himself in reproving the errors of
his Patient, and those that look to him, Let him not be fearful nor over
consident, but let him walk in the middle path, between fear and confidence. He
should be neat in body and mind, temperate in diet, a hater of venereous and
lascivious actions: let every wise man beware of a drunken Physician, or any
way viciously inclined. Let him not greedily desire honor, but what he
honestly gets by his Art; let him not beg it of others, nor confer it upon
himself. Let him be courteous and have a fellow feeling of others miseries. Let
him declare the event of a disease, so far as he knows it, that so he may
stir up the sick to obedience, and avoid the ignominse of that may be cast upon
the Art: yet let him so declare it, as not to afflict the mind with the Disease
of the body. A good Physician is not envious at the success of another, nor
will he detract from his due praise. He ought not to be dogged, currish,
scurrilous, nor ridiculous, to be familiar with all, and speak no more than
becomes him: let him use but few words, and those that are pertinent to the
purpose. Let gravity and love, be read in his face. He ought to visit the sick
as often as necessity requires, and speak comfortably to him. Let no unseemly
action, nor uncivil word proceed from him. Let him not forsake his Patient for
any cause whatsoever. Let him consult with God in the beginning of all his
cures, and heartily give God thanks for the performance of them. Let him love
godliness, and honesty, and be an unblameable servant to God, and Nature. These
are the principal and chief Characters, by which every diseased man may make
choice of his Physician, of whom I shall say with the learned Fernelius:
Medicus remedia confert, non solum ut naturae minister, fed interdum ut
adjutor, interdum etiam ut opifex primarius: A Physician does cure, not only as
Natures servant, but sometimes us her helper, yea sometimes as the chief
workman. I shall not build my discourse Theorically but Practically: and having
in the former Book briefly desctibed the principal parts of man and the humane
faculties and virtues thereon depending: I shall in this Book declare the
Causes, Symptoms, and Cures of Diseases in those parts, which hinder them in
the exercise of those humane faculties. I shall treat of each disease simply
and distinctly, and leave this Aphorism to the consideration of the ingenious:
Simplex affectus, simplici remedio; compositus composito propellendus: A simple
Disease is removed by a simple remedy; a compound Disease is expelled by
compound Medicines.

CHAP. II. Of Diseases of the Head.
MAny Diseases are incident to the Head of Man, I shall treat of them in order,
according to the places which they possess, which I shall devide into three
parts: First, the Membranes. Secondly, the substance of the Brain. Thirdly, the
Nerves which nourish the Brain. The Membranes, is the first pannicle within the
Skull, called Dura Matter; or without the Skull, called Pericranium: which are
subject to these Diseases, viz. the Headache, the inveterate Headache, and the
Megrim. In the substance of the Brain, which is the seat and instrument of the
intellectual faculties of the Soul, viz. imaginations, judgment, and memory,
are defects also, viz. the depravation of those faculties, as a Frenzy,
Melancholy, and Madness; Sleepy Disease, Lethargy. The Ventricles of the brain
are subject to many distempers, as Vertigo, Falling sickness, the night Mare,
the Apoplexy, Palsy, Convulsion, trembling and quaking, and Catarrhs.

Of inveterate Headache, ^d the Megrim.
The inveterate Headache is called in Greek and Latin, Cephalaea; it is a
disease of long continuance, very painful, and upon every light occasion
invadeth the Patient with sharp fits; that he cannot endure noise, nor light,
but desires to lie still in the dark: sometime this Disease is with
continuance, and sometimes with intermission.

The Cause.
This Disease is caused through blood or other humors abounding, or by sharp
humors, or vapors within or without the Scull, inflaming the Head: sometimes
weakness of the Head is the Cause.

The Sign.
If fullness of humors be the cause of the Disease: then is the Head very heavy
and lumpish: if the humors be sharp, the pain is felt with pricking and
shooting, if there be inflammation, the Head works like the Pulses: if wind
be the peccant cause, there is found distention or stretching out, without
heaviness or beating: if two or more of these Symptoms appear together, judge
accordingly. Note that if the pain be felt superficially, or outwardly, than is
the perieranium grieved: If it be felt within (which is known by the pain at
the roots of the Eyes) then is the grief within the Dura Matter. Hemicrania or
the Megrim differs not from Cephalaea, saving if in the Megrim one half of
the Head is afflicted, whereas in the other the whole Head, by the aforegoing
Symptoms, you may discover the humor offending.

The Cure.
As there are diversity of Causes, so there is of Cures: If the Disease be
engendered of plenitude of humors, and the whole boy app^ ^ll: it is not amiss
to begin the cure with the evacu^ of the whole body: and if age, strength and
the season consent, open the Gephalick or head Vein: If phlegmatic and viscuous
humors, be the Cause, it is good to extenuate and make thin the humors, thus;
Take of Oximel scilliticum, and syrup of Staechas, of each half an ounce;
distilled water of Marjerom, Betony and Parsley, an ounce; mix these and make a
potion for the morning. Or else make a decoction in this manner; Take Mint,
Calamint, Marjerom, Betony, Sage, of each half a handful: the seeds of sweet
Fennel, Annis, and Parstey of each half an ounce; the roots of Asparagus,
Fennel, and Parsley, of each two ounces; Peony root, half an ounce; shread the
herbs, bruise the seeds, slice the roots, and take out the pith, and boil it
in a quart of water till half be consumed, strein it, and add of syrup of
Betony compound, one ounce: and Oximel simplex as much; and make a potion for
three times; take it, at night two hours after a light supper; the Body thus
prepared, you may come to purge, and evacuate the peccant humors: Take half a
dram of Pill. Cochiae, the greater in the morning, and keep the Chamber; they
which are most commendable are pills of Hiera with Agarick; Take half a dram
at night two hours after a light supper, take some warm broth in the morning,
and keep the house; thus do for a week or longer: in like manner you may use
Pill. Alephanginae, and order your body as before: and remember that gross and
clammy-humours will not follow, a sudden purgation, and therefore often purging
is used, that so they may be drawn out by little and little. Also clisters are
necessary because they cleanse the bowels, and pull back those humors and
vapors, which ascend and annoy the head: Take of Mallows, Pellitorie of the
Wall, Endive, Succorie, Violetleaves, Cammomell-flowers, of each one handful,
sweet Fennellseed, half an ounce, Linseed, Two drachmes, boil them in a quart
of Spring water, (or rather clear posset drink,) till half be consumed,
streine it out; and to the decoction, add of the pulpe of Cassia Fistula, one
ounce; Oil of Rue half an ounce, Benedictae Laxativae, half an ounce.

The Body being purged by discretion, it is not amiss, for the patient to make
use of some diet drink, that has power to warm the brain, to exsiccate and
concoct crude humors, to attenuate the gross, cut that which is tough, and
expel the thinnest, either by Urine, or insenfible transpiration.

You may make it thus. Take of Guajacum, Sassufras, the Root of Salsaperilla,
of each two ounces, English Liquoris, and Cinnamon, of each one ounce,
Coriander-seed half an ounce: infuse them 24 hours in 4 quarts of
Spring Water, the vessel standing in hot embers, and close covered; afterward
boil it gently to the consumption of half, sweeten it with honey, whilst it
is hot; let the Patient drink half a pint in the morning, and dispose himself
for sweat: and if he drink it for his ordinary drink, 15 or 20 days more or
less, as necessity requires, it is the better. If the Patient become costive
by the use of this diet drink, let him take a Clyster, as often as need
requires: and once in seven days let him take some purging medicine; that
day, omitting the diet drink.

This bole, taken in the morning two hours before meat, is exceeding good to
strengthen the head, after due evacuation of the peccant humors, viz: Conserve
of Roses, and of Rosemary-flowers, of each two scruples, of Venice Treacle the
weight of both, with a little fine Sugar, make bole, and administer it, as
before.

Likewise may Gargarisms be made, and used in manner following: Take the root
of Masterwort a drachme, Long-Pepper and Nutmegs, half a dram: Mustard Seed
one scruple, beat them to powder, and put them in a linen cloth, and chew it
half an hour, which will purge the head of gross and phlegmatique humors.

Sometimes it is convenient to use Sneezing-Powders, and you may make them in
this sort: Take the Leaves of Marjarom, Rosemary, and Betony dried, two
scruples, white Hellebore, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cubeba, of each half a scruple,
beat them into fine powder, and, by the help of a quill, provoke sneezing.

Also a quilt, to corroborate and strengthen the Brain may be thus made: Take
of Wood-Betony dried, one ounce: the flowers of Rosemary, and Stachas, a
Dram; Red-rose-leaves, two drachms, Frankincense, Mastick, Benzoin, Mace and
Cloves, of each half a Drachme, beat them to powder and quilt it in Silk or
Linen, and apply it warm.

I might here reach you to make Plasters to corroborate the brain, to
attract, or resolve the humors, but I forbear here for brevityes-sake, and
referr you to its proper place, where I shall treat of the making of Plasters
and their uses.

If the distemper has its original from Choleric humors; let him use meats
and drinks that are naturally cold and moist; it is convenient that the humors
be prepared, quenched, and concocted: for which purpose you may use this
medicine following; Sirrup of Violets one ounce, of Water Lillies, half an
ounce, distilled waters of Endive, Succory and Lettuce, of each one ounce, mix
them, and drink it in the morning fasting; the humors thus concocted, and made
mild and obedient unto nature, may the better be removed by purging medicines:
To which purpose, take fine Rubarb two drachms, Spickuard, one scruple, cut
small and infused in the distilled water of Endive, Succory, and buglosse of
each one ounce, for the space of twelve hours: dissolve therein a drachme of
the electuary of the juice of Roses, and make a purging potion. Pills of
Reubarbs, and Alephangina may be safely used in this case: the dose is a
scruple or half a drachme taken at night going to bed: Pill, aureae, or golden
Pills taken half a dram in the morning, purges choleric and other
offensive humors from the head.

Clysters in this case profits much. Take of the decoction for a Clyster
before described: add one ounce of Cassia fistula, Hiera picra half an ounce,
oil of Roses one ounce, Salt half a drachme, mix them and make a Clyster.

After purging of the Choleric humor it is convenient to cool and strengthen
the head by outward medicines: oil of Roses, and oil of Cammomell, mixed with
a little white-Wine-Vinegar, is good to anoint the head; but if there need
greater cooling, you may add to the oils juice of Housleek, Purslane,
Nightshade or Sorrel. If the sick cannot sleep, anoint the forehead with oil
of Water Lillies and Poppy.

If the symptoms declare wind to be the cause, let the Patient eschew all
meats that do breed windiness, empty the belly with Clysters; that are made of
such things as do naturally dissolve windiness: viz. The seeds of Annise,
Sweet Fennel, Carraway and Comin, of each one ounce, boil them in a quart of
posset drink till half be wasted, streine it, and add to the liquor
Catholicon, and diaphaenicon, of each half an ounce. This Clister does not
only purge the intestines, and those parts about the Liver, but also pulls
back those vapors which ascend to the Head.

To the outside of the Head may be applied repulsive medicines, as Vinegar,
Wormwood, Melilot, Mints, Pomegranate-rinds, Shephards Pouch, Purslane,
Laurel, Nutmeggs, etc: After a moderate use of these, add medicines that have
power to mitigate, concoct, and digest: as Camomell, Linseed, Fenugreek,
Saffron, yelks of Eggs, Hens and Goose-grease. Lastly, apply medicines that
have power to discuss, viz: meal of Lupines, and Barley, Lilly-roots,
Nigella, oils of Dill and Rue.

CHAP. III. Of the Frenzy.
THe Frenzy is an inflammation of the brain and membranes thereof caused by
the abundance of blood or choler occupying those parts: it differs from
madness in this that a fever is joined to the Frenzy. Some that are thus
grieved, do err much in imagination; others are acute in imagination, but want
judgment to regulate their cogitations: and some are deprived of memory.

Symptoms and Signs.
They who are thus greived, are in a continual Fever, are mad, and cannot
sleep: Sometimes they sleep, and are much troubled therein. They often rub their
eyes, which are red and sometimes dry, sometimes afflicted with a hot rhume. The
tongue is rough, sometimes they bleed at Nose; they snatch and catch at the
bedclothes: their Pulse is weak, and hard like the motion of a sinew: they
breathe seldom: If choler be the cause of the I hrensie, they rage very
furiously, and can scarcely be ruled: if blood be the cause, they sometimes
laugh, and rejoice: This disease (according to the opinion of the wisest
Physicians) for the most part is deadly and incurable.

The Cure.
For the cure of this distemper, the blood, or cholet afflicting the brain,
must be discussed, pulled back, repelled, and evacuated, so, that the distemper
of the head be removed, the strength of the head, and of the whole body be
preserved. It is convenient, as soon as the disease is discovered to open a
Vein, having first administered a Clyster, thus made: Take of the Leaves of
Violets, Mallows, Endive, Beets, and Lettuce, of each one handful, of the root
of Marshmallows an ounce, of the flowers of Water Lillies, and the tops of
Dill, of each half a handful, let them be boiled in a sufficient quantity of
Barley-water; then streined out to a pint of this decoction, dissolve Cassia
newly drawn, Sirrup of Violets, Diaprunum Lenitive, of each half an ounce,
brown Sugar one ounce, and make a Clyster.

You must, soon after the Patient has had a stool, open the Cephalic or
Head-Veine, but if blood do abound, open the Basilick or Liver-veine, or the
middle Vein first, and after a while breathe the cephalic Vein. If you find
that suppression of Menstrues, or the hemorrhoid, has been the cause of the
distemper, you may first open the Vein under the Ancle called Saphaena, and
afterward open the Cephalic Vein. If the age, and strength of the Patient
forbid not, you must bleed him often in the Cephalic Vein; if the body be weak
open the Vein under the Ancle: be sure not to draw too much blood at once,
least the sick faint. If you fear bloodletting, by reason of age, want of
streangth, or a bad season, use cupping with scarification, behind the neck
upon the back bone.

It is good also to use Frictions, and Ligatures upon the legs, and to draw
blisters upon the Arms and Shoulders.

After Phlebotomy, you must apply medicines that do cool the Brain, and
repel, and hinder the humors from ascending to the head: as Oil of Roses two
ounces, Rose Vinegar one ounce, the water of Plantane, and Lettuce, of each two
ounces, with the whites of two Eggs, mingle them together, and apply it, to the
forehead with a double cloth. If that prove not essicacious, take oil of
Mandrakes, Roses, Violets, and water Lillyes of each two drachms; the juice of
Lettuce and Pu^slane, of each half an ounce, the whites of two eggs, mingle
and apply it.

But here let me advise people; to be very wary and careful in the applying of
these medicines; by no m^anes apply cooling medicines in the extremity of the
fit; nor refrigerate and stupsie the Brain too suddenly; lest by overmuch
cooling you turn the Frenzy into a Lethargy, and make your Patient sleep his
last. Likewise consider from the Symptoms of the disease, to what part of the
head, to apply your medicine, having consideration to the age of your patient,
and season of the year, your Wit will inform you, whether you are best to
apply it warm or cold. If you find the inflammation extend it self to the
skin, and exterior parts, use no repelling medicines, for fear you drive the
distemper to the Brain.

It is convenient likewise to refrigerate the interior parts, thus; take of the
syrups of Violet, erratick Poppys, and Pomegranates, of each four drachms: the
distilled waters of Plant, Lettuce, Poppy, and Purslane of each two ounces, mix
them and make a julep, for three doses. This electuary is good in this case:
Conserve of Roses and Violets, of each one ounce; the conserve of
Clove-Gilliflowers, and water Lillys, of each half an ounce; Diamargatiton
frigidum, half a drachme, with Syrup of Violets: make it into an electuary,
give the sick the quantity of a Nutmeg, once in an hour, two, or three as
necessity shall require.

Having thus prepared the humors, you may evacuate them by purgations, but it
is convenient to use the most gentle purgers; you may safely administer an
ounce of Catholicon in the evening; drink somewhat warm in the morning, it is a
fine cooling and gentle purge. Or you may make a decoction of some cooling
herbs, and in half a pint of the liquor warm, infuse therein a drachme of
Rubarb 12. hours; dissolve therein half an ounce of Catholicon, and two
drachms of syrup of Roses, and make a potion. Let his drink be Barley water, and
mingle with it, the syrup of Pomegranats, Lemons or Barberies. By this you may
know how to cure not only Frensies, but all ravings and watchings which are
engendered by Fevers.

CHAP. IV. Of Madness.
THe Latins call this disease Insania, and Furor, and the Greeks Mania, we
call it Madness, In this distemper the body is much out of order, and the
Spirits much disquieted: It comes without a Feavour, and therein it differs
from the Frenzy. This disease is caused, sometimes of the abundance of blood
flowing up to the Brain: Sometimes of hot and choleric humors, or of a hot
distemper of the Brain. The Symptoms of Madness, are, weakness of the Head,
tickling of the Ears, and shinings before their eyes, watchings, strange
thoughts, and ravenous appetite: If it proceed from the abundance of blood,
there follows continual laughing, objects of laughter evermore appearing
before the eyes. When it proceeds from both blood and choler, it causes a
dashing and fervent motion in the brain, which makes the sick irefull, full
of motion, and bold. But if the choler wax gross, the sick is more mad, and
harder to cure.

There is another sort of Madness, caused by melancholy occupying the mind and
changing the temperature of it: Sometimes the blood is generally corrupted by
melancholy, and the brain hurt thereby. Sometimes melanchollyblood ascends to
the brain, when the blood is not generally corrupted. Sometimes inflammations,
obstructions and evil effects of the Stomach and Spleen may be the cause
thereof. There are many Signs of this distemper, they which are most common
are these; fearfullnesse, sadness, hatred, and very strange imaginations: Some
have fancyed themselves beasts, and have counterfeited the voice of Beasts:
others, earthen-pots, and have fled from company for fear of being broken:
Sometimes they desire death, and to make away themselves; Sometimes they much
dread death. Some think themselves inspired with the holy Spirit, and do
Prophecy; others fancy themselves great Philosophers. If the blood be
generally corrupted, the body is lean, pale, and rough, and generally
melancholy. They, whose distemper arise from defects of the stomach or Spleen:
have burnings, grevious inflammations, and plucking of the sides, are subject
to be costive; troubled with wind fuming to the head, causing lightness and
troublesome dreams.

For the cure: If blood abound (after the administering of a Clyster) you must
come to blood-letting: You may open the Cephalic; if that appear not, the
middle vein: draw as much blood as the strength of the Patient will bear: you
may, as you find occasion, open the vein in the forehead, if it appear: if
the sick be a woman open the vein under the Ancle, you may also bleed the
Hemorrhoid-veines. I beseech you, not only here, but in all other distempers,
to be very careful, and sparing of your Patients blood; draw not too much at a
time lest you weaken nature too much: in this case it is best often to bleed,
and in the mean time, keep the body soluble, either by Clysters, made as the
former Chapter will direct you, or other convenient purges, viz: Take black
Hellebore sliced small, one ounce; infuse it three days in a quarter of a pint
of raine-water: then boil it gently to the consumption of the third part,
(keeping it close covered) streine it out and add to the liquor, two ounces of
clarified honey: let the sick drink half an ounce (in the morning) in a little
broth or posset drink, for several days together: increase or decrease the
dose according to the strength or debility of your patient. Or take of the
extract of black Hellebore half a scruple, Syrrup of Violets, one ounce; mix
it for one dose.

If the body require a stronger purgation; Take of Diagridium, and Lapis
Lazuli, of each half a drachme. Turbith, one dram: Sena, half an ounce,
Epithymum, Cremo-tartar of each two drachms: Of Cinnamon, and Citron pills, of
each one scruple; Safron, half a scruple; Let them be finely pulverized, the
dose is a drachme or four Scruples administered in broth or some other
convenient Liquor. These are convenient medicines, which purge both choler and
melancholy. You may purge with confectio Hamech, Diasenae, Pillulae Indae,
Pill: Lapid: Lazuli; the dose must be regulated according to your patients
condition, strength, and age. Before you come to purging, make use of altering
or preparing medicines; Take of the slowers of Borage, Buglosse, and Violets;
of Hart's-tongue, Fumitory, and Tamarisk, of each one handful; Raisons of the
Sun stoned, one ounce: bark of the root of Capers, three drachms: roots of
Fennel, Parsley, Lycorish, of each a drachme, boil them all gently in three
pints of water, till one be consumed, streine them out, and clarify the liquor
with whites of eggs; add to the same, of the syrups of Fumitory, Epithimum, and
Apples magisteriall, of each one o^nce: Take half a pint in the morning; use
this, or medicines of this nature, three or four days: twice in the week,
purge gently; twice in a month administer a strong purge: ever remember in the
mean time to use Phlebotomy, as necessity requires: forget not to empty the
body by Clysters, if there be occasion: The night after you have let your
patient blood, be sure you administer such things, as have power to procure
sleep, which you may do thus: Take of conserve of Roses, Violets, and Buglosse
flowers, of each half an ounce: the conserve of the young tops of Tamariske,
and Clove Gilliflowors; of the stalk of Lettuce, and Citron rindes preserved,
of each four dra^, Mirabolanes and Emblicks, of each one: Confectio Alchermes
and de Hyacintho, of each two drachms, Coral and Pearls prepared, of each two
scruples. pil: dia Margariton frigidum, and Laetificans, half a drachme, mix
them well in a marble or glass Mortar, adding one ounce of syrup of
sweet-sented apples: The dose is the quantity of a Wall-nut, drink after it a
little of some convenient Julep or decoction. You must likewise apply repelling
and discussing medicines to the head; the Chapter of the Frenzy will furnish
you with such medicines. But if the Choleric, and melancholy humors in the
Brain, are gross and hard to be removed, prepare a fomentation in this
manner. Talte a sufficient quantity of Cephalic herrbs, viz: Betony,
Pennyroyall, Rosemary, Lettice, Plantane. Willow-leaves, Housleek,
Strawberry-leaves; Violet-leaves, Fumitory, Water-Lillys (or their Flowers)
Staechas, Poppys, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain water: then
take of Bay Berries, and the root of black Hellebore, a sufficient quantity,
crosly bruise them, and sow them (with some of the softest of the herbs) into
a long bagg, boil the bagg a little in the aforesaid decoction; bathe the head
(being shaved) with the decoction, an hour, as hot as may well be endured,
with double clothes: then bind the bagg to the crown of the head with hot
clothes, let the patient lie in his bed and sleep if he can, this will
wonderfully expel the humors, through the Emunctories of the head, for it
wonderfully discusseth the fuliginous matter, gathered in the head, which other
remedies can scarcely perform. This you may do for nine days together if you
see occasion; but be sure to keep the head warm afterward. If you find that
obstruction or inflammation of the Spleen, or defects of the Stomach be the
cause of the distemper, you must administer inward and outward medicines, to
open the obstruction, and allay the inflammation; for such medicines, I referr
you to those Chapters, where I shall treat of the distempers of those parts.

CHAP. V. Of the Apoplexy, Lethargy, and Sleepy-disease.
THe Apoplexy is a depriving of sense and motion throughout the whole body,
coming suddenly without let or hurt of all voluntary functions.

Causes.
It is caused of humors cold, gross and tough, which fill up and obstruct the
Ventricles of the brain; which are engendered by overmuch crudities:
drunkenness is oftentimes the cause: Sometimes a blow or fall causing humors
to flow thither is the cause: Sometimes of a gross melancholy humor: Or, the
excrements and humidity of the brain, are congealed and thickened by the
coldness of the air.

Signs.
The Symptoms or forerunners of this disease are violent and sharp pains of
the head, the Vertigo, the swelling of the Veins of the neck, a slownesse to
move, the extreme parts of the body, cold. When the disease comes to its
height, the breathing is so diminished, that it cannot be perceived, and that
is a very evil sign; or else it is holden for a while, and then fetched with
great violence: so much the more it differs from the natural course, so much
stronger is the disease. Hippocrates in his Aphorisms says, that it is
impossible to cure a strong Apoplexy, and not easy to cure a weak one.

The Lethargy is likewise an inexpugnable desire of sleeping, and sluggishness;
Its name in the Greek, viz. (...): (...) signifies forgetfulness, and (...)
dull, viz. dull oblivion. The cause is the same with the former in quality: they
differ only in this, that the Lethargy is accompanied with a Fever and raving:
the Pulse is great and strikes seldom, and as if they were full of water: they
fetch their breath weakly, always sleepy, and can scarcely be compelled to
awake. If you call them very loud, they will sometimes open their eyes, but soon
shut them again: they gasp and gape, and sometimes forget to shut their mouths,
etc.

Coma is a profound sleep, from which if he be roused, he will answer to any
Question, but soon fall asleep again: sometimes the sick watches much, yet
cannot hold open his eyes, but is very desirous to sleep.

Carus is also a sleepy disease, and differs from the rest; it differs from
Coma and the Lethargy, because they that have Carus lie in a dead sleep, call
them, pull them, and prick them, they will not answer. Again, for the most part
a violent Fever goes before Carus: in the Lethargy it follows; it differs
from the Apoplexy, in it the breath is very straight, that the sick can
scarcely breath at all, but in Carus the sick has his breath at liberty.

The Cure.
They who are afflicted with either of these Diseases, are in much danger, and
have need of the speedy help of an able Physician, who must without delay use
his best endeavors. First let him endeavor to awake his Patient out of this
dead sleep, by presenting forcible objects to every sense: Let him place him
so, that the Sun beams, or some clear light, may shine upon his face: Let him
fill his ears with noise, clamours, and sounds, and call him by his name with a
loud voice, put up into his nose things that are sharp, as Rue, Castoreum, and
Vinegar: do the like to his mouth. Likewise you must provoke the sense of
feeling by frictions, pulling of the hair, pulling out and solding the fingers,
and all other parts, binding, etc. You must provoke the body to stool by sharp
Clysters, thus; Take of Sage, Betony, Rue, Centory, of each one handful:
Camomel, Calamint, and Penny-royall, of each half a handful: the seeds of
Cummin, sweet Fennel, and Dill, of each three drachms: the roots of Polypody,
six drachms: Agarick, three drachms: pulp of Coliquintida, one drachin; boil
them in a convenient quantity of water, until half be consumed; to a pint of
the decoction, add the oils of Lillies and Rue, of each half an ounce; Hiera
Picra, Benedicta Laxativa, and Diaphaenicon, of each half an ounce; Honey of
Roses, an ounce: Salt, a dram: mix them and make a Clyster. If your Patient
be young, strong, and full of hot humors, and blood, you must soon after the
operation of the Clyster, open a vein in one Arm, let him not bleed too much at
once, lest his strength fail; in a few hours space open a vein in the other
Arm: for by that means the disease will be the more abated, and the strength
the more preserved. After the first vein opened, if you perceive his
countenance more lively, his pulse beat more orderly and his breath fetched with
more ease, it is a good sign, and a good encouragement to open another vein:
Make the Orifice wide, or else the grosseft blood will lie behind. Where you
see the body abound with blood, draw blood liberally: if not, draw blood
sparingly.

After letting blood, if you see hopes of your Patients recovery, within a few
hours, you must administer some purgation, the time of the day matters not: one
ounce of Elect. Diacarthamum, half a scruple of Castor, dissolved in Betony
water: you may in this case make use of Pillulae Cochiae, the greater, or the
less: or Pillulae de Agarico, (pills of Agarick.) But in the Lethargy (by
reason it is accompanied with a Fever) you ought to administer more gentle
purgations, as Pillulae Hiera cum Agarico, (I shall lay down some general
Rules for purging, in the next Book,) which serve to divert the humors,
flowing to the Head. But the humors there fixed, must be purged with Scammony,
one Scruple: Castor, two scruples: administered in Oximel, which has been
proved with good success.

If hitherto your Medicines prove unsuccessful, you must venture to administer
stronger, not fearing the danger or strength of your Medicine, seeing without
it, nothing can be expected. You may use such Medicines as are extracted out of
Antimony, or those less violent, as is the infusion of Crocus Mettallorum: or
two drachms of the Tincture of Tobacco, extracted with the Spirit of Wine, does
powerfully evacuate upwards and downwards, both choleric and phlegmatic
humors, and cleanses not only the Stomach and Bowels, but the Brain also.

Also Frictions and Ligatures on the extreme parts are necessary, that the
vapors do not ascend to the Head. You may fasten Cupping glasses to the
Shoulders, Arms, and Thighs, with scarification, if you have not let your
Patient blood, otherwise without: forget not the often administration of
Clisters, or instead thereof, you may use Suppositories, made thus. Take two
ounces of Honey boiled to a due thickness, of Hiera Piera, two drachms;
Coloquintida, Agarick, and Scammony, of each two seruples: Salt gemme, one
dram: make them into fine powder, and mix them with the Honey, and make
Suppositories as long as you think good.

You may apply things to their Noses, which have a property to awaken them, as
Vinegar, Castoreum, Galbanum, Sulphur, Goats-horn, or Hartshorn burnt, and
holden to the Nose: A fume made with white Amber, is of excellent virtue in the
Apoplexy; You must pull them by the hair, and prick their Legs, or rub them
with Salt and Vinegar: You must anoint the Palare of the Mouth with strong and
sharp Medicines, as Mithridate, Mustard, powder of Masterwort: and rub the
bottoms of the Feet with Salt and Vinegar, and the Palms of the Hands with the
Oils of Rue, and Castor. If the disease be of long continuance, provoke
sneezing, with those Powders prescribed in the second Chapter: to which you may
add Rue and Castor.

You may apply resolving Medicines, but first you must make them thus: Take the
leaves of Betony, Sage, and Rosemary, of each one handful; the tops of
Lavender, and Marjerom, Rue, and Savoury, of each half a handful; the roots of
Angelica, Masterwort, and Setwall, of each one ounce; Bayberries, and Juniper
berries, of each half an ounce; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Vinegar,
and with a Sponge or cloth dipped in the decoction, bathe the Head of the sick.

If the Disease yield not to these Medicines, you may fasten Cupping g^asses,
to the upper part of the Neck, about the first or second joint: Some use to
draw Blisters there, and with good success.

Many precious Medicines, against this distemper, have been left to posterity;
I shall (omitting many) insert this one, viz. Take of the root of Peony, and
Misleto of the Oak, of each two ounces; Calamus, Aromaticus, Galanga, Cyperus,
of each one ounce; of Betony, Sage, Marjerom, of each one handful; the seeds of
Peony, Annis, Fennel, and Carraway, of each three drachms; the flowers of
Lavender, Stechas, and Rosemary, of each half a handful; of Nutmegs, Mace,
Cubebs, Cloves, Grains of Paradise, of each half an ounce: Cinnamon, two ounces:
Saffron, half a dram: of Species Diambrae, and Diamoshi, of each two drams.
Let all these ingredients be shredd and bruised, and put into a glass Limbeck;
power on them of the best rectified Spirit of Wine, enough to cover them, the
breadth of three fingers; digest them in a Bathe eight days, afterward distill
it, and upon occasion administer a dram, or half a dram, in some other
convenient liquor. In like manner may the Spirit of Castor be administered in
Oximel, and it is a good Medicine against these Diseases. Moreover, be very
careful that you well understand the nature of the humor offending, as if blood
offend, use not too many refrigerating Medicines, and bleed the more; I need
say no more, Verbum sapientibus, etc. If after so many Evacuations, the Brain
become too cold, and much weakened, you may strengthen it with Lozenges made
thus, or after this manner; Take of the distilled oils of Annis, Cinnamon, and
Nutmegs, of each three drops: oil of Cloves, one drop: Amber-grease, half a
scruple: with four ounces of Sugar, dissolved in Betony water, make Lozenges,
take a dram in a morning. Likewise you may make Pills to strengthen the Head
in this manner: Take of the Species Cordiales temperatae, and Aromaticum
Rosatum, of each two drachms; Mastick, Nutmegs, and Cloves, of each one
scruple; Ambergrease, half a scruple: and Musk three grains; make it into a
Mass for Pills with the juice of Marjerom, and take a scruple to bedward, once
or twice a week: or you may take half a dram of the powder, called Diarrhadon
Abatis, night or morning. If any fear the return of this Disease again after
cure: or any (by the aforegoing Symptoms) fear its growth upon them; let them
carefully consider the humor offending: if blood abound, lessen it by opening
a vein; if Choler, phlegm, or melancholy, by purgation; How you may know which
humor offends, or by what it may be purged, this Treatise (if you have any
ingenuity) will inform you.

CHAP. VI Of the Vertigo, and Falling Sickness.
THe Vertigo is a Disease which makes a man think every thing turns round,
and suddenly his sight fails him, all things appear misty and dark. This
disease is caused through inordinate moving of windy vapors, and Spirits
contained in the Brain, or in the Mouth of the Stomach offending the Brain.

The Sign.
Those that are thus troubled, a darkness and mist appears before their eyes,
upon every light occasion, especially if they turn about. It astonisheth him to
see a man, a wheel, or any thing, turn round. When it is accompanied with
sound, and noise in the ears, and vehement pain in the Head, with much
heaviness; the deprivation, or debility of any of the senses: these are
infallible testimonies that the cause of the distemper lies in the Brain: then
is the fit worst, when the head is heat by the S^n, or any other means. If
gnawing of the stomach, or a disposition to vomit, precede the fit, then the
disease proceeds from the mouth of the Stomach. This Disease is oftentimes a
Prodormus or forerunner of the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness, and sometimes of
the Apoplexy.

The Epilepsy is a Writhing, Cramp, and Convulsion of all the parts of the
Body; it attacheth and much hurts the sense and mind. Sometimes it is caused
through gross and clammy phlegm, or choler, stopping the passage of the
Ventricles of the Brain: and sometimes from the mouth of the Stomach, as in the
Vertigo. There goes before this Disease an evil state of the body and mind,
sadness, forgetfulness, troublesome dreams, ach of the Head, and continual
fulness of the same, palenesse of the Face, and inordinate moving of the
Tongue.

The Sign.
They, who are afflicted with this Disease, fall down, are plucked up together,
they tremble and turn about, snort, cry out, beat themselves, and foam at the
Mouth.

The Cure.
It is good for those that are thus afflicted, to eschew all meats of a hard
digesture, and such as afford a crude nourishment, or breed fumosities; observe
the same in all Diseases of the Head. In the beginning of the cure, make the
body soluble by Clysters if need be. If plentitude appear, and the sick be of a
sanguine complexion, begin the cure with blood letting: otherwise observe the
same order, before prescribed in the Cephalaea, or Headache, proceeding of
gross and phlegmatic humors; this remembering, to add to the Medicines there
described, the roots and seeds of Peony, and Misleto of the Oak, which have a
notable faculty in the cure of the Falling Sickness, as experience teaches.
Make use of the sudorifick drink, there described, thirty or forty days,
adding to every dose, three or four drops of Vitriol; You must purge the sick
with Pillulae Cochiae, Pillulae cum Agarico, or such as purge phlegm, but
remember to regulate your purges, according to the strength of the sick; and to
prepare the body with Medicines, which do attenuate and cut gross and thick
humors: as be the syrups of Wormwood, Hysop, Stechas, or Oximel scilliticum:
or with the decoction of Hysop, the roots of Peony, or such like. Stibium is of
great force, and does mightily purge the superfluous humors of the Head; you
must use it thus, take 12 grains, and make it into fine powder; put it into
four ounces of Wine, and there let it remain 24, hours, shaking it every three
or four hours; then power off the Wine, leaving the powder, and drink it with a
little Sugar: let none use this Medicine but such as have strong Bodies, and be
first well advised by a skilful Physician. The syrup of Tobacco, mentioned by
Quercetanus in his Pharmacopaeia, is of great force and virtue against this
disease; but before you make use thereof, be well advised, as I said before.
After the Body has been diligently, and carefully purged, it is meet you make
use of this, or such like Medicines, viz. Take of the flowers of Betony,
Rosemary, Peony, and Buglosse, of each one ounce; the root of Eringo, and the
rind of Citrons preserved, of each two drachms: powder of Sassafras, one ounce;
of the seed of Peony, and Misleto of the Oak, gathered the Moon decreasing,
Elks claws, of each half a dram: of the Scull of a man not buried calcined,
half a dram: of Coral, Pearls, and Hartshorn prepared, of each four
scruples: of Bezoar, one scruple: Diamosh. dulcis, four scruples; Theriaca
Andromachi, and Confectio de Hyacintho, of each one dram, Oil of Vitriol 20
drops: with as much Syrup, Citron Pills, and Oximel, as is sufficient to make a
liquid Electuary or Opiar, of which take three or four times in a day the
quantity of a Filberd. Emplastrum Epispaslicum, and such as have power to draw
blisters, and Causticks, may with good success be applied to the hinder part
of the Head and Neck.

Fabius Columnus extolleth the root of Valerian to the Skies, for the cure of
this Disease: a dram in powder administered in Wine, or other convenient
liquor, is a sufficient Dose. Of no less esteem is this Chimicall Medicine
following; Spirit of Vitriol, one scruple: Spirit of Tartar, one dram;
Treacle water camphorated, one dram and a half: mix them, and in a glass
well sealed, digest them a Month; the Dose is one dram, taken with some
convenient liquour.

If a Child have this Disease, you must make use of Medicines suitable to the
age and strength of the Child: If it suck, let the Nurse use a moderate diet,
and eat such meats as afford good nourishment. By Clyster or Suppository, make
the Child soluble. Take one ounce of fine Sugar, of Poony root, and Misleto of
the Oak, of each half a dram: with as much oil of sweet Almonds as is
sufficient to make a Lohock, and let the Child lick often thereof.

Riverius commends this Epileptick powder, by him called Pulvis de gutteta,
Take the root and seed of Peony, the root of white Dittany, Misleto of the
Oak, of each half an ounce: the seed of Arach, two drachms: of man's Scull,
three drachms: red Coral prepared, of Hyacinthus, or Jacinth, of each half a
dram, of Elks claws prepared, half an ounce: Musk, one scruple: leaf-gold,
one dram; mix them, and make them into very fine powder: of which administer
from half a scruple to a scruple, in milk, broth, or some Antepileptical water,
as the compound water of Peony, etc. Anoint the Head of the Child with oils of
Dill, and Marjerom: apply Medicines to the Head, that have power to discuss
the peccant humors, and to corroborate, the Brain: Anoint the Backbone, and
those members which are contracted, and drawn together, with this following
Liniment. Take of the Oils of Rue, and Earthworms, of each two ounces: the oil
of Castor, a dram: with a little Aqua vitae, make a Liniment. Or, take of
Venice Treacle, one dram; Confectio Alchermes, and de Hyacintho, of each a
scruple; the waters of Betony, Sage, Marjerom, and Cinnamon of each half an
ounce; mix them all, and bathe the Nose, Temples, and Ears: and you may give
the Child half an ounce to take inwardly. You may purge the Child twice in the
month with Manna, Syrups of Roses, and Rubarb: and every change of the Moon,
take a dose of the powder before mentioned, and oftener if need require.

To conclude, if the Disease be caused by some evil effects in the mouth of
the Stomach; you must labor to free the Stomach from the humors that offend.

For the Cure of the Vertigo, I shall say nothing, but refer you to those
Medicines propounded for the Cure of the Falling Sickness; and to the 2.
Chapter, viz. Of the cure of Cephalaea, proceeding from cold, crude and
phlegmatic humors; it being my present task, only to epitomize, not to write
largely of the cure of Diseases.

CHAP. VII. Of the Palsy.
PAralysis, or the Palsy, is a disease, wherein the whole Body, or part
thereof (as Atm, Hand, Leg, or Tongue,) does lose sense or motion, or both:
Sometimes it follows the Apoplexy. Here note, that the Faculty of sense and
motion, flows from the Brain, as from its proper fountain, and is conveyed to
all parts of the Body, by the Sinews the proper Organs of sense and motion.
Hence it comes to pass, that if that faculty of the Brain be obstructed,
that it cannot descend to all parts, that all, or some of the (...) of the
Body, lose either motion, or sense, or b^, according to the part obstructed.

The Causes.
The Palsy is caused by abundance of gross and clammy humors, which stop the
sinews, and hinder the animal faculty, that it cannot come from the Brain or
fountain to the members. It may be caused by vehement cold, or by some
inflammation or swelling near the Backbone: or the sinews may be crushed by
some binding, or hurt by some wound, or Ulcer, or the like.

The Signs, and Cure.
There need no more Signs to know this disease by, than what has been declared
in the explanation of it. This disease for the most part happens to old folk,
and surprizeth them in the Winter time; therefore Phlebotomy for the most part
is unnecessary, and dangerous. If plenitude of humors or blood appear, open a
vein, on the sound side, draw blood sparingly, lest you cool the Body too much.
Let what part soever of the Body be affected, yet you must not forget the
Brain, but you must purge, corroborate, and strengthen it. If you find the
original of the distemper in the Brain, you must apply Medicines, which have
power to extenuate, dissolve, and discuss; such as are described in the second
Chapter, for the cure of cold and phlegmatic distempers of the Head. To the
purging Medicines you may add these, Pillulae Fatidae, de opopanace, Arabicae,
and Trochisci Alhandall, taken in a convenient quantity (as you shall be
instructed in the next Book) and suitable to the season of the year, and a^ ^f
your Patient. Let him abstain from drinking ^f strong beer, and Wine; and let
most of his drink be the decoction of Guiacum, and the bark of the same; and if
you add Cephalic herbs to these, it will be the better. This Decoction is
commendable, viz. Take of Guiacum ground, two ounces; of the bark of the same,
half an ounce: the root of China, and Salsaparilla, of each two drachms:
Sasafras, three drachms: Lignum Aloes, and Galanga, of each two scruples: the
root of Angelica, Peony, and Fennel, of each two drachms: the seeds of Peony,
and sweet Fennel, of each one dram: Betony, ground Pine, Sage, of each one
handful: the flowers of Lavender, Rosemary, Stechas, and Cowslips, of each one
pugil: Cinamons, and Polipodium of the Oak, of each half an ounce: Infuse them
in six quarts of water twenty four hours: then boil it gently to the
consumption of two quarts, strein it, and add to the decoction of brown Sugar,
candy, and syrup of Stechas, of each four ounces. Let the diseased take half a
pint in a morning, three or four mornings, as a preparative to purging, you
must purge once in a week, with one of the aforenamed Medicines; having respect
to the age and strength of your Patient, and season of the year. Or you may
prepare the aforesaid water by distillation, thus: Take of the simples
aforenamed, and infuse them 24 hours in four quarts of water, and two of
White Wind: then distill them in Balneo Mariae, (as you shall be taught in the
fourth part of this Treatise) to a pound of this distilled water, add one ounce
of the syrup of Staethas, and a dram of Theriaca diatessaron, divide it into
three parts for three mornings.

It is convenient to set Cupping glasses to the part affected, without
scarifying of it, but easily drawing the humors and spirits to the place:
afterward you must rub and chafe the parts: it is convenient to bathe the
paralytick part, and cause it to sweat with the decoction of Bur root, and
Elder leaves: hot-houses often profit much; but much better it is, if they can
come to natural baths, which proceed, either from Nitrous, hituminous, or
sulphurous Mines, as the Bath of Bath. You may safely Bathe two or three times
in a week; and afterward anoint the Member with some convenient Liniment,
viz. Take of the Oils of Foxes, Castor, Earthworms, and Rue, of each one
ounce: Unguentum Nervinum, and Martiatum, of each half an ounce: the distilled
oil of Rosemary, one dram; Oil of Spike, six drops: mix all these, and make a
soft ointment; with which anoint the Backbone, and the other parts that are
diseased; afterward wrap them up warm with the skin of a Fox, or Hare. If the
Palsy be caused by an inflammation, or hard swelling in any part; the cure of
the inflammation, or swelling, cures the Palsy also. If bruising of the sinews
by pinching or binding be the cause, remove the bruised blood, and the cure
will ensue. If the Spondills of the Back be out or broke, and that cause the
Palsy or Resolution; the cure of the cause, takes away the effect. If the
Palsy ensue a wound or Ulcer, in the Head, Back, or any particular Sinew; if
the Sinew be curable, the Palsy cease.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Covulsion.
SPasmus, Cramp, or Convulsion, is a disease, when the Sinews are drawn or
plucked up against a man's will. Of this there are two sorts, viz. a true
Convulsion, when there is a constant retraction of the Muscles, and the Limb
remains unmovable: or a convulsive motion, when the retraction is every time
new, and the Members moved diverse ways. They differ likewise in their Causes,
for a true Convulsion proceeds, either from repletion, or inanition; a
convulsive-motion, from irritation, or provocation. Again, they are thus
divided, a true Convulsion is either total, by which most part of the Body is
contracted, or partial, by which one particular member suffers contraction.
The Universal Convulsion is caused from the Brain, when the Face is plucked
together as well as the whole Body, or from the marrow of the Back, when the
Muscles that move the Head and Back, are drawn together. A particular
Convulsion is made from the contraction of the Muscle of some part, coming
from the hurt of that Nerve which is ordained for his motion. The immediate
Causes (as I said before) is repletion, or inanition; the Nerves being too full
of moisture, or too dry, are extended or contracted, and the Muscles into which
they are united, are, by that means drawn back to their original.

The mediate Causes of a Convulsion, proceeding from repletion, are phlegm, and
waterish humors slowing to the Nerves, stretching them in breadth, must
consequently make them shorter, and sometimes cause an inflammation.

But here in the way lies an Objection, namely, why a watery humor obstructing
the Nerves, and the cause of the Palsy and Conuvlsion, should sometimes bring
one, and sometimes the other: the humor offending, and the parts affected,
being one and the same. The diverse opinions, and long disputations of writers,
I shall not here repeat; the difficulty of the matter having distracted them
into diverse opinions. I shall answer the objection briefly, and adhere to the
most able, modern Physicians, and say they differ thus: A Palsy is caused of a
pure watery humor without mixture, which softeneth the Nerves, extends them
not: The Convulsion is caused of the same humor, but mixed with much wind, by
which the Nerves are stretched, and the Muscles contracted to their original.
It is the opinion of all Physicians, that wind is the cause of Convulsions; and
experience teaches us, that the greatest distentions are caused by wind, as we
see in the Dropsy, Tympanites, and the Chollick. Sometimes an inflammation, in
or near the original of the Nerves, may cause a contraction of those Nervous
parts; and the cause of this inflammation is sometimes internal as a flux of
blood upon the part; or external, by a wound, contusion, or bruise.

The Causes of a Convulsion by emptiness, are all immoderate evacuations
whatsoever, diseases, diet, and Medicines which are hot and dry.

A convulsive motion is caused by humors, or vapors which are full of
Acrimony, or Malignancy: and it sometimes so happens in malignant Fevers;
and Diseases of choler occupying the Head, or Stomach.

From what has been said, it is easy to know a Convulsion proceeding from
fullness or emptiness, or convulsive motion. A Convulsion near the Brain is
dangerous; in the Muscles of the breast, gives fear of suffocation: If it come
after bleeding or purging, it is deadly: So is a Convulsion, following a
Frenzy. A Convulsion coming upon a Fever, shows malignant matter which ends in
death: but if a Fever follow a Convulsion, it takes away its cause,

The cure of this disease is as various as the cause: The Convulsion caused by
emptiness requires moystening medicines, both internal and external: This
disease seldom happening, and almost (if not altogether incurable) I shall say
nothing of it.

A Convulsion coming of repletion or fulness must be cured by evacuation of
the pecant humors; if you see occasion, make use of Phlebotomie, and purge the
humors with medicines agreeable to the age and strength of your Patient: and
sometimes with sharp Clysters, such as are described in the fifth Chapter. If
you see it not convenient to let blood, apply Cupping-glasses, always above
the parts grieved, that so the humors may be brought back to their original;
that is to say, if the Convulsion or Cramp be in the Legs, apply them to the
Buttocks and Loins; observe the same rule, where ever it be. The part affected
ought to be chafed with oils and ointments suitable to such a distemper, viz.
the oils of Rue, Camomill, Dill, Spike, the oil of Foxes, etc: the ointments
of Marshmallows, Martiatum, Nervinum, to which may be added the Mucilage of
Briony, with which you may make convenient Liniments to anoint the parts
affected, and the root of the Nerve which comes to it. Ducks o^ Goose-grease,
prepared in manner following, is much commended, viz. Take a fat Duck or Goose,
pluck it and draw it, then fill it with these things following, viz. of Sage,
Marjerome, and Staechas, of each one handful; Gum Ammoniacum and Bdellium of
each one ounce; Calamus Aromaticus, Nutmegs, Mace, and Cloves, of each half an
ounce: beat them in a Mortar, moystening them with oil of Earth-wormes: after,
sew them into the belly of a Goose or Duck, spit it and roast it, receiving the
dripping in a pan, half full of Vinegar, and anoint therewith. Or you may make
it stronger, thus: Take of the aforesaid dripping six ounces; The Chimicall
oils of wax, Nutmegs, and Sage, of each two drachms, mix it and make a
Liniment: when you have anointed the part affected, cover it with a hot sheeps
skin, a Hares or Foxes skin. To put the part affected into an Ox or Sheeps
belly, or any other newly killed; or to apply the Lungs of a Sheep; young
Pigeons, Whelps or Chickens slit in the middle, is much commended, and has
been successefully proved. For those that are thus affected, it is very good to
bathe themselves in the Bath of Bath, or such like, proceeding from a
sulphurous Mine: If you cannot conveniently come to this Bath, you must make a
Bath with thesethings following. Of Marsh-mallow roots and Lillys of each two
pound: Of the leaves of Penniroyall, Laurel, Rue, Marjerome, St. John's wort,
Violets, Mallows, Sage and Wormwood, of each two handfulls: Linseeds, and
Fenugreek, of each one pound, boil all these in water sufficient to make a
bath, and let the party diseased sit therein, not too long, but let him come
out as soon as he finds ease. If you dare venture to be at the cost, make your
bath, with oil, boiling a Fox therein, together with the aforesaid herbs, you
may purge the head with sternutations, Gargarisms, and such medicines as you
may find in the second Chapter, for the cure of a cold Phlegmatic distemper of
the brain: and it is good to soment the hinder part of the head and neck, with
hot Aqua Vitae. The infusion of Castor, or the Spirit of the same, the dose is
a drachme, or half a drachme, according to the age or strength of the Patient:
Mathiolus his Bezoar water, the like dose: the compound water of Peony: give
these mixed with other cooler medicines. The syrrup of Peony compound:
Diamoschu dulce: Diacorum, diatessaron, are much commended for the cure of this
disease.

I might add variety of medicines for the cure of this distemper, but what I
have said, (I hope) is sufficient to give light to the ingenious searching
Spirits.

CHAP. IX. Of a Catarrh or Desluxion.
A Catarrh is a Desluxion of excrementitious humors from the head into the
inferior parts. The brain requiring much nourishment, must necessarily void
much excrements, which if they are in quantity moderate, and natural, they are
received into the fore-Ventricles, and conveid to the moist gladules, and spit
out from the Palate; If it grow more plentiful, yet natural, it is dispersed
through the films of the brain, and sent forth by the Nostrill as well as the
Palate. But when the brain is weak, and affected with distempers, and receives
more nourishment then it can concoct, it abounds with excrements, which by
their quality and quantity overcome the retentive, and provoke the expulsive
faculties, and so evacuate themselves by unusual and improper ways, to the
disturbance of the whole body.

The cause of this distemper proceeds from want of a good concoction in the
brain, and this proceeds either from a hot or cold distemper.

A hot distemper does attract more nourishment then nature can sufficiently
digest. A cold distemper turns the nourishment, brought to the brain, to
phlegm or water. Cold, gross, and slimy meats hinders a good concoction, and
windy meats send up many vapors to the head.

Add to these many external causes, as Southerly winds, long sleep upon a
full stomach, especially an idle life, etc. And though this be accounted a
disease of the head, yet the principal cause lies in the inferior parts, in
which evil humors are collected, as the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Womb, etc.
from whom, not only vapors, but even the humors themselves are sent to the
head, and descend to the inferior parts again; a hot distemper of the
Bowels, like an Alembeck send continual vapors to the head; a cold distemper
engenders crude humors, which are also many times drawn up thither.
Costivenesse or obstructions in the lower belly, which hinder the avoiding of
excrements, they not finding their ordinary passage fly up to the brain,
which, by reason of its weakness, and loose and soft substance, is forced to
yield to the stronger parts disburthening themselves upon it. The Impulsive
causes are too much heat or cold in the brain: too much heat does extenuate
and diff^se the humors, and this happens to the head, heated by the Sun,
fire, covering, etc. Coldness does compresse the head, and strains forth the
humors therein contained, as a sponge is squeesed in the hand. A Catarrh is
caused by a Communication of cold humors, to the brain, from the feet,
conveyed by the chiefest Nerves, which run through the Marrow of the back:
The stoppage or closure of the external pores, when the body requires sweat
is the cause of a Catarrh; hence it comes to pass that Catarrhs are most
frequent in Autumn, viz. the body being made thin in the Summer, and the pores
open, evacuating excrements by sweat and insensible transspiration: in Autmune
the pores being sudainly stopped, by reason of the contraction of sudaine cold,
which causes many vapors to fly to the head. Many more causes might be
instanced, but I fear I shall grow too voluminous, and what I have said is
sufficient to stir up ingenious wits to further discoveries. I shall add a few
words, of the nature of the parts receiving this Defluxion, which by reason of
their weakness are forced to receive the burden laid upon them, by the
stronger parts, like the inferior Commons, who are forced to bear the heavy
impositions of their insulting Superiors. The Lungs is naturally weak by
reason of its softness and looseness, which makes the part sit to receive
Defluxions; want of natural heat, caused by a cold distemper, makes the part
unable to resist Defluxions: A wound or Ulcer in the part, causes the humors
to flow thither, if you take notice of Issues, and Cauteries, you will scarcely
doubt of the truth of it: So does any inflammation or unnatural heat in the
Lungs; Consider of this and you may be able to give a reason of consumptions of
the Lungs, Pluresies, and spitting of bloody matter. The humors, which cause a
Catarrh, flow from the brain internally or externally: internally, if the
humors fall upon the breast, it is called a Catarrh or Defluxion: If upon
Aspera Arteria, it is called Raucedo or hoarsnesse: If it flows into the
Nostrills, it causes Coryza, Ozena, or Polypus: If it falls upon the Nerves,
it produces numbnesse, Palsy, Convulsion, trembling; if in the Ears,
deafness; if in the eyes, Inflammation, Tears, blindness; if upon the Uvula
or Palate it causes a swelling, loofnesse or Ulcer there: if it fall into the
throat, the Quinsie follows; if on the Lungs, Inflammation, Pleurisy,
shortness of breath, Cough, Consumption. If it falls into the Stomach,
vomiting and want of appetite ensues, if into the bowels, Dyarrhea, or
Dysentery: and sometimes it flows into the Veins with the blood and causes a
Fever called Febris Catarrhalis, and is the forerunner of the joint gout, and
Erysipelas. Sometimes the humors flow from the head externally, without the
skull under the skin; these humors fall into the Eyes, Teeth, Neck, and other
external parts: therefore it is rightly conceived, by many learned men, that
the greatest part of the diseases, incident to the body of man, have their
original from the head: Such whose bodies are spare and slender, easily
penetrated by heat or cold; or such as are grossly compact, and have not free
transpiration: Such who have weak and cold brains, that cannot discuss, nor
concoct the humors or vapors therein contained; or those whose brains are so
hot as to attract too many vapors; Such, whose Stomachs and Livers are
contrary in quality, viz. one hot, the other cold, are men subject to Catarrhs
or defluxions.

The sign of this disease may easily be gathered from the Causes, the approach
of this disease may be discovered by the following Symptoms, viz. by heaviness
of the head, dullness of the senses, long sleep, a snotty nose, much spitting,
costivenesse of the body, and much wind; when the disease is perfect, the
flowing humors are plainly felt, with swellings and pains in diverse parts: If
the defluxion be of cold humors, then will the body be sensible of cold, the
face pale, the habit of the body generally phlegmatic, troubled with sour
belchings, sweet, slimy and waterish spittle. If it be a hot distillation, the
habit of the whole body is Choleric; the parts affected inflamed and painful,
the face red, much thirst, a salt and sharp humor in the mouth. I need not
tell you how an external defluxion may be known from an internal, but take
notice, that if there appear plenty of humors, the Catarrh is more dangerous,
for by a sudden defluxion, desperate accidents may follow.

If age, strength, and the season permit, or if the body abound with blood, or
the Liver be too hot, (as it often happens in this distemper) breathe a vein
at the beginning of the cure, the contrary prohibiting Phlebotomy. You must
first prepare the matter, then gently purge the head, afterward more strongly
purge the peccant humors: out of the former Chapters you may find, what purges
are convenient, with respect to the humor offending, Coloquintida has an
excellent faculty to purge the head, but by reason of its violent operation, is
not fit for common use; therefore use it not without good advice* In this
disease also it is good to use Masticatories, and Gargarismes, when the humors
fall into the eyes or nose, etc. Errhines, and sneesing powders when it falls
upon the Breast, Lungs, etc. Issues behind the neck or ears are found, by
experience, a gallant remedy for a Catarrh. I shall not here trouble my self
or the reader, to insert examples of the aforegoing medicines; the Chapters
beforegoing, together with every Artists ingenuity will sufficiently insorme.
Take this for a general rule, that when a Catarrh or Deflaxion is caused by
excrementitious humors, flowing from any of the inferior parts, by reason of
the natural passage, being stopped, you must open the obstruction, by often
purging, or by medicines regarding the nature of the obstruction, and by that
means turn the humors offending into their natural channel; after
convenient Evacuations, with internal and external medicines. labor to
corroborate the head, and dry up the humors, Internal medicines may be
prepared thus, or after this manner. Take of Coriander seed prepared, and
Coltsfoot dried, Nutmegs, and Frankincense of each half an ounce; Liquoris,
Mastick and Cubebs, of each two drachms, flos Sulphuris, three drachms:
Conserve of red Roses one ounce, with a pound of white Sugar dissolved in
Popy-water make rolls, weighing three drachms or half an ounce: Take one
morning and Evening. Or you may make Troches in this manner, Take of the best
Frankincense, and juice of Liquoris, of each one dram: Lac Sulphuris, half a
dram: Opium, Saffron, and Mirrh of each one scruple; the oils of Annise-seed
and Nutmegs, of each three drops, with Diacedium, as much as suffices, to make
Troches; or if you please you may make them into pills: and take half a dram
morning and evening. It is good to apply bags of herbs to the fore part of the
head, which have a drying quality, shave the fore part of the head, and apply
the gum Sacamahaca, spread upon a cloth in the form of a plaster, and add
thereto a little Mirrh; or if you make a fume thereof, and shut the Chamber
close, it profits. If the defluxion proceed from a hot cause, you must
administer medicines, which have power to thicken the humors, to repel, and
evacuate it: you must likewise correct the distempers, and fortify the parts
both sending and receiving, and that you may so do, you must revel or pull b^ck
the humors by Phlebotomy, if nothing hinder it. You must thicken the humors,
by administering Juleps, made of the Waters of Plantane, Purslane, Lettice; the
Sirrups of Poppies, Violets, Water Lillies, of dried Roses, and Meconium, and
such like. Having thus thickened and prepared the humors, you must evacuate
them by gentle Purgatives; Take of the Bestrhabarb a dram, infuse lit in any
of the aforementioned waters (as much as is sufficient for a potion) six hours in
warm Embers, strain it out, and add to the liquour one ounce of Manna, and as
much Sirrup of dried Roses, and administer it: To make the potion stronger, you
may dissolve therein Catholicon, Diapranam Solative, or Lenitive, Confectio
Hamech, etc. or such like, having respect to the age and strength of your
Patient, and humor offending. You must endeavor to restrain the Flux thus;
take of Conserve of Roses one ounce, Diatraganthum Frigidum, and Palyis Haly,
of each a dram, Bolearmenick prepared with Rose Water a dram; with the
Emulsion of the four great cold Seeds, and Sirrup of dried Roses, make an
Opiate, and give the quantity of a Nutmeg to bedward. These Troches are much
commended, take Gum-Dragant, and Arabic, of each two drams: Bolearmenick, and
Terra Sigillata washed in Rosewater, of each one dram; White Poppy seeds, and
Juice of Liquorish, of each half a dram; Sugar-penid one ounce, with the
Musilage of Quince-seeds, extracted with Rosewater, make Troches to be held in
in the mouth day and night.

The Spirit of Sulphur, and Vitriol given three or four drops in a convenient
Julep, morning and evening, works no small effects against a defluxion,
especially if it proceed from an inflammation of the bowels. If you find the
Disease too stubborn to yield to these medicines, you must make use of
Narcoticks, of which Laudanum is none of the worst, four or five grains given
at bedtime. Faventius extolleth these Pills in a Salt Catarrh, or defluxion of
salt humors. Take of the juice of Liquoris two drachms, washed Aloes one
dram, Pillulae de Cynoglosso half a dram, with Sirrup of Violets, make a
Mass, and take a scruple thereof at bedtime. It is convenient to make pouders
to apply to the head, which have power to strengthen, to stop the defluxion,
and consume the humors. Take of white Amber, Benjamin, Mastich, Nutmegs, of
each half an ounce: Betony, Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Marjarome, of each half a
handful: Frankinsense, graits of Kermes, Red-roses, Peony seeds and Poppy
heads, of each two drachms: Sanders, Myrtles, Cyprus nuts, and Pomegranate
flowers, of each one dram; make a powder for the lining of a Cap or Quilt: or
if you had rather, you may make a plaster with the same Simples, with Wax and
Oil of Rofes, according to art: and apply it to the head, being first shaved.

CHAP. X. Of Diseases of the Eyes, and first of the Diseases proceeding from
Obstruction in the Optic Nerves.
IN the former book having given you a brief account of this worthy member, and
what varicty of wonderful operations, God and Nature has placed in so little a
subject; yet of the parts and faculties thereof, it is too hard a task for the
most exquisite Philosopher to conceive aright; or for the most eloquent Orator,
to express such wonderful notions: But, seeing God has endued every man with
this member, by whose curious inspection, he is enabled to pry into all things;
it is the duty of every Naturalist to exercise this member in finding out its
own constitution, and curing the distemper and maladies, to which it is
subject. For the benefit of those, who want better helps, I shall, as briefly
as may be, discover the diseases and cures of the eye, as they are, in which
work I adhere to the opinions of the wise and learned Physicians, verified by
Reason, and my own Experience.

Sometimes it happens, that the sight of the eye is totally extinguished, and
no fault appears in the eye: And this comes to pass, either by obstruction or
adstriction of the Optic Nerves; and is called by the Latins, Gutta Serena,
and Amauresis. Obstruction (for the most part) is the cause of this Disease,
which happens by the flowing down of a watery humor upon the Nerves, which
causes blindness, or dimness of sight: the like obstruction happening to the
other Nervs, causes the Palsy. Adstriction or compression sometimes happens
by some moist humor gathered about the Optic Nerves, as blood or filthy
matter, gathered In the brain, sometimes bp humors, sometimes by inflammation,
in malignant Fevers, and may be the cause of this Disease. For the Nerves
being thus obstructed or compressed, the animal Spirits cannos pass from the
brain to the eyes. To this I may add, that in case by a wound in the head, the
Optic Nerves be cut, without controversy it causes blindness. The sign of
this Disease, is the loss of sight, and the eye appearing in its natural
condition, only the Pupilla, or sight of the eye, looks wider, blacker, and
dimmer: the difference of causes is thus known: If the cause be blood or
choler, some inflammation, impostume, or wound in the head has gone before. If
the Nerves are compressed by Phlegm, gathered about the roots of the eyes, all
or most of the head is affected, and the other senses are hurt: but if it be
obstruction of the Optic Nerves, the eye is only affected, or the forepart
of the head about the eye-hrows, bears part of the affliction. If the Disease
proceed from an obstruction in the Optic Nerves, and the sight be totally
lost, for the most part the Disease is incurable: but if the obstruction be
imperfect, that is to say, the sight much diminished, and the Patient not
totally blind, then there is hope of recovery. If it happen by humors gathered
into the forepart of the head, compressing the Nerves, it is curable.

For the Cure, the head must be cleansed by medicines, which effectually purge
those humors, which compress or obstruct the Nerves; but remember, that as you
cannot free the Nerves, without purging the whole head, so you cannot cleanse
the head without purging the whole body. It is good that the Patient avoid a
thick, cold, cloudy, and moist air, and frequent the contrary. Let him eschew
all meats that are gross, or yield a gross juice, such as are windy, hot
spices, or whatever fills the head with vapors. It is good to put the seed of
Fenel into his bread. Let his meat for his sauce be extenuating, as Betony,
Eyebright, Fenel, Hysop, Marjarom, Sage: Nutmeg also does much comfort the
brain, and clears the sight, as it is generally believed: Let the aforesaid
herbs likewise be boiled in his broth: Lettice and such ilke cold herbs are
very hurtful; Turnips are highly commended, and it is proved they clear the
sight, being often eaten: Pigeons, Sparrows, and such like Fowls are said to
be a good food for such who are thus diseased. Let him eat no Supper, if he eat
any, let it be light, and not too late. Then let him make use of this
Diet-drink following. Take of Bettony, Eyebright, Celandine the great, Fenel,
Balm, Marjarom, Sage, and Vervain, of each two handfuls: the roots of
Elecompane, Fenel, Flowerdeluce, Liquoris, and Sawsaparilla sliced, of each one
handful: the Seeds of Coriander, Anice, and Fenel, of each one ounce: the
slowers of Ros-mary and Lavender, of each a handful: Raisons of the Sun stoned,
and blew Figs sliced, of each a pound: Senna two ounces: Let all these be
infused six hours, in a sufficient quantity of Wort, upon hot Embers, then
tunned up in four gallons of Newbear, let them work together: Let the Patient
drink a draught every morning till the Cure be perfected, unless some other
medicine intervene. You must purge the body often, as you see cause, either
with gentle or stronger purges; let them be Pills, and such as purge the humor
oftending; of which you shall have a particular account in the fourth book.

If your Patient be not old, and you find blood abound, you may open a vein:
the opening of the particular veins of the head, especially those that are
nearest the eyes, have often proved successful, because the veins, by reason of
their fullness of blood, have compressed the Optic Nerves.

Sometimes the application of Cupping-glasses, Vesicatories, and Cauteries, to
the hinder part of the head or neck, to the shoulders or back, have been
attended with admirable success. After due evacuation, it is convenient to dry
up the humors by a sudorifick Diet-drink, made and used, as is described in
the second Chapter; adding such herbs, as have a special property to cure the
eyes, viz. Celandine, Ey-bright, Fennel, and Vervain. If you see occasion to
dry up the moist humors of the head, make use of such powders, bags, and caps
prescribed in the fore-poing Chapters. Also sulphurous and Bituminous Bathes
profit much.

The Glossie and Crystalline humors of the Eye are subject to infirmities and
disorder: the first is subject to a mixture, with other humors; and this
Disease is hard to discover; but must be cured by cleansing the head and optic
nerves, and repelling and discussing the humor, which mixeth with the vitrous
humor, and makes it dusky. This humor also may be disordered, in respect of
its situation, when it is brought before the Crystalline, and so diminishes
the sight. This Disease is hardly distinguished from a Cataract, only it
differs in the cause; for a Cataract comes by a defluxion of humor; this
from a blow or contusion, and is uncurable: sometimes it happens that Nature
works a cure, and reduces it to its place again; but no man as yet can imitate
her, therefore we leave the business to her disposing.

The Crystalline humor is the chief instrument of sight, and if any defect
happen to it, that it be not pure nor perspicuous, the visive spirits cannot
exercise their office. This humor does often suffer prejudice through some
drying and condensing cause, as it often happens to ancient people, where the
aforesaid cause changes the Crystaline humor to redness. The sign of this
Disease is a thick White about the sight of the Eye, and every object appears
to the Patient as through a Cloud: It is called Glaucoma, and differs from a
Cataract in this, viz. a Cataract lies in the Pupilla, or sight near Cornea,
but Glaucoma lies much deeper, and is uncurable, especially in old people.

Sometimes the Crystalline humor is displaced, that it lies not directly
against the Pupilla; sometimes it lies too high, and sometimes too low; and if
one eye suffer, all things seem double: sometimes vapors and water divide the
visive humors, and causes the objects to be received into two places.
Sometimes the Crystalline humor is removed and brought nearer to the Pupilla,
and things that are near, are not so easily seen, as things farther of. But if
it be removed backward, things near are plainly seen, but not afar of; the use
of Spectacles are profitable in this case. Sometimes the Crystalline humor
lies to the right, or to the left side, so that more White appears on one
side, then on the other, and this we call Strabismus, or Squinting, this also
is uncurable, unless it happens that the muscles of the eyes be displaced by
convulsion, or palsy, for if it so happens, it is uncurable. Sometimes there
happens an inversion of the Crystalline humor, so that the objects seem
soulded or crooked: But these Diseases being uncurable by medicines, I shall
prescribe none.

CHAP. XI. Of a Cataract.
A Cataract is caused or bred by a distemper of the watery humor of the eye,
which distemper is in quantity or quality: if in quantity, it causes a
dilatation of the Pupilla; of which I shall speak in the next Chapter. If the
distemper be in quality, it proceeds from a mixture of excrementitious humors
with the watery humor: In the beginning of this distemper, the sight being a
little darkened, it is called Suffusion; but when it is gathered about the
Pupilla (like water) they call it Aqua-water; but when it is gathered thick
about the Pupilla, it is called a Cataract. If Choler be the humor mixed with
the watery humor, the Cataract appears somewhat citrine or yellow: if
melancholy, then is the Cataract more dull and blackish: If it be white as
chalk, it signifies a thick and compacted matter: if it be of the color of
Pearl, then slime and transparent phlegm is the humor offending.

There are two sorts of Cataracts, a true, and a Bastard-cataract: A true
Cataract does for the most part effect one eye only; and if both be affected,
they are not alike, nor affected at the same time, as in the spurious Cataract.
In a true Cataract, or Suftnsion, a derk matter appears in the Pupilla, which
does not in the other. But here let the Reader beware, lest he fall into error;
for this does not always hold, as a sure distinguishing rule: for if the humor
be as thin as the warry humor, nothing appears; and many upon this ground
have thought it to be Gutta Serena: but there is a great difference between
Gutta Serena, and this: for in Gutta Serena the sight is quite left, or at
least much diminished, and no fault appear in the Pupilla: But it is not so in
this Suffusion, which cannot be seen; for the sight is but a little diminished,
because the humor being thin and transparent, the objects pierce it like glass.

Though I need say nothing of the signs of this Disease, it being easy to
gather the signs from the causes, yet I shall and a few words. In the beginning
of a Suffusion, certain small Bodges, as hairs, flies, cobwebs, gnats, wool,
and such like, sly before the eyes, as it grows on the symptoms, are more
evident, and the objects appear as through a glass, when it is perfect: the
Pupilla is changed in color, and the sight is totally lost: what the colors
denote, I have already laid down. If the matter of the Cataract appear dark, it
lies between Chorion (or Uyea) and Cornea, and the Pupilla is dilated, and
white or red veins appear about the circle of the eye: if the contrary appear,
judge that the matter lies between the Christalline, and Uvea. If the matter
lie deep, the Pupilla is contracted, if higher enlarged. When the Cataract if
newly begun, and the Patient can see, as thoug a clad; if he be young, and the
season suitable, it may be cured: On the contrary, if it be confirmed, and the
matter gross, it yields not to medicines, but must be couched with a needle.

And seeing I speak of couching give me leave to tell you, that it is a
dangerous operation, and often attended with bad success; but if you find it
needful, and likely to be prevalent, make use of a near-handed Chyrurgeon; and
that you may know, whether it be likely or no to be cured, consider a few
rules. Sign. of care, by couching, are these: If when the sound eye be shut,
the Pupilla of the eye affected appear larger, and perceive some light, there
is hopes of cure: if the contrary appear, judge accordingly. A black, green,
yellow, and hard Cataract, never yields to medicine, seldom to the Needle:
Attempt not the operation on old men, nor children: You must also consider,
before you attempt this operation, whether the Suffusion be ripe and sit for
couching; or whether it be not grown too hard. The first you must try thus;
press down the eye affected with your finger, and if you alter the shape of
the, Suffusion, and when your finger is off it, returns to its former
station, then is it thin, and not ripe: but it the contrary appear, it may be
couched with a Needle: But here note, that it must be moderate, and not too
compact, but like a skin that will roll upon the Needle; if it be thick and
solid like chalk, or hail, it cannot be couched.

For the cure, you must observe the same rules prescribed in the former
Chapter, you must use and abstain from the same kind of diet; you must use
general and particular Evacuations; you must revel the humors offending, and
strengthen the head and eyes. Then you must come to Topical medicines, and
though I am (almost) of Galens opinion, who says they are little worth, for
they promise more then they can perform, yet Experience has taught, and
Authors have confirmed, that Cataracts, which have not been of long
continuance, but taken in the beginning, have been cured by Topics, after the
use of the medicines before mentioned; therefore I shall insert a few of them,
and leave the Ingenious to find out more.

First, you must make a Fomentation of such things, as have power to mollify
and dissolve: Take of Celendine, Fenel, Eyebright, of each one handful; of
Rue, Vervain, Clary, of each half a handful; Melilot, Chamomel Flowers, and
Red-Rose leaves, of each one pugil: Fenugreek seed one ounce: boil them in a
pint and a half of Spring water, to the consumption of the half pint, then put
in a half pint of White Wind, and let it boil a little. Strein it out, and with
clothes wet it in the liquor, soment the eyes every morning, so long as you see
occasion. If you wash the eyes with Red-Wine, sometimes it hinders the
defluxion, discusseth and dissolveth. It is good to let a child lick the eye,
after it has eaten sweet Fenel seeds. Infuse Crocus Metallorum in White Wind,
and wash the eye with the Wine; or after a sufficient infusion, pour off the
Wine clear, and with sweet Fenel and Fenugreek seed, of each one ounce; of
Aloes half an ounce, Saffron a dram; beat them, and searse them into fine
powder, the blood of a young Pidgeon hot, the weight of them all, with the
aforesaid Wine, what is sufficient to make a soft Pultis, and apply it warm to
the eye at night; take it off in the morning. Or slit a young Pidgeon, and lay
it to the eye. Then you must come to make use of Topical Medicines called
Collyries, which many times (by Galens favor) has good success, if the
Cataract be not too much confirmed Take the leaves of Rue, Fenel, Vervain,
Celendine, and Eyebright, of each one handful; Centaury the less, Burnet,
Avens, Sage, of each a half handful; Fenel roots, and the roots of round
Birthwort, of each a half pound; Red rose leaves, and White-violet leaves, of
each one ounce; Radish seed, and Fenugreek seed, of each one dram;
Ammoniacum, and the Natural Balsome, of each a dram; Tutty two drachms:
powder those that are to be poudered the heaths and roots shred and sliced; put
to them White Wind, honey, and the urine of a Boy, as much as may wet them all,
viz. Of White Wine three parts; of the Urine two, and honey one; then distill
them in Balneo Mariae: drop the water into the eyes, morning and evening:
regarding the course and medicines before prescribed. Josephus Quercetanus, in
his Pharmacopaea, does much commend this following Water, viz. Take of the
water of the greater Celandine six ounces. Crocus Metallorum one dram; infuse
it in the same water, and drop two or three drops into the eye, three or four
times a day as long as need requires.

I could insert many more Receipts of Learned and able men, but I fear my Book
will swell too big: I shall only insert the Ointment of Zacutus Lasitanas,
which he commends, for drying and purging the moiffure flowing into the eyes:
Take of the Oil of Roses three ounces, white Rose Water nine ounces: Camphire
one dram, Tutty one scruple, Honey two ounces, the Gall of a Goat half an
ounce, Lupin meat half a dram, Aloes Succotrine one dram, Sugar Candy half a
dram, the juice of Horehound, Fennel, and Rue, of each half an ounce, Mirrh
one scruple, Ammoniacum half a dram, Saicocol one dram and a half.

Powder them that are to be poudered, mix them, and boil them a little with a
gentle fire; and with the grease of a Goat or Sheep, and a little Wax, make an
Ointment accorbing to Art; anoint the Eyebrows twice in a day, three hours
after meat, which will purg plenty of water out of the head, through the corner
of the eye.

When you have finished your Cure, whether by M^es, (...) by the Needle, you
must keep your Patient (...) of Physic, for fear of a Relapse, and administer
such things as threaten the head and eyes, and hinder defluxion: It is good to
wash the head and eyes, every morning, with white wine, wherein has he en
infused sweet Fennel seed in powder, till they smart; but for other medicines,
to strengthen the head and eyes, I refer you to the preceding Chapter.

CHAP. XII. Of the enlarging, and dilating: of the straitening or contracting
of the Pupilla.
THis Disease is called in Greek Mydriasis, because too much light going in,
hurts the sight: hence it is, that those that are thus distempered, see
better in a darkish place than in the light. And this may be demonstrated by
the natural change of the Pupilla (in sound eyes) in bright and obscure places.
For when a man is in a bright and clear place, the Pupilla is contracted and
made less, lest the light, going in too fast, should dissipate the spirits: so
that a man going suddenly out of a very light place, into a house or place more
obscure, at the first entry he sees (almost) nothing at all, the Pupilla being
so lately contracted: he remaining in the same place, the Pupilla is soon
dilated or enlarged to receive more light, and then he sees perfectly those
things, which before he could not. Then if he go out suddenly into a very light
place his eyes are dazzled, and he sees not perfectly, because the Pupilla is
enlarged, and the Light going in so fast, does dissipate and dispierse the
Visive Spirits. Hence you perceive, that the Light ought to pass into the Eye
in a moderate quantity, and the Pupilla ought to be of a moderate size. Hence
Galen observes, that they who are born with narrow Pupillas, see best.

The Pupilla is enlarged, or contracted by dryness, or repletion. It is
enlarged by dryness, which stretches the Uvea, which makes the form of the
Pupilla larger; as Leather being pierced, when it is dry, the hole is larger,
and this proceeds from Fevers, and such drying Diseases, which are attended
with want of sleep. So may the Pupilla be straightened by dryness, when the
Tunicle Uvea, by reason of the diminishing of the humors of the Eye, loses
its former extension, falls together, and is wrinkled, and so the hole of the
Pupilla is made streighter: whereas in the former the Tunicle though dry,
holds its extension. It is made larger also by repletion, namely by vapors
or wind sent unto the Eye, or by the extraordinary flowing of the watery and
other humors to the eye, or by the swelling of Uvea it self, it is distended,
and the Pupilla made larger: So the same watery humor may work a contrary
effect, namely by relaxing the same Tunicle, and by that means making the hole
streighter: The Pupilla is enlarged sometimes by Convulsion, as may be seen by
some Epileptick Children: Sometimes a stroke or fall, may cause a deflaxion
into the eyes, hence comes extension; retension of the Spirits causes wind and
humors, and that causes distension of the Pupilla, and sometimes the Pupilla
is made streighter, by reason of the want of the visive spirits to extend the
Tunicles, for want of which they are relaxed, and fall together, as may be seen
in old men.

These Diseases, though they are contrary, yet are to be cured by the same
medicines; remember this, that if these Diseases be of long continuance, and in
ancient people, they are (without doubt) incurable. But if the Patient be
young, and the Disease of no long continuance, you must proceed, with this
consideration, that the cure must be varied according to the variety of causes:
If it proceed from dryness, you must refresh the body with medicines which are
moist and restaurative; and such you shall find in the cure of the Hective
Fever. If it comes from a humor filling the Eye, you must purge and cleanse
the head and whole body of that humor, as you are taught in the cure of a
Cataract. If from Wind, after due Evacuations, you must labor to discuss the
Wind, with the decoction of Fennel, Rue, Dill, Cammomel, Red-Roses made in Red
Rose Water, and White Wind, and the Eyes fomented therewith. If there be
occasion for Astriagent Medicines, to bring the Pupilla (being enlarged) to its
former state, make use of this following, taught by Ryverius. Take of Red-Roses
dried two Scruples; Saffron, Spicknard, and the Bark of Frankinsense tree, of
each half a scruple: Tutty prepared, Burnt-Ivory, and Acatia, of each one
scruple: make them into fine powder, and tie it up in a fine linen rag, and
hang it in three ounces of Red Rose water; woen you have occasion to use it,
squeez the cloaih, and drop the water into the eyes, and wash them therewith.
If a blow in the eye causes an inflammation, cure it as the inflammation of
the eye: but if by the blow, the Pupilla be enlarged without inflammation, drop
in a drop or two of Pigeons blood: and apply a Cataplasme, made with
Beanflower, and Red-Roses, juice of Plantane, and Redrose water.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Pin and Web.
THE Tunicle, called Cornea, sometimes loses its color and brightness;
sometimes it grows thick by dryness, as in old men, and is incurable. Sometimes
gross humors are fastened to it, by reason of inflammation. Sometimes by
resolving Medicines, the thinner humors are dissolved, and the thicker remain:
or by the use of cold medicines, the humors are thickened, and a white humor
is contracted, which is called by some Leucona; by others Albugo, commonly a
Pin and Web. Sometimes it comes from a Sear, after an Ulcer, and so the Cornea
loses its transparentress. Sometimes the Eye is bloud-shod, and that spoileth
the natural color of the Cornea, and this is called Sugillatio: Sometimes the
Cornea is made yellow by the Jaundise. All these Diseases are easily
discovered, and their causes are laid down in the Description: That which
comes after a Wound or Ulcer, and is a Scar, is not easily cured. But the cure
of the Pin and Web consists in Emollients, attenuating and discussing
medicines. But the Antecedent cause must first be removed by universal
evacuations, such as are described in the 10. and 11. Chapters. Then you must
soften the hard matter, with the decoction of Fenugreek, Mallows, Melilot,
Celendine, Fenel, and the like. Then let a Child chew sweet Fenel-seed, and
afterward liek the eye, or make a Water thus: Take of Honey a pint, the juice
of Fenel-Brooklime, and Celendine, of each half a pint. Sugar Candy dissolved
in the juyces an ounce, with the natural Balsome a scruple; clarify them
together, or distill them in Balneo Mariae, and drop it into the eye. The seed
of Oculus Christi put into the eye, is good. If it be a scar, after the use of
the former medicines, use the Water of Honey: afterward, put a quantity of the
Gall of an Ox to the Juyces before spoken of, and thicken it with Gum-Traganth.
If the Eye be blood-shod, and yields not to the foregoing medicine, you must
seek its cure in the Chapter of the Cataract. As for the yellowness of the Eyes
caused by the Jaundise, take away the cause, and the effect cease.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Inflammation of the Eyes.
THis Disease is called Ophthalmia, which is an inflammation of the Tunicle
Adnata, and is sometimes extended to the Cornea: By the Latins it is called
Lippitudo, bloodshontess: This Disease is divided into three kinds; the first
is called Taraxis by the Greeks, and by the Latins Conturbatio, and it comes
from an external cause, viz. the Sun, Smoke, Oil, Dust, or the like. If it
comes from an internal cause, namely from distempers of the stomach, it is
called Phlogosis, and is a light inflammation, but is the Original of the true
Ophthaliny: which always proceeds from an internal cause, accompanied with
tumor, redness, and pain, and a thick Exerement, called Lippa; from whence the
Latins call it Lippitudo or bloodshotness. The third sort is called (...), in
in Latin also Chimosis, this is attended with vehement pain, and the eyelids
are so inverted, that they can scarcely cover the eye, the red covers most
part of the Iris, and it proceeds from repletion and flegmy humors. I might
here show you how Hippocrates has divided these Diseases; namely, a moist and
dry Ophthalmy; the moist I have already spoken of, the dry he calls (...), it
wants humidity, and proceeds from Choler, and adust Melaneholy; there are
other subdivisions, if there be itching joined with it, he calls it (...);
and if it come with hardness of the eyelids (...). Galen mentions another,
which he calls Ophthalmia Tabida, which ends with a Consumption, and loss of
the eye: this happens to them who have moist heads, and weak eyes, sit to
receive a defluxion. The immediate causes are defluxion, or congestion, and
sometimes both. The defluxion comes from the head, either by the internal
veins, which comes from the brain under the skull, or by the external veins,
which come from the Pericranium to the Eyes.

These signs demonstrate the Disease, and the cause thereof; if redness appear
without swelling, it is a Cont^rbation: If swelling, heat, and tears, be joined
to the redness, then is it a perfect Ophthalmy: but if it cover the black of
the eye, and invert the eyelids, then it is called Chimosis. If blood abound,
and cause the distemper, the eye and face will be red, and the veins swelled.
If Choler be the cause, the Patient feels a pricking pain, sharp tears, which
corrode the cheeks and corners of the eyes. If it proceed from Phlegm, the pain
is heavy, many sl^my and glutin^tious tears. If Melancholy cause the grief, the
tumor is but small, the color of a dusky redness, few tears, the humor
thick, the constitution of the Patient melancholy. If the defluxion come from
the internal parts of the head, the pain will be felt inwardly, and about the
roots of the eyes; if through the exterior vessels the contrary signs appear,
the veins of the forehead are distended, and there is much shooting about the
Temples.

For the cure, the external causes must be removed, the antecedent causes
evacuated, revelled, and repelled; the conjunct cause derived and discussed,
and the parts affected, strengthened.

Let the Patient observe an orderly and temperate Diet, and eat such things
that are of easy disgesture, let him avoid all sharp and salt things, and such
as fume up to the head, and such things as breed Choler: Let him abstain from
strong drink; let most of his drink be Barley water: Let him avoid all motion,
let him lie still as long as he is able, and sleep as long as he can. Let him
keep his eyes shut, and what ever you do, endeavor to keep his body soluble.

Phlebotomy for the most part is convenient, but let it be regulated and
moderated according to the constitution, strength, age, and sex of your
Patient, and nature of the Disease.

If the body be Plethorick, and the Disease has its original from blood, you
must take away the greater quantity, for Galen in his book de curat. per sang.
mis. reiateth how one was cured of an Ophthalmy by bloed-letting: first three
pound, and four hours after one pound: understand this only in the case before
mentioned, though I could instance many cases more, cited by eminent Authors
and Fathers of Physic, yet let this serve for all to avoid prolixity. If only
one eye be affected, bleed your Patient on the contrary side. If you find a
stoppage of any accustomed evacuations, viz. the Terms or Hemorroid veins; if
the first be stopped, open the Saphaena; if the other, bleed them with Leeches.

To make revulsion, some do apply Cupping-glasses to the shoulders and back:
others open the veins of the head and temples, sometimes the veins or the
corners of the eyes, and behind the ears: and some bleed these veins by
Leeches, all which are very profitable for derivation. When you have bled, and
made sufficient revulsion, you must purge the humor that offends, and
causes the blood to be inflamed; but first let the humors be prepared, then
purge gently, and often; and if you see occasion, after all this, you may purge
more strongly. Prepare the humors thus: Take of Endive, Succory, and Fumitory,
of each one handful; Red. Rose leaves one ounce; of the greater Cold-seeds half
an ounce; Of Lettice and Poppyseeds, of each two scruples: boil them in a quart
of Spring water, to the consumption of half, shrein it, and with Sirrup of
Violets two ounces, and Sirrup of Fumitory one ounce, make a Julep for three
potions: afterward you must administer such medicines, as have power gently to
carry away the peccant humors. Take of Cassia newly drawn, one ounce and a
half: Manna dissolved in Rose Water an ounce: Catholicon half an ounce, Powder
of Rubarb two drachms, with Sugar sufficient, make a Bolus for three times. If
the body be slagmatick, purge with pills of Agarick, or Lucis Majores; but take
this caution along with you, that you administer no strong purgation in this
distemper, without the advice of an able Physician. After sufficient
Evacuations, you may profirably apply a Cataplasme to the forehead and temples,
that has an astringent power, by which the humors flowing to the eyes may be
stopped: Take of Bolearmonick, Mastich, Frankincense, Sanguis Draconis, and
Wheatflower, of each one dram; the powder of Lentils, and Red-Roses, of each
two seruples, with the White of an egg, juice of Nettles, Vinegar of Roses, of
each a like quantity, sufficient to make a Cataplasme. An Apple roasted with
Frankincense and Mastick in it, moisten it with the White of an Egg beaten to
water, and as much of a sound woman's breast-milk, make a Cataplasme, and apply
it to the eye; or with crumbs of bread, and woman's milk, with a little Rose
water, you may make a convenient Cataplasme.

Then you must prepare Collyries, Unguents, and Fomentations, which must be
used with discretion, and varied as the pain or inflammation increases, or
decreaseth, or as the humors are discussed or fixed, etc. out of the
multiplicity of such medicines, I shall insert a few, and but a few, for
brevities sake.

Take the Salt of Lead one scruple, Sal-Armoniack six grains, Rose Water and
Plantine-water, of each three ounces, the White of an egg beaten to water, one
ounce, let them be mixed therein, and the Salts well dissolved, drop a little
into the eye morning and evening. Quercetan commends the infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, made in Eyebright, and Fenel-water, and used as before. Paenotus
his Ointment is very good in these ocular inflmamations; and the way to prepare
it is thus: Take of Tutry prepared an ounce and a half, Camphire one dram,
Verdegreece 12. grains; beat the Tutty and the Camphire together in a mortar,
into fine powder, likewise the Verdegreece by it self: then take of fresh
butter (or May butter, if you can have it) one ounce, Rosewater one dram;
boil them gently together, then take them from the fire: first put in the
Camphire and Tutty, then the Verdegreece by degrees, stir them well together,
and strein them through a piece of Sarsenet, put it into a glass, and keep it
for your use: anoint the inside of the eyelids, especially about the corners,
and you shall find ease, whether it be a moist or dry inflammation. If you make
an Ointment of fresh butter, and juice of Tobacco, you may do wonders in this
case, but you must only anoint the outside of the eye lids. In the declination
of the Disease, you may make a fomentation, which has a power to discuss and
resolve, of the decoction of Camomel, Melliot, Roses, Eyebright, and Marjerom,
and with clothes foment the eyes.

If the Disease has its original from a phlegmatic humor, your resolvents
must be the stronger. Baths, also the drinking of Wine has been approved, and
much commended by Galen and Hippocrates, as a means to extenuate, dissolve,
diffuse, and discuss the thick humors gathered in the eyes, and to open
obstructions. If you find that the Ophthalmy is caused by defects of the brain,
by defluxion, or a hot distemper of the Liver, then labor first to remove the
cause, as the several Chapters, thereof entreating, will instruct you.

Sometimes if the humor cannot be resolved, there is a suppuration and an
Ulcer sometimes follows it, and sometimes matter gathers under the Cornea;
this is called Hypopye, this comes also sometimes by a contusion; sometimes it
covers the Pupilla, and sometimes compasses the Circle of the eye, and is
like a man's nail: Hence the Greeks call it (...): This Disease is known by the
inflammation going before; the matter is white under the Cornea, and when the
eye is moved, it has a motion. For the cure of this, you must (if any of the
inflammation remain) use the aforegoing medicines; afterward do as you are
taught in the cure of a Cataract.

Sometimes not only in the Cornea, but also in the Adnata, little blisters do
arise, like little bubbles, like Pearls or Grumwel seed, it has its original
from a sharp and watery humor: it is called Phlyctaenae: in the Adnata they are
red, in the Cornea white within; but if they be on the outside, they are black.
They which are in Cornea are more dangerous, then those that are in Adnata: and
the more superficial they are the less is the danger. The cure consists in
the resolving the matter conjoined, and averting of the antecedent cause:
labor to prevent a Suppuration, lest an Ulcer follow. For the particular cure
of this Disease, you must use those medicines proper for the cure of the
Ophthalmy.

After an Ophthalmy, and blisters in the eyes, ulcers sometimes happen in the
aforesaid Tunicles; when the humors there gathered, or the blisters come to
suppuration: and sometimes they follow sharp, corroding and watty humors
flowing into the eyes. Some of them are superficial or profound, broad or
narrow. A hollow narrow and hard Ulcer is called in Greek (...), in Latin
Fossula, or a little Ditch. An Ulcer that is broad, and not so deep, is called
(...); that which comes in the Circle of the eye is called (...), or Ulcus
coronale. They that are deep, solid, hard, and crusty, are called (...), or
(...). If the Ulcer be in the Cornea, there will be a small white blemish in
the black of the eye: If it be in the Adnata, there will be a small red blemish
in the white of the eye, because the Adnata is full of blood. All Ulcers in the
eyes are dangerous, and hard to cure, but more in the Cornea, than in the
Adnata: If it happen in the? pilla, though it be cured, it much prejudiceth the
sight, because it leaves a scar, which hinders the perspicuity of the
Cornea. For the Cure, you must use such medicines as dry and cleanse moderately
such as assuage pain, and revel, and restrain the humors flowing upon the
eyes. You can scarcely read thus far, and be ignorant of particular medicines;
yet for the benefit of the unskilful, I shall insert one or two: Take an egg
boiled hard, pilled and cut in two pieces: take out the yolk, and fill the
hollow with Sugar Candy, and Mirth in Powder, tie them last, and hang them up
in a Cellar, and a Water will drop from it, which is good to cleanse the eye
without pain: the water of honey distilled, has been found very effectual. But
if these medicines are not strong enough, do as follows: Take of Plantane,
Vervane, and White rose water, of each one ounce, honey two ounces, the Whites
of ten new laid eggs, boiled hard; of Mirth, Tutty, and the white Troches of
Rasis, of each a dram, Sarcocol, Frankincence, Aloes, and Ceruse, of each
half a dram: powder them that are to be powdered, and mix them all in a
stone mortar; then put them into a small glass body with a head and receiver,
and distill it in Balneo: This Water is excellent against Ulcers in the eyes.
These three Diseases I thought good to annex to the cure of the inflammation of
the eyes, having a dependency thereupon.

CHAP. XV. Of the Cancer, and Rupture of the Cornea.
SOmetimes a Cancer grows up, and is perfected in the eye, of which there is
two sorts, either occult, or ulcerated: The occult is called a Cancerous Tumor,
or Cancer of the Eye: The ulcerated is called a cancerous ulcer in the eye: It
is known by a blew, leaden color, and unequal hardness, the veins adjoining
are very full and blew, and the eye, the temples, and the whole head is
afflicted with a strong and pricking pain. If the Disease be fixed and perfect,
it is incurable, except it be taken away by manual operation, but if it be
taken in the beginning, it may be cured: you must administer convenient
Physic, and adjoyn a suitable diet. You must draw blood on the same side: if
you find occasion, bleed the Hemorrhoid veins by Leeches, and apply them
behind the ears: after the use of these, or the like revulsions, purge
melancholy often, and gently: once or twice a week (if the body be strong
enough) purge with the extract of black Hellebore. These remedies will much
diminish the humors, and decrease the pain, after which you must use Topics,
such as have prepared Tutty, and the white Troches in them, for which have
recourse to the preceding Chapter. The flesh of young Pigeons or Chickens
applied to the Cancer, has been found very available.

The Rupture of the Cornea, is when the Tunicle is so divided, that the watery
humor, and sometimes the Uvea comes forth. The cause of both is a Wound,
Ulcer, or a great afflux of humors; by which the Cornea is so distended, that
it cracks, and the humors contained are let out, and sometimes the Uv a
shoots out: Paulus divides this Disease into four kinds; the first comes
forth like the head of a Fly, and therefore he calls it (...); The second is
when a greater part comes forth, and is like the stone of a Raisin, and is
called (...). The third is, when the Eruption is so great, that it seems like
an Apple, and is called (...). The fourth is when the Uvea (being come forth)
is hard, and is called (...). The Cure is very difficult always, but for the
most part it is incurable. After bleeding (if need be) and purging the peccant
humors, you must use astringent and glutinating medicines; as the white
Troches, and the white of an Egg dropped into the Eye: then make a Cataplasme to
the part, thus: Take the root of Solomon's Seal four ounces, Quinces pared and
fliced two ounces; Red-rose leaves a handful, Acatia a dram; Saffron two
scruples, boil these in red wine, and Plantane water (of each a like quantity)
as much as is sufficient to make a Cataplasme. Afterward, to make a perfect
consolidation, take an ounce of the Mucilage of Gum Traganth made in Plantain
water, the clarified juice of Plantain, and of the root of Solomon's Seal, of
each one spoonful: of the white of an egg beaten to clean water, and a woman's
breast-milk, of both a spoonful, washed Aloes, prepared Tutty, and Sarcocol, of
each two scruples, Saffron one scruple: powder what is to be poudered, and mix
them for a Collyric.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Diseases of the corners of the Eyes and Eyelids.
SOmetimes there happens a Tumor in the corner of the Eye, at the root of the
nose; if it do not break, it is called Anchylops; if it do break, it is called
Aegylops. Sometimes this Tumor comes without inflammation, and is bred of a
thick, phlegmatic, slimy humor as the Tumors called Atheromata, Steatomata,
etc. of which you shall have a brief account in the next book.

When it comes with inflammation, it is like a Bile, with shooting pain, and
very red, and it comes by thin and choleric blood flowing thither, and then
imposthumateth; which being open produces an Ulcer; then it becomes hollow,
and is called Fistula Lachrymalis. The Cure is very difficult, because it is
ill applying medicines, the eye being so near. If it has not been of long
continuance, and the Orifice to be seen externally, it may be cured by
medicines: But if it has continued a year, the Bone is foul, and hard to be
cured without burning. If it turns to a Cancer, it is incurable, because
medicines will enlarge it, and increase pain, and is known by the hardness and
blewness of the skin, the extension of the veins, and extremity of the pain.

You must open a vein, if nothing hinder, and revel the humors by purging,
which you may do by these following Pills, viz. Cochiae, Arabicae, Aureae, and
Lucis Majoris: then you must endeavor to stop the progress by repelling
medicines: take the juice of Night shade, Shepherds purse, and Knotgrasse, of
each two ounces; Acacia, the flowers of Balaustines, Bolearmeniack, Gauls,
Frankincense, and Roch-allum, of each a dram; boil them well together: then
with four ounces of white Wax, and four drachms of Turpentine, make a Cerate,
to be applied to the forehead: Afterward endeavor to resolve the humors:
Amatus Lucitanus commends this following Cerate: Take of the Powder of
Cockle-shels two drams, Mirrh, Aloes, and Frankincense, of each half an ounce:
Sarcocol, Sanguis Draconis, and Ceruse, of each three drachms: Opopanax
dissolved in Wine, Vinegar, and Bloud-stone, of each one dram and an half,
Saffron two scruples, Wax and Rozen, of each three ounces: make a Cerate
according to art, and apply it to the corner of the Eye and Forehead. If, after
all this, it will come to Suppuration, make use of such things as will hasten
it, least the humors corrode the part: apply a Plaster of Diachilon Simplex.
If an inflammation approach, apply a Cataplasme made with white bread and milk:
If it break not suddenly, open it with a Launcet, cleanse the Ulcer and heal
it. But if it prove a Fistula, you must be the more careful, first to cleanse
it thus. Take of Aqua vitae, and Honey of Roses, of each one ounce, Mirrh two
ounces, with Alum and Verdegreece, of each a dram: boil them together, and
make a Liniment: Unguentum, Aegyptiacum, and Apostolorum, is of great virtue in
this case.

If the bone be foul, it must be cured by an actual Cautery: yet Fabricius
Hildanus says he cured a Lachrimal Fistula with medicines; he applied
Euphorbium, and upon the same an Emplaister of Gum-Elemi, and this he did till
he skaled the bone: afterward with the Tolutan Balsome, a drop upon a little
lint, he incarnated, and consolidated the Fistula in a very short time.

After this Lachrymal Fistula, there follows a consuming and diminishing of
the Caruncle in the corner of the Eye, sometimes it also happens by a sharp
humor falling down thither, and sometimes by cleasing medicines applied
without discretion; this Disease is called Rhyas: there is another Disease
conrrary to this, which is an immoderate growth and increase of the flesh in
the corner of the eye: which proceeds sometimes for want of orderly drying up
of the Ulcer, and sometimes by a defluxion of blood to the part, and this is
called Enchanthis. For the cute of the first, you must perform it by
Incarnative Medicines: Take of Aloes, Borax, Frankincense, Dragons Blood,
Cypress Nuts, and Mprtles, of each one dragm, the flowers of Pomegranates, Red
Roses, and Comfrey, of each two scruples; theseeds of Sumach on scruple. Let
them be boiled in old Canary, and Plantane, and Rose Water, of each half a
pint, to the consumption of half, and with this Collyrie often wash the part
affected: the other you must cure by taking away the superfluous flesh, with
eating medicines, as Burnt Alum, Burnt Vtriol, Unguentum Aegyptiatum, or
Apostolorum; or you must cut it off, and burn it with an Iron: But proceed
which way you will, you must not forget convenient Evacuations, for fear of a
defluxion, and you must beware least you take it not away too near, least it
turn to Rhyas. There is also a defluxion of Rhenm, issuing out of du the
corners of the Eyes and is called involuntary weeping, and by some Epiphora:
for the producing of this Disease there is an indisposition in the part
sending, and the part receiving: the part sending is the brain, which, being
too hot or too cold, attracteth a watery humor, and sends it to the
inferior parts. By the weakness, thinness, thickness, of the Caruncle in the
corner of the Eye, it is made incapable to resist such a defluxion, which often
happens in the three forementioned Diseases.

This defluxion is conveyed sometimes by the external, and sometimes by the
internal veins: Sometimes the defluxion is hot, and sometimes cold. If it be
conveyed by the external veins, the veins of the Forehead and Temples are
distended, and the pain is felt without the Skull; if internally, the pain is
felt contrarily. If the humor be hot, it causes the more pain; heat, redness,
and exulceration of the eyebrows follow.

If this Disease comes from an outward cause, if it has not continued long,
it may be soon cured, but hardly if your Patient be old. If it proceed from a
Lachrymal Fiflula, Rhyas, or Echanthis, it has its cure with those Diseases.
You must take away the defluxion, and strengthen the part, you must evacuate
the humor offending by purging: likewise if the body be phlethorick, and
nothing prohibit, you may open a vein. You must make revulsions of the flowing
humors by Cupping, Vesicatories, Blisters behind the neck, and Issues in the
arms.

For derivation, apply Leeches behind the ears, and Masticatories in the
morning: strengthen the head and brain, whether the humor be hot or cold; the
Chap. of the Catarrh, and of the coldest distempers of the brain, will
particularly inform you, how to purge, revel, and derive the peccant humors,
and strengthen the part affected. Then you must apply astringent medicines to
the Fore head and temples; if the humor flow through the external veins: If it
be a cold humor, take of Frankincense, Tacamabacca, and Mastich, of each two
drachms: Terra Sigillata one dram, Mace pulverized, and Juniper Gum, of each
two scruples: Turpentine and Wax sufficient to make a Cerate for the forehead
and temples; But if it be a hot and sharp humor, take of Endive and Knotgrass,
of each one handful; the Root of Solomon's Seal one pound, beat them well in a
Stone mortar, and with a pint of White Wind Vinegar, let them boil till half of
the Vinegar be consumed: then take of Bolearmenick, Sanguis Draconis,
Pomegranate Flowers, of each two drachms: Frankincense, Mastick, and Red-Roses,
of each half a dram, powder them, and mix them with the other, and make a
Caraplasme to be applied as aforesaid. You must likewise apply drying and
astringent medicines to the part affected. Take of prepared Tutty, Egg-shels,
Aloes, Frankincense, and Mastich, of each two scruples, Sarcocol, Sanguis
Draconis, and Sumach seed, of each one scruple; Mirrh and Spicknard, of each
six grains; make them all into fine powder, and tie them up in a rag, and steep
it in white Wine, Fenel, Eyebright, or white Rosewater, and squeez it often
into the eyes. These medicines prescribed for an Ophthalmy are good likewise in
this distemper.

There is another disease appertaining to the corner of the Eye, it is called
by some (Pterygium) by other some the Haw in the Eye, and by others Unguis, and
it is a hard and Nervous Membrane, growing out of the corner of the Eye,
covering the white, and in time the Pupilla also. Sometimes it is thin and
white, and sometimes it is red and full of Veins.

It is caused by Ulceration of the Caruncle of the Eye, and is bred by
excrements (flowing to the part) as well as blood; hence it comes to pass
that variety of Haws are bred, according to the seeding humor, and may be thus
distinguished; A red Haw comes of pure blood, a Yellow of Choler, a white of
Phlegm, a dark and black one of Melancholy. It the Eye affected grow less, it
is an evil sign, and little hopes there is of recovery.

If you take it whilst it is new and beginning, it may (with difficulty) be
taken off by medicine; but if it be far gone, it must be done by Surgery, you
must Evacuate and purge the Antecedent cause, as you have heard sufficiently
already in the other Chapters of the diseases of the eyes; and you must use the
same Course of Dier.

Then you may make use of those Topics spoken of in the Cure of blisters in
the Eyes.

Take of Cuttle bone in fine powder, and put it upon the Haw; this I have
known, take the Haw from the Eye of an Horse: if you mix Tutty and Vitriol to
it, it may prove the better.

I shall instance one more commended by Forestus. Take of the juice of Fennel
four ounces; the juice of Celandine three ounces, of Rue two ounces, and of
Mallows two ounces and an half, Aloes one dram, Vitriol two scruples,
Verdegrease one scruple, Ginger and Cinnamon, of each half a scruple; the Gall
of an Eel half an ounce, the Gall of an Ox two drachms, Sugar Candy two
scruples, let the juyces boil with the rest, then clarify it and make a
Collyrium, with which dress the Eye, and if this prevail not, it must be
taken off by Surgery.

I shall say no more, but put an end to this Chapter, and the diseases of the
Eyes.

CHAP. XVII. Of the diseases of the Ears.
THe Ear is the Organ of hearing, the most spiritual sense, the agent of
understanding, the gate, through which science truth and virtue has its
entrance into the soul, this member is subject to diverse diseases, Similary,
Organick, and Common, which are known and distinguished by their symptoms.

There is first deafness or dullness of hearing, which I shall join, because
they differ only in degrees, and are the same in causes. I shall not spend my
time to show you the difference between deafness and dullness of hearing,
only declare the causes of both. The first is called by the Greeks (...), the
other is called (...), both of these have their original from a distemper of
the brain. The cause lies either in the exterior, or interior cavity; the
exterior cavity may be obstructed or stopped by Tumor, Impostume, blood,
matter, phlegm, or the like, which may prove defective to the hearing; but this
cause cannot make an absolute deafness, because there is an open way from the
interior eavity to the Pallat, by which the sound is carried; as you may
observe by those that are hard of hearing, for they are subject to hold open
their mouths, that so they may hear the better, and you may prove it by this
example: Hold a stick between your teeth, with which strike the strings of a
musical instrument, Ropping your Ears, and you may hear the sound as well or
better then with your open Ears. The interior Cavity is sometimes obstructed by
Phlegmatic, and Choleric humors, and sometimes by blood. Sometimes humors from
all parts of the body are sent to this Cavity as it happens sometimes in
Fevers. Sometimes the Tympany may be relaxed, sometimes by excess of moist
humors, and sometimes by some violent and sudden noise, sometimes it is
stretched or dried after some violent disease, accompanied with watching or
fasting, sometimes it may be broken by a violent motion, or corroded by a sharp
humor. Sometimes Narcoticks administered over much: sometimes a cold distemper, or
cold water got into the Ear, or sometimes the instruments of hearing hurt by
some stroke or fall or the like, may be the cause of this disease.

Though it be hard to distinguish all these by their proper signs, yet you may
by Art, and Conjecture come near it. If the distemper comes from a distemper
of the brain: either there is an appearance of some disease in the head, as the
Headache, Apoplexy, etc: or some of the other senses are hurt. If the external
Cavity of the Ears be obstructed by excrementitious humors, or something fallen
in, it may be discovered by the Eye. If the interior Cavity be obstructed by
some humor: the humor may be known by some present or preceding disease, or by
the constitution of the body. The looseness or moistness of the Tympane, may
be conjectured by some preceding moist distemper, the dryness of the same
part, by the dryness of the whole body. The Tympane cannot be broken, unless
there has been some violent cause, which might break it, preceded.

If deafness be absolute, and of long continuance, or if the Patient was borne
so, it is incurable. If it proceed from a sharp or continual Fever, the cure
of the Fever is the remedy. The Tympane broken, the deafness is incurable. If
it increase and decrease, it proceeds from a moveable humor, and is curable.
If it has its original from a distemper of the brain, it is easier cured,
then if it comes from a proper distemper of the Ear.

For the Cure, you must consider what humor is the cause of the defect, and you
must purge the body, and particularly the head: you must use Revulsions, as
Cauteries, Vesicatories, Gargarisms, and Masticatories: to be breise, these and
other remedies effectual against this distemper, may be sought out of the
Chapter treating of cold distempers of the brain. Sulphurous and Bituminous
Baths are very profitable especially if the Patient wear a cap made of Sponge;
and the water pumped upon his head. It is good also to make fomentations of
these following herbs, viz.

Mallows, Marjarom, Hysop, Centuary, Mints, Camomell, Rosemary, Peneroyall,
Sage; boil them in white Wine, and soment the Ear: If you would have it
stronger, add a dram of the pulp of Coloquintida, and as much white Hellebore
to the fomentation, a sumigation made with a Punnell of the same decoction,
does wonderfully pierce the Cavity of the Ear. Or make a Loaf of bread, and
m^x with the meal a good quantity of Carawayseeds, Bayberryes, Juniper
berryes, Nutmegs, and Cloves: and when it is baked, cut it in the middle, and
apply it hot to the Ear affected, or to both if need be, and if you think it
not of sufficient force, dip it first into the spirit of Wine; this will serve
instead of a somentation. After which you must put some Oil or Liquors proper
to the Cure into the Ear, as Oil of Bitter Almonds, Castor, Rue, etc. The
Chymicall Oils of Rosemary, Marjarom, Sage, Fennel, Spike, and Cloves, which
are too hot to be used alone, but may with good success be mixed with other
Oils and applied. Take the water of an Ash, (that runs out at the end, the
other being in the fire) one ounce: The dripping of a silver Eel, (roasted upon
a spit) as much; a fruple of any of the beforenamed Chymicall Oils, or a
dram of the other; mix them and drop it into the Ear. Observe this general
rule, that you drop nothing cold into the Ear, and that you stop the Ear
afterward with Wool, or Cotton, and a little Mu^k into it.

Sometimes the sense of hearing is prejudiced by a preternaturall noise in the
Ears; the causes of which are many, but chiefly a wind or vapor sent thither
from other parts, or bred there.

It comes from all parts of the body, when it happens in a Fever, and this
(according to Hippocrates) is deadly. Sometimes it comes from the Stomach,
Liver, Spleen, Midriffe and Womb: witness Vomitings, Hypocondriak,
Melancholy, and fits of the Mother, which for the most part are attended with
a noise in the Ears. Sometimes it is caused by Phlegm, contained in the Ear,
for they that are thick of hearing, are seddome free from a noise in the Head:
a blow, great sound, or an Ulcer in the head may cause a noise in the head, a
hot distemper in the head fills the Arteries of the Ear with much spirit,
and causes a noise. If the noise has been of long continuance, it is hardly
Cured: if it proceed from Phlegm, Obstructing the passage, it is doubtful that
it will end in deafness. If you judge it curable, you may find the cure in
this Chapter, for it differs not in cure from dullness of hearing in some
Cases; and agrees with the cure of the pain of the Ears in others. But this
remember, that if it come by consent of the Stomach, Liver, etc: take away the
cause and the effect cease.

Pain in the Ears is called in Greek (...), and is caused by cold winds, cold
baths, or the like, or by a hot distemper, so it be accompanied with a
defluxion of humors, otherwise heat is freindly to those Nervous, and
Membranous parts.

The cold matter which causes pain is Phlegm, water or cold wind, either
coming from without, or from some inferior part within.

The hot matter is Choler or blood.

There may be other evident causes of pain, as wounds, Contusions, Ulcers, or
breaking of an impostume, or any hard or pricking thing got into the Ear. You
may judge the distemper to be from cold, if a cold cause has preceded, and hot
medicines profit; the contrary declares a hot distemper; If Phlegm cause the
pain, the Ear and Head will be heavy, some Rhume falls upon some other
part; the distemper is taken in cold wether, or the Patient is old. If wind be
the cause, the pain is without heaviness, nor is it constant. If water
causes the pain, the Patient is troubled with a sharp defluxion upon the
Teeth, Eyes, Breast, etc. If it come from Choler; the pain is sharp and
pricking, cold things give ease, the body is Choleric, etc. An inflammation is
accompanied with a great heating pain, the parts adjacent are very red, and
there is joined a Fever. A wound makes it self known by blood issuing out at
the Ear, and an Ulcer by filth. But sometimes there issues filth from an
Impostume in the brain, but this may be distinguished by Head ach preceding,
and other signs of Impostume; the filth comes away in great abundance at
first, and decreaseth by degrees. If an Ulcer follow an Impostume in the Ear,
the symptoms of an Impostume going before declares it. If the Ulcer come by
defluxion, there is a burning and shooting pain, and the matter issues forth
by little and constantly. If the Ulcer be in the bone, the matter is thin, and
yellow, and has continued long: the deeper the Ulcer is, the more matter
issues; the fouler it is, the more and thicker is the matter: If it be
Virulent the matter is thin, if putrid, it stinketh much; if it corrode, blood
accompanies the matter; If it continue very long, it grows Fistulous, and
then the matter is Virulent and the flesh grows hard.

If the distemper proceed from a cold cause, with or without matter, you must
use the medicines, prescribed for the cure of deafness, especially
fomentations, and fumes, with warm oils dropped into the Ear, and if it be
with matter you must evacuate, and purge the humor. If the distemper come from
a hot cause without matter, use cooling Topics. If it has a Choleric matter,
you must revel the humor by Phlebotomy, and with cooling drinks and Juleps
allay the preternaturall heat of the Liver, but this having dependancy to the
diseases of the head, proceeding from a hot cause; also to the inflammation of
the Ear, I leave the ingenious there to seek the Cure.

The inflammation of the Ear is cured by making revulsion (after the
administration of an Emollient Clister) by blood-letting; and this must be
done, in as great a quantity as the violentnesse of the disease requires, and
the strength, age and constitution of the Patient permits: open the
Head-Vein on the same side the inflammation is. If the stoppage of the Terms
has been prejudicial, open the Saphaena, or the Hemorrhoids if you see
occasion. Revulsions by frictions and ligatures of the Arms and Thighs;
Cupping the Shoulders and Back with or without scarifications, are often
successful; a Cupping-glass fixed behind the Ears with Scarification has
been attended with admirable success: and Horsleeches applied to the same
place, has been no less effectual.

If you find the Cure difficult, the opening of the Arteries in the Temples is
good to prevent hot and windy blood, which does much feed the inflammation; you
must often purge Choler, and temper the Humors with cooling Juleps thus: Take
of Lettice, Purflane, and Sorrel Water, of each two ounces; the Water of
Plantane and Succory, of each three ounces; of Syrup of Lemons two ounces; the
Syrup of Erratick Poppies one ounce; mix them, and make a Julep; take sour
spoonsuls morning and evening.

You may foment the Ear with the decoction of cooling and piercing Herbs, and
let the Patient receive the same with a Funnel: then come to the use of
Topics, which have power to mitigate pain thus: Take of Breast milk two
Ounces, the Oil of Roses, and Water Lillies, of each one ounce and an half: the
Water of an Ashen stick before mentioned, one ounce, the White of an Egg beaten
to water half an ounce mix them and drop some into the Ear, after you have
formented and famed it.

If you would have it repelling, add Vinegar of Roses to it, but use it with
moderation, lest you drive the Humors to the Brain.

If the vehemence of the pain constrain you to make use of stupefactive
Medicines, mixea scruple of Opium, or an ounce of Oil of Poppy seeds, with your
former Medicine; but be careful also in the use of this, lest you offend the
Brain.

If you see occasion for resolving Medicines, the Oils of Camomil, Dill, sweet
Almonds, and Violets; all or either of them may be mixed with your aforesaid
Medicine.

If after all this you find that the Imposthume will come to suppuration, you
must help Nature therein thus. Take the leaves of Mallows, Nightshade, Camomel,
and Dill, of each one handful: bruise them well in a STONE-MORTAR; boil them in
a quart of milk to the consumption of half: add the Musilage of Line-seed,
Fleabane, and Fenugreek seeds, of each one ounce; Ducks and Hens Grease, of
each one ounce; the Oil of Camomel, Roses, and Violets, of each one ounce; with
the crum of White Bread, as much as is sufficient, make a Cataplasm, and apply
it. After the Imposthume is broken, and the Matter run out, you must apply
cleansing Medicines, viz. Mix Barley water, and Honey of Roses, and drop it
into the Ear.

If the Humor be sharp, and cause an Ulcer, you must, after the use of needful
Purgings, necessary bleeding, and all requisite Evacuations, make use of
cleansing and drying Topics. Take of the juice of Reets, and sow-Bread, of
each one ounce; Horehound, Smallage, and Wormwood, of each half an ounce;
Myrrh, and Frankincense, of each half a dram; Saffron, and Verdegreece, of
each one scruple; White Wine, and Honey, of each four Ounces; boil it, and scum
it, till the Wine be consumed: then drop of it into the Ear 2 or 3 times in a
day.

After you have well cleansed it, you must come to cicatrize it: Take of the
Powder of Galls, and Burnt Alum, of each one dram; Frankincense, and Myrrh,
of each half a dram; Gum of Juniper, and Sarcocol, of each one seruple; make
them into fine Powder, and mix them with White Wind, and drop it into the Bar.

If you find that it is sed by defluxion, you must labor to divert the
deflaxion, as you are taught in the 9th Chapter of this Book.

If the Ulcet be very foul, you must mix Unguentum Aegyptiacum, and the Rust
of Iron powdered with White Wind, and drop it into the Ear. If the Humor be
sharp, and you find sharp Medicines disagreeing to it, make use of the Oils,
and yelks of Eggs, of sweet and bitter Almonds.

If any thing be fallen into the Ear, you must endeavor to get it out with an
Ear-picker, but beware lest you thrust it further. If you cannot prevail so,
inject Oil into the Ear, to relax it, that it may the easier come out, and
anoint the Ear-picker with Birdlime, and see if by that means you can draw it
out. Provoke sneesing, with the Mouth and Nostrils shut, and by that means it
may be forced out. If a Flea, being got into the Ear, procure pain and trouble
to the Patient, make a little Ball of Dogs hair, and put it into the Ear, and
the Flea will come into it. If by swimming, or washing the Head, Water gets
into the Ear, and is the cause of pain, hop on the contrary foot to that side,
and hold your Ear downwards, or put in a dry Sponge into the Ear, and as it
grows moist take it out, and put in more till you be freed.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Diseases of the Nostrils.
AS God and Nature has wisely instituted and ordained this Member, as needful
and official to the service of the body, so the Corruption of Nature (by our
Fall) has brought many Distempers therein, viz. the Ulcer of the Nostrils, and
Ozaena; Sarcoma, and Polypus; the loss of Smelling in the Nose, the Coryza,
Sneezing, and Bleeding; the last of which I shall treat of in a Chapter by it
self, and speak briefly of the rest in this Chapter. And first of the Ulcer of
the Nostrils; which, whilst it is new, is called the simple Ulcer of the
Nostrils: when it is old, it is called Ozaena. The cause of the simple Ulcer,
is either internal, or external: Internal, when a sharp or salt Humor flows
to the pare: External, either by a Wound or Contusion. The cause of Ozaena, is
a malignant and acrimonious Humor, or the other Ulcer neglected. They are
easily known and distinguished one from the other: The simple Ulcer causes but
little pain, sometimes sends forth blood, and sometimes casts forth a Scab.

The Ozaena is more painfuls foul, and stinking, anoying not only the Patient,
but all that come near him.

If it turn to a Cancer, it eats the Gristle of the Nose, and destroys the
Pallat, and for the most part has its original from the French Pox, or
Elephantiasis.

The New Ulcer may be easily cured; the old one hardly. If it turn to a Cancer
it is never cured: If it has its original from the French Pox, or
Elephantiasis, it cannot be cured, till the Disease be cured.

For the Cure, you must use convenient Evacuations, Purging and Bleeding,
Revulsions and Derivations by Cupping, Vesicatories, or Causticks applied to
the hinder parts; and then strengthen the head, and withal appoint a good
Diet, which may hinder and assuage the sharpness of the Humor. This being
done, if the Ulcer be covered with a Scab, you must endeavor to take it off
gently, and not rashly, for fear of a Defluxion of Humors; and to that end you
must mollify the Scab with Oil of sweet Almonds, or fresh Butter, and warm
Water. Then you must cleanse it, by washing it with Barley Water, and if you
mix a little Oil of Roses with it, it will not be the worse: then apply
Medicines, which are astringent, as the Oytment of Tutty, the white Ointment,
more commonly known by the Latin Name, Unguentum Album, the Oil of the yolks
of Eggs; the Ointment of Tobacco is good, being carefully applied.

Ozaena must be carefully cleansed; Take of Smiths water half a pint, Barley
water four ounces, the juice of Plantane and Wormwood, of each two Ounces: boil
them together, till half be consumed, and scum it carefully: then put in sour
Ounces of Honey of Roses, let the diseased often snuff it up into his Nostrils
wherein the ulcer is. You may make an Ointment more powerful for this purpose
thus: Take of the juice of unripe Grapes half an Ounce, the Peels and Flowers
of Pomegranates, of each three drachms; of Myrrh, Alum, and Laudanum, of each
two drachms; Aloes, Chalcitis, and Frankincense, of each one dram; the Oil of
Roses, and Myrtles, of each two Ounces, with red Wax as much as suffices, to
make an unguent, which apply to the ulcer. Or you may wash it with Alum Water;
and if it want cleansing, mix a little Aegyptiacum with it.

The sublimate Water does dry and cleanse wonderfully, and you may prepare it
thus: Take of Crude Sublimate in Powder twelve Grains, put it into four Ounces
of Plantane water, and boil it to the consumption of half.

Now and then touch it with this water; When it is thoroughly cleansed, you must
prepare Medicines, which are powerful to dry it up.

Rondeletius commends the smoke of a Wax Candle taken up into the Nose often:
or you may make a Fume thus:

Take of Labdanum, Benjamin, Hypocistis, Maslich, Myrrh, Red Storax, and
Calamith, Sandarach, Frankincense Bark, and red Arsenick, of each three
drachms, with surpentine sufficient to make Troches, of which let the Patient
take the Fume Morning and Evening.

Sarcoma and Polypus is a preternatural Tumor, or Excrescency of Flesh in the
Nose: The first grows without shape, like proud flesh; but Polypus springs
as it were from small Roots, and hangs down to the lower part of the Nose,
and sometimes out of the Nose.

If it be rooted high, it sometimes falls into the passage that goes into
the Pallat. It is a spungie soft flesh, white, red, or blew, and it is fuller
at the full of the Moon, then at the Change.

The cause of both is a gross Humor coming from the Brain, mixed with blood.

The first, for the most part, is easily cured. The second, with more
difficulty: The lower it is rooted in the Nostril, the easier may the Cure be
effected: If it be soft, white, or red, it is more easily cured: but if hard
and blew, it is dangerous. You must prescribe a dry and attenuating Diet: you
must purge the Humor you see abound; you must revel, and repel the Humors,
and strengthen the Head, as you are taught in the aforegoing Chapters.

Then you must apply such Medicines to the Tumor as are drying and astringent:
If it may not be thus cured, it must be taken off by a Caustic, or by Incision.

But apply the mildest Medicines first; Take the Juice of the three sorts of
Pomegranates; beil it to the thickness of Honey; apply it often to the
Excrescencie.

Then make use of this Sublimate Water spoken of before in the Ulcer. This
following Water is commended by Weckerus. Take of unripe Grapes three pound,
Pomegranate Peels and Flowers, and Sumach, of each two pound; macerate them in
Vinegar, and distill them: then add to the water thus distilled, Alum one
pound, Vitriol three Ounces: Distill them again, and with this water often touch
the Tumor, for it has a great power to dry and consume it.

You may make it stronger, if you see occasion, by adding red Arsenick, and
Sandarach to it: Mercury precipitate, and applied with Honey of Roses, with a
Tent, is good. You may make an Ointment thus: Take of Letharge of Silver one
dram, Ceruss three drachms, Pomegranate Peels and Alum, of each two drachms,
Verdegreese, and Orpiment, of each one dram: powder them, and in good old
white wine, boil them to the thickness of Honey: put in a little Oil of Myrrh,
and reserve it in a Leaden Box, and use it as the forenamed Medicines.

The sense of Smelling is either diminished, abolished, or depraved; either by
Obstruction, or Astriction. Cold, moist, and Phlegmatic Distempers, may either
dull or abolish the sense of Smelling: Hence Defluxions, upon those parts, do
hinder the sense. Phlegm obstructs and hinders the sensible passages, viz. the
Nostrils, and the Pores of the Brain, the insensible Passages, and the
Processus Mamillates; or Sarcoma, and Polypus, may hinder the senceby
obstructing the Nostrils. Smelling is hindered by Astriction, when Phlegm,
gathered in the forepart of the Brain, does compress the Mamillares, as was
said before in the compression of the Optic Nerves. Sometimes this Sense is
depraved by some putrefaction, or ulcer in the Nose, or the Menings, or some of
the parts official to this Sense, and thereby hinders it: or some stinking
Vapor arising from some other part of the Body, may hinder the exercise of
this Office: as the Tongue is depraved by Choler, and makes all things that
is tasted seem bitter, the signs are these: Slimy Phlegm coming from the Brain,
and cold and moisture oppressing the Brain, show Phlegm to be the cause. If it
be from Sarcoma, or Polypus, it is easily discovered. If the matter causing the
obstruction be contained in the Nostrils, the speech is hurt also: but it is
not so, if it be in the Mamillares, or the forepart of the Brain. The Cure is
diverse, according to the diversity of causes: I shall say nothing to it, only
give you this general Rule: If it come from a Defluxion, you must proceed, as
you are instructed, in the cure of a cold Catarrh. If from obstruction, or
compression of the Mamillares, I shall refer you to the Chapter, treating of
the cold distemper of the Brain, for the Cure.

In the 9th Chapter of this Book, treating of a defluxion, I told you if it
fell into the Nose, it is a cold Coryza: I think it not amiss, if I here speak
a word or two of the nature and cause of it. This Defluxion is caused either by
overmuch heat, which does dissolve the crude Humors gathered in the fore
Ventricles of the Brain; or else by cold, which does compress and squeez the
aforesaid Humors. This is easily known by the Humors flowing through the
Nose; and of all Catarrhs, it is the most easy to cure. For the Cure repair to
the 9th Chapter: to which add the Vapor of Marjarom, and Red-Rose Leaves,
boiled in Vinegar, taken into the Nose. It the Distemper be cold, Take
Frankincense, Mastich, Nigella, and the like, thrown upon a Chafingdish of
Burning Coals, and do as before.

I shall now speak a word or two of Neesing (vulgarly sneezing) which, though it
be looked upon but as a slight effect, not worth mentioning, has (by reason of
a sharp Defluxion) proves not only troublesome, but dangerous: And hence came
the Custom of saying, God bless you, God save you, or Christ help, when a man
sneezeth. Sneezing is a swift motion of the Brain, by which the Breath is drawn
up unto the Brain, to force out that which does offend: for Sneezing belongs to
the Natural Expulsive Faculty of the Brain, and its Membranes: as it is with
the Cough which does by its natural motion, free the Arteries of the Lungs from
Phlegm, which obstructeth them. But the proper cause of Sneezing, is a sharp
Humor, which does provoke the inside of the Nostrils, (as it is verified, by
snuffing up sharp things into the Nostrils) which Humor comes from the Brain,
or some inferior parts: sometimes the coldness of the Air does act upon, and
compress the Brain, and causes a sharp Humor to fall into the Nostrils, which
provokes Sternucation. The knowledge of this Disease is manifest: outward
causes appear, and by the signs of the parts affected.

As to the Prognostic, it is naturally and essentially without danger,
accidentally it may prove hurtful; namely in the beginning of Coryza, it
hinders the concoction of the Humors by its violent motion: sometimes in
Fevers it is violent, and causes bleeding, and is prejudicial to the Patients
strength. In the Plurisie, and all Diseases of the Lungs, it is bad, because it
violently pulls those parts, and causes a greater inflammation. Yet if there
be Phlegm got into the Gristles of the Lungs, which a Cough cannot get out,
then is Sneezing helpful. For the most part it is friendly to healthy people,
and promises help in Fevers. It is good in Apoplexies, and always welcome to
women in travel, or troubled with fits of the Mother.

If Sternutation become Symptomatical, you must remove the external cause, or
internal, from whence it comes by Evacuations, Derivations, Revulsions, and
Discussions: and if you see cause you must bleed, use Frictions, Ligatures, and
Cupping. In the mean time, you must labor to take away the sharpness which
provokes to Stenutation: Let your Patient snuff up warm milk, warm water, or
warm water and Butter mingled, the Oils of Roses, sweet Almonds, and Violets,
which will afford much comfort to the diseased,

Of bleeding at the Nose. CHAP. XIX.
THis disease is called Haemorrhagia, and it is either organicall or common,
the organicall is either the opening of the Vessels, called in Greek (...); or
the rarefaction of them called (...). The common disease is also twofold,
either the breaking of the Vessels, called (...); or the Erosion called (...):
Blood offending either in quantity or quality is the cause of these distempers.
Sometimes external causes concur, as wounds, strokes, falls, vehement exercise,
drunkenness, long staying in the Sun. It is also either Critical or
symptomaticall: Critical, when nature discharges her self of superfluous
blood, sometimes in health, sometimes in Fevers, and sometimes from an
inflammation of the Liver or Spleen. Symptomaticall is, when filthy blood,
caused by the weakness of the Liver (in a Cronical distemper) is let go by
reason of the debility of the retentive faculty; or (by the strength of the
expulsive faculty, expelled, as unprofitable and unnecessary. If the blood
flows by reason of the vein broken, the blood is thick, and flows
continually; if the vein be only opened, the blood is thinner, and flows by
fits. If the veins be eroded or gnawen asunder, the Patient has had a salt
Catarrh, or Ulcer or Cacochymia. The causes are easily distinguished by their
signs, viz: A red face and eyes with heaviness signifies plenty of blood If
choler or Melancholy be the cause, the blood is corrupt, and their proper
signs appear in the body. If the weakness of the retentive faculty let it
go, the body is weak, the face is pale, or some disease has preceded, which
has weakened the Liver. If it comes from an Artery, it comes with great
force, hot, pure and fresh; if from a vein that contrary appears. If it come
from the Liver, Spleen, etc: pains, extensions, or inflammations in those parts
will declare it. If blood issue out of the Nose upon a judicial or critical
day, it is a good sign, and is not to be stopped, if it flow not immoderately.
But if it happen in the beginning of a disease, it is symptomaticall and
dangerous. If the Liver be affected, and the blood issue out at the right
Nostrill it is good, and if the Spleen be affected, if the left Nostrill bleed
it is good; the contrary to any of these happening, is bad. If the Haemorrhagy
continue long, it cools the Liver, and causes a Dropsy: Likewise bleeding is
very hurtful to Melancholy and Phlegmatic people; as also to such as have a
quartane Fever.

For the Cure, you must consider whether the Haemorrhagy be Critical or
Symptomaticall: If it be Symptomoticall, you must endeavor suddenly to stop
it: I^ it be Critical, immoderate, and the constitution not able to endure it
without prejudice, you must do the like: you must begin with revulsions, of
which blood letting is the cheise; you must open a vein on the Arm, on the
same side the Nostrill is that bleedeth; you may draw as much blood as the
strength of the Patiens will bear. Apply Cupping-glasses behind to the
Shoulders and Arms, to the Hypocondria: but make use of this, after sufficient
blood letting, for fear of an inflammation of the Liver. Forrestus commends
the application of Cupping-glasses to the feet, others commend an actual
Cautery. Throw cold water into the face on a sudden, which does repel the
blood. It is good to put a Cloth dipped in Vinegar to the neck behind, another
to the Cods, and to snuff up Vinegar and water into the Nose, and hold the
mouth full of it, as long as any thing is snuffed up: take up the fume of
Vinegar thrown upon an hot Iron. Foment the Forehead and Temples with water and
Vinegar cold: Vinegar put into the Ear on the same side, on which the bleeding
Nostrill is, is good. Then apply a Cataplasm, made with the juice of Plantane,
Nightshade, Vinegar, of all a like quantity, and Bolearmenick sufficient to
make a Cataplasme, which must be laid to the forehead, from Temple to Temple.
Or thus, Take of Sanguis Draconis, Terra Sigillata, and Bolearmenick, of each a
dram, Rose Vinegar, and the juice of Nightshade, of each one ounce, the
Whites of two Eggs, with the distilled water of Red-Roses, and Plantane, make a
Cataplasm; and apply it as before. If you perceive that the veins of your
forehead are swelled, bind a sixpence, or a dry bean slit, upon the root of
the Nose between the Eyebrows. Also the powder of Hoggs-dung blown into the
Nose, or mixed with the juice of Nettles, and a Tent dipped in it, and put up
into the Nose, has an excellent property to stop bleeding.

Others commend the Powder of a dried Toad, put in fine red Sarsnet, and put
under the Arme-pits, or held in the hand.

It is convenient likewise to make use of those things, which have a faculty to
close and glutinate the Veins, Take of Bolearmenick, Sanguis Draconis, Aloes,
and Cobwebs, of each two scruples, white Vitriol, burnt Egshels and Paper, of
each one scruple, powder them finely, and blow it up into the Nostrills: to
prevent its coming into the mouth, hold the mouth full of cold water, and
Vinegar; or else you may mix it with the whites of Eggs beaten to water, and
the juice of Plantane, and dip a Tent in it and apply it. If hitherto you are
succeslesse, you must make use of Escharotick medicines, of which burnt Vitriol
claims the preheminency, powdered and used as before: but if you fear to use
it alone, add the same quantity of Dragons blood, Bolearmenick, and
Frankincense. A dram of the powder of Spicknard drunk in the morning in broth
is very good. If the disease does often invade the Patient, let him make use of
inward medicines, which have power to Coagulate, thicken, cool, bind, and
restrain its motion: Take of dried Knotgrasse, Fumitory, and Bistort root, of
each half an ounce; the Troches of Spodium, and Amber, Terra Sigillata, and
Sal-prunella, of each half a dracbm; Coral, burnt Harts-horne, and Bloudstone,
of each one scruple, powder them; Conserve of Roses, and Quinces, of each two
ounces, with the syrrup of the juice of Plantane, make an Opiate, of which let
the Patient take the quantity of a Nutmeg, five or six times in a day. To
conclude, if it be inveterate let the peccant humor be diligently evacuated;
and if it has its original from the disaffection of any other part, as the
Liver Spleen, Womb, Kidneys, etc: let that be considered and their Cures sought
in their proper Chapters.

CHAP. XX. Of the diseases of the Tongue.
THe Tongue being the chief instrument of speech and taste, a very necessary
(though unruly) member, it is not amiss if we consider, and briefly treat of
the distempers incident to it, by which the actions are hindered. This member
is subject to inflammation, and Tumors, which have their original either from
pure, Choleric, Phlegmatic, or Melancholy blood. If pure blood cause the
inflammation, there is pain felt with heat and redness of the Tongue, and
face: and this is a true Flegmon. If the Tumor has its original from Choler,
then is it called Erisipelas; if from Phlegm, Oedema; if from Melancholy
Schirrhus, all which may be discovered by the humor predominate, and shall be
more plainly discovered in the next Book, where I shall treat of Tumors and
their kinds. These Tumors are sometimes only troublesome, but do not oftentimes
endanger life, except they grow so big, that the body is endangered by
suffocation; or a malignant melancholy humor, do breed a Cancer, which may be
discovered by its hardness, blewnesse, and pricking pain: you must begin the
Cure with blood-letting, and (if you can come at it) open the Vein under the
Tongue, afterward if you see occasion, open a Vein in the Arm, and draw away
as much blood, as the Patients strength will permit. You must purge the humer
with convenient purgatives, or administer a sharp Clister: Some do draw back
the humors by Cupping-glasses fastened to the shoulders, or a little one under
the Chin. Cooling and repelling Gargarisms must be used, and you may prepare
them thus. Take of the distilled water or decoction of Plantane, Nightshade,
and Sorrel, of each four ounces; the syrrups of Mulberys, Pomegranats, and
Lemons, of each one ounce; let the Patient often wash his Tongue; Zacutus
Lusitanus commends the application of Horsleeches to the Tongue. If you find
it inclinable to suppuration, you must help nature, for which purpose this
Gargarism is good. Take Violet-leaves, Mallows, and Parsley, of each one
handful, whole Barley four ounces; Figs, and Raisons, stoned, of each three
ounces; the seed of Flax, and Fenugreek, of each one ounce: Spring water a
quart, boil it to the Consumption of half, strain it, and add four ounces of
the syrrup of Jujubes; use it as the other before. When the humors are
suppurate, if it break not, make incision, then cleanse it with Plantane water
and Honey of Roses

There is another Tumor under the Tongue, called by the Greeks (...), by the
Latins Ranula, because it represents the hinder part of a Frog, also because
they that are thus affected, when they speak do Croake like a Frog. This humor
is a loose and soft carnosity under the Tongue, the tumor therein contained is
sometimes hot, though for the most part it is cold, slimy, and pituitous matter,
which when it is opened, is like the white of an Egg, sometimes mixed with
yellow. This disease is not (for the most part) accounted dangerous, unless it
be in a Child, or the humor be Cancrous. If nothing prohibit, you must begin
the Cure with blood-letting, that so the humors may be the more obedient: you
must likewise purge the peccant humors with discretion: then you may endeavor
to disolve and discuss the humor, thus, Take of green Mugwort, and Hysop, of
each one handful, Common Salt, and Salt Armoniack, of each two drachms: Galls
one dram, beat them well together, rub the place often with it. But if it
submit not to this way of Cure, (as it seldom does) you must open it with a
large Orifice, and if you open it on both sides, it will be the better: Some
commend a Cautery of iron; after you have opened it, squeez out the matter with
your finger, then wash it with White Wind, and Honey of Roses: or thus, Take of
White Wine, and Plantane water, of each two ounces; dissolve a dram of Alum,
then add twenty drops of the Oil of Sulphur, with an ounce of syrrup of
Mulberrys; make a Lotion, and wash the place till it be whole. Sometimes the
Tongue suffers a Palsy, by which it is deprived of its motion: Sometimes it
follows an Apoplexy, and sometimes it is joined with a Palsy, which afflicts
half the body, sometimes it is only in the Tongue, when its nerves and moving
Muscles are prejudiced by some moist or pituitous matter.

Sometimes those Nerves may be cut, and the Palsy may follow; Avicen confirms
this opinion, by an example in his time, of a certain man being cupped, and
scarified, by which the small Nerve was cut, and caused a relaxation of the
Tongue.

If this Palsy follow an Apoplexy, and the other parts of the body be
affected, and the Patient be old, it is incurable.

If you have hopes of recovery, you must take away the Antecedent cause, lodged
in the brain; and you must dissolve and discuss the conjunct cause, viz. the
humors which obstruct the Nerves, and hinder the motion of the Tongue.

If you see occasion, you may make use of Phlebotomy; it profits much to open
a Vein under the Tongue: you may purge with Pills, or Cephalic Apozems, you
may rarifie the humors by sweating drinks; cuppings, vesicatoryes, Cauteryes
may be applied: for discussing and drawing forth of the humor, let Gargarisms,
Masticatories, and Errhies be followed, for strengthening the brain, and
dispersing offending humors therein contained; make use of Fumigations,
Powders, and Quilts for the head; for the making and application of which, I
refer you to the second Chapter of this Book.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Diseases of the Teeth.
THE Teeth also are subject to Distempers, viz. the ache, and foulness, and
rottenness: The Toothache is caused by a Flux of Humors, either hot or cold,
which flow to the Membrane, Nerves, or to the substance of the Teeth: Sometimes
Worms are bred in hollow and rotten Teeth, of an Excrementitious Humor, which
causes pain: sometimes Wind contained between the Cavity and the Nerve, does
cause pain. The External Causes are cold Air and South Winds: Likewise the
debility of the part, as hollowness, or rottenness of the Teeth do sometimes
cause pain.

Every cause is known by its proper sign; for if a hot Humor falling upon the
part be the cause, the pain is more violent, the Patient is sensible of heat,
about the Teeth and Gums; hot Medicines encreasoth pain.

Signs contrary to these, do declare the Humor peccant to be cold.

If the cause be Worms, the pain is with intermission, and their motion may be
felt. If Wind cause the pain, it is exceeding violent with sensible extension,
yet quickly ending, after the use of discussing Medicines.

If it be a hot Humor, that causes the Toothache, it is good to open a Vein
on the same side, by which the Humors are revelled; and though the Humor be
cold, yet Phlebotomy may be needful, to revel the Defluxion, but it must be
regulated according to the age and strength of the Patient.

The next day you may purge the Humor that principally offends; Cupping is
sometimes requisite, and f^r the most part Vesicatories to the Neck and behind
the Ears, are successful to draw back the Humors.

Astringent Medicines to the Temples are good to hinder the Defluxion; Of
Plasters these are good, Emplastrum de Mastiche, ad Herniam, and Gum Elemi,
spread and applied to the Temples, and behind the Ears.

Riverius commends the Root of Comfry, bruised and applied as before, to
hinder the Defluxion.

Riverius, Physician to Henry the Great, commends this Plaster; Take of
Cyprus Nuts, Red Roses, Mustard seed torrified, Mastich, and Terra Sigillata,
of each one dram and an half: Steep them in Vinegar of Roses twenty four
hours, and then dry them; Opium three drachms, dissolved in Aqua Vitae; Pitch,
and Colophonia, of each one dram; Yellow Wax, melted in the expressed Oils of
Henbane, and White Poppy, as much as is sufficient to make an Emplaister, which
must be applied as before.

The Oil of Bitter Almonds, or Vinegar, put into the Ear, is good to stay the
Defluxion, if it proceed from a hot cause.

If the Humors be cold, put the Oil of Rue, or a Clove of Garlic into the
Ear, and wash the Teeth with Red Wine, wherein is boiled the Roots of Bistort,
Cinquefoil, Tormentil, the Leaves of Vervain, Peny-royal, and Galls, and anoint
the Checks, or the Check on the same side, with the Oils of Camomel, Rue, or
Roses, to assuage the pa^n.

If the Toothache come from a hot cause, boil the Leaves of Henbane, spotted
Arsmart, Housleek, and Nettle Roots, in Vinegar, and wash the Teeth; and to
assuage pain, anoint the Checks with the Oil of Lillies, Roses, sweet Almonds:
Or you may make a Cataplasm, with Barley and Bean Meal, the juice of Housleek,
and Milk, and the aforesaid Oils; and if you add a small quantity of Opium to
it, it will not be amiss.

But take this Caution, that if the Checks be swelled, beware how you apply
Cataplasms, lest the Humors be repelled, and do fall into the Throat.

Many find ease by Masticatories, by which they draw much Rheum from the Teeth;
Take of Mastich, and Pellitory of Spain, of each a dram; the Seed of Henbane,
Satuesacre, and Pepper, of each half a dram: Powder them, and sew them up in
Linen bags, like little Balls, and chew them.

If the Teeth be hollow, the Oils of Cloves, Camphire, Tobacco, Box, and of
Hazel Nuts, are good, if a little Lint, dipped in any of them, be put into the
hollow Tooth.

If the pain cease not, add Laudanum, and Opium; for sometimes Narcoticks, by
stupefaction, do give ease, when other means have failed. Sometimes all
Medicines can do no good, till the Nerve in the hollow Tooth be burned with an
actual Cautery. This may be done with Aqua Fortis, or safer with Oil of
Vitriol; but be well advised, before you operate with things of this Nature.

If Worms be in the Hollow Tooth, Take of Aloes two scruples, Camphire one
scruple, Aqua Vitae one scruple, the Oil of Vitriol, and Tobacco, of each three
drops; mix them, and with Lint dipped in it, apply it.

If all the Medicines prescribed take not away the pain of the Hollow Teeth you
must draw it out; but beware of drawing Teeth, when the Defluxion is great, the
Head aketh, or the Gums swell: Draw not a Tooth violently, lest you injure the
Jaw bone, or cause a Flux of blood, which may prove dangerous; but if such a
thing should happen, and the blood not easy to be stanched, you must apply
Burnt Vitriol to the Gum, and dip Lint in Vinegar, and lay thereon; or if you
see cause, you must burn the Nerve with an actual Cautery.

Many people have their Teeth disfigured, by black or yellow Humors cleaving
to them, which in time make them rotten: this is caused sometimes by a
Defluxion of Humors into the Teeth, by Distempers of the Stomach, and evil
nourishment thence arising:

Sometimes the Scurvey is the cause: For the cure it is requifite, that the
antecedent cause be removed, by purging and other Remedies; and that things,
that corrupt the Teeth be abstained from, especially things that are sweet.
Many are the Medicines prescribed to make the sees white; as Corral, White and
Red, poudered, Tobacco Ashes, and the Ashes of Vine Branche, burnt, Burnt
Alum, and many more: that which I have found to be the most excellent, is the
Oil of Vitaiol, mixed with Spring Water, and the Teeth washed therewith: some
say the Oil of Sulphur has the same virtue.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Diseases of the Gums.
SOmetimes sharp and corroding humors, flowing from the Brain, or occasioned
by some Disease of the Stomach, Liver, or Spleen, may cause an Erosion, or
exulceration of the Gums: this Disease is easily known; you must purge the
humor offending, and if the cause be in the Liver, Spleen, etc. you must
endeavor to remove it: the Flux must be diverted from the part affected, by
convenient Revulsions:

Then you must apply Topical Medicines, that are astringent and drying: Take of
Acorn cups, Galls, and Alum, of each one dram: Sanguis Draconis, Burnt
Hartshorn, Red-Roses, of each two scruples; Sugar Candy, Tobacco-ashes, and
Mirrh, of each one scruple, powder them all: the white of one Egg, beaten to
water, with as much honey as suffices to make it into the form of a soft
Ointment; spread it upon a Rag, and apply it. The Oil of Vitriol, or Sulphur,
mentioned in the former Chapter, may be here applied, as there described; or a
few drops, mixed with the aforegoing medicine. Sometimes a fleshy excressence
is generated upon the Gum, and in time grows so big, that it hinders the
speech; Fernelius says, that it has its original from an Ulcer not well
healed: see Fern. lib. 7. page 340. Sometimes it grows to a Cancer: It must
be taken off by a careful and well-skilled Surgeon, and afterward burnt
with a Cautery or the Oil of Vitriol.

Some cure it thus, after purging, and sufficient revulsions to divert the
defluxion of humors, they tie a double thread about it, close to the Gum, so
straight, that in time it falls off; then use your Cautery as before, to
prevent its growth again.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Ulcers of the mouth.
IN the upper part of the mouth, there are certain Ulcers bred, called by the
Greeks (...), we call it Trush, vulgarly Thrush; it is most common to children,
presently after they are born, caused by the sharpness of the milk, or by
reason of the milk corrupting in the Stomach, for want of good digesture;
sometimes they happen to men of ripe years: they are more or less dangerous, as
they exceed in quantity or quality: their bigness may be discovered by the Eye;
also how deep, and putrid they be: their color declares the quality of the
humor, which is the cause of them. It Phlegm be the cause, the Trush is white,
and easily cured. If yellow, Choler is the cause, and it is harder to cure. If
red, Blood predominateth. If black, Melancholy is the cause, and it is the worst
and hardest to cure. It comes sometimes by reason of a foul Disease in the
body, or when the Patient has got the French Pox. For the Cure, if it be in
Children, you must wash the mouth often with Plantane water, and Sirrup of
Mulberries, or dried Roses: if you find that too weak, add some Alum to it:
Let the Nurse eat such things as are cooling and drying; as Pears, Medlers, and
Services, Marmalade of Quinces is very good in this case; let her likewise make
use of Lettice, Purslane, and other cooling herbs: and if need require, let
her bleed and purge. If your Patient be a man, and the Disease be stronger, and
more violent; after the use of mild medicines, you must proceed higher: If he
has the French Pox, he must be freed from that, or else you labor in vain.
Generally, you must consider what humor offends, and purge that; you must
bleed, and use such revulsions as necessity calls for. Then you must make a
decoction of Plantane, Bramble, Violet, and Strawberry leaves, Pomegranate
flowers, etc. add Alum, and the Sirrups before mentioned, and wash the mouth
with it: if you find that it heals not, dip a little Lint in Oil of Vitriol,
and often touch it. If there be an inflammation, add to the before mentioned
decoction, the juice of Purslane, Housseek, and Nightshade; or the Mucilage of
Quince-seeds, or the emulsion of the cold seeds. If you find an extraordinary
defluxion, and your Patient want sleep, administer Laudanum; the Dose regulated
according to the age, and strength of your Patient.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of a loose Columella, and the inflammation thereof, and diseases
of the Tonsils.
The Columella, or the Uvula, is relaxed or loosened by a waterish humor
falling upon it, which does so moisten and soften it, that it is extended to
the upper part of the Wezand, and causes a Nauseousness, and the Patient often
striveth to swallow it, by which it may be known, as also by looking into the
mouth. You must make use of such Evacuations, Revulsions, Derivers, and
Repellers, as are prescribed in the ninth Chapter of a Catarrh. And you must
make use of Gargarisms which restrain and dry. Take of Plantane, Purslane, and
Shepherds purse, of each one handful, Cyprus nuts, Pomegranate flowers, and
Red roses of each one ounce; Galls and Alum, of each one dram: boil them in
a quart of Spring water, to the consumption of half: strain it out, and add to
it, Bolearmenick a dram; Sirrup of Mulberys, and Honey of Roses, of each one
ounce; gargarise the mouth therewith. Powders are better, which have an
astringent and drying property: Take the Roots of Bistort, flowerdeluce, and
Tormentil, the Flowers of Pomegranates, and Red Roses, of each half an ounce:
Burnt Alum, and long Pepper, of each one scruple: make them into fine powder,
and (depressing the tongue) blow it upon the Uvula. If this does not perfect
the cure, the superfluity must be cut off; this operation must be performed
very warily; for if you cut too much, it will be prejudicial to the speech: if
there be an inflammation in the Columella, you must extenuate such accidents,
before you cut it, lest a greater inflammation follow, or a flux of blood: if
the Uvula be greater at the bottom then it is at the top, then it is fitter
and safer to cut. If the Uvula be only inflammed, you must make use of such
medicines as are prescribed for the cure of the inflammation of the tongue.

There are other distempers of the throat, viz. the inflammation and Ulcers of
the Tonsills or Almonds of the throat, occasioned by a defluxion of crude,
Phlegmatic and Viscid humors, mixed with blood; or by excessive drinking of
wine, or strong liquors or by a greedy devouring of meat: they who are thus
afflicted, swallow with much difficulty, and pain: and many times have a
Fever. For the cure, administer a cooling Clister, open the Vein under the
tongue; and if blood abound, open the Cephalick-Vein in the arm: use all other
convenient revulsions. Then make a Cataplasme of Barley meal, the Seed of Flax
and Fenugreek, and the Leaves of Mallows bruised, with new Milk sufficient:
and apply it to the throat. Then use astringent Gangarisms, you have examples
enough in the foregoing Chapters. If the inflammation increases; and the pain
be sharp and vehement in the Evening, then expect suppuration: then you must
surther it, by gargarising with a decoction made of Hysop, Figs, and the Seeds
of Marsh mallows; or with aquamulla. When it is perfectly rotten, squeez it
gently that the matter may run forth, or else open it with a sharp instrument,
and let the Patient hold his head down, that the matter may the better run out:
then wash it again with aquamulsa, till it be healed. For the cure of the
Ulcers of the Tonsils, you must observe the same rules, prescribed for the cure
of the Ulcers of the mouth.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Quinzie.
ANgina, or the Quinzie is a disease of the Jaws and Throat, by which breathing
and Swallowing are hindered, withour defect of the breast and Lungs: there are
two sorts of Quinzyes, Legitimate and Bastard: Legitimate Quinzy is accompanied
with a fever, and inflammation of the part; which Galen, and the ancient
Greeks, have divided into four sorts: the first they called (...) when the
inflammation is in the inward and proper Muscles of the Larynx: the second they
called (...), and the outward Muscles of the Larynx are in flammed: the third,
they called (...), and the interior muscles of the pharynx are inflamed: the
last they called (...) because the exerior muscels of the Jaws are inflamed; a
Bastard Angina or Quinzy comes without a fever.

The cause of the first, is blood either pure or mixed with Choler, phlegm, or
melancholy; flowing from the head to the jugular veins: the cause of the
Bastard Angina is caused by much phlegm falling into the jugular veins, and by
its glewinesse obstructing the passage of the spirits; or by a Tumor in the
Vertebrae of the neck, caused by a deflux of cold phlegm removing the Vertebrae
from its proper seat or causing a luxation thereof, by loosening their Nerves,
and making them slippery between the joints: or lastly this may happen by some
fall or stroke or some external cause.

The Legitimate Quinzy may be known by the difficult swallowing and breathing,
without fault of the breast or Lungs; pain about the Jaws and threat, red nesse
heat and a fever: their sorts may be distinguished by their proper signs. In
the first, there is great hinderance of respiration, the patient is almost
strangled, cannot breathe except he open his mouth and hold his neck straight.
In the second, there is less difficulty of breathing but greater of
swallowing, especially of drink which flies out at the nose. In the third,
there is some red tumor about the Jaws, less difiulty of brething, then in the
first, but more then in the second. The last does hinder the breath but little,
or not at all, the outward parts of the neck are red and painful.

The bastard Angina may be known by the abundance of phlegm, and humors flowing
to the mouth: If it comes by Luxation, the motion of the head and neck is hurt,
and a preternatural cavity appears in the neck: I shall not need, to spend
time, to show the signs of every distinct humor predominating: reason, or
other parts of this book will inform you.

A Legitimate Quinzy is an acute disease, and very dangerous, for want of
freedom in respiration; therefore the first is worst, and the patient in most
danger of strangling: the other are more or less dangerous as they more or
less hinder respiration. If the matter fall upon the Lungs, or the swelling
vanish away, without critical or artificial Evacuation, it is very dangerous,
and for the most part deadly. If the patient foame at the mouth, it is a sign
of death says Hippocrates in his 43 Aphorism, because it is a sign of
straightness and violent heat about the heart, which squeezes the moisture
out of the Lungs, and sends it to the mouth in a foame.

Every Quinzy requires a hasty and speedy cure, for it sometimes kills in
one day: read Fernelius Lib: 5 page 284. Let the physician open the Cephalic
Vein, and, if the body be naturally plethorick, and blood the cause of the
disease, draw as much as the Patients strength will bear, and reiterate
Phlebotomy, according as necessity requires: give a Glister first, or after,
or both, or as often as need requires; you must speedily make use of other
revulsions, as cupping glasses with scarification to the shoulders,
vesicatories, frictions, and ligatures to the lower parts; purges must be
administered, and if you find the case desperate, you need not Question the time
of the day: Trallianus reports that he was forced to open a Vein, and to
purge the same day, or else his Patient had bin strangled. To derive the humor
from the part, it is good to open the Veins under the tongue, called Ranulae.
If the ease be desperate, open the jugular Vein, and if the blood cannot be
stopped, make use of Galens Emplaister, against a flux of blood. You must make
use of Gargarisms, which have power to allay the inflammation, and somewhat to
repel. Take the leaves of Plantaine, Nightshade, Woodbine, Strawberry, and
Cinqueoil, of each one handful: the flowers of red roses, and pomegranates, of
each one pugill: boil them in a quart of running water to a pint, Strain it
and add four ounces of Sirrup of Mulberies. But beware lest repelling
medicines drive the matter to the Lungs. The oil of Vitriol mixed with water,
sufficient to allay its sharpness, often taken, is good to allay the
inflammation of the stomach, Liver, and veins, also the parts inflamed in this
distemper. Then you must apply loosning and resolving Liniments, adding such
things as eases pain. Take of the juice of Mallows, Chamomel, and Orpine, of
each two ounces, the oil of Chamomel, sweet Almonds, and Lillies, of each one
ounce: hens grease and frish Buter, of each three ounces, boil it to the
Consumption of the juices and make a Liniment. You must apply such things as
have power to dissolve, among those which have a peculiar property against the
Quinzy, as Riverius teaches: Take of a Swallows nest and Album graecum of each
one dram, powder them: flowerdeluce roots, and Chamomel, of each half a
dram: Hens grease and oil of Lillys of each one ounce, yellow wax a little,
make a Liniment. Orpine has a peculiar faculty against the Quinzy, if the
bruised herb be outwardly applied, and the juice sweetened with honey often
swallowed. Let us not forget the old and vulgar medicine viz. album graecum and
honey mixed, and administered like a Lohock. For sqeemish stomachs, or such as
delight in dearer medicines, you may prepare this lohock; Take of Species
Diatraganthum frigidum, and diapenidion, of each one ounce: Lohock Epinis, et
Sanum et Expertum, of each half an ounce: mix them, and with the Sirrups of
Mulberies and Jujubes sufficient, make a lohock, and take as before. If it tend
to Suppuration, make use of the first Liniment, prescribed in this Chapter:
Cassia newly drawn held in the mouth and gently swallowed, eases pain, and
maturateth the humors: when it is ripe and will not easily break, you must open
it with a crooked incision-knife: or drop a little oil of Vitriol upon it,
when it is open, let the Patient hold down his head, that the matter may run
forth; then wash it often with barley water, and honey of roses.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Asthma.
Asthma is a difficulty and shortness of breathing, which comes from the
stuffing of the Lungs, and the obstruction of the Bronchion, or gristles of the
wind pipe, and is naturally with out a fever; yet sometimes it may be joined
therewith. This disease is divided into three sorts, the first is called in
Greek (...): this is a difficulty of breathing, caused by the stuffing of the
substance of the Lungs, and not the gristles, and is not accompanied with
snorting, and this is the least of the three. The second is called (...), when
the bronchia of the Lungs are filled with phlegm and do make a great noise,
with snorting and wheezing, in which the Diaphragma, and the intercostal
muscles between the ribs, and the Abdomen are violently moved. The third is
called (...), in which the Patient fetches his breath with much difficulty,
with his neck stretched upright; the aforesaid Muscles, together with the
Muscles of the breast and shoulders violently moved. This disease is caused for
the most part from phlegm, which falls from the head into the Lungs, and
obstructeth the windpipe: sometimes humors brought thither by Arteria Venosa,
flow to the Bronchia, and causes Asthma with snorting: but if they fall into
the substance themselves, or into the smooth arteries, it causes an Asthma
without snothing. There needs no more signs for the discovery of this
disease, then what may be gathered from its description. As to the prognostic,
I say; that this disease is Chronical and hard to be cured, unless the Patient
be young and of a strong Constitution: if a child has this disease, if it be
not speedily removed, it dies of a Catarth. In men, it ends in Chachexia or
the dropsy. If it turn to a pleurisy, or peripneumonia, it is deadly.

You may begin the cure with blood-letting if the body be plethorick or
Corpulent, for when the Veins are empty of blood the respiration is free. But
you must beware of phlebotomy in such bodies, where you fear diminishing the
natural heat, lest phlegm increase. You may openthe Saphaena, or ancle-Vein
without danger; you must, in the next place, purge the head of Phlegmatic
humors, which are prescribed in the second Chapter of this Book. It oftentimes
has bin proved that vomitting is good in this case, that the stomach may be
emptied of phlegm and thick vapors, which puffing up the stomach compresseth the
diaphragma, and causes difficulty of breathing: one ounce of Tobacco water,
sweetened with Sugar, will cleanse the stomach by vomit. Let the Physician be
careful how he administreth vomits to weak people. Sharp Glisters are good in
this disease, for revulsion; but let them be given in small quantityes, lest
the fullness of the Bowels, compresse the diaphragma. The Patient must make use
of such things as extenuate, and make thin the humors, Take of Coltsfoot-water
two ounces, Cinnamon water one ounce: with an ounce of Oximel Simplex, and take
it in the morning. Then let him make use of such as have an Expectorating
quality: Take of the powder Diatraganthum Frigidum, the powder of Liquorish,
and Colts soot; of each one dram; the roots of Elecampane, and Marsh mallows
Candied, Conserve of roses and Violets of each half a dram, the flower of
Brimstone, and Sugar Candy, of each a scruple, with oil of sweet Almonds,
(newly drawn) and Sirrup of Maidenhaire; make a Lohock. And let the Patient
take the quantity of a Nutmeg, Morning and Evening; and half so much every two
hours: this I have often given with good success. In the extremity of the Fit
rub the breast with a cloth to open the pores, and then anoint it with this
following ointment. Take of the Oil of Chamomel, Dill, Rue, and sweet Almonds
of each two drachms; the Roots of Elecampane, and Flowerdeluce in powder, of
each one dram: the meal of flax-seed and Fenugreek a dram; Saffron one
scruple with wax sufficient; make an ointment. Out of the fit, to perfect the
cure, you must endeavor to stop the defluxion, and to cleanse the Lungs. For
the first you may find sefficient remedies, in the ninth Chapter of this book,
adding such which respect the breast, to them: Let your medicines not be too
drying, lest they thicken the humors and increase the disease. Then you must
endeavor to unstuffe and cleanse the Lungs and wind pipe, with the before named
Lohock, or of the like nature. I could insert many which I omit for brevitie
sake. Quercetanus his Sirrup of Tobacco is very good: the Tincture of dried
Tobacco, as much as a pease held in the mouth, and swallowed by degrees,
draws abundance of phlegm out of the stomach and Lungs: or if you take Tobacco
in a pipe, it is good. The juice of red Coleworts made up into a Sirrup and a
little Spirit of Sulphur added to it, may be taken, an ounce in the Morning. Or
you may make Tablets of great virtue thus: Take of the Roots of Elecampane and
Licorish, of each one ounce: the Leaves of Colts foot, Maiden hair, Scabius,
and Woodbetony, of each a dram: Lac Sulphuris two drams, Saffron two
scruples; make them all into fine Powder, and with the Mucilage of Gum Traganth
made with Coltsfoot water, make Tablets, which let the Patient hold in his
mouth often. Platerus highly commends the preparation of a Cock thus. Take an
old Cock, kill, pull, and draw him: stuff him with these things following: Fox
Lungs fresh, or prepared, one ounce, Raisons stoned, and figs, of each two
ounces; Elecampane one dram: Hysop, Savory, Horchound, Thyme, Calaminth,
Peneroyal, dried, of each one dram: The Seeds of Fenel, and Annise, of each
one dram: Carthamas Seeds bruised, and the Roots of Polypody, of each half an
ounce: White Tartar one dram: Salt, half an ounce: the Yolks of two Eggs,
Fresh Butter, half an ounce: Cut and bruise them according to the precepts of
Pharmacy, and few them up into the Belly of the Cock; boil him (in a large
Vessel, and so much water as will cover him, and no more) till his flesh come
off from his bones: strain it, and add to every ten Pints, one Pound of Honey,
that it may not quickly corrupt: let the Asthmatick person take a Porrenger
full every morning, in which diss^lve of Manna and Cassia newly drawn, of each
half an ounce. It will be the better, if presently after he take a dram of
Venus Turpetine with penids in form of a Bolus or otherwise. The Patient may
continue taking this Cock-broath a Month, or longer.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Pleurisy, and inflammation of the Lungs.
A Pleurisy is an inflammation of the Membrane Pleura, and the internal
intercostal muscles, girding the sides within, the Greeks call it (...), and
the Latins also Pleuritis. The matter causing this disease, for the most part
is Choleric blood, which does easily penetrate the Membrane; but seeing other
humors may cause it; it is either Sanguineous, Choleric, Phlegmatic, or
Melancholic: but what ever the humor offending be, Choler it has for its
Vehicle. The signs of a Pleurisy (according to Galen) are five: first a
pricking pain of the side; caused by a Choleric humor in the Membrane,
extending it self, either toward the throat, or the Hypochondria. Secondly a
continual sharp Fever, which is either Symptomatical, coming from some
Sangnineous Tumor about the part; or essential, that is, when a Fever first
invadeth the Patient, and the boiling blood is expelled to those parts.
Thirdly, difficulty of breathing, because the heart being inflamed, as well as
the rest, greedily desires refreshment; and he parts inflamed cannot
sufficiently distend themselves, to draw in the cold air. Fourthly, a hard
Pulse like a Saw; which is caused by the stretching out of the Membrane, by
which defect the Arteries are distended. Fifthly and lastly, an often and
troublesome Cough; because nature does strive to expel those troublesome humors
from the part affected; also some of the matter sweateth from thence into the
Lungs, which causes a Cough. I might here add another sign viz. spitting of
blood or bloody matter, but because it happens not in all Pleurisies, nor at
all times, I omit it. You may partly judge of the humor peceant by the
constitution of the Patient, and season of the Year. The particular signs are
first of blood, bloody spittle, stretching and pricking pains, full Veins
especially about the Temples, red Urine, and the like. Signs of Choler are,
yellow spittle, a burning Fever, a hard and quick pulse, the pain more acute
and pricking, restlesnesse, bitterness of the mouth, and yellow Urine. The
signs that show Phlegm, are, much, sweet, and frothy Spittle, the Fever
remiss, little thirst, the pain heavy but not violent, the pulse not so hard,
the Urine white and thick, the Spittle black and tough, the pain and Fever
moderate, a dry Cough, the tongue black and rough; the belly bound, the Urine
red and dark, are signs of Melancholy. As to the prognostic I say. This
disease afflicting old men, women with child, Asthmatical persons, or such as
have had it often, is dangerous. If the Fever be violent, the breath fetched
with dissiculty, the Cough raises up no matter; or the Spittle very bloody, or
very white, and glutinating, green, tustick black; much Spitting and yet the
pain abates not; the spitting cease and the pain continue; all these are
dangerous signs. On the contrary plentiful vomitting, Choler in the beginning
of the disease; blood or Choler mixed with the spittle etc. are good signs.

The Cure of a Pleurisy, consists in the revelling, Deriving, discussing,
digesting, maturating, and expectorating the peccant humors: if the Fever be
essential, seek its cure in its proper place. Bleeding is a very natural remedy
for a Pleurisy, which you must moderate, according to the constitution and
strength of your Patient; and the violent or remiss, symptoms. If your Patient
spitt freely, forbear blood-letting, lest his spitting be stayed, and his life
endangered. Twice or thrice in a day, or oftener, as you see occasion,
administer cooling Juleps, to restrain the heat of the boiling humors: make a
Iulep of Poppy water and Sirrup of Violets. After bleeding prepare a
fomentation. Take of Mallows, Violet leaves, Chamomel, Pellitory of the wall,
of each one handful, the roots of Marsh mallows, and Lillies of each four
ounces, the seeds of Flax, Commin, and Fenugreek, of each one dram; boil
them well, and put them, with the liquor into a hogs bladder and foment the
side, afterward anoint it with this following Liniment: Take of Fresh butter
and Hens grease of each two ounces, the Oils of Chamomel, Lillys, Dill, and
sweet Almonds of each half an ounce: The Chimical oil of wax a scruple, mix
them and make a Liniment: some slit a live-Hen and apply it: some the Lungs or
the paunch of a sheep hot: others apply hot bread, out of the Oven, dipped in
Butter. Then you may make an Emulsion, of blanched Almonds, and the great, cold
seeds, thus: Take of Almonds blanched and steeped in Coltsfoot water, one
ounce; the four great cold seeds of each half an ounce; the seeds of Lettice
and white Poppy of each one dram: beat them in a Marble mortar, pouring on by
degrees, the decoction of Barley, Liquorish and Plantane, a Pint and an half:
strain it out, and dissolve Sirrup of Jujubes, two ounces; Sirrup of Violets
one ounce: make an Emulsion for three doses, give it Morning and Evening. If
his Cough be violent let him always have in his mouth, Sugar of Roses, Sugar
Candy or penids, or the Tablets of Diatraganthum Frigidum, or with Sirrup of
Violets and Jujubes you may make it into the form of an Celegma or Lohock. If
his spittle be thick and tough, add Oxymel Simplex, or the Sirrups of
Liquoris, or Coltsfoot. Let his constant drink be Barley water, boil it in
Currants, Borrage and Bugloss Flowers, Hartshorne, Maidenhaire, Coltsfoot,
Liquoris and such like, give it warm. You must not purge in this disease, till
the declination thereof, and then use a gentle potion. Many medicines there are
proper and special for a Pleurisy: as Stone-horse dung, or White-hens dung,
soaked in Carduus water, and strained, give a quarter of a pint; this has a
peircing and discussing quality, (by reason of the volatile salt in it) and
does wonderfully disperse the humors in the Pleurisy. An Apple, made hollow,
and a dram of Frankincense put therein and roasted, given to the sick, drinking
three ounces of Carduus Water after it and laid to sweat, is good, says
Quercetan. Goats Blood also is good. If the Sick fall into a looseness in the
height of this Disease, it is very dangerous: in the declination it is good:
but if it so happen, give him the Sirrup of Myrtles; and do as you are taught
in the Cure of Diarrhaea.

(...), Or
The inflammation of the Lungs, is a disease, not much different in the causes,
or signs from a Pleurisy; but only in the part affected. Sometimes this
Peripneumonia comes alone, and sometimes follows another Disease: as the
Quinzy or Pleurisit, which is a dangerous Symptom: on the contrary, if a
Pleurisy follow the inflammation of the Lungs, it is a hopeful Symptom. This
Disease is more dangerous then a Pleurisy, and for the most part deadly, by
reason of want of respiration, and the nearness of the heart. The cure is the
same with the Pleurisy, therefore I shall say no more of it.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Empyema.
EMpyema, ((...)) or a Collection of matter in the Cavity of the Thorax, is a
Disease, which for the most part follows a Pleurisy, and Peripneumonia, and
sometimes a Quinzy, when they are not carefully cured; and the inflammation
comes to Suppuration; and when the Imposthume breaks, the matter falls
into the cavity of the breast. Sometimes blood falling into the Thorax, by the
breaking or wounding of a Vein, may come to Suppuration, or rather Corruption.
Sometimes, phlegm falls from the head and other parts into the breast, and
there putrefying, begets matter like quitter. The signs of Suppuration
beginning, according to Hippocrates, are these: First the Pleurisy being not
purged the Fever increases while the matter is turning into Pus.

Secondly the sharpness of the matter touching the Membranes, causes quaking;
the Third, is weight and sense of heaviness in the part. To these we may add
the difficulty of breathing; for although when the Imposthume is broken, the
Diaphragma, and the Muscles of the Thorax, move more freely; yet the Lungs are
oppressed by the matter lying, about them. But an old and confirmed Empyema is
known, by a lingering, putrid and partly Hectic Fever, more violent toward
night, and much sweating, a constant troublesome Cough; the Cheeks grow Red,
the Eyes hollow, the legs swell, Pustles break out on the breast. If the
Suppuration break, and the Fever continues, are thirsty, want appetite, the
pus green, livid or frothy, brought up with much difficulty, and a loose belly;
all these are signs of Death, or of long sickness: the contrary are the signs
of recovery. They who in this condition do lift up the whole breast, when they
breathe, by reason of the matter contained, are quickly choked.

If the matter be not spit forth in forty days, it turns to a Consumption
and death follows. The Supuration on both sides is more dangerous then that
of one: that on the left side the worst, by reason of the left Ventricle of the
heart. If the matter flow plentifully by Stool and Urine, and the Patient
strong and hearty, it is a sign of recovery.

For the Cure: you must endeavor to help nature in Suppurating the humors, if
Suppuration cannot be hindered, by this or the like Cataplasme: Take of
Chamomel, Melilot, and Mallows, of each one handful; the Roors of Althaea; one
handful: Figs, and Raisons stoned, of each four ounces: after due boiling,
beat, and strain them, adding to the Liquor, the Oils of sweet Almonds,
Lilies, and Fresh Butter, of each one ounce; with the Meal of Wheat, Fenugreek,
and Flax Seed, sufficient, make a Cataplasm, and apply it. In the mean time let
the Patient take of this Lohock: Take of the Conserve of the Flower of Bugless,
Violets, and Roses, of each one ounce; Maidenhaire, Liquorish, and Coltsfoot,
of each one ounce: Oil of Sweet Almonds, newly drawn, one ounce, Sugar Candy,
one ounce: Powder what is to be Powdered, and with Sirrup of Liquorish, or
Colts foot sufficient make a Lohock; and let the Patient take thereof often.
Venice Turpentine washed, and with Liquorish powder made up into Pills, are
good to maturate, discuss and cleanse: give three drachms in the Morning. But
if the matter will not be spit up, you must open it between the fourth and
fifth Rib; and apply a Plaster to draw out the matter, giving the Patient a
Wound-drink in the mean time: If you desire particular direction herein, read
Hieronymus Fabricius ab aqua pendente, in Libro de operationibus Chirurgicis.

CHAP. XXIX. Of spitting of Blood.
Sputum Sanguinis or spitting of Blood, called in Greek (...), is an unnatural
Flux of Blood, from the vital parts, viz. the breast, Lungs, and Aspera
Arteria. The Immediate cause is Organical, or common; the Organical twofold,
either the opening of the Vessels called in Greek (...), or Rarefaction, called
(...). The common Disease is twofold also, as the breaking of the Vessels
called (...), or the Erosion of them called (...). Blood offending in quantity
or quality may be the cause of opening, rarifying, breaking or Corroding of the
Vessels. To be further satisfied therein, Ipray you have recourse to the
nineteenth Chapter: of Bleeding at the nose. Some external cause, as Fall,
Wound, or the like, may be the cause of Haemoptysis: Immoderate Cold may be the
cause, by hardening the Tunicles that they cannot be extended. It is very
difficult to judge of the part from whence it comes. If it comes from the
head, it is cast forth by Coughing, hawking, and there is a tickling in the
Palate, as in a Catarrh. That which comes from the breast and Lungs, causes
Coughing: that which comes from the Lungs is Frothy; that which comes from the
breast is Blackish, and comes up with pain. That which comes from the Gullet
and Stomach, is known by Vomitting; from the Jaws and Wezand, by Hawking; from
the Mouth, by simple spetting. Sometimes the Blood is sent from some other part
to the Lungs and spet forth: but this may be known by pain, or some hurt
happened there. You must judge of the signs from the quantity or quality of
the Blood: the Nineteenth Chapter will instruct you.

To the Prognostic; Hippocrates says, that what kind of Blood soever is spit
from any of the inferior parts is evil, for every opening of a Vessel, which
lets out Blood is dangerous, especially in the Lungs. But sometimes it
happens without hurt, when nature critically does evacuate superfluous Blood
that way: as it is seen sometimes in women, who have their courses stopped.

You must begin the cure with Blood-letting; open a Vein on the same side, you
judge the distemper to be. If there be obstruction of the Terms, open the
Saphaena: If your Patient is subject to the Hemorrhoids, Bleed with Leeches.
Cupping or other Revulsions you may use, if occasion be. Then purge Choler,
which causes the Blood to be thin and fluid, with Rubarb, Mirabolans, and the
like: Then give Medicines a stringent to close the Orifice of the Vessels: but
at the first give such things with them, which have an expectorating quality,
lest Blood in the breast, or other parts, out of the proper Vessels should be
coagulated; Take of Conserve of Roses, and the juice of Purslane of each two
ounces. Sugar of Roses one ounce, Red Coral, Bloodstone, Bolearmenick, and
Terra Sigillata, of each half a dram: Troches of Amber, a scruple: the Oil of
Vitriol six drops: with the Whites of eggs beaten to Water, make a Lohock, of
which let the Patient lick often, especially Night and Morning. Quercetan
prescribes a Water, excellent against spitting of Blood; see the fourth part
of this Treatise, among Distilled Waters. The Chemical Oil of Amber, two or
three drops, has an excellent astringing quality, take it in the Distilled
Water of Knorgrass, or Plantane, or the like: so you may take, or give half a
dram of Sanguis Draconis; or the Blood stone alone finely powdered out two
scruples, Opium, Laudanum; Philonium, Romanum, and Persicum: These and such
like may be given, provided, the dose be regulated by an able brain: the juice
of Nettles drunk four or five ounces in the Morning, has prevailed when all
other have failed, says Amatus Lucitanus. If by the use of Astringent
medicines, your Patient be costive, give a Clister or purge, that leaves an
Astringency behind it; and if the use of Astringents hinder spitting, mix those
things, which do not only stop Blood, but mollify the breast also; such are
the juyces of Plantane, Purslane; the Sirrups of dried Roses, Quinces, Myrtles,
and of jujubes, Gum Arabic, Traganth, and Starch, and such like. If Blood be
congealed in the breast, endeavor to dissolve it, by administering six ounces
of Oxycrate, three times a day; if it cause Coughing, sweeten it with Sugar or
Sugar Candy. Apply this cooling Epithem, to allay the heat of the Liver, if you
see occasion: Take of the Water of Rose, Plantane, and Succory, of each four
ounces: Vinegar of Roses two ounces: of the powder called Diatrion, Santalen, a
dram, and an half; Camphire one scruple, make an Epitheme and apply it warm
to the Liver; afterward anoint with unguentum Rosarum, and Rose Vinegar.
Anoint the reins with Oil of Roses, and Water Lillys: and the Testicles, with
Oxycrate. If a Defluxion of sharp humors, from the head unto the Lungs, be the
cause of the Disease, seek the cure in the ninth Chapter. When the Blood is
stanched, let your Patient avoid all things, that may cause a return thereof;
as Salt, and spiced meats, rich Wines, great heat, anger, and violent exercise.
If you judge him inclinable to the Distemper, by reason of thin Choleric
humors, mixed with the Blood, purge those humors, at the Spring and Fall.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Consumption or Ptisick.
This Disease is called in Latin Tabes, and in Greek (...), which although it
signifies every Consumption, yet is most properly taken for the extenuation of
the whole Body, caused by an Ulcer in the Lungs. An Ulcer in the Lungs, by
reason of its nearness to the heart, afflicts it with putrid vapors; the
heart disperseth it into all parts; hence comes a Fever hectic joined with
a putrid; and by its unnatural heat, does hinder the well concocting of
nourishment, hence the whole Body decays. Sometimes sharp corroding and Salt
humors falling from the head, or the Suppurated humors from the Pleurisy, or
Empyema, which humors putrefying upon the Lungs may Ulcerate them. Many times
the cause is in the Lungs themselves, which have a vicious, hereditary
constitution naturally tender, and disposed to corruption. Sometimes a Pustule
is bred in the Lungs, and never breaks, but grows till it stop the passage
of the breath, and kills the Patient. Sometimes it comes to Suppuration and
is called the Imposthume of the Lungs: which being broken, and flowing to the
Bronchia, or passages in the Lungs, it may be spit up, if the body be strong
and the matter little in quantity: but many times an Ulcer remains, which
causes a Consumption. If the Impostumated matter flow into the Ventricle of
the heart, the sick dye sudainly; and many times insensible of any pain or
sickness: take examples from Fernelius lib. 5. de partium morbis et Sympt.
Chapter. 10: Page 288. To the causes of this Disease, here mentioned, you may
add all the causes mentioned in the ninth Chapter: of Defluxions. Hippocrates
mentions many more kinds of Consumptions, too tedious for me to insert in
this Volume: as those proceeding from nocturnal pollutions, the running of the
Reins; also the obstruction of the Nerves, or the flowing of Choler to the
Back, so, of nourishment, or drying causes a Consumption: likewise a
Distillation from the head to the Marrow on the back, may be the cause, as
Hippocrates faith; when a Defluxion falls upon the Spinal Marrow, there is a
secret, and undisernable Consumption. Sometimes it has its original from
hunger, and want of nourishment. Sometimes when the Meseraick Veins are
obstructed, that the Chylus Concocted in the stomach, cannot pass to the
Liver. In the Diagnostick, we must observe the signs of a Consumption,
beginning, begun, or confirmed. Signs of a Consumption beginning are, a small
Defluxion, the Lungs not much hurt thereby, the Cough but small; the spittle
Sweet, Salt, or Bitter; the body a little Feverish. The signs of a Consumption
begun, the Distillation is stronger, the Lungs pierced, by which the Lungs are
exasperated, and the Cough violent. The matter contained in the Lungs makes
the stomach weighty, a sharp pain before and behind, from the humors
suppurating, sharp and hearing humors, fall into the body, and sometimes into
the Veins causing a hective Fever, sometimes joined with a Putrid The Lungs,
by contracted Filth grow hot; by which heat, phlegm and other humors good and
bad, are drawn from the brain, which the brain fetches from all the body,
hence comes its decay and extenuation. The Patient spetteth thick rotten Phlegm;
and does sweat at night, as soon as he sleeps. A Consumption confirmed, is
known by these signs: the Patient spitteth matter it self: the Fever
stronger: the Cough more violent, with more provocation, and less Evacuation:
the Cough is attended with a hollow sounding: he ineth and wants appetite,
for the mouth of the stomach is weakened by the Defluxion: The belly is loose,
for the Phlegm falling from the head, weakeneth the stomach and Bowels, and the
retentive Faculty is destroyed, The Patient breaths difficult ly, for the
faculty is weak, and the Bronchia stopped with Putrid Matter: the hair falls
off, the cheeks wax Blue, and his feet swell: the nails of the fingers are
crooked, because the flesh on the tops of the singers, which held them up, is
decayed. Let the Patient spit in a Basin of Fair Water; if he spit Matter, it
sinketh; if Phlegm, it swimmeth. Thus have I briefly touched upon the causes and
signs of a Consumption; a word or two of the Prognostic. If the Consumption
has not long continued, and the Ulcer but newly begun, it may be cured;
otherwise not, for those things which dry the Ulcer, do hinder spitting, and
increase the Fever, and makes the body leaner. Those things which are moist,
good against leanness and Fevers, do make the Ulcer fouler. Those that have
narrow, and straight breasts, and their shoulder blades stick our like wings,
are inclinable to Consumptions, to whom it is natural, for want of natural
heat. If the Consumption came with an acute Disease; or the sick fall into an
acute Disease, it kills speedily. If the Patient spitteth stinking matter, or
cannot spit at all; his belly loose, he is very near Death.

It would take up a great deal more room, then I have to spare, to set down the
cure of a Consumption, (I mean when it is only begun, and the Patient strong,)
I shall only Epitomize it. Let the sick drink Milk warm, either Asses, Goars,
or Red Cows, but above all the Milk of a sound woman is the best. Let him use
a cool and moist diet, and make use of such things, which may correct the
Blood, make a decoction of China, Sanders, and Guajacum. You must purge the
humors offending, but be sure you make use of such purges, as work very gently
as Manna, Rhubarb, Cassia, Sirrup of Roses and the like. To allay the Fever,
it is lawful to let Blood, if your Patient be not too lean. You must divert the
Defluxion, have recourse to the ninth Chapter. Then you must give such things,
which have a healing quality, to cure the Ulcer, of which the Milk spoken of
before is very good, and if Sugar of Roses be given with it, it will be much
more available. Conserve of Roses is good; if it astringe too much, and the
breath fail, and the sick cannot spit, make use of Expectorating medicines, as
the Sirrup of Hysop, Coltsfoot, or Lohocks: the last Chapter will inform you.
If hear be procured by the same means, give coolers, as the Sirrups of Violets,
and Jujubes: the Musilage of Flealand, Quinces, and the cold seeds. The Sirrup
of the juice of Ground Ivy is much commended by Quercetan, see the fourth Book
of Sirrups.

This Sirrup has admirable virtues. Take of the juice of Grounding, Veronica,
and Carduus Benedictus clarifyed, of each eight ounces; in which boil of all
the sorts of Maidenhaire, Scabious, and Lettice, of each half a handful, very
gently; then dissolve, in the Liquor streined, a pound an half of White Sugar,
and boil it to the height of a Sirrup; add in the end, of the extract of
Juniper, three drams: of the juice of Liquorish, and the Extract of Carduus, of
each four scruples. Let the Patient take a spoonful before every meal, and as
much when he goes to bed. Forrestus commends this powder following; Take of
White Poppy Seed ten drachms, Starch, Gum, Arabic, and Tragacanth, of each
three drachms: Purslane, and Mallows Seed, of each five drachms: the four great
Cold Seeds, of each six drachms; Quince Seeds, the like quantity: Spodium, and
juice of Liquorish, of each three drachms: the Penids the weight of all the
rest, make it into fine powder, and give two drachms in a morning, with the
Sirrups of Poppyes or Jujubes: or you may give it in Barley Cream, Almond Milk,
or in any other convenient liquor.

Or this Lohock is very good: Take of Lohocke pulmone Vulpis, and Sanum et
Expertum, of each one ounce: Conserve of Roses; Dimargariton Frigidum, and
Diapenidion, of each half an ounce: Manus Christi, and Lac Sulphuris, of each
three drams: with the Sirrup of Comfry; make a Lohock, of which let the Patient
take the quantity of a Hazel-nut often, and twice as much night and morning.
The oil of Vitriol is good to dry the Ulcer, if two or three drops, be given
in a morning, with the juice of Plantane, or Rose Water and Sugar, says
Claudinas. The Balsom of Peru, is not without its virtues, for the healing of
the Ulcers of the Lungs, if a drop or two be made into a Pill with Sugar, or
the Powde of Liquorish, and taken every morning; so you may take the Balsome of
Sulphur. Fumigations may be made of Frakincense, Mirrh, Mastich, Benjamin,
Yellow Sanders, Amber, Storax, and the like; and taken in the mouth or nose,
and the room sented therewith. Or you may make a moist Fumigation of such
herbs, which are freindly to the Lungs. Take of Coltsfoot, Hyssop, Horehound,
and Alehoofe, of each two handfulls, bruise them and put them in a Pipkin with
a cover close Luted on, with water sufficient; put it into the Oven, when the
Bread is half Baked; the Bread being Baked draw out the Pipkin, and put a
funnel into a hole which it must have at the top, and draw the fumes into the
mouth, and put it out at the nose. Many other medicines and precepts, I might
here prescribe, which I must omit, for brevityes sake; only remember that all
the medicines against spitting of Blood, are profitable for the Ulcer of the
Lungs.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Palpitation of the heart.
The Palpitation of the heart is an immoderate, and preternatural shaking of
the part with a great diastole or vehement Systole, which sometimes has bin so
great, that the adjoining ribs have bin displaced, sometimes broken: and
sometimes an Artery has bin much dilated, so says Fernelius lib. 5. Chap. 12:
Page 292. The Greeks call this Disease (...), and the Latins Palpitato Cordis.
The causes of it, may be referred to three heads: the first is a molestation of
the heart, sometimes a troublesome vapor, arising from cold and thick humors
lodged near the heart, especially the Pericardium, and conveyed to the
Ventricles of the heart: or sent from the stomach, Spleen, womb or the like; or
caused by the Plague, poison, worms putrified; or the Mestrues stopped, and
conveyed as before, may be the cause of Palpitation. To these, add excess
in quantity or quality, of bloody, Choleric or watery humors oppressing the
Veins, Arteryes or Ventricles of the heart. Likewise Inflammation,
Imposthumation, or Tumors happening in the Arteries of the Lungs near the
heart, or in the Pericardium, may be the cause of Palpitation. A Second cause
is a preternatural heat, by which the Spirits are inflamed, and the motion of
the heart and Arteries is increased, and this sometimes (though seldom)
arises from an inward cause: often from an outward, as anger, violent
exercise and the like. The third cause is the defect of Spirits, caused by
hunger, watching, anger, joy, fear, shame, or great Diseases, or any thing,
which dissipateth the Spirits, which the heart laboring to recover, increases
its motion, and causes Palpitation. The Diagnosis or knowledge of this Disease
is easy, for it may be felt, heard, or seen: The causes must be distinguished
by their proper signs. A hot distemper is known by often breathing, by a
Fever and heat of the breast, and a desire of cold things. If wind be the
cause, it is subject to Variation, and raised by a small motion, the breath is
difficult; a mist before the eyes, and a noise in the ears etc. If the Disease
comes from humors in the heart or Pericardium, it comes not suddenly, nor
goes away quickly. The nature of the humor you may gather from their
Symptoms. Water in the Peticardium is hard to be known, but we may conjecture
it, by the weakness of the Pulse, the heart seems to be almost suffocated in
water. If Malignant and Pestilent humors cause it, the Patient faints, a
loss of the pulse and strength etc. If it come by consent from other parts,
their proper signs declare it. If a Tumor be the cause, the motion of the
heart is different from the natural, and the pulse is various: if the Tumor be
in the pericardium, and hard, the disease is constant, and the Patient decays
without manifest cause. To the Prognostic I say, it is a dangerous Symptom,
because the motion of the heart, by which life is preserved, is hindered; and
Galen says, that they who are thus affected in youth, or middle age, live not
to be old, because the Vitalls are weak in them. Alpho: 41 de loco aff: Sect 2
et 5: Chap. 2. If it come from a Tumor, it is incurable; if it be peculiar to
the heart, or pericardium, it is incurable. If it come by consent from other
parts, the cure must be sought out of their proper Chapters: but, (seeing not
only the cause ought to be removed, but also the Symptoms assuaged, by
refreshing the heart) you must administer Cordial medicines, which have power
to strengthen the heart. If a hot distemper vex the heart, Take of the Conserve
of Violets, Water-lillys, Borrage or Buglosse flowers, of each one ounce:
Diamargariton frigidum, Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each two drachms: Red Sanders,
Coral, and Camphire, of each a dram: with the Sirrups of Coral, Balm, or
Citron peels, make an Opiate, of which let him take often. If cold humors cause
the Palpitation: Take of the Conserve of Roses, and Rosemary flowers, of each
one ounce: Aromaticum Rosarum, Dianthus, and Diambra, of each one dram:
Cinnamon, Cloves, and Mace, of each half a dram: Confection of Alchermes, two
scruples: Amber, Musk, and Saffron, of each one scruple: with Sirrup of
Clove-Gilly-flowers, make an Opiat, and give it as before. With these and the
like ingredients the Ingenious may form medicines of all sorts, whether the
disease be hot, or cold: likewise may Liniments, Unguents, Epithemas, and
Sacculibe prepared, and applied to the Region of the heart, to strengthen, and
abate the hot or cold distempers thereof. If an humor gathered near the heart
cause the Palpitation, extenuating medicines must be mixed with your Cordialls,
and if nothing prohibit, open the inner Vein of the arm, called Basilica; if
that appear not, open the middle Vein, which course Galen commends; also if
you see occasion administer purging, and Carminative Clisters.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Swooning, or Syncope.
(...) or Swooning is a sudden, and swift failing of all strength: for all
parts having a continual necessary influence upon the heart, and vital spirits;
when they fail, all the rest must suffer. This Disease is distinguished from
the Epilepsy, which has a Convulsion, and this not from an Apoplexy, in which
the breath is much stopped, and the pulse not much abated, till near death: but
here the pulse fails and the breath is free. In Fits of the Mother, the
breath is most obstructed, the pulse not much altered, nor the color of the
face, except it be higher: the contrary happens in a Syncope. The immediate
cause of this Disease, is the defect of the Vital Spirits, in which nature is
constrained, lest the heart should totally fail, to fetch the spirits from
other parts to the heart, by which means they lose their functions. This defect
happens four ways principally: First they are naturally few, by fault in the
faculty making of the Vital Spirits; or the matter: which fault comes by
diseases proper to the heart, or by consent from other parts. Proper to the
heart, are too much constriction, dilation, and Solutions happening to the
Ventricles of the heart; or such as destroy the natural temper, as Sharp,
Malignant, Fainting, Pestilential, and Hectic Fevers, and the like. The
faculty may be hurt by diseases in those parts, which have a Sympathy with the
heart, as the Brain, Liver, Stomach, and Womb. The matter is faulty, when the
Air or Blood, (by which the Vital spirits are generated) is defective, or
corrupted. The air is defective, when respiration, and transpiration is
hindered: But the hinderance of nutrition causes a defect of the Blood. They
are both corrupted, when their qualityes are changed. Secondly this Disease is
caused when the Spirits are dissipated and spent, by too great evacuations
which may be done sensibly, or insensibly. Sensibly, by inordinate Phlebotomy,
Bleeding of wounds, or at the Mouth, Nose, Womb, Belly, or Hemorrhoids: or an
extraordinary discharging of other excrementitious humors, by Vomit, Stool,
Urine, or Sweat: the breaking of an inward Impostume; or by Empyema; or by
tapping the Nave lin the Dropsy. Insensible evacuations, are caused by sharp or
thin humors, which rarifie the skin; or the immoderate heat of Bathes or
Hot-Houses. To these add long Watchings, Fastings, Lechery, Anger, Joy, long
continuing, and violent pain or sickness etc. may cause a dissipation of the
spirits. Thirdly, this disease is caused by things which alter and corrupt the
Spirits, as venomous and pestilential air and stincks, or an evil disposition
of the Bowels and other parts; in a word, all things which are averse to the
heart may corrupt the spirits. Or Lastly the spirits may be suffocated or
destroyed: which may come to pass, by a vehement returning of Blood and Spirits
to the Heart; as also corrupt vapors, cold and thick blood, and other humors
gathered about the Heart, or the adjacent parts. These signs show a Syncope,
viz. a sudden failing of strength, a slow pulse sometimes stopping, a pale and
bluish Face, the body externally cold, a cold Sweat, especially on the
Temples, Neck, and Breast. The signs of the Causes, for the most part, are
manifest, as the sorts of Fevers, and the external Causes, but now named, may
be easily known. A sharp Nose, hollow Eyes, the Temples fallen, are signs of
thin Humors: gnawing of the Stomach, pricking heat, and great pain, do show
that the Body is troubled with Choler. Abundance of crude Humors, is known by
the enlarging of the Body, swelling of the Breast, the color pale, and the
pulse small, unequal, and obscure. If swoonding come by consent from other
parts, the Signs of those parts affected will discover it. They who often and
violently faint without manifest Cause, die suddenly (says Hippocrates.)

A Syncope, which comes from some evident Cause, as Fear, Sorrow, or
immoderate Evacuations, is less dangerous then that which comes from an
internal Cause. In respect of various Causes, you must vary the Cure. If it
come from immoderate Evacuations, you must endeavor to stop it with their
proper Medicines, prescribed in their several Chapters. If from too violent
purging, give three grains of Laudanum, or two of Opium. If by too much
sweating, you must use Medicines which restrain Sweat. If from suffocation of
the Spirits, call them back by Frictions, Ligatures, and Cupping. If it come
from Poison taken, give something to expel it; after Vomiting with Oil, give
Treacle: if it burn in the guts, give Milk, fat Broth, or cooling Cordials. If
thinness of the Humors cause it, give things that are sweet and thickning.

If want of Food cause a Syncope, make use of a restoring Diet, and nourishing
Broths. To conclude, From what Cause soever it come, in the Fit, lay your
Patient upon his back, throw cold water into his Face, make him sneez, put
Aqua-vitae, Caelestis or Imperiales into his Mouth: call him loud, stop his
Nostrils, wring his Fingers, pull his Hair, rub, bind, and Cup if need be.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of want of Appetite.
As there are diverse actions of the Stomach, so there are diverse diseases
hindering those actions: See the fifth Chap. of the first Book. And seeing that
the attractive faculty is the first in order, I shall begin with the want of
Attraction or Appetite. It is called (...) or (...), In Latin Inappetentia, In
English Want of Appetite or Loathing of Meat. That we may rightly judge of the
Causes of this Disease, let us consider the Natural Causes of Appetite and
Hunger, by which we may the better discover the fault or hinderance. The first
cause of Hunger, is emptiness of the Stomach: if there be no emptiness, there
is no Attraction, nor Appetite. Want of emptiness, is when the parts are
filled with plenty of crude Humors, caused by Gluttony or Drunkenness; want of
Exercise or usual Evacuations: Weakness of the Natural Heat or a Fever, when
the Heat is busied to concoct the matter of the Disease, or the like. The
Second cause of Appetite, is the attraction of Nourishment to the Stomach,
sometimes this is depraved, though the parts are empty, when the Veins have
left their strength by Sickness, or immoderate Evacuations. The third cause of
Appetite, is the Attraction of the Chilus, from the Stomach to the Liver, by
the Meseraick Veins; which cannot be performed if those Veins are obstructed,
the Chilus sent out by Siege, and the parts d^prived of their necessary
Nourishment.

Fourthly, the faculty of attracting an Appetite requires a good disposition
of the stomach, brain, and Nerves: consequently what ever alters their
dispositions destroys apperite: great heat and dries, dispersing the moist
substance of the stomach, does cause a want of appetite. The like does cold,
which causes a Stupefaction of the parts, and extinguisheth the natural heat.

Flegmy and Slimy-humors gathered in the stomach by evil concoction, or by a
defluxion from the head: the suppression of the Terms, or Hemorrhoids,
smoothereth the natural heat, and causes want of attraction. Distempers of the
Brain and Nerves, makes a man insensible of the attracting in the stomach. The
sign of the first cause is known by high feeding, repletion, want of
evacuation, the body is full and the Veins Swollen, and the like. The second
cause is evident, by sickness, or immoderate evacuations. The third is known
by obstruction of the Liver, Spleen, or Mesentery The fourth cause is thus
known. If there be a great heat in the stomach, dryness, bitterness of the
congue and Jaws, and a Fever, with heart-burning, and the like. All which
signify a hot distemper of the stomach; if it flow from some other parts; the
signs of Inflammation of the Liver and other parts will demonstrate it. A cold
distemper and much phlegm is known by coldness of the stomach, great
heaviness, and sharp belchings. Prog: want of appetite is dangerous, for it is
a digression from the natural estate. Loathing of meat for want of natural heat
is far more dangerous, then when it is caused by abundance of evil humors. In
children want of appetite is worse then in men, because their natures require
more nourishment. In all diseases want of Appetite is an evil Symptom. If a
man recovering wants Appetite, there is fear of a Relapse. If want of
Appetite come from a Disease of some other part, I referr you thither for the
Cure: but if it be only in the Stomach, you must consider it as either Hot or
Cold. If a hot Humor be the cause, purge Choler gently and often, if your
Patient be easy to vomit, give an easy Vomit. Alter the Humors with cooling
Sirrups and Juleps, mixing therewith the Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur; for all
sharp things allay Choler, and provoke an Appetite. After Purging, Marmalade of
Quinces is good, or take this following Opiate: Take of Conserve of Wormwood
and Sorrel of each one Ounce: Conserve of Roses, Succory, and Buglosse, of each
half an Ounce: Diamargariton frigidum, and Diarrhodon Abbatis, of each one
Dram: Troches of Spodium one Scruple, with Sirrup of Lemmons, make an Opiate;
of which let the Patient take the quantity of a Chestnut, Morning, Night, and
Noon. To the Stomach apply a Rose Cake steeped in Vinegar. Or anoint the
Stomach outwardly with this Liniment: Take of Oil of Roses, Martles, and
Quinces, washed with Vinegar of Roses, of eath two Ounces: all the Sanders, red
Coral, Coriander seed prepared, and red Roses, of each one Dram: the grains
of Kermes and Spodium, of each half a Dram: White Wax as much as is
sufficient to make a Liniment, and anoint the Stomach often therewith.

If a cold Distemper of the Stomach, draw crude, phlegmatic, and inelancholy
Humors thither from other parts: you must amend the Distempers of those parts
with Medicines, laid down in their proper Chapters. Then you must evacuate the
Humors oppressing the Stomach; and afterward strengthen it. You must evacuate
the Humors, eitherby Vomit or Stool; give no Vomits, but to those who are easy
to vomit. Of Purges, Pills are most profitable, because of their long
continuance in the Stomach: the last Book will furnish you with purging
Medicines. If the Humors in the Stomach be tough, you must dissolve them with
Honey of Roses, Oxymel, and the like.

Beware how you administer Pills, which are strong in operation, lest they draw
Humors from other parts to the Stomach. If the Liver be very hot you may be
let Blood, otherwise not; and in this case, you must administer such things as
cool the Liver. After sufficient Purging, you must come to strengthen the
Stomach, internally and externally: Take of the Sirrup of Wormwood, and
Quinces, of each two Ounces: the Sirrup of Citron Peels, one Ounce: Cinnamon
water, four Ounces: the Spirit of Sulphur, ten Drops: mix them, and let the
Patient take a Spoonful or two, Morning, Noon, and Night, or oftener, as
necessity requires. Quercetanus his Sirrup of Cinnamon is very good, See the
last Book. If the Disease be of long continuance, let the Patient make use of
the Guajacum Drink, prescribed in the Second Chapter of this Book; the bath of
Bath is profitable in this Case.

But if a hot Liver attend a cold Stomach, as it often does, your Medicines
ought to be the more temperate, Zechius commends this Bolus; Take of washed
Turpentine two Drachms: Powder of Mastich half a Dram: Aromaticum Rosarum,
half a Scruple; make a Bolus; and let the Sick take it two hours before Meat.
Candied Nutmegs and Ginger is good: and it is convenient for the Patient to
drink his Beer warm. This Liniment is good, Take of the Balsom of Peru, three
Ounces: the Oils of Nutmegs, Wormwood, and Mastich, of each one Ounce; mix
them and anoint the Stomach: Also with these and other ingredients, which have
a heating and expectorating Quality you may make Unguents and Plasters, to be
applied to the Stomach.

CHAP. XXXV. Of a depraved Appetite.
The Appetite is depraved two ways: Either in Quantity or Quality. If it be
depraved in Quantity, Nourishment is desired in greater quantity then Nature
would: it is called by the Greeks (...), by the Latins Fames Canina, whence we
call it, Dogg's Appetite. It is depraved in Quality, when things, which are not
Food, but vicious and unwholesome, are desired, This is called in Greek, (...),
or (...) and (...).

First, those that are troubled with the Dogg's Appetite, do feed insatiably,
and afterward some do vomit like Dogg's, some do purge, and others do digest
it, and if they have not more presently, are sick. The part affected, is
chiefly the mouth of the Stomach: The Cause containing, is Sense of sucking and
vehement pulling, which stirrs up the Appetite. Vicious Humors sticking to the
mouth of the Stomach, by their too much Coldness; Sharpness or Sowrness do
bind, wrinkle, and pull the mouth of the Stomach, and so beget a false
Appetite; Melancholy, sent from the Spleen to the Stomach, if it exceed and be
praeternaturall, causes an unnatur all Appetite. It may be caused by want of
Food, and Emptiness caused by too great Evacuations, by which the Veins do
continually suck.

Sometimes it comes from Worms in the Stomach, which devour the Chilus. The
Hermetick Physicians do attribute it to a sharp, salt, and devouring Spirit or
Faculty in the Stomach: which does readily consume what ever Meat is taken, as
Aqua Fortis does quickly dissolve the fixedst Metals, the hardest Stones into
Liquor; and by this means, does not allow Nature a lawful and necessary bound
of Nourishment. The Disease it self, needs no other Sign, then the devouring
of Meat. The signs of the Causes may be easily found; they which manifest a
cold Distemper, and sharp Humors in the Stomach, are belching and sharp
vomiting, crude Ejections, want of Thirst, and external Causes of
Refrigeration. If defect of Nourishment is the Cause, the Patient is Lean, and
there are Causes present, or a foregoing of the decay of Moisture. If Worms be
the Cause, in the Chapter of the Worms, their signs shall be spoken of.

Prog: If this Disease, come from external Causes, or from Worms, it is not
dangerous: Judge the contrary, if it follow Emptiness, and great Evacuations:
or if the Patient does vomit or purge much, for then the Body (for the most
part) falls into a worse Disease. To cure this Disease, you must purge, by
Vomit or Stools, (taking the Caution in the last Chapter) the Phlegmatic and
Melancholy Humors, sticking to the Stomach; Then you must labor to strengthen
the Stomach with internal and external Medicines, prescribed in the former
Chapter. Six grains of Ambergrease taken in a reere Egg, has a special
Quality to strengthen the Stomach, and cure the Disease. Narcotick Medicines,
by dulling the exquisite Sense, do sometimes cure the Disease, but must not be
used till all other means fail, and then advised by an able Brain.

Hippocrates says that Wine and Aqua vitae is good: and experience teaches,
that Oil and Fat things, are seldom given without Success.

Pica and Malacia is a depraved Appetite, by which unprofitable and hurtful
things are desired. It is caused by the eating of evil Meats, by which, the
Stomach is disposed for the production of Melancholy and Phlegmatic Humors,
hence diverse Apperites of evil things are engendered. Some desire things that
are sour, sharp, bitter, and cold; as Vinegar, Juice of Lemmons and Orenges,
cold Water, Snow, Ice, unripe Fruits, and the like. Some do desire earthly,
dry, and burnt things; as Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, and other Spices: Salt,
Ashes, Coals, Chalk, Tobacco-Pipes, Lime, Oat-meal, Tar, Candles, and such
like. This Disease happens, for the most part, to Women with Child, or to
Maids which have the Green-sicknesse, who having their Terms stopped, and
staying, corrupts the Body, and ascending, infecteth the Stomach, and takes
the Appetite from its Natural Condition. Sometimes (though seldom) Men and
Boys, are thus troubled: Fernelius speaks of a Noble man, who having an
extraordinary Appetite to Lime, did devour a piece as big as his fist, without
offending his Stomach or Bowels. The Cause of this Disease may be found out by
the things desired: For if they desire Coals, Salt, or the like, we may
conclude, that the Disease depends upon salt and burnt Humors.

This Disease is Chronical, and of Continuance, but is seldom dangerous: yet
sometimes if the Stomach cannot be reduced to its former Condition,
Obstructions, Evil habits, Dropsies, and Cardialgiaes, are produced. The more
contrary to Nature the things desired are, the farther distant is the Stomach
from the Natural Temper. If you aim at the Cure, it differs not from the
former: but you must consider the variety of the Bodies affected. If this
Disease happen to a Man, it has its original from the Obstruction of the Liver
and Spleen, and you must seek the Cure in their proper Chapters. If Women with
Child are thus affected, be sparing in giving Medicines, for fear of
Miscarriage: for the most part they are freed of it in the fourth Month. If
the Green Sickness in Maids be the Cause of this Effect; seek the Cure in the
Chapter of the Green Sickness.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Thirsty Disease.
This Disease is called in Greek (...); in Latin Sitis Morbosa; The immediate
Cause is Want of moist Nourishment: Dryness of the Stomach and other parts,
which makes the Stomach sensible of their wants: It is caused by those things,
which have a Power to consume and dry up the Moisture of the Stomach and whole
Body. It is caused also by Propriety or Sympathy: by Propriety, when the
Moisture of the Stomach is altered or drawn forth by a hot, dry, salt, sharp,
or filthy Humor, contained in his Cavity. By Sympathy, when the whole Body, or
some particular Member, having lost its Moisture, does suck Moisture from the
Stomach: For the Veins having lost their Moisture, endeavor to recruite
themselves with the Stomach's moisture, as it happens in Fevers,
Inflammations of the Liver, Lungs, and a hot and dry Distemper of the Reins,
causes Diabetes or a continual Pissing, and is accompanied with great Thirst,
and therefore is called Dipsacus. The outward causes also are all such things
as heat and dry: the use of salt, sharp, and spiced Meats; Excess of old rich
Wine: Watchings, or immoderate Evacuations. The Sons of Hermes conclude, that
praeternatural Thirst is caused by thirsty Spirits, bred of sulphurous
Excrements: whose Thirst cannot be satisfied with ordinary cooling Medicines:
unless the sharp spirits of Vitriol, Sulphur, or Salt, be added to them.

The Knowledge of the Disease is easy, of the Cause, and the Part affected, not
difficult. Of the Disease, the Patients Complaint for want of Drink, will
inform you: Likewise the Cause may be distinguished, by the Tastes, which are
hot, dry, salt, bitter, sharp, and the like. Lastly, the Tastes do not only
distinguish the peccant Humor, but also that the part affected is the Mouth of
the Stomach: but if Thirst come by consent from other parts, the Signs of
those Diseases will be manifest. The Thirst which comes from external Causes,
is easily quenched with Drink: that which comes from internal Causes, are more
or less dangerous, according to their differences. Thirst accompanying
Fevers, ends with them, and their Cures shall be set down in their proper
places. Thirst in a Dropsy is not allayed, but rather increased by Drink, and
is most dangerous. If it be caused by immoderate Evacuations: Suppress the
Evacuations, and restore the Empty Parts with cooling and moistning Medicines,
such as are prescribed in the Cure of the Fever Hectic and Marasmus.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of evil Digestion.
The Concoction of the Stomach is hurt three ways: viz. it may be diminished,
depraved, or abolished, Concoction diminished is called (...), depraved (...),
abolished (...). The fault of Concoction, is either in the Organ, Object,
External or Internal things. The fault in the Organ comprehends all Diseases
in the Stomach: For since digestion is made in the Stomach by a moderate
natural Heat, if it want its Moderation, the digestive Faculty is hurt. A cold
Distemper of the Stomach, if it be gentle, diminishes the Heat, and weakneth
Concoction. If it be greater it abolisheth it: A hot distemper in the Stomach
depraveth the Faculty, and causes difficult Concoction.

Though these Distempers are sometimes simple, yet many times, they are joined
with Matter, as Phlegm, and black Humors caused by Hypocondriack Melancholy,
which cause Crudities, sour Belchings, Rumblings, Winds, and the like. The
fault of the Object is thus considered, when the Nourishment, which is the
proper Object of the Stomach, offends, in Substance, Quantity, Quality, or
Time. Nourishment offends the Stomach, in Substance, when it is too hard and
difficult to be concocted. In Quantity, it offends the Stomach, when either
too much is taken at once, that the natural Heat cannot digest it, but some
part of it remains Crude: Less taken then Nature requires, becomes Crude
also, when it is dried or burnt in a Choleric Stomach. In Quality, Food
offends, when it is either too hot, or dry, or too cold, moist, and windy for
the Stomach. In respect of Time, Nourishment may offend the Stomach, If a Man
contrary to his order in Diet, does eat liberally a little before he goes to
Bed, this may hurt concoction. External or internal Means may hurt the
concoctive Faculty: Namely, an Air too hot may dissipate the natural Heat; an
Air too cold may dull it: Immoderate Exercise, especially after Meat, draws
the Heat from the Stomach to the External parts; and drives the imperfect
Chylus into the Guts, and so weakens Concoction. Costiveness of the Belly, or a
Flux; immoderate Watching, or sleep in the day time; deep Study upon a full
Stomach; Sadness and other Passions of the Mind, do hinder the Actions of the
Stomach. The Hermetick Physicians add another Cause, for they say (and not
without reason) that a sharp Liquor sent from the Spleen to the Stomach, which
has a great power to dissolve, in its Natural State, causes a laudable
Concoction; and that concoction is not made by Heat only: For Meat boiled in a
Pot, with a strong Heat many days, is not dissolved: and Bones in a Dogs
Stomach are quickly dissolved: Likewise Fishes do quickly dissolve their Meat,
though they have no actual Heat. Birds do quickly concoct the hardest Seeds,
and small pebble Stones, and they have a Spleen round about their Maw; and that
there is a dissolving Spirit inhaerent in the Gizzards of Birds, the Physical
practice does prove, being often used in Medicines to help Concoction, dissolve
the Stone, and the like.

The Signs of a diminished or abolished Concoction, is the same, differing
only in Degrees: viz. sour Belchngs, Vomiting or Purging forth of Food either
not well, or not at all concocted; Weight, Extension, and Inflammation of the
Stomach; the Patient sensible of some cold Cause going before, and is worse by
taking of cold things: the Urine thin, and pale like Water, and sometimes thick
and red. If the concoctive Faculty be depraved, the Patient is sensible of
stinking Belchings, and the like Taste in the Mouth, of Heat and Thirst; and is
prejudiced by Hot things. If it come from external Causes, the Patient, or some
about him will be able to demonstrate it; if it come by consent from other
Parts, their Signs must be considered.

Concoction hurt by consent from other Parts, is easier cured, then that, which
is proper to the Stomach, only that which comes from external Causes, is
cured easiest of all. Concoction diminished, though it be not the worst, yet it
brings many inconveniences, as the Chollick, Chachexy, and sometimes the
Dropsy. Concoction abolished is worst, because all Parts are frustrated of
their Nourishment, and deadly Diseases follow, as the Lientery, Dropsy,
Atrophy, etc.

A depraved Concoction is the cause of many Evils likewise, as Obstructions,
Scabs, Fevers. etc. To cure the Disease, you must remove the Antecedent,
Conjunct, and External cause: The Stomach must be cleansed of the offending
Humors, and then strengthened, seek Medicines in the Chap. of Want of
Appetite. If it come by consent, you must amend the Parts sending the Humors:
their proper Chapters will furnish you with means.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Hiccough.
(...) in Greek, and Singultus in Latin, in English Hiccough, is a depraved
motion of the Stomach, by which it desires to expel something which is
hurtful. It is caused (according to Hippocrates) of Fullness or Emptiness;
sometimes (says Galen) by Provocation. The matter causing the Hiccough, is
either gathered in the Stomach; or is sent from other Parts. Sharp Humors,
Nourishment, or Medicines; or gnawing Worms in the Stomach, may cause a
Hiccough by propriety: It is caused by consent, when the Liver, Spleen, Guts,
or other Parts, being inflamed, send offensive Vapors, or Water to the
Stomach. A Tumor in the Liver (being inflamed) does compresse the Stomach, and
so provoke the expulsive Faculty; finally, sharp Humors, sent from all parts
of the Body, in malignant Fevers, may be the cause of the Hiccough.
Diagnostick signs are, if the Disease come by Propriety, it is more lasting,
and is eased by Vomit: the signs of the Humors in the Stomach, appear by the
Taste in the Mouth, Belchings, etc. If it come from any other part of the Body,
their proper Signs will declare it. Prognostics are. If the Hiccough be
caused by Meat, Drink, of Cold, it is not dangerous. But if it come in a
malignant or great Fever, and continue, it is deadly. The same you may judge,
if the Hiccough (accompanied with redness of the Eyes, in an acute Disease)
invade the Patient after Vomiting. Singultus from the inflammation of the Liver
is also hurtful. For the cure, you must, (if the disease come from a cold
cause,) First, administer medicine, which do cut and prepare the Humors, as
Vinegar, and Oxymel of Squils, and Oxymel Simplex: then evacuate the Humors by
Purge or Vomit, and then strengthen the Stomach: use the Medicines prescribed
in the Chapter of Want of Appetite, coming of a cold Cause: if the Disease be
violent, add these following: Take of Castor and Mirrh, of each, three Drachms:
Sal Gem, half an Ounce: Diagridium and Mastich, of each, one Dram: Agarick
newly trochiscated three Drachms: Aloes, the weight of all the rest: with the
juice of Mints: make them up into a Mass, and of one Dram make six gilded
Pills: Let your Patient take two or three in the Morning. Riverius.

If Wind in the Stomach be the Cause: Take of Dill-Seed, Sweet Fennel and
Annis-Seed, of each one Ounce, Juniper Berries, half an Ounce: Cloves, a
Dram: Macerate them in good Wine, or Spirit of Wine, and distill it in
Baineo. If sharp and chollerick Humors be the cause of the Hiccough, you must
give Oil of Sweet Almonds, Prisan Broth, Sirrup of Apples and Quinces, and the
Emulsion of the Cold Seeds: foment the Stomach with a Spung dipped in Rose Water,
or apply a cooling Ointment to the Stomach. Sneezing has been attended with
admirable success; Vomiting with little less, but have a care how you
administer Vomits to weak People; Drinking of Milk fom the Cow is much
commended, and sometimes proves succesful. Narcoticks sometimes effect the Cure
by stupifying the too too Exquisite sense of the Stomach.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Vomiting.
(...) Nausea, and (...) Vomiting, differ only in Degrees: the first, is a
Desire to vomit up, what soever troubles the Stomach, either in Quantity or
Quality, but cannot, either by reason of the weakness or the Stomach, strength
of the upper Orifice, or thickness or sliminesse of the Matter. But Vomiting
is a depraved motion of the Stomach, which shakes it, by which the expulsive
Faculty is stirred up, by contracting the Fibers of the Lower part, and
loosening the Superior, and with a violent motion casts forth the Matter
contained therein, which was trouble some to it. The Causes of Vomiting are
external or internal, and is divided into Natural or Artificial: the Natural is
either without or in a Disease, and is thus divided, it is either Periodical,
Critical, or Symptomatical. Periodical vomiting, is without a Disease, and is
used by many twice in a year or oftener, to cleanse the Stomach of choleric or
phlegmatic Humors, and to prevent Disease. Critical vomiting, is when Nature,
in a disease, casts forth her Enemy. Symptomatical vomiting, is when Nature is
provoked and weakened, and is not eased by it, because she is not strong enough
utterly to expel it: the Matter vomited is either Excrements: as Phlegm,
Choler, Melancholy, Water, Matter, Worms, and the like: or Nourishment, as
Meat, Chylus, or Blood. Artificial Vomiting, is from an external Cause: as
Compression of the lower Belly, Strokes, Falls, violent Excorcise, Riding,
Sailing on the Sea, Poisonous Air, or Breath, stinking Smells, or beholding
some Filthy thing. External Causes may provoke Nature, as Vomits taken; Some
Nourishment is distastful to some Stomachs, and causes vomiting: Hippoceates
reports that one eating Mushtooms died vomiting: Meats which are Fat and Oily
are praeposterous to some Stomachs: Omitting Gluttony, which is many times the
Cause. The whole Body in a Plethory, evil Habit, Fevers, and other Diseases of
the Body, may be the Cause: Inflammations or Obstructions of other Parts, as
the Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, or Bowels, the Terms or Hemorrhoids stopped, a
Catarrh, or the like may cause Vomiting. If Vomiting be caused by Humors
offending the Stomach, or by an Organical disease therein, you may find the
signs thereof in the praeceding Chapters of diseases of the Stomach. If it
come by Sympathy from other Parts, their proper signs will inform. Make the
Prognostic thus: Choler and Phlegm exquisitely mingled and vomited up, is
good. If the Sick vomit Critically, and cast forth Choler in a choleric
Distemper, and Phlegm in a phlegmatic, it is hopeful. Violent vomiting, and
little brought up, in a Fever is evil: for it shows abundance of Matter, or
that Nature is weak. Vomiting, after a Flux of the Belly, is good, for there is
a revulsion of the Matter, and Nature is refreshed. Vomiting of diverse Colors
is dangerous, because Nature has to do with diverse Enemies. Green, blew,
black, and stinking Matter vomited, is deadly. In Fevers acute, if the Patient
vomit without mixture of Humors, it is an evil sign, because that a pure
Humor is not capable of Concoction. For the Cure: If the Disease come by
consent from other parts, remove the Cause by working their Cures. If
phlegmatic, choleric, or melancholy Humors provoke the Stomach, cast them
forth by vomiting: prepare and cut them if they be tough and clammy. Give
gentle Vomits, as warm Oil: or white Vitriol prepared: or Salt of Vitriol made
red by Calcination, for they cleanse and dissolve the glutinous Matter. If your
Patient be weak and indisposed to Vomits, give often Clisters or purge the Body
with this or the like Pills. Take de Aloe lota, three Drachms; yellow
Myrabolans, and Rubarb in Powder, of each, half a Dram: red Sanders, and
prepared Coral, of each, one Scruple: with the Sirrup of Roses solutive, make
them into a Mass: give a Dram every other or third day: and if the Sick be
weak, give but half so much. If the Vomiting be violent, give two Scruples and
an half of Cochie the less, with three grains of Laudanum in the morning. Then
you must strengthen the Stomach, with the sirrup or conserve of Quinces,
conserve of Roses, Mastick in a small quantity, sirrup of Mints, Plantane water
made sour with Oil of Vitriol, etc. All these strengthen the Stomach and stay
Vomiting, of which you may make Medicines in diverse forms. Foment the Stomach
with a sponge dipped in Plantane water, Rose water, and Rose Vinegar. But First,
boil in the water a handful of Mints. Or apply this following Cataplasm: Take
of Marmalade of Quinces, or Quinces boiled soft in Rose water, or Vinegar, four
Ounces: the roots of B^stort and Tormentill, of each two Drachms: Mastick,
Moce, and Nutmegs, of each two Scruples: Sour Leaven half a pound: with the
juice of Mints and Vinegar make a Cataplasm and apply it. If your Patient vomit
Blood: the Causes and S^gnes you may find in the 19 and 30 Chap. and the
Medicines prescribed in the 30 Chap. Of Spitting of Blood: ordered by an able
Head-peece, may perform the Cure.

CHAP. XL. Of Cholera.
(...) in Greek, and Cholerica Passio in Latin, is a Disease, violently
sending forth by Vomit and Stool, sharp and choleric Humors: this Disease is
a symptom of the expulsive Faculty being hurt, by Meats not well concocted, and
if the retentive Faculty be also in fault, the Disease is the worse and more
violent. Some will have two sorts of Choler, a moist and a dry; A moist is
that which has relation to what has been said. The dry is more rare, and
comes from a windy spirit, produced in the Stomach, by the fiery Heat of the
Part corrupting the Meat: or by Meats which are Rank and Windy, and this is the
opinion of Hippocrates himself. Sennertus (from the Hermetical doctrine) adds
another Cause, viz. Salt and adust Humors in the Hypochonaria, which grow hot
by the mixture of another Humor, and demonstrateth it, by the mixing of Aqua
fortis, and Oil of Vitriol, with Salt of Tartar, which produce very flatuous
Spirits. So that the immediate Causes of this Disease are choleric, burnt,
sharp, salt, or rotten Humors in the Stomach, Bowels, Spleen, Mesentery; or
some Nourishment of an evil Quality, or some strong Medicine, or Poison taken.
The signs of this Disease are often and plentiful Evacuations of choleric,
sharp, and corrupted Humors, by Vomit and Stool: swelling with Wind, Thirst,
and a Gnawing of the Stomach and Guts: a Loathing, which is appeased a little
with cold Drink which is soon after cast up. The Pulse is small and unequal:
Sweating, with Convulsion of extreme Parts, and Swooning, and such dangerous
Symptoms. It is easily discovered whether the Cause come by some violent
Medicine, Poison, or offensive Diet. The internal Causes are known by the
Quality of the Humors, that are ejected. If there be a continual Loathing and
Gnawing, the Disease is in the Stomach. If a malignant Fever be joined, it is
in the Veins. If it has its original from some evil Food, there is hopes, that
when the Matter is cast forth the Disease will end. If it be very violent, it
is dangerous, I had almost said desperate: for the greater the Convulsions,
Swoonings, and Coldness of the extreme Parts be, the nearer is Death at hand.

In the beginning of the Cure, you may help forward Evacuations, with gentle,
cooling, and cleansing Clisters, thus: Take, of Milk, half a pint; Sirrup of
Violets, and Lettice, of each one ounce: The Oils of Roses and water Lillyes,
of each half an ounce; The yelks of two new laid Eggs well beaten, mix them
and give it. Or you make a Clister with Chicken Broth or Oxycrate. It is good
to open a Vein, by which means, the burnt and boiling Blood may be cooled,
revelled, and assuaged: but do it with discretion, twice or thrice if the
strength be not impaired by the first. You must endeavor to qualify the
sharpness of the Humors, thus: Take, of the waters of Plantane, Purslan, and
Mint, of each, two Ounces: Sirrup of Quinces and dried Roses, of each, one
Ounce; Sirrup of Vinegar, half an Ounce; mix them, and dissolve therein two
Scruples of Theriack Andromachi, and six drops of the Oil of Vitriol: give now
and then a Spoonful. But, if the Patient has someease, and the Symptoms
abate, or appear not, beware lest they suddenly return and destroy the Patient,
as it sometimes happens in this case. Therefore nourish him and strengthen
his Stomach with this restoring Opiate: Take of the Gelly of Hartshorn made
with Canary Wine, four Ounces: of the Conserves of Roses, Burrage, Bugloss, and
Clove-Gilliflowers, of each one Ounce: Confectio Alchermes, half an Ounce:
Citron Barks, and Nutmegs candied, of each three Drachms: the Essence of
Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, and Cinnamon, of each three drops, with the Sirrup of
Clove-Gilliflowers make an Opiate; of which let the Patient take often the
Quantity of a hazel Nut, and more, Mornings and Evenings. To conclude, the
Medicines prescribed in the last Chapter, against choleric Vomitings, may be
useful here.

CHAP. XLI. Of Pain in the Stomach.
Dolor Ventriculi or Pain in the Stomach, is caused by naughty, venomous, and
gnawing Humors contained therein: the Ancients made this distinction, viz.
that if the upper Orifice of the Stomach, which is of exquisite sense, by
reason of the great Nerve, which it has from the fifth Conjugation, be
affected; the Pain is very sharp, which makes the Heart, (the most Noble part,
and near unto it) sensible of the same, from thence it is called Cardialgia.
But if the Membranes of the Cavity, or lower Orifice (called Pyloras) be
affected, it is called Dolor Ventriculi: or Colica Ventriculi, especially if it
comes of Wind. The Cause of this Disease, is either Worms gnawing the Tunicles
of the Stomach: or Wind lodged in the Cavity of the Stomach, which causes
Swelling and painful Distension: or sharp and malignant Humors therein
contained, as salt Phlegm, green and black Choler, whose sharp Vapors cause
Pain: corrupt Matter from an Imposthume of the Liver or the Breast; Diseases of
the Stomach and the Parts adjoining; evil Humors from the whole Body in
Fevers; Choler from the Liver; Melancholy from the Spleen; and salt Phlegm
from the Head; all these may be the Causes of this Evil. The external Causes
may be evil and corrupt Nourishment; or Meats that are too hot; that breed Wind
or Choler: Meat taken in too great a Quantity: Poison: strong, sharp, and
deadly Medicines, not well corrected. Diagnostick Signs are thus taken: when
the Pain is under the Ensiformis, it shows that the upper Orifice of the
Stomach is affected: a very sharp Pain, that the Patient cannot rest, and
sometimes faints: the Vapors sometimes offend the Brain, and cause
inveterate Headache, the Megrim, Vertigo, and Epilepsy. In the other parts of
the Stomach, there are not so violent Symptoms, but great Pains like the
Chollick. Thus you may know the Causes. The Humors offending, may be known by
the Excrements avoided at the Belly or Mouth: also Choler, Phlegm, Wind, or
Worms may be known by their proper Signs. The Diseases of the Stomach or
parts adjoining, causing this Disease, may be known by their proper Signs.

Prog: This Disease is more dangerous then any other Disease of the Stomach:
The danger is greater if a Fever accompany it: if the extreme Parts be cold,
Death is at hand: thus says Hippocrates. It is least dangerous if it proceed
from Worms; yet sometimes dangerous Symptoms appear, and the Patient dies:
sometimes, if the cause of Wind cannot be removed, a dry Dropsy follows. If
it come from other Parts, there begin your Cure; if it be in the Stomach
properly, consider the peccant Humor. If Wind be the Cause, first, administer
a Clister: Take of Camomil, Penny-royall, Miats, and Pellitory of the Wall, of
each, one handful: the Seeds of Annise, Fennel, Cummin, and Dill, of each, two
Drachms: make a Decoction in white Wine Posset Drink: add Benedicta Laxativa,
half an Ounce: the Oils of Dill, Rue, and Chamomil, of each half an Ounce: the
Chemical Oil of Juniper Berries, ten Drops, make a Clister, and give it or the
like, as often as need requires. Make a Fomentation, with the Herbs and Seeds
aforesaid, or with others of the like Nature: then anoint the Stomach with the
Oils of Sage and Cloves Chemical, Oil of Dill, Camomil, Rue, and the like. Then
administer this or the like Julep, which has power to assuage Pain, discuss
Wind, and strengthen the Stomach: Take of Wormwood, Pennyvoyall, Century the
less, and Agrimony, of each, one handful: the Flowers of Camomill, and Juniper
Berryes, of each, one Ounce: the Seeds of sweet Fennel, and Anise, of each, two
Drachms: Boil them in a Quart of white wine to the consumption of half, sweeten
it with the compound Sirrups of Wormwood and Betony, of each, two Ounces. Let
the Patient take a spoonful of this often, and six spoonfuls Night and Morning:
this have I often proved with good success, let the Cause be what it will. If
the Disease be yet too stubborn to yield to ordinary Medicines, make a Bath of
mollifying Herbs, and let the Patient sit in it, giving inward discussing
Medicines. In vehement Pain, some do give a Purge, and mix Narcoticks with it,
to allay the Pain, and this following is much commended by Forestus: Take of
Diaphenicon, half an Ounce: Philonium Romanum, two Scruples: with Camomil
water, (in want thereof, the Decoction) make a Potion. If Choler cause pain,
purge it, administer Juleps cooling and thickning. Foment the Stomach, and
apply a Cataplasm made of mollifying, cooling, and discussing Herbs and Seeds.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Inflammation, Ulcer, and Imposthume of the Stomach.
The Inflammation of the Stomach is a Tumor coming of Blood, sent into the
Stomach and its Membranes, from the Vena Porta, by the small Veins; which Blood
is either pure, and makes a proper Phlegm; or mixed with Choler, and makes
an Erisipelatous, or with Phlegm, making an Oedmatous, or with Melancholy,
making a Schirrous Tumor. In a word, all things that may inflame the Blood, may
be the Cause of this Tumor. Diagnostick Signs are, great Pain, burning,
pricking, distending, beating, even to the Back: you may see or feel the Tumor;
belching, and sometimes vomiting of Blood, and the Breath is ferched
difficultly, and a burning Fever. If it be only of Blood, it is somewhat
gentler: but if it be with Choler, there are grievcus Symptoms. But be
careful to distinguish this Inflammation, from that of the upper side of the
Liver: see the Chap. of the Inflammation of the Liver. This Disease for the
most part is deadly. If the Inflammation be in the upper part of the Stomach,
or over the whole, or much loathing of the Stomach, or rumbling in the Belly,
all these are deadly Symptoms. If the Inflammation kill not, and the Fever and
Pain cease, and the Tumor remain, then it turns to an Imposthume; which being
broken, there remains an Ulcer, which is known by voiding of Matter by Vomit
and Stool. But an Ulcer may be bred in the Stomach from other Causes, as sharp,
salt, choleric Humors bred in the Stomach, or sent thither from other parts:
the breach of a Vein, which could not grow together again: a Wound not well
cured: Poison, or corroding Medicines taken. The Signs of an Ulcer bred in the
Stomach, are the same with the former; to which I add these: a constant
lingering Fever, stinking Belching, no Appetite, a pricking Pain and Burning,
when any thing is taken, which is hot, cold, sharp, salt, or sour. This Disease
for the most part is deadly, because Cleansers increase Pain, and Dryers cannot
execute their Office, but are hindered by Meat, Drink, and Chylus. The Cure of
theso Diseases, must be diversely considered. Purging is altogether prohibited,
lest more Humors be gathered to the Stomach, but give an emollient and cooling
Clyster every day, such an one as is prescribed in the last Chap: you must let
Blood in both Arms, as much as strength will bear; bleed the Haemorrhoids if
you see Occasion; cup and scarify the Shoulders, Back, and Buttocks: rub and
bind the extreme Parts, and heat them with the Oil of Spike, or Flowerdeluce
and the like. You must give Medicines which are altering, and strengthening, and
with them mix such, which have power to dissolve. This Julep is good. Take of
Barley water well clarified, two Ounces: Fennel and Purslane water of each one
Ounce: the Sirrups of Water Lillies and Violets, of each, one Ounce: the Sirrup
of Poppy, half an Ounce: Diamarganiton frigidum, a Dram: mix them, and make a
Julep for three Doses, give it Morning, Noon, or Night. Foment the Stomach with
^he Decoction of cooling and mollisying He^, Roots, and Flowers, and afterward
anoint it with Oil of Roses, Violets, and the like. Some commend Turpentine
washed in Wormwood water, given in Pills three or four times, which will
quickly dissolve or maturate the Imposthume.

If you find that the Imposthume tend to Suppuration apply this Cataplasm: Take
of the Roots of common and March Mallows, of each, one Ounce: Camomill, two
handfuls: red Rose leaves a handful: boil them well together, and then beat
them in a stone Mortar: then add of the Meal of Barley, Flax seed, and
Fenugreek, of each one Ounce: with Hen's Grease, and Oil of Roses and Camomill,
alike QUantity, sufficient to make a Cataplasm, which must be applied and often
removed. When the Imposthume is broken, cleanse the Ulcer with new Milk and
Sugar, or Hydromell: or Take of Barley water 3. Ounces, Sugar of Roses, and the
Oil of sweet Almonds, of each, one Ounce: make a Julep and give it. The
drinking of Mineral Waters is good. Before you endeavor to heal it, you must
endeavor to cleanse the Stomach as well as the Ulcer. Take of Cassia, one
Ounce; Powder of Rubarb, one Scruple: dissolve it in Whey, and drink it: you
may with this or the like Purgers (which attract not the Humors to the part)
cleanse the Stomach as often as Necessity requires. Then fement the Stomach
with the Decoction, of Comphry roots, Quinces, Wormwood, Roses, Pomegranate
flowers and peels, Myrtles, Galls, Frankincense, Mastick, and the like; then
apply astringent Unguents, and Emplaisters to the Stomach; and inwardly give
Medicines of the same Nature: Take of the Conserve of Roses and Comphrey roots,
and of Marmalad of Quinces, of each, one Ounce: Bolearmenick, Sanguis Draconis,
Terra Sigillata, of each, one Dram: Gum Arabic, Red Coral, and Blood stone,
of each, half a Dram: Hypocistis, Sarcocol, and Frankincense, of each, one
Scruple: with Sirrup of Comphrey, make an Opiate, a little of which, let the
Patient take often. if his Stomach loath the often use of one Medicine: let
Troches be made of the Powders and the Musilage of gum Traganth: or into any
other form: How to make Troches, see the fourth Book. Give him for his Food, in
the mean time, Chicken Broth, and boil therein astringent Herbs; fresh Barley
and China Root.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Chollick.
The attractive and digestive Facultyes, are not only hurt, but the expulsive
Faculty, which chiefly respects the Intestines, may also be defective, and
cause many distempers in the Body, the first of which is the Chollick. This
Disease took its Name from the Part affected, which is the Gut, called by the
Greek Colon, and the Disease (...), which is caused by excrementitious Matter,
retained too long, and, by distending, pricking, or corroding, causes grievous
pain. Sometimes it is caused through Crudities, bred by a cold Distemper of the
Stomach and Intestines, which causes Wind to afflict the Guts (being
obstructed) especially the Gut Coion: sometimes cold, gross, and phlegmatic
Humors, sticking to the Tunicles or Coats of the Guts, cause constriction, and
divulsion, and a gnawing pain: also salt, and sharp, choleric, and melancholy,
sour Humors, by pricking and twitching the Cuts, cause Pain. Here note, that
if Wind or Humors remain only in the Cavity of the Guts, they might be easily
excluded, by evacuating, cleansing, and curminative Medicines; but being (for
the most part) fixed to the Coats of the Guts, they are not expelled without
difficulty. There are other less usual Causes of the Chollick, viz. Tumors in
the adjoining parts, causing compression of the Guts: Tumors and Inflammations
in the Intestines causing Narrowness: Knots of Worms, or Stones bred in the
Guts which stop them: sometimes a poisonous and malignant Matter engenders a
pestilent Chollick or Plague in the Guts. The External causes are, either a
cold Air, which does constringe the Belly; or an Air too hot, indurating the
Excrements: Raw Fruit, Meats gross and of hard Digestion; in a Word, every
thing which disturbeth the concoction of the Stomach, may here be taken for an
External cause. Diagnostick Signs are, a very sharp pain sometimes moveable,
sometimes in the Region of the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Reins: sometimes above,
and sometimes beneath the Nayel; oftentimes in the left side; so that by
comparison of other Signs you must distinguish between this and the Spleen and
Stone. The Pain is like the Boaring of an Auger, he vomiteth chole rick and
phlegmatic Matter, if the Stomach consents. The pain is greater after Meat:
the Belly (for the most part) is bound, that the Patient cannot so much as
break Wind: when he voideth Excrements, they are windy, like Cow dung with
Water on the Top. The causes are also distinguished by their Signs: If Phlegm
be the cause, the pain is not so violent, the Sick has used a phlegmatic
Diet; but if Wind be joined with it, the part seems as if it were boared
through with a Wimble; the Urine is crude and white, yet sometimes the violent
Pain enflameth the Spirits, and the Urine appears yellow or red: He is better
for hot, and the worse for cold things. If choleric Humors cause the
Chollick, there is a violent, pulling, and pricking Pain; the Urine is
choleric; a Diet breeding Choler went before, he is the worse for hot
Medicines; there is great Heat, Thirst. and sometimes a Fever. If the Chollick
proceed from Wind, there is a stretching Pain and the Belly swells, and the
Wind rumbleth therein, he finds ease when he breaks it: If the Wind be in
the Cavity, the Pain is moveable, and increases and decreaseth; If in the
Coats of the Guts, the Pain is fixed in respect of place, and constant.
Prognostic signs are, It the Chollick be gentle, moveable, and the Belly
soluble, it is easily cured: on the contrary, if the Pain be great and fixed,
the Belly bound, the Patient wants Sleep, vomiteth, and is troubled; with
cold Sweats, Hiccoughs, Doting, and Coldness of the extreme parts, it is
always dangerous, and (for the most part) deadly. An Epidemical and pestilent
Chollick is very d^ous. If it come of sharp chollerick Humors, ^generateth
sometimes into other worse Diseases; as the Palsy, Falling Sickness, and the
Gout.

You must vary the Cure, according to the diversity of Causes; if Phlegm and
Wind be the cause, you must administer an emollient, discussing, and
carminative Clister, (See Chap. 41 Of Pain in the Stomath) three or four times
in a day. Or make a Decoction of emollient and carminative Herbs, and boil
therein three Drachms of Colloquintida. If two or three Clisters provoke not to
Stool, make use of this Suppository: Take of Honey sodden, half an Ounce: Hiera
piera, one Dram: Diacolo-Cynthidos, one Scruple: Salt Gemm, half a Scruple,
mix them and make a Suppository. It is not amiss, if after all this you purge
the noxious Humors, mixing with your purge Narcoticks: See Forrestus his
Medicine prescribed in the aforenamed Chap. Or give an Ounce and an half of
Manna; of Oil of Sweet Almonds newly drawn, two Ounces; give it in Broth. Then
you must foment, bathe, or anoint the Belly, (See the aforesaid 41 Chap.) The
Bowels of a Wolf pulverized, and the white Dung of the same, is much commended,
if the Patient take a Dram in white Wine. The Electuary of Bay berries taken,
as much as a Nutmeg often, eases Pain. This Medicine I have used with good
Success: Take of Pellitory of the Wall, Mints, Parslypearch, of each, one
handful: the Roots of Fennel, Parsley, Marshmallows, and Butchers Broom, of
each half a handful: Juniper Berries, one Ounce: the Seeds of Aunis, sweet
Fennel, and Cummis, of each, half an Ounce: Bay berries, three Drachms: bruize,
slice, and powder them; Infuse them in white wine twenty four hours, and
distill it in Balneo: after sufficient Evacuations, give one Ounce. Galen much
commends the Application of a Cupping-glasse to the Navil; afterward apply a
Plaster of Tacamahacha. Also the Decoction of Guajacum given for many days,
is good, and afterward purge Phlegm, if there be occasion. The choleric
Chollick is cured also by giving of emollient Clisters, and such as temper the
Acrimony of the Humors: as the Decoction of Camomil, Violet leaves, Endive:
the Seeds of Faenugreek, Linseed, Hens-grease, Goose-grease, Oil of Roses,
Cessia, and the like. Foment the Belly with an emollient and cooling Decoction,
and aroint it with a Cataplasm, made with the Meal of Linseed, Faenugreek, and
Barley, boiled in Oil of Camomil, and Roses. Cool the Liver outwardly by
Epithems, and inwardly by Juleps, made of Poppy, Lettice, Succory, Endive,
Sorrel, Violets, and the like: forget not to add a little spirit of Vitriol to
your Juleps. If the pain be violent use Narcoticks: afterward purge the Humor
with such Medicines which purge gently or strongly, according to the strength
of your Patient, and the Degree of his Distemper.

CHAP. LXIIII. Of the Iliack Passion.
This Disease is called in Greek (...), in Latin Iliaca Passio, in Englsh the
Iliack Passion, from the Gut Ilion, which is chiefly affected in this Disease.
But because the other Guts are capable of the same, it is rather derived from
(...), which signifies to be rolled or girt about, and therefore the Latins
call it Volvulus or Convolvulus. It is a praeposterous motion of the
Intestines, the Guts are obstructed, nothing passes downward, sometimes the
Excrements are brought up into the Stomach, and issue out at the Mouth. The
Intestines have a natural Motion downwards, which is compared to the Motion of
Earthworms, which move the parts of their Bodies succesfully; by which they
carry the Faeces and Excrements downwards. The expulsive Faculty of the Guts is
sometimes too vehemently stirred up, the Passage being obstructed, that by a
violent motion, the Excrementitious Matter is cast upwards: so that not only
the Chylus and Excrements, but also Clisters and Suppositoryes are violently
snatched up and vomited. Any thing which causes the obstruction of the Guts,
as hard Dung long retained, gross Vapors, Inflammations, Tumors, or the
like, may be the Cause of this Disease. Sometimes an Ulcer in the Guts may be
the Cause, when the Excrements touch the part ulcerated, it pricketh it, so
that the Faculty is provoked, not to let so noxious a thing pass, but drives
it upwards, the other Guts by Sympathy assisting, forces it into the Stomach,
which also by a Peristatick inverted Motion, casts it out by Vomit. The
Diagnosticks of this Disease, are, partly common to those of the Chollick, and
partly proper or peculiar to it self. Common Signs are, the Belly bound, and
puffed up, Pain in the Abdomen, loathing, vomiting, difficulty of Breathing and
Pissing, want of Rest. The peculiar Signs are, a violent Pain, great
Distension, a hard Tumor in the Hypogastrium, nothing voided downwards, an
irregular vomiting of Choler, Phlegm and Chylus, at last the Excrements are
vomited up. The Signs of the causes are thus gathered, If Inflammation of the
parts cause the Disease, it quickly comes to the height, an intense Fever,
with vomiting, as aforesaid. If hard Dung in the Bowels be the Cause, there
went before Constriction of the Belly, it is of longer Continuance, the Pain
not so violent at first, nor the Fever so great, if any. If Wind or Phlegm be
the Cause, (for the most part) the Chollick preceded, and the Signs thereof
are laid down in the preceding Chapter. This Disease is dangerous more or
less, according to the Causes and Symptoms; that which is accompanied with the
Strangury, or that irregular vomiting before mentioned, (for the most part) is
deadly. If there be a remission of Symptoms, and things, taken at the mouth,
find passage downwards, there is hopes of recovery.

What belongs to the cure of this Disease, must thus be considered, viz. If
hard Dung obstruct the passage, you must often inject emollient and laxative
Clisters, in the mean time, give Medicines inwardly of the same Nature, mixing
with them such as strengthen the Stomach and Vital parts: having read thus fair
you cannot be ignorant how to prepare them: by this means I cured one in this
Condition, who went not to Stool in sixteen or eighteen days. You may likewise
apply Fomentations, Liniments, and Cataplasms of an emollient Nature to the
Belly. If you find the Body flatuous and in much pain, administer the Medicines
prescribed against the Chollick. If the Guts be inflamed, you must open a Vein,
and draw as much Blood, as the strength of the Sick will bear. Administer
cooling and emollient Clisters, and other Medicines, prescribed, in the 42
Chapter, for the inflammation of the Stomach. If he vomit not, give him warm
Water and Oil of Violets, for it is a good Revulsion. Let his drink be Barley
Water, and sometimes give, in a draught thereof, two ounces of Oil of sweet
Almonds, and, if the Pain be violent, use Narcoticks. Let him abstain from
Food, for it turns to no good Nourishment: let him now and then take a spoonful
of Broth, and drink such things as are before mentioned. If the Bowels fall
into the Cods, and cause this Disease, you must foment the part with emollient
Oils, and relaxing Decoctions, giving emollient and carminative Clisters, then
let the Patient ly with his Heels higher then his head, and gently thrust them
back, and keep them up with a Trusse. If there be a Circumvolution of Hoisting
of the Guts, Hippocrates prescribes this as the last Remedy, namely, to apply
a payr of Bellows to the Fundament, and blow into the Belly, and afterward to
give an emollient Clister; this has been proved by many able Physicians, and
highly commended. Others have commended the taking of Quicksilver in a great
Quantity, which has cured when all other means have failed.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Flux, Lientery, and Coelick Passion.
(...), Lientery is a Flux of the Belly, in which the Meat is quickly sent
through the Body undigested. (...), or the Coeliack Passion is, when the Meat
comes forth crude and impertectly digested: these two differ only in degrees,
and their Cures are the same. This Disease is not to be referred to
concoction-hurt only, but to the Debility of the retentive Faculty, for the
Meat is not long enough receined to be concocted; hence it appears, that the
Disease comes from a fault of the Stomach as well as the Guts. The Causes of
this Disease are referred to three Heads; First, a cold Distemper of the
Stomach and Liver, which generateth phlegmatic and glutinous Humors, which
cover the wrinkles of the Stomach, that it cannot retain the Food. Though
Retention be made by the astringing Quality, yet it operates by fit
Instruments, viz. the Roughness of the inward Coat of the Stomach, which
Roughness being taken away, and the wrinklesfilled up by the Humors
aforesaid, the Retention is hurt, and the Meat slippeth away without
Concoction. Secondly, sharp Humors prick and twitch the parts, by which the
Stomach and Guts are provoked to send forth the Meat too soon. Lastly, in
malignant Fevers, and other dangerous Diseases, the retentive Faculty is
weakened, and Nature being conquered degenerateth into a Lientery. There is
another Cause, peculiar to the Coeliack Passion, Namely, the Obstruction of the
Meseraick Veins, which hinder the passage of the Chilus to the Liver, and
therefore must of necessity be cast forth by the Belly. I need not lay down the
Signs of this Disease, being obvious to the Eye. The Causes may be thus
discovered. If it come from a cold Distemper, there are sour Belchings, the
Excrements are phlegmatic: If the Humors flow from the Head, the Excrements
are frothy, and the Flux greater after Sleep, the Signs of a Catarrh appear.
If it come from Provocation, there is a Heat in the Hypocondria, sharp and
choleric Excrements, great Thust, and a Gnawing in the Stomach. These Diseases
if they last long are very dangerous, because Nature is deprived of her
Nourishment, and the Body soon falls into a Dropsy or Atrophy. If it follow
other Diseases, it is for the most part deadly. If the Disease has its
original from phlegmatic Humors, covering the wrinkles of the Stomach, you
must use those remedies, propounded for the cure of Want of Appetite coming
from a cold Cause, with which, make use of those things which are astringent to
stay the Flux. Clisters are of no great force, except the Flux be violent, in
such Cases they must be astringent, such as shall be prescribed in the 47
Chapter, of the Flux Dysentery. You must purge the peccant Humors, and then
strengthen the Stomach, with the Medicines prescribed in the Cure of Want of
Appetite; for which purpose Amatus Lusitanus highly commends this following
Opiate: Take of Conserve of Roses, six Ounces: of the best Treacle six Drachms:
Sirrup of Quinces, sufficient to make an Opiate: give half an Ounce in the
Morning, and fast one hour. If this Flux come from Provocation by choleric
Humors, do as you are taught in the Chapter of choleric Vomiting, or you may
use those things prescribed in the following Chapter of the Flux Diarrhaea. For
that which comes from the Imbecility of the retentive Faculty, now and then
give Clisters made of Posset drink, in which red Roses have been boiled, and
dissolve Sugar therein, and the yelks of Eggs. Give inwardly strengthening and
astringent things, which are prescribed in the following Chapter, and against
choleric vomiting. Anoint the Stomach and Belly with this following Ointment:
Take of the Oils of Mastick, Wormwood, Mints, and Myrtles, of each, two
Drachms: the Powders of Cinnamon, Cloves, and Galingale, of each, one Scruple:
the flowers of Pomgranates, and red Roses, of each, half a Scruple; Wax,
sufficient to make an Ointment. If this Disease depend upon the Obstruction of
the Meseraick Veins, use the Remedies prescribed for opening Obstructions of
the Liver.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Flux Diarrhaea.
(...), Diarrhoea is a Flux of the Belly, or a great and copious sending forth
excrementitious Humors; not of Food or Chylus, as in the Lientery or Caeliack
Passion: nor of Blood, with Inflammation or Ulceration of the Intestines, as in
the Dysentery, which remains next to be spoken of. The Humors voided are,
either Choleric, Phlegmatic, Melancholy, or Serous. The Place from whence it
comesis, either from the whole Body, or from the Brain, Stomach, Intestines,
Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Womb, and the like. The Cause is, either Critical or
Symptomatical; Internal or External. The Disease it self is easily known, from
what has already been said; the difference of the Matter and Humors sent
forth are manifest to the Senses. It is somewhat difficult to know from what
part of the Body the Humors are sent: If it come from the whole Body, there
has been some Disease, which has afflicted the whole Body, as Cachexia,
Leucophlegmatia, a continual Fever, or excessive Eating or Drinking. If it
comes from the Head, the Excrements are froathy, and are voided more violent by
Night then by Day, and there is some manifest Disease in the Head, as a
Catarrh, Deafness, Lethargy, etc. If the fault be in the Stomach, the Patient
filled himself with Food apt to corrupt, or there be Signs of Concoction hurt;
viz. If the Humors be sharp, choleric, and stinking, the Concoction is hurt
by a hot Distemper of the Stomach; and the expulsive Faculty labors to throw
it out: If they be crude and phlegmatic, Concoction is hurt by a cold
Distemper. If Worms in the Guts be the cause, their Signs seek (...) Chapter
of the Worms. If the Humors come from the Liver, they are choleric, and there
appears some Distemper of the Liver. If from the Spleen, the Excrements are
blackish, and distempers of the Spleen and Hypocondria appear. If from the
Mesentery, there is extention; but Humors there, have their original from the
Liver or Spleen. If from the Womb, there are the Symptoms of the Womb affected.

To the Prognostic: I say, the Flux of the Belly, which is Critical, that is
easily endured, and is a benefit to the Patient, by which, Humors, which are
burdensome to Nature, are discharged, is good. On the contrary, if it be
symptomatical, painful, and weakening to Nature, it is evil. If the Excrements
are thin, voided often, with Pain, without Feeling when they are voided, or in
an acute Disease, all these are evil Signs. If the Excrements voided be yellow
as yelks of Eggs, green, black blew, or of diverse colors, it is evil. If this
Flux afflict a Woman with Child, she is in great danger of Miscariage. If the
Excrements begin to grow thicker, there is hopes of Recovery. If a Flux
happens in the Dropsy, wherein the whole Body is affected, it causes a
Recovery: understand this where the Patient is young, strong, and the Disease
but begun; for if Nature be weakened by the long continuance of the Disease, and
the Flux happen, the Disease and Life (hand in hand) go together.

For the Cure, If the Body abound with Blood, open a Vein; if not, if the
Patient has a Fever, it is good to let Blood. Then purge the Humor
offending, with such Purgers, that leave an Astringent behind them: If the Body
be strong, vointing is good, for it revelleth and evacuateth the Matter of the
Disease. Before and after purging, give cleansing Clisters; after the Body is
sufficiently emptied, give astringent; all which the next Chapter will furnish
you with. Inwardly you may give astringent und strengthening Medicines,
prescribed in the next Chapter; If your Patient be free from a Fever, boil new
milk and scum off the Foam, and quench red hot Steel often in it, and let him
drink thereof warm, which is a present Remedy. Unripe Mulberryes, and
Blackberryes dried and heaten to powder, is good to stay this Flux. This Opiate
is excellent: Take of the juice of Quinces, Conserve of Roses, of each, one
Ounce: Sanguis Draconis, Terra Sigillata, and fine Bole, of each, one Dram:
Bloodstone, and the Troches of Amber, of each, half a Dram; with Sirrup of
Comphrey, make an Opiate, and let the Patient take a little often. Take of the
Powder of Rubarb, one Ounce; the Troches of Sanders, two Drachms, mix it, and
give the Patient two Drachms twice a day; it evacuateth the Matter and
strengthens the Bowels. Both the Sirrup, Magistery, and Tincture of Coral
avails much; and the Decoction of Juniper Berryes in red Wine is no less
effectual. If it continue long, and your Patient's strength much decay, give
Laudanum among your other Medicines. The Fume of Fleabane and Mullein taken
through a hollow Chair is excellent. The Conserve of Hips is good against a
choleric Flux, you may mix with it such things, which are astringent: I shall
say no more of the Cure of this Disease, but refer you to the next Chapter.
Only this, if the Disease come by consent of other parts, seek the Cure in
their proper Chapters.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Dysentery, or Bloody Flux.
(...) is a bloody Looseness of the Belly, depending upon the Ulceration of
the Intestines: but it is commonly taken for every Bloody Flux: the Latins
call it Tormina, because of the Torture the Patient endures. Galen mentions
four kinds of Fluxes, which he calls Dysenteries. The first is, when any
usual Evacuation of Blood, as the Haemorrhoids, or at the Nose, is omitted or
impedited, or any part of the body is hurt, and by that means the Blood is sent
to the Intestines, and voided by the Belly. The second is, when watery Blood is
voided, by reason of the weakness of the of the Liver; of this I shall treat
hereafter. The third is, when Blood mixed with Melancholy, and burnt by reason
of long Retention in the Liver and Spleen, is evacuated and shines. The last,
and that which I am now to discourse on, is, when Blood and Excrements are
mixed together, and sometimes also Matter is mixed therewith, and is evacuated
with Torture to the Patient, by reason of Ulceration in the Guts; this is the
proper Dysentery. The internal Causes, are sharp and ulcerating Humors,
yellow, green, and black Choler: Salt Phlegm in the Head, bred by Heat, or in
the Belly by putrefaction, which being brought to the Guts and sticking to them
ulcerateth the part. The Causes external, are all things which make sharp and
evil Humors, Meats which soon putrify, Fruits which are soon rotten, all
things unripe; the Air thus qualifyed: the Winter cold and dry, and the Spring
very wet and full of South Winds, cause Dysenteryes in the Summer: Or if the
Winter be wet and full of South Winds, and a dry Spring and the North Winds
blow much; such a Season produces Dysenteryes. Sometimes the Air is infected,
and produces a contagious and epidemical Dysentery, which is so infectious,
that the Excrements of the Sick, being cast into a Privy, infecteth all that
sit over it. The Diagnostick Signs are, often and bloody Evacuations, with
Pain in the Belly, Watching, Thirsting, Loathing of Meat, sometimes a Fever.
If the small Guts are affected, the Pain is vehement like the pricking of Pins,
because they are of more exquisite Sense, they go not to Stool presently after
the Pain, and the Blood is mixed with the Excrements. The contrary judge, if it
be in the great Guts, the Pain not so sharp, they go to Stool presently after,
and the Blood swimmeth on the top of, or a little mixed with, the Excrements.
You may judge of the Humor causing this Disease, by the Color of the
Excrements, Age and Temperament of the Patient, and Season of the year. Thus
the Prognostics are made. Dysenteryes caused by black Choler are deadly, if
it be not Critical, because the Ulcer grows cancerous: be sure you judge
aright between Melancholy and Blood congealed. If Loathing of Meat and a Fever
accompany it, it is dangerous. If pieces of Flesh be voided, it is deadly. Much
Watching, great Thirst, black, bloody, and stinking Stools without a Mixture of
Humors, Hiccough, choleric Vomitings, Pain in the Liver and Midriff, are (for
the most part) deadly Signs. If Choler or sharp Diet be the cause of this
Disease, it is easily cured; salt-Phlegm is worse, because it sticks longer to
the Guts. If this Disease happen to one troubled with a disease in the Spleen,
or the Gout, it is good (says Hippocrates) because the Matter is sent forth:
but this is rather a Diarrhae a then a Dysentery.

To cure, you must evacuate sharp Humors, you must assuage Pain, cleanse,
consolidate, and dry the Ulcer, and stop the Flux. To evacuate the Humors, you
must purge every second, third, or fourth day, according to your Patients Age,
Strength, Season of the year, and the like. Rubarb is exceeding good in this
Disease, given a Dram, or a Dram and an half, or two Drachms; Or made into
a Potion thus: Take of Liquorish scraped and sliced, and Raisons of the Sun, of
each, three Drachms: Tamarinds and yellow Myrabolans, of each, two Drachms:
boil them in Barley and Plantane water to three Ounces: in which streined,
infuse a Dram of Rubarb thin sliced: then add one Ounce of the Sirrup of
Roses solutive, and make a Potion: if you think it not strong enough, add of
Diacatholicon, three Drachms; or you may give the Rubarb in Powder, in the
aforesaid Decoction. If the Dysentery be accompanied with a Fever, and
Inflammation of the Bowels, open a Vein, and let the Patient bleed according to
his Strength. Sometimes vomiting is profitable to revell the Humors, which
fall from the Stomach to the Intestines; Omit not vomiting if you find the
Stomach very foul: Especially if the Sick be inclinable to vomit, for then
Nature dictates the right way, and ought to be imitated. In the mean while, you
must give asswaging, mild, and cleansing Clisters, afterward glutinous and
astringent, Thus: Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, Butter-burr, of each, one
handful: Camomil Flowers, one Pugil: the Seeds of Flax, and Fleabane, of each,
two Drachms; boil them in Barley water, or Milk Chalybeated, or Mutton, Capon,
or Sheeps Head Broth, to a Pint; strain it, and dissolve therein the yolks of
four Eggs well beaten, Oil of Roses, and Sirrup of Quinces, of each, one Ounce;
and make a Clister. If the Ulcer want cleansing, add Century and Wormwood to
the former Decoction: and to the strained Liquor add Turpentine dissolved in
the yolk of an Egg, and the chemical Oil of Wax, of each, one Dram. When
there is need of more binding and glutinating, make a Clister thus: Take of the
Roots of Comphry, Tormentill, and Bistort, of each, one Ounce: Plantane,
Shepherds purse, Knot-grasse, and Mous-ear, of each, one handful: Pomegranate
Flowers, Mirtles, Acorn cups, and Cypress Nuts, of each, one Dram: parched
Rice, French Barley, and red Roses, of each, one Pugill: Make a Decoction in
Smiths water, to a Pint of the straining; add of the Juice of Plantane and
Yarrow, of each, one Ounce, and the yolks of two roasted Eggs. Or, instead of
the Juyces, you may add the Musilage of Gum Traganth, made with Rose or
Plantane Water, and the Suet of a Goat, of each, one Dram, which Emplastick
Clisters, as with a Plaster, cover the internal Superficies of the Guts, and
preserves the part from the gnawing of the Matter. All this while you must
give internal Medicines of the same Nature, and the oftener, if the upper Guts
are ulcerated. First, to cleanse, give Gears Milk; to glutinate, Cows Milk
Chalybiated; with it, you may mix the juice of Plantane, Sirrup of Comphry,
Sugar of Roses, the Troches of Amber, and the white Troches of Rhasis. Let the
Sick eat Rice boiled in Chalybiated Milk: or the Musilage of Gum Traganth and
Arabic, drawn as before, in his Broth half a Dram. The Body being well
cleansed, you may make an astringent Decoction to complete the Cure: Take of
the Roots of Bistort, Tormentill, and Comphry, the Leaves of Plantane, Yarrow,
Shepherds purse, Horse-tayl, Mousear, and Agrimony, of each, one handful: the
Seeds of Sorrel, Sumach, and Grape-stones, of each, one Ounce. make a Decoction
in four quarts of Water, to the Consumption of half; Sweeten the strained
Liquor with the Sirrup of Comphry, Quinces, dried Roses, Myrtles, or Coral.
Front what has been said, there is light enough for the Ingenious to make
Medicines in any form, to please the Palate of his Patient, which I omit,
being loath to be tedious; but lest I should omit any thing necessary, make an
Opiate thus: Take of Conserve of Roses, and Quinces, of each, one Ounce:
Conserve of Comphry Roots, half an Ounce: Coral prepared, Sanguis Draconis,
Bolearmenick, sealed Earth, Acatia, Conserve of Sloes, of each, one Dram:
burnt Ivory and Spodium, of each, one Scruple, with any of the Sirrups
aforesaid, sufficient to make an Opiate, and give the Quantity of a Chestnut,
Morning, Night, and Noon.

Narcoticks do Wonders, especially, if they be mixed with astringents, and
strengthners: Take of Conserve of Roses and Services, of each, one Dram:
Confectio Alchermes half a Scruple: Laudanum three Grains, make a Bolus. Anoint
the Belly with the Oils of Quinces, Myrtles, Roses, Mastich, Wormwood, and the
like. The Ointment called Comitissae is of wonderful Virtue. I might here teach
you to make Fomentations and Cataplasms, for the purpose aforesaid, of the
aforenamed Simples, but seeing the Ingenious need it not, and the Ignorant
deserve it not, I shall save that labor, fearing my Book will swell to a
greater Volume then I intended. What ever you do, remember to strengthen the
Liver, with Cataplasms for that purpose, made of Simples strengthening the
Liver. If the Dysentery be Epidemical, and Malignant; Sudorifick Medicines are
of great force. As Medicines made of Bezoar, and Treacle water: you must begin
with Cordials, and proceed as you do in a Malignant Fever.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Tenasmus.
(...) in Greek, and Tenasmus in Latin, is a continual desire to go to Stool,
yet the Patient voideth nothing but Slime, and bloody Matter; it is caused by
an Ulcer in the Intestinum rectum or straight Gut, from which filthy Matter
continually flowing, provokes the expulsive Faculty, hence follows a
continual desire to go to Stool. This Disease properly belongs to a
Dysentery, yet by custom, when only the straight Gut is ulcerated, it is
called Tenasmus, therefore I shall not insert the Causes, being the same with
the former. For the Knowledge of this Disease, it is easy to distinguish between
this and a Dysentery. In a Tenasmus, the desire of going to Stool is continual;
in the Dysentery, by Fits only. In the first (notwithstanding all straining)
nothing is voided, but Slime, bloody or mattery; in the other, both Exerements
and Humors are voided. (The Signs of the Causes seek in the former Chapter.)
Tenasmus (for the most part) is easily cured, but is dangerous, if a melancholy
Humor be the Cause, lest it turn to an ulcerated Cancer; yet (for the most
part) it is of long Continuance, and very troublesome. If a Woman with Child
has the Tenasmus, it brings many Inconveniences to her, and great danger of
Miscarriage: Hippocrates says, she will miscarry; but I have known the
contrary. True it is, a Woman seldom escapes in that condition, for that
Motion does much disturb the Womb; because the same Muscles which serve to cast
forth the Excrements, are employed for Delivery. If the Ulcer be near the
Fundament or Anus, if it continue long, it turns to an incurable Fistula. For
the Cure I shall refer you to the former Chapter, it being the same, both in
the Causes, and the part affected, of the same Nature with the other Intestines.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Flux of the Liver.
FLuxus Hepaticus, a Flux of the Liver is, when serous and bloody Humors are
voided, much like Water wherein Flesh has been washed. It is caused by an evil
Disposition, consuming the radical Moisture of the Liver, and destroys the
natural Heat thereof; this Disposition comes by burning and swooning Fevers,
and by a hot Distemper of the Bowels: or by great Coldness, from abundance of
Phlegm and Melancholy, which oppresses the natural Heat.

Outward Causes, as great draughts of cold Water, extraordinary eating of raw
Sallets, poisonous and too violent Purges, salt, sharp, and peppered Meats,
which parch the Substance of the Liver, may corrupt the natural Hear. There is
also a bastard Flux of the Liver, when the radical Moisture is not in fault,
nor the Faculty hurt, yet the Blood is impure and corrupt, by the mixture of
Choler, Melancholy, or some corrupt Matter: or by its staying too long in the
Liver, and the parts adjacent: by which it is made thick, burnt or rotten: or
the Spleen is in fault, and does not suck away the drossy Blood. In this
Bastard Fluy, thick and black Blood, and sometimes Blood mixed with diverse
Humors, is voided. The Signs of this Disease may be gathered from what has
been said, and it differs from the Dysentery in this, that the Stools are
l^quid, bloody, and watery, and voided without pain. The Signs of the Causes
most be considered. If this defect of the Liver come from a hoe Distemper,
there went before a burning Fever, or a Fever is present, green Vomits or
Stcols, Thirst, Foulness of Body, and Want of Appetite, stinking Evacuations.
If from cold, the Stools are not so stinking, nor is there Thirst; the whose
Body is colder and bluish. Moist and dry Causes produce contrary Effects; a
moist Distemper causes more Stools and thin: a dry, sewer and thicker, and
less in Quantity, with much Thirst. This Disease is very dangerous, because a
principal part is affected, and the radical Moisture consumed, which can
scarcely be restored, and nothing but destruction to be hoped for; so much the
more if the Disease comes of Hear. If it comes in Fevers, the whole Body
melts and putrifieth. If it come from a cold Cause, it losteth the longer,
and turns into an incurable Dropsy. Though a Bastard-Flux of the Liver be
dangerous, yet it is far less then a true one: because the Liver is sound,
and the Distemper may be taken away, if the Humors which corrupt the Blood be
evacuated. In the Cure of this Disease, your main work is to strengthen the
Liver, correct the Distemper, and stay the Flux. If it come from a cold Cause,
deal with it as with a Dropsy. But if it come of a hot Cause (as for the most
part it does,) you may gently evacuate the peccant Humors with Rubarb, as you
are taught in the Cure of the Dysentery. Then you must give Medicines, which
strengthen the Liver: Take of the Roots of Succory, Sorrel, Bloodwort, and
Monks-Rubath, of each, one Ounce: the Leaves of Plantane, Endive, Succory,
Purslane, Agrimeny, and Dandelion, of each, one handful: Wormwood, half a
handful: Red Sanders, two Drachms: Coriander seeds prepared, a Dram: red
Roses, one Pugill, the shavings of Ivory and Spodium, of each, a Dram: boil
them in Barley water to a Quart, and in the straining, dissolve, of the Sirrups
of Quinces, Vinegar Simple, and dried Roses, of each, two Ounces; of the Oil of
Vitriol, as much as will make it moderately sharp; and make a Julep for six
Doses, to be given Morning and Evening, First and Last. The Sirrup of Myrtles,
of Succory simple, or compound with Rubarb, the Sirrup, Tincture, or Magistery
of Pearl is very good, and may be made use of as the former, or made into a
Julep with Plantane, or other cooling Waters. The Liver of a Wolf is much
commended, and it may be made into an Electuary, Opiate, or into any other
form, with the aforenamed ingredients. The Tops of young Nettles boiled in
Broth or Water are good, and the juice taken is more powerful to stop the Flux
and to purify the Blood. It is good to apply an Epitheme to the Region of the
Liver, made of the aforenamed Ingredients, or as many of them as you think
good. It is convenient that, among your Medicines, which you give to stop the
Flux, you administer such as are restorative, because in this Disease the Body
is much consumed. Riverius much commends this distilled Water, and the truth
is, it deserves commendation: Take a fat Capon and a Partridge; pull and draw
them, and filth ir bellyes with Succory, Agrimony, and Snails, of each, one
Handful: Conserve of Roses, three Ounces: Plantane and Coriander Seeds
prepared, of each, two Drachms: Citron Myrabolans, one Dram: the Leaves of
Bloodwort, half a handful: the Troches of Amber and Spodium, of each, four
Scruples: the Powder of the Electuary de Gemmis, Triasantalon, and
Diamargariton frigidum, of each, one Dram: Sprinkle them with Styptick Wine,
and put them into the Fowls Bellyes: boil them in a close Vessel, in four Pints
of Water, till half be consumed; then put them into a glass Limbeck with three
Ounces of good Wine, and distill them in Balaeo: give a little of the Water
often by it self, or with other Medicines.

CHAP. L. Of the Worms.
Worms (for the most part) breed in the Guts, therefore I shall speak of them
here. Galen Propounds three kinds of Worms; the First, are round and long, and
are called Teretes, and are more common then the rest, and are bred in the
Guts, but do sometimes get up into the Stomach. The Second are called Ascarides,
they are little and small, like threads, and they commonly ly in the lower part
of the thick Intestines, and over against the Sphincter-Muscle: The third sort
are broad Worms and long, though seldom seen: sometimes they are voided of an
incredible length. They are bred of such Nourishment as easily putrifieth in
the Stomach: hence it comes to pass that Children, and such as are
gluttonous, who eat much Fruit and such things as easily putrify, especially
more being eaten, before the former is digested, are troubled with Worms. The
Signs of Worms in the Guts are diverse, not in all alike: a stinking and sour
Breath, Stools like Cow dung; in color, Gray like Potters earth. Sometimes
there is a continual Fever, Heaviness, Fainting, Loathing, Vomiting,
unquenchable Thirst, and sometimes cold Sweats: an unequal Pulse, the Cheeks
are, sometimes red, sometimes blew, the Eyes shine, the Nose itcheth, the Teeth
gnash, a dry Cough. There is pain in the Belly, sometimes by Inflammation, and
sometimes by Distention, some start in their Sleep. Sometimes the Body pineth,
and the Patient has an insatiable Appetite, this is a Sign of flat Worms,
which eat up the Food. The Ascarides are known by the itching of the Fundament,
and the Excrements are many times full of them. Sometimes the eating away of
the Gums is a Sign of Worms. Though to Children and older Folk Worms are
common, and little feared, yet many and dangerous Symptoms and Diseases are
bred by them. In the beginning of a Disease, it is evil for Worms to be voided
alive or dead, especially alone without Dung: if they be alive, they signify
great Crudity, and Want of Nourishment; if dead, great Putrefaction, by which
they are killed. In the declining of a Disease, Worms coming forth with the
Excrements, is a good Sign. The Cure of the Worms consists in giving
Medicines to kill them, and to evacuate them being killed. The best way to kill
them, or at least to drive them to the lower Intestines, are these Simples
which follow, viz. all the sorts of Wormwood, Southernwood, Calamint,
Dogs-tooth, Century, Horehound, Dittany, Hyssop, Rue, Savin, Peach leaves,
Coriander seed, Hearts horn, Lupines, Mints, Garlic, Elecampane, and many
other: of these Simples may several forms of Medicines be composed, mixing with
them such things as purge, not only to kill, but also to carry away the Cause
of Worms; Rubarb is much commended, because it may safely be given, if a Fever
be present. Take of Rubarb, one Dram, yellow Sanders, half a Scruple; infuse
them, in Purslane water, three Ounces, strain them, and dissolve the Powder of
Rubarb, and the Powder against the Worms (which you may have at the
Apothecaryes) of each, one Scruple, Sirrup of Roses, one Ounce; mix them, and
make a Potion. If the Fever be not great, add Hiera picra to your Potion, more
or less according to the strength of your Patient, afterward give a Clister,
made of the Decoction of Liquorish, Raisons, Figs; or Chicken Broth sweetened
with Sugar and Honey of Roses; such Clisters are good to draw them down into the
thick Guts. Afterward give a Clister made after this manner: Take of Wormwood,
Southernwood, Century, of each, one handful: Lupines, half an Ounce: the Seed
of Wormwood, and Coriander seed prepared, of each, two Drachms: In a half Pint
or a Pint of the strained Liquor, (according umo the age of the Patient)
dissolve one Ounce or two of the Oil of Wormwood, and Salt, one Dram and an
half. To bring them out being killed, add to the former Clister, Benedicta
Laxativa, Hiera picra, and Cassia newly drawn, of each, three Drachms, or more
if your Patient can bear it. Rondoleitus does highly commend Diaearthamum; and
the Infusion of Agarick in Oxymel, because it not only kills Worms, but
purges Phlegm and corrupted Chyle, of which, Worms breed and are nourished:
but this remember, they are not proper Remedies in Fevers. Therefore, if the
Sick has a Fever, you must be careful how you administer hot Medicines, the
like you must observe, if you administer any thing to people of hot Natures.
Women do commonly give Wormseed to their Children for the Worms, mixed with
sweet things, which is a Medicine not to be despised. But, least it should hurt
by its Hear, infuse it two hours in Vinegar, afterward mix it with boiled
Honey, and make an Opiate, which Amatus Lusitanus much commends. Forrestus as
highly commends burnt Hartshorn given with Raisons. Aloes are much in use
likewise, but the Pill de Aloe rosata is much better, if half a Dram be given
at Night. The Juice of Lemmons is good, (if there be a Fever) and a good
corrigent for hotter Medicines. If they have not a Fever, the Chemical Oil of
Juniper given one drop in Broth is excellent: and no less effectual is spring
Water, made sharp with Oil of Vitriol. Many (and those very learned) Physicians
have much commended Quicksilver, who say it may be taken in a moderate quantity
with admirable success, and without the least danger to the Body: for
Dioscorides says, that it kills no otherwise, but by tearing the Guts with
its great weight; therefore we fear not to give it in a small Quantity, because
its Weight and Roundnesse will easily carry it through the Body. Of this
opinion also was Mathiolus, Brassavolus, Fallovius, Platerus, Fabricius,
Hildanus, John Baptista Zappata, Baricellus' Sanctorius, and many others, who
extol the benefit of this Medicine to the heavens for its Virtue, and say they
never found any inconvenience by it. Those that dread the use of that, let them
use Mercurius Dulcis well prepared; the Dose for once taking, is from eight to
ten Grains, for a Boy of ten years of Age; it will be better if you mix, of
Diagridium, half the weight of the former, to carry it sooner out of the Body,
and to expel the Worms, if you give it to a child younger, or to a weak Child,
give it in a smaller quantity. Lastly, you may make Topics, of what form you
please, to apply to the Belly: Take of the Oils of Wormwood, Mints, and bitter
Almonds, of each, one Ounce: the Juice of Wormwood and Rue, of each, two
Ounces: Wormseed, Aloes, and Elicampane in powder, of each, a Dram:
Colloquintida, six Drachms: of the Gall of an Ox, two or three Ounces, with
Wax, sufficient to make an Unguent, or so much (if you please) as will make a
Plaster, and apply it; if the Sick be loose, leave out the Colloquintida.

CHAP. LI. Of the immoderate Flux of the Haemorrhoids.
Though a moderate Flux of the Haemorrhoids be healthful, and preserves a man
from many and dangerous Diseases, viz. the Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, Stone in
the Kidneys, Madness, Melancholy, and from many other Diseases; yet the
immoderate Flux is very perilous, and brings many pernicious Diseases, viz.
Weakness of the whole Body, Coolness of the Bowels, and Liver, an Arrophy,
Cachexia, and Dropsy for want of natural Heat, for by this Flux the Blood is
wasted, which is the Treasure of life, and Cherisher of the whole Body. This
Flux has the same Cause that other bleedings have, viz. Blood offending in
Quantity or Quality. In Quantity, when plenty of Blood it brought to the
Haemorrhoid Veins, and dilateth and opens the Orifices, or overmastereth the
retentive Faculty, hence follows a Flux. If the Blood offend in Quality, as
Sharpness and Thinness, it stirrs up the expulsive Faculty, and sends forth
both good and bad Blood. This Disease is known by weakness, and a yellowish
Color of the Body, coming upon a long Flux of the Haemorrhoids. If too much
Blood be the Cause of the Flux, there went before, Causes of increase of Blood;
and the beginning of the Flux was a refreshment to the Patient; but the Flux
continuing, he grows weak. If the Flux came from Sharpness and Thinness of
the Blood, there preceded Causes which breed Choler, or sharp Water, the Body
is of a choleric Constitution, the Blood flows violently and is shining,
whereas if it offend only in Quantity, it is black and Melancholy. To perform
the Cure, you must stanch or moderate the Blood, by revelling, deriving,
thickning, and astringing Means. First, open a Vein in the Arm, and if the
Patient has not lost much Blood, but abounds therewith, draw Blood
plentifully; otherwise, draw little and often. Rub and bind the superior parts,
and Cup and Scarify the Shoulders that the Blood may be revelled. By gentle
Purges, derive the choleric Humors, which make the Blood so violent: purge
with such things as have an astringent Quality, as Rubarb, Myrabolans,
Tamarinds, such as are prescribed against vomiting of Blood, and bleeding at
the Nose. But beware lest the Body be too much bound, lest by straining, the
Veins will be more open: therefore after the use of astringents, let the
Patient eat sharp French Prunes before and after Meat. Then you must give such
things as may thicken the Blood, (have recourse to the 19, 30 and 39 Chapters.)
Lastly, you must prepare astringent Fomentations and Unguents to be applied to
the Haemorreoid Veins: boil Mullein in Smith's water, and foment; or you may
add other Herbs of the same Nature to it, thus: Take of the Roots of Bistort,
half a Pound: the Leaves of Plantane, Mullein, Shepherds purse, Bramble, and
Oak Leaves, of each, two Handfulls: Pomegranate Flowers and Peels, Galls and
Sumach berries, of each, one Handful: red Roses, two Pugills; Myrtles, half a
Dram: Alum, one Ounce, boil them in three parts of Smith's Water, and one of
red Wine, and soment the part therewith, but let it be but moderately hot. Or
with a greater quantity of the Simples, you may make a Bath for the Sick to sit
in, but let it not be hot. Or you may make an Ointment with their Juyces, and
Bolearmenick. Terra Sigillata, Sanguis Draconis, Ceruse, Vinegar, and such
like; Unguentum Comitissae is good to anoint the Veins and the Back. The
Dripping of un Eel is much commended. Or take the Hairs of an Hare burnt,
Spiders Webs mixed with the white of an Egg, and apply it. Or touch the Vein
with Oil of Vitriol, and, in a desperate Case, with Aqua Fortis. If the Veins
should ulcerate, cleanse the Ulcer as you are taught in diverse places of this
Treatise. But be sure you consider the State of the Liver and Spleen; if they
be hot or weak, cool or strengthen them, as you are taught in their proper
Chapters.

CHAP. LII. Of the pain of the Haemorrhoids.
THe Haemorrhoid-Veins, sometimes do swell and cause very great pain. The cause
of this differs not from the former, for the blood offending in quantity or
quality, and cannot open the ends of the Veins, causes a Tumor, or
inflammation. These Tumors are sometimes like Grapes, Mulberries, Warts, and
sometimes like bladders: Some are external, others internal. It is convenient
that you make a distinction between the Haemorrhoids, and the clefts of the
Fundament, which are like those chops which are in the lips, caused by sharp
Northerly winds: and the Tumor called Condiloma, which is in color, black, as
the Haemorrhoids are, in form, long, and not in the Veins; whereas the
Haemorrhoids are in the Veins, and round. There is also in the Fundament
sometimes to be found a carnuons swelling, called Thymi, and sometimes in the
privities of Men and Women, and they are like the flowers of Thyme, they are
little, white, or reddish, without pain; the Haemorrhoids are for the most part
black, greater, and painful. The piles are greater then the former, they are
called Fici, they are blew and painful, are like the Haemorrhoids, only they
are a carnuous swelling, and the Haemorrhoids is a swelling of the Veins. The
Piles are of a Malign quality, and do sometimes ulcerate. The swelling of the
Haemorrhoids is not dangerous, unless it be inflamed, and Gangrene: Or if it
suppurate and come to an Ulcer, and chance to turn to a Fistula, which may
prove incurable. To cure, you must bleed, and make such revulsions prescribed
in the former Chapter; likewise open the Saphaena. You must not use strong
purges, lest you draw more humors to the place, yet you must keep the body
soluble, least the voiding of hard dung greatly increase pain; keep the body
soluble by this or the like Medicine: Take of the leaves of Lettice, Burrage,
Buglosse, and Mallows, of each, one handful: Polypody of the Oak three ounces;
Liquorish, Raisons stoned, and Current, of each, half an ounce: Buglosse,
Burrage, and Violetflowers, of each, one Pugill; Boil it in running water to a
pint and an half; Strain it, and infuse therein an Ounce of Senna, (the liquor
being kept hot) six hours; then put in of Cassia newly drawn, one ounce, and
let it stand an hour; strain it, and Clarify it, and sweeten it with two ounces
of syrrup of Violits, make four potions thereof, and give it twice in a day,
first and last. Then you must apply such things to them which has power to
case pain, viz. the Oil of Peach-kernells, Sweet Almonds, Nuts, Eggs, Box: or
oils of the seeds of Poppy, or Henbane. Of these may diverse Lineaments be made,
good to appease pain, discuss the Tumor, and to dry the Ulcers: Take of the oil
of Eggs, (made in a Leaden Mortar) the oil of Violets, and Roses, of each one
ounce; Populeon, half an Ounce, the Oil of Box, two scruples, with Hens Grease,
and Goats Suet, sufficient to make a Liniment, and apply it, or take of the
juice of Purslane, and honey, of each, two ounces; white Diachylon, mollified
with the Oil of Chamomell, two Ounces, Opium, six grains; make an Unguent.
Horstius commends wild Flax made into an Ointment, with Hogs grease. To
discuss the Tumor, the Balsome of Sulphur is much commended, or this
Cataplasme is good. Take of Plantane, Pilewort, and Mallows of each a like
quantity; make a decoction in Milk, till the liquor be half wasted, strain out
the herbs, and make a Cataplasm with the crumbs of white bread; adding to it
the Oil of Violets, Roses, Myrtles, and the like. Or a Cataplasm made of the
heads of Leeks, is much commended. Green Elder leaves boiled to slime, and
applied, and often renewed, are very good. The Lungs of a Sheep or Goat taken
hot, and some slices thereof applied, or if the sick sit upon them, it
oftentimes proves effectual. If you see good, you may make a fomentation,
with Mullein, Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Flax, and Fenugreek
seed in Milk, water, or Oil, or all of them; or with a great quantity make a
Bath: Or a fume made of the powder of Darnell, Mullein, Pilewort, dried and
thrown upon hot coals, and the Sumen received. The decoction of yarrow,
Mullein, and Pilewort, is a good Medicine to take inwardly, or a Syrrup made of
their Juyces, against both Haemothoids and Piles. If they will not open, bleed
them with Leeches, or rub them till they bleed. If the Piles be ulcerated, the
Balsom of Sulphur, the Oil of Eggs stirred in a Leaden Mortar, is good to
cleanse them. To conclude, those that are subject to these distempers, ought to
have an Issue in the Leg.

CHAP. LIII. Of a hot distemper of the Liver.
A Hot distemper of the Liver is either with, or without matter; but for the
most part, a hot distemper of the Liver, does produce hot and choleric
humors: It is called in Greek (...); it is caused either by hot weather,
violent exercise, anger, or such like passions of the mind: hot or spiced
nourishment, drinking much Wine, or any thing that is naturally hot. This
distemper is known by loathing of meat, the body Costive and hot, especially
the palms of the hands, and soles of the feet, the whole body grows lean; a
bitterness of the mouth, and for the most part a Fever; if there be plenty of
humors, the patient vomiteth, or evacuateth downwards Choler; he is the worse
for hot, and the better for cold things. This distemper, though not very
dangerous in it solf, yet may be the cause of many diseases: It is hard to cure
it if the stomach be cold, because what you give to cool the Liver, increases
the distemper of the stomach. To cure it, you must cool the Liver, and evacuate
Choler. First give a Laxative and cooling Clister; then, open the Liver-Vein
in the right arm, and draw as much blood as the patients strength will well
bear, either at once or at several times. Then make an Apozeme to purge
Choler, thus, Take the roots of yellow Docks, or Muncks Ruharb, Sorrel,
Succory, and Licoris, of each one Ounce, the Leaves of Endive, Succory,
Fumitory, Dandelion, and Burrage, of each one handful; of the great cold
seeds, of each three Drachres: Of the Cordial flowers, of each, one Pugill,
Tamarinds one Ounce; boil them to a Pint and an half, then add to infuse of
Rubarb and Senna, of each half an Ounce, Syrrup of Succory, with Rubarb, and of
Roses Solutive, add at the last, and clarify it, aromatize it with two drachms
of yellow Sanders. Let the Patient take it four mornings. Let his ordinary
drink be Barly-water, and put therein the Syrrup of Lemmons or Maidenhair; or,
if he delight in things that are sharper, make it sharp with the spirit of
Sulphur, or Vitriol. Whey likewise is very good, it is best if it be made by
turning the milk with Vinegar, or the juice of Lemmons, and add such things as
I advised for the Barley water. Likewise you may prepare Juleps to cool the
Liver. Take the waters of Endive, Succory, Sorrel, and Buglosse, of each one
ounce, the Syrrups of Lemmons, Sweet Apples, and Pomegranats, of each one
ounce: of the Syrrup of Coral, compound half an ounce, the Oil of Vitriol, ten
drops, mix them, and make a Julep for four doses; Or, Take of the Conserve of
the flowers of Buglosse, Violets and Succory, of each one Ounce, the conserve
of Hips, one Ounce and an half, with Syrrup of Lemmons make an Opiate, and take
a little often. Likewise you may make a decoction of China, and Hepatick
herbs, sweetning it with the aforenamed Syrrups, and taking half a pint in the
morning. Likewise of the aforenamed cooling herbs you may make an Apozen to
cool the Liver, or you may make a Bath to cool and moysten the body.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the Inflammation of the Liver.
THe Inflammation of the Liver, is a hot Tumor, occasioned by blood, out of its
proper vessels, sent into the substance of the Liver. This Tumor arises
either from pure blood, or else the blood is mixed with Choler, Phlegm, or
Melancholy, so producing either a true, Erysipelous, Oedematous, or Schirrous
Phlegmon. This Tumor is sometimes in the gibbous, or hollow part, of the Liver.
The causes of this disease are too much blood, or the heat, thinness or
sharpness thereof, and by its motion in the Veins it is sometimes thrown into
the Liver: For, the Liver being hot and in pain, does attract the humors to it
self: or by its weakness, is forced to receive the burden that stronger parts
lay upon it, according to the Proverb, The weakest goes to the walls. Sometimes
an obstruction of the Liver, by retaining the thick humors, which by a
preternaturall heat is inflamed. The external causes are the same which cause
heat of the Liver. To which add a stroke, or fall, bruising the Liver, or
Medicines applied to a cold stomach, or a Cupping-Glasse fastened to the Region
of the Liver. The signs of the disease, are heaviness in the right
Hypocondrion, a weighty pain sometimes extending it self to the throat, and
sometimes to the lower ribs, a Fever more or less violent, according to the
nature of the humor offending, viz. Choler, or Phlegm, and difficulty of
breathing, because the motion of the Diaphragma is hindered, a dry chough, an
unequal pulse and like a Saw, the Tongue at the beginning red, afterward
black, great thirst, loathing of meat, vomiting Choler, and sometimes Phlegm, a
pale and yellowish color of the whole body, red and flaming Urine, the sick
has more ease lying upon his back, then upon either side: for the most part he
is costive, because the heat of the Liver dries up the moisture of the Chylus;
but if the Liver be weak also, the sick is loose, and the excrements are like
water wherein flesh has bin washed. If the Gibbous part of the Liver be
affected, you may feel the Tumor in the right Hypochondrion, the breath is
fetched with difficulty, and the pain reaches to the right side of the Throar.
If the cavity of the Liver be affected, the Tumor is not felt, but because that
part lies upon the stomach there is greater loathing of meat, vomitting,
thirst, and sometimes loosnesse of the belly, by reason of the corruption,
which the distemper of the Liver causes in the Stomach. The signs of the
causes are thus known, if the infla^mation be of blood only, the face is
either red or duskish, the Pulse is great and soft, the Urine is red and thick,
the body is full of flesh, and there is sweetness in the mouth; and for the
most part, the Patient is young and has fed high. If Choler cause the
infla^mation, the face is yellow, the pulse swift, hard and unequal, the Urine
thin and yellow, the body thin, the eyes hollow, a bitter taste in the mouth,
and Choleric vomitings. The Symptoms of the inflammation of the Abdomen,
differ little from them of the infla^mation of the Liver, therefore let us a
little consider the difference. If the Muscles of the Abdomen be infla^med, the
skin is extended, and if you lay hold of it, you cannot move it, but if the
Liver be inflamed, if you lay hold on the Muscles, they yield, and the Tumor
appears deeper. If these Muscles be inflamed, the color appears fresh, and
in its natural color; but if the Liver be inflamed, the color is yellow as
in the Jaundise, you must likewise distinguish between the infla^mation of the
Liver, and a Pleurisy. Sometimes moist and bloody stools, distinguish it; in
the Pleurisy the pain will be vehement, and great toward the right
Hypocondria, no change of color, the cough great and dry, with bloody spittle
for the most part, the pulse hard and like a Saw; the infla^mation of the Liver
is manifosted by the signs laid down before. If the Mesentery be inflamed, the
Tumor appears beneath the region of the Liver, the stools will be thin and
moist, with unconcocted matter; if the party recover, the matter quickly is
concocted, the color of the face is not much altered. Prog. every infla^mation
of the Liver is dangerous, for the most part deadly: if the Patient be not
cured, or killed presently, the disease ends in a Dropsy, Atrophy, or
Consumption. If Choler be the cause of the infla^mation, it is worse then if
blood were the cause, and the Fever is stronger. The Hicchough in this
distemper, is a very evil sign, for it shows the greater Malignity of the
infla^mation, which does disturb the Stomach. A Flux joined with it, unless it
be critical, and the humors evacuated, concocted, is deadly. To cure it,
follow the rules prescribed in the 42. Chapt. Of the Infla^mation of the
Stomach. Let his drink be Barley water, with a little Syrrup of Violets. If the
disease be stubborn, to the former Medicines prescribed in the 42. Chapter, add
this following Apozeme. Take of the roots of Smallage, Fennel and Parsley, of
each, two ounces; the leaves of Agrimony, Violets, Succory, and Maidenhair, of
each one handful; Polypody of the Oak four Ounces, Chammell flowers, one
Ounce; the seeds of Fennel, Gromwell, and Parsley, of each one Dram: boil it
to a Pint and an half, and in the strained Liquor infuse an Ounce of Sen na,
and three Drachms of Rubarb; afterward, add of Sirrup of violets and Vinegar
Simple, of each, two Ounces: divide it into four Doses, and let the Sick take
every other Morning. Then make an Epithem, Liniment, Unguent, or Plaster,
thus: Take of the Juice of Endive, Succory, Sorrel, and Plantane, of each,
half an Ounce: of the Oils of Roses, Wormwood, Camomill, and Myrtles, of each,
one Ounce: Vinegar, half an Ounce: boil it to the Consumption of the Juyces:
then add of the three Sanders in Powder, of each, one Scruple: with Wax
sufficient, make an unguent, and anoint the Region of the Liver. If the Pain
and Fever decreaseth, you must add to the former Ointment, such things as
dissolve and mollify as well as cool: as the Flowers of Camomill and Melilot,
Barly-meal, the Roots of Marshmallows, Calamus Aromaticus, and Cypress: the
Leaves of Mallows, Violets, and Agrimony: the Seeds of Annise, Fennel,
Faenugreek, and Flax. Or with these Simples you may make a Fomentation.

If the Inflammation be not discussed, as it seldom can, it tends to
Suppuration; otherwise to a Gangrene. The Imposthume, for the most part, is
complete in twenty days, it is very dangerous, and few escape thereof. But if
it be little, and only in one part of the Liver, and the Matter white which
comes forth by Urine and Stool, the Sick escapes; if it be in the outward part
of the Liver, it may be opened by an actual Cautery, and if the Matter which
comes forth be white, the Patient escapes. After the Imposthume is broken,
there remains an Ulcer, if the Patient continues: the Ulcer is hard to cure,
and brings the Patient into a Dropsy or Marasmus. But sometimes sharp,
choleric, and corroding Humors in the Liver produce an Ulcer without
Inflammation. This Ulcer is discovered by the Signs following: Pain in the
right Hypocondrion, mattery and bloody Stools, and pain in the Bowels as in the
Dysentery; only here the Weight and Pricking about the Liver makes a
Distinction: sometimes pieces of the Liver have been voided by Stool. If the
outward part of the Liver be ulcerated, the Urine is mattery, without any
Disease in the Bladder or Reins. The Color is yellow, sometimes small Pimples
in the Face, a stinking Breath, Loathing Flesh, and the Sick faints often. An
Ulcer in the Liver is accompanied (for the most part) with an Hective Fever;
for the most part Death lodges not far from it: that which follows an
Imposthume and Inflammation is more dangerous then the other. If it tends to
Suppuration, it is hardly cured, yet you must proceed, thus: Take of the
Emplaster of Diachilon magnum, and Melilot, of each, one Ounce: Gum Ammoniacum
dissolved in Vinegar, half an Ounce: Oil of Wormwood and Wax, make a Plaster,
and spread it upon Leather in the form of an half Moon, and apply it to the
Region of the Liver. Make use also of mollifying Cataplasms. Give inwardly
Chicken Broth, and boil therein Marsh and common Mallows, Figs, etc. When the
Imposthume is broken, make use of the Medicines prescribed for the Cure of an
Ulcer in the Stomach; give him to drink Whey or Barly-Water and Honey of Roses.
If the Suppuration be outwardly and after the opening thereof, the Matter is
filthy, red and stinking, Death must perfect the Cure; but if the Matter
evacuated be white and concocted, there is hopes of Recovery.

CHAP. LV. Of the Obstruction of the Liver.
(...), or the Obstruction of the Liver, is a Disease organical, a
preternatural Straitness of the Branches of the Vena Porta, and Vena Cava, as
also the whole Substance of the Liver, which hinders the distribution of Blood
and Nourishment, by reason of a preternatural Humor which shuts up the
Passages. The Quantity or Quality of the Humors may be the Cause of
Obstruction. Plenty of Humors cause Obstruction in the Cavity of the Vessels,
which by fullness are so distended, that they cannot contract themselves to
send forth the Matter. The Quality of the Humors is gross, tough, and clammy
Excrements sticking to the Passages, and are more thickened by the Heat of the
part: viz. Phlegm which easily grows thick and clammy; Mela choly, which is
cold, thick, and drossy: Choler, staying long in the Liver, grows thick: and
sometimes the Thickness of the Blood may cause Obstruction; sometimes gross
Vapors may cause Obstruction, as in the Chollick. All things which make thick
and clammy Humors, as a cloudy and thick Air; Meats, that are astringent,
cold, of gross Juice, hard of Concoction being immoderately eaten, or more
eaten, then the Constitution of the Body can well dispense with; as Beef,
Bacon, Pork, and Fish dried in the Smoke; Cheese, Pease, Beans, etc. Pears,
Quinces, Medlars, Services, and Mushrooms: Bread not well baked, muddy Ale, and
astringent Wine. A cold Distemper of the Liver, which cannot well concoct the
Chylus, but turns it into a salt, tartarous, and mucilaginous Matter, may be
the Cause of Obstruction. Distempers of the Stomach, by reason of which it
cannot well concoct, but beget crude Chyle, which the Liver cannot well order,
may be the Cause. Diag: In this Distemper, the Excrements are not natural, but
are moist, white, chylous, or bloody: The Urine, white, thin, and warry: when
the Patient walks fast, or up a Hill, he breaths with difficulty: the Face
pale, the whole Body lean and dull: a sense of Weight in the Hypocondria,
especially after Meat, and though the Sick has eat Meat light, and little in
Quantity, yet he seems as if he had overgorged himself. Sometimes the
Hypocondria is extended; and a dry Cough. The Causes are thus known: If the
Pain be heavy, extended and fixed, gross Humors are the Cause. Sharper Pains,
and more moveable, declare Wind. If cold Humors be the Cause; there is more
Weight, the Face is pale, no Thirst nor Fever: a thick and cold Diet preceded:
the contrary Signs declare hot Humors to be the cause, Choler makes the
Face yellow, and blood-red. Prog: An Obstruction newly begun may be easily
cured: but an old, hardly. If the Obstruction of the Liver be not removed, it
breeds many dangerous Diseases: in a word, it may be well called the Mother of
all Diseases. That which comes of crude and phlegmatic Humors is worse then
that which comes of Wind. You must begin the Cure with universal Evacuations,
suitable to the Nature of the Disease, the Strength and Constitution of the
Patient. If Blood abound, open the Liver-Vein, but beware lest you cool the
Body too much. Then you must make opening-Broths, thus: Take of the Roots of
Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, and Asparagus, of each, one Ource: Agrimony,
Maidenhair, and Polypody of the Oak, of each, one handful: the Seeds of
Annise, Parsley, and Fennel, of each, one Dram; boil them in Chicken or
Mutton Broth, and strain it; every Morning give the Sick a Porringer full,
dissolving first therein, Cream of Tartar, one Dram; Salt of Wormwood and
Tamarisk, of each, half a Scruple. Or every other day infuse in his Broth, half
an Ounce of Senna, and give it as before. Baths and Fomentations made of
sottning and opening things are good: Take of the Roots of Marsh mallows,
Lillyes, and Briony, of each, two Ounces; the middle Rind of Tamarisk, the Bark
of Caper Roots, the Roots of Sea holly, Cypress, and dwarf-Elder, of each, one
Ounce: The Leaves of Marsh and common Mallows, Camomill, Mints, Germander,
Penny-royall, Violets, and Wormwood, of each, one handful: the Seed of Flax,
Foenugreek, and Juniper Berryes, of each, one Ounce: the Flowers of Broom,
Elder, Camomill, and Mililot, of each, one Handful: boil them in chalybiated
Water, and (if you please) add one part of White Wind, and foment the Region of
the Liver: or with a greater Quantity make a Bath. Your Wit (if you have any)
will teach you how to make Unguents, of the same ingredients, to anoint the
part, after fomenting. It is good to have in readiness an Opiate that opens
Obstructions, strengthens the Stomach, Liver, and other parts; Take of the
Conserve of Wormwood, two Ounces: the Root of Elicampane, and Citron Peels
candied, of each, one Ounce: Candied Nutmegs, half an Ounce: one Myrabolan
candied, Confectio Alchermes, two Drachms: Diarrhodon Abbatis, one Dram: Salt
of Wormwood and Tamarisk, of each one Scruple: Saffron, and Amber-greese, of
each, half a Scruple: with the Sirrup of the five opening Roots make an Opiate,
of which let the Patient take the quantity of a Wal-nut every Merning.

In this case steel-Medicines are of excellent use, and well approved of by
Galenists as well as Paracelsians: sometimes the Powder may be given alone, or
of it may be made several sorts of Medicines, as steel-Wine, Sirrups, Opiates,
Pills, and Lozenges. Some infuse it in white Wine or Claret, and drink thereof:
many ways are steeled-Wines prepared, I shall only prescribe that which my
self have found effectual and leave every man to his liberty to prepare it as
he sees good. Take the powder of Steel prepared with Vinegar, three Ounces: the
Roots of dwarf-Elder, two Ounces: the Root of Elicampane and Sea-Holly, of
each, one ounce: yellow Sanders and Epithimium, of each, one Ounce: the Flowers
of Camomill, Broom, and Rosemary, of each, half an Ounce: (it will not be the
worse if you add two Ounces of Senna, and half an Ounce of Rubarb:) the best
White Wind, three Quarts: Let them infuse in a Bath twelve days, twice a day
you must shake them: let the Patient take two or three Ounces every Morning as
long as need requires. Likewise may Pills, Opiates, and Sirrups be prepared of
the infusion and extract of Steel. But this remember, that after all Medicines
made of Steel must much Exercise be used, to make the Strength of the Medicine
go to the parts obstructed. Quercetan commends the compound Powder of Aron to
open Obstructions: two Drachms taken in a Morning in some convenient Liquor,
for several days: See the fourth Book: But of all Medicines, to open
Obstructions, those made of Vitriol, Tartar, and Steel claim the pre-eminence:
if Dr. Dunce have not the administering thereof.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Schirrus of the Liver.
THis Disease is a hard Tumor in the Liver without Pain: it is either perfect
or imperfect; the perfect is without Pain or Sense: that which is imperfect
has some Pain. This is bred by crude, viscous, and clammy Humors sent from
other parts, or bred in the Liver by evil Concoction. The imperfect Schirrus
is caused by immoderate use of discussing, or repercussive Medicines; or things
which by cooling and binding do thicken the Matter, and keep it from
dissolving. The Signs are, a Hardness in the right Hypocondrion, and a great
Heaviness, especially, when the Breath is fetched, neither Fever nor Pain, as
in the Inflammation; or at lest but little Pain, when the Schirrus is
imperfect: the Face is pale and greenish, because there is no good Blood
produced by it. The whole Body decays, because there is no Sanguification,
nor Distribution of Nourishment, as ought to be. To the Prognostic, Galen
says thus; an insensible Schirrus is incurable: that which is sensible is
curable, though with much difficulty. A Schirrus turns to the Dropsy incurable;
sometimes it causes the Jaundice: and sometimes it comes in the Jaundice, both
which are very dangerous. To cure it in the beginning of the Disease, you must
take away the antecedent Cause, as you are taught in the preceding chapter of
Obstructions, all the Medicines there mentioned are proper for this. Riverius
much commends these Pills following: Take of the best Aloes, and Gum
Ammoniacum, dissolved in Vinegar, strained, and again made thick, of each, half
an Ounce: Mercurius Dulcis, (well prepared) two Drachms: Diagridium, one
Dram: with Oxymell of Squills, make a Mass for Pills, of which, take half a
Dram in the Morning, for twenty or thirty days, but sometimes rest, and in
the intermediate days, make use of the steeled and other Medicines, mentioned
in the Chapter. Likewise the Fomentation and Unguent there prescribed may be
made use of to mollify this Tumor.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Jaundice.
THe Jaundice is a spreading of a yellow Color over the whole Body. There is a
two fold Jaundice, the yellow and the black; the black proceeds from the
Spleen, and is rare. I shall here speak only of the yellow Jaundice. This
Disease comes from three principal Causes: First, from an evil Disposition of
the Liver, as an Inflammation, Obstruction, Schirrus, or Weakness thereof,
that it cannot separate the Choler from the Blood, and by that means it is
carried over the whole Body. A second Cause is the Obstruction of the Gall,
which hinders its passage into the Guts, and so remains in the Blood, with
which it is carried to all parts of the Body. The Gall is obstructed, either by
gross Phlegm, or Choler abounding, and sometimes by little stones bred
therein, etc. The third Cause is the Malignity of the choleric Humor, which
consists, either in the great Quantity which Nature cannot regulate, nor
separate from the Blood: or fills the Bagg so full that it cannot contract it
self to expel it. Or else it consists in the evil Quality of the Humor,
which, by corrupting the rest, hinders their due Evacuations, which Nature
perceiving, striveth suddenly to cast it forth: as it sometimes happens in
choleric Fevers, after the taking of Poison, or after the biting of some
venomous Creature. The Signs of the yellow Jaundice is a Yellowness of the
Body, especially, the whites of the Eyes and the Balls of the Checks: choleric
Vomitings, and Hiccoughs, Laziness, Itching of the Body, and Bitterness of
the Tongue. If it come from a Distemper of the Liver: there preceded an
Inflammation, Obstruction, etc. If from an Obstruction of the Gall, the Belly
is bound and the Excrements white, the Urine yellow or reddish, which will dye
a new piece of linen cloth. If it come from the Malignity of the Humor, both
the Urine and the Excrements are high colored, especially, after a putrid
Fever, now if the Fever remain, the Jaundice is Symptomatical; If, when the
Jaundice appears, the Fever cease, the Urine and Excrements be of their
natural Color; the Jaundice is critical. Poison taken and venomous Bitings the
Patient can declare. They, who in a Fever have the Jaundice before the seventh
or critical day, are in great danger; the contrary, if it happen on a critical
day. The Jaundice, coming upon an Inflammation of the Liver, is dangerous,
because the Disease commonly ends in an Imposthume: if upon a Schirrus, it is
no less dangerous, because that ends in the Dropsy. If it come from an
Obstruction of the Gall, it is most easy to cure, because the Passage is near
the Guts, except Stones bred in the Passages be the Cause, which, by reason
they cannot be dissolved, are counted incurable. For the Cure, if it come from
Distemper of the Liver, have recourse to the aforegoing Chapters, if the
Jaundice be critical it needs no Cure. If from the Obstruction of the Gall; to
cure it, take away the the Obstruction, which may be done, by the Medicines
mentioned in the Chapter Of the Obstruction of the Liver. Yet least I should
seem to omit any thing needful, I shall apply a Medicine or two proper to the
Disease. If the Body be plethorick, Phlebotomy may be profitable. Afterward
evacuate the Humors with Medicines that principally purge Choler: Take of the
Electuary of the Juice of Roses, and the Electuary of Prunes solutive, of each
three Drachms: Rubarb in Powder, one Dram: Saffron, half a Scruple: with
Sugar make a Bolus, give it once or twice, as the Patient stands in need
thereof. Then make a Decoction thus: Take the Roots of Smallage, Nettles, and
Maddir, of each, one Handful: the Leaves of Celandine, Cleavers, Fumitory,
Wormwood, Century, and the Tops of Saint John's Wort, of each, one Handful:
Cinnamon, and the Shavings of Ivory, of each, two Drachms: the white Dung of an
Hen, and the Dung of a Goose, of each, two Drachms, tie it up in a Ragg, and
with it a Scruple of Saffron: make a Decoction in white Wine, (or if you
please, in Fumitory, Wormwood-water, or the like) to a Quart: Let the Patient
take a quarter of a Pint fasting, and gently exercise himself. Of these, and
Ingredients of the like Nature may any form of Medicine be prepared. Whilst
inward Medicines are administered, foment or anoint the Region of the Liver, as
you are taught in the foregoing Chapters.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the Dropsy.
THere are three kinds of Dropsyes, the first is called in Greek (...) Ascites,
the second (...) Tympanites, the third (...) Anasarca or (...) Leucophlegmatia.
Ascites is a Swelling of the Belly, caused of a serous Humor, and salt, (as
Water it is cold, as Salt it is hot, infecting the Mouth of the Stomach, hence
comes a Fever and Thirst,) and not only the Belly, but sometimes the Cods,
Thighs, Legs, and Feet: and sometimes it begins in the Legs and Feet and
ascends upward. It is the Opinion of most Physicians, that all Dropsyes have
their original from a cold Distemper of the Liver, which cannot make Blood,
but Water, Phlegm, and Wind. This Opinion is undeniably true in Anasarca, but
in Ascites and Tympanites it is questionable, although sometimes a cold
Distemper may be the Cause thereof. The Experience of Modern Physicians has
put the business out of doubt, who have found the Liver sound in dissected
Bodies, who died of the Dropsy. And if the Liver should breed warry Blood; what
reason can be given that the Water should be sent to the Cavity of the Belly
only, and not to other parts, and breed Anasarca? A Dropsy may be caused by a
hot Distemper of the Liver caused of Fevers, much Wine, or hot Meats, which
does disperse the native Heat, by which means, the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys
become less active, and not able to draw the Water, nor cast it forth by the
Ureters: the like may be said of a cold Distemper. Some external Cause may
hinder the Attraction and Distribution of the Water, as, namely, the drinking
of much cold Water, or hot Wine, or any thing that does diminish or disperse
the native Heat.

The Dropsy Tympanites, has its Name from Tympanum a Drum, because the Belly
sounds like a Drum; and is much stretched out. This Stretching has its
original from Wind shut up in the Cavity of the Abdomen, and sometimes in the
Cavity of the Guts as Platerus observed. This Wind is bred by crude and thick,
phlegmatic or melancholy Humors, which being stirred by Heat, and made thin,
becomes thick and flatuous Vapors, which are hard to be dissolved. Nor does
Wind alone cause a Dropsy but with it a mixture of Water, so that if Wind be
predominant, it is called a Tympany: if Water, Ascites. Anasarca is bred of a
phlegmatic Humor spread throughout the whole Body, and makes every part to
swell and be white: a cold Distemper of the Liver is the Cause; when the Liver,
instead of making good Blood, produces such Humors. The Cause of this Disease
may be imputed to all such things as cool the Liver too much, and hinder its
Concoction, as a Diet too cold and moist, the Stopping of the Terms or
Haemorrhoids, all Obstructions, and Tumors in the Liver, much bleeding, or any
praeternatural Evacuation.

You may make the Diagnosticks thus; In Ascites, the Belly is great and broad,
press the Sides and you may hear the Water make a Noise: when the Patient
turns in his Bed, his Belly swayeth to that side: the Thighs, Legs, Feet, and
Cods swell, but the upper parts decay: the Urine is little in Quantity, thick
in Substance, in color, red: In the increase of the Disease, the Patient
breaths with much difficulty, by reason of the Abundance of Water which lies
upon the Diaphragma, especially, when he lies down; therefore the Patient (for
the most part) is forced to stand or sit: the salt Humor swimming in the
Stomach causes a continual Thirst, and a lingering Fever. In the Tympany the
Belly sounds like a Drum, is big but less burdensome; when the Patient
lies upon his Back, his Belly remains hard and extended, nor does it sway
when he turns himself: the beginning of this Dropsy (for the most part) is
accompanied with pain about the Navel and Reins. In Anasarca, not only the
Belly and lower parts, but the upper parts also swell; if you thrust the
Swelling with your Finger, it does pit and leave an Impression: the Flesh is
soft and loose, and the Skin pale and earthy: they have a lingering Fever,
breathing difficultly, and the Urine is thin and white.

To the Prognostic, I say; Every Dropsy is hard to be cured, the older the
Parient is, and the longer the Disease has continued, the more perilous.
Anasarca is least dangerous: Ascites and the Tympany are sometimes one more
dangerous then another, according to their Causes: for Ascites coming from a
Tumor or Ulcer of the Liver or any of the internal parts, it is more dangerous
then a Tympany, et e contra. If a Dropsy come upon an acute Disease, it is
evil. If the Liver, being full of Water, discharge it self into the Omentum,
the Disease ends in Death. If in the beginning a Dropsy, (the Patient being
strong, and free from Tumor or Ulcer in the Liver or any internal part,) the
Water flows into the Belly and causes a Flux, the Patient is cured; if the
contrary happen, expect a contrary effect. This I gather from the words of
Hippocrates; In the beginning of a Dropsy, if there come a Flux of the Belly,
without want of Concoction, or crudity it is prevented, the less Urine is
voided the worse, because the drink runs not to the Reins, but to the Belly. It
is a very hopeful sign, when the Patient voideth more Urine then he drinks,
and the belly grow less. Impostumes or spots in the Legs of Hydropicall men,
are for the most part forerunners of death. If a man who has been cured of the
Dropsy fall into the same again, it is very dangerous; If a melancholy body
have a Tympany, he seldom escapes; especially if he piss by drops. If the
Hydropicall person eat his meat and digest it well, and be not sick after,
have no cough nor pain, his tongue not rough nor thirsty: if he be in a
natural order without physic, and medicines work easily with him; if he be
not faint, and his Urine change according to his Diet, he may easily be cured.

For the cure, you must consider if the disease has its original from
obstructions, Tumors, etc: And seek the beginning of your cure out of their
proper Chapters. Afterward you must labor to evacuate the matter, whether it
be in the Abdomen or whole body, first make an Apozem thus: Take of the roots
of Parsley, Smallage, Fennel, Elicampane, Bruscus, Danewort, and Madder, of
each one ounce: The Leaves of Agrimony, Wormwood, Maidenhaire, the tops of St.
John's wort, and Century, of each one handful: the inward bark of the roots of
Capers, Ash and Tamarisk, of each four drachms: Liquorish, one ounce: the seeds
of Fennel, Parsley and Juniper berryes, of each half an ounce: the flowers of
Broom, Beans and Elder, of each, one pugill: Julep roots, two drachms: boil
them in a sufficient quantity of water, wherein steel has been quenched, to a
pint and an half: strain it, and add to the Liquor, one ounce of Senna, cover
it and let it infuse six hours, strain it and dissolve therein of the syrup of
Hart's-tongue one ounce: and the syrup of Succory, with Rubarb three ounces:
Clarify it with the whites of Eggs, and aromatize it with two drachms of
Cinnamon, or yellow Sanders; give it four mornings. Afterward once a week give
this powder; Take of Senna, Jallap, Mechoacah, Turbith, Gum, and Hermodacts, of
each one dram: Cream of Tartar, and Salt of Wormwood, of each two drachms:
Cambugia half a dram: Diamher, Diarrhodon abbatis, and Fennel seeds, of each
two scruples: make a fine ponder, and infuse one dram in a quarter of a point
of White Wind all night, and let the Patient take it in the morning. Of these
and such like may be prepared medicines of all forms. Some commend the juice
of flowerdeluce roots, taken with honey or manna, the dose is three ounces, and
Platerus in his Observations does highly extol it. Chimists do much commend
the extract of black Hellebore, Mercurius vitae and Diaphoreticus, Mercurius
dulcis, antimonium Diaphoreticum, and such like: but let the physician beware
how he gives medicines of this nature, except his Patient be strong; the like
caution let him observe in giving of purging medicines, especially such as
purge with violence. But rather let him (if his Patient be weak) give
discussive and Diuretic Clisters, thus. Take of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Chamomell, pellitory of the wall, and Mercury, of each one handful: the seeds
of Annis, Sweet Fennel, Caraway, Dill, and Bay-berryes, of each two drachms:
the flowers of Broom and Melilot, of each one pugil: boil them in Posset drink
or Mutton broth to a pint, dissolve in the strained liquor, of Oil, of
Camomell, Dill and Rue, of each one ounce: Diacatholicon (or Diaphaenicon) of
each one ounce: (and if you see good, add half an ounce of Benedicta Laxativa)
and make a Clister: you must principally give such medicines which purge by
Urine: the steeled-wine prescribed in the 55. chap. is very good; in the
preparing of it, you may add (if you see occasion) any of the aforementioned
ingredients, which provoke Urine. The Spirit of Vitrioll, Tartar and Salt is
much commended, if it be administered in some Diuretic decoction. The salt of
Wormword and Juniper profits much. Or you may make a Lee of the Ashes of
Juniper and White Wind, giving five or six ounces thereof, which Lee alone has
cured some Dropsies says Mathiolus; the same I have known my self. Bleeding is
prohibited, and upon good grounds too, unless the disease come from stoppage
of the Terms or Hemorrhoids, bleed not then, unless it be in the beginning of
the disease, and the Liver in its natural condition. Issues, Blisters, and
Scarifications are likewise forbidden, because they gangren for the most part:
yet in the beginning of a Dropsy, the lower parts being exceedingly swelled, I
made an Issue in the Leg, out of which an incredible quantity of water issued,
and the Patient perfectly cured. Among Evacuations, Sweatings are not the least
profitable, especially in Anasarca; but in Ascites and Tympanites the Liver
being dry, besides the difficulty of procuring it, it rather hurts then
profits. All the time of the cure forget not to strengthen the Liver, that
you may hinder the increase of water, as well as purge it; have recourse to the
55, Chapter of the Obstruction of the Liver. Hollerius commends this opiate:
Take of Currance cleansed, half a pound: boil them in Sack till they be as
thick as a pultis, heat and strain them, then add of the Conserve of Rosemary
flowers, Citron peels Candied, and Cinnamon, of each one dram: the powder
Aromaticum Rosatum Diamargariton, Calidum, and Diacinamon, of each two
scruples: Lignum Aloes, half a dram: Saffron half a scruple, mix them and
make a soft Electuary. Then make a fomentation for the belly with these, or
herbs of the like nature: Agrimony Danewort, Chamomell, Calamint, Elder,
Mallows, and Marsh-Mallowes, Marjerom, Melilot, Broom, Pennyroyall, Rue,
Snakweed, Southern wood, Tamarisk, Wormwood, and the like, the seeds of Parsley,
Dill, Cummin, Fennel, Bay, and Juniper berryes: foment the belly with spunges
dipped in the decoction of these, or lay the herbs themselves in a bag hot to
the belly: Afterward, anoint the belly with the oil of Dill, Chamomell, Rue,
Flowerdeluce, and the like. Or you may make Unguents, Cataplasms, or
Emplasters. This harmless Cataplasm I have found profit much: Take of
Wormwood, Chamomell, Mayweed and Danewort of each two handfulls, bruise them in
a stone mortar, then boil them in Vinegar and Honey, then with Bean and Barley
meal, and Cow Dung dried, of each a like quantity make a Cataplasm. Galen
commends a Cataplasm of Snailes, bruised with their shells, and laid upon the
Navell, and there keep it till it falls off of its own accord. Radishes bruised
and laid to the Belly and Reins, works by stool and Urine. To conclude, If
the body be strong, you may use strong purgers in your Cataplasms, but if the
body be weak forbear. In Anasarca you may often and strongly purge watery, and
phlegmatic humors: In Ascites and Tympanites more seldom and gentle. In
Ascites, order your internal and external medicines principally to purge
water: in Tympanites let them be Carminative and discussive. In every of them
have a special respect to the Liver; and if it be too hot (as it sometimes
happens) give cold things mixed with warm openers; Let their meat be of the
dryest, and let them shun sweetmeats as a Plague. For drink let them abstain
from it as much as can be, and drink none but what is made with Wormwood,
Tamarisk, Elecampane, Juniper, etc: or let them only hold it in the mouth to
cool and assuage their thirst, let them chew Mastick, for it draws water
from the Stomach.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the Obstruction, Inflammation, and Tumor of the Spleen.
THe Spleen is subject to Obstruction as well as the L^ver, or rather more;
because it draws cruder blood: when thick humors stick in the substance of
the Spleen, it makes an inflammation and Tumor. If the humors grow thick and
hard, it breeds a Scirrhus. If the Tumor be phlegmatic, it is called Oedma,
which chances to them, who live upon cold and moist food, or live in a moist
air. But if it be soft; loose and puffed up, it is called an inflammation or
puffing of the Spleen, The causes of the Obstruction, Inflammation, and tumor
of the Spleen, are the same with them of the Liver: Sometimes the affect
seizes on both together.

They are distinguished by their Signs: the Obstruction of the Spleen is
distinguished from the Obstruction of the Liver, by the situation of the part.
If the Spleen be obstructed, there is heaviness and pain in the left
Hypochondrion, especially after running, riding, or any more than ordinary
exercise; if you handle the hypochondrion there is resistance, the face is
bluish, and Signs of melancholy appear, the disease is of long continuance,
and if it be not speedily cured, it turns to a Scirrhus. The cure is performed
the same way, as the Obstruction of the Liver is; only you must add things,
which particularly respect the Spleen, and purge the Melancholy humor.

The inflammation of the Spleen likewise has the same conjunct and antecedent
cause, only it is especially caused by Melancholy Blood. The Diagnostick
Signs are different, viz: the Patient has swelling, pain, heaviness, and
beating on the left side under the ribs, thirst, blackness of the tongue,
loathing of meat, a constant fever, troublesome lying on either side,
especially the right, sometimes the Tumor is in the shape of the Spleen:
Sometimes fills the left Hypochondrion, and if the adjacent parts be inflamed
also, it extends below the Navell. If only Melancholy blood cause the
inflammation, the Tumor is harder, the color black, and many times the Urine:
If choler be mixed with melancholy blood, the thirst is greater, the Fever
stronger, and worse every third day; the mouth bitter, and the Urine red: great
want of sleep and doting. If phlegm be mixed, the former symptoms are
lessened.

The Prognostic is the same with the inflammation of the Liver, only it is
less dangerous, for as much as the Liver is the nobler part* If it ends not
in Death, it ends by some critical Evacuation, as by Stool, Urine or
Bleeding at the left Nostrill, or else it grows hard, and turns to a
Schirrhus. Which may be known by the causes and signs laid down in the Chapter
of the Schirrhus, of the Liver; only it appears on the contrary side. The
cure of this and the former may be performed by the medicines, laid down in the
Chapters of the inflammation, obstruction, and Schirrhus of the Liver, only
make use of some things that especially respect the Spleen, and purge
melancholy, as I hinted before.

Sometimes the Spleen is much pained by wind, which stretches the Spleen and
its membranes, but is without fever or hardness. It is easily distinguished
from the former griefs, but hardly from the Chollick, by reason of the
neernesse of the Gut Colon: but you may distinguish them thus: the pain of the
Spleen is weighty and in one place: but of the Chollick is stretching, sharp,
moveable, and runs over the whole Belly. The Cure must be wrought by Medicines
carminative, emollient, and discussive, given internally, or Clisters of the
same Nature, with Fomentations and Liniments, made of the Oils of Wormwood,
Lillyes, Camomell, Capers, and such like, adding a little of the Oil of Spike:
and, if the pain cease not, some commend the Application of a Cupping-Glasse;
but be well advised first, whether there be no Defluxion or Inflammation.

CHAP. LX. Of Hypocondriack Melancholy.
THis Disease has its Original from melancholy and adust Humors, which are
bred by the Distemper of the Spleen, or Stomach, which, by reason of of their
Crudity, stay long in the Veins, Arteries, and other Passages, which cause
great and grievous Fermentations or Workings, from whence noisome Vapors
ascend to the Brain, Heart, and Midriff, which cause diverse Symptoms, which I
shall mention hereafter. The antecedent Causes are, all Meats of evil Juice,
and of hard Digestion; long continued Passions and Sadness, because they
disperse the Spirits, and hinder Concoction, and cause Credityes, which being
burnt by Heat, turn to Melancholy. Much Study, Watching, and want of Exercise
may be the Cause by reason of much Retention of Excrements; hence it is, that
learned men, and such who sit much, are troubled with this Disease. The
Stoppage of the Terms or Haemorrhoids may be the Cause.

The Diagnostick Signs of this Disease are many, according to the parts
affected: Sometimes the Patient spitteth or vomiteth much, because the Stomach
concocteth ill, and turns the Nourishment into watery, sharp, sour, or clammy
Substance, which not being drawn away by the Guts, ly in the Stomach, and
sometimes discharge themselves as aforesaid. Sometimes the boiling of these
Humors in the Stomach causes flaruous Vapors, which stretch the Stomach and
afflict the Heart, and cause Swooning: These Vapors cause a Noise beneath the
Ribs, hence it has been called the windy Disease. Sometimes the Wind reaches
to the Kidneys, and causes great Pain there, which makes the Patient think he
has the Stone. He is often costive, because the clammy Humors (bred by evil
Concoction) stick to the Guts: sometimes the Sharpness of the Humors causes
the Belly to be soluble. There is great Heat in the Hypocondria, so that the
Face will grow red and hot from those Vapors. Sometimes the Urine is thin,
because thick and tartarous Humors stop the Passages: sometimes thick, red,
and troubled, and has a thick tartarous Sediment, and sometimes stick to the
bottom of the Urin all like Sand, which causes a Suspicion of the Stone, but
this dissolves between the Fingers like Salt, and that which is bred in the
Reins is hard. The Vapors ascending produce many Symptoms, as, Palpitation of
the Heart, a distempered Pulse; if they ascend to the Tongue and Pallat, it
causes great Thirst: if to the Lungs, difficulty of the Breathing: if to the
Membranes of the Brain, Head ach: if to the Brain it self, Dimnesse of sight,
Noise in the Ears, Giddiness, Fear, and melancholy Fantasies; if they be very
sharp, they sometimes cause the Falling Sickness, and if they settle in the
Nervs, Convulsion: if they be stupifying, they cause Numbnesse, the Palsy,
Apoplexy, etc: If the Vapors be hot and dry, they dry the Brain, and cause
Watchings, troublesome Sleep, and frightfull Dreams. Note that all these
Symptoms are not to be expected in one and the same Patient, but more or fewer
according to the variety of the peccant Humors.

Prognostics are: A continual Pain and Giddiness of the Head in a Hypocondry,
does threaten an Epilepsy, Apoplexy, or Blindness, and the like. Thick Urine
is better then thin, for thin Urine is a Sign that thick Humors are detained
in the Body. Vomiting, Flux of the Belly, or Haemorrhoids, if it be moderate,
and continue not long, is a hopeful Sign, judge the contrary if it continue
long. For the most part, this Disease is of long continuance, and seldom cured,
therefore it has been called the Scourge and Disgrace of Physicians.

The Cure of this Disease consists in four things, First, in opening
Obstructions: Secondly, in amending the Distempers of the Bowels: Thirdly, in
evacuating the peccant Humors: and, Lastly, in strengthening the affected and
vital parts. But, to forbear Tediousness, and to avoid needless Reperitions,
I refer you to the Chapters aforegoing, especially, Of the Obstruction of the
Liver and Spleen. Take this general Rule, keep the Body always soluble, by
Medicines which the Parient may use before Meat, changing them often; as often
as need shall require let the Patient be purged, let him make use of Broths,
Decoctions, and Drinks that have a Faculty to open Obstructions; as the Juice
of Wormwood, or Wormwood-Wine, adding thereto Tamarisk, Agrimony, Borrage, and
Buglosse, Burnet, Sanders, Rosemary Flowers, and the like. Montanus much
commends Venice Turpentine; because it looseneth the Belly, cleanses and
warmeth the Stomach: provokes Urine: opens the Obstructions of the Liver,
cleanses, and does not heat it. Steel-Wine, and other Medicines made of Steel,
which you may find in the Chapter Of the Obstruction of the Liver, powerfully
opens Obstructions, especially the Extract of Steel, in the Administration of
which, I have found more then ordinary Success: but let Medicines of this
Nature be administered by a skillful and careful Physician. The Decoction or
Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum does open Obstructions safely and pleasantly.
And some do much commend the Decoction of the Root of sweet Bryar for the
Patient's ordinary drink. Whilst you use internal Medicines, Externalls are
not to be neglected, viz. Fomentations, Ointments, etc. such as are prescribed
for the Obstruction of the Liver and Spleen; choose the coolest of them and
apply them to the Hypocondria. And, because in this Disease the Stomach always
suffers, seek the Remedy in its proper place. Or if the Vapors ascending
from the Hypochondria, trouble the Heart or Brain, and cause Swooning,
Palpitation, Trembling, Convulsions, Headache, or the like, have recourse to
the Chapters preceding, which treat of those Diseases.

CHAP. LXI. Of the Scurvy.
THe Scurvy is nothing else but an Hypocondriack Disease, but having a peculiar
degree of Malignity, arising from the Putrefaction of Melancholy, it has more
Symptoms then in the Hypocondriack Disease.

Diag: All the Symptoms mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, are common to the
Scurvy. Peculiar Symptoms are these, Redness, Itching, Putrefaction, Bleeding
and Stinking of the Gums, Mouth, and Teeth, which are also (sometimes) black
and loose. Spots in the Legs, first red, afterward purple, black or blew.
Straitness of the Breast and Shortness of Breath, occasioned by thick
Vapors, arising from the Hypocondria to the Midriff, or to the Sweetbread,
causing a Swelling or Tumor, and consequently compressing the Diaphragma. The
Body is heavy and lazy, especially the Legs, and grievous pain there and in
other parts, as in the Toes, Fingers, Soals of the Feet, Ancles, Thighs, Belly,
Arms, Shoulders, and the like. The Urine is various, as in the Hypocondriack
Melancholy. The Pulse is weak and unequal. Some have the Headache, and a
seavourish Heat in the Night, which vanishes by a Morning Sweat. Some have tho
Toothache without manifest Cause. Sometimes the Vapors ascending (being
astringent) contract the Gullet, and the Patient fears strangling. A stinking
Breath is common to Scorbutic persons. Tumors in diverse parts, sometimes hard,
sometimes soft like Bladders, and sometimes like the stinging of Nettles. And
lastly, an Atrophy, Consumption and general decay of the whole Body.

That I may more perfectly discover the Symptoms of this Disease, I shall here
lay down some other, which are common to other Diseases, and show you how to
distinguish them. Sometimes the Scurvy causes pains in the Joints, which must
be distinguished from the pains caused by the French Pox thus: In the French
Pox, the pains are between the Joints, and by long continuance cause Knots
there: the Symptoms of the Pox appear, as Running of the Reins, Bubo, etc. or
the Patient has acted with some unclean woman. But in the Scurvy, some of the
preceding Symptoms appear, or at least the Patient is of a melancholy
Constitution. This must be distinguished also from the Arthritis or Joynt-Gout,
which is fixed, or at least seldom changes the place; but in the Scurvy it is
very moveable, running from one Joint to another, and sometimes for a while
vanishes. In the same manner is the bastard-Palsy (which the Scurvy causes)
distinguished from a true one, which is constant; but in the Scorbaticall
Palsy, he that one day could not walk or stand at all, can the next day walk
with little or no help. Sometimes it causes a Flux of the Belly like a
Diarrhoea, but differs from it in this, that the Excrements are thicker then
in the former, and in greater Quantity, exceeding the Quantity of the Meat
taken. Sometimes the Excrements are mixed with Blood, but differs from the
Dysentery, because there is no pain of the Belly, and the Blood is thick, sent
thither by the Meseraick Veins. Sometimes the Scorbatick pains are in the sides
imitating the Pleurisy, but is much different; because the Fever (if any) is
weaker; there is no difficulty of Breathing, no Cough, Spitting, nor constant
pain. Lastly, you must distinguish these pains from the pains of the Stone: for
the Urine is sometimes red, like Blood, as if the Kidneys were wounded by the
Stone, and sometimes black, both which come from a scurvy salt Matter in the
Spleen, or Parts adjacent.

Prog: This Disease is very hard to be cured, because the Melancholy Humor is
so far predominant. Many times it is very dangerous, because it brings the
Dropsy, Consumption, etc. And sometimes acute Diseases, as the Apoplexy,
Swoonings, and the like, which produce sudden deaths.

In the Cure of the Scurvy, you must follow the Method prescribed in the Cure
of Obstruction of the Liver and Spleen, beginning with the weakest first; with
which, you must make use of specificall Medicines for the Scurvy; of which, the
chief are, Dutch and Sea Scurvy-grasse, Water Cresses, Brook-Lime,
Horse-Radishes, Fumitory, Wormwood, Celandine the less, etc. Those which are
of less Efficacy, and have a Faculty to correct and prepare the melancholy
Humor, are these which follow, Agrimony, Asarum, Bettony, Borrage, Buglosse,
Carduus, Ceterach, Elicampane, Germander, Hyssop, Maidenhair of all sorts,
Polypody of the Oak; the Bark of Ash, Capers, and Tamarisk; the Flowers of
Elder, Dodder of Time, and Tamarisk. Observe this general Rule, if the Patient
be feavourish or subject to heats, you must give the hottest of them in a
smaller Quantity; and add Endive, Sorrel, Succory; the Juice of Citrons,
Lemmons, and Orenges: and the Spirit of Sulphur and Vitriol. Of these and such
like, may several sorts of Medicines be formed, which (for Brevity sake) I omit.

CHAP. LXII. Of the Stone in the Kidneys.
THe material Cause of the Stone in the Kidneys, is a phlegmatic, feculent,
thick, slimy, and tartarous Humor in the Urine: the efficient Cause is Heat,
which dries and hardneth the Matter, and at length turns it into a Stone;
this is the Opinion of Hippocrates and Galen, and most modern Physicians. The
Hermetick Physicians have found a certain Juice, which they call Succus
Lapidiscens, which is a certain Humor, naturally proper to turn to a Stone,
and this they say is the material Cause of the Stone: and the efficient Cause
to be Spiritus Lapidiscens, a stonemaking Spirit. So that if a man eat or drink
any thing wherein the Stony Juice is, that Juice is turned into a Stone, if the
Reins have a Stone-making Spirit. But if the Reins be free from this Spirit, a
Stone is not bred, unless the stony-Juyce be very predominate: on the
contrary, if the Reins have this stony Faculty, and the Food be free from this
Juice, the Stone is scarcely engendered, unless the stone-making Faculty be
very predominate. Many Historyes show that Stones come from a stone-making
spirit, or Breath out of the Earth, which has turned the Bodies of Men,
Beasts, and other things into Stone: Riverius upon this Subject (in his last
Edition) quoteth Aventius Annal. Bavar. lib. 7 An. 1343, who says, that above
fifty men, with many Cows, were turned into Stone. Ortellius tells the same
story of whole herds in Russia. And Camerarius reports, that in the Province
of Chilo in Armenia, at the blast of a South Wind (which happens four times
in a year) whole Troops of horse have been turned into Statues of stone,
standing in the warlick posture in which they were before. The Antecedent
Causes are many, The Stomach being not able to concoct well, sends a crude
Chyle to the Liver; A hot Liver does bake the chylous Matter; or a cold Liver
makes crude Blood: the Spleen weak or obstructed, does not sufficiently purge
the drossy Blood; these do cause even the Blood, or crude Juyces fit to make a
Stone. Likewise the Reins, besides their conjunct Cause, may be an Antecedent
Cause in two respects, viz. their Temper and Form: First, their Temper being
hot does violently draw the crude Matter and thicken it. In respect of their
Form, the emulgent Veins may be loose, and fit to receive the tartarous Matter
into the Reins; and the Ureters so narrow that the thick Matter has not
passage from the Kidneys. Lastly, all Food that produces crude, thick, and
slimy Nourishment, does afford Matter for the Stone, as Flesh or Fish that is
very salt or dried in the smoke, Pulse, Cheese, and all Milk-Meats, hard Eggs,
Chestnuts, Pears, Quinces, Medlars, Rice, Wine thick and not well purged,
standing Waters; all things which make the Liver and Reins too hot; as old
strong Wine, Garlic, Onions, Pepper, and Ginger; too strong Diuretics, which
carry crude Matter too violently to the Reins: violent Exercise after Meat,
inordinate Lechery; too much Fullness or Emptiness, and the like.

The Signs of the Stone of the Kidneys are many* viz. a constant pain about the
Loins; whilst it is in the hollow of the Kidneys, the pain is heavy, when it
gets into the head of the Ureters, sharp and pricking, and so continues,
unless it get back again, or fall into the Cavity of the Bladder. The Urine is
sometimes bloody by reason of the opening, Corrosion of the Veins, or cutting
of the tender Flesh of the Kidneys; sometimes it is thin and little in
Quantity. Voiding of Sand and Stones is an evident sign of the Stone, but if
the Patient voideth Gravel without stones, be not too hasty in your Judgment,
but take the Caution given you in the 60 Chapter Of the Hypocondriack
Melancholy. The Thigh, on the same side the Back is pained, becomes numb;
because the Stone does oppress the Nerve, which is in the Muscles of the Loins
under the Reins, and goes to the Hip for its Motion. The Sick loatheth, and
vomiteth often, by reason of the Connection of the Kidneys with the Stomach; the
Stomach (sympathetically sensible) endeavors to exclude that hurtful
companion. Be sure you make a distinction between the Stone in the Kidneys, and
the Chollick; have recourse to the 43 Chapter, where I have left a few Rules.

This Disease is very dangerous, and brings many and sad Symptoms, as
Inflammations, Exulcerations, great Pains, long Watchings, Weakness, Fevers,
Suppression of Urine, and Death it self. It is difficult to cure (if not
incurable) in old men, says Hippocrates, with whom Experience agrees. If the
pain has continued long and violent, and the Sick grow externally cold, with
cold and faint Sweats, Death is at hand. If the Stone be accompanied with an
Ulcer of the Kidneys it is incurable, because those things which do break the
Stone, do exasperate the Ulcer.

The Cure of the Stone in the Kidneys consists in mollifying, enlarging, or
relaxing, and throwing the Stone out of the Ureters, to break the Stone if it
be too big for the Passage; to take away the antecedent Cause and to ease pain,
which you must do thus: first, open the Liver-Vein on the same side, that is
most grieved: draw as much Blood as the Constitution of the Patient can well
spare. Then administer a mollifying and laxative Clister: Take of Common and
Marshmallows, Camomill, Penny-royall, Pellitory of the Wall, and Violet Leaves,
of each, one handful: the Seeds of sweet Fennel, Flax, and Faenugreek; of
each, half an Ounce: boil it in Posset Drink to a Pint, strain it, and dissolve
therein Cassia, Catholicon, and Diaphaenicon, of each, three Drachms: the Oils
of Rue and Scorpions, of each, one Ounce: make a Clister and administer it.
Likewise the Oils of sweet-Almonds, Camomill, Dill, Lillyes, and Violets are
good to be used in Clisters of this Nature. This Clister, or one of the same
Nature, you must give twice or thrice in a week; and, in the days between,
foment the Region of the Kidneys with a Fomentation made of the aforenamed
simples, or others of the like Nature, which I shall treat of before I put an
end to this Chapter. Afterward anoint the part with the Oils aforenamed. Or
you may make a Cataplasm of white Bread sodden in white Wine, and if you add
any of the aforesaid Oils it will be the better. Afterward lay a Plaster to
the place; Take of the Oil of Camomill and Rue, of each, half an Ounce: of Dill
and sweet-Almonds, of each, two Drachms: Goose and Hens Grease, of each, one
Dram: with Wax, and the compound Melilot Plaster, as much as suffices, make
a Plaster and apply it. In the mean time, you must not forget inward
Medicines, which have a Faculty to break the Stone, to ease pain, and mollify
and enlarge the Ureters. The simples following are approved of, viz. the Roots
of Asparagus, Birthwort, Fennel, Butchers-Broom, Filipendula, Couch-grasse
Garden and Horseradish, Maddir, Marsh and common Mallows, Liquorish, Onions,
Parsley, Knot-grass: the Leaves of Bettony, Camomill, Penny-royall,
Marshmallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Maidenhair, Parsley peart, Filipendula,
Saxifrage, Savin, Burnet, Goats-Thorne, Kidney-Wort, Melilot, Golden-Rod: the
seeds of Nettles, Parsley, Gromwell, Burdock, Winter Cherryes, Bay, Ivy, and
Juniper Berries, the four cold Seeds; the stones of Hips, Haws, Medlers, etc,
Of these you may make Decoctions, Powders, or distilled Waters, and the like,
the Description of which (sot brevity sake) I will omit. Quercetanus, in his
Dispensatory, commends this following Powder; Take of the inward skins of
Hen's, Gizzards, and their white Dung, of each, half an Ounce: the inward skins
of Egg shells dried and powdered, two Ounces and an half: Rupture-wort and
Cinnamon, of each, four Scruples: the Stones of Medlars, two Drachms: the Seeds
of Annise and Fennel, of each one Ounce: powder them, and give half a Dram
or a Dram in White Wind. Goats Blood prepared is excellent: and the Water
distilled from it in Balneo Mariae does wonders. And some do commend the Urine
of a Goat, taken out whilst he is alive, and drunk, and the Entrails applied.
Chemists do highly extol their Salts, and Experience tells us that if they be
well prepared and carefully administered, they work no small effects: viz. the
Salt of Bean Cods, or stalks of Camomill: Tartar vitriolate: Oil of Vitriol;
the Spirit of Salt: Mercurius Dulcis, etc. Zacutus Lusitanus commends the
natural Balsom, a few drops thereof, taken with Oil of sweet-Almonds. Crato
had as good an Opinion of Filberts eaten, and confirms his opinion by
Experience. Mineral Waters are good, for they do not only dissolve the slimy
Tartarous Matter, which breeds the Stone; but also allayeth the hot Distemper
of the Liver and Reins. Of all Diuretic Medicines, Turpetine is the safest,
given the Quantity of a Nut with Sugar every Morning: for Diuretics taken very
often (for the most part) hurt, by carrying the Humors from other parts to the
Reins; but Turpetine seldom or never works any evil effect. You may use it
thus: Take of Venice Turpetine, washed with Saxifrage Water, half an Ounce:
Cassia newly drawn, six Drachms: Ruharb and Liquorish in Powder, of each, half
a Dram; mix them and make a Bolus. To conclude, give Clisters often, or, if
you see it more convenient, purge the Body between your Diuretic Potions, for
the reason before given: your best Purgations are Cassia, Diaphaenicon, Rubarb,
and such like. If the Liver and Reins are distempered by Heat, make use of
those Medicines prescribed against the hot Distemper of the Liver. If Crudities
in the Stomach be the Cause seek Medicines out of the Chapters which treat of
the Diseases of the Stomach. If you do carefully consider the Cause, or from
what part of the Body the Reins fetch their stony Materials, and order your
Medicines accordingly, with prudence and reason, by the blessing of God, you
may find the Cure of the Stone not to be so difficult, as it is commonly
adjudged. For my part, I have cured several people, who have been grievously
vexed with this Grief: for which Mercy I do and shall praise God.

CHAP. LXIII. Of the Stone in the Bladder.
I Shall speak nothing of the Cause of the Stone in the Bladder; the material
and efficient Cause being the same with that of the Reins. This Disease
happens to Children, oftener then to people of riper Age, who are more subject
to the Stone in the Reins: because Children, eating much and often, their Urine
is thick, and the expulsive Faculty in the Reins is stronger in them then in
men, and sends the Urine speedily to the Bladder; where (being long kept by
reason of much sleep or play) the Urine settleth, and is retained till it by
Heat becomes a Stone, for the passage is narrow in Children, and the Urine not
being very sharp, does not powerfully provoke the expulsive Faculty. Fernelius
was of an Opinion that the Stone in the Bladder was always first bred in the
Reins, and falling from thence into the Bladder, and getting fresh Matter,
there increases: Fern: Lib. 6 cap. 13. page 317. Many times it so happens:
but daily Experience teaches that many have the Stone in the Bladder, who
never had pain in the Reins, especially Children.

The Knowledge of this Disease in the beginning is difficult; but when the Stone
is grown great is evident enough, to the Patient's sorrow. The first sign is
pain in the Neck of the Bladder, reaching to the end of the yard, especially
after pissing. The yard itcheth and the Patient handles it often. He feels a
great Weight about the Neck of the Bladder, when the Stone is grown great; the
Urine suddenly stops, and he is in pain, like a Woman in travel: his yard
stands often, and he makes Water with most ease lying upon his back, because
then the Stone falls out of the Neck of the Bladder. When he has need to
make Water, he is also much provoked to go to stool, by reason of the consent
of the Sphincter Muscles of the Anus and Bladder, being moved by the Branches
of the same Nerve. Many signs more I might insert, but these I think sufficient
for the ingenious; To be fully satisfied, the best way is to make use of the
Catheter.

This Disease is always exceeding painful and no less dangerous: if the
Stone be like Flint it can never be dissolved; if soft or brittle, it may be
dissolved by the long use of strong Medicines: but sew there are that have
Patience enough to make use of so many Medicines. The Cure is not altogether so
difficult in Women as in Men, because the passage in them is wider. In the year
1656 I cured a Woman, who was a long time grieved with the Stone, and intended
to venture upon the last and terrible Cure by Cutting; with in the space of a
Month, (having first dissolved part of the Stone by Medicines) she voided a
Stone (without the help of manual operation) in bigness two Inches, in length
an Inch and an half, without prejudice to the Uritery parts: she was then aged
63, and is yet a live and lusty to praise God for so great a deliverance.

For to perfect the Cure, you must do as you are taught in the foregoing
Chapter, so that I need not here repeat any thing, only lay down the Medicine
so much commended by Horatius Augenius; it is thus prepared: Take of Sows or
Wood Lice prepared, a Dram, or four Scruples: Aqua vitae, two Scruples: the
Broth of red Cicers, nine or ten Ounces; take it in the Morning fasting.
Sennertus also commends it, and this Medicine likewise, Take of Salt of white
Tartar one Ounce: Parsley water, one Pint; mix them, and strain them with a
brown paper. If, after the use of Medicines, you find the Neck of the Bladder
wounded, or much pained by the roughness of the Stone, make a Decoction thus:
Take of the Roots of Marsh Mallows, Fennel, Coughgrasse, and Cammock, of each,
one Ounce: Liquorish, two Drachms: Camomill and Saxifrage, of each, one Pugill:
Winter Cherryes, twenty: Red Cicers, four Ounces: Raisons of the Sun, two
Ounces: the four great cold Seeds, a Dram and an half: French Barley four
Ounces: boil them gently in the distilled Water of Saxifrage, Cammock, and
Parsley, of each, half a Pint; when it has boiled a while, add half a Pint of
white Wine, and let it boil till half be consumed: to the straining, add six
Ounces of the Sirrup of Marshmallows; drink three or four Ounces in the
Morning. To the Region of the Bladder must be applied mollifying and asswaging
Fomentations. If all Medicines fail, and the Patient's pains unsupportable,
Necessity requires the dangerous Operation of Cutting. Let the Physician
prepare the Patient's body by Purging, Bleeding, and Diet, according to the
Constitution and Condition of the Patient's Body; and let the Patient prepare
his Soul for God.

CHAP. LXIV. Of the Inflammation of the Reins and Bladder.
THis Disease is a Tumor in those parts, caused by the flowing of Blood or
Choler unto them, The Causes of this Inflammation are natural, unnatural or
preternatural. Natural, when there is a natural haereditary Infirmity in the
parts, or great Heat originally, which violently draw the Humors thither.
Causes not natural are, Gluttony, Drunkenness, much Venery, great Passions of
the mind, violent Exercise, Stoppage of some usual Evacuation as the Terms or
Haemorrhoids, all things which cause Repletion, or evil Concoction, and drive
the Humors to the inward Bowels. Things preternatural may be the Cause, as a
Stroke, Wound, or Bruise upon the Reins or Bladder; constant Fevers; the
Matter of the Pleurisy, or Empyema carried away by the Urine: Heat or Stoppage
of the Urine, the Stone, or Exulceration of the part may cause an Inflammation.

The Inflammation of the Reins is known by those Signs, a weighty and beating
Pain about the part, which extends it self to the adjacent parts, the Patient
cannot help himself, nor ly otherwise then upon his back: If he does sneez or
move his Body the pain increases, he has a Numbnesse in the Leg on the same
side, he makes Water with difficulty: he has a constant sharp Fever, with
Watchings, Dotings, and dangerous Symptoms: He vomiteth Choler, Phlegm, and
other Humors; the Urine is, first, thin and yellow, afterward, thick and red.

If the Bladder be inflamed, the Patient is vexed with a sharp Fever,
Watching, Vomiting, etc. as aforesaid. The Share becomes hard, and has
vehement pain, he has (almost) continual Provocation to go to Stool, as in
the Disease Tenasmus.

Prog: The Inflammation of these parts do threaten continual danger of Death.
Convulsions, Dotage, Watchings, cold Sweats, are the Messengers of Death. If
the Inflammation suppurate, and the Imposthume break, and the Matter be
evacuated by the Urine, there is hopes. If the Haemorrhoids bleed, there is
hopes that the Inflammation will cease.

You must begin the Cure with a mollifying and cooling Clister: to the
Decoction for the Clister (prescribed in the Chapter of the Stone in the Reins)
add of Cassia, and Diaprunes Lenitive, of each, half an Ounce: Sirrup of
Violets one Ounce: the Oil of Violets two ounces: make a Clister. Then open the
Liver-Vein on the same side, the Inflammation is: If the Bladder be inflamed,
open the Liver-Vein on the right Arm; draw as much Blood, as your Patient's
Strength will bear. And if you open the inferior Veins, it is a good
derivation. Then give the Clister again, and as often as need requires? but
remember to give it in a small quantity, least it oppress the Tumor. Use
Cupping and Scarifying; Frictions and Ligatures to the extreme parts, to draw
the Humors outward. You must allay the Heat of the Blood by cooling Juleps,
in which use no Diuretic Simple, lest it carry Humors to the part and
increase the Inflammation: in the declination of the Disease, Diuretic
Medicines may be given, You may make a cooling Julep thus: Take of the
distilled Water of Endive, Lettice, Plantane, and Purslane, of each, four
Ounces: Sirrup of Pomegranats, two Ounces: the Sirrup of Water-Lillyes, and
Violets, of each, one Ounce: Oil of Vitriol, as much as suffices to give it a
grateful Relish: mix them for four Mornings and Evenings Draughts. Or you may
make an Emulsion of the Seeds of Sorrel, Letrice, Purslane, Poppy, Almonds,
Pine-Nuts, and the like: The great cold Seeds are diuretic and must not be
used in the beginning of the Disease, for the reason before given. Nor ought
you at first to purge till the Declination, then you may profitably purge with
Medicines which are gentle, as Manna, Cassia, Rubarb, Tamarinds, Diaprunes
lenitive, Sirrup of Roses, etc. Outwardly you may apply Cataplasms, Liniments,
Unguents, that are cooling, repelling, and (if the Inflammation be in the
Bladder) astringing: when the Defluxion is stopped use Softners and Dissolvers.
If the Strangury, or any other dangerous Symptom appear, converse with their
proper Chapters. If the Tumor tend to Suppuration, which you may know by the
increase of the Fever and Symptoms, trembling and vomiting, you must help
Nature with mollifying Cataplasms, the Chapters of Inflammations of other parts
will advise you. If the Tumor appear outwardly, you must open it with a
Cautery, or Incision-knife. If it break, and the Matter fall into the Abdomen,
it brings sudden Death, or a Hectic Fever. If the Tumor grow hard and the
Fever gone, it breeds the Dropsy, evil Habit, or some such Disease, and is
incurable, for the most part; you must deal with it as with the Schirrhus of
the Liver.

CHAP. LXV. Of the Ulcer of the Reins and Bladder.
THis Disease is caused, either from an Imposthume broken there; from
Sharpness of the Humors; or from a Stone which does corrode them.

This Disease is known by the voiding of much Matter with the Urine. To know
whether the Reins or the Bladder be diseased, take a few Rules; If the Ulcer be
in the Reins, the pain is there, the Matter is more concocted, more in
quantity, and more mixed with the Urine, making it appear like Milk, which,
standing, settleth to the bottom; sometimes much Blood is voided, and pieces of
Flesh, which sometimes stops the Passage. When the Ulcer is in the Bladder,
contrary Signs appear, the pain is near the Privityes, the Matter is less in
Quantity, and not well concoct, but of diverse Colors, and stinketh; sometimes
Matter is voided without Urine: If the Ulcer be old, callous and hard, snotty
Phlegm is voided, such as is voided, if there be a Stone in the Bladder; for
the most part, little Skins, like Scales or Bran, are voided.

As all inward Ulcers are dangerous, so are these much more, because the
continual Flux of Humors, with the Urine, to the part, does nourish the
Ulcer. The Violence of the pain causes Watchings and a Consumption of the
whole Body. If the Vicer be taken in time and the Patient young, it may be
cured, else not.

The Cure must be performed by evacuating the peccant Humors, by cleansing,
drying, and healing the Ulcer. You must parge the Humors, which flow to the
part affected, with gentle Medicines, such as are prescribed in the Chapter
aforegoing. If there be Repletion or Inflammation in the part, let Phlebotomy
be used. Evacuate the Humors by gentle purgers, mentioned in the Chapter
aforegoing. Mercuvius Dulcis does cleanse and heal the Ulcer. Turpentine is a
good cleanser. It is good for the Patient to vomit often. After due
Evacuations, you must use cleansers: as the Milk of Cows, Goats, or Asses,
which are very good, and cleanse with their wheyie part, and heal with their
cheezie, but give it not in a Fever. Let the Patient drink Water and Sugar,
thin Hydromell, or Barley Water. In Hydromell, if there be a Fever, boil the
cold Seeds, Mallows, Liquorish, etc. Waters that spring from Alum and Iron
Mines are good, for they correct the Heat, and cleanse the Ulcer. The Decoction
of China, Guajacum, Sarsaparilla, and the like, is good to dry up the Humors,
to purge the crude Matter, in them that have the French Pox, and have no
Fever, nor Flux of Blood. But lest the Bowels should be inflamed, give cooling
Broths at Night. After the use of cleansers, (you may see, by the Urine, when
the Ulcer is cleansed; viz. when it appears white and clean without any
dreggy or filthy Matter,) then you must give astringing, glutinating, and
healing Medicines. Take of Conserve of Roses, four Ounces: Bolearmenick, Terra
Sigillata, red Coral, and Sanguis Draconis, of each, two Drachms: the Seeds of
Lettice, Purslane, and Plantane, of each, one Dram; red Roses, and Shavings
of Ivory, of each, two Scruples: with Sirrup of Comphry, make an Opiate. Or you
may make of it a Mass for Pills with Venice Turpentine, or (if that cause
pain) with the Juice of Liquorish. Chemists do much commend Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, Mercurius Dulcis, and Diaphoreticus. To allay the vehemence of
the pain, you must sometimes mix Anodines with your Medicines, as Laudanum, the
Sirrup of Poppyes, and the Emulsion of the cold Seeds. Outwardly foment the
Region of the Kidneys, thus: Take of Camomil, Mallows, Melilot, Pellitory of
the Wall, and Violets, of each, one Handful: the Roots of Marshmallows, and
water-Lillyes, of each, two Ounces: the Seeds of Flax, Fenugreek, and
Winter-Cherryes, of each, three Drachms: make a Decoction and foment the part.
Then apply this Liniment: Take of the Oil of Violets and Sweet Almonds, of
each, one Ounce and an half: Oil of Roses, one Ounce: of the Musilage made of
the Seeds of Marshmallows and Fenugreck, of each, two Ounces: Saffron, one
Scruple; make a Liniment. If the Ulcer be in the Bladder, you must make an
Injection twice in a day, with new Milk, Whey, Hydromel, or Barley Water with
Honey of Roses, to cleanse; afterward add Astringers and Driers, as the white
Trochts of Rhasis or of Gordonius: or boil in Whey or Barly-water, the Roots of
Comphry, Alum, Mirth, Tragacanth, and the like.

CHAP. LXVI. Of extraordinary Pissing.
(...), Diabetes is a quick and plentiful making of Water, after which
follows violent Thirst, and a wasting of the whole Body. The Cause of this
Disease is a hot Distemper of the Reins, which draws Water violently from the
Veins, which causes a great Thirst after drink, which, as soon as it is taken,
is carried to the Reins; where burthening the retentive Faculty and provoking
the expulsive, it is soon sent to the Bladder. Some attribute it to choletick,
sharp, and salt Humors in the Kidneys, which draw Water thither; as such
Humors, which stick to the Tunicles of the Stomach in Fevers, cause Thirst.
Others will not admit of this opinion, because the Kidneys only suffer in this
Disease; and that Choler, and other burnt Humors, are first bred in the
Liver. They say there is a venomous Quality bred in the Kidneys; Galen himself
is of this opinion, that diverse kinds of Poisons may breed in the Body of Man.
In Lybia there is a Serpent, called in Greek (...) Dipsacos (which name the
Greeks give this Disease, from the unquenchable Thirst, with which it is
accompanied) which Serpent, if he biteth any man, infecteth him with such a
Poison, as begets an unquenchable Thirst.

The Signs of this Disease are clear, from what has been said, viz. An
unquenchable Thirst, an extraordinary Pissing, and voiding the Drink as soon
(almost) as it is drunk; and a Decay of the whole Body.

This Disease is deadly, if it be not taken in the beginning, and the Patient
young, for it brings a Consumption.

If you judge the Patient curable, you must labor to allay the hot Distemper
of the Kidneys; to correct their poisonous Quality; to thicken the Humors
which flow to them, and to strengthen them. First, give mollifying and
asswaging Clisters, and purge, if you see occasion, as you are taught in the
Chapter Of the Inflammation of the Kidneys. Gentle Vomits do evacuate and draw
the Humors from the Ureters. If nothing forbid, open a Vein in the Arm. To
correct the Distemper and thicken the Humors, make a Julep, thus: Take of the
distilled Water (or the Decoction) of Plantane, four Ounces: of Lettice, Poppy,
and Purslane, of each, two Ounces: the Sirrup of Myrtles, Comphry, and Quinces,
of each, one Ounce: the Sirrup of Poppyes, half an Ounce: the Spirit of
Vitriol, twenty Drops; mix them and make a Julep. If you will have a Medicine
more astringent or binding, thus: Take of the Seeds of Plantane, Purslane, and
Coriander prepared, of each, one Ounce: the Flowers of red Roses, Pomegranats,
and yellow Mirabolans, of each, half an Ounce: Nutmegs, half a Dram: Coral
and Pearl prepared, burnt Hearts Horn, Bolearmenick, and the Roots of
Tormentill, of each, one Scruple; make them into Powder: Or, if you please,
make them into a soft Electuary, with the Sirrup of Myrtles, Comphry, or
Quinces. The Milk of Asses, Cows, Goats, or Sheep is good, especially, if
Flints be often quenched therein.

Sweating is a good Remedy, if it be provoked by outward means, or with China,
Sarsa, and such mild Medicines, for it drives the watery Humor outward: but
beware of strong Medicines, least they purge by Urine, and increase the
Distemper. Outwardly foment the Loins, with things which cool and bind; as the
roots of Sorrel, Plantane; Pomegranate-peels; Sumath Seeds, etc. boiled in
Vinegar; afterward anoint with the Unguent of Roses, Sanders, and Comitissa.

CHAP. LXVII. Of involuntary Pissing.
THis Disease consists in the hurting of the retentive Action of the Bladder.
Some are subject to this Distemper, while they are awake, which is the worst.
Others are subject to it sleeping only, which is not so bad, because then the
animal Functions are less excercised. There are two Causes of this Distemper;
First, the Weakness and Looseness of the Sphincter Muscle of the Bladder. Or
Secondly, the exquisite Sense of the Bladder, and the Sharpness of the Urine,
(which stirs up the expulsive Faculty) with consent of the Will. The first
Cause is apparent in sucking Children, weak people, and such whose vital Heat
is decayed, and the Body oppressed with cold and moist Humors. The other Cause
you may discover in those, whose Bladder nor Sphincter is no ways distempered,
but they imagine (when the Quantity and Sharpness of the Urine stirs up the
expulsive Faculty) that they are pissing against the Wall, and so get a custom
of it, which cannot be cured by Medicines. The Sphincter Muscle may become weak
or loose, by Youth, old Age, decay of vital Heat, by the Palsy; in Women, from
Diseases of the Womb, or hard Labor, cutting for the Stone, or any Wound
there, or deep Ulcer.

This Disease is easily known, and the cause thereof is as easily discovered;
if it come by Wound, Ulcer, old Age, or the like, it is apparent. If it come by
consent of other parts, the Diseases of those parts are obvious as the
original: If neither of them appear, consider the cold and moist Temper of the
part, which is known by the internal and external causes, and the Effects upon
them depending, as Softness of the Body, Whiteness, and Looseness of the
Nervs about the privityes, Childhood, Age, evil phlegmatic Concoction, and
such like.

In old Men this Disease is incurable, because the vital Hant cannot be
repaired. In Children Nature works the cure, when they grow elder, by drying
up the superfluous Humidity, and knitting the Muscle; but if a man continue so
till the Age of twenty or twenty five, he is incurable. If involuntary Pissing
come to a man sick of an acute Fever, Death is at hand.

If this Disease come by a Wound or Ulcer or any other manifest Disease, the
cure depends upon the removing of them; otherwise the cure is wrought by
amending the cold and moist Distemper and the Looseness of the Sphincter
Muscle. First, you must purge the cold and phlegmatic Humors; add to your
phlegm-Purgers such Medicines, which purge and leav a binding Quality behind
it, as Rubarb, Myrabolans, and the like. Then give Medicines that knit the part
and dry the Humors: Take of the Roots of Comphry, and Cypress, of each, half
an Ounce: Cypresse-Nuts, and Myrtles dried, of each, two Drachms: Coriander
Seed prepared, red Coral, Amber, and Shavings of Ivory, of each, one Dram:
the Seeds of Plantane, Rue, and Acorn cups, of each, two Scruples: powder them,
and with the Sirrup of Comphry, make an Opiate, and give the Quantity of a
chestnut Morning and Evening: or drink half a Dram of the powder in red Wine.
Sweating Medicines are much commended. Things proper for the cure of this
Disease are, the Brain and Stones of a Hare burnt: the Throat of a Cock; Snails
and Egg shells; Mice fried or dried to powder; Hogs Hoofs powdered; Agrimony
and the Gizzards of Hens in powder. Apply Medicines to the Privityes, that are
hot, strengthening, and astringing. Let him drink the Decoction of the inward
Bark of an Oak, of Sloes, and such like; and let him avoid drink to bedward.
You must allay the Symptoms which may accompany this Disease, as Fevers,
Thirst, Watchings, Consumptions, etc. by the Remedies laid down in their proper
chapters.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of the Stoppage of Urine and Strangury.
THe Stoppage of Urine, and the Strangury, are Diseases, which differ only in
degree; the first is called by the Greeks (...); the other (...). Iscuria is
when the Urine is totally stopped: when little is voided then it is called
Stranguria. The first is caused by an Obstruction in the Nerv, which helps
the expulsive Faculty of the Bladder, by the Palsy, or some sleepy or
stupifying Disease. A cold Distemper of the Bladder, dulling the Sense thereof,
may be the Cause. Sometimes an Inflammation or Tumor in the Muscle of the
Bladder may stop the Passage, the Stone, some thick humor, clod of Blood, or
the like. Sometimes by long holding of Water, by which the Bladder is so
stretched that it cannot contract it self to open the Passage. Sometimes the
Bladder is empty, and no Urine comes to it, this is called a bastard Iscuria,
and may be caused, by some hurt in the attractive or expulsive Faculty of the
Roins. The attractive Faculty is hure by some Stoppage in the Reins, or
emulgent Veins. The Reins may be obstructed by the Stone, thick Phlegm, or the
like; the emulgent Veins, by abundance of Blood or Water. Sometimes the watery
humor is spent, as in Fevers; or sent to some other part, as in the Dropsy;
by which means the attractive Faculty of the Reins is hindered. The expulsive
Faculty of the Reins is hindered by the Stone, Phlegm, or clods of Blood.

Diag: The Disease is easily known; the Causes thereof may be obtained. If it
come by long holding the Urine, the Patient is able to inform you. If there be
a stoppage in the part, the use of the Catheter or fearing Candle, and the
ingenuity of the Artist, will discover the Nature of the stoppage. If the
Passage be stopped by the Stone, the Symptoms of the Stone have gone before; If
a Caruncle, there has gone before a Gonorrhaea, or an Vlcerin the passage of
the Yard. If clods of Blood stop the Passage, the Patient has formerly voided
Blood, and clotted Blood will stick to the Catheter.

The Strangury is thus known, there is neither Weight, Tumor, or Extension
about the Privityes, but rather an Emptiness; the attractive or expulsive
Faculty of the Reins is obstructed as aforesaid.

Prognostics are thus made; This Disease is ever dangerous, if it continue
above seven days it is deadly. The same judge, if the Patient has Hiccough or
Tenasmus accompanying this Disease: or if it came by a Wound or Blow upon the
backbone; or if his Breath stink of Piss. The Cure of both these consists
in removing the Causes. If it proceed from the fulness of the emulgent Veins,
bleeding is good: if from Diseases of the Reins or Ureters, seek the Cure out
of the Chapters, that treat of the Pain, Inflammation, or Stone in the Kidneys.
If it depend upon the Inflammation of the Bladder, see the 64 Chapter. If upon
the Stone fastened in the Neck of the Bladder, lay the Patient upon his back,
with his Thighs lifted up, move him hither and thither till the Stone fall out
of the Passage; if that will not do, make use of the Catheter. If the Stone
lies in the Passage of the Yard, bathe the Yard in warm Milk or Oil, and
labor to get it out with your fingers: if it will not come out; bind the Yard
on each side, and make an Incision on the upper side of the Yard. If a Caruncle
stop the Passage; Medicines, which are proper to take it away, must be conveyed
to the part with a Wax-Candle. If Phlegm obstruct, purge it with Medicines
convenient, and when you see occasion, give such as provoke Urine. The Chapters
of the Stone of the Bladder or Kidneys will direct you how to prepare them, as
also Clisters, Fomentations, Unguents, and the like.

CHAP. LXIX. Of the Scalding of the Urine.
(...), Dysuria in Greek is a Disease which modern Writers call, Scalding of
the Urine: it differs from Stranguria in this, that more Water is made, and
with far more pain. Any thing that can wound the Sphincter-Muscle, or passage
of the Bladder, may be the Cause. The usual Cause is either a mixture of sharp
Humors with the Urine, or sometimes, the sharpness of the Urine, caused by
the eating of hot and sharp Meats, or by the hot Distemper of the Bowels,
Liver, or other parts: or from evil Concoction in the Stomach or Liver, by
which the Blood is not freed from salt and tartarous Humors, which, being
sucked to the Kidneys, is sent to the Bladder, and causes pain. Filthy Matter,
coming from an Ulcer in the Reins or Bladder, may be the Cause; he who is
troubled with a Gonorrhaea or Running of the Reins, is seldom free from
scalding Urine. To conclude, the Stone or large Gravel may be the Cause.

The Knowledge of this Disease is evident, the Signs of the Causes are easily
gathered. If it be caused by the Stone, Inflammation, or Gonorrhaea, it is
known by their proper Signs. If from sharpness of Urine, by the mixture of
Humors, the Urine will be thin, and high colored; or in it will appear a
mixture of Choler, Phlegm, or Matter; the Patient has eaten hot things, or
else has some hot Distemper.

This Disease is not very dangerous, unless it continue long, and ulcerateth
the Neck of the Bladder: Sometimes it is hard to be cured, especially, if the
Patient be old.

The Cure must be wrought by taking away the Cause: If a mixture of sharp
Humors make the Urine sharp, first make use of Phlebotomy, which is good to
correct the hot Distemper of the Liver and other parts, make use of this
Evacuation as often as the Patient's Constitution will bear, and the Distemper
require; then, to derive it from the part affected, open the lower Veins. Then
purge with Cassia, Manna, Rubarb, Mirabolans, Tamarinds, and such things, which
purge gently: if you give it with the Decoction of Plantane, Mallows, Lettice,
Purslane, and the like, it will be the better. A gentle Vomit is much commended
as a good Revulsion. Cooling Clisters are good. Inwardly the Whey of Goats
milk, or Mineral Waters that cool, are good for ordinary drink. Or this Julep:
Take of the Roots of Marsh and common Mallows, of each, one Ounce: Lettice,
Endive, Purslane and Violet Leaves, of each, one Handful: Jujubes and
Sebestens, of each one Ounce: of the four great cold Seeds, a Dram: the
flowers of Violets, Roses, and water-Lillyes, of each, one Pugil: boil them in
Spring Water to a Pint and an half; strain it, and add of Jujubes, Violets, and
Poppyes, of each, one Ounce and an half; Oil of Vitriol, twenty Drops: make a
Julep for four Doses, to be taken Morning and Evening. If there be no Fever,
give Milk by it self. The Troches of Winter Cherryes is good. If the pain be
very great, let the Patient, when he makes Water, put his Yard into warm Milk,
or a Decoction of Mallows, and other cooling Herbs. Or inject Milk,
Plantane-Water, or an Emulsion of the cold Seeds, into the Passage. Baths and
Fomentations, made of cool Herbs are good; and if the Privities be anointed
with Unguentum Populeon, the Oil or Unguent of Roses, Oil of Lillyes, and the
like, it profits. If the Liver, Reins, or other parts by their Heat be the
Cause, use Medicines that are good to cool them. If the Liver be too hot, bleed
the Haemorrhoids, or make an Issue in the right Leg. If it come from the Stone,
Inflammation, or Ulcer of the Bladder or Kidneys, cure them according to the
Rules in their proper Chapters; but the cooling Medicines, before mentioned,
are good to allay the Symptoms.

CHAP. LXX. Of Pissing of Blood.
THough Blood may come from diverse parts of the Body to the Passages of the
Urine, yet I shall here speak only of that bloody Urine, which is made from
the defect of the Reins or Bladder. The usual Causes are, much sharp Blood
which corrodeth the Veins, or plenty of Blood which bursteth them; Sometimes a
Stone in the Reins or Bladder, being moved by Riding or violent Exercise, by
its roughness teareth the part. A Fall or Stroke, vehement Motion, lifting or
carrying may break a Vein. Sometimes the Weakness of the Reins, being not able
to divide the Urine from the Blood, may cause this Disease.

This Disease is apparent to the Senses, for when Blood is mixed with the
Urine, it appears like Water wherein Flesh has been washed, with Clods of
Blood at the bottom: if it stays too long in the Bladder it looks black. The
place that is pained shows the part affected. If it come from the Reins, it is
more mixed with the Urine, then if it come from the Bladder. If it come from
the Bladder, it is in a lesser Quantity. If it come from the Stone in the
Kidneys or Bladder, the Signs mentioned in their proper Chapters will appear.
If it come from Repletion or Sharpness of Humors, the Abundance of Blood,
Choler, Melancholy, or such Humors appear in the Body. If it come by a Blow,
Fall, violent Exercise, etc. the Patient is able to inform.

This Disease, if it be violent and continue long, is very dangerous; for
sometimes the Patient falls into a Consumption, sometimes into the Dropsy:
Sometimes it causes a Stoppage of Urine, and sometimes an Ulcer breeds in
the place from whence the Blood Flows.

If Blood or sharp Humors abound, begin the Cure with blood-letting; after a
while, for derivation, let the Haemorrhoids and the Saphaena or Ancle-Vein be
opened. Then purge the chollerick Humors with those Medicines that are
prescribed in the 30 Chapter Of Spitting of Blood. After you have purged
sufficiently, give things that knit the Veins and stop Blood. For this purpose
give four or five Ounces of the Juice of Plantane, and a Scruple of the Troches
of Amber, or of Gordonius, Morning and Evening. Forestus in his Observations
does much commend Sheeps Milk; six Ounces, with one Dram of Bolearmenick, is
the Dose. The Decoction of Knot-grasse, Purslane, Horse-Tail, Comphry roots,
Plantane, Pomgranats, Quinces, and the like. Likewise the Powder of red Coral,
Boodstone, Sanguis Draconis, Terra Sigillata, given with the Water or Juice
of Plantane is good. Giye cooling Juleps to allay the Heat of the Blood. Apply
such things to the Loins as cool and astringe, thus: Take of the Roots of
Bistort, Comphry, and Clowns-Wound-Wort, of each, one Ounce: Horse-Tail,
Plantane Purslane, Knot grass, and Shepherds purse, of each, one Handful:
Pomgranate peels, half an Ounce; Sumach, Myrtle Berryes, and Hypocystis, of
each, two Drachms: Acorn cups, red and yellow Sanders, of each, one Dram: red
Roses, three pugils: boil them in Smith's Water, and Vinegar, therewith soment
the Reins. Then anoint the Loins with Unguentum Comitissae, and Refrigerans
Galeni; and if you would have it bind more, add the juice of Plantane, or such
like, Sanguis Draconis, etc. Then wear a thin plate of Lead, about the Reins,
pricked full of holes. Let the Patient's ordinary drink, be Beer, in which is
tunned Mastick-wood sliced and cut small, Plantane, and the Herbs before named.
If the Liver be distempered with Heat, conferr with the 53 Chapter. If the
Stone or Gravel be the Cause, use no strong Diuretics, because they provoke
the Flux, but that which I have known very effectual in this case, I shall here
commend, and put an end to the Chapter: Take of the four greater and lesser
cold Seeds, of each, one Dram: Quince Seeds, half a Dram: the Seeds of
Marshmallows, white Poppy and Winter Cherryes, of each, one Scruple; make an
Emulsion with the Decoction of Marshmallows, and give two, three, or four
spoonsuls in the Morning, and if you add a little Oil of Vitrioll, it will be
the better. Venice Turpetine, made into Pills with the Powder of Rubarb, half a
Dram taken in the Morning does gently cleanse the Reins.

CHAP. LXXI. Of the Green-sicknesse.
THis Disease is called by some, the Virgins Disease, the white Fever, the
white Jaundice, but vulgarly the Green-sicknesse. It is an evil habit of the
Body, proceeding from the Obstruction of the Veins about the Womb, Liver,
Spleen, and Mesentery, causing a heaviness and unweildinesse of the whole
Body, difficulty of Breathing, panting of the Heart, and Headache, a desire
after Food that is evil, and a loathing of good. The Veins about the Womb being
obstructed, that Blood, which Nature has ordained to go thither, having not
free passage, runs upwards, and oppresses the Heart, Liver, Spleen,
Diaphragma, stops the Vessels, and destroys the natural Heat; hence it comes
to pass that the Stomach and Bowels cannot concoct well as they ought to do,
so Crudityes are dispersed throughout the body, and make an evil Habit.
Sometimes, by this means, the Hypocondria is swelled, which depressing the
Diaphragma, causes Shortness of Breath. This gross Blood being carried in
the great Artery to the Heart, which, least it should be suffocated by it,
labors for its deliverance, and often moving of its Arteryes, causes a
Palpitation, and Beating of the Temples. The Stomach, by this means, being
filled with Crudityes and excrementitious Humors, causes a Loathing of Food,
and a desire after such things, which ought not to be eaten, as Salt, Chalk,
Coals, Ashes, Oat-meal, Wheat, Tobacco-Pipes, etc. which Disease is called Pica
Malacia, and we have spoken of it in the 35 Chapter of this Book. This
Obstruction is caused many ways, as drinking cold Drink to Bedward; eating raw
or unripe Fruits: Some go to Feasts, and upon a full Stomach, dancing and
sporting all Night, disturb the natural Frame of the Body, and want Rest:
others sleep too much, and sit long at their work, as Seamsters,
Bonelace-makers, and the like. By these and the like means, Concoction is hurt,
the natural Heat is extinguished, and the Body filled with crude Excrements
and thick slimy Humors, which cause Obstructions.

This Disease is easily known, and you may know the diseased, if you do but
veiw their Faces, which are pale and white, sometimes of a Lead color, blew or
green, the Face and Eyelids, the Legs and Feet, swelled. The whole Body is
unweildy and lazy. When the body is stirred by Exercise, or Walking, especially
going up a hill or steep place, there follows Palpitation of the Heart, and
Shortness of Breath, Beating in the Temples, and great Headache; behind, if
the Womb be obstructed, before, if the Hypocondria be afflicted: there is great
loathing of wholesome Meat, and desiring the contrary: the Pulfe is swift and
quick as in a Fever, and when the Disease comes to the hight, the Terms are
stopped.

This Disease continues a long time, yet is seldom dangerous; sometimes, by
long continuance, it breeds Corruption in the natural parts, Dropsyes,
Fevers, Consumptions, which end in Death. If the Veins of the Womb only are
obstructed, a Husband will cure her. Women, that have a long time been in this
condition, bring forth weak and sickly Children, and sometimes they are barren.

This Disease is cured by opening the Obstructions, evacuating the filthy
Humors, and strengthening of the parts. The Obstructions are opened, by such
Medicines as are mentioned in the cure of the Obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen; you may add to them such things which respect the Womb, as Mugwort,
Fetherfew, Pennyroyall, etc. If the Spleen be obstructed, add such things which
are proper for that, as Caper-bark, Ceterack, Spleenwort, etc. Open the
Saphaena or Ancle-Vein, but first, if the Maid be full of Blood, open a Vein in
the Arm. Then purge often with such Medicines as are prescribed in the Cure
aforenamed: and make use of such Medicines as powerfully open Obstructions
there prescribed. Zacutus Lusitanus does much commend the Conserve of Mugwort,
given thirty days together, drinking after it a little of the distilled Water
of Savin, in which Rubarb has been infused. The Salt of Mugwort is very good,
and Faecula Brioniae, mixed with the Conserve, has an effectual and powerful
operation. If the Obstructions are stubborn and not easily opened, make a Bath,
thus: Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, Briony, Elder, and Lillyes, of each,
two pound: Balm, Fethersew, Mallows, Mercury, Maddir, Mugmort, Nep,
Pennyrorall, and Violets, of each, three Handfulls: the Seed of Flax and
Fenugreek, of each, two Ounces; boil them in a sufficient. Quantity of Water,
and let the Patient bathe her self in the Morning and Evening, two days, and
let the Decoction be renewed the second day. The next day, open the Vein under
the Ancle, if the Terms be stopped, (as, for the most part, they are in this
Disease,) then give Medicines that powerfully open Obstructions: when you find
that the Obstructions are opened, which you may easily perceive by the decay of
the aforenamed Symptoms, then you must discuss the peccant Humors, that
remain in the Veins and other parts of the Body, by Sweats; for which you must
use the Decoction of Guajacum in cold constitutions; or of China and Sarfa in
those that are hot. In the mean while, every fourth or fifth day, give a purge
to cleanse the Body of the crude Humors, which cannot be sent forth by Sweat.

CHAP. LXXII. Of the Stoppage of the Terms.
MEnsium Suppressio or the Terms stopped, is when a Woman of ripe Age, has
little or no Evacuation of Blood by the Womb, once in a Month, yet gives not
suck, nor is with Child. Diverse Diseases of the Womb may cause this
Suppression, viz. A cold and dry Distemper, which thickneth and binds the
Womb. A hot and dry Distemper dries the part. Inflammation, Tumor, Ulcer, or
Erosion of the mouths of the Vessels in Abortion; or Tumor in the adjacent
parts, by compression, may cause this Stoppage. The Vessels of the Womb may be
obstructed by thick and phlegmatic Humors, or they may be compressed by a
Tumor in the parts adjacent. The cause may be in the Blood, when it offends in
Quantity, Quality, or Motion; in Quantity, when there is too much Blood, which
does so dilate the Vessels, that they cannot contract to expel it: too little,
when the Body has not enough for its Nourishment. It offends in Quality,
when the Blood is thick, slimy, and viscuous, by some cold Distemper of the
Liver, or by the mixture of such Humors with the Blood. It offends in Motion,
when it flows some other way, as by the Haemorrhoids, by Urine, the Nose,
Vomiting, and by Spitting, and many other ways. Riverius says, that he saw a
Maid which had a sore Head which opened once a month and bled plentifully, and
I know a Maid in the same Condition at this time.

External causes are, taking cold in the time of the Flux: eating things of a
very hot Nature, by which the Substance of the Liver is dried: or Food that is
cold, thick, and astringent, especially, at the time of Purgation, eating too
much or too little: by too long retaining of Excrements; by bleeding at the
Nose, or any unnatural Evacuation by Vomit, Seige, Urine, or Sweat. To these
add the external Causes mentioned in the Chapter aforegoing Of the
Green-Sicknesse.

This Disease is known by the Patient's Relation, but it is convenient to
distinguish between this kind of Suppression, and that which is common to Women
with Child. They who have their Menstrues thus stopped, are pale and more
discolored, then those who are with Child. They who are in this condition, the
longer it continues, the more the Symptoms increase; the contrary you shall
find in Women with Child. They are likewise more sad and melancholy then those,
who are with Child. In these the lower Belly, though it swell, yet it is not so
hard nor proportionable to the Womb. And, Lastly, an expert Midwife may
distinguish it by the mouth of the Womb; for in these the mouth of the Womb is
not so close shut, as in a Woman with Child, but rather hard and painful.

More particularly, the Stoppage of the Vessels of the Womb are known by a pain
in the Loins, especially, when the Terms should flow, and if any thing issues,
it will be white, or blackish and slimy. If the parts adjacent be obstructed,
the Veins in the Thighs and Arms, by abundance of Blood, are swollen:
especially, if the Woman be fleshy, plethorick, and has fed high. Or else the
Woman wants Blood. Or the Blood is corrupted, which you may perceive by the
evil habit of the Body, and some Disease of the Liver. If the Blood has a
praeposterous Motion, or flow some other way, it is manifest.

The Stoppage of the Terms is very dangerous, and many (I had almost said, all)
Diseases may come thereof. It is lest dangerous if it come by reason of too
much Blood. It is worst, which comes by Straightness of the Vessels, or crude
and slimy Humors, which obstruct them.

The Cure consists in this generally; If too much Blood be the cause, abate
the Quantity by Phlebotomy, first, in the Arm, then in the lower Veins. Then,
by Fomentations, soften and relax the parts about the Womb; and give such
Purges as do properly provoke the Terms. If you find that Want of Blood is the
cause of the Obstruction, use Restoratives in the first place, and whatever you
find to be the cause of Extenuation, let that be removed; and if you find a
praeposterous Motion of the Blood, labor to repel it, and drive it to the
Passage of the Womb. But seeing that (for the most part) this Obstruction is in
the Veins of the Womb, you may follow the same Rule in cure, prescribed, in the
Chap: Of the Green sickness, adding such things which more especially respect
the Womb. Purge thus: Take of Aloes, three Drachms: the Mass of Cochy Pills,
one Dram; with the Juice of Savin (or Sirrup of Mugwort) make twenty Pills;
and give three in the Morning every third day. Emollient Clisters are likewise
of great use. After Phlebotomy, and sufficient purging, give such things as
powerfully open Obstructions, such as are prescribed in the cure of
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen: to these add Medicines made of the Roots
of Asparagus, Parsley, Fennel, Smallage, Maddir, Elicampane, Birth-Wort,
Angelica, Cyperus; the leaves of Wormwood, Calamint, Camomill, Origan,
Southern-wood, Mugwort, Pennyroyall, Hyssop, Hore-Hound, Rue, Motherwort, Sage,
Fether-few, Maidenhair, Nep, and Savin: the seeds of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel,
Juniper, Bays, Annis, Cummin, Nettles, and such like; of these may be made
Decoctions, or distilled Waters, Sitrups, and the like, which I omit, fearing
my Book will swell to a far bigger volume then I intended. Of these or such
like you may make a Bath for the Patient to sit in, afterward anoint the
Share, and parts about the Privities, with the Oil of Dill, Rue, Lillyes, etc.
You may, likewise, make dry Suffumigations, with Castor, Storax, Galbanum,
Cinnamon, Frankincense, Bdellium, Benzoins, Lignum Aloes, Cloves, and Mace. Or
you may make Pessaries, with the mass of Cochy pills, and Honey, and the Juice
of Mercury. Or with Hiera Picra, and Benedicta Laxativa, with the Honey and
Juice aforesaid: but this remember, that Pessaryes must be applied to married
Women only. If the Disease be inveterate, let Issues be made in the Legs, and
after the menstrual Flux is obtained, let them be dried up again.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of the immoderate Menstruall Flux.
Mensium Fluxus Immodicus, is when the monthly Terms do exceed in Quantity,
come too often, or stay too long. This is caused by an opening of the Veins,
either by Abundance, Heat, Sharpness, or Thinness of the Blood, or by some
Blow, Fall, or Wound: to understand the Cause more fully, have recourse to the
19 and 30 Chapters, Of bleeding at the Nose, and spitting of Blood. The Disease
it self may be known by the Patient's information, and the Symptoms which
follow, viz. decay of Strength and Appetite, an ill habit of the Body, by
reason of ill Digestion, Swelling of the Legs, and a Leady colored Complexion.
To know the Causes, observe, that a thin habit of the Body, with a Diet, which
does increase thin and wheyish Blood; or you may perceive the thin and wheyish
Humors in the Blood, which comes from the Patient, this shows that the
Blood soaketh thorough the Veins. If the Coats or Ends of the Veins be broken,
the Patient has had soul Wound, Bruise, or Fall, or used some immoderate
Labor, Exercise, or Venery; has endured too great Heat or Cold: or she has
had a hard bargain in Childbirth, a Miscarriage, or been handled by an
unskilful Midwife. If there be an Exulceration in the Womb, by which the Veins
are eaten thorough, the Blood droppeth by little and little, with Pain and
Sharpness: the Patient's Body is afflicted with sharp and choleric Humors:
the Blood, which issues, is at first matterish, wheyish, blackish, or yellow:
If it increase, the Ends of the Veins come with the Blood, and the Flux
increases, and is hard to be stopped.

Prognostics are; All long and lasting Issues of Blood are dangerous,
especially those of the Womb; that which comes by soaking thorough the Veins,
though it continues longer, yet the Blood and Spirits do not so much decay,
therefore it is not so dangerous. On the contrary, the breaking of the Veins
cause more danger because of the sudden issuing of Blood, yet is sooner cured,
because the Patient has Strength and Store of Blood. But of all the other that
which comes from Exulceration is most dangerous, because some part of the Veins
is perished, which lets out the Blood in great abundance, and is very
difficult to be cured. If she grow weaker, and the Issue more violent, there is
danger of Death; in elderly Women, it is hard to be cured.

Since the Cure must be performed in the same manner (almost) as is praescribed
in the 51 Chapter Of the immoderate Flux of the Haemorrhoids, I shall say the
less. First open a vein in the Arm, and let her bleed much by degrees. Use
Frictions and Ligatures; and fasten Cupping-Glasses to her dugs, as Hippocrates
advises. Purge with the same Medicines prescribed in the Chapter aforegoing.
Also Vomits are good, for they draw the Blood upwards, and Hippocrates,
treating of Women's Diseases, does much commend them. Then make use of this
Powder, much commended by Johannes Michael Paschalius, and it is thus prepared:
Take the Shells of two new laid Eggs burnt; Frankin-cense, Mastick, of each,
half an Ounce: Pearls and red Coral prepared, and Amber, of each, two drachms:
Hamatites and Emerald, of each, half a Scruple: Barley meal fine sifted, two
Pugills: the Whites of four Eggs, and chalybiated Water, enough to make the
Powder into two Cakes; bake them in an Oven, so hard, that they may be beaten
to Powder; give, of this Powder, half a Dram, or a Dram in the Morning, in
Broth made of Sheeps feet or Calves feet. The Juice of Plantane, Yarrow,
Nettles, Shepherds Purse, Knot-grasse, Comphry, and Hors-tail, is very good, or
a Sirrup made of all or either of them is much, and upon good grounds,
commended. Milk, in which red hot Steel has been quenched, allayeth the
Sharpness of the Humors, and stays the Flux. Spiknard, in fine Powder
inwardly taken, or applied to the Womb upon a little Lint, has been much
approved of. Mineral Waters, which receive their Tincture from Vitriol, Iron,
or Alum, do remove the Cause and strengthen the Part. The Chemists do much
commend the Tincture of Coral, and vitriolated Steel. Before you go farther
take this necessary Caution, that you do not altogether give strong
astringents, but sometimes Medicines which strengthen the Liver, and somewhat
bind. Outwardly foment upon her Loins, Share, and about the Privityes, with a
fomentation made of the aforegoing Herbs. Then anoint the parts aforesaid with
the Oil of Myrtles, Mastick, and Quinces: or make an Ointment more astringent.
adding, Frankincense, Dragon's Blood, Sealed Earth, Bolearmenick, and the like.
Unguentum Comitissae is very powerful in this Distemper. Afterward apply a
Plaster to the Navel and Loins, Emplastrum ad Herniam, Hystericum, or
Emplastrum de Mastich, either of these; or all three are very effectual.
Likewise dry Fumes, Pessaryes, and Injections, for the Womb, may be prepared of
the aforenamed Herbs and other astringent Simples. When she is cured, you must
endeavor to prevent the Disease for the future, by the Rules prescribed in the
51 Chapter, Of the Immoderate Flux of the Haemorrhoids.

CHAP. LXXIV. Of the Whites.
THis Disease is called the Flux of the Womb, the Woman's Flux, and the Whites;
and it is an excrementitious Humor, flowing from the Womb, sometimes white,
and sometimes watery, sometimes mixed with yellow, green, or black, according to
the Nature of the Humor. Women are subject principally to this Distemper, and
sometimes Maids, though some have affirmed the contrary, and condemned them as
unchaste, yet according to the opinion of the wisest Physicians, the purest
Virgins may have this Infirmity, and their opinion is confirmed daily by
Experience. These Humors are bred in the whole Body, or in some particular
part, or in the Womb it self. They are bred in the whole Body, either by ill
Diet, or a vicious habitual Distemper. The particular parts may be, the Brain,
Stomach, Liver, or Spleen. These Humors may be bred in the Womb, by a cold or
hot Distemper therein; the cold makes it unable to digest its Nourishment, and
the hot Distemper corrupts it, hence comes this excrementitious Humor.
Childbearing, Abortion, Contusion, Inflammation, Imposthume, or Ulcer in the
Womb may weaken the part and dispose it to breed and receive such Humors.

This Disease is known by the relation of the Patient; from what part it comes
is thus known: If the whole Body send this Humor to the Womb, the whole Body
appears in an evil State, is weary and heavy, as if the Patient were weary
with hard labor, and by this Flux her Body is at present refreshed; the Hands
and Feet are puffed up, with a great itching and stinging, if the Humor be
choleric. If it come from some peculiar part, the Symptoms and Excrements
proper to that part appear. If it come only from the Womb, something has
happened, which has hurt the Womb, as a Fall or Blow upon the Back or Belly,
immoderate carnal Embracements, especially if the Woman be young, or any
Disease of the Womb. Signs, that distinguish between this Disease and an Ulcer
in the Womb, or Gonorrhaea, are these: If there be an Ulcer in the Womb, that
which flows is more digested, mattery, mixed with Blood and stringy, and
comes with pain; and the Woman admits not of Copulation without pain. In the
Gonorrhaea the Matter comes in a small Quantity, and seldom, and is of a
shining Whiteness. But if it be a Gonorrhaea which is gotten by acting with an
unclean Person, then is the Womb ulcerated, the Urine sharp, and many other
malignant Symptoms.

This Disease is not dangerous, but is hard to be cured, for it is hard to
divert the Humors from this Channel, it being the Sink of the Body, through
which the superfluous Humors of a healthy Body, are every Month evacuated.
That which is bluish, green, black, and stinking is worse then that, which is
pale, white, and does not stink. This Disease is seldom cured in old Women,
because they abound in Phlegm. Lastly, by its continuance it may breed great
evils, as Barrenness, Falling out of the Wo^b, evil habit in the whole Body,
and Consumption.

To cure, the Humor offended must be purged with convenient Medicines; and
because Phlegm for the most part is the Humor peccant, purge with such
Medicines as principally purge Phlegm, with which mix such as purge the Humor
mixed. Vomits (if the Patient be strong) are good, because they empty the
Stomach of excrementitious Humors, and do powerfully revell the Humors from
the Womb. After sufficient Evacuations, let the Patient take sweating
Decoctions, made of Lignum Vitae and Sassafras, if the Patient be phlegmatic;
of China and Sarsa, if she be choleric or melancholy. Also Sweat procured by
sulphurous Baths, is kind. Milk wherein Steel has been quenched is very good,
and it will be more powerful it a little Bolearmenick, Sanguis Draconis, and
Terra Sigillata, be given with it. Among a multiplicity of Medicines, which are
astringont and proper for this Diseale, I shall insert but one or two. Zecheus
does highly commend this following Electuary: Take of Gum Arabic and Gum
Tragant, of each, two Drachms: Coral of both sorts, Eg-shells burnt,
Hartshorn, Dill Seeds, Amber, of each, four Scruples: Honey of Roses, as much as
will make into it an Electuary; give half an Ounce in the Morning and fast two
hours after it. This Julep I have found of great virtue: Take of the distilled
Water of Plantane, red Roses, Oak Leaves, and Knot grass, of each, four Ounces;
infuse therein, a whole Night, of the Flowers of Comphry, Buglosse, and red
Roses, of each, one Pugill: strain them out, and make it sharp with Oil of
Vitriol; with the Sirrup of Comphry and red Roses, make a Julep for four or
five Mornings Draughts. Whatever part sends pblegmatick Matter to the Womb,
you must seek its cure from its proper Chapter. To conclude, the Medicines
prescribed in the former Chapter are good against this Distemper. Outward
Remedies, as Fomentations, Unguents, Fumes, Pessaryes, and Injections, such as
are prescribed in the Chapter aforesaid, are useful here.

CHAP. LXXV. Of the Mother.
THis Disease is called, the Hystericall passion, Uteri Strangulatio, by the
Greeks, (...), we call it the Mother and Strangling of the Womb. It is caused
by the Seed, menstruall Blood, or other excrementitious Humors, retained
besides the intent of Nature, in the Womb, and there putrified and corrupted,
breeds venomous and, malignant Vapors, which arising does afflict diverse
parts of the Body. Now these Vapors do not always afflict, but when they are
stirred up by some cause; (the most noted are, sweet odours, sweet meats eaten,
anger, terror, and grievous passions of the mind; these and such like bring
Women, subject to this Infirmity, into their Fits, wherein their breathing is
impaired, sometimes (to appearance) abolished, the Body becomes cold, their
Speech gone, and Pulse intercepted; so that they ly for dead, and sometimes
have been laid out for burial, and yet have revived. Sometimes these choking
Fits are not so extreme, yet is accompanied with other hystericall Symptoms,
as Vomitings, Ravings, Convulsions, Swoonings, and the like. Sometimes the
Patient feels herself, as it were, choked by an halter or rope, this is
caused by abundance of Vapors and Winds ascending from the Womb, (sometimes
seconded by hypocondriack Melancholy) which Vapors, compressing the Diaphragma
and Lungs, hinder Respiration, and the Patient feels herself as it were
strangled. Others will have it proceed from the Nature of the malignant
Vapors, whose property is to cause Suffocation. Sometimes she loses her
Breath without pain or sense of Strangling, by reason of the stupefactive Power
of these Vapors, which takes away the vital Action from the Heart, and so
hinders Respiration: For Nature having ordained the drawing of Breath to cool
the Heart, and the Heart is extremely cooled by these venomous Vapors, having
no need of the cool Air, Breathing cease: For the vital Spirits being
destroyed, the Animal, which are made of them must needs lose their functions;
We may also say that these venomous and stupisying Vapors do fly up and
assault the Brain, and hinder the Influx of the animal Spirits, whereby the
Motion of the Diaphragma and the Muscles, which serve for Respiration, are
hindered. Likewise the Womb being filled with these flatuous Vapors, does
ascend toward the upper parts, as it were, by a convulsive Motion, which
causes a Compression of the Midriff and Muscles of Respiration. Sometimes
these sharp and malignant Vapors ascend to the Head, and disperse themselves
into the membranous parts, and cause diverse pains, pricking and smarting, and
sometimes stretching and swelling; sometimes they cause pains beating like the
Pulse. Sometimes the Falling Sickness comes from the Womb, by reason of sharp
and malignant Vapors, which having gotten a powerful Acrimony, do sharply
smite the nervous parts. These Vapors assaulting the Heart, the Heart
labors to expel them, hence arises Palpitation. Likewise it causes a
great Pulsation in the Back. The Stomach does oftentimes suffer much by this
Distemper, according to the Nature of the Humors afflicting, or part of the
Stomach it gets possession of; as Want of Appetite, or a depraved Appetite,
that is, destring Food which Nature disdains, as Coals, Chalk, etc. Loathing of
Meat, Vomiting, Belching, Hiccough, and pain in the Stomach. If, in the Womb,
menstruall Blood is retained, it flows back by the Voins into the Liver, from
thence shed abroad into the whole Body, hence comes Swelling, Fevers, and
other Diseases. If it flows back to the Spleen, Swelling, Stopping, Melancholy,
and hypocondriacal Diseases are bred. Lastly, Women have pains in their Loins,
Thighs, and other parts, which are caused by these Vapors conveyed from the
Womb. Therefore, to know this from other pains, mark well the Signs of this
Disease.

Much may be gathered from what huth already been said, remembering this, you
must not expect all the Symptoms in one, but some in one, and some in another,
the Breathing fails, Sense of Strangling, Coldness of the Body, the Pulse
cease, and the like, which I have mentioned before. There goes before the
Fit a Noise in the Belly below the Navill, Belching, Inclination to Vomit,
Weariness, Stretching, the Face pale and wan. As it gathers Strength it
brings Suffocation or Choking, afterward all the vital and animal Actions
are depraved, diminished, and, as it were, abolished, the Womb may be felt in
diverse parts of the lower Belly, gathered round like a Ball, tossing and
tumbling to and fro. When the Fit begins to be over, a moist Humor flows out
of the Womb, the Body begins to be warm, they have a Color in their Face,
they open their Eyes, they sigh, they begin to move, and so by degrees are
freed from the Fit.

Signs of the Causes are thus known; If the Seed corrupting in the Womb has
been the Cause, there has preceded those things, which might gather together
or excrease Seed, and cerrupt it in the Womb; as flourishing Age, high keeping,
and an idle life, Sanguine Complexion and ripe for Generation; or one formerly
accustomed to the Actions of Generation and left it of: if any such fall into
this Disease, and have their monthly Purgation well, you may judge that
Corruption of Seed is the Cause. If it come from the Putrefaction of menstruous
Blood, the Menstrues are stopped, or come not down well, and the Woman wants
no carnal Embracements. If evil Humors be the Cause, the Woman enjoys
camall Exercise, and has her monthly Purgation, but her Body is full of evil
Humors.

Prognostics we make thus: This Disease is seldom mortal, but of long
continuance; the Patient is in great danger if it continue long, because
Respiration being so often hurt, there is danger that the native Heat be
suffocated. Young Women when they come to bear Children, for the most part they
are cured: Old women are seldom or never cured. To women with Child it is very
dangerous, and threatens Miscarriage: To Women lying in, as dangerous by
reason of their Weakness. It is good for a Woman to sneez in the Fits, for it
signifies Strength of the Brain, and it disperseth the Vapors from the Brain.

I shall lay down a few Rules, first, to give present ease in the Fit;
secondly, to give perfect Cure. First, lay her down in such a posture, that her
Neck and Shoulders may ly high, her Thighs and Privities low, shooting
downwards, that so the Womb may be the better reduced. Let her lower parts be
rubbed and bound so hard as to cause pain. And if her Fit be inveterate, apply
Cupping-Glasses to her Hips and Share. If she swoon, rub the Bottoms of her
Feet with Vinegar and Salt, and course Cloths. Hollow in her Ears, and bend her
Fingers, and if need require apply Epispastick Cataplasms to her Feet. Put
strong and stinking things under her Nose, as Leather and Feathers burnt,
Brimstone fited, Assafaetida, Castoreum, and the like. But take this Caution,
carefully to distinguish between this Disease and the Falling Sickness, for in
the latter such Smells are hurtful. The Warts that grow upon a Horses Legs
being dried and powdered and a Fume made thereof, under the Patient's Nose, is
very good in the time of the Fit. The smoke of Tobacco blown into the Mouth and
Nostrils is likewise of great efficacy to free the Woman from the Fit-Whilst
you do this, you must apply Musk or Civet, wrapped up in cotton Wool, to the
Womb. Then blow th^s Powder into her Nose: Take of white Pepper, Mustard Seed,
Pellitory, and Castor, of each, one Scruple: make it into a very fine Powder,
and blow some up her Nose: if you judge it not strong enough, add a little
white Hellebore or Eaphorbium. Or let her Nose be anointen with Oil of Amber.
If the Fit be of long continuance give her a laxative, carminative, or
windexpelling Clister: if one does it not, give another. Afterward give
another made of Vinegar and Water, and let her drink a little Vinegar and
Water. Apply Emplastrum Hystericum to the Navel, or a Plaster made of
Galbanum, Caranna, Assafaetida, and Tachamahaca. If you find the Sick troubled
with plenty of Wind and Vapors, bathe and soment the Belly with Fomentations
made of emollient, carminative, and discussing Herbs and Seeds. If the Sick be
a married Woman let her have carnal Conjunction with her Husband as soon as
ever the Fit is over. If that cannot be had, that is, if she be a Maid or
Window, let a Midwife, tickle the Neck of the Womb with her finger anointed
with the Oil of Musck, Cloves, or the like, that so the offensive Sperm may be
avoided. You may in the Fit give Pills made of Assafaetida, Castor, Faecula
Brioniae, Mirrh, and the like; and, if the Fit be violent, give Pillulae
Faetidae. Oil of Amber given three or four drops in some convenient Waters are
very good. The Afterbirth of a Woman, that lies in of her first Child, dried,
and powdered, and a Dram given in some convenient Liquor, is excellent:
Quercetanus his Powder made of Elder-Berryes, taken a Dram in Wine, is very
good.

For the Cure, you must consider whether the Woman be with Child or not, and be
careful how you administer stinking Medicines for fear of Abortion, but rather
outward Medicines then inward. Whatever part of the Body suffer by this
Disease, either Brain, Heart, Liver, etc. take care to free and strengthen the
part, seek the means in their proper Chapters. The Patient must once in a Month
be purged with such Medicines, as principally regard the Humor offending,
adding thereto things that are hystericall. If the Body be full of Blood open a
Vein, or bleed the Haemorrhoids if Nature requires it. After general
Evacuation, make use of sweating Decoctions, or let the Patient frequent
sulphurous Baths. These Pills are much commended: Take of the Troches of
Agarick, one Dram and an half: Hiera of Colloquintida, one Dram: the Seeds
of Carrots, and Agnus Castus, of each one Scruple: Mirrh, Castoreum, and
Diagridium, of each half a Scruple; Venice Turpetine, as much as will suffice
to make all into a Mass, let ber take half a Dram or two Scruples twice or
thrice in a Month. Or Pillulae Faetidae taken, half a Dram, once in a Month
does very much cleanse the Womb. Then make use of this Sirrup, much commended
by Mercatus: Take of the Juice of Mercury, and the cream of Carthamus Seeds, of
each, six Ounces: the Water of Scorzonera, seven Ounces: Sugar, as much as will
make it into a Syrrup: while it boiles add of Confectio de Hyacintho, of
Alchermes, and Powder of the Electuary de Gemmis, of each, two Drachms; let the
Dose be two or three Ounces. Assasaetida, and Castor made into Pills with Honey
have a peculiar property against these Firs: many use the former with good
success, tied up in a thin ragg or farcener, and hung about the Neck: and for
this purpose the Liver or Flesh of a Wolf; or the Pizzell, or Stones of a Fox
dried and hung about the Neck with a string, resting upon the Navell;
vitriolated Steel, or the Salt thereof, given with Sugar, from two, to twenty
grains, according to the Strength of the Patient, is much commended, for
opening Obstructions and cooling the Womb. Eight days before she expect her
monthly Purgations, let the Woman sit in a mollifying and resolving Bath, that
so the Humors may be resolved and flow forth with her Courses. Lastly, Issues
made in the Thighs are good, for they derive and turn aside evil Humors from
the Womb.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of the Inflammation, Ulcer, and hard Swelling of the Womb.
THis Disease is a Swelling of the Womb, which is caused by Blood mixed with
Choler or other Humors flowing to the part, vehement Exercise, or immoderate
Copulation; some Blow or Fall upon the part: Meats that are sharp and sretting,
or such things as naturally offend the part, as Cantharides, or Pessaryes that
are of a sharp Nature, Abortion, hard Labor in Childbed, or a violent
handling by an unskilful Midwife.

The Signs of this Disease are, Swelling, Heat, and Pain about the Region of
the Womb, the Body feavourish. If the Inflammation be in the Neck of the Womb,
the pain is felt toward the Groin, if in the former side, the Bladder
suffers, if in the hinder side, the strait Gut will be sensible thereof, and
the Pain is violently felt about the Loins. If either side of the Womb be
inflamed, the Thigh and Groin on the same fide will be heavy and pained. If you
consider the Constable tution and present Temper of the Patient, you may easily
guess what Humor offends. If it be purely Blood, the Symptoms are more mild;
if Choler be mixed, it is more vehement; if Phlegm or Melancholy, the
Distemper is more fixed and lasting, but the pain is not so vehement. If the
Inflammation imposthumate, and gather Matter, the pain and Fever increases,
and the Patient has shaking Fits, and most of all about the Evening. Sometimes
it turns to an Ulcer, which is known by avoiding of snotty. Matter or Quittor
out of the Womb. If it be party-colored, greenish, or Lead colored, stinking,
and comes away with great pain, it is the worse. If it depend upon the French
Pox or Gonorthaea, their Symptoms will declare the same. Sometimes the
Inflammation turns not to an Imposthume nor Ulcer, but to a painlesse hard
Swelling, called a Schirrus, which is thus known: the Fever and pain cease,
and the Swelling remains; there is a hardness, heaviness, and Sense of
Weight, bearing down when the Woman stands.

As to the Prognostic, I shall say a word or two of either of them: An
Inflammation of the Womb is a dangerous, and de adly Symptom, especially, if
the whole Womb be inflamed. If a Woman with Child suffer Inflammation of the
Womb, the Child dies, and probably the Mother follows. Ravings, Hiccoughs,
Coldness of the Hands and Feet, and cold Sweats, are the Messengers of Death.
If it imposthumate and turn to an Ulcer, it ought not to be slighted, because
the Womb is of exquisite Sense, and has a fellow-felling with the principal
parts of the Body. If the Ulcer turns cancrous, hollow, or fistulous, it is
seldom or never cured, but vexes the Patient miserably all her lifetime. An
Ulcer in the Neck of the Womb is most easily cured, because Medicines may be
applied to them immediately. A Schirrhus, or insensible hard Swelling, is seldom
cured, because the natural Heat is so weak in that part, that it can hardly
discuss such an hard and almost stony Substance: If it be not cured it soon
brings a Dropsy: and if it be tampered with, with over hot and moist Medicines,
it turns to a Cancer.

The Cure you must prosecute thus: First, in the Inflammation of the Womb, give
a cooling Clister, then open the Basilick Vein, on the same side the Womb is
inflamed, if all the Womb be inflamed, repeat your Phlebotomy, afterward open
the lower Veins. Rubbings and Bindings are good, and Cupping-Glasses fastened
to the Loins and Back. Purge the Humor offending with such things as purge
gently. Then give cooling Juleps or Emulsions to allay the Heat and sharpness
of the Humors; mix therewith Narcoticks to give ease and rest, if the Patient
be tired out, Apply cooling Liniments and Cataplasms; In Liniments use, the Oil
and Ointment of Roses, Galen's cooling Ointment, Ceratum Santalinum, and such
like; and with the Oil of Roses, white Bread and Milk, make Cataplasms, adding
the Juice of Henbane, Nightshade, Plantant, and Sorrel; or instead of the
white Bread, the Meal of Barley, Flax and Fenugreek Seed. Of such cool Herbs
make Injections, and Pessaries. But use not cooling and repelling too long,
lest the Tumor be fixed and hardened, but rather use softning and discussing
Medicines with repelling, such as these, viz. Marsh and common Mallows,
Mugwort, Melilor, Camomill, Fenugreek. If the Patient be subject to be costive,
give gentle purgers, or mollifying and cooling Clisters. If the pain be very
violent, make Injections with new Milk, and a little Opium: and make Pessaries
of Philonium Romanum and a little Cotton and apply it. If it tends to
Suppuration, apply a Cataplasm made of the aforenamed softning Herbs, fat Figs,
Yolks of Eggs, Saffion, Oil of Lillyes and fresh Butter. When it is broken we
must endeavor to purge out the Quitter, and cleanse the Ulcer. You must often
purge with gentle Medicines, as Senna, Rubarb, Tamarinds, Mirabolans, Agarick,
Catholicon, and such like, that the evil Humors may be diverted from the
Womb; for such who are easy to vomit, a gentle Vomit is very profitable. Make a
vulnerary Drink to cleanse and heal the Ulcer: Take of Agrimony, Burnet,
Mugwort, Knot-Grasse, Plantane, and Yarrow, of each, one Handful: China Root,
half an Ounce: Rha Ponticum, one Ounce: Currance, and French Barley, of each,
two Ounces: boil them in Chicken-Broth, and let the Patient take somewhat more
then a Quarter of a Pint, Morning and Evening. Venice Turpotine washed in
Mugwort Water, or in the Water of any other Herb, respecting the Ulcer, is good
to cleanse and heal it. If the Humors be sharp and painful, inject the
Emulsion of the cold Seeds, Goats Milk, or (for want thereof) Cows Milk, with
the Juice of Shepherds Purse, or of any of the Herbs aforenamed. To dry and
fill up the Ulcer, make a Decoction of the aforenamed Herbs, or of the like
Nature, made in Water wherein Steel has been quenched, or in Plantane Water:
add thereto Acacia, Hypocistis, Sanguis Draconis, Bolearmenick, fine Starch,
Aristolochia rotunda, great Comphry, etc. Unguentum Egyptiacum, de Plumbo, de
Ceruso, and de Apio, are very good in Injections; and the Oil of the Yolks of
Eggs, stirred in a Leaden Mortar, is much more commended. If the Ulcer in the
Womb come by reason of the French Pox, a Fumigation made of Cinnabaris, or
Minium, taken into the Cavity of the Womb, has a peculiar property to cleanse
and heal the Ulcer; the same virtue has Quicksilver Ointments.

If it come to a Schirrhous Tumor, you must purge the melancholy and rebellious
Humors, and give steeled and such Medicines, which powerfully open
Obstructions of the Womb or other parts. Then you must prepare emollient and
resolving Medicaments to be applied outwardly; as the Fomentation, and
Cataplasm mentioned in the 56 Chapter, Of the Schirrbus of the Liver. Likewise
the Liniment there prescribed, may serve here for an Injection. To conclude,
you must use a great deal of care, diligence, and industry in this Cure, lest
that the Tumor become harder, or, (which is most dangerous) degenerate into a
Cancer.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of the Womb swelled by Wind or Water.
There is a twofold Dropsy of the Womb, one from Wind, which is like that sort,
called Tympanites, the other from a watery and wheyish Humor, answering to
Ascites. Some add a third answering to Leucophlegmatia, which is seldom seen.
This Wind or Water is contained in the Cavity of the Womb, or in the Membranes
thereof, or in certain Bladders. It is caused by the weakness of natural Heat
in the Liver or Spleen, from which parts. Wind, Phlegm, or wheyish Humors are
sent to the Womb: or by the weakness of the Womb, those Humors are collected.
Causes which weaken the natural heat of the womb are many, viz. cold air
heedlesly taken into the womb, or staying in the cold, or padling in cold water
whilst the courses flow: the use of cold meats and drinks; add to these,
abortion, hard labor, immoderat flux of the Terms; all diseases proper to the
Womb.

This disease is best discovered by signs, which distinguish between this and
the universal Dropsy of the Belly. The Womb-Dropsy causes a swelling, chiefly
in the lower Belly; in the other Dropsy, the swelling is in all parts: in this
the Body decays not, nor there is not such a Thirst and Dryness of the Tongue
as in the other; and Wind and Water sometimes bursteth out at the Mouth of the
Womb. Secondly to distinguish between the sorts of these Dropsyes, consider, if
Wind be the Cause, the lower part of the Belly, being struck, gives a Sound,
thence is a pricking pain in the Belly, which reaches to the Diaphragma: the
Womb rises like a Globe toward the stomach, Wind bursteth our of its Neck,
and the Patient is subject to Belching, and when she breaks Wind, she finds
some ease. If a watery wheyish Humor be the Cause, the part appears soft and
flaggy with a Noise of Water, and great Heaviness. If from Phlegm, it will be
more soft; and the parts adjacent, as well as the Womb, have a phlegmatic
Swelling. Thirdly, you ought to consider, whether this Disease has its
original in the Womb, or by consent of other parts, thus: if there appear
Symptoms of the whole Body or some part thereof to be misaffected, viz. if
there be long Fevers, or a Flux of Blood, Distillations from the Head,
Weakness of the Stomach, Swelling of the Liver and Spleen, and other stubborn
Diseases in those arts, judge that the Womb receives its Distemper from some of
these parts. On the contrary, if the Body and all the parts are in good health,
saving some particular Disease of the Womb, then judge that the Disease has
its original in the Womb. Fourthly, to know, whether the Wind or watery Humor
be in the Cavity of the Womb, or in little Bladders, take these two Rules, that
if it be in the Cavity of the Womb, it makes a greater Swelling, and more
Water flows out at the Neck of the Womb. Secondly, if little Bladders of Water
come forth, it is an evident Sign that the Water or Wind is not contained in
the Cavity of the Womb. Fifthly, this Womb-Dropsy is easily distinguished from
Tumors of the Womb, caused of blood or Choler, because there is no Fever; nor
pain in the touching of it; it differs likewise from a schirrhous Tumor, for
it is not so hard as not to yield to the finger. Sixthly, it is very convenient
to distinguish between this Disease and a Woman's being with Child: when a
Woman begins to be big with Child, the bigness of her Belly buncheth out, in
this Disease it is depressed and flat: in the first, the Woman's Dugs do swell,
in the latter they become extenuated and smaller. Women with Child, after a
while, grow better and better, but in this Disease they grow worse and worse.
Again the Child is manifestly perceived to stir. Lastly, you must distinguish
between this Disease and the false Conception Mola, thus: in Mola Women find a
great heaviness in their Wombs, and when they turn toly on either side, it
roules like a Stone to that side: again they that have conceaved with Mola (for
the most part) have a violent Flux of their Terms, every third or fourth Month,
and lastly the Dugs swell and sometimes have Milk in them; which things never
happen in this Womb-Dropsy.

Sometimes this Disease comes not to the height but proves an Inflation: if
it continues, if the Humor be void of Putrefaction, though it continues
long, yet it is curable, nay, sometimes it flows out of its own accord. If
wind or water be in the cavity it is evacuated with more ease, then if it be
shut up in Bladders. If the Humor be malignant and sharp, it produces the
like Symptoms, and is dangerous, for the most part deadly.

You must begin the Cure with Phlebotomy, if the Disease has its original
from the Terms, and the Body be plethorick, other wise it will much hurt,
because natural Heat is much weakened thereby. Then you must give such things as
have power to purge, open, provoke Sweat, and move the Courses: you need go no
farther then to the 58 and 71 Chapters, treating Of the Dropsy and
Green-Sicknesse. Give a gentle Vomit twice a week, if the Woman be easy to
vomit. The Heat of the Stomach must be cherished and maintained, by Medicines
prescribed in the Chapters treating of the Diseases of that part; and the Womb
must be strengthened, and the peccant Humors discussed by Fomentations or
Baths, made of the Decoction of the Roots of Briony, wild Cucumber, and horse
Radish: the Leaves of Dwarf-Elder, Mercury, common Elder, Origanum, Calamint,
Rue, Sage, Wormwood, Marjarom, Mugwort, Pennyroyall, Time: the Seeds of Annis,
Fennel, Broom, Carrots, Cummin, Bay, and Juniper: the Flowers of Camomill,
Melilot, and Rosemary. If it be a windy Dropsy, a dry Fomentation will be much
better. Afterward anoint with the Oil of Nard, Rue, Wormwood, Dill, and
Southernwood. Give frequent Clisters, and Injections to evacuate the Humors
contained in the Womb: then make Pessaryes, of Coloquintida, Elaterium,
Mechoacan, and such like, with Honey, and apply it. Nitrous and sulphurous Baths
do profit much, and, if the Disease proceed from Humors falling to the part,
let Issues be made in the Thighs.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of the falling down of the Womb.
SOmetimes the Womb loses its natural Situation, and falls down to the
watergate, sometimes out to the very Thigh. All things that may cause a
Rupture or Relaxation of the Ligaments of the Womb, may be a cause of this
grief, as a Blow, Fall, dancing, leaping, lifting, carrying, violent sneezing,
or coughing, (especially in Childbed, or being big with Child, Tenasmus, hard
Travel, a violent drawing the Child out of the Womb, or of the afterbirth, or
the expulsive Faculty of the womb, being violently provoked to expel a dead
Child, after birth, or the Mole, and many such like Accidents may be the cause
of the breaking of the Ligaments, and falling out of the Womb. A Relaxation of
the Ligaments may be caused by a long Defluxion, by Crudityes, the Whites:
external Causes may be prevalent, as bathing in cold water; the Southern or
moist Air being received into the Womb, soon after a lying in, Meat of a cold
and moist Nature; to conclude, all Meats, Drinks, and Actions, which will breed
Phlegm, or cause its Deflux into the Womb.

This Disease needs no Signs to discover it by, it being apparent to the
Sense: the causes may be thus distinguished. If it come by Looseness of the
Ligaments, it comes by little and little, the pain is leffe, causes,
moystening the Womb have preceded. If it come by a Rupture, there is a violent
pain; sometimes Blood starteth out, and such causes, which have been able
tobreak the Ligaments, have preceded.

If the womb fall down by a rupture of the Ligaments, it is incurable. That
which comes by a relaxation of the Ligaments is not very dangerous, but
troublesome to the patient, it hinders her walking, conception, and monthly
Purgation. In young Women it is caslier restored to its place, than in elderly.
The womb coming not far out, and if taken in time, the Cure is far more easy
then if the contrary happen. Sometimes grievous and violent Pains do attend it,
and threaten Death. Sometimes the Air corrupts the womb, and it becomes
gangrenated, so that there is a Necessity that it be cut off.

You must begin the Cure with such Medicines that may discharge the Guts and
Bladder of their Exerements, that they may not hinder the Reduction of the
womb. Then let her ly upon her Back with her Thighs wide asunder, and draw up
her Knees, and let her with her own hands, or by the help of a Mid wife, thrust
the womb inwards, or (that you may drive it in farther and hurt her less) make
a Pessary of linen clothes, and with it thrust up the womb; first anoint it
with the Oil of Lillyes, and, if it be swelled, use a Fomentation of Althaea,
common Mallows, Fenugreek, and the like. Before you repose the womb to its
place, anoint it with the Musilage of Comphry Roots, or Infusion of Gum
Traganth, or any thing that is of a glowing Nature. When it is up, let the
woman ly with one Thigh over the other, and put up toward the Neck of the womb,
a little wool wetted in ted wine or Rosewater, wherein Acatia and Hypocystis
has been dissolved. Rodericus a Castro advises the Physician to come with a
red hot Iron, and to make as if he would thrust it into the womb: Avenzoar, and
Zacutus Lusitanus, after the use of all means and devices, by this Stratagem
reduced the womb, that is, having laid her down as before said, and one held
down her Thighs and another her Breast, then put her into a great fright, by
setting Mice or Frogs to run up her Legs and Thighs, by this fright the womb
has been reduced into its proper place for by this means. Nature contracteth
her self for fear, and draws the womb with her. Then lay a plaster against
Ruptures, on the Region of the womb and Groins: and have a care that you keep
the Body that it be not costive nor too soluble. To conclude, all the Medicines
external and internal, prescribed against the immoderate flowing of the
Menstrues, are here good: but beware you use them not when the Courses should
flow; and, lest by the frequent use of such Medicines, they should be hindered,
your Patient being young, and having her Courses monthly, be sparing in the use
of them; but rather let her wear a Trusse.

CHAP. LXXIX. Of Barrenness.
Barrenness or Sterility is an impotency of Conception; the principal causes
thereof are four; first, when the Woman does not conveniently receiv the Man's
Sperm into her Womb; and this happens by diverse causes, viz. If the Woman be
too young, and the Neck of the Womb too strait for the Man's Yard; the same
happens to elderly Virgins, being not exercised in actions tending to
Generation, their genitall parts become flaggy, withered, and so straight that
they cannot easily admit of the Man's Yard; some are lame and crooked that they
cannot ly in a fit posture; some have a cold Distemper in the Womb, that they
are dull and have no delight in the act: others are very fat, which causes a
Straightness in the passage, or their Bellyes, being big, hinder their due
conjunction with the Man. Want of love between a Man and his Wife is a great
cause. Diseases in the Womb or the adjacent parts, hinder the Reception of the
Seed. The second cause of Barrenness is when the Woman does not retain the
Seed of the man in her Womb, for sometimes the Womb is moist and slippery, and
full of excrementitious Humors, by which means the Sperm does easily slide
back again; and the Orifice of the Womb is so loose and flaggy, that it cannot
contract it self to hold the Seed: or it may be so slack that it cannot
contract to do its Office; and this Slacknesse may be occasioned by a breaking
of the Fibers of the Womb one from another, in hard Labor, or Abortion: to say
all, the Whites, or any moist Distemper of the Womb, may be the cause of
Barrenness. Thirdly, want of sufficient Nourishment of the Womb to cherish the
Seed may be the cause of Barrenness, and this comes to pass by any Distemper
of the Womb that does corrupt the Seed: a cold Distemper extinguisheth, a hot
Distemper dissipateth the Spirits in the Seed: a moist Distemper hinders the
Seeds coming to its due Thickness, and a dry Distemper consumes and drinks up
the moisture of the Seed. Some say, Witchcraft and Charms may be the cause;
certain Meats and Poisons, many things are antipathetical to Faecundity, as
Vinegar, Mints, Watercresses, Beans, and such like, Jet, Glowworms, Saphires,
Smaragds, the Matrice of a Goat of Mule, malignant Diseases may corrupt Seed
and hinder Conception, as stinking Ulcers, the French Pox, leprous Infections,
and the like. The fourth thing that hinders Conception is when the Woman wants
fit materials for the formation of the Embrio, and to augment the same; and
this chiefly depends upon want of seed and menstruous blood; and this defect
happens to those that are too young or too old, the determined and approved
age is from fourteen to 50. Likewise the materials may be ill disposed through
evil diet, which cannot breed blood or good seed, Diseases weakening nature
may cause the same. Add to all these causes a disproportion or unsureablenesse
between the man's Sperm and the Woman's, that is when the man and the Woman are
of one Complexion, by which means the seed of either of them partake of the
same excess, that is that they are either too hot or too cold; hence it comes
to pass that the same Woman who could never have a Child by her Husband, after
his Death, has Children by another man, and a man by another Woman. Sometimes
a man and Woman live ten years, or more, together and have no Children, and
afterward the woman conceaveth and brings forth, and this comes to pass by
the change of Temperature caused by years.

I should now lay down the Signs of all these causes, but most of them are
evident to the Senses; and the rest, he who cannot discover has not a Head
befitting a Physician: therefore, to abbreviate the work, I shall leav it to
the search of the Ingenious, and trouble the Reader with a few Rules, left by
the Ancients, to try whether a Woman be naturally barren or no, Hippocrates
advises to wrap the Woman close in Blankets, and burn some Perfume under her,
and if the Smell proceed through her Body, to her Mouth or Nostrills, then
certainly she is fruitful. The same Author advises to put a clove of Garlic
peeled into her womb, or Galbanum, and if the Smell come to her Head or Mouth,
judge that she is fruitful. Amatus Lusitanus to try whether a Woman be
fruitful or no, gives a Dram of Hares Runner, dissolved in warm water, to
the Woman, being in a Bath of hot water, fasting; and if the Woman finds
pains in her Belly, he judges her fruitful, if she has no pain, he judges
her barren. Some steep Barley in the Urine, and if it shoot within ten days,
they judge the Woman fruitful. Before you try these uncertain conclusions upon
the Woman, examine the man, and see if the fault be not in him. It is known
thus, if the man be unable to raise his yard, if he want Sperm, if he has a
swelling in his Stones, or if he have the Running of the Reins, he is not fit
for Venus School. If the man be of an effeminate Spirit, if he has no Beard,
if he be long casting forth his Seed, and takes little delight in the act, and
the Woman in the act feels his Seed cold, be sure the man is unfruitful; Or
Causes, which may make the Seed unfruitful, have preceded.

Prog: These that conceave not by reason of tenderness of age, have great
hopes to live to have better success: but if she live above forty and never
conceaved, she has little reason to hope. If Barrenness be caused by Fatness,
or any Distemper or Disease whatsoever, if the Woman can procure Leanness, or
have her Distemper removed, she may conceave. But if Barrenness be caused by
evil shape of the Members, it is likely to continue.

In the cure, you must endeavor that whatsoever hinders may be removed. If
tenderness of age be the cause, let her wait the time; in the mean while let
her refuse carnal Embracements, lest her genitall Members be spoiled. If it be
caused by Age, that is incurable by weakness of Nature, you may endeavor to
strengthen the Body and revive the Spirits, but it is difficult. If the Body be
too corpulent, or too manly, you must extenuate, moisten, and cool. If any
Distemper of the Womb hinder Conception, labor to remove the Distemper. If a
hot Distemper be the cause, cure it as a hot Distemper of the Liver. If
dryness be the cause, use a restorative Diet, such as is prescribed in the
Chapter Of the Hectic Fever. If it be caused hy Witchcraft, next to fervent
and devout prayers to god, and a confident despising and slighting of Charms
and Witch-crafts, let the Woman wear the Pizzle of a Wolf about her, or the
Adamant or Hyacinth Stone, which are much commended against Fascination,
likewise Sea Onions, Sea Holly, Sagapenum, Rue, and St John's W^rt, (which some
call the Devil driver) are of great efficacy. But for the most part a cold and
moist Distemper of the Womb and of the Body, being accompanied with the Whites,
is the cause, whose particular cure you may find in its proper Chapter. You
must purge the cold phlegmatic Humors, you must make Issues in the Arm, Neck,
or Thighs, and give such things as strengthen the Womb. Some things there are,
which have a peculiar virtue to cause Faecundity and remove Barrenness, viz.
the Afterbirth of a Woman dried and beaten to powder, and given to the
quantity of a Dram. The Stones of a Bore pig and the Liver, which was
farrowed alone without any more in that Litter. Half a pint of the Juice of
Sage taken a quarter of an hour before the Woman enjoy her Husband, it is best
for her to take it soon after she has had her monthly Purgation. Rejecting the
multiplicity of Medicines which I might here insert, I shall content my self
and the Reader with one or two of the best of them, and first, an excellent
Electuary may be made thus: Take of the Roots of Eringo, and Dogs Stones called
Satyrion candied or preserved, of each, one Ounce: Green Ginger candied, half
an Ounce: Pine and Filbert kernells, and Pistachios, of each, six Drachms: one
preserved Nutmeg: the Seeds of Rocket and Watercresses, of each, two Drachms:
Ashes of a Bulls Pizzle, the Reins of the Sea Scinkos, and Shavings of Ivory,
of each, one Dram: Confection of Alchermes, three Drachms: the Powders
Diambra and Diamoshe Dulce, of each, one Ounce and an half: Ambergreese, half a
Dram: with Sirrup of preserved Citrons, make an Electuary: and let the Woman
take the quantity of a Chestnut to Bedward, twice or thrice in a week, and drink
a glass of Sack after it: Quercetanus does much commend this Decoction
following: Take of the Stones of a Ram, prepared with Wine and dried; the
Matrix of a Hare, prepared in the same manner; Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, white
Ginger, and Seeds of Ammeos, of each, two Drachms: Saffron, a Dram and an
half: Hazell-Nut kernells, and Pistachios, of each, three Drachms: boil them in
a quart of Muscadine, till a third part be consumed: let her take three or four
Ounces of it, for three days together, three hours before Meat, then let her
upon the fourth day, have Geniall Embracements with her Husband. Likewise
external Medicines, as Pessaries, Injections, Fumigations, such as have power
to cleanse, dry, and strengthen the Womb, may be applied: the afore-going
Chapters will direct you.

CHAP. LXXX. Of Miscarriage.
ABortion or Miscarriage is the bringing forth of a Child, either dead or
alive, having not attained to the just Term of growth, which it ought to have
had. The Causes are either external or internal: the external causes do
either kill the Child, deprive it of its natural Nourishment, or loosen the
bands, by which the Child is fastened in the Womb. Things that kill the Child
are, the Stink of a Candle, or such abominable Smells, such things as are
antipatheticall to the Womb, and provoke the Courses, strong purges, or the
Child may be killed by violent Commotions of the Mind, as Anger, Sadness,
Terror, etc. and many times things longed for, and not obtained, kill the
Child. If the Mother undergo Penury or Famine, or lose much Blood, the Child
wants Nourishment. The Bands, by which the Child is fastened to the Womb, may
be loosned by violent Exercise, dancing, running, riding, being jumbled in a
Cart or Coach, by some fall, lifting, or carrying: any thing which causes a
violent motion of the Belly, as Coughing, Sneezing, Vomiting, Convulsions, etc.
or immoderate Copulation. Internal causes of Abortion may be attributed, to
the Humors, to the Child, to the Womb. Humors offend in excess or defect; in
excess, in a plethorick and full constitution, when more Blood flows to the
Womb, then is requisite to nourish the Child, and flows to the Veins, so the
Courses flowing provoke the expulsive Faculty, and drive forth the Child.
Defect of Humors fit to nourish, spring from such causes, which destroy the
Nourishment or draw it from the Child, as long fasting, loathing, and vomiting
up of all Food, immoderate bleeding at the Nose, Womb, or Haemorhoids, or a
Looseness, or any thing that makes the Body lean or weak.

The causes attributed to the Child are, if the Child be over great, if there
be more then one, for the womb overladen, does exclude the Child before the fit
time: likewise if the Child be dead, Nature desires to be rid of it. In respect
of the Womb, if it be any way diseased or defective, that it cannot open as the
Child grows bigger: or if it be moist or slack, it cannot contain the Child,
but Abortion must necessarily follow.

Abortion when it happens is known: there are signs preceding it, which do
foretell Abortion to follow: her Breasts grow little and flaggy, she feels a
heaviness about the Loius and Hips, she has no appetite to eat, nor desire to
stir, she has a shivering by Fits, she has Straightness of the Sides and
Belly above the Navell, and a pain in her Head: plenty of Milk flowing from the
Dugs, shows that the Child is weak, and danger of Abortion. If pains about the
Reins, Loins, and Share, torment the Woman, then know that Abortion is hard at
hand: the same judge, if Blood or Water burst out and flow; and the Situation
of the Child is changed from the middle of the Belly to the Bottom. If any of
these or the like Symptoms befall a Woman with Child after any external cause
of Abortion, as Blow, Fall, etc. let the Woman betake herself to her Bed and
take such Medicines which prevent Abortion.

Prognostics of Abortion are thus made: Women are more endangered by Abortion,
then by a natural, and timely Birth, because in a timely Birth the Vessels and
Ligaments are loosned and opened of their own accord, but in Misearriage they
are broken in sunder; the like you may perceive between the Stalk of ripe and
unripe fruit. Women many times become barren by Miscartiage, because the womb
is rent, and its nature all disposition much altered. Much bleeding, seconded
with Convulsions, raving, and fainting, is always deadly. If an Inflammation
of the Womb follow Abortion, it is deadly. In young Women, who never bore Child
before, it is worst, because the passage is narrower, and they more
unaccustomed to pains. The bigger the Child is, the more the danger. Women who
have moist and slippery Wombs, do often miscarry and with little danger.

To prevent Miscarriage, you must, before and after she is with Child,
endeavor to remove all evil dispositions of the Body or Womb, that may cause
Miscarriage, if Blood abound open a Vein, purge the peccant Humors, strengthen
the Womb: but if the Woman be with Child, beware how you bleed, except it be in
the first month, and the Body full of Blood: and in this case, let Purges be
gentle and often reiterated. To conclude, to streng then the Womb fetch
Medicines from the 73 Chapter.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of hard Travel in Childbirth.
HArd Labor is when more vehement Pains and dangerous Symptoms happen to
Women in Travel, and continue a longer time. There are diverse causes, some
whereof may be assigned to the weakness of the Woman's Body, Leanness or
Dryness as well as Fatness of the Body, her Age, or Sicknesses, as the Stone
or preternaturall Tumor in the Bladder, or any Disease of the womb. Other
causes may be assigned to the Child, when its Body or Head is too big, when
there are two, or when the Child is dead: or when it endeavors to come forth
with his Feet, Hands, Back, Belly, or Breech, etc. A cold and dry Air, and
Northern Wind, streightneth the Body, and drives the Spirits inward, and is
obnoxious to the Child's first entrance into the world. If the Air be more hot
then ordinary, it is as bad as the former, for it dissipates the Spirits,
exhausts the Strength, and introduces feavourish Distempers into the Bodies of
Mother and Child. Meats of a hard digesture or astringing quality taken a
little before the time of Delivery, Sleepiness and Sortishnesse, the Retention
of Excrements, all vehement Passions of the Mind, want of an expert Midwife,
and Women to assist the laboring Woman, may be causes of hard Labor.

Hard Labor is easily known to the Woman herself, to the Midwife, and the
Assistants. The time of a natural Birth ought to be accomplished in the space
of twenty four hours, if the Woman continue a longer time, it is hard Labor.
If her pains be weak and long before they return, and more about her Back then
Privityes, the causes may easily be known; many you may gather from the
Relation of the Woman in Travel, her Leanness, Weakness, Fatness, and Age
is perceived. Diseases of the Womb and Bladder may be known by their proper
Signs. The Bigness, and disorderly Posture of the Child, is soon seen by an
expert Midwife. If the Child be dead, you may know it by these Signs, the
Breasts of the Woman become flat and flaggy, her Eyes hollow and troubled, her
Face and Lips are of a pale and leaden color, her Belly is cold and there is a
Sense of Weight: there is no Motion felt, though you apply something wetred in
the Decoction of Tansy warm to her Navell. When the Woman turns, the Child
sways that way like Lead. If the Afterbirth come away before the Child, it is
a Sign of the Death of the Child. And if the Child comes not away, it soon
putrifieth, and stinketh, and stinking Moisture flows from the womb, and
their Breath stinketh.

Hard Labor is dangerous, for sometimes the Mother, sometimes the Child, and
sometimes both do lose their lives. Sleepy Diseases and Convulsions, if they
befall a Woman in Travel, death is at hand. If the Woman be in Travel above
three days, it is likely the Child will die. If the Woman fall a sneezing in
her Travel it is good, says Hippocrates. If the Child be dead, the danger is
exceeding great; especially, if it be not brought soon away, for it will cause
Fevers, Faintings, Convulsions, dead Sleeps, and death it self.

In difficult Labor, first all causes, which hinder the Birth, must be
removed, if it be possible; then such things as further the Birth must be
administered. An Ounce of Oil of sweet Almonds, and a Dram of Confectio
Alchermes given in Broth is good. Burn white Wine with a little Saffron and
Cinnamon, afterward dissolve a little Alchermes, this I have found very
powerful to hasten the Birth. If you find this Medicine too gentle, make a
Julep of more efficacy, thus: Take of the Water of Mugwort, and Vervain, of
each, two Ounces: the Sirrup of Maidenhair, one Ounce: Confectio Alchermes,
half a Dram: Dittany of Creet, and both Birth worts, of each, one Scruple:
Oil of Cinnamon, five Drops, mix them, and make a Potion: Oil of Amber, fifteen
Drops; or the Extract of Saffron, five Grains; may be either of them mixed
instead of the Oil of Cinnamon. Provoke sneezing, and open the lower Veins if
need be. Then let the Midwife anoint the Mouth of the womb, with the Oil of
Lillyes and Sweet Almonds, and the like: and foment the Belly with a mollifying
Decoction: and in a dangerous case give a sharp Clister. Some things have a
peculiar property to help the Birth, as the Stone Aetitis, Loadstone, and
Storax held near the Privityes; the Eyes of a Hare taken out in the month of
March and dried, use it as the Stones, and when the Woman is delivered take
them away, lest it draw out the Womb. Some commend the Gall of an Hen, applied
to the Navell.

If the Child be dead, give the same things before mentioned, but it is
convenient to make them stronger, by adding Savin Water and the Leaves of Savin
dried, the Troches of Mirrh and Castor. Then foment the Privityes and Share
with a mollifying Decoction, to which add Briony Roots, and the Roots of wild
Cucumber, round Birth-wort, and the like. And put up a Pessary made in this
manner: Take of the Roots of round Birth-wort, Orice, black Hellebore;
Coloquintida and Mirrh, of each, one Dram: Galbanum, Opopanax, of each, half
a Dram, with Ox Gall, make a Pessary and apply it. If all this will not do,
you must implore the help of the Surgeon.

If the Afterbirth be retained, you must endeavor to expel it by such
Medicines as expel the dead Child: to which add these which are said to have a
specific property, the Stones of a gelded Horse, dried and powdered, and given
as much as will ly on a three pence, two or three times as need requires, is
commended by Gesnerus and Augenius. Some commend the Juice of an Onion given in
Wine, or an Onion held in the Woman's mouth, between her teeth, and the Juice
squeezed out and swallowed, and a Draught of White Wind drunk after it: Or 20
or 30 drops of the Oil of Juniper drunk in Wine; or the Juice of Lovage taken
in Renish Wine.

If her Purgations flow immoderately, that you fear the Death of the Woman; or
in case her Purgations be suppressed, which may cause dangerous Symptoms, have
Recourse to the Chapters treating of those Maladyes.

Many Women are much troubled with after-pains, which do much afflict them, and
these pains, are caused either by the Thickness, or Sharpness of the Blood;
or by Wind. If the Blood be thick, you may know it by its clotting: if thin, by
its Tenuity or yellow Color. If the Blood be thick, give this Julep: Mugwort
water, two Ounces: sirrup of Violets, and oil of sweet Almonds, of each, half
an Ounce: If the Blood be sharp, add to the former, the Musilage of Quince
Seeds drawn with Violet Water, half an Ounce: If Wind be the Cause of these
Pains, which you may know by its Motion from one part of the Belly to the
other, then give inwardly and apply outwardly carminative Medicines; Take of
the Seeds of Carrots, one Dram: of Annise, Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, of each, a
Scruple, make them into fine Powder, and give it half at one time in Wine.
Foment her Belly with the Decoction of Bawm, Bay Leaves, Camomill, Calamint,
Mugwort; and the Seeds of Carrots, Caraway, and Cummin, and lay on a Pultise
made of boiled Onions, Camomill Flowers, the Seeds of Flax and Cummin beaten,
and Barley Meal.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of the Gout and Sciatica.
(...), Arthritis in Greek, in Latin Articularis Morbus, is the
Joynt-Sicknesse, caused by an Influx of Humors into them, which causes pain
in the Membranes, Tendons, and Nervs. Authors do commonly make four sorts of
Gouts, according to the diversity of the Joints affected, as (...) Chiragra the
Hand-Gout, of (...) a Hand; (...), Gonagra when it is in the Knees, of (...)
the Knee: (...) Podagra, when it is in the Foot, because the Greeks call the
Foot (...): (...) Ischias, the Hip-Gout or Sciatica, of the word (...) the Hip.
The immediate cause of the Gout is a wheyish Humor flowing to the Joints, and
by its Quantity stretches the sensible parts, or by its Sharpness twitcheth
them, and this Humor flows not only from the Brain and Head, but from all
parts of the Body. The cause may be attributed to all Meats, which increase raw
and wheyish Humors; Meats of a gross Substance hard to be digested, and such
as afford plenty of Excrements; Gluttony, Drunkenness, immoderate Venery,
(therefore the Gout is called the daughter of Bacchus and Venus;) long Sleep,
and unseasonable Watchings, Fear, Sadness, continual care, and intermission
of such Excercises or Evacuations as men have been accustomed to, and the like.

The beginning of the Gout is known thus, there is a more exquisite and quick
Sense in the Joints then formerly: they are easily hurt, as by a new shoe,
walking, the least touch against any hard thing. Commonly a Fever ushers it
in: and at its approach there is a kind of unusual Heat felt in the Joints,
and a Motion, as if some living Creature were therein: after which, follows a
tormenting pain in the Joints, for the most part beginning in the great Toe,
and attended with Redness and Swelling.

The Signs of the causes, or the Humors, which are mixed with the wheyish
Humors, are thus considered. If choler be mixed with the wheyish Humor, the
Urine is thin, yellowish or red, the pain great and violent, the Fever comes
to the height, the part is swelled, is red or pale, but very hot, the
application of cold things gives ease. If Phlegm be mixed, there is a soft and
loose swelling of the part, the pain not so violent; the Urine is thick and
troubled, little or no Heat, and hot things give ease. If Melancholy be the
Humor mixed, the Temper of the Body inclines to Melancholy, and there is a
weariness felt all over, the part is of an obscure Color like Lead, the pain
deep, and the Urine thick and melancholy.

The Gout is no dangerous Disease, but it continues long, and is attended with
violent pain, for the most Part to the end of a man's life, and sometimes it is
a means of long life; because Nature does drive the vicious Humors to the
Joints, which, if they should fall upon the more noble parts, would be a means
of great Diseases, if not death it self. But in weak Bodies, that are decayed
by Sickness or Age, that Nature cannot expel these Humors to the Joints,
many dangerous Diseases are ingendered. He that has no knots in his Joints, is
inclinable to Labor, and is for the most part soluble; by a skillfull
Physician, may be cured. An haereditary Gout is seldom or never cured. If the
Veins of a gouty Person do swell with black Blood, there is hopes that the Gout
leaves him. If the Gout does not return at its season it is dangerous, unless
the matter be taken away by Medicines, for it is an argument that Nature is
weak, and cannot expel it.

The Cure of the Gout is to be performed by stopping the Flux of the Humors
into the Joints: by removing the Humors in the Joints: and to abate the
Sharpness of the pain. If the Patient be full of Blood and strong, let him
bleed in a great Quantity, or let him blood often, till the plenitude of Blood
be sufficiently abated. Then let him be purged with strong Medicaments, which
may evacuate the stirred Humor, and turn the cause from the Joints. Whilst you
are purging, let Ointments or Plasters, be applied to the Joint above the part
affected, of an astringeing and drying property; by which the Humors may be
intercepted, that they may not so much nor so forcibly fall into the Joint, Let
your Ointments be made of the Roots of Snake-weed and Tormentill, Bolearmenick,
Sanguis Draconis, Pomgranate Rinds, Balaustians, red Roses, the Whites of Eggs,
Vinegar, Oil of Roses, of unripe Olives, and the like. If the Patient be strong
and easy to vomit, give a gentle Vomit to carry away the Humors in and about
the Stomach; soon after vomiting purge strongly. Sweating Medicines are very
good to discuss the wheyish Matter; if a Fever be present, give Hartshorn
with Carduus water. In a Gout without a Fever, the Decoction of Sassafras,
Salsa, and China, may be given; it is not amiss if the Heat thereof be
allayed, by boiling with it Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Burrage, Buglosse, and
the like. The Waters of Bath do provoke Sweat, and do readily and profitably
discuss the Matter contained in the Joints. Forrestus commends the Decoction
of the Root of the great Burdock, for this purpose. Likewise a Decoction of
Elder, Bay Leaves, Sage, Rosemary, and such like, receiving the Vapor in a
sweating Tub. Afterward come to local Medicines: Amatus Lusitanus does
commend the Milk of a Goat, milked warm upon the part affected, or you may make
a Cataplasm with it and white bread, and the Musilage of the Roots of
Marshmallows, the Leaves of Henbane, Violets, and the like, and if the pulp of
Cassia, and Venice-Treacle be added, it will be much more effectual. The
distilled Water of Frogs Spawn is very good against the pains of the hot Gout,
if the part be bathed therewith; with it you may mingle the Oil of Calves Feet,
or with the Flowers of Camomill, Melilot, Roses, Mullein, Mallows beaten, you
may bring it into the form of a Poultis. Green Tobacco leaves are much
commended, and so is a living Whelp laid to the gouty part. When the Pain
rages violently, use Narcoticks: as Plantane, Lettice, Henbane, Housleek,
Nightshade, Mandrakes, Purslane, and Poppy Heads; but be sure you let them not
ly on too long, for they are inimicall to the natural Heat, and to the Nervs.
Some do commend this Fomentation: Take Spirit of Wine, well tinctured with
Saffron, four Ounces: Camphire, one Scruple: boil them a little, and dissolve
one Dram of Opium; and bathe the pained part. The Oil of Wax is good to ease
the Gout, and the Oil of Man's Bones is preferred before all other, and it is
thus made: Take the Bones of a man fresh and unburied, break them small, and
let them ly in Oil till they have drunk up as much as they can, then distill
them in a Retort. The Root of Briony and Cuckow-pintle, bruised and mingled
with Cow dung, is an excellent Cataplasm. I might here fill a Volume with
Receipts against the Gouts; but passing by all, I shall only insert one or two
out of Quercetanus his Dispensatory: Take Brine, Salt, and the Urine of a Boy;
of each, equal parts: distill them, and dip linen Clothes in the Water, and
apply them to the place affected, changing them often. Take green Elder Leaves
and Flowers, of each, one pound: beat them in a Mortar, and macerate them in
Aqua-Vitae, three days, then distill them till all be dry, use it as before.
Take of rectifyed Spirit of Wine, two pound; of the best Honey, one pound:
distill them in Balneo Roris, from which will come two Liquors, the first
waterish; the second strong and sulphurous: keep them by themselves. To the
Foeces add of oriental Saffron whole, one Ounce and an half; Venice Turpetine,
two Ounces: Castor, six Drachms: Tartar calcined white, half a pound: Salt
dissolved, one Ounce; Phlegm of Vitriol not separated from the Spirit, four
Ounces: Lie made of the Ashes of Vine Branches, two pound: macerate them twenty
four hours, then distill them till all be dry, keep this also by it self. To
the Dregs remaining pour on the former Water, which you kept, macerate and
distill as before; Lastly, put all these Waters together, and distill them in
Balneo Roris, wet linen Cloths therein, and apply it to the gowty place.
Riverius Lib. 10. Chapter 1. p. 378. prescibeth another, which he accounts
inferior to none, which penetrates into the Roots of the Disease, and
resolves and attenuateth the salt, tartarous, and stony Matter in the Joints;
and he supposes it to be that which the aforesaid Quercetanus reservs to
himself, as his Master-peice to brag of; it is thus made: Take of ^slaked Lime,
four pound: slake it in River water as much as is convenient, and let it stand
in a Wine Cellar the space of three days, that the Salt may be extracted the
better: afterward boil it a little and strain it through Hippocrates Sleev. In
twenty Pints of this Liquor, quench first Plates of Steel, then of Copper made
red hot, seven or nine times; thirdly, ten Ounces of Vitriol calcined till it
be white; fourthly, half a pound of Antimony melted in a Crucible: fifthly,
half a pound of Litharge or Ceruse, heated in a Crucible: sixthly, white
Precipitate once washed, one Ounce and an half: lastly, Erasse burnt and finely
powdered, half an Ounce: after all this, let the Water stand in a Cellar the
space of 10 days, afterward boil it and strain it, and apply it with linen
Rags. To raise Blisters upon the part, has been found by experience to be very
effectual. In the use of all Medicines, take special notice which do harm or
hurt, for the Nature and Complexions of Men are diverse, and the Excrements bred
in several men are of diverse kinds. Hence it is, that the same Disease does
much differ in several persons; and what cures one, does prejudice another;
Therefore the Physician ought to have several Medicines in readiness, and use
th^se that Reason and his Experience does approve of.

To prevent its return, let the Patient bleed twice in a year, viz. at Spring
and Fall; and purge 4 times in a year, and make use of sweating Drinks, and
frequent sulphurous and nitrous Baths.

The Sciatica differs nor from the other Gout only in its Situation, which
is in the Hip, extending the pain to the top of the Buttock, the Loins, and
Ossacrunt, and reaches down the Hip and Leg even to the Foot.

This peculiar Prediction belongs to this Disease, that if it continues
long, it puts the Hip out of Joint.

The Cure is performed almost in the same manner with the other Gout. First
open the Vein in the Arm on the same side, afterward open the lower Veins on
the same side, viz. Vena Poplitea about the knee, or the Vein near the outward
Ancle called the Sciatica Vein, if you open the Vein on the contrary side, it
will not do amiss; bleeding the Haemorrhoid Veins by Leeches does wonderfully
help those that are Hipgouty, for there is a great consent between those Veins.
But be not too forward to let Blood unless you find Blood to abound. Then let
the Humors be purged strongly, by Pillulae Faetidae, or Hermodactylls, or the
Powder of Hermodactylls compound, but beware how you give the latter except to
strong Bodies. Mercurius Dulois with Scammony is much commended, and the
Chemists do much esteem of Mercuriall and antimoniall Purges; and many prefer
Vomits before all. Then apply resolving Decoctions made of the Roots of Briony,
Danewort, the Leaves of Ground Pine, Mint, Marjarom, Sage, Savin, Rue, Rosemary,
Pennyroyall, etc. the Flowers of Camomill, Melilor, and Mallows; the Seeds of
Flax, Fenugreek, Bay and Juniper Berryes, and such like, and foment the part
therewith. Also Juniper Berryes fried in a pan, (being first beaten,) with Salt
and Bran, and moistened with Canary Wine, and put in a Bag, and applied warm.
With the aforenamed Ingredients, Cataplasms may be made; and with the Oils
following let the part be anointed, viz. Oil of Camomill, Dill, Nord, Orice,
Rue, Scorpions, Tiles, Turpentine, of Foxes, and the like: the Ointment of
Marshmallows, and Spanish Soap dissolved in Spirit of Wine. This is much
commended: Take a good Quantity of Snails, bruise them well in a Mortar, then
make Paste with them and Rye Flower, adding a little Spirit of Wine: and fasten
it to a Spit and roast it; a Liquor will drop from it, with which anoint the
part, for it is of excellent Virtue. Then lay on this Plaster: Take of
Shio-Pitch and Rozin, of each, two Ounces: Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar,
and Emplastrmm Diachylon cum Gummis, of each, one Ounce: Brimstone and
Hermodactylls powdered, of each, three Drachms: Turpentine, three Drachms, and
Wax sufficient; make a Plaster. If the Disease do still continue, proceed to a
Vesicatory: add to the former Mass for a Plaster, Cantharides their Wings
taken off, Staves-acre, and Mustard Seed, of each, one Dram. In the whole
course of the Cure let not frequent Clisters be neglected. And if the Disease
be old, make an Issue in the Leg on the same side, on the outside of the Leg.
If you find Symptoms of a Catarrh; which may occasion the Sciatica by a
Defluxion of Humors, make an Issue in the hinder part of the Head, and use
other means to correct the Distempers of the Brain, See Chap. 9. by this means
has the Sciatica been cured, when all other means failed. Sometimes the Matter
causing the Sciatica, does imposthumate; and after it is opened, there remains
a filthy Ulcer, which, for the most part, pineth the Patient away, and brings
him into a Consumption; The Cure whereof belongs to an expert Surgeon.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Of one day-Feaver.
THis Disease is called in Greek (...), Ephemera, in Latin Diaria Febris, in
English One day-Feaver, because, for the most part, it finisheth in one day of
its own Nature. It is caused by some internal cause, as some hot fiery Swelling
on some part of the Body, or when some hot Excrements, shut up in some part, do
offend the Heart, by Retention of Excrements and Obstruction of the Vessels, by
which the Pores of the Skin are shut, and Transpiration is hindered. Or
secondly it is caused by external causes, as vehement Motions of the Body or
Mind, by which the Spirits are inflamed, by being heated with the Sun, or Fire,
by Surfeiting, Drunkenness, especially, with Meats and Drinks of a hot Nature.

By what has gone before, you may know this Fever: the Pulse is swift and
great, and so he fetches his Breath; he is very hot, and his Head aketh. He
has no Shivering, Cold, nor Weariness, unless it came by the Heat of the
Sun, or by cold. You must give the Sick such things as are cooling and
moistning, as cooling Broths, Barley Cream, Ptisan Drink, small Beer and Sugar,
Water and Sugar, or mix Sirrup of Violets, Lemmons, or Maidenhair, with his
Drink. If the Disease was caused by the Heat of the Sun, give him cooling
things, and lay him in a cooling Lodging, and anoint his Temples with Vinegar
of Roses. If he took his Fever, being in the cold, provoke Sweat; the like
observe if the Pores be obstructed. If it come by over eating and drinking, let
him take a Clister; If evil Humors abound in the Blood and Body, open a Vein
and purge; if putrified Humors lodge in the Stomach, vomit. If it continue
above three days, it degenerates into a simple Synochus, putrid, or Hectic
Fever.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Of the Fever Synochus non-putrida.
IF the Fever aforesaid light upon a plethorick Body, or one who is gross and
thick skinned, it turns to a simple Synochus.

It is known by the corpulent and swelling Habit of the Body, high Color of
the Face. He breathes with difficulty, he is much pained in his Head, and his
Temples beat strongly. The Pulse is orderly, but quick and full. The Urine
little differs from its natural color, yet a little thick and red: and the
Heat is not very violent. It lasts to the fourth, and sometimes to the
seventh day; if it ends not then, it degenerates into a putrid Fever.

The Cure is to be performed by blood-letting, by cooling, and by opening the
Pores of the Body. Before blood-letting, if the Patient be costive, and his
Body foul, give an emollient and laxative Clister. Then give cooling Juleps,
made of the Decoction of Barley and cool Herbs, or with their distilled Waters,
as of Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Buglosse, Borrage, and the like, with the
Sirrups of Succory, Lemmons, Vinegar, Violets, Pomgranates, and the like,
adding some drops of Oil of Vitriol; or boil in the distilled Waters
Triasantalon, or Diamargariton frigidum, lest the Waters increase Crudityes by
their Rawness. Or you may make an Emulsion of Almonds, the great cold Seeds,
and white Poppy Seeds, with Barley water, or the distilled Water of the
aforegoing cooling Herbs. Galen advises, to give the Patient cold water in
great abundance, till his color fade, but beware this Cure unless the Patient
be strong, corpulent, and not full of ill Humors, and that he take it in the
height of the Fit. I confess I have seen many so cured, and have experimented
it upon my own Body, but durst not advise it. Anoint the Liver and Loins with
Unguentum Rosatum, Refrigerans Galeni, or Ceratum Santalinum. Or make an
Epithem of the distilled Waters of Endive, Succory, Sorrel, etc. the three
Sanders, and Powder of Diamargariton frigidum. If the Disease end not quickly
after bleeding, purge with gentle things, that do not heat, nor much stir the
Humors, as Rubarb, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Sirrup of Roses, Catholicon, and
such like.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of continual putrid Fevers.
I Shall describe the causes and Cures of all putrid Fevers in one Chapter,
for though there are diverse sorts, yet the Cure is almost the same in all;
therefore, laying aside particular precepts, let the Judgment and Dexterity of
every Physician put a difference between them. I shall likewise wave many nice
descriptions and definitions of Fevers, first, as not beneficial to the young
Student in Physic: secondly, as not befitting this Volume.

Synochus putrida is engendered of the same causes as the simple Synochus, as
the shutting up of the Pores of the skin, and Obstruction of the Vessels by
much Blood, or clammy Humors; by which means, the Transspiration of fuliginous
Vapors is hindered, and Putrefaction is bred in the Blood.

A continual Tertian does every third day afflict the Patient more then
ordinary, and is caused by choleric Humors putrefying in the Vena Cava. And
it is caused by all things that may breed Choler, as violent Exercise, hot and
dry Air, Fasting, Watching, Meats hot and dry, and a hot and dry Distemper of
the Liver.

A Quoridian continuing, is a putrefying of phlegmatic Humors in the Veins;
and afflicts the Patient more then ordinary every day, and does for the most
part assail phlegmatic persons; and because Phlegm is not easily putrifyed,
this kind of Fever is seldom seen.

The continual Quartane is that which has its Exacerbations or Fits every
fourth day, and it is caused by the Putrefaction of Melancholy in the Vena
cava, and is caused of any thing that breeds Melancholy and causes it to
putrify.

Of these Fevers there are accidental differences, raised from their distinct
Symptoms. First, Febris ardens, or a burning Fever, which is accompanied with
these Symptoms, viz. an ardent burning Heat, and an unquenchable Thirst; which
is also divided into two sorts, a Legitimate, or bastard burning Fever, a
Synochus ardens and Ardens periodica, and they differ one from the other, only
as the Choler causing them is more or less sharp, and nearer or farther from
the heart. A Second sort is Febris Colliquans, a melting Fever, which in
regard of the greatness of the Heat, does melt the fat, and Flesh, and
sometimes the Blood, and dissolveth it by insensible Transpiration, Sweat,
Urine, or Stool. It is caused by a sharp, thin, and choleric Matter,
vehemently inflamed, unto which is joined many times a malignant and pestilent
Quality. The third sort is called Febris Horrifica, in which the Patient is
troubled with shaking Firs; and it is caused by chollerick and phlegmatic
Humors mingled together, which being unequally moved, stirs up quaking;
either because the thin and sharp Humors do twitch the sensible membranous
parts, or the inflamed Choler putrefying, puts in Motion the Crudityes; or
else Nature does seek to shake off the crude undigested Humors, by this means
the Heat being driven back to the Center, the extreme parts of the Body become
cold; and afterward, the Heat coming forth again, they grow hot. Fourthly,
there is another kind called Assades Febris, in which the Patient is very
unquiet, tumbleth and tosseth, and is sick in his Stomach, and vomiteth. The
fifth sort is called Elodes, in which the Patient, by reason of Putrefaction
and Malignity of Humors, continually sweateth, by which the Substance of the
Body is wasted. The sixth sort is Febris Syncopalis, because the Patient often
swoons and faints away and it is caused by thin, sharp, and venomous Choler,
or by Phlegm, or abundance of Crudityes, together with a weakness of the
Stomach. The last sort is Epiala Febris, in which the Patient is sensible of
Heat and Cold at one and the same time; and this is caused by glassy Phlegm
mingled with bitter Choler, the Phlegm causes a Sense of Cold, and the
Choler of Heat: or else it is caused by glassy Phlegm alone, partly putrified,
and partly void of Putrefaction. For glassy and tough Phlegm does not quickly
putrify, but by degrees, and that which is not putrified following that which
is putrified, hence comes a Sense of Cold from the first, and Heat from the
latter.

There are yet other sorts of accidental differences of continual Fevers,
which are called Symptomatick Fevers, which arise from the Inflammation and
Putrefaction of the Humors in some of the Bowels, and of this kind are those
Fevers, which accompany the Frenzy, the Plurisy, Squinzy, the Inflammation of
the Lungs or Liver, and other Inflammations, Ulcers, or Imposthumes of the
internal parts, and may be known by the defects of the parts, which cause
them. Yet take this Caution, that all these Fevers which accompany these
Diseases are not Symptomaticall, but sometimes essential, and precede the
Disease, as is commonly seen, that one may be sick three or four days of a
continual Fever, before any pain in the side or Symptom of the Pleurisy
appear, the sam^ you may find preceding the other Diseases, and is an
Observation worth note, and of great Moment in the practice of Physic.

There are other peculiar and extraordinary Causes, which many times happen, of
which Zechius propounds an extraordinary example, of a certain Infant, scarce
two years old, who had a continual Fever, attended with grievous Symptoms,
viz. Unquietness, Convulsions, and Vomitings; the external parts were cold,
and the internal parts burned with Heat, for which cause they judged that some
Malignity was joined to the Fever, which is seldom accompanied with such
Symptoms: at length the cause was found to arise from Blood putrefying in the
Stomach; for the Infant being Tongue-tied, and a little before cut by a
Surgeon, the Veins, beingcut, shed Blood, which, for want of care, fell into
the Stomach; after the taking of Oil of sweet Almonds, it vomited clotted
Blood, then by the help of a Clister, it voided more downwards, and the Fever
and its Symptoms ceased.

These Fevers are known to be continual by their Continuity, and the
Putrefaction is known by a more sharp and biting Heat then ordinary; the Pulse
is great, quick, and unequal, the Systole is quicker then the Diastole,
because Nature does more strive to expel the sooty Vapors, then to draw in
cold Air. The Fit begins with a cold Shaking, or some of these Symptoms,
viz. Weariness, Watching, troubled Sleeps, difficult Breathing, Pain of the
Head and Stomach, Plenty of Excrements, Yawning, and Retching: when it comes to
the height, these Symptoms are heightened, and seconded with Giddiness,
Ravings, Hiccoughs, Heart-burning, Thirst, and Blackness and Roughness of the
Tongue. Particular Signs demonstrate peculiar differences. The Synochus putrida
has the same Signs, which are proper to Synochus simplex, but more vehement.
Signs of a Fever from Choler, are burning Pain, the Pulse swift and quick, a
fiery and crude Urine, without Sediment at the beginning, chollerick Vomits and
Stools, Thirst, and Bitterness of the Mouth, Dryness and Blackness of the
Tongue, Want of Sleep, Raving, and the like. A Synochus putrida differs from a
Synochus biliosa in this, that the first has Fits every third day, the other
keeps the same Tenor.

A continual Quotidian is known by these Signs, the Heat at first is more
mild, afterward more sharp: the Pulse is not so quick nor great as in the
former; the Urine is at first white and troubled, afterward red and thick;
little Thirst, no Sweat unless salt Phlegm abound, the Face is swelled, bloat,
and of a Lead Color, and all Signs of Phlegm appear.

A continual Quartane is known by this, that the Symptoms are not so violent
as in the chollerick Fever, and sharper then in the phlegmatic or Quotidian.
An appearance of cold, dry, melancholy-Symptomes, and the Fits invade the
Patient more then ordinary every fourth day.

The burning Fever is known by the Signs of a Fever proceeding from Choler.

A melting Fever is known by a fat and oily Urine chollerick, fat, clammy, and
stinking Stools, the Nose sharp, and a sudden Consumption of the whole Body.

I need not tell you how, shivering, or tumbling and tossing Fevers are known.

Elodes is known by inordinate Sweats, abundance of Urine, and thick by reason
of Putrefaction; the Stools show an apparent Wasting, and the loss of Strength
does manifest the same.

Syncopalis Febris is known by the swooning Fits: Epiala, by Heat and Cold felt
together: and Symptomatick Fevers, from the Diseases from which they proceed.

Signa Prognostica: Synochus putrida is not without danger. If Signs of
Concoction appear about the fourth day, the Disease will terminate about the
seventh day. If Concoction appear not, and the Patient's Face is swelled, it
will continue long. The redder the Urine is, the better, if Concoction appear;
but with Signs of Crudity it threatens death. White Urine is worst and
threatens death. Chollerick Fevers are acute and dangerous, and so much the
more, as the Symptoms are violent, and increased above the natural Temper of
the Patient. A continual Quotidian continues long for the most part, because
of the thickness of the Humors, the more Evacuations the better; beware lest
it degenerate into a Chachexy or Dropsy. A continual Quartane is rare:
sometimes the quartane Ague degenerates thereunto, and is deadly, for the most
part. The melting, sweating, shaking, tu^bling, swooning Fevers, are
dangerous. Symptomatick Fevers are to be judged from the excellency of the
part affected, the Nature of the Distemper, and the Validi^y of the Patient's
Strength.

Medicines in a choleric Fever ought to be cooling and moistning; in
phlegmatic and melancholy, more warm and attenuate. Let the Air be cold and
moist, let cool Water be sprinkled upon the ground, with Herbs and Flowers, let
the covering of his Bed be light and thin. Let his diet (if he eat any thing)
be very sharp, thin, and slender. Let his drink be Barley Water, and his Meat
Barley Broths, Pavados, and such like. If the Fever be of long continuance, let
the Sick make use of a fuller Diet, viz. of the Broth or Flesh of Chickens,
Hens, Capons, Partridges, Veal, Mutton, or Gellyes made with them. In his drink
or Barley Water let cool Herbs be boiled, and give it a grateful Relish with
Spirit of Vitriol. If the Fever arise from not and thin Choler, or if there
be a Consumption of the Lungs, Inflammation of the Stomach, bloody Flux, Ulcers
of Kidneys and Bladder, or Pissing of Blood; sharp things are not good, but
rather such things as gently thicken, as Barley Water, with Sirrup of Violets,
or of dried Roses. Sleep is very good and Watching hurtful, yet overmuch Sleep
does overwhelm the natural Heat, and hinder Evacuation: which ought to be
made, and nothing to be retained, which ought naturally to be expelled. First,
Blood-letting does diminish Plenitude of the Body and Veins, pulls back the
Humors which cause Obstructions cooles the Body, and makes it perspicable,
keeps back Putrefaction, and furthers Concoction. Therefore after the Patient
has had a Stool by Clister or otherwise, open a Vein, and bleed the Patient
according to his Strength and present State. But this observe, that you bleed
not in the extremity of the Fit. When Weakness or Age will not permit a Vein
to be opened, Copping-Glasses must be applied. Frictions must not be used but
in swooning Fevers. After you have let Blood, once, twice, or thrice, if you
see occasion, come to purge the morbifick Matter; the Medicines for this intent
must be Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Catholicum, Electuarium lenitivum, Diaprunum
simplex, Sirrup of Roses, and of Succory with Rubarb. Some do object against
Rubarb for its Heat, Manna and Sirrup of Roses because it is sweet and soon
turned into Choler; but being mingled with cool things, or given in cool
Waters, they can do no hurr. If the Stomach is much afflicted, and the Patient
is troubled with Vomiting, you must understand that Nature endeavors to cast
out her enemy that way, and she ought to be assisted by a Vomit. The gentler
sort, and such as are to be chosen for weak people, is the Oil of Almonds, or
common Oil given in Barley Water; you must give a Pint at the least, or else it
will hardly work the effect. Sirrup of Vinegar or Oxymel given in the Decoction
of Radishes. Every day or every other day give an emollient and refrigerating
Clister, such as Barley, Mallows, Violet leaves, and Mercury. Flowers of
Camomill, and Melilot, Seeds of Dill and Fennel, etc. cooling Herbs are,
Lettice, Endive, Succory; Housleek, a Blade or two, Water-Lillyes: dissolve
therein Cassia, Catholicon, Diaprunum simplex, the Honey of Violets, and
Mercury, Oil of Water-Lillyes, Violets, etc.

If the Disease spring from Phlegm, leave out the cooling Herbs, and dissolve
in it Hiera Picra, Diaphaenicon, Honey of Roses and Mercury, Oil of Camomill,
Dill, or common Oil. No absolute and perfect Purgation ought to be administered,
till the Morbisick cause be ripened and digested, which must be done by Juleps,
thus: Take of the distilled Waters of Endive, Succory, and Sorrel, of each,
two Ounces; Sirrup of Lemmons and Violets, of each, one Ounce and an half; a
little Oil of Vitriol to sharpen it; make a Julep, and let the Sick take a
Spoenfull or two, often. Or you may make a Decoction of the Roots of Sorrel,
Succory, Maidenhair, Endive, Dandelion, Tamarinds, and such like, and make a
Julep with the aforesaid sirrups, or the Sirrup of Vinegar and Pomgranats. If
the Choler by its sharpness cause a Flux, make Juleps which have a thickning
Quality: Take of the waters of Lettice, Purslane, and Plantane, of each, three
Ounces: the Sirrups of Violets and Water-Lillyes, of each, one Ounce; of red
Poppyes, half an Ounce; mix them and make a Julep. If the Fever comes from a
phlegmatic cause, you must give things more cutting and attenuating, as a
Decoction of Agrimony, Maidenhair, Betony, Carduus Benedictus, and the five
opening Roots, Liquorish, Raisons, and such like; and the Sirrups of Vinegar,
Maiden hair, and Byzantius, and Spirit of Vitriol. If it proceed from
Melancholy make a Decoction of Ceterach, Burrage, and Buglosse, Maidenhair,
Fumitory, Dedder scordium, the Bark of Ash, Capers, Tamarisk, and with any of
their Sirrups, viz. Fumitory, Buglosse, etc. make a Julep. Or with such like
Ingredients, (according to the Nature of the peccant Humor) you may make
physical Broths, or Emulsions, and Almond Milks. Likewise, of the aforesaid
Ingredients you may make Epithems, Ointments, and such like, to cool and well
temper the Liver. Altering and preparing Humors used for some days together,
you may make bold to purge with Scommoniate Medicines: as Diaphaenicon,
Diaptugu^ soletivum, Electuarium de succo Rosarum, and Diacarthamum, and such
like, whose Doses you shall find in the last Book. To strengthen dejected
Nature, make use of the Conserve of Buglosse Roots, the leaves of Sorrel, and
Wood-sorrell, the Stalks of Lettice, the Flowers of Burrage, Buglosse, Violets,
Succory, Roses, Pulp of Citrons. These Powders are pood, of Coral, Pearls,
Ivory, Hartshorn, Diamargaritum frigidum, Diatriasantalon, Diarrhodon Abbatis,
Confectio Alchermes and de Hyacintho: with these may the Ingenious make
Electuaryes, or other Compositions according to Art.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Of the Hectic Fever.
AN hectic Fever occupies the solid parts of the Body, as well as the
Spirits; it is an unnatural Heat, of which the Patient is scarce sensible.
This Fever is either primary, and begins of it self, or secundary, and
follows some other Fever. Some begin at the Heart, and some at other parts,
as the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Womb, or other parts inflamed. The causes
of this Fever are external or internal; External causes are all that may
occasion any of the other Fevers. The Internal Causes are burning and
pestilentiall Fevers, which do speedily consume the Moisture of the Heart; or
some lingering Fever. An Inflammation, Ulcer, Putrefaction of any of the inward
parts, may cause an hectic Heaver.

An hectic Fever is known easily, because it is continual, without
increasing or decreasing, saving a little after Meat; the Pulse is little
frequent and quick; the Arteryes are hotter then the other parts; the Urine
appears as of a healthy man, but after long continuance there is an Oil swims
on the top, and a Sediment like to Meal, which signifies the Wasting of the
Body.

An hectic Fever may be cured, unless it be neglected till it come to the
height, that is, when the Eyes are hollow, dry with dry Excrements, the Bones
stick out, and the Color of the Face is gone, the Skin is dry, and the Midriff
so contracted as if the Patient had no Guts, then it is incurable.

If the hectic Fever depend upon the Disease of any other part, the Cure must
be directed to that Discase; and if it be joined with any other Disease,
respect must be had to that Disease. The Cure of the hectic consists more in
a due observance of Diet, then in Medicines. His Diet must be cool and moisten,
and soon nourish; as Chicken Broths, or Broth made of Hens, Capons, Veal, Kid,
Mutton; in which boil French Barley, Lettice; Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Burrage,
Purslane, and such like. The Flesh of young Hares, Pheasants, and young
Partridges are good; Panados, Water Gruell, Barley cream, Rice pottage, with
Almonds or the cold Seeds. Boiled Meat is better then roasted, and if the
Patient eats roasted Meat, let Oranges and Lemmons be his Sauce. For his Diet
likewise may be prepared, Gellyes made of Capons, Knuckles of Veal and Mutton,
Calves Feet, Sheeps Feet, and such like, adding Herbs or other Ingredients that
are cooling, moistning, and cordial. New laid Eggs, boiled rear, are good; and
of Fruit, Apples are much commended, especially Pippins, because they breed
cold Blood. For his drink, let him use Barley Water with cooling Sirrups. Galen
approves of cold Water, with which he says he has saved many from the
Marasmos, which is the Consumption of the radical Moisture of the Body, which
commonly follows this Disease. Great care is to be used in the giving of cold
Water, to decayed people, lest the heat of the Patient should be wholly
extinguished. Motion and much Stirring, and Labor, is not good, yet a little
Exercise before Meat may be allowed of: But above all Excrcises, let him beware
of the Under-sheet. Let his Sleep be moderated; if he be costive, provoke a
Stool by a Suppository, or gentle Clisters. Purges are not to be allowed of,
because the Body has more need of repairing then weakening: yet if the Body be
full of Excrements, you may venture to give gentle Purgers, as Cassia, Manna,
etc. Cooling and altering Juleps, such as are prescribed in the Chapter before
going, the Patient make use of, but let him beware of the too frequent use of
them, lest they diminish his Heat too much. Such Epithems, Unguents, or Oils
mentioned in the aforegoing Chapter, are good to temper the Heat of the Lover.
Lastly, such Medicines, mentioned in the former Chapter, as strengthen Nature
and revive the Spirits may be used, and there is need enough thereof. The worst
Symptom that can attend this Disease is a Looseness: if it so happen, give
Goats or Cows Milk wherein Steel has been quenched, or Rice boild in it, or
Sirrup of Quinces given with the Decoction of French Barley parched, or such
like.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Of the Tertian Ague.
THis Disease is divided into an Exquisite and Bastard Tertian; the exquisite
is terminated in 12 hours; but a bastard lasts longer: if it exceed twenty
four hours it is called Tertiana extensa, a Tertian extended.

The Tertian Ague is Simple, Double, or Triple; the Simple is that which comes
every other day; the Double Tertian comes every day, and shall be
distinguished from the Quotidian in its proper place; and sometimes the Patient
has two Fits in one day. The Triple Tertian is when the Patient has three
Fits in two days.

Choler and such things as engender it, are the cause of this Disease, viz. a
hot and dry Distemper of the Spleen, youthful Age, hot Air, Watchings, Cares,
Anger, Fastings, use of hot Meats, and overmuch Exercise. Those that have hot
Livers, that eat and drink liberally, and such things as breed Crudityes,
Phlegm, and melancholy Humors, are subject to bastard Tertians, by reason of
the Mixture of Choler with the Crudityes.

The exquisite Tertian does always begin with shaking, the Quotidian begins
with a light Shivering or Coldness. After the cold Fit, follows great Heat,
sharp biting and intolerable Thirst, and sometimes all the Symptoms of a
putrid Tertian Fever. In the bastard Tertian all the foregoing Signs appear,
but more remiss, and more vehement then a Quotidian; according as more or
less Phlegm is mingled with the Choler, this Disease comes nearer to a
Quotidian, or exquisite Tertian.

A Legitimate Tertian seldom lasts above seven days, and is not dangerous,
unless some Malignity be joined with it; and the Patient be of a healthy
constitution, and temperate in eating, and drinking; judge the contrary, if the
Patient is otherwise qualifyed. If the Patient's Lips break out with Scabs, or
if he fall into a Looseness these are good Signs; for Nature is turning out
the Enemy.

To work the Cure, a cooling Diet must be appointed, and withal moistning,
such as has been prescribed in the Cure of continual Fevers, the same you
must observe in the double Tertian. But in the bastard and Single Tertian, a
fuller Diet is to be observed. What ever the Patient ^ateth let him eat nothing
before the Fit, two or three hours, that there may be a digesture; but it is
good if he go to Stool before the Fit, to help the same give a Clister.

Clisters, in an exquisite Tertian, must be made of emollient and cooling
Decoctions, adding Cassia, Catholicon, Diaprunum lenitive and solutive, etc.

In a bastard Tertian let the Decoction be emollient and cutting, and dissolve
in it Diaphaenicon, Honey of Roses, etc. Purgatives ought to be the same for the
exquisite Tertian, as for the continual Fevers. In the Bastard, add Agarick,
Catholicum, Diaphaenicon, Sena, and such as the judicious Physician shall judge
suitable, in respect of the Patient's Constitution, and the Humors offending.
But to every Medicine cream of Tartar may be added, for it opens, cleanses,
and cools. If the Patient be subject to vomit, go that way to work as I said in
the last Chapter. Open a Vein and draw Blood as often, or as much, as you see
occasion. Prepare the Humors with Juleps, as you are taught in the last
Chapter, then purge. If the Humors be stubborn, and the Fit continue, make a
Decoction of Wormwood and Century, with cool Herbs to qualify the Heat, it is
much commended; after the use of that purge again. If there be a Distension
under the short Ribs, apply an emollient, attenuating, and strengthening
Fomentation. What ever part of the Body is ill disposed, have a regard to that
in all your Medicines. The Spirit of Sulphur is much magnified, for
extinguishing the Heat of Fevers, and if the Humors be thin it sends them
forth by Sweat: give from half a Scruple to a Scruple in four Ounces of
Purslane Water. Or you may give it thus: Take of Salt of Wormwood, half a
Drathm: Spirit of Sulphur, a Scruple: Carduus Water, four Ounces: mix them, and
give the Patient to drink, when the Fit approaches, and lay him to sweat. Those
things, which are usually laid to the Wrists by the common people, are not to
be despised, I shall not insert them, nor more Receipts, for the cure of this
Ague; First, it being my chiefest end to describe the Causes and Signs of
Diseases; Secondly, almost every woman's Head is full of Medicines against an
Ague.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of the Quotidian or every day-Ague.
THis Ague is caused by Phlegm putrefying in the first Region of the Body:
therefore all things that breed Phlegm in the Body may be the Cause thereof.

The Diagnostick signs are such as testify Phlegm to abound in the Body, as
white color, pale, dull Sense, Softness and Fatness, Profoundnesse of Sleep,
and Droaming of Water. It comes with a cold shlvering, little or not shaking;
and for the most part it comes in the Night. After the cold Fit the Patient
feels Heat but mildly, not scorching, little Thirst: the Pulse is small,
seldom, and slow; there is a Distension about the short Ribs: the Fits appear
more intense or remiss, last longer or shotter, as the Phlegm is simple or
mingled with other Humors: the Fit commonly lasts twelv hours, and then
leaves a feavourish Fit behind it. Sometimes it lasts twenty four hours, and
is almost like a continual Fever. There is a difference found in respect of
the Nature of the Phlegm, for salt Phlegm makes the Patient thirsty; sharp
Phlegm, hungry; sweet Phlegm, sleepy: If the Phlegm has no Taste, it makes him
without Appetite. Acid or glassy Phlegm (by reason of its Coldness) causes
shaking. This Disease for the most part continues long, and is not without
danger, because it sometimes degenerates into a Cachexia, Dropsy, or Lethargy.

The Diet and Medicines must be such as have an extenuating, cutting, and
dividing Quality. The Cure must be performed almost in the same Manner, as the
bastardly Tertian: Zacutus Lusitanus does much commend the Decoction of Roman
Wotmwood and Camomill Flowers, if five or six Ounces be adminisred. And the
Decoction of China and Guajacum for many days, but beware it dry not too much.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of the Quartane Ague.
AN intermitting Quartane is caused of Melancholy putrefying in the Body.

There are two sorts of Quartan Agues, viz. a Legitimate and a Bastard
Quartane: a Legitimate is bred of natural Melancholy, which is the carthly
part of our Nourishment, in quality cold and dry. The bastard Quartane is bred
of preternaturall Melancholy, which is bred of adust Choler, and is hot and
dry, or by Melancholy mixed with adust Choler. A Quartane Ague is either
single, double, or triple, the single is that which comes every fourth day. The
double is when two Fits happen upon two days one after another, and the third
day none. The Triple Quartane is when Fits come every as in a Quotidian, and
double Tertian.

Diagnostick Signs of a Quartane, are, the Ague coming every fourth day, and
Melancholy abounding in the Body: it begins with gaping and stretching,
heaviness of the Body; shivering and shaking follows, as if it would break the
Patient's Bones. The Pulse is seldom and slow: the Urine watery, thin, and
white, after a while it is higher colored and thicker. The bastard Quartane
(for the most part) follows other Fevers or Agues, by which Adustion of
Humors is made; and in it the Fever, Heat and Thirst, is more violent, and
all the Symptoms are greater, because the Humors are thinner. A double
Quartane is known by the course of the Fits. A triple Quartane is distinguished
from a double Tertian, or Quotidian, by Melancholy abounding; and by the course
of the Fits; and chiefly in this, that at first it was a simple or double
Quartane.

Prognostics are thus made: This of all Agues is the longest of Continuance,
some continue half a year, some a year, and some longer. It is good in this
Ague for the Patient to void black Urine. The bastard Quartane is not of so
long continuance as the Legitimate, because it proceeds from thinner Humors
then the other. The Legitimate is not so dangerous as the other, which has
many times dangerous Symptoms, especially if the Liver, Spleen, or any of the
interior parts, be damnified, because it is sometimes degenerated into a
Dropsy. If any aged above sixty fall into the Quartane Ague, it proves
mortal. If the intermitting Quartane degenerate into a continual, it is for
the most part deadly. To bleed at the Nose in a Quartane Ague is but a bad
Sign, because the morbifick Humors are too thick for such an Evacuation.

If a bloody Flux come upon a Quartane Ague and continue but a while, it is
good.

A bastard Quartane is cured almost with the same Medicines, which have been
prescribed for the Cure of a Tertian; to them adding such Medicines as regard
Melancholy, and free the Spleen from Disaffection.

Seeing the Legitimate Quartane is caused of Humors that are cold and dry,
thick and earthly, we must use Medicines that do heat, moisten, and attenuate.
Let the Patient's Diet be heating and moistning, of good Juice, easy of
digesture, and of thin substance: as rear Eggs, young Animals, and Birds of
Mountains, Fishes of stony Rivers: among Herbs, Borrage, Buglosse, Spinach,
Fennel, Parsley, and Turnips; Crato does much commend the Broth of Turnips: of
Fruits, Almonds, Apples, stewed Prunes, Figs, Raisons, Dates, and
Pine-kernells. Let him abstain from all Meats, which are of a thick and clammy
Substance, and of hard digesture: let him drink small Ale or Beer; let him eat
moderately, and on the Fit day, six hours before the Fit comes: let him be
very moderate in drinking, for much drink fills the Spleen and makes the
Disease rebellious. Having thus ordered his Diet, give him a gentle Purgation
by Clister: Take of Mallows, Camomill, Mercury, and Beets, of each, one
Handful: Polypody of the Oak, an Ounce and an half: Epithimum, half an Ounce:
of the four greater cold Seeds, and of Annis, and Fennel, of each, two
Drachms: boil it in Posset drink to a Pint: strainit, dissolve therein
Catholicon and Honey of Roses, of each, one Ounce: the Oils of Violets and
Camomill, of each, one Ounce and an half, mix all and make a Clister. Then
purge the Melancholy Humor by some gentle Medicine, beware of a strong purge
in the beginning before Concoction, lest you inflame the Humors, and turn the
Disease to a continual, or at least to a Double or Triple Quartane. Make a
gentle Purgation thus: Take of Fumitory, Buglosse, and Maidenhair, of each,
one Handful: Polypody of the Oak, Liquorish, and sweet Fennel Seed, of each,
half an Ounce: boil them; when they are boiled, infuse or gently boil half an
Ounce of Senna, till the Liquor come to three or four Ounces: dissolve therein
Manna, and Sirrup of Roses, of each, one Ounce, for a Potion: give it the next
day after the Clister. After purgeing open a Vein in the left Arm, unless you
find the Liver out of order, then you must open a Vein in the right Arm; if the
Blood be black and impure, draw the more, Most do let Blood upon the well-day,
some will have it done on the Fit-day before the Fit, because the Humors then
begin to stir: Zacutus Lusitanus will have it done when the Moon is at the
full, because, by the Moons Influence, the earthy and melancholy Humor is made
more fluid and apt to come away. It is good to open the Haemorrhoids, if your
Patient has been inclinable to that Evacuation: if your Patient be a Woman,
provoke the Menstrues if they be stopped, and open the Saphaena. The opening of
the Vena Salvatella is much approved of. Likewise you must make Decoctions,
Broths or Juleps to prepare and concoct the Humors; for which purpose these
Simples are good, viz. the five opening Roots, and the Root of Succory,
Liquorish, and Buglosse: Bark of Tamarisk: The Leaves of Burrage, Buglosse,
Ceterach, Maidenhair, Fumitory, Germander, Ground Pine, Wormwood, and Century,
the three cordial Flowers: of these you may make Decoctions, and sweeten them
with Sirrupus Bizantius or Sirrup of Maidenhair. After the use of these
preparatives purge the melancholy Humor; and between the days you purge, give
a Clister, this observing, that you often change your Medicines, and continue
in the course a long time; for the melancholy Humor is not soon evacuated; and
that is the reason that so few are cured of this Disease, because few will
observe the Rule of the Physician, or have patience to take his Medicines.

Vomits, in the beginning of this Fever, are commended by all; of Asarum, a
Dram given in White Wind, is of an excellent Faculty. In the declination of
the Disease, Diaphoreticks may be given to discuss the relics of the
Disease, the Decoction of the Roots of China and Sarsa are good, and
Venice-Treacle has great virtue. You may anoint the Backbone with a Liniment
made of some of these Oils, viz. of Dill, Camomill, Orice, Costus, Rue, Bays,
and Spike in a small Quantity: mixing with them, Treacle, Cloves, Mustard Seed,
Castoreum, and the like; of these an ingenious Man may compound a Liniment to
anoint the Back bone, one hour before the Fit; then lay him to Bed, and lay hot
Tyles, wrapped in clothes, to his Feet and Hands, and lay him in a Sweat. To
conclude, great care ought to be had of the Spleen, for in this Disease the
Spleen is disaffected, and obstructed: The 59 Chapter will furnish you with
such Medicines.

CHAP. XC. Of the Pestilence.
HAving briefly treated of most Diseases that the Body of man is incident to, I
thought it convenient to write a word or two of the Pestilence. But considering
how many larger Treatises thereof are at this day extant, I could have
willingly omitted it, but hoping my Mite will not only be acceptable but
beneficial, I thought good to epitomize this as well as the rest.

This Disease afflicts Nature, not only by a bare Distemper or Heat arising
from Putrefaction, but also by a malignant and venomous Quality: by which means
it becomes popular and epidemicall. Before we go any farther, know that those
Fevers which we call malignant or pestilentiall, vulgarly spotted Fevers, are
of the same kind with the Pestilence, and are cured by the same means. The
causes of the Pestilence are either internal or external; the internal
causes are immediate, or mediate: The Immediate cause is a Corruption of the
Humors with Putrefaction, the venomous Quality is bred of Corruption, and from
Putrefaction the Fever is bred. The Mediate causes are Fullness of Blood which
Nature cannot master, but easily turns to Putrefaction: Abundance of evil
Humors is easily corrupted and putrified: to these, join Obstructions, which
is a great means to breed such Diseases; for such Humors, close shut up in the
Body, and having no Evacuation not Transspiration, must of necessity putrify.
But Obstruction is not a principal cause of this Disease, for the venomous
Quality is received by drawing in of the Air, by which Venom the Humors are
changed from their natural condition, and, of their own accord, putrify. The
external Causes are, First, the Air, which becomes hurtful to men, first, if
it be not blown through with wholesome Winds, as Hippocrates observes,
speaking of a grievous pestilentiall year, that in that year there were few
Winds. Secondly, the Air may be vicious by putrid Exhalations, as of Lakes,
Pools, Fish Ponds, or other standing Waters, or from Bodies unburied, which
have been slain in Battle. Thirdly, the Air may become hurtful by Excess, or
the praeposterous condition of the first Qualityes, as Excess of Heat, Cold,
Drithe, or Moisture, of which I could lay down manifold Examples, which befit
not my small Volume. Inequalityes of Seasons must be acknowledged as a cause,
when it is sometimes hot and sometimes cold, sometimes dry and suddenly
Moisture follows; one while vehemently hot, and suddenly very cold; or after a
violent wet and moist time, a sudden and extreme Drouth: a hot Winter and a
cold Summer. Next to vicious Air, is a bad Aliment and Diet, when the Fruits of
the Earth, by a bad Temperature of the Air, are corrupted; or when, by reason
of Scarcity, the Poor are fain to feed on unwholesome Diet, (whence the proverb
came, the Plague follows the Famine) or a great Plenty following a Famine,
when the poor gorge themselves, which, for want of Heat and a good Disposition
of Body, cannot be digested, but turns to Putrefaction. Add to these the
malignant Influence of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, in humane Signs, by which
the Constitution of the Air and the Bodies of men are changed and corrupted:
for all Philosophers by common consent acknowledge, that inferior Be dies are
governed by the heavenly Constellations: To this kind we must add the defects
and Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and unusual Meteors, especally blazing
Stars. Above all causes, let us not be unmindfull of the strict and severe
Judgment of God, for the sins of Mankind: For many times he is pleased to
punish our Sins and Offenses by this Judgment; as the Scriptures do frequently
prove. To these non-naturall causes before mentioned, we must add the Retention
of Women's Courses, the Haemorrhoids in men, or some usual Evacuation,
Idleness, or too much Sleep, Anger, Sadness, or other Passions of the mind.

Signs, that show the Pestilence approaching, are taken from the presence of
Causes before mentioned. Those Bodies are disposed to receive pestilentiall
Infection, which have collected evil Juyces and Diet, and have had a
praeposterous use of the non-naturall things before specifyed. The chief Signs,
which show the Body to be infected; the Heart is much afflicted, Cardialgia,
and Heart-burning, and pain about the Mouth of the Stomach: sometimes great
Thirst, exceeding the Measure of the Patient's Heat; sometimes Want of Thirst,
yet a vehement Fever and Dryness of the Tongue: Want of Appetire and
abhorring of all Meat, and vomiting up what ever Food, Drink, Juleps, or
Emulsions is given, and their Thirst continue, and the Tongue black: A frequent
and inordinate shivering, which comes diverse times in a day: Weariness and
Heaviness of the whole Body: Pains of the Head, Watchings, and Ravings: Some
are very drousy and sleepy, then judge that the Brain is full of phlegmatic
Excrements. To some there happen choleric Fluxes, which stink very much.
Frequent Sweats, small, short, and unprofitable, do break forth: the Heat is
mild and gentle to the Feet, because the Disease is caused rather by a
malignant and venomous Quality, then by Putrefaction. Redness of the eyes, and
sometimes a frowning or a furious look. Sometimes abmndance of Worms are
voided, which show a great Putrefaction. The Urine is sometimes like the Urine
of a sound man, if a malignant Quality does rather offend then Putrefaction:
sometimes it appears thick, troubled, and high colored, and has a thick,
red, and scattered Sediment. On some, purple Spots like Flea-bitings:
Carbuncles, and Risings in the Groin, behind the Ears, and under the Atmpits.
Those Spots upon the Bodies of the dead, which are of a Lead-colour or black,
do especially denote the Pestilence.

No certain Prognostic can be drawn of this Discase, therefore the discreet
Physician ought to suspend his Judgment of the issue thereof: For many have
died, notwithstanding many hopes and testimonies of recovery; and, on the
contrary, many have escaped, with most mortal signs. Yet it is lawful for
the Physician to give his conjecture thus; If the Pulse keep a Tenor and
equality there is some hopes; on the contrary, if it be inordinate, unequal,
and contracted, it is dangerous. If the Pulse be like the Pulse of an healthy
person, it is dangerous; because it is a sign that Nature does not labor to
concoct the Humors, for her own deliverance. Raving is not dangerous if it be
lessened by Sleep, but if it turn to dotage, and continue, there is little
hope. Contractions, convulsive and trembling Motions are deadly, for it shows
that the Brain is mortally wounded, and that Nature is overcome by the Disease.
Deafness at the beginning is dangerous: but in the state of the Disease, it is
not so, for many times health follows. Sneezing is laudable. Heart-burnings.
Hiccoughs, and extreme Loathing, do portend danger, and that the Stomach is
over mastered by the Malignant quality of the Humors. Suppression of all
Evacuations, in the beginning and state of the Disease, is good, provided that
the Malignity does not settle in the head, or near any Principal part. The
Urine that is like the Urine of a healthy person is bad; the same judge, if
they be thin, thick, confused or troubled. Urines which have a laudable
sediment, and well concoct are good, and show a strong natural Faculty to
expel the Venom. An Urine, black or blew, fat and oily, with a black or
bluish settling, shows a wasting of the Body, and is a deadly Sign. Sweats
seldom portend good, though it happens on a critical day, unless it does much
diminish the Fever. Sometimes, a Looseness of the Belly, at the beginning, is
good, and sometimes it is a deadly Sign. Spots, the more laudable the color
is, the better, if they be black, or Lead-colour, and go in again it is
dangerous. Carbuncles and Buboes, the farther from the Heart, the better, and
the sooner they ripen, the safer.

The Cure ought to be twofold, first, to preserve those from it who have it
not; secondly, in healing those that have it. First, to preserve, take away the
causes both internal and external. If the Body be plethorick, let Phlebotomy
abate it: If full of evil Humors let them be purged: If obstructed, let means
be used to open Obstructions. If the Body be in a good state, labor to keep it
so. If it be too moist, babour to dry it, and avoid all moist Nourishments, and
much drinking, eat no Fish, Meats made of Milk, nor Herbs; walk not in the
South Air, or near Lakes, nor in the Night, fleep not too much. If the Body be
weak use a restorative Diet. If the Air be too hot; labor to cool it, as we
taught you, in continual Fevers, if it be too moist correct it by fires and
fumes, as also to consume and dissipate the infection of the Air: make fires
and fumes of sweet Woods, and other sweet sented ingredients, as Cypress, Wood
of Aloes, Juniper; Storax, Labdanum, Mirrhe, Benjamin, yellow Sanders, Ireos,
Storax, Frankincense, Cinnamon, Cloves, Red-Roseleaves, Calamint, Bays,
Rosemary, and such like. Let the common sort of people, and the poorer sort,
carry Rue and Angelica to smell to, and take in the morning fasting, and when
they go abroad, Mithridate's medicine; Mithridate, Venice-Treacle, and such
like. Let the Rich man use of this Pomander. Take of Labdanum, and of the Rinds
of Citrons, of each one dram: of the three kinds of Sanders, of each half a
drachme; Wood of Aloes, flowers of Buglosse, Nenuphar, Rose leaves, of each two
Scruples, a lipta Muscatae, half a scruple; Cloves and Marjoram, of each one
scruple; Zedoary root one scruple; Benjamin one dram; Storax Calamita one
dram and an half, Camphir half a drachme: Musk and Ambergreece of each sour
Grains; Powder them, and with the Musilage of Gum-dragant made in Rose Water,
make a Pomander. and let them make use of this Preservative: Take of
Bolearmenick prepared half an ounce, of Cinnamon three drachms, of white
Dittany, the roots of Angelica, Gentian, and Tormentill, of each two drachms,
the root of Zedoary, Red Roses, of all the Sanders, Hartshorn, the leaves of
Scabious, and flowers of Buglosse, of each one drachme, of Juniper Berries,
Nutmegs, and bone of a Stags Heart, of each half a dram; of Pearls prepared
two Scruples, of Saphir, Jacinth, Emerauld, Ruby and Granate prepared, and
leaf-Gold, of each one scruple; powder them all, and with Syrrup of Vinegar or
Lemons, make an Electuary, and take a Scruple or two in the Morning.

For the cure of those that are sick, let the same course of Diet be observed,
as was prescribed in continual Fevers; and it the body be plethorick, open a
Vein; How much blood to take away, and how often to bleed, let prudence be your
director. If you judge it necessary, apply Cupping-glasses to the shoulders,
back, and hips; and vesicatories applied to the neck and Armpits, and Groyns,
are seldom without admirable success; and a Cataplasme of Snails, or
Radishes, laid to the feet are good. First, altering Juleps, are good to
prepare the humors, made of such things as are prescribed for the Cure of
continual Fevers; to which add Antidotes, which have a specific property to
fight against the venomous quality: as the roots of Tormentill, Cinkfoil,
Scorzonera, white Thistle; the leaves of Scordium, Carduus, Scabious,
Meddowsweet, Flowers of Marigolds; Lemons and Citrons, Odoriferous Apples,
Hartshorn; the juice or Syrrup of Lemons, Pomegranats, Citrons, Vinegar, the
spirit of Sulphur and Vitriol. In the whole course of the cure, Antidotes must
be given, of which there are four sorts, or degrees, the first resist the
venomous quality, and besides are cold, dry, and astringent, by which they
strengthen the Heart, hinder putrefaction, and the venom, from spreading over
the body: of this sort are Bolearmenick, Terra Sigillata, the roots of Bistort,
Cinkfoil, Tormentill, etc. The second sort, by their coldness and tenuity, do
resist putrefaction, and restrain the venomous quality: as the juice of Lemons,
spirit of Sulphur and Vitrioll, and all other acid things. The third sort are
such as are hot and Diaphoretick, which expel the venom from the Center to the
Circumference, from the Heart, to the outward parts, by sweat, and of this sort
are Angelica, Zedoary, Dictamnus, Meddow-sweet, Scordium, Carduus, Scabious,
Treacle, Mithridate, Treacle-water. The last sort are such, as by a special
quality, without excess, do oppose the venomous quality, as Bezoarstone,
Hartshorn, Unicorns-horn, Troches of Vipers, and such like. Of these, and
Simples of the like nature, may many Medicines be composed, which must be
diversely varied and mixed, according to the different degree of malignity, and
putrefaction, according to the intension and remission of the Fever, according
to the diverse Temperaments, Sex, and Age of the Patient, the determination of
which depends not upon any certain rules, but upon the Prudence and headpiece
of an able Physician. In the Malignant and spotted Fever, if putrefaction be
greater then the vonemous quality; the medicines of the first, second, or
fourth order, do best agree in the beginning and Augment of the Fever: and
those of the third, viz. Diaphoreticks and sweating medicines in the
declination; but if it be the Plague, and the venomous quality exceed the
putrefaction; let Diaphoreticks be used first: as for the forms of particular
medicines, let the Physician vary them according to the different degree of
heat, putrefaction, and malignity. Let the Physician take care to strengthen
the Heart, also, by outward applications of Cordial Epithems; and let the
Carbuncles and Borches be suppurated, broken, and healed, by the expert
Chirurgious Art.

CHAP. XCI. Of the Small Pox and Measels.
THe Fever which attends the Small Pox and Measels, may be justly termed
Pestilential, for it is epidemicall, contagious and many times mortal: I need
not write any thing of the difference between these two, viz. Pox, and Measols,
for every Woman knows it. There is another sort of Pustules come out upon
children like bladders, without inflammation or redness, and without a Fever:
some Physicians call it the Crystalls, we call it the Blisters. The cause of
the small Pox and Measells, was in the Mothers Blood, with which the child was
nourished in the Womb, and is hence chiefly gathered, because among thousands
of men, it is hard to find one, who once in his life has not had these
diseases. For in the blood be it never so pure, some impurities are found,
which does communicate pollution to the parts of the child, and defile the
Mass of blood; and being provoked by some occasion, ( viz. a certain
disposition of Air, proportionable to the disease) the blood boils and
purifieth it self and the parts, and the impurity is cast forth. Understand
that these impurities do not substantially remain in the body, for then they
would corrupt in a little time, but an evil quality is by them imprinted upon
the parts. When this ebullition begins, the excrement is twofold, either
thin or thick; if thin, the Measels follow; if thick, the small Pox. And
another reason is this, Sometimes the Air is inclinable to the one, and
sometimes to the other. Again, the Pox is either Perfective or corruptive; the
Perfective is when the corrupt, impure, and excrementitious part of the blood,
is cast forth by nature, the rest remaining pure, and the Patient is restored
without Physic: the corruptive Pox, is not only the corrupt blood purged
forth, but the most pure blood corrupted, which is occasioned by a malignant
constitution of the Air, and so produces a dangerous and Epidemicall Pox,
which is sometimes a forerunner of the Plague. In respect of the natural
constitution of the body they come forth more or less, sooner or later, and
sometimes they seize upon the internal as well as external parts, as the
throat, Lungs, Guts, Liver, Spleen, etc.

Signs which declare the Pox at hand, are pain in the head, and beating about
the Temples, troubled and terrified in sleep, sometimes ravings and
Convulsions, hoarsnesse, cough, and difficulty of breathing; heat and pricking
all over the body, pain of the back, shining before the eyes, the face red and
swelled. If they come out soon, and easily ripen, there is no danger, the same
judge if the symptoms are not great, and the voice and breathing is free. If
they come out red, afterward white, round, pointed, and outwardly in the skin,
there is no danger. The contrary to these are signs of a deadly and dangerous
Pox, viz. a great Fever, which is not abated at their coming out, difficulty
of breathing, great thirst, a loosnesse or bloody flux, because the malignant
humors have their recourse inward; which is contrary to nature a bloody Urine,
or stool, bleeding at the Nose, Gums, or other parts, are commonly deadly
signs, for they signify the extreme acrimony and malignancy of the Blood, that
nature is forced to void it in such a preposterous way. Pox long coming out,
shows the contumacy of the Humor, or Weakness of Nature, if they be many,
great, double, and united, they show abundance of Humors: hard ones show the
Thickness of the Matter: flat ones show the Weakness of the expulsive Faculty:
if there be a black Spot in the middle it shows the malignity of the Humors;
the like judge, if they be green, bluish, or black, and they are all bad
Signs; but it is worse if they sink, go in, and the Tumor falls, for it
signifies the Retirement of the Humors inward, and few in this condition
escape. If black or blew Spots come forth among the Pox, it shows great
Malignity; and the Patient in great danger. If the Excrements and Urine be
black or livid, they signify abundance of Melancholy, and great danger.

For the Cure, keep the Patient in a warm room, and if you tender his life,
keep out the cold Air, lest the Humors be driven inward. Keep the Clothes
close about him, but let them not ly too heavy. Let his drink be Barly-Water,
and boil therein Sorrel Roots and Hartshorn, and Figs, if the Fever be not
violent: let his Sleep be moderate. Physicians, for the most part, advise the
Cure to begin with blood-letting, that is, if the Patient be full of Blood, and
nothing forbid it; but it must be done before, or just as they be coming forth.
Purges are absolutely forbidden; but if the body be very costive, move it with
a Suppository, but do not provoke it. Then endeavor the expulsion of the
Matter, thus; Take of the Roots of grass, Asparagus, and Fennel, of each, four
Ounces: Liquorish, half an Ounce: Wood Sorrel, two Handfulls: twenty Figs: the
cordial Flowers, one Pugill: make a Decoction to a Pint, toward the latter
end, put in a little Saffron; take four Ounces Night and Morning. Bezar and
Gascoins powder is good to send out the Pox, and for Children Diascordium is a
familiar Medicine. We must endeavor to preserve the internal parts; if you
fear that the Liver, Spleen, or Guts, should suffer, to the former Decoction,
add husked Lentils, two drams, Gum Lac, and Traganth, of each, one Dram. You
must defend the Eyes with the Water of Roses and Plantane, and infuse Camphir,
Saffron, and if the Inflammation be great, infuse Tutty. You must defend the
Lungs with the Conserve of Roses and Violets, the Sirrup of Violets, Jujubees,
Myrtles, dried Roses, Poppyes, and such like. You must defend the Throat with a
Gargle of Oxycrate; or you may make it with Plantane Water and Sirrup of
Mulberryes or Pomegranates. To defend the Nose, put up a Nodulus, made of
Vinegar, Rose Water, and the Powder of Sanders and Camphir. When the Pox are
out, full ripe, and begin to break, anoint them often with the Oil of Almonds,
it will be a means to prevent their pitting; and where there are likely to be
holes anoint with the Oil of the yolks of Eggs.

The End of the Second Book.
The Third Book.
HAving in the former Book been more voluminous then I expected, I shall be
briefer in this, and treat more theorically then practically: And leaving the
Description and Cures of Wounds, Tumors, and Ulcers in particular, to the
ingenious and expert Surgeon; I shall run over their Causes, Signs, and
Cures generally, and as briefly as may be,

CHAP. I. Of a Green Wound.
A Wound is a breach of Continuity, fresh and bloody without Putrefaction or
Matter: It is caused by a Sword, Bullet, Arrow, or such like, which the
Surgeon may easily perceive. Wounds in the flesh are easily cured; in the
Nervs, Veins, and Arteryes, they are not without danger: In the isntrumental
and principal parts, as the Heart, Liver, Lungs, Brain, Spleen, Midriff,
Wezand, Stomach, Guts, or Bladder, are deadly. A Fever, Perturbation,
Swooning, Convulsion, and such like Symptoms are dangerous.

The Cure must be directed, first to the cause; secondly, to the Wound itself;
thirdly, to the part affected; lastly, to the Symptoms attending. The Cause or
outward things, viz. a Bullet, Arrow, or such like, sticking in the Body must
be drawn out, by Instruments or by Medicine: what concerns the first I shall
not meddle with, the medicinal part I shall briefly handle. The Simples
availeable and of force for the purpose aforesaid are, The Roots of Reeds and
Birthwort; the Leaves of Dittany, Crow-foot, Missletoe, Thapsia; Sagapenum,
Ammoniacum, Opopanax, Quick Lime, burnt Frogs, Galbanum, Bears grease, the
Lodestone, Mustard Seed, and such like. Of these and such like you may prepare
compound Medicines: This Unguent of Vesalus is much approved of: Take of Rozin
of the Pine tree, two Ounces: Galbanum, three Ounces: of the Stone called
Calamites, one Ounce: the Gall of an Ox, one Ounce and an half: of Turpetine,
three Ounces; New Wax, two Ounces: first, strain out the Wax, Rozin, and
Turpetine; after, mix the Golbanum, Gall, and the Powder of the Stone, and make
an Unguent.

This Plaster is likewise good for the same purpose: Take of Leaven, one
pound: Oil, half a pound: the juice of Knot-grasse, and Dittany, (or, for want
of it, the Powder of the dried Herbs,) of each, three Ounces: Turpetine, one
pound: The Bird Lime made of Missletoe Berryes, Ammoniacum, and Galbanum and
dissolved in wine, of each, one Ounce; of Wax, four Ounces: mix them upon the
Fire, and make a Plaster.

Having thus far proceeded, and removed all things unnatural from the Wound,
then must the Surgeon, if the Solution be great, artificially join the
gaping sides of the Wound by Seam, Taches, or stiching cloths and such like,
which I omit, and shall lay down a few Rules to prevent pain, Inflammation, or
other untoward Accidents, which may happen to the wounded part, or whole Body.

Inflammation is restrained by taking away the Cause of the Fluxion: Now the
Humors, flowing to the part, are either drawn or sent. They are drawn by
reason of the Pain and Heat of the Member, which does attract the Humors to it
self. They are sent, thus; when the whole Body is full of evil Humors, and
every part disburtheneth it self upon the weaker. The Inflammation of the Part
must be allayed with such Medicines that quench Heat; and the Body must be
purged, and such a Course of Diet used as may somewhat free the Body from such
Humors, which are offensive and burdensome to Nature.

But before I come to treat of the removeall of such Accidents and evil
Symptoms; I shall briefly show you the manner of Cure, which ought thus to be
performed. After closing of the Wound, dress it with some agglutinative
Medicine, made of such Simples: viz. Frankincense, Mastich, Aloes,
Rolearmenick, Sanguis Draconis, Sarcocolla, Terra Sigillata, Balaustines,
Pomegranate Rinds, Cypress Nuts, Galls, Horse-tail, Tobacco, and such like.
You may make a Balm thus: Take of Turpetine, a pound: of Galbanum, Gum Elemy,
Gum of Ivy, Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, of each, two Ounces: Aloes, Lignum
Aloes, Galanga, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, Cubebs, of each, one Ounce: Aqua
Vitae, three Ounces; infuse and distill them to a Balm. After the Application
of this or the like Balsome, lay on this Plaster: Take of Ammoniacum dissolved
in Vinegar, two Ounces: Gum Elemy, three Ounces: Rozin of the Pine tree, five
Ounces: Turpentine of the Fir Tree, three ounces: Oil of Roses, two Ounces:
make a Plaster. Open it once in twenty four hours till it be whole: thus may
you cure a simple Wound in the Flesh.

If the Wound be hollow, you must put in Tents, twist them not too hard, but so
that the Sanies may come forth. If the Wound be deep without loss of
Substance, you must consider whether the Orifice of the Wound look upward or
downward. If the Orifice look downward, and the bottom be upward, then may the
Matter run freely out of the Wound, and the Cure thereof is performed as a
simple Wound in the Flesh. But if the Orifice of the Wound be upward, and the
bottom tending to the lower parts, that there is a place for the Matter to rest
in, then if you find it needful (as many times it is) make an Incision, from
the top to the bottom, or only in the bottom; let reason guide you whereto
make your Incision or when to neglect it. Wash the Wound with Wine, wherein
Mirrh and Salt has been boiled: then put in this Oil, which is much commended,
and it is made thus: Take of Oil of Olives, three pound: of white Wine, two
pound: of the Flowers, Leaves, and Seeds, of St. John's Wort, one pound: of
greek Valerian, the spotted and common Sanicle, Saracens consound, amd
Self-heal, of each, half a Handful; beat the Herbs in a Mortar, and infuse
them in the Wine and Oil twenty four hours, then boil it gently to the
Consumption of almost half: then strain it, and add thereto, of Venice
Turpetine, one pound and an half: Oil of Turpetine, six Ounces: Olibonum, five
Ounces: Mirrh three Ounces: Mastich, and Sanguis Draconis, of each, one Ounce:
Roots of Alchenet, (first bruised and infused in Oil two or three hours,) boil
them gently and sufficiently, and reserve it for the use aforesaid. Then lay on
Emplastrum Sticticum, the receipt of which you may read in the London
Dispensatory: or you may buy the Plaster at the Apothecaryes.

If the Wound be hollow with loss of Substance, you must make use of such
Medicines which are by Nature drying and cleansing, called Incarnatives.

This Unguent is much commended for cleansing Putrefaction, and breeding of
good Flesh in Wounds.

Take of common Oil, and Rams suet of each one pound: Stone-pitch, half a
pound, Grecian-pitch, three Ounces; wax two Ounces, Mastich, Olibanum,
Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Sagapenum, Opopanax, and Turpentine of each half an
Ounce: powder those that are to be powdered, and melt the rest in Oil, stir
them well together on the fire; when they are sufficiently boiled, add the
Turpentine, strain it, and use it upon occasion.

This plaster is very good to incarnate both wounds and Ulcers; Take of
Virgins wax eight Ounces, Deers suet four ounces and an half; Common Rozin, and
Rozin of the Pinetree of each four Ounces; Myrrh and Mastick, of each four
Ounces; Honey six ounces; Turpentine eight Ounces, White Wine one pound and an
half, Dragons blood one pound; boil them (the Sanguis Draconis excepted) to the
form of a plaster. Or you may make a less quantity by decreasing each
particular analogically. Take this general Rule, that according to the Dryth
or moisture of the body or wound, you must make your medicines less or more
drying, when the wound comes to be plain, equal and filled, it must be
Cicatrized, or covered with skin; which must be performed by medicines which
are astringent, and very much drying, because it must consume not only the
superfluous, but also the natural moisture, of which properly are the simples
following: Galls, Balaustines, the rinds of Pomegranats, the white Thistle,
Sumach, Bolearmenick, Sealed Earth, Ceruse, Lead burnt or washed, Litharge, and
the Bark of the Pinetree. To which add the following, which perform it
accidentally, as Brass burnt and washed, the scales of Brass; Alume and
Vitrioll, burnt and washed: Plantane, Aristolochia, and such like. Of these and
such like, may many forms of Medicines, viz. Waters, Oils, Unguents, or
Plasters, be made. Take this Plaster as an example for all. Take of Litharge,
and Ceruse of each six Ounces, burnt lead, Lapis Calaminaris, and Terra
Sigillata, of each three Ounces: Colophonia, Ship-Pitch, and Rozin, of each two
Ounces, Sarcocolla, Laudanum, and Ireos, of each one Ounce and an half,
Camphir, half an Ounce, Leake seed two Ounces; Oil of Roses, one pound and an
half, white Wax four Ounces; make it into a plaster.

If the Cicatrice be uncomely or deformed, it must be amended: if it be too
tender, it must be thickened, and hardened with Diachilon, or with Calamint, the
roots of Briony and such like sodden in Oil. If the Cicatrice be thick and
hard, it ought to be attenuated with the root of wild Cucumer, stamped and
applied, or the Oil of Balsome-Apple. If it be deformed in respect of color,
you must labor to bring it to whiteness, for which this plaster is
commended; Take of Swines Grease three Ounces, Litharge one Ounce, Verdigreese
and burnt Vitrioll, of each two drachms; make it into a plaster.

Sometimes a wound is overgrown with flesh: this flesh growing too proudly,
must be dealt withal with medicines that may diminish, and take away the same,
and they must be by nature sharp and drying; as Calcitis, Vitriol, burnt Alum,
the roots of Asphodels, Hermodactylls, the stones of Dates burnt, the seed of
Nettles, Serpentary, the Scales of Brass, burnt Brass, the ashes of a Hedghog,
Mercury sublimnte; Of Medicines compounded, Unguentum Apostolorum, or Unguentum
Aegyptiacum are of known validity. If these suffice not, the Chyrurgion must
use his Incisionknife, hot Scissars, or a Cautery.

CHAP. II. Of a contused wound, and a Bruise.
THat the wound is contused appears by the swelling, pain, black or blew
color; whether it were given by a fall, or blow, the patient can satisfy you.
The Cure consists, first in mundisying, filling the hollownesse, with
incarnative Medicines, and when it is made plain and even, cover it with
Cicatrizing Medicines. And secondly, in removing the accident, which for the
most part accompanies a wound of this nature. First, to mundify the wound,
wash it in white Wine, wherein has bin boiled Myrrh and Salt, then arm your
Tents with Unguentum Apostolorum, or such like, and lay on dry stapes and bind
it up; this do till the wound be clean; then fill it up with incarnative
Medicines, afterwatds Cicatrize it; the Medicines for that purpose in the
foregoing Chapter will serve here. Secondly, labor to remove the accidents
incident to these wounds, which are either pain or swelling. Pairl must be
mitigated with Oil of Dill, Chamomil, or Lillies. Or a Liniment made of the Oil
of Roses, and the yolk of an Egg, and applied with Lint. The swelling or Tumor
is to be removed by taking away the Antecedent or conjoined cause: the
Antecedent cause is the humor flowing to the wounded part, the conjoined cause
is the humor already contained in the part. For taking away the antecedent
cause, you must consider, whether it be blood or other humors. If it be blood,
whether it comes from the whole body, or some particular part, it must be
evacuated by bloodletting, and a thin cooling Diet. You must evacuate and
disparch it from the wounded member, either by revulsion, or repercussion:
Revulsion must be made either by Phleboromy, Cupping, Rubbing, and binding the
contrary side, to withdraw the humor to the contrary part. Repercussion is to
send the matter from the part: of this sort are the Oil of Roses, and Myrtles;
or an Unguent made of Oil of Myrtles, Bolearmenick, and the White of an Egg,
with which the parts about the Wound are to be anointed: Afterward lay on a
Plaster made of the Powder of Myrtles, and the White of an Egg. If it be other
Humors, which flow to the Wound, let them be purged with such Medicines as are
proper to the Humor: The foregoing Book is full of Examples; and the last
Book is well furnished. The Humor which is now impact in the Wound, must be
brought to Suppuration: This Plaster is good; Take of the Roots of
Marshmallows, and wild Cucumers, of each half an Ounce: Origan and Hysop, of
each half a handful: the Flowers of Camomel, and the Seed of Flax, of each one
pugil: six sat Figs; boit them well, then strain the liquor from them, and beat
them in a Mortar; add to them Mirrh, Galbanum, Styrax Liquida, and Sheeps
Grease (separated from the woot which grows in the Flank, and between their
shoulders,) of each one dram and an half; make a plaster.

If by a fall, stroke, or blow, clotted blood is gathered under the skin, the
part is swelled, soft and easily pressed, blackish, and many times without
pain. A bruise by a violent contusion is not without danger; for sometimes, not
only the part it self corrupts, but many times the whole body. It the skin
hang by, separated from the flesh, cut it away, fot it is seldom; or never
joined again. For the Cure, in respect of the wounded Part, observe the same
rule in taking away pans and swelling, either by evacuation, or repercussion.
In respect of the whole body, you must consider whether there be clotted blood
in the body; which if there be, it must be dissolved and scattered by
Medicines, which dissolve blood, and fireng then the inner parts; and secondly,
it must be scattered by Diaphoretick, or Sweating Medicines. This Powder is
good to dissolve blood; Take of Rubarb terrified, sealed Earth, Bolearmenick,
Mummy, and the seed of Cresses torrified, of each one dram; make them into
fine powder, and give a dram in Plantane water, or the water of Shepherds
pouch.

To provoke Sweat, boil a handful or two of Osmond Royal, and Horstaile, in
Wine, sweeten the Decection with Honey, give five or six Ounces thereof, and
let the Patient sweat thereupon. If the blood be clotted under the skin, apply
a Rams skin newly pulled off hot to the body, and let the Patient sweat in it.
Then anoint it with this Unguent, etc. Take of Bolearmenick, Frankincense,
Rezin, Fenugreck, and Gum Traganth, of each half an ounce; Saffron one dram,
the powder of Roses, Mirtles, and Sumach, of each three drachms; the Ointment
of Maish mallows, the Oil of Roses, Camomel, Mirtles, and Dill, of each two
Ounces: New Wax and Turpentine, of each one Ounce, make an unguent, and use it
twice a day. After you have used this Omtment a while, leave out the
Ingredients, which are astringent, and use discutients only. If you find the
matter will not be discussed, but is prone to Suppuration, help it forward by
such Medicines as are proper for the purpose: then procure Issue, and mundifie
the Ulcer, and heal it up.

Many places of this Book will furnish you with fic Medicines.

CHAP. III. Of a Wound by biting, or stinging of any Creature venomous, or not.
What Creature inflicted the Wound, most people know, or whether he be
venomous or not: Venomous are, a Mad-Dog, Serpent, Scorping, Basilisk, Dragon,
Viper, Adder, Slow-Worm, Asp, Spider, Toad, etc. Not venomous, are a Dog, Ape,
Horse, Sow, Cat, Wasp, Be, and the like. If the Creature were venomous, the
Symptoms are more violent, viz. vehement pricking, and biting pains, change of
color, and grievous anguishes, and sometimes the body is astonished, sometimes
in a great heat, and the like.

A venomous biting is very danperous, if it be not soon cured; because Poison
ayms at the destruction of the Heart. Some say if the Patient be thirsty, and
yet is fearful of Drink, he is incurable: This I once saw verified in a Boy
that was bit by a Mad. Dog. If the Patient be bit by a venomous Creature, the
Cure may be begun with cupping the wounded part, with scarrifieation, to draw
forth the Venom: sucking of the Wound is commended, instead thereof, apply the
tail of an Hen: if the part be not full of sinews, apply a Cautery; and if the
venom be very malignable, cutting is commended. External Medicines must be
attractive to draw the Venom back: Of this sort are the Simples following,
Garlic, Onyons, Mustardseed, Harts-ease, Scabius, Peneroyal, Calamint,
Gentian, Polymountain, Germander, Scordium, Ditany, Briony, Asphodels,
Aristolochia, Euphorbium, Galbanum, Treacle, Leaven, Goats Dung, etc. Of these,
you may make variety of compound medicines. On a sudden mix Leaven and Goats
Dung together; or for want of it, Leaven alone, beat with it Garlic, Onyons,
and Treacle, or any of the aforenamed Simples, which you have in readiness, and
make a Plaster. This Plaster is good: Take of the Powder of Long Birthwort
two ounces, Asphodels and Briony, of each one ounce, Assa Foetida; Galbanum and
Mirrh, of each half an Ounce, with Oil of Bays and Wax; make a Plaster. This
following Unguent is commended by Vesalius, Take of Galbanum, and Opoponax, of
each one dram, Ammoniacum, Turpentine, and Wax, of each one dram and an
half; Sagapenum two drachms, Pitch two drachms and an half: put them over a
gentle fire, and when they boil a little, put in a small quantity of
Bean-flower, Leth argie, Saffron, and Bdellium, of each one dram; Mirrh, and
Olibanum, of each half a dram; Mastich, four scruples, Fenugreek one scruple,
boil them as much as you find convenient; then with the Oil of Roses, and
Seasamini, of each two drachms, make an Unguent.

Then you must labor to preserve the Heart from the venom, by inward Med
cines.

Julius Palmarius does much commend that Powder, against the biting of a Mad
Dog, or other venomous Creature; which Powder is called by the College of
Physicians, in their Dispensatory, Pulvis Antilissus.

Paracelsus advises to give the Patient red astringent Wine, wherein Steel
has been quenched, and a little Treacle with it. Or let the Patient take now
and then a little of this mixture with the Wine: Mithridate two Ounces, Venice
Treatle one ounce, the powder of red Corals one ounce and an half, mix them.
Also, Philonium Perficum, does wonderfully defend the Head and Vital Parts. If
the Patient grow very thirsty, it is a sign that the Venom reaches to the
Heart: then give warm milk, and the powder of Red Coral; and apply to the
Region of the Heart an Epithem made of Rose-Vinegar, Camphire, and Sanders,
sealedearth made into a Plaster, with some convenient moisture, and applied,
is much commended against the poison of the Spider and Toad. Lastly, you must
labor to bring the Wound to suppuration, asterwards mundifie, incarnate, and
cicatrize it. If the Creature which inflicted the Wound were not venomous, the
pain is less, and the danger not so great, and the Cure easily performed by
ordinary Medicines.

CHAP. IV. Of a Wound in the Nerves, Tendons, Ligaments, Veins, and Arteries.
Whether Nerve, Tendon, etc. are wounded, may be easily conjectured; and how,
and with what weapon it was done, the Patient will be able t^ inform.

If a Sinew be burnt, there is great pain, hurt both of sense and motion,
sometimes a Fever, Inflammation, Convulsion, or raving; a breach or wound of a
Vein, or Artery, is known by profusion of blood. But whether the Vein or
Artery be wounded, their proper figns must distinguish, viz. the blood black
and thick, with an equal fluxion, shows a wounded Vein: but if the blood be
thin and yellow, and comes forth leaping, like the motion of the Pulse, then
is the Artery wounden.

The Nervous Ligaments will endure Medicines of great force: If in Wounds of
this nature a Tumor appear, and afterward vanish away it threatens danger of
Convulsion and Raving. If a Nerve be wounded overthewart, and not cut alunder,
it brings the move peril of Convulsion. An Artery cut overthwart is sooner
joined together, then if it were severed longwise. An Artery cut is harder to
cure then a Vein. Flux of blood is peril lous, especially of an Artery; for
unless it be stopped, it brings death unavoidably. Swooning, Convulsion,
Raving, etc. in this case, is an evil token. For the Cure, if the Nerve be
priekt, begin thus: If there be any weapon, or any outward thing sticking in
the Wound, let it be removed, and keep the part from in jury, and if you fear
inflammation, open a Vein. Let him lie in a warm Room, on a soft bed; and keep
the body loose, by Clisters, or laxative Medicines, regulated according to the
nature of the humor peccant. Let his Diet be sparing, and small Beer his
Drink. Let him lie as free from motion as may be; let not the cold Air, which
is inimical to the Sinews, afflict him; not too hot Air, for fear of
inflammation. Keep the Wound oren, and if it be not wide enough, makeit wider:
then use such Medicines, that may ease the pain, and draw forth the eruginous
and fretting matter: Medicines which heat and dry without pain, is good in this
case; as the Oil of Turpetine, Ireos, Sage, Elder; or Water, wherein Salt and
Turpetine has been boiled; the Oil of Earthworms, and of the yolks of Eggs
mixed; or the Oil of Roses and Turpetine; or the Oil of Turpetine, and of
Savine mixed; or Euphorbium one dram, boiled in two Ounces of Oil. For which
purpose, this Plaster is good: Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, the Meal of
Barley, Beans, and Lentils, of eaeh a like quantity, as much as you think good:
boil them in Lie; then put to it Oil of Roses, Camomel, Dill, and Turpetine, of
each sufficient, and a little Saffron, so make a Plaster. If the Wound will
come to suppuration, heal it forward, and afterward mundify it.

If the Nerve be cut, after you have observed the asorelaid general Rules, join
the Nerve; then apply this Medicine: Take of Karth-worms prepared three drachms
Horstail two drachms, Betony and Nettles in powder, of each one dram;
Olibanum three drachms: encorporate them with the slesh of Snails beaten, and
apply it four days, laying on some Glutinative Unguent. Take of the lesser
Century, Plantane, Hounds-tongue, Mouse. ear, both the Consonds, Horse tail,
and Yarrow, of each one handsal; Earthworms a pound and an half; Oil and Wine,
of each one pound and an half; Vinegar sour ounces: stamp them, and let them
infuse 7 days: then add the Suet of a Ram one peund, Pitch and Rozin, of each
sour ounces: boil them to the consumption of the Wine and Vinegar; add to the
straining Ammoniacum, Gathanum, Opaponax, dissolved in Vinegar, of each 5
drachms: Turpemine one ounce and an half, Frankincense, Maslick, and Sarcocol,
of each three drachms: Of Saffron two ounces; Wax, as much as needs, to make
an Unguent: Both these are much commended by Jacobus Weckerus.

If the Vein or Artery be cut, you must first labor to stanch the blood:
Secondly, to cure the Wound. First, the blood may be stanched, either with, or
withs out Evacuation: With Evacuation, is to open a Vein on the contrary part,
and sometimes near the Wound, and to let it fly, and suddenly stop it again.
To stay the blood without Evacuation, must be performed by cupping, with
scarrifying, binding and rubbing of the contrary part. Secondly, you must
bridle the furious course of in by things that thicken, cool, and astonish:
Things which thicken the blood, are Rice, Lentils, Jujubees. Quinces, and all
Stiptick Fruits. Cold Water drunk, or laid upon the member near the Wound, does
astonish it. It the Vein or Artery lie so that you may easily come at it, ty
the end with fine silk, stitch up the Wound, and apply astrictive Powders upon
it; and upon that lay on the like powder, mixed with the White of an Egg, with
Stuphs. This Powder is good: Frankincense, Aloes, Terra Sigillata,
Bolearmenick, and Senguis Draconis, of each equal parts; powder them finely,
and with the white of an Egg, and the hairs of a Hare, let it be applied: Or
this, Take of Lapis Haemitatis one ounce; Frankincense, Mastich, Bolearmenick,
Cobwebs green Galls, dried Frogs, Soot, white wall, and the Meal that lie upon
the walls of Mills and Bake-houses, of each two drachms: Burnt Vitriol,
Quicklime, and Gum-Traganth, of each three drachms; the shaving of the skin of
a Ram, or He-Goat, Paper-cards, the hairs of an Hare, and cotton torrified, of
each one dram: Asses dung half an ounce; make it into fine powder, and use it
as the fermer. The accidental Symptoms both of this and other Wounds, you
shall have in a Chapter by themselves, with their Cures.

CHAP. V. Of Luxations and Fractures.
A Luxation, or Dislocation, is the slipping of a joint from his Natural
Position, and proper place, into some strange and unwonted seat, whereby
voluntary motion is hindered. A Fracture is a division or breaking of the bone:
the causes of the first are either outward or inward; outward causes are falls,
strokes, extension, wrenching, or the like, the Patient is able to inform you.
The inward causes are filthy, slimy, and Phlegmatic Humors, falling between
the joint, as it many times happens in the Sciatica. Causes of Fractures, are
things of weight falling upon the place, or the Patient falls from on high,
slippeth, or such like.

A Dislocation is known by these signs, viz. a Tumor in the part where the bone
lies, a pit or cavity in the place from whence the bone is departed, great
pain, a difficulty or deprivation of motion in that member. The bone broken is
easily seen; but whether the Fracture be overthwart, or long ways, you may
discern thus: If it be overthwart, by seeling you may discern the bone several,
and disjoined, the bones make a noise and crackling, when you handle each side
diversely. If it be long-ways, the former signs appear not and that part
appears thicker then ordinary, uneven, and painful.

Of bones that slip out of their places, some are easily reposed, and some more
hardly; the knee easily slippeth out, and is easily put in again, the fingers
and shoulders may easily be reduced. The jawbone, the shoulder blade, Ostali,
the heel-bone, the hand and middle of the foot do commonly knit in fourteen or
one and twenty days: the hip in fifty days, and the foot in sixty, if the
Patient give it rest. If in the setting the bone crack, or make a noise, and
the member look like the other, it will be well, the Elbow seldom slippeth out,
and is not put in again without much trouble. If the borders of the bones are
broken, it is the worse. If a wound, Inflammation, a violent pain accompany
the Luxation, it is dangerous and hard to be cured. If it has continued long,
and is grown Callous, it is hard to be cured. If a Child happen to have a
dislocation, and it be not reduced, the member grows little or nothing.

Likewise in a fracture the bones of the Arms, Legs, Thighs and Fingers are
not very dangerous, the farther from the head the better. A fracture
accompanied with violent pain, Inflammation, wound in the flesh, or contusion,
is very bad, because it cannot be dealt withal, till those accidents be first
removed. In declining age, and Choleric persons the cure is difficult; in very
aged persons impossible, the older the Patient is, the worse, a rib broken is
dangerous. The breach of the bone or Gristle of the nose is bad, worse if the
flesh be wounded. In a fracture of the scul these are dangerous symptoms; when
the membrane is unmovable, black or evil-coloured: loss of wits, resolution or
distension of the Ne^ves. A Transverse fracture is most tolerable: a slope
fracture with loose fragments is worse, but if it be sharp pointed, it is worst
of all. The scull asks thirty days to be joined: the Arm and Legs forty
days, the Cubit thirty, a rib one and twenty, the Showlder and Thigh forty,
the bone of the nose is joined in eight or ten days.

For the cure, first of a dislocation, the bone must be stretched out, and
compelled to its proper place. But the operation must be warily and variously
handled, according to the nature of the part, and the disposition, situation,
and knitting of the bones, tendons, and Nerves. Sometimes it may be done by the
hand, and sometimes not without hands and Engines: when it is in, you must
labor to keep it so, by strengthening the member, anoint it with the oil of
Roses, Myrtles, and Mastich, then lay on a linen Cloth dipped first in oil
of Roses, upon that Cloths wet in the white of an Egg, and put upon it some
astringent Powders: then roll it up with Clothes wet in Water and Vinegar,
then splent it with stiff Leather or Pastboard, bind it not too hard for fear
of inflammation, then leave it so seven or ten days, unless any symptom
arise. Then open it and bathe it with warm water, to discuss the
superfluities and ease pain, and do it up as before, and bind it a little
harder. If there be inflammation, wound, or fracture with the dislocation it is
dangerous, and many times the placeing of the bone must be deferred till the
inflammation be eased; if it be with a wound or fracture, the following
discourse of the cure of fractures will instruct you. If any Callous bardnesse
be gathered between the Luxated bones, the place must be somented with the
decoction of Marsh and common-Mallowes; or afterward it must be anointed with
the unguent of Marsh Mallows, and lay on a Payster of Diachilon Magnum.

A fracture must be thus dealt with, viz. let the Patient sit or lie in a place
convenient, or such as the nature of the member requires, let two with their
hands, one under the member, and the other above, or one to the left hand, the
other to the right join the broken bone: if you have need of more force,
prepare large Tyalls of Linen, and let two draw one one way, and the other
another, and pull the member as much as is needful; but beware of violent
pulling and extension of the member, least vehement pain, Fevers, Convulsions,
and resolutions be procured: when the bone is in its place and joined, labor
to keep it so, and bind it up as is taught before in binding up of a
dislocation, and lay it best for the Patients case: open it not in fifteen
days, unless pain, Inflammation, Itching, or some such like symptom; in the
mean while foment the member round about it with the Oil of Roses, Myrtels and
Mastick. After fifteen days open it again, and foment it with Wine, wherein
Wormwood, Roses, and a little Salt has been boiled, and bind it up as before,
till seven days be past, then open it again, and apply Emplastrum Oxycroceum
upon it. If the fracture be in the lower parts, move not the belly by Clister
or otherwise, if the body be full of blood open a vein, because it hinders
defluxions. In the beginning let his diet be but slender, after the tenth day
let him eat freely of such things as engender thick, and cleaving juyces, as
Rice, Wheat, the intrailes of Sheep, and the feet of Calves, and Sheep, and
such like.

If there be a contusion with the fracture, you must not roll up the member as
before you are taught, but slopewise on either side of the contusion, that so
you may come to dress the contusion, and not open tho member, the like you may
do if there be a wound; but if there be any small splints that prick the
member, they must be taken out before. If you find that the Callus grow not
fast enough, apply such things as draw nourishment to the place: as warm-water,
moderate frications, and a Plaster of Pitch. If it grow over great, apply that
which may diminish i^, rub it much, and apply a plate of Lead to the part. If
it be inflamed, ^oment the part with warm-water, and Oil of Roses, and such
things which are appropriated to allay such distempers: and apply no splents
till the inflammation be removed. If the part be vexed with Itch, or Pustules,
anoint it with unguentum populeon, diapompholigos or album. If the part
gangrene, scarrifie it, and deal with it, as you shall be taught in its proper
place.

CHAP. VI. Of Accidents commonly happening to wouned persons.
I Should first begin with immoderate bleeding, being commonly the first
Accident; but to avoid needless repetitions, I shall referr the Reader to the
fourth Chapter of this book, where I have sufficiently performed this task.

If immoderate pain vex the Patient, as many times it does; Simples mitigating
pain, may be made use of, viz. common Oil, the Oil of Roses, and Poppyes, the
crumbs of Wheaten bread, steeped in hot water, the white of an egg, Women's or
Cows-milk, Sheeps grease, you may make compound medicines of the root of Night
shade, finely powdered, and Hog's Grease, make an oyntmnt, or you may use
unguentum e Solano, or the white of an egg, and Stiptick Wine, and such like.
Then you must consider if the distemper be hot or cold; if hot, whether it is
of the whole body or the part only: if the whole body be distempered, it is a
Fever, and you must seek the cure in the second book; if the distemper be in
the Member only, foment it with the decoction of Plantane, Roses, and such
like, with the Oil of Roses, unguentum album, populeon, etc: if the member
suffer by a cold distemper, which you may know by the swart color, loosnesse,
and softness of the part; then you must apply heating medicines: unguentum
Basilicon, will do very well in this case.

If a Convulsion happens, you must consider what is the cause: if repletion,
or fulness of phlegm be the cause, let the place wherein he lies be
naturally, or art ficially hot, and dry: let him lie free from perturbation,
and trouble, let his sleep be moderate, and only in the night. Let him be very
moderate and sparing in his Diet, which ought to be rere Eggs, Barley, Cream,
the flesh of Chickens, Capons and Hens; Raisons, Pine-Kernells, sweet-Almonds;
of herbs, Sage, wild Time, Hysop, Marjarome and such like. Let the phlegmatic
humor be purged, and the convulsed part anointed, with the oil of Nard, Bays,
Castor, Rue, Nutmeggs, etc. Vesalius commends this following ointment: Take
of oil of sweet-Almonds, Hens grease, and the marrow of Calves feet, of each
nine drachms; oil of Violets six ounces; the fat of a Kid and Calfe, of each
fifteen ounces: boil them in the decoction of Mallows, the root of
March-Mallowes, and the seeds of Quinces, till it be consumed, then strain it
and bring it into the form of a Liniment. If Convulsion come by repletion of
blood, and inflammation, open the middle vein, and draw blood at several
times, give Clysters, and deal with this inflammation as with another. If
emptiness be the cause of Convulsion, direct a moist diet; rest of body and
mind and much sleep. To the diet aforesaid add small stone fishes, let his
drink be Barly-water, and if a little Liquoris and Cinnamon be sodden therein,
it will be the better, herbs proper for him are Lettice, Spinach, Arach,
Borage, Buglosse, Mallow, and such like; of fruits, Melons, Gourds, Damask
Prunes, Peaches, ripe Grapes, etc. The conserve of Violetts, Borage, Buglosse,
Diatraganthum frigidum, and bathe his body or the part with warm water and
oil, or anoint with the oil of sweet Almonds. Be sure to remember to have
respect to the greatness of the disease, the season of the year, the age,
strength, and constitution of the Patient.

Swooning often happening to wounded persons, if vioient pain be the cause,
labor to appease the pain, you have rules enough before going. If it be
occasioned by unmeasurable Evacuation, cast Rose Water or cold water into his
face, use strong Ligatures and fricarions to the extreme parts.

If some venomous quality, by reason of a bite of some venomous Creature, or
wound with some venomous weapon, be the cause of this symptom, you must seek
the remedy in the third Chapter.

If Raving and Madness happen, appoint a mean diet betwixt hot and cold;
labor to provoke sleep, to loosen the belly, and to expel all perturbations
of the mind. If the body abound with blood, and nothing forbid it, open a vein:
then alter and prepare the humors with Juleps, made of the syrup of Roses,
Violets, Water-Lillyes, Poppyes, and Endive: then empty the body with Manna,
Cassia, or some such gentle thing: or with an Emollient Clister; but above all,
have a special regard to the wound, because pain there may be the cause,
therefore let it be often opened, and bathed with Vinegar, and oil of Roses,
or something that may powerfully appease the pain.

If the Palsy happen you must be very circumsp^ct, and appoint such a Diet, as
for the Convulsion; let his drink be honyed water, and boil therein Sage, and
Cinnamon: or this, Take of Cinnamon two ounces, Ginger, half an ounce: grain of
Paradise, Galanga and long Pepper, of each one dram: Cardamoms one dram,
and an half; Nutmegs, Cloves and Mace, of each one dram: boil them in water
to the wasting of a third part, strain it, and sweeten it, and let the Patient
drink two or three ounces in a morning. For medicines internal, or external
go to the seventh Chapter of the second book.

If the wounded person be costive, and he begin to suffer prejudice thereby,
give him some Lenitive medicines, or a suppository. If he suffer by stoppage of
Urine, give him somewhat, which gently provokes Urine: see the 68 Chapter of
the second book. If Vomiting happen, and it cease not in due season, Take
Leaven, half a pound, the juice of Mint extracted with Vinegar, as much as is
needful, boil them in to the form of a Cataplasm, lay it warm to the Stomach.
If the Patient feel heat, and astonishing about the wound, anoint the wo^nd
with the oil of Camphire* If the wound swells with heat, and pilleth under
the finger, boil Watercresses, and Water-Lillyes in Rose Vinegar and apply
it. If there appear the Flux of the Sinews, which is a viscous liquor from the
Nerves; dress it with a vulnery oil, and lay on Emplastrum Sticticum. If the
wound putrify, and goes back from healing, swells with heat, looks black,
blew, or swart, Take of Litharge, one pound; Alum one pound and an half; Salt
two ounces; Frankincense four ounces; Roman Gum five ounces; of Wine, Water,
and Vinegar, of each one pound, boil them a quarter of an hour, and apply it
warm. If there grow a Pustulous Fistula, that is when the wound is healed too
soon, without any firm foundation, so that it putrify underneath, and break
out again, in this case Paracelsus advises this Cerat to be used. Take of
common oil, Virgin Wax, and Litharge of Gold in Powder of each one pound:
boil them together into the forms of a Cerate, to which add Opoponax prepared
with Vinegar, and Mummy, of each three ounces; Aristolochia, Mastick,
Frankincense, and Mirrh, of each half an ounce: Turpetine three ounces: Oil of
Bays two ounces: Camphire two drachms: mix them upon the fire, afterward make
it up with oil of Camomel. So much for the general cure of wounds, and their
accidents.

CHAP. VII. Of Sanguine Tumors.
FIrst Phlegmon is a Tumor begotten of pure blood, and is for the most part
incident to the fleshy parts; the Antecedent cause is abundance of blood. In
which Tumor are three things considerable, first the part that sends it,
either by reason of its plenty, strength, or straightness of passages;
Secondly, the part receiving it, either by reason of weakness, largeness or
opening of the passages, or by the lowness of its situation. Thirdly, the
part drawing it, which it does either through heat or pain within it. The
conjoined cause is much blood in the part, which before it comes to
suppuration, causes a Tumor, Redness, heat, and pain: but when it is
suppurate, the Tumor is soft, yielding and growing to a point, a pricking and
beating pain: last of all the skin breaks, and the pus issues out: sometimes
if the humors be thin, and the skin of the same nature, the Tumor may be
resolved without suppuration.

To this Tumor happens evil accidents sometimes, if the Surgeon want care
or skill. Sometimes it turns to corruption, and is seen by its leaden black
color, and stinking savor. Sometimes the matter makes a regression, and the
Tumor diminishes, but the whole body is inflamed with a Fever and such like
accidents. And sometimes it turns into a Schirrhous hardness.

In the cure the Antecedent cause must be first removed. Therefore first let
the Surgeon open the Liver-vein, or any other vein, which he finds has more
affinity with the sending part; if he see good, he may bleed him in the
opposite part for a revulsion, and derive the matter to some part adjacent, by
cupping, frication, or Ligatures; and apply to the part affected medicines that
cool and repel or beat back the flowing humors; and of this sort are these
simples. Acatia, Vinegar, Balaustines, Bolearmenick, Camphite, sealed Earth,
Myrtles, Pome-granate Peels, unripe Grapes, Vine-leaves, the leaves of Cyprus,
Plantane, Oak, Sumach, Nightshade, Henbane, Housleeke, Lettuce, Purslane,
Roses, and such like. Of these you may make somentations, or Cataplasmes, to be
used in the beginning of the Tumor, to hinder and beat back the blood, which
flows to feed it. Take this caution that in some cases, these medicines ought
not to be meddled with, to wit when the humor is Malignant, or thick; or if the
Tumor be Critical: Or upon some of the Glandulous parts.

Next you must deal with the conjoined cause, or the blood impact in the part
affected. If you judgo that the blood is thin, and apt to be discussed,
discussing medicines are to be applied. This Cataplasm is good: Take the leaves
of Mallows, Melilot and Camomell, of each one handful: the seeds of Dill,
Flax, and Fenugreek, of each half an ounce, boil them to the Consumption of
the Water, then beat them in a Stone-Morter; and add to it the oil of Dill,
and Camomell, of each one ounce: a little Honey and Leaven, and make it into
the form of a Cataplasm. But if the matter be thick, and not fit to be
discussed, then labor to bring it to suppuration. For which these Simples are
proper, Warm water, Butter, Wheaten Bran, or Wheaten bread, the grease of an
Hogg, Calfe, Goose, etc. Grease tried from the Wool of a Sheep, Rozin, Pitch,
Figs, Saffron, Frankincense, etc. Of these you may make Cataplasms, and remove
them twice a day. If the hot intemperature does stir up a Fever, let the diet
be ordered, and such medicines administered, as the nature of the Fever
requires; see the second book, among the Chapters of Fevers; when you find it
very soft, and well suppurated, open it with a Lancet, where it is softest, and
in the most convenient place for the matter to come forth; afterward mundifie,
incarnate and Cicatize it.

A Carbuncle is a Sanguine Tumor, the antecedent cause of it is black, thick,
hot and faculent blood, flowing to the place: the conjoined cause is the
settling of the blood in the part as you have heard before. The signs of a
Carbuncle are sometimes but one, and sometimes many small pustu'es like burnt
blisters, which being broken, a crusty Ulcer ensues. If it be pestilentiall,
the crust is black or Ash color, about it redness, Inflammation and grevious
pain; the Patient is troubled with Loathing, Vomiting, loss of Appetite,
Palpitation of the heart, and Swooning.

Carbuncles for the most part are attendants of the Plague, and Epidemicall
causes. If they come upon the Emunctuories, there is very great danger, lest
the venemons humors fall upon some principal part. If it break out about the
Stomach, or Jaws, there is danger of Choking. If the color be first Red,
after Yellowish, it is laudable, but if it be black or blew it is dangerous; If
the accidents which accompany the disease vanish, there is hepes.

In the cure, first have regard to the ancient cause which is thick hot blood,
and must be altered and evacuated, to alter the quality of the blood, give him
broth of Chickens, with Lettice, Purslane, Pomegranates, and Lemons; and his
drink Barly-Water: give him medicines cooling and concocting: as Juleps made of
syrup of Vinegar, Pomegranates, Citrons, Lemons and Endive; and the distilled
water of Lettice, Purslane, and the like. But if the Pestilence be present, you
must have respect to the malignity, and give such medicines which strengthen
the Heart and Vitalls: See the 90. Chapter of the second Book; the quantity
must be diminished, either by blood-letting, cupping, or medicines, as gentle
Purges or Clisters; in all which be well advised, if the Plague be present. If
there be a great fluxion of blood to the part, lay on discutients and
repressings: discutients you have before. Take this caution that you apply
gentle ones in the beginning, and stronger when the matter is gathered, to lay
defensives to the adjacent parts, as the Ointment of Roses, Bolearmenick, or
the oil of Mittles and Vinegar; also attractives are convenient, as hot Bread,
the warm Lungs of beasts new killed, the tail of a Cock made bare, and a
little Salt put into it and applied, or young Pigeons slit alive and applied
warm. The cause conjoined must be taken away by Chirurgions, or Medicine: first
scatifying of the Tumor (if nothing (orbid it) deeply, and wash it with
warm-water Horsleeches are good. When the matter cannot be dispersed, or
otherwis dealt with, you must apply such things as have an altering, or ripening
quality, as is aforesaid. If the Carhuncle be very venomous, this is commended
viz.

Take a great Onion, and cut off the head of it, and pick out the core or
middle part; fill the hollow place with good Venice Treacle, pasle on the head
again with a little Leaven, and roast it in the Embers: when it is soft pill
it, and beat it in a Mortar, and apply it warm to the Sore, and renew it every
6 hours.

This Cataplasm is much commended. Take of Onions, and Garlic heads, of each
of them four; one Lilly Root, the Seed of Flax, and Fenugreek, of each one
spoonful: Snails, with their sh^ls, four or five; sour Figs: Leaven as much as
a Walnut, Barrows grease as much as two Walnuts; beat them all in a Mortar very
well, warm it and apply it.

Then you must mundifie and heal it; but if there remain a crusty Escar, you
must resolve it; for which purpose this Plaster is good.

Take the flower of Wheat and Barley, of each three ounces, with the decoction
of Mallows, Violets, and Althea Roots, and make it into a solid Plaster: then
add to it fresh Butter, and Hogs grease, of each two ounces, the yolks of two
new laid Eggs.

This mollifieth the crustiness, and caseth pain. If it be corrupt and
putrified, you must make use of incision, cautery, or hot Iron.

Gangrena is a mortification of any part, occasioned by exceeding inflammation,
but not fully accomplished, but some sense remains. Sphacelus is when the
part is utterly deprived of senle, and is mortified: so that if it be stricken,
burnt, or lanced, it feels no hurt. The fleshy parts are not only subject to
this, but even the Nerves and Bones. The cause is adust blood, flowing to, or
lodged in the part. Outward causes are cold Air, or Medicines, unmeasurable
Heat, or Venom, Ligatures, Compressions, Contusions.

Gangrena is known by the loss of sense, though not wholly, black or swartish
color; there is pain, heat, and beating of the Atteries. In Sphacelus, there
is a total loss of sense, black color, putrified, stinking, rotten; being
pressed, yields to the bottom, and returns not.

The first is difficult to cure; the other more, and not without cutting, when
the Bones and Sinews are affected it is incurable: unless it be cured in the
beginning, the part affected dies, and it creeps to the near parts, to the
destruction of the whole Body.

In the Cure, first temper the blood by a cooling Diet as before, and give
preparing Juleps, such as are before prescribed. Diminish the same by
bloodletting, if nothing forbid it, and by gentle Purges; as Cassia Fistula,
Tamarinds, Fumitory, Catholicon, Diaprunum, Lenitive, and the like. Lay
repressing Medicines to the parts round about: Take of the Oil of Roses and
Myrrh, of each three ounces and an half, the Juice of Plantane and Nightshade,
of each two Ounces, boil them to the consumption of the Juyces: add to it white
Wax one Ounce and an half, the Meal of Beans, Lentils, and Barley, of each half
an Ounce; of all the Sanders, two drachms and an half, Bolearmenick one Ounce,
the Powder of Myrtles one dram; mix them for a defensive.

Give the Patient such things inwardly, as cheer the Heart, and revive the
Spirits.

This done, draw up your forces against the conjoined cause: and first, if
nothing prohibit, bleed your Patient, and scarifie the place, and wash it with
Water and Salt: cut the member, or burn it with a hot Iron, and leave nothing
that is putrified, to preserve the rest of the Body: then apply Medicines,
whose property is to dry and resolve.

Quercetanus preseribes two Unguants of great force for the purpose: Take of
Honey two Ounces, Crocus Martis, and Crocus Veneris, of each half an Ounce;
Myrrh, and Round-Dirthwort, of each one Dram: Camphire, one Dram and an
half; the Phlegm of Vitriol six Ounces: Boil them to the consistence of an
Unguent: then add of Mercury Precipitate half an Ounce, and make an Unguent. Or
this, Take of Butter of Arsenick two Ounces, Mercury precipitate half an Onnce:
Oil of Myrrh two Drachms: Mix them with Honey, being first washed with the
juice of Celandine.

When the putrefaction cealeth to go any farther, remove the Escar, as you were
taught before: then mundifie and heal it.

CHAP. VIII. Of Choleric Tumors.
FIrst, Erysipelas, or ignis Sacer, is a Choleric Fluxion, chiefly consisting
betwixt, or about the skins. The antecedent cause is Choler, abounding and
flowing to the part. The conjoined cause is the same Humor there settled. The
first is known by a Choleric Constitution and Diet. The second is known by
great heat, small Tumor, reddish or yellow color, soon vanishing in touching,
and quickly returning: The pain is not with pulsation and beating, but biting
and pricking, and the Patient is sensible of the motion of a Tertian Fever.
Erysipelas about the head is a hard thing to cure, and it easily gets into the
Face, and there spreads: for the flesh there is thin, and the humor light
and active. If it happen to the Womb of a woman with child, it is deadly: if it
lie near the bone, it is dangerous: if it return from the outward parts to the
inward, it is very evil: the like judge, if it come to suppuration, which it
seldom does, but is sent forth by transpiration.

First, order the Air to be cool and moist, where your Patient lodges, and his
Diet of the same nature. Bleed not, unless blood be mixed with Choler, which
is called Erysipelas Phlegmonosum: Then prepare the Humors with Tuleps
convenient, made of the Syrups of Vinegar Simple, Bugloss, Maidenhair,
Violets, Water Lillies, Endive, and Succory, and their distilled Waters, or
others of the like nature. When you have prepared the humor, purge it either
by Clister, or Potion. This Potion is much commended: Take of the best Rubarb
four seruples, the Flowers of Violets and Borrage, of each one dram, the
decoction of Tamarinds, sufficient: insuse the Flowers and Rbubarb ten hours,
strain them, and dissolve therein Diacatholicon three drachms, Syrrup of Roses
two ounces, and make a Potion. Vesalius. You may alter, or make variety of
Potions, as you see occasion: Or empty your body with this Clister; Take Marsh
and common Mallows, Violet leaves, Camomel, and Lettice, of each one handful;
the seeds of Anise, Fennel, and the four great cold seeds, of each one dram;
the flowers of Borage, Bugless, Violets, and Water Lillies, of each one Pugil;
Polypodium, and Senna, of each one ounce: make a Decoction to a pint; of which
add of Cassia one ounce; Diacatholicon, half an ounce, Oil of Violets, two
ounces, make a Clister.

Add strength and aid to the part, by cooling and repelling Medicines, viz.
Epithems, and Liniments, made of the juice or distilled Water of Nightshade,
Housleek, Stonecrop, Fleabane, and Henbane, Purflane, Lettice, Endive, Succory,
and such like; the Oil of Roses, and Water Lillies, Vinegar, Sanders, the White
of Eggs, the Musilage of Quince seeds, etc. Compounds are the Unguent of Roses,
or Refrigerans Galeni, and such like.

The conjoined cause must be removed by Medicines, which have power to evacuate
and discuss; Take of the Litharge of Gold one ounce, washed Ceruse six drachms,
the juice of Plantane, and Woman's milk, of each one ounce and an half, Oil of
Roses three ounces, white wax, as much as sufficieth to make an Unguent.

There are other Yumonis, which do commonly associate with Erysipelas, viz.
Herpes Exedens, or Miliaris, which are called Chollerick Pushes, and the
Shingles. The first is caused of a thick and sharp (...) of yellow Choler,
slowing into the part which does feed upon, and eat the skin. Herpes Miliaris
are small Pastules rising upon the ^kin, like the seeds of Millet from whence
it has its name: It is caused of yellow Choler, mixed with thin Phlegm.
These, Humors abounding in the body will declare.

The cure of these, differ little from the former; appoint the same Dier and
Medicines, externally and internally, making this difference: In the first, let
the Medicines preparing be more cutting, and the purging Medicines stronger,
because of the thickness of the Humor; and let the outward Medicines be more
powerfully discutient. In the cure of Herpes Miliaris, observe the same Diet,
to your Preparatives, and such things as cut Phlegm: To your Purges, such as
purge Phlegm. Extemal Medicines may by an easy Brain be regulated, little
differing from the former. This Cataplasm is very good: Take of Pidgcons Dung
fresh, as much as you please: mix it with Wheaten flower, and apply it cold,
and cover it with a Colewort Leaf; renew it twice in 24 hours.

CHAP. IX. Of Phlegmatic Tumors.
OEdema is a loose Tumor without pain, proceeding of Phlegmatic Humors,
flowing into some part. The Tumor is loose and soft, yields to the finger,
and retains the pit after the finger is gone.

This Disease is more prone to Resolution, than Suppuration: sometimes it
turns to Nodes and Knots in the flesh.

Order your Patient with a Diet, contrary in quality to the Disease, viz.
Heating, drying, and making thin. Then prepare the Humor for Evacuation; these
Simples are good: Betony, Sage, Hysop, Balm, Polymountain, Penyroyal, Calamint,
Origanum, Margarom, Southernwood, Mint, Wormwood, Germander, Groundpine,
Cowslips, Agrimony, Maidenhair, the cold Seeds, Lignum Vitae, the Roots of
Cyprus, Acorus, Ireos, Galanga, Elicampane, Smallage, Parsley, Grass,
Asparagus, Butchers Broom, Fenel, etc. Of these you may make Compound
Medicines, to prepare the Humors for purging. This Apozem is of good virtue:
Take the Root of Ireos, and Galanga, of each 6 drachms Smallage, Parsley, and
Asparagus, of each one ounce; of Betony, Balm, Germander, Groundpine, and
Maidenhair, of each one handful; the Seeds of Annise, Fenel, Caraway, and
Cummin, of each two ounces; the seed of Melones 6 drachms; of Raisins stoned
two ^unces, the seed of Carthamus two ounces, Senna one ounce and an half, the
Flowers of Broom, red Ci^ers, Stechas, and Bugloss, of each one pugil: make a
decoction, of which take two pound, and dissolvt therein Honey of Roses, and
Syrup of Wormwood, of each two ounces; Sugar as much as suffices, Aromaticum
Rosatum two drachms and an half; make an Apozem, and clarify it for 6 Doses.

When the Humoes are thus prepared, you must come to purging them with such
Medicines, as purge the Phlegmatic Humors: the next Book will furnish you
with store of such Medicines, so that I need nor here insert them. Outwardly
sortifie the part with this or the like Unguent. Take of Bolearmenick, and
Acatia, of each one ounce, Cyperus half an ounce, Aloes and Myrrh, of each five
drachms, Saffron half a dram, the juice of Coleworts two ounces, Oil of Roses
four ounces, Vinegar one dram and an half; Wax sufficient, to make an
Unguent. Concerning the matter impact in the parts, you must consider whether
it be thin, and may be resolved; or thick and subject to suppuration,

If the Humor be thin, lay on this, or a Plaster of this nature.

Take of Cow Dung one pound and an half, Olibanum, Styrax, Moss of Trees,
Calamus, Atomaticus, Spicknard, Wormwood, of each half an ounce; make them up
with Vinegar, and the decoction of Coleworts into the sorm of a plaster.

If you find the matter will come to suppuration, apply this Plaster.

Take of Mallows, Trank Ursint, the Root of Lillies, Onions, Snails, Leaven,
and Flax Seed, of each a like quantity sufficientl; boil them, and beat them in
a Mortar, with Hogs grease, or fresh Butter, to the form of a Plaster.

If you fear that the Humors may suffer in the mean while, provide internal
and external Medicines for the same: Take of Conserve of the Flowers of
Stechas, and Rosemary, of each one ounce; of the Rinds of Citrons preserved
half an ounce, Emblicks, and Mirabolans preserved two drachms, Species
Diacinnamon two scruples with Syrup of Citron Peels, make an Electuary; whereof
let the Patient take the quantity of a Nut an hour before meat,

The Aposthume being ripe, open it with an hot Iron, or Coustick; then mundifie
it with Unguentum Apostolorum, or cleanse it with this following Unguent: Take
of Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Rozin, Turpetine, Pitch, Bullocks Tallow, and Oil, of
each a like quantity: Dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and then let them hoil a
little with the rest upon the fire. Afterward incarnate and cicatrize it as
you do other Ulcers.

Out of this Phlegmatic Humor is sometimes engendered a flatuous and windy
Tumor, which is gathered either under the skin, or under the membranes, which
cover and cloth the Bones and Muscles.

They appear with a certain brightness and shining, resist the touch; and being
smitten, sound like a Bladder: the pain is extensive, and stretching. Let his
Drink be such, as expels and prevents such Humors. Let the Humors be prepared
by Wine, expelling Julips, and the Body emptied by Carminative, and Clisters,
and convenient Purges.

Then you must attenuate, discuss, and scatter the conjoined Cause; these
Simples are fit for the purpose, Anise, Fenol, Dill, Caraway, Carots, Commin,
Siler Montauum, Smallage, Parsley, Rue, Bay Berries, Oil of Rue, Bays,
Flowerdeluce, Nard, Spike, Nuts, Euphorbium, and such like. Of these, and other
Ingredients of the like nature, are many Unguents and Plasters formed.

Take of the Oil of Camomel, Dill, Bitter Almonds, and Rue, of each one ounce;
the Seed of Annise, Fenel, Carrots, Caraway, Arreos, and Rue, of each half an
ounce: White Wind three ounces: Boil it to the consumption of the White Wind;
strain it, and add Wax sufficent to make an Unguent.

The expert Surgeon ought to compound and alter his Unguents, Plasters, and
all his Medicines, according to the constitution of the Patient, and nature of
the Tumor; for which it is impossible to lay down certain Rules. Give inwardly
Diacinnamom, Diacalamenthum, Aromaticum, Rosatum, Diagalanga, Dianisum, and
such like; and lay a Plaster of the same nature to the stomach. If a Watery
Tumor is engendered in any part, or all over the body, see the 58th Chap. of the
2d Book.

Struma is a Tumor, in which, underneath, certain Glandules made of Matter and
Blood, and enclosed with a Membrane do grow: They have their place for the most
part about the Neck, Arm-holes, and sometimes in other places. The principal
cause is Phlegmatic Humors: sometimes falls, ^oaks, or great Surfeits may be
the cause. They that have narrow and short Foreheads, flat Temples, and broad
Jaws, are subject to this Disease. This Tumor seldom comes to suppuration, if
it does, it gathers again. The greater the Tumor, and the deeper it is
rooted, the harder the Cure.

For the Cure of the Struma, or Kings evil appoint a diet, that will heat,
dry, and attenuate; then prepare the humors. Take of Oxymell compounded, syrup
of Staechas, honey of Roses, of each half an ounce: the distiled water of
Scabius and fumitory, of each one ounce: mix it for one dose, and take thereof
as often as need requires. Then purge with Diaphaenicon, Diacatholicon, Indi
majoris, Hiera piera, Pill Cochiae, de agarico, and such like. It is good also
to cleanse the blood by Urine: Take of Pilewort three handful, Philipendula
two handfulls, pimpernell, Mouseare, Tansie, Red Coleworts, Madder, of each one
headfull: the Roots of Fennel, Parsley, round Birthwort, Raddish, and stinking
Gladwin, of each half a handful, the seed of Nettles, Juniper, and Bay-berryes,
of each one dram; boil them in Wite-Wine to the Consumpoion of half, sweeten
it with Honey, give every second or third day three ounces in the morning. If
the conjoined cause be fit to be resolved, then use means that can mollify,
attenuate, disperse and sepetate: such as is Diachylon, Commune, and Magnum,
Diapalma, many unguents, Liniments, and Plasters may be made for the purpose
aforesaid, which I hear omit. If the matter be unfit for resolution, then have
you two ways to empty it, that is suppuration, and incision. This plaster is
good to ripen it. Take the roots of Marshmallows, and Lillyes, of each one
pound, boil them soft, and beat them in a Mortar: Garlic and Onyons boiled,
of each three ounces, the oil of Lillyes and Buster, of each two ounces, Hogs
grease, and Goose grease, of each two ounces and an half, the Meal of Wheat,
Fenugreek and Flax seed, sufficient, the Yolks of two Eggs make a plaster,
when it is ripe open it with an instrument, or ruptory of Chantharides or
Arsnick. If it appear filthy, cleanse it with Unguentum Apostolorum,
Egyptiacum, or such like, afterward incarnate and Cicatrize it. If it submit
not to medicines, it must be taken out by manual operation, which only
belongs to an expert and able Surgeon: seeing the whole cure is difficult,
and ought to be managed by an able brain, and skillfull hand, I omit any
further discourse of it, it being my task principally to instruct people of
mean Capacity.

There are three other phlegmatic Tumors, which lie under the general notion:
the first is called Atheroma, and is a Tumor without pain and change of color,
which is a humor contained in the membraines or Nervous Coats: it is clammy
like sodden Meal, Starch, and sometimes mixed (as it were) with hairs, pieces
of bones, etc. Meliseras is a Tumor somewhat thinner, and almost of the
substance of Honey, otherwise agreeing with the former. Steatoma is much like
the two former, save that the humor contained is like suet, and the Tumor does
increase, and is much enlarged in process of time; the inward causes of them
all are Phlegmatic humors, with which the body does abound. The first is thus
known, the Tumor is long and ridged; being pressed, returns to its place
again but slowly, by reason of the clammynesse of the humor; the second Tumor
is rounder and thinner, being pressed, yields and returns speedily; the
last is hard, yields not to the pressing of the finger, for the humor is like
Suet.

The first must be dealt with by corrosives and incision; the second by
discutients, corrosives, and incision; the last no otherwise but by incision
alone.

The diet, preparatives, and purges, which are proper for Oedema, are here to
be used. If you find the Tumor fit for resolution, apply discussive plasters,
a plaster made of Cyclamen is much commended.

Take of Cyclamen, otherwise called Sowbread, as much as you pleass,
Hog's Grease and Brimstone of each equal parts, beat them into the form of a
plaster. If it will not be resolved, consume it with eating medicines: among
many of this nature, this following is commended.

Take of the Scales or flower of Brass half an ounce, of red Arsenick, and
black Ellebore, of each two drachms, with Oil of Roses; make a plaster; make
a deep eschar, and make incision through it, and apply a Caustic.

The Cure may be performed only by incision, but the Surgeon must beware
that the Tunicle, which holds the matter be not broken, lest some part of the
humor be left, to the hinderance of his operation.

CHAP. X. Of Melancholy Tumors.
THe true and Legitimate Scirrhus is a Tumor hard, without pain, yet sensible.
The antecedent cause is Melancholy, abounding in the body; the conjoined cause
is the humor fixed in the part. The first is known by the Melancholy
constitution of the Patient; a diet and course of life, which is apt to breed
Melancholy. The second, viz. the conjoined cause is known by a Tumor hard and
scarce yiedling to the touch, in color between red and black, of dull sense.

These Tumors if they be timely and carefully dealt with, may be cured by
resolution: Sometimes they become indurate, and sometimes they degenerate into a
Cancer.

Let the Patient live in a Temperate air, let him use moderate exercise, and
avoid excessive affections and passions of the mind, let his body be kept
soluble, and let his meat be such as is of good nourishment, and easy
digesture, and let him therein be moderate.

Let the Melancholy humors be prepared by Juleps made of the syrups of
Fumitory, Borrage, Buglose Endive, Succory, Rubarb, Hart's-tongue, Epithymum,
and Vinegar, with their distilled waters. This Apozem is very effectual.

Take the root and leaves of Sorrel, Borrage, Buglosse, and Fumitory, the
leaves of Maidenhaire, Succory, Endive, Dandelion, and Hops, of each one
handful; Balm, half a handful, the four great cold seeds beaten, of each two
drachms, the seed of Purslane two dram; Anise and Fenell, of each one dram,
Raisons of the Sun stoned six drachms, Polypody, one ounce; Senna one ounce and
an half; Time and Epithymum, of each two drachms; the Flowers of Violets,
Borrage, and Buglosse, of each one pugill, make a decoction, in two pound of
which dissolve the juice of Odoriferous Apples, and of Buglosse, of each four
ounces, boil it again to a pint and an half, then sweeten it with Sugar, as
much as is convenient: Clarify it, then Aromatize it with the Powder,
Diamargariton Frigidum, and Diatr^aganthum Frigidum, of each one dram; make
an Apozem for four Doses.

The humor prepared, purge it with such things as purge Melancholy; these
simples are proper; Sena, Polypodium, Epithemum, Fumitory, Cassia, Lapis
Lazuli, and Mitabolans, black Hellebore, and such like. Look for compound
Melancholy Purgers in the next book.

The conjoined humor must be dealt with by such things as soften, separate, and
discuss, as the grease tried out of flank Wool, Butter, the oil of Almonds,
Camomel, Dill, Lillyes, etc: the fat of a Cock, a Duck, Goose, Fox, Bear, Lion,
Sow, Calfe, Stag, Eagle, Vulture, Bee-Glew, Wax, fat Figgs, Marsh and Common
Mallows, Lillyes, Branck ursine. Ammmoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Styrax, Tarr,
Rozin, and such like, of which you may make unguents and plasters. This
plaster of Calmeteus is of great virtue. Take of fat Figgs, in Number twelve,
boil and stamp them, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, dissolved in Vinegar, of
each two ounces, Liquid Styran, one ounce, the Musilage of Ma^sh-Mallow roots,
of the seed of Flax, and Fenugreck, of each two ounces, Oesipus and fresh
Butter, of each one ounce, oil of Lillyes three ounces, with Wax as much as
suffices; make a Plaster.

A Cancer is a hard, unequal, round, and venomous Tumor; of a black color,
hoe and painful: it is called in Greek (...) and (...), it has this name for
these reasons, first because the veins about it, filled with Melancholy blood,
are stretched out like unto the feet of the Crab fish. Secondly, because it is
much like in color to a Crab; and lastly some will have its name to be taken
from its sticking quality, that it can scarcely be pulled away, as the Sea-Crab
does, which obstinately sticks to the place, on which it lays hold. The
cause is thick and Melancholy juice contained in the part, and appears with
a hard, resisting, unequal, swartish or brown Tumor; round about it the veins
are swelled, and exalted: about it there is sometimes sudden pricking, but for
the most part it is of dull sense.

The thicker and blacker the humor is, so much the w^se is the effect, this
disease happens to any part of the body, but more especially about the face,
Ears, Lips, Women's breast, who have wanted their natural purgation: and it
happens to men, who were wont to have Hemorrhoicall purging, and have lost it.
By reason of the thickness and stubbornness of the humor, it is seldom cured,
but rather turns to an Ulcerate Cancer. Those Cancers only that are upon the
extreme parts of the body receive curation: but if they are deeply lodged,
they admit not of cure: a Cancer that is confirmed cannot be cured unless it
be rooted up, by incision or burning,

Order your Patient, as before in respect of diet, and prepare and purge the
Melancholy humor as before is taught: in this case let purges be very gentle
and often reiterated. Then give medicines which have a faculty to consume and
dry up the matter: This Electuary of Antonius Montaguana is good. Take of the
powder of Sea or River Crabs drowned in Milk, and dried in an Oven, of each
four ounces, the powder of Frogs, Snailes, and Hedg-Hogs, of each one ounce,
the rind of Citrons preserved, two ounces; the shaving of Ivory, and the bone
of a Stages Heart, of each three drachms. Xylobalsamum, and wood of Aloes,
Sanders, Coral, and the powder of Steel prepared, of each two drachms; the
seed of Sorrel and Citrons, the powder of Carduus, Scordium, and Ceterach, of
each one dram, Amber and Musk, of each two grains, the conserve of Borrage,
Buglosse, Sorrel, and Sowthistles, of each two drachms, with the simple sirrup
of Apples as much as suffices; make an Electuary, the dose is the quantity of
a Chestnut, three hours before meat. Then apply such medicines to the part,
that may scatter the humor contained, and strengthen the part against farther
defluxion: These simples are very assistant in this case: Nightshade, Ceterach,
Agrimony, St. John's wort Clery, the juice of Coriander, the flesh of Cocks,
Snailes, River-Crabs, Frogs, the dung of a man, burnt and washed lead, oil of
Frogs, oil of sulphur and such like, you may make a compound ointment thus.

Take of Bolearmenick and Terra Sigillata of each one ounce, of Lapis
Ealaminaris, and washed Ceruse, of each half an ounce, Tutty and Marchasite
prepared, of each three drachms, the powder of Frogs and Snailes dried in an
Oven, of each three drachms: Litharge of Gold two drachms, oil of Roses three
ounces, oil of Frogs one ounce and half^, Vinegar two ounces, the white of two
Eggs, Wax sufficient, let them be well beaten in a Leaden Mortar, and brought
into an Unguent.

Whilst you purge, apply such things as principally repel or beat back; in the
augmentation you must beat back and discuss, in the declination discuss only,
and all the while let the Patient be nourished with Cordialls, to defend the
Heart, Liver, and all the principal parts from this so malignant and stubborn
Enemy.

CHAP. XI. Os ulcers.
An Ulcer is a solution of continuity in the flesh, containing Sanies and Pus.
The antecedent causes is Blood, Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy thereto flowing, as
has been said of Tumors; the joined cause is distemperature, pain, tumor,
contusion, or such like, stirred up by antecedent causes: Of this cemeth matter
either good or bad; that which is good is of a mean substance, between thin and
thick, white light equal, and not stinking: that which is bad is thin, glewy,
much in quantity, swarrish, black, pale, stinking.

If the distemperature of the Ulcer be hot, it is known by heat, redness, and
relief by cold things. In a cold distemperature, there is not so much redness,
and it is cased by hot things. Whether the distemperature be moist or dry, the
eye will discover.

The cure of an Ulcer simply considered, must be performed by Medicines which
have a digestive, mundificative, incarnative, and cicatricing quality: of which
sort, I have alieady treated in the cure of Wounds.

I shall only now briefly treat of the Distempers, Adjuncts and Accidents of
Ulcers.

First, let the symptom be removed: if it be hot, consider whether it be with
matter, or without; if with matter, whether it be Sanguine, or Choleric. If it
be a Sanguine Distemper, let blood, observe a slender and cooling. Diet and
Medicines. If the matter be Choleric purge Choler, observe a cooling Diet,
and use cool Medicines. If there be a hot distemperature without matter,
neither purge nor bleed, but use cooling Medicines; as Unguentum Album,
Diapompholigos, Rubrum, Camphora, Ex Plumbo, and Ex Cerussa, and such others.
Also, Rose Water, the Juice or Water of Nightshade, Housleek, Plantane, and
such like.

If the Distemperature be cold, purge Phlegm if it abound, and use Diet and
Medicines, which does heat and dry inwardly: Outwardly apply warming Ointments;
Unguentum de Althea, or Unguentum Citrinum: wash it with warm wine, or the
decoction of Wormwood, Mint, Hysop, Calamint, Origan, Rosemary, Peny-royal, and
such like.

If the Ulcer be too moist, dry it with Unguentun Pompholigos, de Plumbo, de
Cerussa, de gratia dei, de Calce.

If it be too dry, let his Diet and Medicines be moystening; as Basilicon de
Pice, Diachylon, etc. Having removed the Distemperature, go on gradually to the
Cure; if the matter be crude digest, having digested it, mundifie it; having so
done, in carnate it: and lastly, cicatrise it.

If a Tumor does accompany the Ulcer, you may from the Chapters asoregoing, be
able to judge what the Humor is, which is the cause thereof. You must evacuate
it by bloodletting, purging, thin and cooling Diet and Medicines: The Chapters
aforegoing will inform you, whether it be drawn thither by the part if self, or
sent from other parts, or from the whole body: Nor you need not go any farther,
nor I trouble my self to prescribe Medicines, to repel and discuss the Tumors,
the aforenamed Chapters being sufficiently furnished.

A contused Ulcer must be nourished with Medicines moistening and ingendring
good matter, and the Cure may be performed by the means prescribed for the Cure
of a contused Wound.

If the Ulcer be accompanied with proud flesh, it must be taken off by an
Incision Knife, Cautery, or hot Scissers, etc. or by cotrosive Medicines: the
gentler sort are Burnt Alum, Hermodactyls with Tartar, Date Stones burnt, Aqua
vitae with Sulphur, Unguentum Apostolorum, Nettle-seed, the Flower of Brass,
Burnt Brass, Serpentaria, the Root of Asphodels, etc. Of a stronger sort are
these, the Powder of Mercury, Unguentum Aegyptiacum, or Apostolorum, with
Natural Verdegrease. Of the stronger sort are, Quicklime, Red Vitriol, Burnt
Vitriol, Mercury sublimate: Of these may many Compounds be made, which for
brevity sake I omit.

If the Lips of the Ulcer be hard, soften it with mollifying Medicines, made of
the fat of a Goose, Hen, Duck, Lion, Bear, Calf, Ox, or the like; the Oil of
Lillies, Sweet Almonds, Earthworms, Foxes, Unguentum Basilicon, Diachilon, and
Emplastrum de Mucilaginibus. If it be so hard that it will not yield to
Medicine, make use of In cision, Cautery, or of the aforenamed corrosive
Medicines.

If the Bone be defiled by an Ulcer, take it off with a Scaling Instrument, or
an hot Iron: after you have loosed the Scale, the first three days apply Oil of
Roses, and the White of an Egg warm: the next three days, the yolk of an Egg,
and Oil of Roses; after that with Butter and Honey. If the Bone lie so deep,
that you cannot apply your hot Iron, inject this Water: Take of White Wine one
pound and an half, the distilled Waters of Plantane, and Roses, of each one
pound; Mercury sublimate three drachms, Bolearmenick half an ounce, Burnt Alum
one ounce and an half, white Vitriol, and Borax, of each half an ounce, White
Sugar two ounces, Maslick, Sarcocol, of eath one ounce and an half; Powder what
is to be powdered; boil it to the consumption of half, then filter it, and add
of the best Aqua Vitae one pound, and reserve it to your use. It is good also
to lay this following Powder to the putrified Bone: Take of round Birthwort,
and the Bark of the Pine Tree, of each three drachms: of the Root of Hegs
Fennel, and Reeds, of each two drachms; of Agarick, and Tartar, of each one
dram and an half; Eupborbium one dram; make a Powder; lay it upon the
putrified Bone, or mix it with Honey, or Aegyptiacum, or such like.

If Worms breed in the Ulcer, take away the humidity and putrefaction whereof
they are engendered; kill the Worms with the Juyces, or Decoction of Wornewood,
Centory, Eupatorium, Wormwood, and such like, bitter Herbs. So much for the
general cure of Ulcers.

CHAP. XII. Rules for Vomiting and Purging.
THE first thing herein confiderable, is the matter offending; what part of the
body is afflicted, and which is the best way to evacuate the peccant humor.
The matter offending is either Phlegm, Water, Choler, or Melancholy. Purging
Simples work gently or strongly, those that work gently only, are to be given
to weak Bodies; the strongest, to stronger persons. Be well advised of the
offending humor before you purge, least instead of helping, you weaken Nature.
Before you take a purge, let the Humors be prepared by some Medicines proper
for the purpose, especially if Phlegm or Melancholy be the humor you would
purge. Prepare the body before with Medicines, that are attenuating and
cutting, and let your Purge be made up with it. The next Book will furnish you
with variety of altering and preparing Medicines.

It is a matter of consequence to consider what part of the body is afflicted,
and to form your Purges accordingly. If the remote parts of the body be
afflicted; as the Head, Arms, Feet, and the like, let your Purge be made up
into a hard form as Pills; that by their long stay in the body, they may be the
better able to draw the humors from those parts.

If the oftending humor lie in the Bowels, or adjacent parts, use liquid
Medicines: and in all these look not upon the multitude of Ejections, but of
the matter ejected.

If the humors lie in the Tunicle of the Stomach, a Vomit is necessary, and in
many cases more it is a good Revulsion; but take them not without advice from
an able Physician.

If the Purge work not at all, give warm Broth, and Posset Drink, and if the
Purge were strong, give a Clister. If it work too stron^ly, which is worse:
give such things as make the Bowels slippery for Ejection, as the Oil of
Almonds, which is good, if the mouths of the Veins be opened, or if there
happen excoriation, for the same purpose, Quince-seeds, and Mallows, boiled in
milk, is good; and Gum Traganth dissolved in water, or Milk; the Syrup, or
Marinalade of Quinces have the like virtue.

If Vomiting hold too long, give a draught of Milk, with a little Mastich
therein; and lay to the Stomach Emplastrum, e Crusta Panss. If either Vomit or
Purge work too churlishly, some give a Pill of Laudanum, and with good success.
Anoint the Stomach and Belly with Oil of Roscs, and lay on it the Powder of
Mastich, of Galls, and Red-Roso leaves.

Chemical Medicines, if they be rightly prepared, and administered with care and
judgment, are the best, for they stay but a little while in the body, and do
not bind afterward, because the Terrene part is taken away.

If the Humor be tough, it is not easily carried away; therefore in such cases
purge gently and often.

The Dose ought to be regulated by an able Brain: In the next Book I shall give
you the Faculties and Dose of most of the Medicines (in use) amongst us. For
the Times and Seasons of purging, in respect of the motion of the Moon and
Stars, I have given you a few general Rules at the latter end of my Almanac
for the Year, 1659. to which I refer you.

An end of the Third Book.
BOOK IV.
IN this I shall show you the Faculty and Natural Operation of most of the
compound Medicines now in use amongst us, and sold by the Apothecary: together
with a general Rule for the making of all such kind of Medicines. Those that
desire a more particular Description of their Ingredients or Compositions, let
them peruse the Dispensatory made by the College of Physicians of London: If
they cannot understand the Latin Tongue, let them make use of the Translation
thereof, by Mr. Culpeper, it being unbefitting for this Volumne. Be pleased
therefore to accept of their Faculties and Doses from the least to the
greatest, which must be regulated with judgment and discretion, according to
the age or strength of the Patient, the Season of the Year, and the nature of
the Distemper.

CHAP. I. Of Distilled Waters.
COld or simple Distilled Waters are drawn out of Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, and
Roots; all which ought to be distilled when they are in their greatest vigor,
and ought to be gathered in a dry day about Noon. The common way is to distill
them in a Peuter Still: the Water thus distilled is (of all Medicines) the
weakest, yet is of use in mixing them with other Medicines, that they may be
the better taken. To avoid burning, put fifted Ashes under the Vessel, which
holds the Herbs, and give a gentle fire.

But to make the Water have more smell and virtue of the Herbs, do thus: Take
what green Herb, and Roots, or Flowers fresh gathered, if you please bruise
them, and mix with them some Leaven, and let them stand close covered four or
five days, then distill them as aforesaid. To make it stronger, do thus: When
you have distilled any Herb as aforesaid in a common Still, by putting a Paper
under them to prevent burning and drying the Cake overmuch: Put the Water and
the Cake together into a hot Still, or Alembick, and let them stand warm 24
hours; then distill them, and if you would have the Water yet stronger, pour
this Water upon more Cakes, and do as before; and if there be any Oil upon the
top of the Water separate it, thus you shall have a very strong and excellent
Water. Or if you perform this distillation in a glass Gourd, in a gentle
Balneo, that is in warm-water, your water will be very good, and far excelling
the water distilled the common way. To know the virtue and use of these waters,
you must find the virtue of the herb by some Herball, or History of Plants and
Herbs. If you would have a distilled water out of flowers, which shall retain
the smell of the flower, do thus. Take Roses, Violets, Honey-suckles, or what
other flower you would distill, pick them, being first gathered in a fair, and
Sunshine day, infuse a handful or two of them into two quarts of the best
White Wind, the space of half an hour, not much longer (lest with the subtle
spirit, the carthy part also come forth): then take them forth, and infuse in
the same Wine the same quantity of flowers; do so eight or ten times. Then put
the Wine into a glass body or Gourd, and close the joints well with Lutement,
and distill it in a gentle Balneo, or place your Glass over the Vapor of hot
water, that so the subrill spirit only may assend. By this means you shall
have a water of a most fragrant odor;

You may distill a water strong of the vegetable out of dried herbs thus: Take
of any herb dried (or seed or root if you please) a pound, put it into twelve
pints of clear spring water, let it stand warm as aforesaid, then distill it in
a hot Still or Alembick, to this distilled water add more dried herbs, and
distill again as often as you please, till your water become like a Spirit. Or
if you add White Wind to the herb, it will be the stronger, which leads me to
the distylled waters, prescribed by the College of Physicians; of one of which
I shall set down the manner of distilling, and content my self in describing
the virtues and quantity to be used of the rest.

Spiritus and aqua Absynthii minus composita. The Spirit and Water of Wormwood,
the lesser Composition.
Take of the Leaves of dried Wormwood two pound, Annis seed half a pound, sleep
them in six Gallons of small Wines twenty four hours, then distill them in an
Alembeck, adding to every pound of the distilled water two ounces of the best
Sugar. Let the two first pound you draw off be called the Spirit of Wormwood;
the rest wormwood-Water the less composition. In the same manner (omitting the
Anniseeds) you may distill the Spirit and Water of any herb, root, flower or
seed whatsoever.

Spiritus and aqua Absynthii magis composita. The Spirit and Water of Wormwood
the greater Composition.
Take of common and Roman Wormwood, of each a pound; Sage, Mints, Salme, of
each two handful, the roots of Galanga, Ginger, Calamus Aromations, and
Elitampane, of each three drachms, Liquoris one ounce, and Raisons of the Sun
stoned three ounces; the seeds of Annis and sweet Fennel, of each three
drachms; Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each two drachms; Cardamoms and Cubebs,
of each one dram; let the things that are to be cut, be cut, and bruised that
are to be bruised; and all of them infused in twenty four pints of Spanish
Wine, for twenty four hours; then distilled in an Alembeck; add two ounces of
white Sugar to every pint of distilled water. Call the first pint the Spirit of
Wormwood the greater Composition. The virtues are these; it heats and
strengthens the Stomach and Lungs; helps Concoction and stays Vomiting; it
kills Worms in the Stomach and Belly; expells wind, mitigates the pains of
the Teeth. The dose is from three drachms to half an ounce.

Spiritus and aqua Angelicae magis Composita. The Spirit and Water of Angelica
the greater Composition.
It comfort the heart and vital Spirits, it rarefieth and discusseth
flatuous humors, it is good against Poison taken, against the Pestilence it is
prevalent, and a good preservative in pestilentiall times, and against ill
Aires. It is good against Crudities of the Stomach, and diseases of the Matrix
proceeding from a cold cause. The dose is from two drachms to six.

Spiritus Lavendalae Compositus; The Compound Spirit of Lavender.
This is a very chargeable Spirit, and is of great efficacy against passions of
the Heart, Convulsions, Cramps, Palsies, Apoplexies, and all sleepy diseases,
vertigo, and comforts a cold brain. The dose is the same with the former.

Spiritus Castorei: Spirit of Castor.
It resists Poison, and is good for such as are bitten by Venomous Creatures;
gives speedy delivery to Women in Travail, and eases the Fits of the Mother.
It helps Deasness, proceeding from stoppage, mixed with White Wine, and
dropped into the Ears, It is good against the Diseases mentioned in the former.
The Dose is from half a dram to a dram. Give it in something that is cooler.

Aqua Petasitidis Composita. The Water of Butter bur Compound.
It is good against the Pestilence, and a good preservative in Pestilential
Times: it gives ease to those who are short-winded, eases the Fits of the
Mother: it dryes up moist Humors in those that have Sores hard to be cured,
The Dose is two, three, or four drachms in some cooling Cordial.

Aqua Raphani Composita. Radish Water compound.
This Water is good against obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Womb;
prevails against the Scurvey, and cleanses Women after their lying in. The
Dose is from two drachms to half an ounce.

Aqua Peoniae Composita. The Compound Water of Peony.
This is very prevalent against the Falling Sickness and Convulsions. If the
Fits come daily, take it Morning and Evening: If it come Weekly, take it at the
New or Full Moon, the first or last Quarter: If the Disease decline, give it
only at New and Full Moon. In the Fit, it is good to rub the Jaws, Nostrils,
and Temples, with it. The Dose is from two drachms to six.

Aqua Bezoartica. Or Bezoar Water.
It withstands Melancholy, and is good for such as are in Consumptions. It
strengthens the Heart and Vital Spirits. It is Diaphoretick, and is good in
Pestilential Fevers. The Dose is from half a dram to a dram: Give it with
other cooling Cordials.

Aqua and Spiritus Lumbricorum Magistralis. The Magistral Water, and Spirit of
Earthworms.
I conceive this was composed for a Restorative for such people that have
lingering Diseases, occasioned by obstruction of the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys;
as the Evil Habit, Hypochondriack Melancholy, Scurvey, etc. The Dose is from
half an Ounce to an Ounce,

Aqua Gentianae Composita. Gentian Water Compound.
It is a good Preservative against the Pestilence, caseth pains in the Stomach,
and helps Digestion, and drives out old Colds, opens Obstructions of the
Liver, eases the pricking pains in the sides, and is good against the yellow
Jaundies; it provokes the Terms, and expels a dead Child, or Afterbirth.
The Dose is from three drachms to half an ounce.

Aqua Gilberti, Gilberts Water.
This Water is a very great Cordial, it strengthens the Heart, and reviveth
languishing Nature; it may be taken from half a dram to a dram: it is so
costly, that it is almost out of the reach of ordinary people.

Aqua Cordialis frigida Saxoniae.
It is a very cooling Water, and profitable in Fevers, and to allay the heat
of blood, it gives rest by sleep: You may take from two drachms to half an
ounce.

Aqua Theriacalis; Or, Treacle Water.
This Water is of excellent virtue against the Pestilence, and other Fevers;
it is a very good counter-poyson, and good for those that have been bit by any
venomous Creature, or such as have the French Pox: for it drives forth all
vitulent Humors from the Heart, and is a great Cordial. The Dose is from half
an ounce to an ounce.

Aqua Brioniae Composita; Or, Briony Water Compound.
This Water is Hysterical, eases the Fits of the Mother: it expels the
Afterbirth, and provokes Women's Courses. Let Women with Child forbear it. Let
those that have occasion take from half an ounce to an ounce, in the Morning,
fasting.

Aqua Caponis; Or, Capon-Water.
It is good for such whose strength is decayed by Fevers, or other Sicknesses:
it is an excellent Medicine for those that are in Consumptions, or wasted by a
Fever Hectic, or Marasmus. Take from half an ounce to an ounce.

Aqua Limacum Magistralis; Or the Magistral Water of Snails.
It opens Obstructions of the Lungs, and purges them of Phlegm, and is very
good for the Consumption of the Lungs. Take half an ounce, or an ounce.

Aqua Scordii composita; Or, Compound Water of Scordium.
This is a good Preservative against the Pestilence, gives rest in Fevers, and
is friendly to the Stomach and Womb. Take it from two drachms to half an ounce.

Aqua Imperialis, and Aqua Mariae.
It strengthens and corroborateth the Heart, and is therefore good for such
as are subject to Faintings, Swoonings, and Palpitations of the Heart, and is a
Preservative against Apoplexies. The Dose is from one dram to three.

Aqua Mirabilis.
This is of admirable force and virtue, to preserve the Body from the Apoplexy,
and all Diseases of the Nerves. It is very good against the Palsy, Convulsion,
and Cramp; and is good for cold Stomachs. From two drachms to half an ounce is
the Dose.

Aqua Papaveris composita; Or, Poppy Water compound.
It is good against Surfets, and Fevers there^from arising: it provokes
sleep, cools the blood, and concocteth the Humors. Take from half an ounce
to an ounce.

Aqua Cinnamomi, Cinnamon Water.
It strengthens the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Heart, Brain, and Nerves.
It clears the sight; is an Antidote against Poison, and biting by venomous
creatures, and is good against a stinking Breath, and nauseousness of the
Stomach. It is very friendly to the Womb, and is of an attenuating, opening,
digesting, and strengthening virtue. From two drachms, to six, is the usual
Dose: in cold Diseases, you may take more.

Aqua Caelestis.
This also prevails against Malignant and Pestilential Fevers, restores
such as are in Consumptions, comfort the Heart, and reviveth drooping
Spirits. It is very hot in operation: You must scarcely exceed half a dram
for the outmost Dose, without the advice of a Physician. In Fevers, mix it
with cooling Juleps.

Aqua Melissae, Bawm Water.
It restores Memory lost, it makes all the Senses acute, it strengthens the
Heart, Brain, and Stomach: and for those who are troubled with cold Stomachs
and Brain, it is a Jewel. It makes the Heart glad, the Tongue nimble (in those
who are subject to the Palsy in that Member) the Teeth white, and the Breath
sweet. The Dose is from two drachms to half an ounce.

Aqua Menthae, Mint Water.
It cools and strengthens the Stomach, Liver, and Spleen, helps Concoction,
breaks Wind, and stays Vomiting. The Dose is from one dram to three.

Ordinary Aqua Vitae, Annise-seed water, Usquebath, and such like, are commonly
used; and most people know they comfort a cold Stomach, and is good against
hurt of Digestion, coming from a cold cause. It breaks Wind, and the like.

Tinctures are made of any Herb, or other Simple, by first bruising them, and
putting to them as much Spirit of Wine as will cover them three or four
fingers; cork it up, or seal it, and let it digest in a Bath as long as you see
good. If you know the virtue of the Simples, you cannot be ignorant of the
Tincture.

To make Physical Wines, is easy: Take this one for an Example; Take a handful
of dried Wormwood, for every Gallon of Wine; stop it in a Vessel close, and let
it remain in steep. So you may prepare a Physical Wine of any Herb, Flower, or
Seed, whatsoever, either simple or compound.

Physical Vinegars are prepared thus: Take of Red-Rose Buds, gathered in a dry
time, the Whites being cut off, and dried in the shadow three or four days, one
pound; Vinegar eight Sextaries: set them in the Sun forty days; then strain
out the Roses, and repeat the infusion as often as you please.

Thus may you prepare Physical-Vinegars of any Flower. As the Hot Waters and
Spirits are best for cold Bodies, and hot Diseases; so on the contrary are
Vinegars best in hot Diseases, and may be externally used.

These I thought good to add the Treatise of Distilled Waters.

For the preparation of Distilled Waters of this nature, read Quercetanus his
Dispensatory; one of which I shall here insert, having prescribed it in the
before going Books; which is his Distilled Water against spitting of blood.

Take of the Roots of Bistort, Comphry, and Tormentil, of each one ounce; the
Leaves of Knotgross, Yarrow, Speedwel, Winter Green, Sanicle, Shepherds Purse,
with its Root, of each one handful: of the tops of the Blackberry Bush, and
Mastick Tree, of each half a handful: the Seeds of Sumach, Myrrles, Plantane,
Barberies, and white Poppy, of each 6 drachms: the Flowers of Water Lillies,
Gourds, Quinces, and Red Roses, of each two Pugils: let them be mixed, and
beaten; then macerated in Balneo for the space of four days, in the Juyces
following, viz. Plantane, Purslane, Sorrel, and Agrimony, of each two pound:
Let them be afterward strongly pressed out; then add of the Juice of Acatia,
Hypocistis, of each two Ounces: Terra Sigillata, and Bolearmenick, of each half
an ounce; Electuarium Diatraganthum frigidum of each two drachms: Macerate them
for four days, and distill it in Ashes till it be dry.

Let them who are troubled with spitting of blood, or any inward Wound or
Bruise, take two or three Choclearies, either by it self, or mixed with Syrup
of Myrtles, dried Roses, or Syrup of Comphry; and if the Flux of Blood be very
violent, give a scruple of the Tincture of Corral with it.

CHAP. II. Of Syrups.
OF syrups there are three sorts; syrrups made by infusion, juice and
decoction; syrrups made by infusion are made of flowers, and such flowers, as
soon loose both color and strength by boiling, as Violets, Roses,
Clove-gilly-flowers, Peach-flowers, etc. and they are thus made. Having picked
your flowers, to every pound add three pints of water made boiling hot, put
them into a Pewter-pot with a close cover, and keep it hot twelve hours. If you
would make your syrrup very strong, put in more fresh flowers as often as you
please; having strained it out, put the liquor into a Pewter-Bason, and to
every pint add two pound of fine Sugar; put it upon a Chaffin-dish of Coals,
and melt it, stirring and scumming it till the Sugar be perfectly melted
without boiling.

Secondly to make a syrrup of the juice of an herb, you must make choice of
such herbs as are full of juice; then beat it in a stone Mortar, press out
the juice, put it over the fire and clarify it, (that is, scum it as long as
any scum arise) then boil it till a quarter of it be consumed; to a pint of
this add a pound of Sugar, boiling it to a syrrup and scumming of it. You may
know when it is enough if you cool a little in a spoon. After this manner you
may make syrrup of Wormwood simple, of Betony, Buglosse, Borrage, Chamomell,
Carduus, Endive, Succory, Strawberryes, Funtitory, ground Jvy, St. John's Wort,
Mercury, Mous-care, Plantane, Purslane, Apples, Raspberies, Sage, Scabius,
Scordium, Housleek, Coltsfoot, and suchlike; and when you have done so, and
would know what they are good for, see the virtue of the Simples.

Thirdly, Syrrups made by decoction, for the most part are compounds; though
you may make Syrrups of Simples by decoction: the operation is thus; Take of
what herb, root, flower, or seed you please, and bruise it a little, if you
make a Syrrup of roots, or wherein there are many roots, let the roots macerate
in the water twenty four hours; then add the herbs, and the rest, and boil
it, till half the water he consumed, then let it stand; and when it is almost
cold, strain it through an hypoeras-bag without pressing: to every pint of the
decoction, add one pound of Sugar, and boil it till it comes to the thickness
of a Syrrup or new honey. After this manner, the most part of the Syrrups
following are made, except they be made of flowers or juyces. Take this for an
example: Take of common Wormwood meanly dry, half a pound, red Roses two
ounces, Indian spicknard three drachms, old White Wind, and juice of Quinces,
of each two pound and an half, steep them a whole day in an Earthen Vessel,
then boil them gently, strain it, and adding two pound of Sugar, boil it into
a Syrrup according to art.

This Syrup is very good for cold and Phlegmatic Stomachs, it helps
concoction, strengthens the Stomach and Liver, provokes an Appetite, breaks
wind, and is good against the Jaundise: the dose is from one ounce to three.

Syrupus Acetousus, simplex vel compositus; Syrup of Vinegar, simple or
compound.
These Syrups cut Phlegm and tough Humors, they cool the body, quench thirst,
and ease any stuffing in the Stomach, and are good to prepare the body for a
Vomit, especially the first; if you use it so, take from one ounce to two or
three; in other cases take it with a Liquorish stick.

Syrupus de Agno Casto; Or Syrup of Agnus Castus.
I conceive by its composition it was intended to prevent immoderate Letchery,
and nocturnall pollutions; for without doubt it dries and cools the natural
seed, thereby restraining venereall thoughts; for my part I can say nothing of
it by experience.

Syrupus de althaea; Syrup of Marsh mallows.
This is a fine cooling, opening, slippery syrup; good against the pains of
the Stone, Gravel, or Chollick. You may give an ounce or two; it is so safe
and harmless, you cannot err in the giving of it.

Syrupus de Ammoniaco; Syrup of Ammoniacum.
It opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and cooles the parts, and helps
all diseases arising from their Obstructions and heat; as Scabs, Itch, Leprosy
and such like. You may take an ounce or more if you see occasion.

Syrupus de Artemisia; Syrup of Mugwort.
It helps the coldness, wind, pains, and all other diseases of the Womb; it
strengthens the Nerves, corrects the blood, opens the pores, and provokes the
Terms. You may take an ounce at a time, or from half an ounce to two.

Syrupus de Betonica compositus; The compound Syrup of Betony.
It is good against diseases in the Head and Stomach proceeding of Cold and
Wind, Vertigoes, and Madness; it concocteth Melancholy, and provokes the
Terms. The dose is from half an ounce to two.

Syrupus Bizantius, Simple and compound.
It strengthens and freeth the Liver from Obstructions and diseases thence
proceeding, cures the Yellow-Jaundise, cuts tough Phlegm; and is good against
the Rickets. Take it with a Liquorish stick: or from half an ounce to two.

Syrupus Botryos; Syrup of Oak of Jerusalem.
This Syrup is commended in the Asthma, and cold diseases of the breast,
Coughs, and shortness of breath. Take it with a Liquoris stick.

Syrupus Capillorum Veneris; Syrup of Maidenhaire.
This strengthens the Stomach and Lungs, and helps their infirmities; it also
cleanses the Reins of Gravel; for the first, take it with a Liquoris stick;
for the last, give an ounce or two.

Syrupus Cardiacus, a Cordial Syrup.
It comforts the Heart, and revives drooping Spirits; it is good for people in
Consumptions, it is of an opening quality, and expels those Vapors, which
offend the Brain. Take it from one ounce to three.

Syrupus infusionis Caryophillorum, Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers.
This Syrup is good in any Fever Pestilential, or not: it strengthens the
Heart, Liver, and Stomach, and refreshes the Vital Parts. The Dose is from
half an ounce, to an ounce and an half. It is so harmless, you cannot err in
the taking of it.

Syrupus de Cinnamomo, Syrup of Cinnamon.
It strengthens the whole Body, and helps Digestion, and comfort the
Stomach and Womb, and cheareth the Spirits. Take one ounce in a Cordial.

Syrupus aceto sitatis Citriorum, Syrup of the Juice of Citrons.
This Syrup has a refrigerating, cutting, attenuating, penetrating faculty; it
allays Choler, and tempers the heat of the Heart, cools the blood, and is
therefore good against Fevers, Pestilential or not? small Pox, or Measils; it
resists Poison. The Dose is from one ounce to four.

Syrupus corticum citriorum, Syrup of Citron Pills.
It is of a most grateful savor, and most pleasant odor; it strengthens the
Stomach, Liver, and Heart, amends the heat of them, and resists Palpitations,
Faintings, Swoonings: it strengthens the Vitals, is profitable in
Consumptions, and Hectic Foavers. The Dose is from one ounce to two.

Syrupus e corralliis simplex and compositus. The Syrup of Corral, simple and
compound.
It refrigerateth, dries, and astringeth; it stays the immoderate Monthly
Flux, and the Whites, the Dysentery, all Fluxes of Blood: it is good in the
Falling Sickness; it strengthens Nature, profitable for such who have Hectic
Fevers, or Consumptions, The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce.

Syrupus Cydoniorum, Syrup of Quinces.
It is the best to strengthen the Stomach, and to help the cold distemper of
the Liver: it helps Concoction, and provokes an appetite: it helps Vomiting,
and is good against a Flux, if it be without a Fever. The Dose is from one
ounce to two; take it in the morning. For a Looseness, take an ounce before
M^at; for Vomiting, an ounce after Meat.

Syrupus de Erysimo, Syrup of Hedge-Mustard.
It prevails against cold afflictions of the Breast and Lungs; as Coughs,
Astmachs, Hoarsness, and the like: Use it with a Liquoris Stick; or take an
ounce, with two or three ounces of some Pectoral Decoction in the Morning.

Syrpus de Fumaria, Syrup of Fumitory.
It concocteth Melancholy, and freeth the Blood of such Humors as cause Scabs,
Itch, Leprosy, Tetters, Ring-Worms, Cancers, Corns, Warts, etc. It opens
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and is sovereign in the Hypochrondriack
Melancholy: it cools the Liver, and cleanses the blood. The Dose is from one
ounce to three.

Syrupus Glycyrrhiza. Syrup of Liquoris.
It helps Coughs, and is good against Plurifies; for it cleanses the Breast
and Lungs. Take it as Syrup of Hedge-Mustard.

Oxy-Saccharum Simplex, Syrup of Pomegranates with Vinegar.
It is many times used in the small Pox and Measuls, by reason of the Vinegar;
it cutteth and attenuateth (...) Humors, it restrains Choler, and mitigates
its heat. The Dose is from two ounces to four.

Syrupus de Hysopo, Syrup of Hysop.
It has a notable Faculty of cutting, and expectorating tough Humors out of
the Breast and Lungs, and to strongthen the parts. It prepares and expels
Salt and Phlegmatic Humors in the Urine, which causes heat and pain in those
parts. For the first, take it with a Liquoris stick. For the last, the Dose is
from half an ounce, to two ounces.

Syrupus Jvae arthriticae, sive Chamaepityos. Syrup of Chamepitys, or
Ground Pine.
It is good against the Fits of the Mother, procures Women's Courses, expels
the dead Child; let Women with Child forbear it. It is good against the
Strangury, or stoppage of Urine, opens obstructions of the Liver and Spseen.
The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce.

Syrupus Jujubinus, Syrup of Jujubes.
It halpeth Diseases of the Trachaea Arteria, occasioned by sharp and dry
Humors, for it is cooling and moistening: it helps Hoarsness, Coughs,
Plurisies. It is good against Ulcers of the Lungs, or Bladder, or any
inflammation. Take it with a Liquoris Stick, or take half an ounce, or an
ounce, as often as you please.

Syrupus de Meconio, vel Diacodium, and de Meconio, compositus. Syrup of
Meconium, or Diacodium, and of Meconium, compound.
It prevails against dry Coughs, Ptisick, hot and sharp gnawing Rheums, and
provokes sleep: but beware of giving it to provoke sleep in the beginning of a
Fever, or the body being costive. The Dose is from half an ounce to two.

Syrupus Melissophylli, Syrup of Bawm.
It is cordial, strengthens the Heart, Breast, and Stomach, chears the
Spirits, and resists Melancholy: it helps them that languish, strengthens
Memory, and is good in Fevers. The Dose is from half an ounce to two.

Syrupus de Mentha, Syrup of Mint.
This Syrup strengthens the Stomach, helps Digsstion, stays Vomiting, and
sour Belechings. The Dose is from one ounce to three.

Syrupus de Mucilaginibus, Syrup of Musilages.
It is a fine Remedy against the Ptisick, Bloody Flux, Stone in the Reins or
Bladder, or Ulcers there, or sharp corroding Humors there, or in any part of
of the body, and is of great virtue for those who have taken Physic too strong
and corroding. Yake one ounce or two: sometimes it is lawful to give four or
five.

Syrupus Myrtinus, Syrup of Myrtles.
It is of a comforting and astringent Nature: it helps all Fluxes, and
spitting of blood, and strengthens the retentive Faculty of the Stomach. An
Ounce or two is the Dose.

Syrupus Florum Nymphae, simplex and compositus. Syrup of Water Lilly-flowers,
simple and compound.
It allayeth the heat of Choler, cools the Head, Heart, Liver, Reins,
Matrix, and allayeth all hot Diseases, and provokes sleep.

Syrupus de Papavere Erratico, Syrup of Erratick Poppies.
This Syrup cools the blood, and may be safely given, with moderation, in
Surfeits, Fevers, Frenzies, and hot Agues. The Dose is from half an ounce to
an ounce.

Syrupus de Pilosella, Syrup of Mouse-Ear.
It is an astringent and hearing Syrup, good for the cure of a Rupture, and
necessary to be used by wounded people. The Dose is from half an ounce to two.

Syrupus Florum Paeoniae, vel de Paeonia compositus: Syrup of Peony Flowers, or
the compound Syrup of Peony.
It is good against the Falling Sickness, Convulsion, and such like
infirmities. The usual Dose is an Ounce.

Syrupus de Pomis Alterans, Syrup of Apples.
It cools the Heart and Stomach, helps palpitation, breeds good blood,
profitable in Hectic, and other Fevers, quenches Thirst. You may take an
Ounce in the Morning.

Syrupus de Prasio, Syrup of Hore-hound.
It cleanses the Lungs from thick and putrified Phlegm: it is good against the
Ptisick, and Cough, in ancient people, or such as are of cold Natures. Take it
with Liquoris stick.

Syrupus de quinque Radicibus, Syrups of the five opening Roots.
It opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and more especially of
the Reins: it is good against the Stone, if you mix it with Syrup of
Maidenhair: it is of great virtue, in preparing Phlegmatic and tough Humors,
and is profitable in the beginning of Fevers. The Dose is from one Ounce to
four.

Syrupus Raphani, or Syrup of Rhadishes.
It breaks the stone of the Kidneys, and cleanses the part, it provokes Urine
and Women's Purgations, and is profitable against the stone in the Bladder. The
Dose is from one Ounce to three.

Syrupas Regius, vel Julepium Alexandrinum: Julep of Alexandrina.
It is profitable in Summer time for such bodies, which abound with Chollers;
for it allayeth the heat, and evacuateth it, and is convenient to prepare it
against Purging. The Dose is from two Ounces, to five.

Syrupus de Rosis siccis, Or Syrup of Dried Roses.
It strengthens and comfort the Heart and Vital Spirits helps Fluxes and
Corrosions, and gnawing in the Guts; strengthens the Stomach, and stays
Vomiting. Take it as Syrup of Quinces.

Syrupus Scabiosae, Syrup of Scabius.
It freeth the Breast and Lungs of Phlegm and Crudities; it eases Stirches in
the sides, and is good against inward Imposthumes. The Dose is from one Ounce
to three.

Syrupus de Scolopendria, Syrup of Hart's-tongue.
It opens the Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, prepares Melancholy, and is
good against the Quartan Ague, and the Rickets. The Dose is from half an Ounce
to two Ounces.

Syrupus de Staechade, Syrup of Staethas.
It strengthens the Brain, and corrects the cold distemper thereof: it is of
excellent virtue in the Palsy, Convulsion, etc. coming of cold Causes. The
Dose is from one ounce to three.

Syrupus de Symphyto, Syrup of Comphry.
It helps spitting of Blood, the Ulcer of the Reins, stops the immoderate Flux
of the Menstrues, all inward Wounds and Bruises, and heals the Rupture. From
one ounce to four is the Dose.

Syrupus Violarum, Syrup of Violets.
It cools and moisteneth; it corrects the sharpness of Choler, quenches
Thirst in hot Fevers, and cools the Heart and Liver, comforts hot Stomachs,
resists putrefaction, the Pestilence and Poison. The Dose is from one ounce
to four.

Syrupus de Portulaca, Syrup of Purflane.
It is cooling and good for all hot Diseases of the Stomach, Liver, Reins, and
Bladder: it cooles the Blood, quenches Thirst, provokes sleep, and thickens
thin Humors. The Dose is from one Ounce to three.

Syrupus Tussilaginis compositus, The Compound of Syrup Coltsfoor.
It holps the infirmities and weakness of the Lungs; as difficulty of
breathing, want of Voice, Hoarsnesse, Coughs, Catarrhs, etc. Take it with a
Liquoris Stick, or an Ounce or two thereof, in some Pectoral Decoction.

Syrupus de Eupatorio, Syrup of Eupatorium.
It has an opening Faculty, but purges not; it opens the Obstructions of the
Liver, and corrects the cold Distemper thereof, helps the Dropsy, and evil
state of the Body, provokes Urine, and is good against the Hypochondriack
Melancholy. The Dose is from one Ounce to three.

Purging Syrups.
Syrupus de Cichorio cum Rhabarbaro, Syrup of Succory, with Rhubarb.
It purges the body of Choleric and venomous Humors, it cleanses the Liver,
it evacuatech by stool and urine. The Dose is from one Ounce to two.

Syrupus de Epithymo; Or, Syrup of Epithymum.
It prepares and purges Melancholy, or adult Humors, and Scabs, Itch, etc.
It strengthens the stomach, and Liver. Take it as Syrup of Fumitory.

Syrupus e Floribus Persicorum, Syrup of Peach Flowers.
It gently purges Choler, and may be given in Fevers, to evacuate the sharp
and Choleric Humors. It is good against Wounds in Children. Take from half an
Ounce to two.

Syrupus de Pomis, Purgans and Magistralis, Syrup of Apples, Purging and
Magistcal.
Both of them purge, cool, and rectify the Distempers of the blood, and free
it from Choler and Melancholy; it is good against the yellow and black
Jaundise, Madness, Scurf, Scabs, and Itch, The Dose is from one Ounce to three.

Syrupus de Rhabarbaro, Syrup of Rhubarb.
This is a gentle Purge, fitting for Children, ancient People, and such as are
very weak: it purges Choler and Melancholy. An Ounce a weak body may take.

Syrupus Rosaceus Solativus, and e Succo rosarum, Syrup of Roses Sclutive, and
of the Juice of Roses.
It looseneth the Belly, and gently brings out Choler and Phlegm. The Dose is
from two Ounces to five.

Syrupus Rosaceus Solutivus cum Agarico; Syrup of Roses Solutive, with Agarick.
It purges Phlegm more powerfully then the former, frees the head thereof, and
relieves the Senses oppressed by it: it purges the Stomach and Liver, provokes
Urine and the Terms. The Dose is from an Ounce to two.

Syrupus Rosaceus solutivus cum Helleboro: Syrup of Roses solutive, with
Hellebore.
It purges Melancholy, and resists Madness. The Dose is from half an Ounce
to an Ounce.

Syrupus Rosaceus solutivus cum Sena: Syrup of Roses solutive with Senna.
It purges Choler and Melancholy, and leaves a binding quality behind it. The
Dose is from one ounce to two.

Syrupus de Spina Cervina, Syrup of Purging Thorns.
It is good against the Dropsy. The Dose is an ounce.

Syrups made with Vinegar and Honey.
Mel Authosatum, Honey of Rosemary Flowers.
IT is good against all infirmities of the Head, arising from a cold and moist
cause: it dryes the Brain, quickens the Senses and Memory, and strengthens
the Nervous parts: it helps all cold Diseases of the Head, Stomach, Liver, and
Belly. It is good against the Dumb Palsy, Lethargy, etc. and all cold Rhumes
falling into the Eyes. See the virtues of Rosemary Flowers. The Dose is from
half an Ounce to an Ounce.

Mell Helleboratum, Honey Helleborated.
It purges Melancholy, and Scabs, Itch, etc. it is good against the Quartan
Ague, Madness, the Dropsy, Sciatica, Gout, Cramp, etc. An Ounce is the Dose.
Be careful in the taking of such Medicnes, without good advise.

Mel Mercuriale, Honey of Mercury.
It is good in Emollient Clisters.

Mel Nuceum, Honey of Nuts.
It is a very good Med^cine for such as have weak Stomachs and Defluxions: it
is a great preservative against the Plague. Take an Ounce in the Morning.

Mel Passulatum, Honey of Raisins.
It makes the body soluble, comfort weak stomachs, and is a very nourishing
thing for people in Consumptions. You cannot err in taking of it.

Mel Mororum, Honey of Mulberries.
It is very good for sore Mouths and Throats, and for heat and inflammation
there, mixed with a little Plantane Water: it is good for sore mouths in
children.

Mel Rosatum soliatum, sive colatum; Common Honey of Roses or strained.
They are both used for Diseases of the Mouth, as the former.

Mel Rosatum solutivum; Honey of Roses solutive.
It is used to cleanse Wounds, and is a good Laxative in Clisters.

Mel Scilliticum, Honey of Squils.
It is very effectual against diverse distempers of the Head, viz. Falling
Sickness, Headache, Dissinesse: it drives away an old Cough, cleanses the
Breast and Bowels very gently; and some say, it leaves nothing offensive in
the body. The Dose is half an Ounce, to an Ounce and an half.

Oxymel simplex, Simple Oxymel.
It is good to cut and attenuate Humors, and to open Obstructions, provokes
gentle Vomiting in some: It is good to expectorate, and to prepare tough Phlegm
against the taking of a Vomit. Take it from one ounce to two.

Oxymel Compositus, Oxymel compound.
Use this, if you find the former too weak to expectorate viscuous Humors; it
is good also in the Asthma, stoppage of the Pipes, and in the Plurisie. The
Dose is from half an Ounce to two.

Oxymel Helleboratum, Oxymel Helleborated.
It strongly evacuateth Phlegm, Melancholy, and tough and viscuous Humors. The
Dose is from half an Ounce to an Ounce, for strong people only.

Oxymel Julianizans.
It is good against the Hypocondriack Melancholy, and the Rickets; for it is a
fine opening Medicine. Take an Ounce, two, or three.

Oxymel Scilliticum simplex, the simple Oxymel of Squils.
It cuts and divides tough and viscuous Humors, frees the Stomach and Bowels
of such humors, and helps sour Belchings. The Dose is an Ounce for a man.

Oxymel Scilliticum compositum, the compound Oxymel of Squils.
This is used when easier Medicines cannot expectorate. It is good against the
Falling sickness, Megrim, Vertigo, swimming, and pain in the head, and
cleanses the Stomach, Lungs, and Women after their lying in. The Dose is from
half an Ounce to an Ounce.

To these I add these following Syrups of Quercetanus, which I have sometimes
quoted in the former Book; whose manner of preparation (if rightly understood)
and virtues, excels most extant.

Syrupus de Peto, simplex and compositus; Syrup of Tobacco, simple and compound.
Take of the Juice of Tobacco four pound, Simple Hydromel one pound, Simple
Oxymel four Ounces: put them into a Glass Vessel of a fit bigness, that one 4th
part be full. Let them digest in Balneo Mariae, for the spaco of 2 or 3 days,
till the thickest fall to the bottom: then pour of the clearest and purest of
the Juice, and digest it again as before, till no impurity remain therein: then
put to it of white Sugar two pound, and boil it to a Syrup.

The compound Syrup is thus made: Take of the Juice so digested as before, two
pound and an half; Simple Hydromel, one pound: In which macerate, for the space
of 2 or 3 days, these Simples following, Hysop, Maidenhair, and Wall-Rue, of
each half a handful; the flowers of Colts foot, Staechas, Violets, and Bugloss,
of each two Pugils; the seeds of Cudweed, Nettles, Carduus Benedictus, of each
one Ounce: the Leaves of Sena, three Ounces; Agarick trochiscated, one Ounce;
Cinnamon, Mace and Cloves, of each one dram: then press it out strongly, and
let it be digestod, to separate the pure from the impure; add its equal weight
in Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup. This Syrup rightly made, is of excellent use,
and its violent, acrimonious, and venomous quality is taken away; yet it
powerfully provokes Vomiting, and is excellent against Asthma's, and all
Diseases of the Lungs, proceeding from cold and gross Humors; as old Coughs,
and difficulty of breathing. The Dose is from one Ounce to two.

His Syrup of Cinnamon prepared, with the Spirit of Wine, is thus made: Take of
Cinnamon 2 or three Ounces, or more if you please: grossly bruise it, and put it
into a Glass Vessel, pouring upon it the Spirit of Wine, as much as may cover
it 3 or 4 fingers, cover it close, and let it stand in a cool place, till the
Spirit of Wine has drawn the Virtue and Tincture of the Cinnamon: then pour it
off clear. To every 8 Ounces of the Liquor, add 3 or 4 Ounces of white Sugar
finely poudered: then put it over a fire, and dissolve the Sugar: then set the
Spirit of Wine on fire, with a lighted paper, stirring it with a large Spatula
and all the Spirits of Wine will fly away, and the Syrup remain. Or if you
please, a little before the spirit is consumed, put it out by covering it close
with a silver Basin, that the Air come not at it: by this means the Syrup will
be the better. This Syrup is of a grateful relish, and a Medicine inferior to
none, in Diseases of the Heart; as Palpitations, Swoonings, etc. against
Weakness, Crudities, Windiness of the Stomach. The Dose is half a Cochleary.

His Syrup of Ground-Ivie is thus made: Take of the Juice of Ground-Ivie, or
Alle-hoof, two pound and an half: digest and purify it in Balneo Mariae, as
you are taught before; the Juice being perfectly cleansed, add to it of Sugar
one pound; of Penids, 4 Ounces; and boil it into a Syrup. It is a very
sovereign Medicine for the Prisick, Ulcer in the Lungs, and for a Consumption,
caused by any defect in that part.

CHAP. III. Of Decoctions and Juyces.
DEcoctions are made of Roots, Leaves, Flowers, Seeds, Fruits, or Barks,
conducing to the Cure of any Disease. Decoctions principally aim at such
Diseases as lie in the passages; as the Stomach, Bowels, Kidneys, Ureters, and
Bladder. If they be made of White Wine, they will last the longer, and are more
penetrating, then if they be made of Water. If you make your Decoction with
Roots, Leaves, Flowers, etc. Boil the Roots first, as I told you in boiling of
Compound Liquors. Such things as make the decoction slimy, you may tie up in a
Rag. You may sweeten it with Sugar, Honey, Sugar Candy, or Syrups suitable to
the Distemper aimed at: and to make it keep the longer, stop it up close in a
Glass, or Stone-Bottle, and keep it in a cool place.

Decoctum Epithymi: Or, a Decoction of Epithymum.
Take of common Myrabolans, Chebula, and Indica, of each half an Ounce:
Staechas, Raisins of the Sun stoned, Epithimum and Sena, of each one Ounce;
Fumitory half an Ounce, Maudlin five drachms, Polypodium fix drachms, Turbith
half an Ounce, Whey made of the milk of a Geat, or Heifer, four pound. Let them
all boil, (the Epithymum excepted) to two pound; the Epithymum must boil but a
walm or two, then take it from the fire, and add black Hellebore one dram and
an half; Agarick half a dram: Salgemone, a drachin and an half, steep them
ten hours, and strain it out.

It purges Melancholy, and adust choler, and is a sovereign remedy against
all diseases caused by Melancholy. The dose is four ounces.

Decoctum Sennae; The Detoction of Senna.
This also purges melancholy, and is good for weak people, and the dose is
the same with the former: for the most part other purging medicines are mixed
with it, and in so doing, you may purge any humor.

Decoctum pectorale; A pectorall Decoction.
This is good against a Cough, Asthma, Hoarsenesse, it clears the voice, and
is good against all diseases of the Lungs. The dose is the same.

Decoctum commune pro Clystere; A common decoction for a Clyster, and a
carminative Decoction.
These both serve for Clysters: to them you may add Oils, Syrups, purging
Electuaries, as necessity requires.

Lac virgineum: It was invented for proud Ladies and Wenches to clear their
faces of Sun-burning, Freckles, Pimples, and such like deformityes.

To preserve the juice of any herb or fruit, take these few rules; First
gather the herb when it is very dry, then beat it, and press out the juice.
Secondly, you must clarify It over the fire, till no more scum will arise.
Thirdly, boil it to the thickness of honey, and (when it is cold) put it up
into a pot or glass for your use. This is called Rob or Sapa, when you find
the word Rob or Sapa simply, without any relation of what it should be made,
know it is the juice of the white grape. I shall insert none of them, nor their
virtues, but refer them to the virtue of the simple, out of which Rob, Sapa, or
juice, is extracted.

CHAP. IV. Of Lohochs.
LOhoch is an Arabic word, the Greeks call it (...) Eclegma; the Latins
Linctas, viz: a thing to be licked. It is thicker then a syrup, and not so
thick as an Electuary. Its used generally against diseases in the breast and
Lungs: and the manner of taking of it, is with a Liquoris stick. The manner of
making it, is thus; Take of any pectorall herbs, or ingredients, make a
decoction, then add twice its weight of Honey or Sugar, and boil it to a
Lohoch. Some are made of the pulp of fruits, roots, and seeds; if there be gums
in them they must be dissolved. If you would know the manner of making each of
them particularly, you must peruse the London dispensatory.

Lohoch de farfara. The Lohoch of Coltsfoot.
Take of Coltsfoot roots cleansed, eight ounces, Marsh-Mallow roots four
ounces, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, and press the pulp
through a sieve, dissolve it again in the decoction; and let it boil once or
twice, then take it from the fire, and add two pound of white Sugar, Honey of
Raisons fourteen ounces, juice of Liquoris two drachms and an half, stir them
well with a wooden pestle, sprinkling in of Saffron and Cloves in Powder, of
each one scruple; Cinnamon and Mase, of each two scruples, make them into a
Lohoch according to Art. It is good for a Cough and roughness of the Windpipe.

Lohoch de papavere; Lohoch of Poppys.
It is good against salt humors, and sharp distillations upon the Lungs: it it
very good in Fevers, accompanied with want of sleep; it is of great use in a
Pleurisy; and allayes the sharpness of the humors, which cause roughness of
the throat.

Lohoch e passulis; A Lohoch of Raisins.
This is a fine medicine for Children, and is good not only against Coughs and
Consumptions of the Lungs; but also against Convulsions and falling sickness.

Lohoch e pino; A Lohoch of Pine-nuts.
It succors such as are Asthmatick, helps continual Coughs, and difficulty of
breathing: it cuts and attenuates tough humors in the breast.

Lohoch e portulaca; A Lohoch of Purslane:
It is good against inward bruises or wounds in the Lungs or those parts; for
such as spit blood: it is very binding.

Lohoch e pulmone vulpis; A Lohoch of Fox-Lungs.
It is very good in Phthisicks, cleanses and heals Ulcers in the Lungs.

Lohock Sanum and Expertum, a sound and well experienced Lohoch.
It is good in cold Distempers of the Breast and Lungs, and attenuates thick
and gross Humors there: No better Romedy for those who have lost their Tongues
by Cold.

Lohoc Scilliticum. a Lohoch of Squils.
It has the same virtue with Oxymel of Squils, but more gentle; it helps
Asthmas, and difficulty of Breathing; it carries away all offensive Humors
from the Breast and Lungs, and thereby furthers Digestion.

Lohoch Caulium, a Lohoch of Coleworts.
It opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and is thought to be good
against the Rickets: it cuts, attenuares, and concocts the thick and viscuous
Humors in the Breast, Stomach, and Bowels of Children.

To these I add one of Quercetans Lohochs: Take of the Roots of Marshmallows
well cleansed half a pound, or as much as you please: boil it till it be tender
in common Hydromel; then beat it well, and rub it through a Sieve; of which
take two Ounces of the Species Diarragacanthi, and Diaireos, of each three
drachms: of white Sugar, and Penies, of each half an ounce: Flos Sulphuris
rightly prepared, two drachms^ Syrup of Maidenhair, and Coltsfoot, of each as
much as suffices; bring it into the form of a Lohoch, and take it with a
Liquoris Stick.

It is an excellent Remedy (says he) against all inveterate Coughs, whether
they have their Original from a hot or cold cause: against the Asthma, Ptysick,
stoppage of the Pipes, and all other Diseases of the Lungs; it maturates the
Plurisie, and causes it to be spit up.

CHAP. V. Preserves, Conserves, Sugars, and Lozenges.
Preserves are made of Roots, Barks, Fruits, and Flowers: And first of Roots;
Take of what Root you please, scrape it very clean, and if there be any Pith
therein take it out; boil them in Spring Water (or in Rose Water, if you can
afford it) till they be soft: then take them out, and to a pint of the Liquor
add a pound of white Sugar, boil it to the thickness of a Syrup: then put in
the Root, and let it boil a little, then put it into a glass, or a glassed pot,
and keep it for your use. So you may preserve the Roots of Angelica, Acorus,
Burrage, Bugloss, Succory, Elecampane, Eringo, Ginger, Burnel, Satyrion,
Comphry, Zedoary, the stalks of Artichokes, Angelica, Burs, Lettice, etc.
before they be quite ripe; making this difference, that whereas before you took
out the Pith of the Roots, you must of these make use of none but the Pith.

In like manner you may preserve Barks; as Citron Pills, the Pills of Lemons
and Or anges, and the green Rind of Walnuts, viz. Take of the exterior, or
outmost yellow skin; then boil it as before, till it be tender, make a Syrup,
and preserve it.

You may preserve Fruits as you did the former, viz. Pare and quarter them, and
take out the Oore; boil them till they be tender, and do as you are before
taught.

Another way is this: Pate, quarter, and take out the Core of some; of others
pull off the outward skin, and pull out the stones: take their weight in Sugar
and dissolve it, put in the fruits and let them boil a little. Thus may you
preserve Apples, Pears, Quinces, Apricocks, Plums, Peaches, Citrons,
Myrabolans, Nutmegs, Grapes, Barberryes, Cherryes, Cornells, etc. or of any of
these fruits you may preserve the pulp, by boiling them till they be tender,
then pulp them through a Sieve: boil the pulp gently till the water be
consumed, then add its equal weight in Sugar, and boil it to its due
thickness. Though flowers are seldom, yet they may be preserved thus: Take a
glass, broad both at the top and bottom, first cover the bottom of the
glass with fine Sugar; then cover the Sugar with the flowers you would
preserve, lay them even and smooth, then cover them with Sugar, and that again
with flowers, till your glass be sull; Tie a Paper over the top, and you will
have a pleasant preserve.

The virtue of Preserves you may easily gather, if you consider the nature of
the root, stalk, fruit, bark or flower preserved; they are of great use in
physic, and many times welcome to sick people; but are most commonly used at
banquets,

Conserves.
Conserves are made either of herbs or flowers: if you make your conserve of
herbs, you must take only the tender tops and leaves; and beat them in a stone
Mortar, when they are beaten pretty small, add to them their treble weight in
Sugar, beat them very well, you cannot beat them too much till (if you eat it)
it feels not rough in your mouth: then put it into earthen pots well glazed,
and keep it for your use.

Conserves of flowers are done in the same manner, only remember to do them
whilst they are fresh, pick them clean, and cur off the whites.

I shall say no more of Conserves, but leave the virtue and use of them to the
ingenious.

Lozenges.
Diacodium Solidum, sive Tabulatum.
Take of white Poppy heads meanly ripe, and newly gathered, in number twenty,
steep them in three pints of warm Spring Water, the next day boil them till
the virtue is our, then strain out the Liquor, and with a sufficient quantity
of good Sugar, boil it according to art, that you may make it into Lozenges.
They are good against thin humors distilling from the head upon the Lungs,
Stomach and Throat: they provoke sleep, and cool the body in Fevers.

Saccharum Tabulatum simplex and periatum.
Lozenges of Sugar simple and pearled, commonly called manus Christi.

It is cooling and very Cordial, and therefore is good in Fevers, and for
weak people, who are subject to Hectic Feavets and Consumptions.

Saccharum Tabulatum Compositum. Lozenges of Sugar compound.
Is is very good for cold Stomachs, and it frees the Stomach of Choler and
Phlegm; and is good against Worms.

Saccharum Penidium, Sugar Penies.
For the most part they are used in other Compositions, of themselves they are
good against Coughs.

Saccharum Rosatum, Sugar of Roses.
They strengthen weak Stomachs, eases pains in the Head, restores loft
strength, they cherish a weak Brain, and comfort drooping Spirits; stay
vomiting and pissing of blood; they are convenient for people in Consumptions,
to carry them in their pockets, and now and then cat a bit of them: In like
manner are all the rest to be taken.

CHAP. VI. Of Troches.
THey are also called Placentule, or little Cakes; they were invented
principally to keep Pouders from losing their virtue, by the intromission of
the air, which this Form does resist, and keep it pure the longer. Besides,
they are convenient for a man to carry about him when he travelleth; their
form, for the most part, is little, round, and flat. The general way of making
them is thus: Take what quantity of Gum Tragacanth you please, the like
quantity of Rosewater, or any other fuitable to the Distemper you aim at; put
it in a Galley pot, and cover it, in six or seven hours the Gum will be turned
into Musilage, with which you may make any fine Powder into Paste; with the
Paste you may make Troches, or little Cakes, and print what you please upon
them. Then dry them in the shadow, and keep them for your use.

Trochisci de absynthio, Troches of Wormwood are thus made.
Take of the Leaves of Red-Roses, Wormwood, and Annis-seeds, of each two
drachms; Juice of Maudlin made thick, the Roots of Asarabacca, Rhubarb,
Spicknard, Smallage seeds, Bitter Almonds, Mastich, Mace, of each one dram;
Juice of Succory, as much as is sufficient to make Troches. They strengthen the
Stomach, and provokes an appetite, open Obstructions of the Liver and Bowels,
and carry away Watery and Chollerick Humors. The frequent use of these Troches
will be beneficial to such as are inclinable to the Jaundise or Dropsy. The
Dose is from half a dram to a dram and an half.

Agaricus Trochiscatus, Agarick Trochiscated.
They purge Phlegm and Choler mixed, and free the Head and Brain thereof;
purge gross and viscous Humors from the Stomach. They are seldom or never
used alone, therefore I forbear the Dose.

Trochisci Albi, the white Troches.
They are cooling and drying and of great virtue, if a dram of them be finely
poudered, and mixed with an Injection for the Yard ulcerated.

Trochisci Alexiterii, Troches against Poison.
They are good against all Pestilential and Epidemical Diseases, and a good
Preservative in Pestilential Times; and they strengthen the Heart. Take a
little now and then.

Trochisci Alhandal.
It powerfully purges gross Humors from the exterior parts; it is good in the
Palsy, sleepy Disease, Apoplexy, and Convulsion, coming from a cold cause.
The Dose is from two grains to four. It is violent, and best mixed with other
milder Medicines, or given in a Clister.

Trochisci Aliptae Moschatae.
They are commended for Children that cannot swallow their Milk well. The Dose
is from two grains to six, given in Breast-milk. Others say it is very good for
Barren Women, taken inwardly and outwardly, mixed with a Plaster for the Womb.
It is very dear, and good for Ladies.

Trochisci Alchelengi, Troches of Winter Cherries.
They are a good Medicine to allay the heat of Urine, and give ease in Ulcers
of the Reins, Bladder, and passage of the Urine, and is good against the Stone.
The Dose is from half a dram to two drachms.

Trochisci Bechici, Albi and Nigri, Pectoral Rouls, white and black.
They are very good for a Cough and Hoarsness, The Dose is from half a dram
to a dram.

Trochisci de Berberis, Troches of Barberies.
They are very good in any Flux, cooling in Fevers, and allay unnatural heat
in any part. The Dose is from half a dram to two.

Trochisci de Camphora, Troches of Camphire.
They are good in Burning Fevers, against the heat of Blood and Choler, and
against the hot distemper of the Stomach and Liver, or any other part, against
the Jaundice, Hectic Fevers, etc. The best way is to take a little often.

Trochisci de Capparibus, Troches of Capers.
They are very profitable against schirrhous Tumors in the Spleen, and opens
Obstructions of the Liver, and are good against the Hypochondriack Melancholy.
The Dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Trochisci de Carabe; Or, Troches of Amber.
They are good to stop fluxes of blood in any part of body. The Dose is from
one scruple to four.

Trochisci Cypheos.
It is used in Treacle and Methridate: It is good against Ulcers in the Lungs,
and other parts of the body.

Trochisci de Eupaterio, Troches of Maudlin.
These Troches are good against the Jaundice, and the Dropsy, and is good in
any Tumor in the Liver or Splean.

Trochisci Galliae Moschatae.
They strengthen the Womb, the Brain, Heart, Animal and Vital Spirit.

Trochisci Gordonii.
They are good against any inward Ulcers, or Ulcers of the Yard, and to cool
the body in Fevers. Take half a dram with Syrup of Marshmallows.

Trochisci Hedichroi.
They strengthen the Heart and Brain, they are of a heating quality; therefore
good for such as have cold Stomachs: they are seldom used alone.

Trochisci Hysterici, Troches against the Mother.
They serve principally against Fits of the Mother, expels the Birth, and
Afterbirth, cleanses a Woman after her Labor. The Dose is from half a dram
to a dram.

Trochisci de Ligni Aloes, Troches of Wood of Aloes.
It chears the Heart and Vital Spirits; it is good against Heart-qualms and
Faintings, and against the Dropsy, and is a pretty Medicine for a
Stinking-breath. The Dose is half a dram.

Trochisci e Myrrha, Troches of Myrrh.
They powerfully provoke the dead Child after Birth, and Women's Monthly
Purgations. The Dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Trochisci de Plumbo, Troches of Lead.
It is good to cure Ulcers in the Eyes.

Trochisci Polyidae,
It is good in green Wounds and Ulcers.

Trochiscide Rhabarbare, Troches of Rhubarb.
They have a cutting, attenuating, strengthening, and Choller-purging quality,
by Urine and otherwise: they are profitably used in the Dropsy, Jaundice, and
inveterate Obstructions following a Fever. Take from half a dram, to a
dram and an half.

Trochisci de Santalis, and Spodio, Troches of Sanders and Spodium.
Both those are cooling and binding, allay the heat in Fevers, quench Thirst,
stop a Flux, and strengthens the retentive Faculty. The Dose is half a dram.

Trochisci de Scilla ad Theriacam, Troches of Squils for Treacle.
They serve principally for other Compositions; as for Venice Treacle. For
their particular virtue, see the nature of Squils.

Trochisci de terra Lemnia, Troches of Earth of Lemnos.
It is very good to stanch bleeding at Nose, or any Flux of Blood in any part
of the body. Half a dram is a sufficient Dose.

Sief de Thure, Sief of Frankincense.
It dryes up Rheum in the Eyes.

Trochisci de Violis Solutivi, Troches of Violets Solutive.
They purge Water, tough Phlegm and Choler; they are violent, take but half a
dram, and that with good advice, that it may be mixed with some proper
Corrigents.

Trochisci de Agno Casto, Troches of Agnus Castus.
See the virtues of the Syrup of Agnus Castus.

Trochisci de Anniso, Troches of Annis-seeds.
They open the Obstructions of the Liver, and help all infirmities thereof. It
is good in Quartan Agues. The Dose is from a dram to two.

Trochisci Diarhadon.
They are good against Fevers coming of Phlegm, all Quoridian Fevers and
Agues, eases pains in the belly, and cleanses the bowels. The Dose is from
half a dram to a dram.

Trochisci de Lacca, Troches of Lacca.
It opens Obstructions of the Liver, and helps Fevers arising from that cause,
purges by Urine, and is good in Ascites, or any Dropsy. Take from half a
dram to a dram.

Pastilli Adronius, and Musae.
They heal Wounds, and cleanse Ulcers, Fistulas, and such like. It cleanses
the Ears that are mattery, represseth excressency of flesh, and cleanses the
filth of the bones. It is good against the inflammation of the Fundament, and
Chollerick eating Pustules.

Croco Magma of Damocrates.
It strengthens the Stomach, warms the Heart, and is expulsive.

Trochisci Ramich.
They strengthen the Stomach, Heart, Liver, and other parts, gives ease in the
Chollick, and helps Pluxes of Blood; and cleanses the body of salt, sharp, and
chollerick Humors. You cannot err in taking of it.

Trochisci de Rosis, Troches of Roses.
They strengthen the digestive faculty of the Stomach, and eases pains there;
they are good against the Hectic Fever, and the beginning of a Dropsy; it
restores Color lost. Take it at any time.

Trochisci Diacorrallion.
They stop the immoderate Flux of the Terms, and other Fluxes of Blood: Take
half a dram, take them with care and discretion. Trochisci Kaemoptoici, is
like it in operation: And Trochisci Diaspermation helps the Pleurisy, eases
pain, and differs little from the former.

CHAP. VII. Of Pills.
THE Greeks call them (...), the Latins, Pilulae, or little Bails; we commonly
call them Pills: they were invented to purge the Head principally; as also, the
remote parts of the Body, which they best perform, by reason they are long
digesting, and better able to draw the peccant Humors to them. P^lls are made
of any Powder, with Syrups, Sapa, or Jellies, by the help of a Mortar and
Pestle; As for Example,

Pilulae de Agarico; Or, Pills of Agarick.
Take of Agarick three drachms, Blew Orris Roots, Mastich, and Hore-hound, of
each one dram; Turbith five drachms, Hiera-Piera half an ounce, Colocynths,
Sarcocol, of each two drachms; Myrrh, one dram; Sapa, as much as is
sufficient to make it into a Mass for Pills. It purges Choler and Phlegm from
the Head, Breast, and Lungs. The Dose is from two scruples to a dram in the
Morning.

Pilulae Aggregativae.
It purges Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy Humors: it helps Diseases of the
Stomach and Liver, and is good against Quotidian Agues. The Dose is from half a
dram to four scruples; take it in the Morning.

Pilulae Alaphanginae.
They cleanse the Stomach, Brain, and the Sensitive Organs, from gross and
putrid Humors, which hinders the exercise of their Functions: It strengthens
also and helps the Concoction of the Stomach. The Dose is from a dram to four.

Pilulae de Aloe Rosata.
It purges Choler, and frees the Stomach of such Humors, opens Obstructions
caused thereby, as the Yellow Jaundise, and is good against Worms, etc. The
Dose is from a scruple to a dram: take them at night going to bed.

Pilulae de Aloe Lota.
It purges the Brain, Stomach, and Bowels of putrid Humors, and strengthens
them: Take them as the former.

Pilulae Aurea.
It is good in Opthalmia, or inflammation of the Eyes, helps the Megrim coming
from a cold cause, and frees the Bowels of Wind. The Dose is from two scruples
to four.

Pilulae Cochiae, the greater.
It purges the Head of phlegmatic humors, and is good against the inveterate
Headache, Megrim, Palsy, Falling Sickness, etc. The Dose is from two scruples
to four.

Pilulae Cochiae, the less.
Take it not alone.

Pilulae ex duobus; Or, Pills of two things.
They purge Choler and Phlegm; but with such violence, that it ought not to be
given alone.

Pilulae de Eupatorio, Pills of Eupatorium.
It purges Choler gently, and are good in Tertian Agues, Yellow Jaundise,
Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. The Dose is from half a dram to a
dram, taken at night.

Pilulae Faetidae, Stinking Pills.
It purges gross, tough, Melancholy, and phlegmatic humors, from the
remotest parts of the body. It is good against the Gout, and cold afflictions
of the Joints, Leprosies, and Diseases of the Skin. The Dose is from half a
dram to four scruples.

Pilulae de Hermodactyls;
Pills of Hermodaetils are of the same nature with the former. The dose is from
one dram to two.

Pill. de Hiera cum Agarico, Pills of Hiera with Agarick.
Some will have this Pill an Universal Medicine: It purges Choler, Phlegm, and
Melancholy: it opens obstruction of the Liver and Spleen, is good against the
Jaundise, the Dropsy, and Scurvey; against Vertigoes and Dizziness of the
Head, provoke the Terms, ease the Mother-Fits, and strengthen the Womb, help
shortness of breath: all which I have sound by Experience. Authors say, it
resists Epidemical Diseases, and poisons; helps the Gout, and cures all sorts
of Agues. The dose is from one scruple to four.

Pilulae Imperiales, Imperial Pills.
Strengthen the Stomach, Liver, Bowels, and Natural Spirit, and purge mixed
Humors. The dose is from a scruple to a dram; take them at night.

Pilulae de Lapide Lazuli; Or, Pills of Lapis Lazul.
It purges Melancholy, and Adust Choler; it works violently. The dose is
from two scruples to a dram.

Pilulae Macri.
They strengthen the Stomach, Brain, and the Nerves, and purge the Humors that
afflict them, and hinder the motion of the body: they open Obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, and are good for people who have been hurt by Falls and
Bruises. The dose is from half a dram to a dram. Take them at night, and
continue taking them a week together.

Pilulae Mastichinae; Mastick Pills.
They strengthen and purge the Stomach, Brain, Belly, and Reins. Take them as
the former.

Pilulae Mechoacanae; Pills of Mechacan.
They purge Phlegm with violence. The dose is from a scruple to half a dram.

Pilulae de Opopanace, Pills of Opopanax.
It purges cold Humors from the Joints and Nerves, is good against the Gout
and Palsy. Take a scruple or half a dram in the morning.

Pilulae Rudii.
It purges Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, from the head and other parts of
the body: it is quick in operation, safe and the best of Purges. The dose is
from one scruple to half a dram.

Pilulae Russi.
They are preservative in Pestilential Times, and evacuate malignant humors,
and such as are gotten by Surfeits, and strengthens the Vitals. The Dose is
from a scruple to a dram: take them to Bedward.

Pilulae sine quibus, Pills without Which.
It purges Choler and Phlegm from the Brain; it is good for Ophthalmia caused
by Choler, and is good ^n the Bastard Tertian. The Dose is from half a dram
to a dram.

Pilulae Stomachicae, Stomach Pills.
It strengthens the retentive and digestive Faculties of the Stomach, and
cleanses it of offensive humors. The dose is from one dram to two.

Pilulae Stomachicae cum Gummi, Stomach-Pills with Gums.
They are of the same nature with the former; they are stronger in operation.
The dose is a dram: take them in the morning early, and sleep after them.

Pilulae de Succino, Pills of Amber.
It is friendly to the Womb, and takes away the causes of Sterility, and helps
Conception; purging Choler and Phlegm, and leaves a binding and strengthening
quality behind it. The dose is from a scruple, to a dram: take them at night.

Pilulae ex Tribus, Pills of three things: Strengthen the Stomach and Liver,
open Obstructions, helps the Yellow Jaundise, and frees the body of Choleric
Humors, which cause the Itch and Scabs. The dose is from one scruple to a
dram: take them at night.

Pilulae Turpeti aureae.
They purge Choler and Phlegm, strengthen the Stomach and Liver. Take them as
the former.

Pilulae Azaiereth.
It strengthens the body, evacuateth Choler from the Veins; and Chollerick,
Phlegmatic, and putrid humors from the Stomach, and is a good preservation in
Pestilential Times. The dose and manner of taking them is the fame.

Pilulae ex Bdellio, Pills of Bdellium.
They are good in the immoderate Flux of the Terms and Hemorrhoids. The dose is
half a drathm.

Pilulae de Rhabarbaro, Pills of Rubarb.
They evacuate Chollerick Humors, help the Jaund se, open Obstructions of the
Liver, and strengthens the Stomach. Take them at night, from a scruple to a
dram.

Pilulae Arabicae.
It removes the Diseases of the Head; as the Vertigo and Megrim: it makes a
man merry; it preserves his Mind in vigor, clears the Sight, repairs Hearing
lost, and frees the Stomach of vicious humors. Take in the morning from one
scruple to four.

Pilulae Arthriticae.
It helps the Gout, and other Joynt-Griefs, or whatever Disease has its
original from Phlegm. Take from one dram to four scruples, in the morning.

Pilulae Fumariae. Pills of Fumitory.
This Pill is good for such as are troubled with Scabs, Itch, and such like;
for it purges Chollerick and adust Humors, and falt Phlegm. The dose is from
two scruples to a dram: take it in the morning.

Pilulae Indae.
It generally purges Melancholy; therefore necessary in all Melancholy
Diseases; as Cancers, Leprosies, Quartan Agues, Pains and Tumors of the Spleen,
Sadness, Fear, etc. The dose is from half a dram to four scruples: take them
in the morning.

Pilulae Luis Majores.
They are given, with happy success, in Diseases of the Eyes: it purges
Phlegmatic and mixed Humors from the head, and strengthens the visive virtue;
Take them as the former.

Pilulae de Euphorbio; Pills of Euphorbium.
They are good against pains in the Loins, Dropsies, and Gouts, coming of a
moist cause: half a dram is a sufficient dose.

Pilulae Scribonii.
They are good against spitting of Blood, Ptisicks, and the like. Take a
scruple going to bed.

Pilulae de Cynoglosso, and de Styrace; Pills of Hounds-Tongue, and Styrax.
They are both good against a Defluxion of hot Rheums upon the Lungs, or other
parts, against Cold caused by Defluxion, and provokes sleep. Take one scruple
or two, if you find your body strong.

Laudanum and Nepenthes Opiatum.
It mittigateth violent pains, allayeth the Fumes that trouble the Brain in
Fevers, and provoke sleep. Beware how you give such Medicines in the beginning
of Fevers. The dose is from one grain to four.

CHAP. VIII. Of Powders.
POuders may be made of any Herb, Flower, Root, Mineral, Stone, etc. and they
are varlously compounded, as follows:

Aromaticum Caryophyllatum.
Take of Cloves 7 drachms; Mace, Zedoary, Galanga the less, Yellow Sanders,
Troches Diarrhadon, Cinnamon, Wood of Aloes, Indian Spicknard, Long Pepper,
Cardamoms the Less, of each one dram; Red-Roses four drachms; Gallia
Moschata, and Liquoris, of each two drachms; Indian Leaf, and Cubebs, of each
two scruples: beat them all into Powder. It strengthens the Stomach, and
clears the Vital parts, stays Vomiting, breaks Wind, and helps Digestion Take a
dram or two.

Aromaticum Rosatum.
It strengthens the Stomach, Heart, and Brain, and is good against Swooning,
Palpitation, Convulsion, Epilepsie, and such like: it discusseth Wind, and
strengthens the Natural Parts, and is profitably given in Consumptions. The
dose is from half a dram to two drachms.

Puluis ex Chelis Cancrorum composiuts; Or, the Powder of Crabs Claws compound:
Otherwise called Gascoins Powder.
It is very good in Fevers, either intermitting, putrid, or malignant: it is
of known virtue in the Small Pox and Measels: it is very cordial, chears the
Heart and Vital Spirits. The usual dose is from one grain to twelve.

Species Cordiales Temperatae.
It is a great Cordial, strengthens both Vital and Animal Parts, and is often
prescribed among other Cordials. The dose commonly is from a scruple to half a
dram.

Diacalaminth, Simple and Compound.
It heats the body, and cuts gross humors: it expels Wind, and opens
Obstructions, provokes Urine and the Terms, and cleanses Women in Childbed.
The dose is half a dram.

Dianisum.
It powerfully discusseth Wind from the Stomach, and raw Humors, and removes
Phlegmatic Humors, which causes a Cough. Take half a dram, or a draclim,
being made into an Electuary.

Pulvis Radicum Ari compositus: Powder of Aaron Roots compound.
It provokes Urine and the Terms, expels the dead Child, and Afterbirth, and
cleanses the Womb, and eases Fits of the Mother; cleanses the Stomach of
tough humors, and is a good Antidote (say some) against poison. Give a
scruple, or half a dram.

Diaires Simplex; Or, Powder of the Root of Flowerdeluce.
It is good against Coughs: make it into an Electuary with Honey, or some
Pectoral Syrup, and take it with a Liquoris Stick.

Dialacca.
It strengthens the Stomach and Liver, and opens Obstructions; mollifieth
schirrhous Tumors, and is of great virtue to remove the effects thereof, viz.
Cachexia, and the Dropsy: It provokes Urine, and breaks the Stone in the Reins
and Bladder. The dose is from half a dram to four scruples.

Pulvis Cardiacus Magistralis.
This Powder has not its name for nothing; it is a very great Cordial, and
strengthens the Heart and Vitals. The dose is from one grain to ten; the
Gentry may use it often.

Diamargariton Frigidum.
It is a great Cordial, good against Syncopes, Asthmahs, Coughs, and
Distillations of sharp Humors, Consumptions, and Hectic Fevers. Half a dram
is an indifferent dose, if it be not too dear.

Diambra.
It effectually strengthens all the bowels and inward ^arts, weakened by cold;
it cheareth the Spirits, and gives the Patient a good color; it profits the
Womb, and is friendly to ancient men and women. The dose from half a dram to
two drachms.

Diamoshu dulce and Amarum.
It is good against cold afflictions of the Brain, and all Diseases thence
arising; against Melancholy, and all Melancholy Diseases. The last besides
the former, has a purging Faculty, and cleanses the Stomacle. The dose is
from half a dram to a dram.

Species Dianthus.
It makes a light heart, a cheerful mind, a good Stomach, and a sound body.
The dose is the same with the former.

Diapenidion.
It prevails against all Diseases of the Breast, Cough, Hoarseness, loss of
Voice. Take half a dram, or mix it with some Pectoral Syrup.

Diarrhodon Abbatis.
It strengthens the Liver, Heart, Stomach, etc. and quenches unnatural heat
in any of those parts. The dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Diaspoliticum.
It is good to discuss wind in the Stomach, and removes the Diseases of the
part, and helps digesture. The dose is from one dram to two.

Diatraganthum Frigidum.
It cures all Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, which proceed from a hot and
dry cause, or from putrefaction in the parts; for the most part, it is mixed
with other Medicines: Or it may be made into an Electuary with the Syrup of
Violets, and you may take a dram.

Diatrion Piperion.
This Powder discusseth Wind from the Stomach and Bowels; it heats the Stomach,
helps Digestion, and frees it of Phlegm. The dose is from a scruple to half a
dram.

Diatrion Santelion.
It is a very good Medicine to correct the hot Distemper of the Liver, and is
good against a Diarrhaea, caused by Choleric Humors: it helps Obstructions of
the Liver also. The dose is from four scruples to two drachms.

Pulvis Haly.
It is a good Medicine against Peripneumonia, or Inflammation of the Lungs,
Phrisicks, and Pleurisies. Take half a dram of the Powder.

Pulvis Laetificans.
It revives the Heart, and chears the Spirits, helps digestion, and preserves a
good Color. The dose is from one scruple to four. Or, of it you may make a
Sacculus, to be applied to the Region of the Heart, Stomach, and Head, against
Palpitation, and cold Diseases of the Head and Stomach.

Pulvis Bezoardicus Magistralis; A Bezoartick Powder Magisterial.
It is a great Cordial, and very good in Fevers, and in all Diseases where the
Vitals suffer. The dose is from a grain to twelve. If you take too much, your
purse will soon complain.

Species confectionis Liberantis.
It is a good preservative in Pestilential Times, and a good Medicine in
Pestilential Fevers. The dose is from half a dram to two drachms: It is a
good Cordial for the Gentry.

Pulvis Saxonicus.
It is a great preservative against Poison, and the Pestilence, and powerfully
expels all poison and malignant humors out of the body. Take half a dram, or
a dram.

Pulvis Antilyssus.
This Powder is good against the biting of a Mad-Dog, or any other venomous
Creature; for it fortifyeth the heart against poison. The dose is from half a
dram to a dram.

Rosatae Novellae.
It helps hot and dry Stomachs, and is good against distempers of the Heart,
Liver, etc. or of any other part, caused by heat and dries: it strengthens
the Vital Spirits, and provokes Sweat. The dose is the same with the former.

Pulvis Thuraloes.
It is good to stanch blood in any Wound: If you mix it with the White of an
Egg, and with the Wool of an Hare dipped in it, apply it to the bleeding part.

Species Electuarii de gemmis frigidi.
It strengthens the Heart and Vital Spirits, and relieveth languishing
Nature. Half a dram is the utmost dose; and that too much for a poor man.

Pulvis contra casum; A Powder for those that are bruised by a Fall.
It is good to strengthen the internal, parts of one bruised by Fall, or
otherwise. The dose is from two drachms to three; sweat after it.

Diacymini.
It is good to discuss Wind, warms the Stomach, and eases the pains of the
Chollick, and helps digestion. The dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Diagalanga.
It discusseth Wind and cold Humors in the Stomach; it corrects the cold and
moist distemper of the Liver and Brain, and does somewhat provoke Urine. The
dose is from half a dram to two.

Species Electuarii Diamargariton calidi.
It is a great Cordial, heats the Stomach and the Womb, and removes cold
Distempers thereof. The dose is half a dram.

Lithontribon.
It heats the Stomach, and helps want of Digestion: it is good against the
Hiack Passion, and Cholick; breaks the Stone in the Reins and Bladder,
Strangury, and Dysury. The dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Pleres Arconicon.
It is good in Syncopes, and Palpitations; and cherishes those who have been
weekned by Sicknesses: it strengthens Memory, and quickneth the Senses; good
against the Falling Sickness, and cold afflictions of the Lungs, and is
exceeding good for sad and melancholy people. The dose is the same.

Pulvis contra Pestem: A Powder against the Pestilence.
The little tells you the virtue of it: besides, it chears the Heart, and Vital
Spirits. The dose is the same.

Pulvis contra Vermes: A Powder against the Worms.
And is a good one for the purpose. The dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Purging Powders.
Pulvis Hermodactylorum compositus; Powder of Hermodactyls compound.
It purges Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy; but with such violence, that it is
the safest course not to meddle with it: Or let it be first corrected by an
able Brain.

Pulvis Senae compositus major.
The Powder of Seen the greater composition: some call it Holland Powder; or,
Ralph Holland's Powder: it discusseth Wind, and helps the Chollick; opens the
Obstructions of the Reins and Bowels. The Dose is from one dram to two.

Pulvis Senae compositus minor: Or, the Powder of Seen, the lesser composition.
It purges Melancholy from the head and other parts. The dose is a dram.

Diasenae; Or, Pulvis Sanctus: The Holy Powder.
It purges the same humor, but is very violent. The dose is the same for
strong bodies.

Diaturbith cum and sine Rhabarbaro: Diaturbith with, or without Rhubarb.
The first purges Phlegm and Choler: the other Phlegm only; but ought neither
of them to be taken, unless corrected by an able Brain, and administered by a
skilful and careful hand.

CHAP. IX. Of Electuaries.
ELectuaries are easily made of any of the aforegoing Powders; or, having your
Ingredients ready, beat them, and sift them into fine Powder, and with three
times the weight of Honey or Syrup, suitable to your Ingreads, make an
Electuary: As for Example,

Antidotus Analeptica.
Take of Red-Roses and Liquoris, of each two drachms and five grains;
Gum-Arabick, and Traga-Canth, of each two drachms, and two scruples; Sanders,
White and Red, of each four scruples; the Juice of Liquoris, White Starch, the
Seeds of White Poppies, Purslane, Lettice, and Endive, of each three drachms:
the four greater cold Seeds husked; the Seeds of Quinces, Mallows, Cotton,
Violets, Pine-Nuts, Sistick Nuts, sweet Almonds, Pulp of Sebestens, of each two
drachms: Cloves, Spodium, Cinnamon, of each one dram; Saffron five grains,
Penies half an ounce: Make them into fine Powder, and with three times their
weight of Syrup of Violets make an Electuary. It is good in Consumptions, and
Hectic Fevers; it quenches Thirst, and restores radical Moisture. You may
take a dram, as often as you please.

Confectio Alkermes.
This is used in Palpitations, Syncopes, and Diseases of the Heart: it
resists the Pestilence and Poison, and relieveth languishing Nature. The dose
is from one dram to two.

Electuarium e Sassaphras; Or, Electuary of Sassaphras.
It opens obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys, and is good against
cold Rheums and Defluxions, from the Head to the Lungs, Teeth, Eyes; and helps
Diseases in those parts, occasioned by such Defluxions: it provokes the Terms,
dryes up the superfluous moisture of the Womb, and all raw thin Humors, and
breaks Wind. The dose is half a dram in the morning.

Electuarium de baccis Lauri, Electuary of Bay Berries.
It is good against the Chollick, and all Diseases caused by Wind or Cold; and
it cuts and attenuates glassie Phlegm. The dose is from one dram to three.

Diacapparis; Or, a Consection of Capers.
It is good against Diseases of the Spleen. The dose is the same with the
former.

Diacinnamomum, A Composition of Cinnamon.
It strengthens the inward parts, and heats the Scomach, helps Concoction,
provokes the Terms, and strengthens the Womb, and is good for people that are
subject to Phlegm and Wind. The dose is from one ounce to two.

Diacoralliou, A Composition of Coral.
It is cordial and binding, and cooling; it strengthens such as are in
Consumptions, cools in Fevers, and stops Fluxes; and is good for those that
are in a Consumption with a Looseness: it stops the Terms, and white Flux. The
dose is a dram in the morning. If you have a Looseness, the dose is from one
to three, and it may be taken often.

Diacorum.
This Electuary heats the Brain, strengthens the Nerves, and quickneth the
Senses, is good against the Headache, Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Catarrhs,
and provokes Lust. The dose is half a dram.

Diacydonium, Simplex and compositum; A Confection of Quinces, Simple or
Compound.
They comfort the Stomach, and are good for those that are subject to Vomiting;
for it strengthens the Stomach, and moderates Women's Fluxes: The dose is from
half a dram to a dram, before and after meat.

Confectio de Hyacintho.
It is a great Cordial, and cooling; and is of great virtue in all Fevers,
putrid, malignant, and pestilential. The dose is from two scruples to half a
dram.

Antidotum Haemagogum.
It provokes Urine, the Terms, and Afterbirth; helps the Strangury, and breaks
the Stone, opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. The dose is from one
dram to two.

Diasatyrion.
This was composed to provoke Lusts, and to whet on those who are impotent in
the acts of Venus, and is good against weakness of the Reins and Bladder. The
dose is from two drachms to three.

Electuarium Diaspermaton.
It provokes Urine, and breaks the Stone. The dose is from half an ounce to an
ounce.

Micleta.
It is profitable in long lasting Diarrhaeas, and Bloody Fluxes. The dose is
from one scruple to four.

Electuarium Pectorale.
It strengthens the Stomach and Lungs, and removes the Vices thereof. Take it
with a Liquoris stick.

Theriata Diatessarion.
It frees the Stomach of pain, Wind and want of digesture, resists the
Pestilence and Poison: it helps stopping of the Liver, Dropsy, Jaundise, etc.
and cold infirmities of the Brain; as Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Palsies,
etc. The dose is from half a dram to two.

Diascordium.
It strengthens the Heart, provokes Sweat, procures sleep, expels the
malignity of the Pestilence, hasteneth Women's Labor, provokes the Terms; is
good for Women lying in, and stops Fluxes. The dose is from one dram to
three. To Children give less.

Methridatum; Or, Methridate.
It is good against Poison, and cold humors in the Body, and Diseases thence
coming; loss of Senses by cold, helps the Chollick, and expels Wind, provokes
an Appetite: It helps Ulcers in the Bladder (says Galen) provokes Urine,
expels the dead Child, and helps such Women as cannot conceive, by reason of
the coldness and slipperyness of their Wombs. The dose is from half a dram to
two.

Phylonium persicum; Magistrale, and Romanum.
The first stops any Flux Diarrhaea, Dysentery, or Women's Monthly Terms, when
other means fail; which the second does likewise, eases pain, and procures
rest in Fevers: Romanum eases the vehemence of the pain of the Cholick,
Stone, Strangury, and such like; and provokes sleep. The dose is from a scruple
to four. Take it not without advice from an able Brain.

Electuarium de Ovo; An Electuary of Eggs.
It is a good Remedy in Pestilential Fevers, and a good preservative. The dose
is from half a dram to a dram.

Theriaca Andromachi; Venice Treacle.
It resists poison, and preserves the heart from venom, of such as have
been bitten by any venomous Creatures: It is good against inveterate
Headaches, Vertigoes, etc. Deafness, dullness of sight, loss of voice, Asthmas,
old Coughs, spitting of Blood, difficulty of Breathing, coldness of the
Stomach, and Wind, Chollick and sliack Passion, hardness of the Spleen,
Jaundise, Stone in the Reins and Bladder; provokes Urine, the Terms, Birth, and
Afterbirth: It is good against Ulcers in the Bladder, Dropsies, Leprosies,
Fevers of all sorts, pains in the Joints: it helps both Body and Mind, and is
good against Melancholy Thoughts, and vain Fears. The dose is from half a
dram to a dram: sweat upon it.

Theriaca Londinensis; London Treacle.
It strengthens the Heart, is good against the Pestilence, and resists
poison and infection; strengthens cold Stomachs, and helps digestion. You may
take two drachms in the morning.

Diacrocuma.
It is excellent against cold distempers of the Liver, Stomach, Reins, Spleen,
Bladder, and Matrix, and the Symptoms arising from those distempers, viz. The
Dropsy, and Chachexia. The dose is from half a dram to four scruples.

Athanasia Methridatis.
It prevails against poison, and biting of venomous Creatures, helps cold
Stomachs, and such whose meat putrifies therein; stays vomiting of Blood, and
old Cough, and is good against all cold Diseases of the Liver, Spleen, Bladder,
Reins, and Matrix. The dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Electuarium e Scoria serri.
It strengthens, opens, and gently purges the Stomach and Spleen, and
caseth the body of Melancholy, and Splenetick Diseases. The dose is from three
drachms to half an ounce.

Confectio Humain.
It strengthens the Heart and Brain, quickneth the Senses, and is a good
preservative against the Pestilence. The dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Diaircos Salominis.
It helps all cold infirmities of the Lungs. Take it with a Liquoris Stick.

Magnum Antidotum Mathioli, etc. Mathiolus his great Antidote against Poison
and the Pestilence.
It is very good for that purpose: See his Bezoar Water for particular virtues.
The dose is from a scruple to four.

Requies, Mitigates the heat in Fevers, and gives rest. Give not above half a
scruple at first: it is scarcely safe inwardly to be given: apply it ontwardly
to the Temples and Wrists.

Electuarium Reginae Coloniens.
It is good against the Stone and Wind-Chollick. The dose is a dram.

Triphera the Greater, Stops the immoderate Flux of the Terms and Hemorrhoids,
frees the body of crude humors, strengthens the Bladder, rectifies distempers
of the Spleen, expels Melancholy, and makes a good color. The dose is from a
dram to half an ounce.

Purging Electuaries.
Benedicta Laxativa.
It powerfully purges Phlegmatic Humors from the Joints; it purges the Reins
and Bladder. The dose is from one dram to a dram and an half.

Caryo costinum.
It is a good Purge for wounded persons, whose Wounds are inflamed: it also
purges hot Rheums: Correct it, or let it alone. Three drachms, or four, may be
given in a Clister.

Cassia extracta pro Clysteribus; Cassia extracted for Clysters.
The dose is an ounce; two or three given in Clysters, it purges the Reins,
and cools them; it eases the pains caused by the Stone, and is good to prevent
the growing thereof.

Electuarium amarum majus and minus; the Greater and Lesser bitter Electuary.
They both purge Choler: the first, Phlegm; and the second, Melancholy. The
dose of the first is from half an ounce to an ounce: Of the other, from one
ounce to two.

Diacassia with Manna.
This is a gallant Purge for hot bodies; for it gently looseneth and cools
much, and therefore is good in Fevers, and in all Diseases wherein Choler does
abound. The dose is an ounce; or more, as you find occasion.

Casia extracta sine and cumfoliis Senae; Cassia extracted without and with the
Leaves of Sena.
They are both gentle Purges; they cleanse and cool the Reins: they cleanse the
Bowels of Choler and Melancholy, and is good in Fevers. The dose of the first
is an ounce and an half: Of the other one ounce.

Diacarthamum.
It purges Phlegm and yellow Choler effectually. The dose is from one dram
to six.

Diaphaenicon.
It purges both Phlegm and Choler; it is good in Fevers, and eases the
Chollick and pains of the Stone, and freeth the Bowels of raw humors. The dose
is from two drachms to five.

Diaprunum Lenitive.
It cools and looseneth the body gently; it is good in all kind of Fevers, and
hot Agues, and is much commended in the Fever Hectic. The dose is an ounce to
bedward.

Diaprunum Solutive.
Is the best purger of Choler, and amendeth the hot distemper of the Liver.
The dose is from three drachms to six.

Catholicon.
It purges every humor abounding, especially Choler: It profits in
Fevers; it mollifieth, and alters the Humors, and strengthens the body: it
helps infirmities of the Liver and Spleen, Gouts of all sorts, Headaches,
Tertian, Quartan, and Quotidian Agues. The dose is from half an ounce to an
ounce: Take it going to bed, or in Clysters.

Electuarium de Citro Solutivum; the Solutive Electuary of Citrons.
It purges Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy; and carries away the rotten
humors in the declination of a Fever. The dose is half an ounce.

Electuarium Elescoph.
It purges Choler, Phlegm, and Wind, from all parts of the body; helps pains
of the joints and sides, the Chollick; it cleanses the Reins and Bladder.

Confectio Hamech.
It purges Melancholy, and yellow Choler: it is good against Melancholy and
Madness, Scabs, Itch, etc. The dose is from three drachms to an ounce.

Electuarium Lenitivum; the Lenitive Electuary.
It is a fine purge, fit for Feverish persons, and such as have Pleurisies: it
gently opens and mollifieth the Bowels, and purges (without trouble or hurt)
Melancholy, Phlegm, and Choler. The dose is from an ounce to two.

Electuarium passulatum.
It cleanses the Reins and Bladder, and is a good purge for those that are
troubled with Gravel, or the Stone: it purges Choler and Melancholy. The dose
is the same with the former.

Electuarium e succo Rosarum, An Electuary of the Juice of Roses.
It purges Choler; and the dose is from two drachms to an ounce and an half.

Hierapicra Simplex.
It is the most excellent Medicine to purge vicious Humors, which stick to the
Tunicles of the Stomach. The dose is from half an ounce to an ounce: In
Clysters, from six drachms to an ounce and an half.

Hiera cum Agarico; Hiera with Agarick.
The Virtues are the same with the former, purges Phlegm more effectually. The
dose is the same: For the further knowledge of the Virtues, see the Pill of
Hiera with Agarick.

Hiera Logadii.
It purges effectually those Humors, which cause the Palsy, Apoplexy, and
such like Diseases. The dose is the same: give it only to strong bodies.

Hiera Diacolocynthidos.
It eases inveterate Headaches, Falling-sicknesses, and such like Evils: for
it purges gross Humors from the farthest parts of the body. The dose is from
three drachms to six.

Triphera Solutive.
It purges Choler and Phlegm: Some account it profitable in the declination of
Fevers, and in hot distempers of the Stomach and Liver. The dose is from two
drachms to half an ounce.

CHAP. X. Of Oils.
AS there are of other Medicines, so there are of Oils, both simple and
compound: Simple Oils are either by expression, or infusion and decoction: Oils
by Expression, are drawn out of Fruits or Seeds; as out of sweet and bitter
Almonds, the Seed of Rope and Flax; by first beating them in a Stone-Morter,
and pressing out the Oil in a Press.

Simple Oils, by infusion and decoction, are thus made: Take the Herbs or
Flowers, of which you would make your Oil; beat them to two or three handfuls;
pour on a pint of oil, put them in an Earthen pot, and cover it with a paper
tied about the top, and set it in the Sun a fortnight: then heat it by the
fire, and press out the herbs: then put in as many herbs as you did at first;
do as before, as often as you see good, to make your Oil strong enough: then
boil it gently, till the vittue come forth of the herbs, and then strain it,
and reserve it for your use. In this manner is made the Oils of Roses, Dill,
Camomil, Melilot, Lillies, Violets, etc. All which, for the most part, are used
externally: some of them in Clysters, they retain the virtues of the simples
whereof they are made; which I hope is enough for the Ingenious Searcher.

Compound Oils are made in the same manner; Take this following for an Example,

Oleum Benedictum; Or, Blessed Oil.
Take the Roots of Carduus, and Valerian, of each one ounce; the Flowers of St.
John's Wort, two ounces; Wheat one ounce and an half; Old Oil four ounces;
Cypress Turpetine eight ounces; Frankincense in powder two ounces: Bruise the
root and flowers, and infuse them in White Wind sufficient to cover them: After
two days infusion, put in the Oil, with the Wheat bruised, boil them together
till the Wine be consumed; then press it out, and add the Frankincense and
Turperine: then boil them a little, and keep it for your use. It is good to
cleanse all manner of Wounds, especially those of the Nerves, and Wounds in the
head.

Oleum de Capporibus, Oil of Capers.
It opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and mollifies the hardness of
the Spleen, and is good against the Rickets: Anoint the part by the fire.

Oleum Castorei compositum, the Oil of Castor compound.
It has a cutting and attenuating Faculty of gross humors in the Joints, and
in cold Diseases.

Oleum Catellorium, Oil of Whelps.
It is good to anoint the Limbs and Muscles, that are weakened by Wounds and
Bruises.

Oleum Costinum, Oil of Costus.
It prevails against affects of the Nerves; for it strengthens, warmeth,
attenuates, and opens obstructions of those parts.

Oleum Crocinum, Oil of Saffron.
It has a faculty of strengthening the Nerves and the Womb, distipates swelling
and hardness, and caseth pains in those parts.

Oleum de Euphorbio, Oil of Euphorbium.
It has the same virtue as the Oil of Castor: both which dropped into the Ear,
helps the ^ise there, and cures Deafness.

Oleum Excestrense, Oil of Exceter.
It is good to anoint the Limbs of such as are lame, by reason of some old
Bruise, Cold, or Sprain.

Oleum Hirundinum, Oil of Swallows.
The Virtues are the same with the former.

Oleum Hyperici compositum, Oil of St. John's Wort Compound.
It has the Virtues of the two former, and is very good in green Wounds.

Oleum Irinum, Oil of Orris.
It does resolve, maturate, and ease pain in all kind of Tumors.

Oleum Majoranae, Oil of Marjarome.
It helps all cold Diseases of the Brain and Nerves: anoint the Backbone with
it for the dead Palsy: anoint the Forehead for the Headache. Drop it into
the Ears for the noise and pain therein.

Oleum Mandragorae, Oil of Mandrakes.
It is good to anoint the Temples of those that want sleep in a Frenzy. It is
extreme cold: be careful in the use of it.

Oleum Moschelaeum, Oil of Musk.
It helps Deasness, and all cold Diseases of the Head, Stomach, Sides, Nerves,
and Reins, and is good in the Strangury and Cholick.

Oleum Nardinum, Oil of Nard.
It has a warming, digesting, and binding quality, and is used with good
success in all cold Diseases of the Head, Liver, and Womb: and being snuffed up
in the Nose, prevails against the Coryza, which is a Distillation of Humors
from the Head to the Nose.

Oleum Nicodemi.
It is good to cleanse and heal Sores, Ulcers, Scabs, Itch, Small Pox, etc.

Oleum Vulpinum, Oil of Foxes.
In pains of the Joints, Podagra, and Chiragra: This Oil is of great use, says
Sylvius.

Oleum de Piperibus, Oil of Pepper.
It heats, attenuates, cleanses, and opens Obstructions: therefore
Physicians do use this Oil in the Palsy, Convulsion, and in all cold Diseases
of the Womb, Neck, Reins, and Bladder: it eases the Gout also.

Oleum Populeon.
It is a fine cool Oil; see the Ointment. I should here set down Chemical Oils;
but that I fear my book is already swelled into too large a Volume. They also
retain the virtue of the Simples, whereof they are made; but are far more
prevalent, and full of Spirit, and are not safely used alone.

CHAP. XI. Of Ointments,
I Have in the former Books showed you the manner of making of Ointments and
Plasters; and in regard that the way of making them is diverse, according to
the diversity of Ingredients, I shall here only declare the Virtues and
Operations of the Ointments and Plasters now in use, and sold by the
Apothecary.

Unguentum Album; The white Ointment has a refrigerating and drying faculty:
Chyrurgeons use it to allay the heat and itching in Ulcers.

Unguentum Egyptiacum, This is used in filthy Ulcers to cleanse them, and to
eat off dead flesh.

Unguentum Anodynum; An Ointment to ease pain: Is eases pain and inflammations
in Wounds and Tumors.

Unguentum ex Apio; An Ointment of Smallage: It is also a cleansing Unguent,

Linimentum Gummi Elemi; It gently cleanses, and fills with flesh Ulcers,
not only in the head, but in any other part.

Unguentum Auream, is accounted the best in curing Wounds, cleansing the Filth,
and drying the Moisture.

Basilicon, the Greater and Less; They heat, moisten, and digest, bring wounds
to suppuration, and cleanses them.

Vnguentum ex Bdellio, Ointment of Bdellium: It helps the Epilepsie, Palsy,
Cramp, and all cold Diseases of the Nerves.

Unguentum de Calce, Ointment of Chalk; is good against Burning and Scalding.

Unguentum de Althea Simplex and compositum; The Ointment of Marshmallows,
Simple and Compound. It has a notable digesting quality, and resolving the
Humors in any Swelling, and softning thereof.

Unguentum Diapompholigos, it cools, binds, dryes, and stays Fluxes, either of
blood, or humors in wounds, and fills hollow Ulcers with flesh.

Unguentum Elunatum sine and cum Mercurio, The Ointment of Elicampane, without
or with Quicksilver, was invented to kill the Itch.

Unguentum Laurinum commune; Common Ointment of Bays: it heats and expels wind,
good in Aches and Sprains, and kills the Itch.

Unguentum de Minio, The Ointment of Red-Lead: it is a notable dryer, and very
cool; it is used in Ulcers, when other Medicines fail.

Unguentum e Necotiana, The Ointment of Tobacce It is good to kill the Itch,
Lice, and Worms; it cleanses Ulcers and Fistulas, and is good against the
biting of any venomous creature.

Vnguentum Nutritum, It is good against the Itch, Tetters, and Ring-Worms; it
allayeth the itching of wounds; for it is of a cooling and drying nature.

Unguentum Opthalmicum, It is good in an Opthalmia, or inflammation of the
Eyes; anoint the Eyelids.

Unguentum ex Oxylapatho, An Ointment of sharppointed Docks: It is good against
Scabs and Itch.

Vnguentum e Plumbo, Or, Ointment of Lead. It dries much.

Vnguentum Pomorum, commonly called Pomatum: It is good to anoint the Nose and
Lips, being chopped by the Wind.

Vnguentum Resinum, Is as good a Sear-cloth for a Sprain as most are.

Vnguentum Rosatum, Ointment of Roses: Is good to allay the heat of Phlegmon,
and Erysipelous Tumors; and is good against gaulling of the Skin, and tempers
the heat of the Head, Stomach, and Liver.

Vnguentum Desiccativum Rubrum; It is a very drying Ointment, restrains a Flux
in a Wound, and skins the Sore.

Vnguentum e Solano; A Unguent of Nightshade: It allays the heat and itching of
Wounds.

Vnguentum Tutiae, An Unguent of Tutry, Anoint the Eyelids with it; to dry hot
and salt humors flowing thither.

Valentia Scabiosae; Tapsivalentia, and Tapsimel: See the Simples, and you may
easily know the virtues of them.

Vnguentum Agrippa, It is good to anoint the bellies of such as have the
Dropsies.

Vnguentum Apostolorum, It cleanses Wounds, Ulcers, and Fistulas, consumes
dead flesh, and softneth the hard Lips of Ulcers, and is a good incarnative.

Vnguentum Aragon, It is good in all cold Diseases, and such as have their
Original from glassie Phlegm, and is good in the Chollick.

Vnguentum de Arthanita, The Ointment of Sowbread: It has been used with good
success in the Ascites, when all other means have failed, for it powerfully
freeth the Abdomen of Serous, and watery Humors.

Vnguentum Catapsoras, It is used to kill the Itch.

Vnguentum Citrinum, It is good to take away the Redness, Imples, and Freckles
on the Face; it makes the Skin smooth.

Vnguentum Comitissae. This Ointment strengthens and binds, and is good
against all fluxes of the Womb and Belly.

Vnguentum Martiatum, It eases pain, and strengthens the Head, Nerves, and
Muscles.

Vnguentum Mastichinum, It has the virtues of the former; the Stomach being
anointed with it, it restores Appetite, and helps Digestion,

Vnguentum Neapolitanum, It is used in the French Pox.

Vnguentum Nervinum, It is good in old Bruises, and for Diseases of the Nerves
coming from a cold cause; as dead Palsies, etc.

Vnguentum Pectorale, It strengthens and casetlpains of the Stomach: it is
good in a Pleurisy, and consumption of the Lungs.

Unguentum Populeum, An Unguent of Poplar: It is good in Burnings, Scaldings,
and inflammations in any part.

Vnguentum Resumptivum, It is good to correct the hot and dry distemper of any
part; it eases pains which come by inflammations, and Convulsions which come
in Burning Fevers.

Vnguentum Splanchnicum, It eases the pains of the Spleen.

Vnguentum e Succis, An Ointment of Juyces: It opens obstructions of the
Stomach and Spleen; Anoint the Breast and Sides for the Rickets.

Vnguentum Sumach, It is a binding Ointment, and drying; anoint the Stomach for
Vomiting, the Belly for a Looseness, and the Fundament for the falling out
thereof.

Vnguentum Refrigerans, It cures inflammations in Wounds and Tumors.

Vnguentum contra vermes, Anoint the Belly with it to kill Worms.

CHAP. XII. Of Plasters.
EMplaistrum ex Ammoniaco, A Plaster of Ammoniacum: It mollifieth hard
Swellings of the Spleen, and eases the pains thereof.

Emplastrum e Baccis Lauri, A Plaster of Bay Berries: Is good against the
Chollick, and caseth pain coming of Cold and Wind in any part of the body.

Emplastrum Barbarum Magnum, It allayeth the inflammation of Wounds, and is
good in the beginning of Gouts, and cures the biting of any Creature.

Emplastrum de Botonica, A Plaster of Betony, unites a broken Scul, or other
Bones, draws out pieces of the Scul, and cleanses Wounds or Ulcers to the
bottom.

Emplastrum Caesaris, It is cooling, strengthening, and binding; it repels hot
Rheums and Vapors ascending to the Head, or flowing to any other part.

Emplastrum Catagmaticum, There are two of this name, both are binding and
drying.

Emplastrum Cephalicum, A Head-Plaister. This strengthens the Head, and repels
Vapors, dryes up the moisture, and hot Scalding Vapors which fall into the
Eyes.

Emplastrum de Cerussa, A Plaster of Ceruss.
It is profitable in Burns, and hot Ulcers: it cooles and dryes up the moisture.

Emplastrum ex Cicuta cum Ammoniaco, A Plaster of Hemlock with Ammoniacum.
It mittigates pains, and allays inflammations in the remote parts.

Emplastrum e Cinnabari, Eats off dead flesh.
Emplastrum e Crusta panis, A Plaster of a Crust of Bread, strengthens the
Head and Stomach.

Emplastrum e Cymino, A Plaster of Cummin.
It is good against the Wind-Cholick, Swellings, and Aches.

Diapalma, is of a cleansing faculty, and drying up of the excrementitious
moisture which is in Wounds and Ulcers, and is most in use in old Ulcers.

Diachylum simplex, ireatum, magnum, and cum Gummi: All of these dissolve hard
swellings, and ease pain and inflammation; and dry up women's milk.

Diachylon compositum; Or, Emplastrum e Mucilaginibus, A Plaster of Musilages.
It suppurates and breaks Tumors, and heals them likewise.

Emplastrum Diaphaenicon, Both hot and cold, strengthens the Stomach and
Liver, stays vomiting and fluxes of the belly: make use of either, according to
the nature of the distemper.

Emplaftrum Divinum; A Divine Plaster.
It is cleansing in Wounds and Ulcers, and is a good incarnative.

Emplastrum Epispasticum.
It is good to draw Blisters.

Flos Vaguentorum, The Flower of Ointments.
It cleanses, draws out bones, thorns, and whatsoever is in the flesh, and
heals speedily.

Emplastrum Gummi Elemi, A Plaster of Gum Elemi.
It is of special use in Wounds and Ulcers in the Head, or other parts also in
Fractures of the Scul.

Emplastrum Lapidis Calaminaris, It is of an exceeding drying nature.

Emplastrum ad Herniam, It is good against a Rupture; and being applied to the
Reins and Womb, stays abortion.

Emplastrum Hystericum, applied to the Navel, is good against Fits of the
Mother.

Emplastrum e Mastiche, A Plaster of Mastich, strengthens the Stomach.

Emplastrum e Meliloto Simplex; the Simple Melilot Plaster, draws and heals
green wounds, ripens, breaks, and heals Swellings.

Emplastrum e Meloloto compositum, The compound Melilot Plaster, asswageth
pain, and mollifieth any Tumor; is good against hardness of the Stomach Liver,
or Spleen, and is good against the Rickets.

Emplastrum de Minio Simplex and compositum; A Plaster of Red-Lead, Simple or
Compound.
It is cooling, and drying, and healing.

Emplastrum Metroproptoticon.
It strengthens the Stomach, and stops a Looseness and Vomiting.

Emplestrum Nervinum, Strengthens the Head and Nerves.

Emplastrum Oxycroceum, It is much used in Fractures and Dislocations.

Emplastrum e Ranis, A Plaster of Frogs.
It was invented for Sores attending the French Pox.

Emplastrum Sicyonium: See the Ointment of Sowbread.

Spadarap seutela Galteri, It is drying sit for Ulcers.

Emplastrum Stephaniaion, and Sticticum, they both draw forth corruption,
strengthen the Nerves, and other parts, and ease pain.

Emplastrum Stomachicum Magistrale, A Magistral Stomach Plaster. It
strengthens the Stomach, helps Digestion, and stays Vomiting.

Emplastrum gratia Dei, It is good in Ulcers and Wounds; it cleanses, cools,
heals, and incarnateth.

Ceratum de Galbano, A Cere-cloth of Galbanum, helps the Fits of the Mother,
and cleanses a Woman after her lying in.

Ceratum Oesypatum, Mollifieth hard Swellings of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, or
any other part,

Ceratum Sentalinum, (A Cerate of Sanders) It helps hot infirmities of the
Liver, Stomach, and other parts.

FINIS.
A Table explaining the Terms of Art and other Words, which are not in the
reach of Vulgar Capacities.
A.
ABdomen, the Belly or Paunch. Absurdity, Unreasonableness. Abstergent,
Cleansing. Actual heat, Is a heat that can be felt with the hand, as in the
fire, or things heated by it, or in the body of one in a Fever. Actual cold,
Understand it as the former. Accidentally, By hap, or chance. Acrimony,
Sharpness. Accident, Is a symptom, or something happening in a Disease.
Access, Addition, joining to. Acute, Sharp, violent; a Disease that soon ends.
Adventitious, Not natural springing from external causes. Adstriction, Binding
together, shutting up. Adust, Burned. Adjacent, Lying near. Adverse, Contrary
to. Adjunct causes of a Disease, Are such qualities are joined with it.
Adjuvant causes, are such as assist the principal cause. Aduata, The outmost
panicle of the Eye. Affected, Diseased, troubled, disordered. Afflux, Flowing
to. Agglutinative, Joining, glewing, souldering together. Aliment, All kind of
Nourishment. Alexipharmacal Medicines, are such as resist the Plague, and all
venomous Diseases. Albugo, The White of the Eye. Alteratives, Are such
Medicines, as alter the quality of the Body and the Humors, by heating or
cooling, moistning or drying. Animal Faculties, Are Imagination, Judgment,
Memory; the Senses, Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling, Going,
Standing, and all voluntary Motion. Antecedent cause, Is the cause afore-going,
of any Discase. The antecedent cause of an Erysipelas, or Choleric Tumor, is
Choler abounding in the Body: The conjunct cause is Choler gathered in the
part. Anodines, Medicines which assuage pain. Aneurism, Is when the internal
coat of an Artery is broken, and the external coat swelled. A^tepileptical
Medicines, Are such as are good against the Falling Sickness. Anus, The
Fundament. Analogically, Proportionably, conveniently, equally.
Apophlegmatisms, Medicines which draw Phlegm from the Head. Apozeme, A Medicine
made of the decoction of diverse Herbs, altering and purging; sometimes Syrups
mixed therewith, to prepare, and gently to purge the Humors. Apoplectick
Medicines, Are such as are to be administered in the Apoplexy. Apply, Lay on.
Aquae Acidulae, The Spaw Waters; they are of the nature of Tunbridge, Epsome,
and Barnet. Aranea Tunica, The sixth Tunicle of the Eye, which is like a
Cobweb. Articulate Voice, Is Human Voice, or Speech. Aromatized, Spiced,
perfumed, sented. Artery, Is a Sinew, or Vein, wherein passes the Spirit of
Life with the Blood, or Vital Blood. Arteria Venosa, Is an Artery, or rather a
Vein; which from the right and left Region of the Lungs, carries Blood, and
Air, to the left Ventricle of the Heart. Arteriosa, is a Vein from the right
Ventricle of the Heart, administers blood to the right and left part of the
Lungs. Aspera Arteria, The rough Artery, or Windpipe. Ascent, Going up.
Astringents, Medicines that bind together, and straiten the pores and passages
of the body. Astriction, Straitening, or binding together. Asthmatical, Trouble
for want of Breath. Atracting, Drawing together. Attest, Witness, declare.
Atrophya, When the body pines away for want of nonrishment. Attenuating, Making
thin. Augment, Is when a Disease increases, and is not at the height. Autumn,
Harvest, or Fall of the Leaf. Axiom, An undoubted Truth.
B.
BAlneum Mariae, Is when a Still stands in warm water. Bolus, Signifies a
Morsel: it is a Medicine to be taken upon the point of a knife. Bellilucanae
Thermae, Hot Bathes in France. Bituminous Bathes, come from a fat Clay, of the
nature of Brimstone. Bronchia, The Branches of the Wezand and Windpipe, which
spread themselves through the Lungs.
C.
CAruncle, is a piece of flesh growing upon any part. Catarrh, is a defluxion
or distillation of Humors upon the Lungs, or other parts from the Brain.
Cataphora, Dead sleep. Catalepsis, Congelation or stiffness of the body.
Causticks, are Medicines which burn the Skin and Flesh to make Issues. Cautery
actual, is burning with a red hot iron. Cataplasm, A Pultiss. Cavity,
Hollowness: Carus, Foulness, Corruption, Rottenness. Caleine, To burn to ashes
in a Crucible. Cacochymical, Abounding with evil humors. Cardialgia, Pain at
Heart, Heart-griefs. Cardiogmos, Heart-burning. Carminative, are such medicines
as break-Wind. Catheter, A hollow Instrument to open the passage of the Urine,
to draw Urine from the Bladder, or to remove the Stone. Cartilages, are
Gristles. Cataract, is a Disease of the Eye: See the 11th Chap. Book 2.
Callous, The skin or flesh grown hard, or unsensible. Cerates, are Medicines
made of Wax, softer then a Plaster, and stiffer then an Ointment. Cephalic,
Capital, of, or belonging to the Head. Chalybeated, Water, Milk, or Wine; as
when red hot Steel is quenched therein: also when a tincture of Steel is drawn
by Wine, etc. Chylus, a certain white substance wrought by the digestive
faculty of the Stomach, and is carried to the Liver. Surgeon, Surgeon.
Cicatrize, To bring to a scar, to skin a Wound, or Ulcer. Circumvolution,
Turned round. Condense, To make thick. Congelation, Freezing, or joining with
cold. Chorion, The skin that covers the child in the Womb. Constipation,
Stopping up. Collyries, Eye-salves. Contraction, Drawing together. Cornea, a
coat of the Eye like a horn. Compression, Thrusting together. Contusion,
Bruising, bruise. Cold Seeds, The greater are the Seeds of Citrul, Cucumber,
Gourd, Molone. The other are the Seeds of Endive, Succory, Lettice, Purslane.
Confirmed, is when a Disease is perfect. Couched, is when any film is pressed
down, or taken out of the Eye with a Needle. Continuity, Joining together.
Compact, Firmly united. Concoct, is when the blood is separated and made pure;
or when Phlegm, or other Humors, are separated from the blood, or other
mixtures. Connatural infirmity, is that which is born with a Man: as to be born
with one hand, is a connatural Disease. Unequal, Bunching out. Conjunct cause:
See antecedent cause. Constriction, a drawing together. Congestion, a gathering
together. Conjoined matter, See conjunct cause. Corroding, Eating knawing,
biting. Consolidation, closing of a wound. Commissura, The Mold of the Head,
where the Skull is united. Consistence, a Body or Substance. Complication of
Diseases, is a mixture of diverse Diseases in the body. Coalition, Healing up of
a wound. Coincide, That happens together. Co-indicants, are diverse
considerations in a sick body, which call for one and the same Remedy.
Contra-indicants, are such as dissuade a Remedy. Coction of Humors: See
concoct. Commemorative, Remembering what is past. Contumacy, Rebellious,
stubborn. Corroborate, To strengthen. Gostiveness, Is when the body is hard
bound, and seldom goes to stool. Columella, is a loose spungie piece of flesh;
it sticks to the roof of the mouth just at the swallow. Coagulate, is to
thicken any thing by heat. Coronal Suture, is the Seam where the two sides of
the Skull close, running through the Crown. Crude Humors, are such as are not
well digested in the Stomach. Critical Evacuation, is, when by bleeding at the
Nose, Mouth, by Vomit, etc. the humors offending are sent forth by the
strength of Nature. Crystalline Humor, is that part of the Eye, which is like
Crystal. Chronical Diseases, are such as last long. Critical day, in Fevers,
is that day as the Moon comes to the square of her place of the decumbiture, or
first falling sick, which for the most part happens on the 7th day.
Cupping-Glasses, are Glasses fastened with lighted tow, or flax, to draw forth
blood, by scarifying of the place. Cumulation: See congestion.
D.
DEcoction, the Liquor wherein herbs and other ingredients are boiled.
Defluxion, A flowing of humors from the brain to other parts: also humors
gathering into any part causing a Tumor. Delirium, Dotage, talking idly, raving
in sickness. Declination of a Disease, is, when the Symptoms decay, and the
Patient begins to recover. Derived, Turned away from. Demonstrated, proved by
Argument. Depravations, Marrings, hurting, spoiling. Depressed, Made flat,
hollow, or dented. Debility, Weakness. Derivations, Is to draw the humor that
offends from the grieved part, to another near it. Diuretics, are medicines
that provoke Urine. Distillation of Humors: See Defluxion. Diagnosis, The
knowledge of a Disease by the signs thereof. Diminished, Lessened. Discuss, is
to dispel invisibly, when a swelling is wasted without breaking. Diverting
Medicines, are such as hinder the defluxion of humors to any part.
Dislocation, is putting out of its place. Diffuse, spread abroad. Dissipate,
scatter abroad. Dilated, made wider. Distorted, crooked, writhed, wrested.
Digestive Medicines, are such as prepare humors for Evacuation. Dissolved,
Melted, or consumed. Distention, Stretching. Diaphragma, the Midriff.
Diagrydiates, such Medicines that have Scammony in them. Dissolution of natural
heat, is a decay of Nature. Diaphoreticks, are such Medicines as provoke sweat.
Dura matter, is the hard membrane which covers the brain, and lies next to the
skull. Dung-gate, is the Fundament, or Arse-hole. Dyspnaea, is shortness of
breath.
E.
EBullition, boiling of the blood or humors. Egression, coming forth. Empyema,
A corrupt matter between the Breast and the Lungs, following a Pleurisy.
Emunctuaries, The ways and paffages of Nature finds to drive ill humors into.
Emollients, such things as soften. Embrochated, Bathed, moistened, bedewed.
Emplastick Diet, such meats as are of a clammy substance: as Gellies, Tripes,
Feet of Beasts, and such like. Emulgent veins, which bring the wheyish
excrements to the Kidneys. Emulsions, are milks made of Almonds, or the cold
seeds. Epipastick, a plaster to draw a blister. Epithemes, are certain powders
put in bags, wet in wine, and applied to the Region of the Heart, Liver,
Spleen, etc. Epidemical, are Diseases which arise over a whole Nation; as the
Plague, small Pox, etc. Errhines, are Liquors to be snuffed up to purge the
Brain. Eruption, Breaking forth. Eroded, Eaten, or eaten asunder. Eradicate, To
pluck up by the Roots. Escharoticks: See, potential Cauteries. Eschar, is the
Core that falls from the place, where a Caustic has been applied. Evacuation,
Is purging, emptying, or voiding. Evaporation, A steaming forth by Vapors, as
boiling water does. Eventilated, The body purged by exercise, which opens the
pores o^ the body, and purges the body; as Corn is purged by Fanning.
Excrement, is the Dregs of Digestion, voided by Dung, Urine, and Sweat.
Expulsion, Driving forth. Extinguished, Put out, or quenched. Extension,
Stretching out. Extenuating, Making thin. Excrementitions, Of, or belonging to
Excrements. Expressed, Squeezed out. Extraction, Pulling out. Exquisite,
Perfect. Exasperated, Vexed, pained, molested. Excrescencie, is any
supernatural growing of flesh. Exuberation, is the same with an Ulcer.
Expectorating, Spitting any thing from the Breast, Stomach, or Lungs.
F.
Fabric, Composition, making up, or frame. Faeces, Are the Dregs, or such
things which settle in the bottom. Fermentation, is the working of the Humors.
Fistula, A hollow, deep, and narrow Ulcer. Filtration, Straining any liquid
thing thorough a brown Paper, or by a piece of cloth hanging out of one vessel
into another. Fluid, That runs like Water. Flatuous, is windy. Fluxive, The
same with Fluid. Fomentation, Is when Linen Clothes, dipped in some warm
Decoction of Liquor, is applied to the diseased part, and often renewed. Five
opening Roots, are the Roots of Smallage, Sparagus Fenel, Parsley, and
Knee-Holly. Fortified, Strengthened. Fracture, is a breaking of the Skull, Arm,
Leg, etc. Frictions, Rubbings. Frontal vein, is the vein of the Forehead.
Fumigations, Perfumes; or things burnt to sweeten a Chamber. Fuliginous,
Smoaky, or footy.
G.
GArgarisms, Medicines to wash the Mouth and Throat. Gangrene, is a Corruption
of the part, tending to mortification. Generating, Breeding, begetting.
Glandules, Kernels, such as are about the Throat, and are called the Almonds of
the Ears. Glutinous, Clammy, or gluy.
H.
HAbit of the body, Is the whole substance thereof. Hemiplegia, The Palsy on
one side. Hereditary, From Father or Mother. Hemorrhoids, Are the Veins in the
Fundament. Hemorrhagies, Is bleeding from any part. Hermetical Doctrine, Is
that which is delivered by Physicians, who have made up their Medicines by
Chemistry, or Distillation. Horrors, Shiverings. Hyppocras Bag, A Bag that it
made of Woollen-cloth, in form of a Funnel, to strain Medicines. Hypochondria,
The parts beneath the Ribs. Hypogastrium, That part of the Belly which reaches
from the Navel, to the Hair of the Privy-Parts. Hydromel, Honey and Water.
Hysterical Sickness, Is Womb-sickness, or Fits of the Mother.
I.
INanition, Emptiness. Inflammation. Great Heat. Irritation, Provoking
Infusion, Steeping. Impulsive cause, Is the moving cause. Intervene, Come
between. Inversion, Turning the inside out. Intermission, By ^its, ceasing,
leaving off. Incarnate, To breed flesh. Incision, To cut, or lay open. Impact,
Thrust, settled, wedged in. Indication, Is a hint to the Physician, what he
ought to do; as extreme fullness of blood, gives indication of blood-letting.
Inherent, Seated, sticking, and abiding within. Inordinate, Disorderly,
unnatural. Intercepted, Stopped. Incrassate, To thicken. Inveterate, Old, of
long continuance. Infirm, Weak. Infipid, Tastless. Intestines, The Guts.
Intension, Increase, and Decrease. Injection, Is a Medicine cast into the Womb,
Bladder, or Fundament. Inspissate Juice, Is the Juice of an Herb, boiled to
the thickness of Honey. Invasions of the Ague, Gout, etc. are Fits of the same
Intense, strong, vehement. Irrigations, Waterings, Sprinklings, and Moistnings.
Intermitting Pulse, Is that which beats sometimes, and then holds still again.
Incoctability, An unaptness to be concocted, or digested.
L.
LAxe, Loose, slack. Laxative, Which makes the Belly loose. Lambative, Is the
same with Lohoch; a Medicine to be licked. Lenitive, Gentle. Ligatures, Are
strings, by which the Joints of Bones and Gristles are bound together: The same
is used for an artificial binding of any part, to draw the blood and humors
from the diseased part, to the part that is bound. Livid, Black and blew.
Looseness of continuity, is the dividing of the skin and flesh which were
formerly united, as in a Wound.
M.
MAsticatories, Chewing Medicines to bring away Rheum. Malignity, A venomous
and poysonful quality. Matrix, The Womb. Mamillares, Nerves like Tears, which
serve for Smelling. Malax, To soften. Macerate, To steep, or infuse. Maturate,
To ripen. Menings, Films, or Coats that cover the Brain. Meseraick Veins, that
charge Chyle from the Stomach to the Liver. Membranes, Skins, or Coats, of the
Arteries and Veins. Mercurial Medicines, are such as are made of Quicksilver.
Mesentery, is that which holds the guts together. Morbifick, or morbifical
matter, is that which is the cause of the Disease. Mortification, is a deading,
or losing of sense in any part. Mollify, Is to soften. Mundifie, Is to
cleanse. Musilage, is made of Gum Tragacanth dissolved in water: or by beating
of any Seeds or Roots that have a flimy faculty. Muscle, is a part which serves
for voluntary motion of the body; it is harder and less sensible then a Sinew;
and softer and more sensible then a Ligature.
N.
NArcotick Medicines, are such as cause sleep, by dulling and stupefying the
Brain and Semes. Nauseousness, inclination to vomit. Nerves, Sinews. Nitre,
Saltpeter; the true Niter is rarely found. Nidorous, Smelling of Burnt-Fat,
Oil, etc. Nocturnal Pollutions, Is when a man sheads his Sperm in his fleep.
Noxious, Hurtful. Nutrition, Nourishment.
O.
OBstruction stopping. Oblique, crooked, athwart. Obnoxious, subject, apt,
liable. Obscure dark, hid, secret, etc. Occult, hidden, unknown. Oedema, A
Phlegmatic Swelling, white, and without pain, or but little pained. Omentum,
The Caul that covers the Guts. Opiate, signifies any medicine, which has
Opium in it; sometimes any soft Electuary, like Treacle. Optic Nerves, are the
Nerves which bring nourishment from the Brain to the Eyes. Opthalmia,
inflammation of the Eyes. Organs, Are peculiar parts, fitted for some notable
service: as the Eye, to see; the Ear, to hear, etc. Orifice, The Mouth or
Passage into any thing; the hole that is made in the Vein, by letting of blood.
or in a wound. Original, Foundation, or beginning. Os Sacrum, The great
Hip-bone, on which the Ridgebone rests. Os Cribosum, Is the Bone full of
holes above the Nose, through which the Snot issues. Oval, Is the shape of an
Egg. Oxycrate, Is Vinegar and Water mingled. Oxyrrhodine, Vinegar of Roses, and
Medicines made therewith.
P.
PAralysis Paraplegia, The Palsy. Paroxysme, Is the Fit of an Ague, or any
other Disease. Palliative Cure, Is the mittigating the Symptoms of a Disease.
Peripneumonia, Inflammation of the Lungs. Pericranium, The skin which covers
the skull. Pellicl's, Little thin skins. Perspicuous, Clear to be seen, as in a
Glass. Peritonaeum, The inner coat of the Belly. Peccant Humors, Are the
Humors that offend or cause the Disease. Perforated, Bored through.
Peristaltick, motion of the Guts, Is when the Guts contract themselves, to cast
forth the Excrements. Paenineum, Is the Ridge-like space between the Privities
and Fundament. Preposterous, Unnatural, unfitting. Perturbation, Is trouble.
Perspirable, To be breathed thorough, when the Pores of the Body are open.
Pernicious, Deadly, destructive. Penetrate, To enter. Frenzy, Is raging and
madness, joined with a Fever. Phlebotomy, Blood-letting. Phlegmon, A Swelling
caused by blood. Pharmacopaea, A Dispensatory, a Description of the making of
all Medicines. Pia Matter, The inner Cauls and Films, which cover the Brain.
Pituitous, Phlegmatic. Periodical, By course or fits. Pessaries, A kind of
Suppositories made of Wool, to be put into the Matrix. Plethorick, Too full of
blood. Plenitude, Fullness. Pleura, The Membrane which cloatheth the Ribs on the
inner side. Pores, Little holes in the skin, through which vapors and sweat
issues forth. Potential heat or coldness, Is contrary to actual; which is so
in operation, not to sense. Ponderous, Weighty. Potent, Powerful. Pomander, A
thing formed like an Apple to smell to. Prognostic Signs, Is, foretelling
what will become of the Disease, and the Patient. Privation, Loss.
Preternaturally, Otherwise than the course of Nature requires. Precede, Go
before. Preparing of the Humors, Is separating them from the good blood,
making them thin, if they be too thick; thickning them if they be too thin, to
the intent they may be better evacuated. Probable, Likely. Profound, Deep.
Producing, Causing, or breeding. Procatarctick causes, The primary and first
working causes. Precipitated, Thrown down, cast down. Protraction, Is
lengthning out. A Pugil, is as much of Herbs as can be taken up between the
Thumb, and Forefinger. Pulsation, is beating of the Arteries. Pupilla, is the
middlemost round circle of the Eye, which we call the Sight. Putrid, Rotten,
filthy, stinking. Pustula, A Pustule, Push, or Whelk. Pubes, The hairy part
above the privities of men and women. Pus, Matter, Corruption, filthiness,
which runs from a Boil, Imposthume, or such like: Quitter is the same.
R.
RAdical Moisture, is the Fundamental Juice of the body, which preserves
Natural Heat. Raucedo, Hoarsness. Rarefying, Making thin. Repletion, Overmuch
fullness of blood and humor. Resolution, Weakening, or dissolving the strength
of any part. Revulsion, Drawing back blood or humors from the part affected.
Repelling, Driving back the humors to the affected part. Relaxing, Slacking.
Remitted, Abated, lessened. Restriction, Limitation, exception. Relics, The
remainders of an Humor. Retraction, Drawing back. Retentive faculty, The power
of Nature to hold or keep its nourishment. Reduced, Brought back again.
Refractions, Breaking of the Presentation of visible objects. Recruited, Made
up, repaired, restored. Resolving Medicines, are such as loosen and scatter
humors gathered into any part. Repercussives, Such as drive back the Humors.
Relaxation, Looseness. Refrigerating, Cooling. Respiration, Breathing. Reflux,
Flowing back again. Recipient part, Is the part which receives the humor
offending. Regression, Is going back. Reiterate, To repeat. Ruption, Breaking.
S.
SAnguineous, Bloody. Sanies, Matter. Saphaena, The Vein which passes by the
Ancle, on the inside of the Foot. Scarification, Lightly cutting the skin, to
draw blood by a Cupping-glass. Scorbutic persons, Who are troubled with the
Scurvey. Situation, Place, or Posture. Scirrhus, A hard Swelling without pain.
Serous, Like Whey. Sediment, The Settling, or Dregs of any thing. Sealing a
Glass, Is to make the Neck red-hot and soft, and work it with a pair of Tongues
till it be firm, and cannot receive, or let out the Air. Seton, Is an Issue
kept open with a Skein of Silk. Sincere, Pure, and unmixed. Sinews, or Nerves,
Are small Strings, which carry the faculty of Sense and Motion from the Brain
all over the Body. Spurious, Bastard, counterfeit, not perfect. Spinal,
Belonging to the Backbone. Sphacelus, Is when the Flesh and Bone in any part
is dead. Spasmus, Cramp. Speculum Oris, Is an Instrument to hold open the Mouth
or Throat. Sphincter, The muscle of the Arse. Spadarap, A Cere-cloath.
Specific, Peculiar and hidden. Stuphs, Hot-houses, Stows to sweat in.
Strangulation, Strangling, choking. Sternon, The Breast Bone. Stupor, Dullness.
Sternutations, Medicines to provoke Sneezing. Stupifying, Benumming, taking
away the sense of Feeling. State of the Disease, is when the Disease is at the
height. Suppository, is to be put up into the Fundament, to loosen the body.
Sudorifick, That causes Sweat. Subeth, Dead asleep. Superficies, is the
outside of any thing. Sutures, The Seams of the Head, where the Skull is
joined. Superfluous, Too much, unnecessary. Suppuration, is when the matter, in
an Imposthume, is inclinable to break. Suppression, Stoppage. Suffocating,
Choking. Suffusion, is a shedding abroad of Humors. Sulphurous, Pertaining to
Brimstone. Sympathy, is fellow-feeling: a Disease is said to come by sympathy,
from the Disease of another part; as the Stomach being foul, causes pains in
the Head; this comes by sympathy. Symptoms, are evil Dispositions, which
accompany a Disease; as Heat, Thirst, want of sleep, etc. are symptoms of a
Fever. Systole, and Diastole, are the double motions of the Pulse; when the
Pulse falls, contracts, and sinks under the finger, it is called Systole: The
Diastole is, when the Artery rises, and stretches it self out.
T.
TArtarous, is a matter hard and congealed, like Tartar. Tablets, are the same
with Lozenges. Testicles, the Stones of a Man, or any Male Creature. Tendons
and Cords, are made of Lgaments and Nerves, that so the Ligaments being
insensible, may the better support the sensible Nerves. Terminated, Ended.
Treble Weight, Thrice the weight. Thorax, The Chest. Tincture, is the virtue of
any thing drawn by Spirit of Wine, or any other piercing Liquor. Torpor,
Numbness. Topical Medicines, Are such as are applied outwardly. Torrified,
Roasted, or tosted. Transpiration, The passage of the Humors thorough the Pores
of the Body. Translation, Carrying a Humor from one part to another.
Transparentness, Clearness. Transverse, Cross. Tumor, Swelling. Turgent,
Swelling, working, and full of motion. Tunicles, Little Coats, or Skins.
V.
Vapors, Steams which arise from the Stomach, and other parts to the Head.
Vertigo, A swimming in the head. Vesicatories, Medicines to draw Blisters.
Vertebrae, The turning bones of the back. Ventricles of the Brain, Is the
hollow places there. Venenosity, Poysonfulness. Vehicle, That which serves to
carry. Venery, is Letchery. Vital Functions, are the faculties of the Heart.
Visive Spirits, are the Spirits which nourish the Sense of Seeing. Vitreous
Humor, Serves to the making up of the Eye, and is like Molten Glass. Viscuous
Humors, are such as cleave, and rope, like Bird-lime. Vicissitude, The
following of one thing upon the neck of another. Ulcerated, Having an Ulcer or
Soar. Uvea Tunico, A Tunicle of the Eye, resembling the skin of a Grape.
Ureters, Are the Pipes which bring the Urine from the Kidneys to the Bladder.
Uvula: See Columella. Unguents, Ointments.
W.
Watergate, The Privities in Women.
The End of the Second Table.
A Table, explaining the Names of such Simples as are unknown to the Vulgar.
ACacia is a Liquour drawn out of the Fruit of a Tree, called by that name,
growing in Egypt, and another in Pontus; but more commonly it is taken for the
Pulp of Sloes. Agarick, is a kind of Mush-room, that grows upon the
Larch-Tree in many places of Italy, Asia, Silesia, etc. Althaea are Mallows
which grow upon the Salt-Marshes in this Nation. Album Graecum, is a Dog-Sturd
that is white. Aloes, is the Juice of Sea-Housleek; it grows in Arabia, Asia,
Sytia, and in the Indies. Ammoniacum, is a Gum, which comes from a Plant called
Fenel-Gyant, growing in Africa, and many other places, and in Europe also.
Ammcos, is the Herb called Bishops-weed; growing in many places of this
Nation. Amber, and Ambergreese, is taken from the Sea. Antimony, is a Mineral.
Arsnick is a kind of Oker. Assa Faetida, is a Gum that issues out of a Plant,
called Laser-wort, growing in Media, Syria, etc. Asarum, is an Herb, vulgarly
called Asarabacca.
Balaustines, The Flowers of the Wild-Pomegranates. Bdellium, is a Gum of a
Tree called by the same name; it grows in Arabia. Benjamin, or Benzoin, is a
Gum. Bezoar is a Precious Stone.
Cassia Fistula, is the Fruit of a large Tree, called the Cassia Tree; it
grows in long black Pods: It grows in Arabia, Egypt, Syria, Armenia, and
in great abundance in Hispaniola. Caper-Roots is the Root of the Shrub, that
bears the Capers we here eat for Sauce: it grows in Arabia, Italy, Spain,
France, and many other places. Castor, is the Beast called Beaver; but most
commonly taken for his Stones used in Medicine. Calamus Aromaticus, is a
sweet smelling Flag: There are many sorts, and they grow in many places; as
Turkey Russia, Egypt, Judaea, etc. Camphire, is the Gum of a great Tree which
grows in India; that is best, that is white and brittle. Calcitis, A Precious
Stone, af the color of Brass. Cardamomes, is that which is commonly called
Grains of Paradise; and it grows upon a low Hearby Shrub in the East Indies.
Carthamus, is a Bastard-Saffron. Cambugia, is a Gum, as some say. I know not.
Carabi, is Amber. Cantharides, are Flies, which will draw Blisters. Ceruse, is
made of White-Lead. Cicers, are a kind of Pease, sown in Gardens. China, is the
Root of a Tree, which grows not only in China; but also in many places of the
East and West Indies. Coloquintida Apple, is the Fruit of the Bitter Gourd: its
Natural Soil is Barbary; but it grows in most of the Eastern Countries.
Colophonia, A kind of Scammony: See, Scammony. Crocus Metallorum, is made of
Antimony, and Saltpeter; calcined in a crucible. Crocus Martis, and Crocus
Veneris, are made, the first of Steel; the other, of Copper; by the Art of
Alchimy. Read Paracelsus de rerum natura, and many other Authors. Cremor
Tartari; Or, Salt of Tartar: The operation thereof, see Pharm. Dogm. Restitut.
Querce. Page 585. Citrons, are the Fruit of the Pome-Citron, or Citron-Tree:
they grow in Spain, etc. Cypress, is a Tree now frequently in our Gardens: its
Natural Soil is the Eastern-Countries, and the Northern parts of America.
Diagrydium; See Scammoni.
Elaterium, is the Juice of Wild-Cucumers dried. Euphorbium, A Tree found by
King Jaba, and named by the name of his Physician. Emblicks, are one sort of
the Mirabolans, which are six square: They grow in the East Indies Wild.
Epithymum, is Dodder, growing upon Time.]
Flos Sulphuris, is a Chemical preparation of Sulphur. Phlegm of Vitriol, is
also made by Chemists. Frankincense, is a Rozin.
Galanga, Grows in the East Indies. Galbanum, is the Gum of Fenel-Gyant,
which grows in Syria. Gum Tragacanth; Or, Gum-Dragant, issues from the Root
of a small Bushy-Plant, called Goats-Beard. They grow in Candy, Marselles, and
Mompelier in France. Guajacum, is a Tree as big as an Oak: it grows plentifully
in the West Indies. You may buy the Bark, or the Wood, ground at the Druggists.
Hellebore, Black and White; are Herbs growing as well in this Nation, as in
many places beyond the Sea. Hermoductyls, some think, are the Roots of a
Wild-Saffron. Hypocistis, is a Shrub growing in Italy, Spain, France, and most
hot Countries. Hydromel, is Water and Honey, mixed together. Jallap, is a Root
like our Briony: it is a sort of Mochoacan; it is called Black Mechoacan. It
grows in the West Indies.
Ireos, The Flowerdeluce.
Jujubes, are the Fruit of a Tree, growing in Africa, Egypt, Arabia, Syria, and
the more Eastern Countries.
Kermes, are the Berries of the Holm-Oak, which grows in Italy, Spain,
France, and many places of Europe: Also, in Asia, Africa, and America.
Ladanum, is the Gum of one sort of Hypociftis, called Gum Cistis. Lac
Sulphuris, Is a Chemical preparation of Sulphur: See 582. page of Quercetan's
Dissensatory. Lapis Lazuli, is a Stone of a green and a blew color. Lapis
Calaminaris, They use it in making of Brass: it is astringent, and is used in
Eye-waters. Lapis Haematitis, is a Boodstone, and is like blood congealed.
Lentils, is a sort of Pulse growing in many places of this Nation: some call
them French Wheat. Lignum Vitae: See Guajacum. Lignum Aloes, is a very
oderiferous wood, and grows in the East Indies. Linseeds, is the seeds of
Flax. Lithargie, is the Scum of Gold, Silver, or Lead. Lupines, There are
several sorts and colors of them grow in England: it is a kind of a Bean.
Manna, is a kind of Dew, which falls upon Trees in hot Countries, like our
Honey-Dews. Marshmallows: See Althea. Mastick, is the Gum of the Mastick-Tree:
it grows in hot Countries; as well in Europe, as elsewhere, most plentifully,
and the best Gum grows in Chio. Mechoacan, is whiter then Jalap, of the same
nature. Mercury Precipitate, is a Chemical preparation of Quicksilver.
Mirabolans, are a kind of Plums growing in the East Indies: There are five
sorts; the Cintrine, or Yellow, Indies or Black, Chebules or Purple, Bellericks
or round, Emblicks or six-squared Mirabolans. Myrrh, is a Gum. Myrtles, Grow in
Spain, Portugal, and Italy, and is a Shrub, or small Tree. Mummy, is man's
flesh prepared with Balsoms.
Nigella, is an Herb which is common in Gardens with us.
Olibanum is a Rozin like Frankincense. Opopanax, the Juice of
Hercules-all-heal. Opium, is the Juice of Poppies, or a Liquor dropping from
them. Oxyerate, Vinegar and Water.
Pistachios, are the Fistick Nuts: they grow in the Indies, and most hot
Countries. Polypody, is the Fearn of an Oak. Pomegranates, are a Fruit growing
upon a Tree, 7 or 8 Cubits high, in Granado, Spain, Portugal, Italy, etc.
Rubarb, is now planted in England; but its Natural Soil, China and the Indies:
There are many sorts.
Sarsaparilla, is a prickly bind-weed: that which grows at Peru is most useful.
Sassaphras, is a large Tree: it grows in Florida, and most of the Western
Indies, Sanders, is a great Tree: it grows in the East Indies, Brazil, the
Island Timor, etc. There are three sorts, Red, White, Yellow. Sanguis Draconis;
Or, Dragons Blood, is the Gum of the Dragon-Tree, which grows in the Canary
Islands to a goodly stature. Satyrimon, is a common Herb in Meadows, and is
called Dogs-Stones. Sagapenum, is the Gum of Fenel-Giant, when it grows in
Media. Sandarach, some call it Red-Arsenick: it is found in Gold and Silver
Mines. Sarcocolla, is the Gum of a Tree growing in Persia. Seen, is the
Leaves of a Tree of a small statute: it grows in Arabia Foelix, and in Syria.
Seammony, is the Juice of an Herb: it is a very violent purger, and an
Outlandish Plant. Spodium, The Soot which rises in the trying of Brass.
Spicknard, is a low Herb: it grows in the Indies, Italy, France, and many
other places. Staechas is the Flower of Cud-weed. Sumack, is a Foreign Tree,
much in use, in Physic; in dying and dressing of Leather.
Taca-mahaca, is a Gum. Tartar, is a stony substance, growing to the sides of
Wine-Vessels. Tamarinds, Grows upon a Tree as by as a Plum-Tree, and is like
a Kidney Bean-cod, full of a black substance, or pulp: it grows in Arabia.
Terra Sigillata, is a Sealed Earth; brought out of the Straights in little
Cakes. Thapsla, is a kind of Fenel. Turbith, is a Root that purges Phlegm.
Tutty, is the heavier Soil of Brass, that sticks to the top of melting
Furnaces.
Verdegreece, is the Flower of Brass.
The End of the Third Table.
Errata.
IN Page 1. Line 11. read polifical. P. 13. l. 30. dele if. P. 22. l. 29 r
venakelis, p. 26. l. 9. for any in, r in any. p. 28 l. 24. for best, r left. p.
29. l. 24. for nutriment to all blood, r nutrimental blood. p. 32. l. 18. for
the, r be, p 41. l. 15. dele of, p. 46. l. 7. for gargarisms, r muflicatories.
p. 51. l. 11. for plant, r plantane. p. 63. l. 13. r prodomus, p. 69. l. 16.
dele of, p. 75. l. 18. r glandules, p. 80. l. 24. r Diacodium, and l 30. r Gum
Tacamabaca, p. 84. l. 17. r Diaprunum Solutive, p. 85. l. 18. r Sarsaparilla,
p. 86. l. 19. r glassie, p. 87. l. 30. r for incurable, curable, p. 89. l. 12.
r bodies, and l. 15. after the word glass, put(:). dele the points after
perfect, and l. 25. for though a clad, r through a cloud, p 94. l 14. r
Lusitanus, and l 19. r Lupinmeal, p. 96 18. r astringent, and l 16. 1 when, and
l 17. r cloth, p 108. l 21. r ophthalmy, p 121. l 2. for of on the, r of the,
p 179. l 21. for he, r the, p 182. l 6. for Celegma r Relegma, p 187 l 28. for
out two scruples, r or two scruples of, p 139. l 32. r proved, p 143. l 9. r
that r the, p 149. l 15. r Errhines, in p. 190. l 12, r want of nourishment, p
192. l 29. r Fleabane: last line, r grounding, p 193. r Lohoch e Pulmone
vulpis, p 198. l 4. after not, insert(:). p 202. r or appetite, p 223. l 10. r
for Phlegm, Phlegmon, p 229. l 10. r Parsley peart. p 237. l 16. r astringent
quality, p 253. l 24. for un, r an. p 256. l 16. for Sumen, r sum. p 258. l 5.
r added at the last, of each one ounce; l the last but one, r Apozem. p 269. l
8. r in the former chap. p 274. l 29. r beginning of a Dropsy, in the chap. of
the Dropsy; for p 265. r 275. and l 30. for Julep roots, r Jalap roots. p 276.
l 5. r Mecoacan; l 10. for point, r pint, l 30. for of oil of Camomel, r Oil of
Camomel, p 279. for Chap. 58. r chap. 59. p 296. l 8. for cough-grass, r
couch-grass. p 323. l 18 r Mastich, p 342. l 31. for glowing, r glewing, p 352.
l 9. after breach, r forward, and p 353. l 10. for their, r her. p 373. l 8. r
Panados, p 374. l 30. r Scammoniate, p 382 l. 5. r fits come every day, p 403.
l 6. r Leek-seed, p 404. for stapes, r stuphs, p 408. l 21. r Litharge, p 410.
l 1. for burnt, r hurt, p 411. l 15. for heal, r help, p 414. l 5. for astali,
r os tali, p. 421. l 6. for pilleth, r pitteth, p 425. l 1. for ancient, r
antecedent. Chap. 9. of the 3d book, read for p. 412. 432. p 434. l 2. for
humors, r inward parts. p 437. r Meliseris, p 450. l 5. r 1657. from 452. to
the end of the following sheet, the page is mistaken, for 153. r 453. and so
forwards; p 477. l 19. for wounds in children, r worms in children, p 478. l 5.
r Solutivus, page 485. l 5. r Sal Gem. p 488. l 23. r penids, p 489. l 20. for
burnel, r burnet, p 492. l 8. r penids, p 493. l 1. read placentulae, p 495. l
9. r Alkekengi.


