To the Honorable the Commons House of ENGLAND. The humble Petition and
Representation of the Officers and Soldiers of the Garrisons of Portsmouth,
Southsea Castle, Southton, Hurst Castle, Poole and Brownsea Castle, Weymouth,
The Castles, Forts and Forces in the Isle of Wight, and the Garrison of
Malmsbury, together with many thousand public spirited persons of those
places and parts adjacent.
SHOWS,
THAT as we have with all readiness and cheerfulness served our Country
against the Tyrannical Oppressors thereof; So we do, at present, conceive
our selves in duty obliged to express the deep sense we still retain of the
several weighty, and insupportable burdens, which the Oppressed Commonalty for
a long time have been, and still are groaning under. For the speedy removal
whereof, We apply our selves to this Honorable House, who undoubtedly ought to
relieve the Nation herein, you having now opportunity with power in your hands;
God making the Army, and all well-affected people as Walls and Bulwarks to
defend you, whilst you faithfully discharge that Trust committed to you for
the benefit of this Nation. And being assured, that it is our undoubted right,
as Members of the Commonwealth, to represent the grievances thereof to you by
way of Petition, and to offer such suitable remedies as we apprehend to be
effectual for their redress; We humbly tender these ensuing particulars to
your serious and speedy consideration.

That Justice is not yet executed upon the Grand Delinquents and Authors of our
miseries, bloodshed and calamities, notwithstanding the many and earnest
Petitions of Well-affected People Grievance, 1.
(as that of Kent, and other Counties lately presented) earnestly desiring the
same.

For remedy whereof, we humbly offer, That the King, and all others the Grand
Contrivers of, and Actors in the first and second war, may be brought to
speedy Trial; As also those of your Remedy.
own House that have betrayed their Trust; and all other Capital Offenders,
without respect of persons; and that Justice be executed upon them according to
their demerits: Likewise that the Prince, Duke, and other Delinquents beyond
the Seas, be speedily summoned, and a time prefixed for their coming in, that
so they may receive a due Trial: And in case they exceed that time, to be
proceeded against as enemies to the Commonwealth: And that a day be appointed,
within two months, for all Delinquents who are not already discovered, to
compound; and if they shall not compound in that time, then their estates to be
wholly forfeited and employed for payment of public debts.

That the intolerable burden of Free Quarter is yet continued upon the people,
notwithstanding the Assessements are generally paid, although very unequally
laid upon many Counties, Divisious, Grievance, 2.
Hundreds, Cities, Towns and Villages; the great oppression by Tithes
continued; Excise most unconscionably exacted from the poor, and no Account
publicly given how the vast sums received have been spent and employed.

For redress whereof, We propound, 1. That Free Quarter be immediately taken
off. 2. Constant pay, or Assignations; and that the Assessements, whilst
continued, be more equally proportioned. 3. That Impropriators being first
satisfied, Tithes be taken away. 4. That the Excise be taken off from all,
except Imported commodities; that no more engagements be laid Remedy.
upon it; and that clipped money be immediately called in. Further that it be
declared, that as soon as the Engagements already charged, ut supra, be
satisfied, it shall be wholly taken away. 5. That all new Taxes be abolished,
and an equal way of Subsidies only continued: And that you may be enabled to
take away those Taxes, We further offer, That Forests lands, the Whole Revenue
formerly belonging to the Crown, Bishops Lands, Deanes and Chapters Lands,
Compositions of Delinquents, and Sequestrations, be speedily improved to the
best advantage, for the ends aforesaid; And that all who have been, or now are
public Treasurers and Collectors of moneys, be forthwith called to an
account, viz. Excise men, Sequestrators, Customers, together with all other
Receivers whatsoever; And for that end we desire, that able Accomptants, Men of
known fidelity to the public Interest be employed for the bringing of the
forementioned Treasurers, etc. to a speedy Account, that so the Commons of
England may know how the vast sums of money raised under pretense of paying
soldiers, have been disposed of; by which means also discoveries may be made
of great sums of money which hitherto has been concealed.

That by reason of the multitude of Officers who depend for maintenance out of
the several receipts, great sums of money are devoured, and by means
thereof, Accounts made difficult. Grievance, 3.


For remedy whereof, We offer, That all public moneys be brought into one
common Treasury, which will much lessen the former charge, that at the end of
every six months an exact Account be published in print of all those sums of
money disbursed by the said Treasurers; which to know, we conceive is of right
due to the Commons of England; and that for their Further satisfaction, all
Remedy.
public disbursments which are of necessity, may speedily be computed, and
the Receipts proportioned thereunto, with some overplus that may always be in
a readiness for any public and sudden occasion. Grievance, 4.


That it has been, and still is, a great grievance and vexation unto the
Officers and Soldiers of the Army, Garrisons, and others our fellow Commoners,
who have causes extraordinary relating to, and occasioned by the late troubles
depending before the Committees of your House, and other Committees of the
several Counties; as also diverse disaffected and corrupt Justices of the
Peace, by whom their persons have been slighted, their business (though never
so just) neglected and protracted, to the great expense of time and money;
which has impoverished some, and almost destroyed others, whilst enemies to
the State, whose causes have been unjust, do by their friends, Allies, wealth
or potency, soon obtain to be heard and answered.

For redress whereof we desire you will appoint Committees of Indemnity in
each County, and that all corrupt Members of Committees, and Justices may be
outed, and such only chosen and empowered in the Commonwealth, as are of
impartial, upright and judicial spirits, who by their judgments and
fidelity, may do justice to the meanest, and that speedily without the
Redress.
aforesaid charge and trouble to the Common wealth.

That there is by sad experience found (especially to the poor) a daily decay
of Trade (the main pillar of this Commonwealths subsistence) occasioned by the
continuation of Monopolizing Charters, and associated Companies, who have power
to interrupt and deter all other Natives from the Exercise of free Trade and
Commerce: and of late also in a more special manner, Grievance, 5.
the Irish Pirates by their increase and strength, have made themselves almost
Lords of the Narrow Seas, robbing and carrying away Ships and Goods from the
mouths of our own Harbors, to the great loss and undoing of many.

For remedy whereof we humbly desire, That you will declare that all free
Dennizons of this Nation, and Friends to the Weal public, may enjoy their
Rights by imploiment and improvement of their Estates and Stocks, without the
before said restrictions in free Traffic and Commerce both Foreign and
Domestique; and that all such monopolizing and encroaching Charters, Remedy.
may be abolished; and that for the better suppressing all Pirates; and securing
of Trade, there may be a speedy and powerful Guard appointed for the Seas, and
entrusted with persons of approved integrity; most part of the Frigots to set
forth From Portsmouth, which we humbly offer as the most convenient place upon
the Southern Coast, for the furthering and advance of that Service: And that
for an encouragement of all Seamen, there may be established a way of
competent subsistence for those that shall lose their limbs or livelihood in
any Service for the Defense of their Country, as also for the Widows and
Children of such, or any others that shall die in the said Service, whereby
they may be preserved from perishing.

That the chargeable proceedings in the Common Law, and all Courts of
Judicature (a Grievance of long continuance, and universally known and felt)
are not yet abollished, but the Natives still exposed to great trouble and vast
expense, which do uphold the corrupt interest of a Generation of men, who like
Locusts and Caterpillars will (if not timely prevented) devour the Grievance, 6.
Commonwealth.

For prevention whereof, we offer, That twelve able and impartial men, be
chosen by the well-affected of each Hundred or Division, any seven of them to
have Power to hear and determine all differences arising within the said
Hundred or Division: and that there be every twelve months at the most, a new
Election, that so none of them may continue in that Trust unless they be Red.
elected thereunto. And also that plain and just Rules be laid down for them to
act by, from which they may be bound by some Penalty not to recede. And for the
better Security and maintenance of the Premises, its humbly desired, that the
Lord FAIRFAX may be appointed by this House to grant Commissions to such
persons as are of approved fidelity to the public Interest, for the well
ordering and disposing of the Militia.

These things we do with all clearness and faithfulness offer to your speedy
Consideration, as that which we conceive for the substance of it) will tend to
a settlement of this Nation, together with the particulars (not here expressed)
contained in the late Remonstrance of the Army, and Petition of the 11th of
September last, which if insisted on, and vigorously prosecuted (not answered
with a formal complement, as has been usual, but really accomplished) will
be a happy beginning of the establishment of the Peoples Freedoms; but if the
present happy opportunity in your hands, shall be neglected, we are like to be
(if God prevent it not) completely miserable, and shall become the scorn of all
Nations, and a shame to posterity, having so freely spent our Blood and
Treasure, to purchase Justice and Freedom, and in stead thereof be reduced to
a worse condition of oppression and slavery then formerly.

Wherefore as a Testimony of that affection and duty we bear to our Native
Country, we leave these things before you, hoping that God may yet use you as
Instruments to ease this oppressed Nation, however we are confident he will
open a way for the People, to obtain these and all other their just Rights and
Liberties by overthrowing all unrighteous powers whatsoever.

Isle of Wight.
Thomas Bowreman. Edm. Rolph. George Elsmore. John Basket. Richard Tonson. Hen.
Duck. Richard Colman. John Fox. Henry Harwell. Thomas Bo^les. Tho. Ward. Steven
Burton. Ed. Templer.
Portsmouth and Southsea-Cast.
To. Saunders. George Joyce. John Pitson. Rob. Peacock. Tho. Mathews. Jo.
Tarant. Edw. Hopgood. Abraham Peter's Tho. Hurst. To. Durnford. To. Weston.
William Bell. Rich. Prat.
Southton.
Peter Murford. George Embry. Io. Durnford. Io. Hubblethorn. George Burton.
John Barton. Will. Cole jun.
Pool and Hurst.
Tho. Eyers. J. Read. Ed. Snering. Ed. Tailor. Fran. Chick. Lieut. Wansey. Hen.
Easman. Hum. Wall.
Weymouth and Malmsbury.
Iam. Hayns. William Harden. Not. Chase. Rich. Clun. Ralph Card. Tho. Loving.
Fran. Stokes.

These our Subscriptions, are in the Name and behalf of those under our
Commands, together with our Neighbors and fellow Commoners, being entrusted
and empowered to agitate in their behalf, for the Redemption of our Native
Rights and Freedoms.

