TO THE HONORABLE CITY OF LONDON. The Humble Petition of Philip Skippon, Efq
SHOWS.
THat your Petitioner was a very eminent Instrument in carrying on the Work of
Reformation; and that he did promote the Good Cause with the same zeal and
endeavors as he did advance himself; whereto he is in gratitude obliged to
say, you were (if not more forward) yet equally prompt with your Petitioner.

But now so it is (may it please your Honors) that he finds all that former
affection toward him so cold since his Patron Oliver forsook this light, that
he fears you will bring his gray hairs down with sorrow to his grave. He would
attribute this change of your favorable and benign Aspect to the various
mutations of the Times, but that they look so inauspiciously and dangerously on
him, he dares not think on them for his life, although the pleasure and delight
of that is already fled with his money beyond Sea, from whence he is alarmed
the Dutch will not part with one stiver since they heard of his disgrace.

In this straight and exigence he has betook himself to his Book of
Corollaries, the Christian Soldiers Exercise, but to very little consolation,
for there is not a word of returning his Coin again, but a long frivolous
Discourse of Patience, which he never intended for himself. And oh that one ray
of Comfort more would shine forth from the Bodkins and Thimbles and the bright
Plate-candlesticks in Guild Hall, how would he improve such an advantage to his
external happiness! But alas those Silver days are done, and this iron Age
has overtaken your poor Petitioner.

Nevertheless, in regard of his Service at Leistithiel, where he alone
despaired not of your Cause (for Essex had left him in the lurch, and 'twas his
best course to show confidence) be pleased to consider him in this his
distress, and befriend him in these following Requests.

That You would be pleased by interposing Your powerful assistance with the
Governors of Suttons Hospital, to get him admitted a Pentioner there; or
rather that You would please to obtain for him from the Parliament the next
vacancy of a poor Knight at Windsor; otherwise your Petitioner, for all
General Moncks detestation of Oaths and Abjuration, will set up for himself a
Knight of the Post, that is a Military as well as Civil term, and will serve to
compensate his lost Command of Major General.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
LONDON: Printed for William Waterson.


