To his Excellency, Oliver Cromwell, Captain General of all the Forces of this
Commonwealth, and to the honorable Council of the Army. The humble
Representation of several Aldermen, Aldermens Deputies, Common Council men,
and other Citizens of London, in behalf of themselves, and many others.
WHen we call to mind how eminent instruments your Excellency, and the Army
under your command have been in the hand of the most high God, to vindicate and
recover the just Rights and Liberties of the free people of this Nation,
according to the Trust reposed in you, and how to these ends you have not
spared to expose your selves to the extremest hazards of lives, and estates
from time to time in the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
although one trouble succeeded another, occasioned by the several wars, and
commotions therein, in all which the Lord of Hosts crowned your endeavors with
most happy success, and has given you a large Interest in the godly
well-affected in this Nation, who continually wrestled with God by prayer on
your behalfs, while you were jeoparding of your lives for our Liberties, in the
high places of the field; we therefore humbly conceive our selves bound in duty
from that zeal we bear to the Religion, Laws, Liberties, and settled peace of
our Native Country, (which we have cordially prayed, fought, and acted for) and
very principally also out of that tenderest affection, and most sincere respect
we bear your Excellency, and the Armies under your conduct, to represent to
you, and them the sad condition of this Nation, which seems as in one day to
be deprived of its Ancient liberty, to wit, their being governed by
Representatives, chosen by themselves, which in all ages since England has
been civillized, the People have been so constantly addicted to, as that
notwithstanding the various changes of their Kings, and the exercise of their
Kingly power, even when they have achieved it by conquest, there has been
ever found a necessiy of governing this Nation by Parliaments: Hereupon we
cannot but hope, and do believe it is the earnest desire and expectation of
thousands well affected in this City, that so ancient and useful a privilege,
(the birthright of this Nation) will be tenderly preserved in your Councels, as
it has been resolutely maintained by your bloods: Might it therefore seem good
in your eyes, that some effectual means may be found out, and pursued for the
meeting of the Parliament again, that so in short time provision may be made
for settling successive Representatives, which may carry on with effect and
assurance those great ends the Parliament has constantly held out, yea have
valiantly fought for, and to make provision for the Army, and many other
public and pressing affairs, in the mean time, as hitherto has been done, it
would be a reviving to the sad and doubtful thoughts of those that have
fervently prayed, and do continue looking up, and waiting for such a settlement
of our Liberties as may assure us that our prayers, and your endeavors have
not been in vain in the Lord.

Signed, Thomas Foot. Thomas Andrews. John Woolaston. John Kendrick. Thomas
Arnold. James Russel. Stephen Estwick. Richard Waring. William Hobson. James
Hayes. Maurice Tompson. Thomas Aires. Michael Roberts. Samuel Warner. Thomas
Steane. Lawrence Waitman. Michael Herring. John Lane. Edward Story. Thomas
Allen. William Beek. Jones Wainright. Edward Winslow. Michael Davison. Thomas
Steines. Tempest Milns. Walter Bushly. William Tompson. Richard Lawton. Allen
Jones. William Penneyer. William Molins. Sam: Lee. Henry Bonner. Thomas Cobhil.
Bar: Mere.


Friday the 20 of May 1653. At the Council of State at White Hall.
Upon the reading of a Representation brought into the Council by the Lord
General, which was this day delivered to his Lordship by some persons of the
City of London, in the name of several Aldermen, Aldermens Deputies,
Common Counsel men, and other Citizens of London, and upon consideration had
thereof, it is ordered that all such persons who have signed the said
Representation, and who have any place of public Trust upon them, and for
which they receive salary, and allowance from the Commonwealth, be forthwith
dismissed, and discharged from their respective places, and employments.

You have here likewise inserted, a Copy of ingenious verses, in relation to
the Lord General Cromwell, which were taken by the original, as they were set up
on the Exchange.

Ascend three Thrones, great Captain and Divine
By the will of God, oh Lion for they are thine.
Come Priest of God, bring Oil, bring Robes, bring gold,
Bring Crowns, and Scepters, it is high time to unfould
Your cloistered baggs, your State cheats, lest the Rod
Of steel, and iron of your King, and God
Pay you in's wrath with interest, kneel and pray
To Oliver the Torch of Syon, and star of day:
Shout then you Merchants, City and Gentry sing.
And all bare headed cry, God save the King.

