To His EXCELLENCY The Lord General MONCK, Capt. General of all the ARMIES and
FORCES In ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, and one of the Generals at Sea. The
humble ADDRESS of the Officers of your Excellencies Army, in the Name of
Themselves and their Brethren, as it was presented to his Excellency this 2d.
day of May, 1660.
By us whose Names are Subscribed.
ALthough we cannot doubt of your Excellencies confidence in our Affections,
and our faithfulness to your Excellency, and that Discipline which by your good
and prudent Conduct has been Exercised over us, whereby we are instructed in
an entire Obedience to your Excellency; and that Authority which the Lord shall
place over us, which we hope we have manifested in our late Actings under your
Excellency, against all Persons whatsoever in any ways disturbing the Peace
and Settlement of the Nation; although some of them have been our Brethren
formerly engaged in the same Cause with us, as also in our late Remonstrance
and Address to your Excellency; wherein, as it becomes us in Duty, we have
solemnly declared to acquiesce in what the Lord shall bring forth from the
Consultations of this present Parliament.

Yet in regard your Excellency has been pleased to Communicate unto us a
Letter and Declaration from the Kings Majesty, full of gracious Expressions; we
cannot but acknowledge that the matter of it gives a great measure of quiet to
our minds, and more then ordinary Expectations of the enjoyment of much
Tranquillity and Happiness under his Majesty's Government.

The Free and General Indemnity offered by his Majesty, with a Liberty for
Tender Consciences, Satisfaction of Arrears, and his readiness to consent to a
Confirmation of Sale and other Grants and Purchases of Estates to all Persons
now in possession of the same, is that, of which, as we cannot doubt of the
real performance, being left by his Majesty to the Parliaments determination,
so we believe it is the most probable way to bring the Nations to their desired
Settlement.

And we hope to Evince to his Majesty, and all the world, that we and all those
that have been engaged in the Parliaments Cause, are his Majesty's best and
most loyal Subjects; And that your Excellency, and the Armies under your
Command, have complied with the Obligations, for which they were first raised;
for the preservation of the true Protestant Religion, the Honor and Dignity of
the King, the Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty and Property of the
Subject, and the Fundamental Laws of the Land.

Charles Howard Coll. Richard Ingoldesby Coll. Herbert Morley Coll. Sir John
Lenthall Coll. Ralph Knight Coll. Th. Fagge Coll. John Clobery Coll. Thomas
Read Coll. Leonard Lytcott Coll. John Hubletborne Coll. John Birch Coll. Sir
Anthony Ashley Cooper Col. John Bridges Col. Col. Robert Venables Governor of
Chester. Col. Sir Peter Killegrew Governor of Pendennis Castle. Col. William
Morris Governor of Plymouth. Col. Carew Rawleigh Governor of Jarsey. Col. Sir
John Carter Governor of Beaumorris and Holyhead. Col. George Crompton Governor
of the Block-house at Gravesend, and Fort of Tilbury. Sir Will. Appletree
Deputy Governor of Scylley. Ethelbert Morgan Lieut. Coll. James Mutlow Lieut.
Coll. Henry Needler Lieut. Coll. William Farley Lieut. Coll. Joseph Witter
Lieut. Coll. James Emerson Lieut. Coll. Richard Hatt Lieut. Coll. George Weldon
Lieut. Coll. Dennis Pepper Lieut. Col. Thomas Johnston Major. Philip Prime
Major. Jeremiah Smith Major. Richard Scot Major. Sylam Callant Major. Robert
Huntington Major. James Dennis Major. John Farmer Major. John Clarke Major.
Daniel Lisle Major. Francis Nicholls Major. Benjamin Gifford Major. Thomas
White Major. Tho. Clarges Commissary-Gen. of the Musters. Commissaries of
Musters. John Clarke Jos. Stubbin
Sam. Barrow Physi. to the Army. Tho. Gumble Scout-master Genesis Jo. Miller
Adjutant General. Richard Merist Adjut. General. Will. Disher Adjutant Genesis
Richard Gerard Marshal Genesis Thomas Fleetwood Commissary of the Ammunition.
Phil. Howard Captain of the Lifeguard. John Butler Captain. Edmond Warcuppe
Captain. Oliver Nicholas Captain. George Elsemore Captain. Henry Jones Captain.
John Barker Captain. William Salkeld Captain. Peter Wilmott Captain. Thomas
Coulson Captain. Henry Ogle Captain. Natth. Harrison Captain. Francis Hacker
Captain. Thomas Milward Captain. Thomas Munns Captain. Anthony Buller Captain.
William Goodwin captain. John Campbell captain. Edward Bertles captain. Thomas
Hooper captain. John Paddon captain. Anthony Nowers captain. Thomas Simnell
captain. John Collins captain. John Mutlow captain. Thomas Mansfield captain.
R. Harley Lt. to the Lifeguard. George Lassells Lieut. Thomas Figes Lieut.
James Cole Lieut. Richard Barker Lieut. Sam. Bridges Lieut. H. Monck Cornet to
the Life-g. William Maslin Cornet. John Grant Quartermaster. Richard Collins
Quartermaster. Thomas Cutchley Chyrurgeon. John Price Chaplain. William Clarke
Secretary. Matthew Lock Secretary.


St. James's 2d. May 1660.
Ordered by His Excellency the Lord General MONCK, that this Address be
forthwith Printed and published.

William Clarke Secret.

London, Printed by William Godbid for John Playford. 1660


