To all the FAITHFUL SERVANTS OF Jesus Christ, Especially to such as labor in
the WORD AND DOCTRINE, THROUGH ENGLAND AND WALES.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange. April 12th 1654.

To all the FAITHFUL SERVANTS OF Jesus Christ, Especially to such as labor in
the WORD and DOCTRINE, THROUGH ENGLAND AND WALES.
Dear Brethren,
THere being nothing under Heaven of greater importance, then the preaching of
the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, you cannot but be very sensible of what
weight and concernment it is to take a right estimate of all that offer
themselves, and to pass a due approbation of such only, as Christ himself
would have admitted to that great employment. A great part of which service in
this Nation, the Lord by his Providence has cast upon us, and is by us
undertaken, as with much fear and trembling, so with a deep sense, that the
effectual accomplishment thereof will much depend upon the Testimonials
exhibited to us, concerning the holy and good Conversation of such as seek for
approbation from us. Wherefore considering how easily and frequently abuses
creep into businesses of this nature, partly through the endeavors of those
who are ill-deserving, and partly through the non-attendance of others, who are
better minded. For the prevention of any such miscarriage, we have thought it
our duty, hereby humbly and earnestly to beseech all the people of God
throughout the Land, who shall send any Certificate to us, that they would not
take things upon the opinion and report of others, but (according to the good
provision made in the Ordinance, designing us to this Service) to certify
their own personal knowledge and experience, so as neither any, whom God
accepts; may want the testimony of his servants, nor any be recommended by
them whom he disalloweth; lest guilt be contracted by you, to whose
testimonials so much is referred, as that through carelessness or partiality
therein, very unworthy men may unawares be admitted, to the dishonor of God,
the prejudice of his Cburch, and the utter frustrating of the pious intentions
of our Governors; and we also be accounted blameworthy, if through your
misinformation, way being made for our mistakes, we should at any time act
amiss. This we are, and shall be more liable to, (...) reason of the
difficulty of our making discovery in a short time of several men's graces and
gifts, in so full and ample a manner as would be desired for just satisfaction,
without the faithful help of such as having been observers of them, and
conversant with them, do more fully know, not only the tenor of their
doctrine, but the constant course of their lives. It being a much more easy
thing to be able to describe what a godly man should be, then to be one indeed.
Nor may we doubt, but there are some men, who having first willingly deceived
themselves by a false apprehension and persuasion of their own condition and
estate in grace, will think it easy to deceive us, by giving a false account
of that condition. But as such shall do well to consider, that he who tries
the Spirit is not mocked, neither can any thing be hid from his eyes, and that
they must undergo another kind of Test then this slender scrutiny of ours,
when the secret of all hearts shall be laid open, and brought to light. So our
Brethren may likewise please to consider what opportunity is put into their
hand by this Address made unto them for the avoiding of such mistakes, and ^^e
inconveniences which may follow upon them through their neglect; besides the
blot which will deservedly stick to them, not only for the present, but with
posterity and succeeding times, forasmuch as the Certificates now exhibited
will appear upon Record. For the prevention whereof, we humbly conceive and
hope, that this friendly and brotherly intimation will be accounted seasonable,
and by the blessing of God, be found useful for the successeful carrying on
that work which we have in hand. And therefore, Dear friends, and much beloved
in the Lord, give us leave again, earnestly to beseech you in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, as you tender the Honor of the great God himself, whose servants
we all are, the precious souls of his people, purchased by the blood of his
Son, the advancement and propagation of his Gospel through all the parts of
this Land and Nation, whereunto we belong, so to lend us the joint assistance,
both of your fervent prayers and due infor^^tions, that hereby the work may be
carried on more prosperously, and we more encouraged to attend it.

Signed in the Name, and at the Request of the Commissioners for Approbation of
public Preachers, by FRANCIS ROVS. JOHN ARROWSMITH. WILLIAM GOFFE. STEPHEN
MARSHALL.



