To the High Court of Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and
JRELAND.
The humble Petition of a great number of Imprisoned Freemen for Debt, of the
City of London, which yet lie in Ludgate, under the cruel rigor of the Norman
yoke of bondage and slavery, by the cruelty and oppression of their obdurate
Creditors.

SHOWS,
That Imprisonment of the Body for Debt, is contrary to the Law of GOD, to
Reason. Justice, and charity, and to the Common Law of this Nation, as
appears by several Statutes; the restraint of Men and Women's persons in
Prison paying no Debts but defrauding the Creditors, and satisfying the
tyrannical wills of the said Creditor, Lawyer, and Jailer.

That some of your Petitioners where Committed before the 20.th of October,
1653. And although very Poor, by reason of loss of Trade, as also by
Suretiship; yet by the injurious practices of their Adversaries, combining with
deceitful Lawyers are by indirect proceedings in the Law, unjustly detained to
(...) utter Ruin of them and their Families.

O^^e^s of your Petitioners, are confined close Prisoners for small matters of
Controver^^^, only out of the cruelty of their Adversaries, and so still
remain under their vexatious Imprisonment.

O^^^ers of your Petitioners, are detained by Outlaries and other Prosses at
the States S^ite, and cannot obtain their just Liberties.

The Premises piously considered, Your poor Petitioners humbly pray; That
your Honors, would speedily break this Cruel sinful yoke by the rule of
Righteousness, Justice, and Mercy, and to cause an Act of Parliament to be p^st
for all such as are now in Prison, to Examine, hear, and determine all Causes
and D^fferences whatsoever, between Creditors and Prisoners, with small
Charges; so that all Differences concerning Prisoners, may be adjudged and
determined (as also Charities of, and belonging to Prisons, which has been
unjustly detained, or mis-imployed) speedily, without pleading of Council,
least your Petitioners perish; And that there may be Provision made in the said
Act, that all Debtors to Prisoners may be compelled to make Restitution unto
them without any further charge in Law; so as all Prisoners may be forthwith
freed and discharged from their Imprisonments.

That so not only We, our Wives, Children, and Friends, but this whole Nation,
may have just cause to bless God for You, and to eter^ize your Names to
Posterity; for the Speedy accomplishment whereof, Your distressed Petitioners
do daily pray, etc.

