heraldic badge of the Prince of Wales CP ICH DIENE

To The Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled.
The humble petition of the Gentry, Clergy, and others Inhabitants, subscribed
of the Counties of Flint, Denbigh, Mountgomery, Carnarvan, Anglesey, Merioneth,
being the six Shires of Northwales. As it was presented this present March the
5th. 1641. Accompanied with thirty thousand hands.
WHereas the present condition of the Church of England (in the public
liturgy thereof in the ancient liberties and form of government as they do
now stand established by law) has been lately brought in question, and
manifold petitions from the several quarters of this Kingdom and other such
like addresses concerning the same have been presented to this Honorable house.

We his Majesty's faithful Subjects in the Principalities and Counties of
North Wales whom it equally concerns, and as strongly tied in duty and
conscience, do likewise presume to make our humble Remonstrance, and we do it
after a long silence and expectation joined with some fears.

And first, for those things which concern the public service of God as they
be of nearest importance, and we nothing doubt but you will take unto your
tendrest thoughts, so we do earnestly propound and prostrate before you that
dangerous consequence of Innovation in matters of so high concernment: as we
conceave and leave it to your own great wisdoms to Judge, what scruples and
jealousies are like to arise, if we be taught a new and different way of
serving God after a full persuasion of the lawfullnesse of that which is
prescribed according to the word of God, not without the deliberate and
concurrent approbation and Industry of the most learned of the Protestant
Church of this and other Nations, and the possession of so many years in the
practice thereof, and al since the blessed time of Reformation.

The mere report hereof has already produced no good effect, breeding in the
minds of ill disposed persons Insolence and contempt, in others perplexity and
grief, not knowing how to settle themselves, or form their obedience in such
distractions and sometimes repugnancy of commands.

Then for the outward policy and form of government, under the Jurisdiction of
Bishops, bounded by law and kept within their own limits.

It is as we believe, that form which came into this Island with the first
plantation of Religion here, and God so blessed this Island, that Religion came
early in with the first dawning of the day very near or in the time of the
Apostles themselves, And in the succession of all after ages the same has been
constantly maintained among us, and that without any eminent interruption or
gainesaying even till these our days.

And now from the comfortable experience which we feel and which our Fathers
have told us of the convenience and moderation of this government together with
the antiquity of the same (a strong argument of Gods special protection) we
do in all humility represent and pray that the same may be still preserved
entire in all the parts thereof, professing yet withal that we heartily
disclaim all scandalous Innovation and Popish corruption whatsoever.

And we are the more encouraged in this suit, because we find it to be the
unanimous and undivided request and vote of this whole Country, who cannot
without some trembling entertain a thought of change. In all which we do not
presume to give any rules, but as it becomes us, humbly declare and open our
own breasts, and labor to deliver our own souls in testimony of our
Loyalties and discharge of our consciences, who shall ever take comfort to
find the same way of honoring God, continued in his own House of prayer, the
Laws of the Land put to actual execution, the peace and government of the
Church preserved, the rumord alterations declined, and the distractions already
too visible arising thereupon avoided.

And as we doubt not but your great wisdoms will take care that our Doctrine,
and Discipline established shall be still in force, and observed, until by
some absolute Law, and the opinions of learned Convocations, or Synod
(according to the Custom of our prudent Forefathers in best times) it be
otherwise ordained.

So shall we never cease to pray for a permanent blessing upon your Counsels,
and resolutions, to the general happiness of Church, and Kingdom.
London printed for. F. Couls and R. Phillips. 1641.


