To Men, Fathers and Brethren;
HENRY HOLLAND (Son of the learned and laborious Scholar Dr. Philemon
Hollard;) a Citizen of London: and to do the King and Commonwealth service; He
has heretofore been a Grand-Iury-man and a Subsidy-man, and one of the Trained
Band, charged with a Corslet: And lived in good Credit and Reputation: and for
a long time, has been an householder* in an eminent Parish, called Mary Le Bow;
Charitable and open-handed to the relief of necessitated good Christians: He
had also a gracious Wife named Susanna, (now with God) who did go beyond him in
Grace and goodness;) and with her Husbands leave was openhanded to the relief
of the Poor: which being taken notice of, he and she in the memorable year of
the Mortality, of the great Plague Anno 1625. Moneys were sent into their
hands: some from some known friends; and othersome from unknown friends (that
left London,) to contribute to necessitated and visited Christians: Whereof
their witness is in Heaven, (and for need yet some few on earth,) that they
were faithful Stewards. He has been also a Commissioner under the great
Seal of England against Bankerupts in four or five Lord Keepers times. And he
was ever a zealous hater and abhorrer of all Superstition and Popery, and
Prelaticall Innovations in Church Government and Discipline: for the which he
has, heretofore, by that Grand Impostor William Land Archbishop of Canterbury
and his Agents, suffered imprisonment, by Attachments of Pursuivants, in the
High Commission Court and the Star Chamber Court: and he has been thereby
put to great trouble and charges, and much impoverished. And he is averse to
all late sprung up Sectaries: when he was 60 years of age, he adventured his
life, and went out one, and was the eldest man of the present Basil Earl of
Denbigh his Lifeguard, in his expedition for the King and Parliament* in the
year 1643. whereof he has good Certificate. And now in these miserable and
distracted times, he is grown aged, betwixt 60* and 70, he is subject to some
infirmities of age, his Eyesight and hearing much decayed, (sometimes almost
stark deaf) so crazy in his Limbs, as hardly able to follow any calling: and
he is not only impotent in body but indigent in estate: (the more with some
unhappy averse suits in Law; wanting necessary subsistence, even now when he is
by the course of Nature not far from the period of his Pilgrimage here on
earth. And so poor he is, that of late, in a just suit commenced in Chancery,
he was feign to make Oath to be addmitted in Forma Pauperis. And seeing the
Holy Ghost by Solomon says, that they that give unto the poor do lend unto
the Lord, etc. And, it is a more blessed thing to give than to receive; Your
Charitable benevolent contribution, as God shall move your heart, toward his
necessitated condition (now in his old age) is most humbly eraved, whose bowels
will have cause to bless you, by him that daily imploreth at the Throne of
Grace for Peace; such an honorable and safe one as may accord with the peace
of the Gospel, or the Gospel of Peace; as also for the welfare of the high
and honorable Court of Parliament, the Reverend Assembly of Divines, and the
prosperity of all the Israel of God, in England Ireland and Scotland, and all
the World. Ita est Hen. Holland.

We having known Mr. Henry Holland a long time, do attest that we do conceive
and believe the premises are true. WILLIAM GOUGE. THOMAS FOXLEY. RICHARD
HILLER. HENRY HICKFORD.



