TO THE HONEST SOLDIERS OF THE GARRISON OF HULL, etc. These
Soldiers,
TIme was when your Persons were as dear as your Actions were Honorable; and
in truth your noble enterprises founded upon Just and Righteous Principles, was
the groundwork of such high affections to your very names; that we did not
only hug you in our bosoms on earth, but heave you up in our hearts to
heaven: To call a person a Soldier, of the Victorious English Army, was in
effect to say, that he was neither sorded nor ingenerous; neither mercinary,
nor unjust; but a man of much goodness, pure in his ayms, undertakings and
ends; esteeming the fruits of Righteousness in the freedom of his Country,
from the yoke of Usurpation and Tyrany above his life; but with the Revolution
of Time, the scene of your noble performances is changed; you and your
fellows, who declared your selves (distinct from your superior Officers)
called forth out of judgment and Conscience to serve the design of God, in
throwing down the horn of Monarchy in England; and your Country, in making
them a free and unsubjected people unto the will and lust of any single person.
Behold, on a sudden, you are made to forfet all your Vows, and your judgment
and Conscience are sacrificed to man's Commands, though never so treacherous and
abominable. This is evident, if we go no further for a President than your own
Garrison, in the late Case of Master Can, who without all process of Law,
show of Reason, any Conviction, some of you turned out of Town, upon the
peremptory and irrational commands of your Mayor, being not able to give the
least account for the legality of the attempt: What say ye, oh ye soldiers?
Was this a proceeding upon Judgment and Conscience, to persecute a man unto
Banishment, for no cause shown? Nay, nor that can be shown, except he were in
some measure true unto your interest of most glorious truth. Will your Mayors
Warrant (suppose you had it in your hands to show) be a sufficient compurgator
for you before the judgment seat of God? What will any of you say before that
great Tribunal, when your solemn Engagements in the high places of the field
shall be laid on this hand, and your actual obeying unjust directions on that?
Will not your Consciences cry guilty before God and his holy Angels, before the
persons, whom you have dealt injuriously with and all the world? Put this day
as far off as you will or can, it can and will overtake you; and then every man
(as well private Soldiers as Major Elton) must give an account of the deeds
done in the flesh, whither they be good, or whither they be evil. But you are
determined to say, Is it not a sin to refuse. Commands from our lawful
Officers? Shall the Scripture decide this Question between us? If it be agreed,
i will name the place, Acts 4. 19. Whether it be right in the sight of God to
harken unto you, more than unto God judge ye; so say I to you, whether it be
right to harken unto your Mayor, more than unto God, judge ye: God commands
you, even you soldiers, to do violence to no man, Luke 3 14. Your Mayor
commands you to do violence to Master Can, now judge you which is most your
duty? If you say, it is more righteous to obey your Mayor in this matter; I
dare pronounce you cursed with a dreadful Curse; and I protest against you
this day, that you are perjured, perfidious, Apostates; the most monstrous
wretches that ever trampled on the ground throughout the Globe of all the
Earth: If you acknowledge God rather to be obeyed, then repent of what you have
done; Repent of the wrong you have done to Master Can. And if ever your Mayor
command you to deal so with any other, without a real reason shown and
declared by some presidented Law, refuse it. Tell him you are men under Vows to
God for righteousness, you have declared your selves no mercinaries; you have
fought for a due distribution of Justice, and will not act against it; tell him
that though he think not of a day of account you must; and howbeit he command,
yet think with your selves, you are not bound to obey besides the rule of
Reason and Righteousness; Being now no longer the servants of men, but of your
Country, for the good of which you unsheathed your swords, imbrewed them in the
blood of Englands enemies, and ought so to do against all who impede its real
prosperity, under a free Representative, be they what or whom they will; and
much rather those (for such there be) who have dealt deceitfully with the
Nation, pretending (with you) to introduce freedom^ but have led us further
into the house of bondage than ^tofore. Soldiers, I beseech you in the bowels
of c^on, think on these things, whilst those who ere (...) were no better than
poor Michanicks (witness your Mayor) pomp themselves over these Nations, and
(though they be baser than the earth (as Job said) vaunt it over the freeborn
people of England, making themselves great by the price of your blood, and
arrears of pay, which they have frudulently wronged you off. They leave not you
also void of drugery, think how sorded a matter it is for you to relinquish all
your noble principles to prostrate your selves to the lust of any creature!
Mind your own hearts, how God has forsaken you, since the stream was turned
by the treachery of your great ones, from a glorious Commonwealth to the
vassalage of a Protector (so called) and a Council! God is against them, and
you for their sakes at home and abroad! How are their soaring designs
frustrated in America? How many of your fellows fell there by the butcherous
hands of fifty Cow-killers? How is the hand of God against them at home? Their
Councels are every way defeated, their Cabinets by their giddie enterprises
exhausted, and themselves run into extreamdebt; so that in probability, the
longer they subsist (except they lay aburden of Taxes upon the Nation, which it
can not, will not bear, (by which means you may smart for their iniquity, being
found at least appearing assistance of their horrid designs) you may still
find a deminution and arrearage in your pay (that free Parliaments by the
blessing of God may fully satisfy) which how ever (indeed) it fair with
themselves, policy invites them to; well knowing that poverty debates the
spirit, and is the best way to servilise any people. Consider also, how many
gallant upright souls, are now exempt from the right of Election and being
elected, only because they stand for what you have engaged to maintain and
fought for, and how they disperse their wretched brood of Ambitious creatures
into all the Countries (in particular Yorkshire) to prostrate the peoples zeal
unto their Tyrannical Threats. Soldiers, In truth, from the highest to the
lowest they have dealt treacherously with you; and let them pretend what they
please, you stand bound before God and his peo^ prosecute the end of your
engagements, for the setle^ of the three Nations in the way of a Common-we^lth,
in opposition to the government of a single Person: Have a care of lifting up a
hand, or stirring a tongue against any, whose designs are by assisting that
way, as you value your eternal peace; fight not for them to the dissolution of
your Country, their alone exaltation, and the loss of your own souls; for if
you do (after so many warnings as you have received, and amongst the rest this
from the hand of your Friend) sad will be your account before the just and
righteous judge of heaven and earth; who for the cry of the dissolute will
bestir himself, as a Lion to the prey, he will cry, yea roar, and will prevail
against his adversaries; And then the sinners in Zion shall be afraid, and
fearfulness shall surprise the Hypocrite. I am far distant from you, but my
affections draws forth these premonitions before the day of calamity come
upon you, like an overslowing flood.

Your true friend so far as you shall be found steadfast to your fisst and (...)


