TO The Honorable Court The House of COMMONS Now assembled in Parliament.

The humble Petition of many hundred thousands, inhabiting within the thirteen
Shires of WALES.

Directed to the House the 12. of February, 1641. showing their manifold
grievances, for which they desire redress from the Parliament.

With their motion that their Country may be more strongly fortified with
Ammunition of Arms.

And how they freely proffer themselves to assist the Protestants in Ireland.

Printed at London for T.H. 1642

TO THE HONORABLE COURT THE House of Commons now assembled in Parliament. The
humble Petition of many hundred thousands, inhabiting within the thirteen
Shires of Wales:
Shows,
THat the manifold pressures, under which we have groaned these many years,
have been by you endeavored to be reformed, and amended by your unwearied
labors, and uncessant consultations. Yet notwithstanding your sedulous
vigilances has wrastled with those extreme disturbances, and distempers in the
Kingdom: We still find out many inconveniences arising afresh, to the great
am^zement and discouragement of his Majesty's loyal Subjects. Wherefore our
humble motion is, that your Honors would seriously revolve the still growing
miseries, under which we have been, and are now subjected: that you would be
graciously pleased to add a period to the calamities which are pressed upon
us. The diffusive current of these grievances distill from one original
spring, and that we conceive to be a malignant party, and faction, who build
obstructions against your deliberate and judicious determinations; who cast
scandalous aspersions upon what has been by you enacted; and labor to
nullify, or at least to extenuate in a repugnant opposition, what you are in
agitation to institute. The boldness of these malevolent adversaries has too
audaciously outdared the very fundamental laws, and has treacherously
studied to subvert the foundation, upon which the Justice and Religion of this
Nation is firmly built and established. We earnestly therefore entreat your
Honors maturely to consider their malicious intents, and daily practices
against the State; which if they be not seasonably castigated in time, before
their infant conspiracies grow to the prime height of their ripe perfection,
they will then become incorrigible. Yet withal we impartially acknowledge
your sedulity in correcting and sequestring them, but your endeavors have
still been frustrate and retarded, by reason of their abounding malignitie.
And whereas diverse high taxations have been oftentimes imposed on us, we did
always upon the consideration of the same, expect a reformation; but as yet
we have found little or no redress: the cause of which we neither conceive,
or suspect to be produced by you, but principally by the calumnious suggestions
of that factious party; which we desire may be excluded and expelled the House
of Peers: Thus the liberty of the Subject is trampled down, the Trades decay
in the whole Kingdom, and for our parts, our Estates are so miserably wasted by
heavy impositions, that without your propitious relief we shall perish with our
Wives and Families; and Cattle which is the chiefest mine of our Country,
have been bought, and driven from us by whole flocks and herds at once, some
transported into Ireland, and others into most parts of England, so that
unless some sudden redress be speedily occasioned by you, we shall be
impoverished: our serious motion is therefore, that your Honors would be
pleased to vindicate the abusive wrongs done unto our Country, and that you
would speedily ease us of this burden of misery, which we are no longer able to
support. And whereas we especially have always shown our loyalty to his
Majesty, our awful obedience unto you, obsequiously subscribing to what you
have been pleased to impose upon us; yet notwithstanding we are disrespected,
and shamefully derided with ludibrious contempt more than any other Country
what soever; wherefore we beseech you that the authors; urgers, or suggesters
of the same may be found out, and known, yea and suffer exemplary and condign
punishment for their reproaching us, according to their just demerits; for
otherwise we can conceive this Epidemicall derision of us to be nothing else,
but a scorning detestation to our known fidelity (which as we have hitherto
kept, so shall still continue inviolable) this grievance especially, unless it
be amended, will become a great discouragement to all our Countrymen.

We desire likewise that Learning be not too much discountenanced and
contemned, but rather that it may be advanced to its former dignity: for it is
a most ignominious, shameful, blasphemous, and unknown thing; yea, most
incongruous both to the Word of God, and common reason too, that Cobblers, and
Doctors of Divinity should be equal competitors. Thus if Scholarship be
defaced, England (the glory of all Nations lately) is suddenly like to
degenerate, and decline from its former splendour, and so consequently become
barbarous. Yet we speak not this in behalf of any, for we call God to
witness, and our own actions can testify as much, that whomsoever your
Honors shall find culpable, and delinquent, we desire may be prosecuted
according to the due process of Law, and (if the atrocity of the crime require
it) be fully executed according to the justice of the Realm. But amidst all
our own calaties especially, we cannot omit that of Ireland, to hear of the
condoleable misery of the Protestant party, and the inhumane tyranny of those
hellish Rebels: they have been in woeful distress a long time, and yet almost
destitute of relief, till of late your Honors have been moved to commiserate
their distressed estates; and as you have begun, so we beseech you proceed, and
continue in the same progression of mercy and charity; that the first beginning
of Resormation do not initiate in cruel opposition, and that the foundation
whereon that Reformation should be established, be not written with the
characters, and inscription of blood. For our parts, we will to the uttermost
of our powers labor to repel, and divert the furious rage of those tyrants,
and will to the end of our lives stand in the defense, and maintenance of
Protestant Religion. What we now crave more, is your mutual concordance with
his Majesty, that you may both concur in a co-unite correspondency of
opinions, that the weighty affairs of the Kingdom may be deliberated with more
facility, and that whatsoever you consult of, may tend to the honor of God,
the peace, safety, and tranquillity of the Land: that the malignant insolency
of the Recusant party may be more easily curbed; that delinquents may be called
to their trials, be punished, and suffer just execution: according as they have
promerited, with expedition, least they should break out, and hatch new
conspiracies, and so contaminate the more sincere body: that the manifold
abuses to our Country be respectively vindicated; that the confusions,
divisions, distractions, and disturbances may be allayed in a peaceful
mitigation; that the Divine Worship of God be no longer profaned, but that it
may rather be settled speedily in a purer way; that a clearer way may be opened
for Trading and Merchandise; that especially this being duly considered, that
we may be better fortified, and provided with Ammunition of Arms, and other
military Hostility, that so we may be more able to encounter with any foreign
Enemy, that shall presume to oppose, or invade the British Nation; That thus
being armed against any opposition, we may more freely enjoy the peace and
liberty of our Consciences, and estates; to the great comfort of his Majesty,
the immortal fame of your Honor, with the safety and prosperity of the whole
Kingdom.

Thus your Petitioners shall be bound to pray for the happy success of your
consultations, that the Divine Providence of Almighty God may direct and
prosper all your deliberations, etc.

FINIS.

