To the honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses Of the House of Commons
in PARLIAMENT assembled. The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the
Parishes, of Stepney, Shorditch, VVhitchappell and Algate, the Chappelgy of
Wapping, the Precinct of St. Katherins, and the Parish of St. Peter Advincula,
adjacent to the TOWER, and without the liberties of LONDON.
Shows,
THAT a great part of the Inhabitants of the Places abovesaid, are Mariners,
and other Persons belonging to Navigation, who are often at Sea, or abord their
Ships and Vessels, and so their Houses and Families left destitute of defense,
and exposed to danger in time of any Uproare; Another part of the same
Inhabitants, are Trained Soldiers (bearing their own charges) under the
command of the Lieutenant of the Tower, at whose pleasure they are called,
either in their whole number, or several smaller divisions of them, both night
and day into the Tower, to do service there, or unto other places remot from
their own dwellings, whereby also their Houses and Families are destitute of
defense, and open to like danger in time of any commotion; And the residue of
the said Inhabitants, are moft Handy-crafts-men, undisciplined in Military
affairs, not set in any order for defense, and thereby as liable to danger, as
any others.

That the apprehensions of these and greater dangers, are increased in the
Petitioners, from the grounds and reasons here under mentioned, which they
humbly offer to your grave consideration: (vizt.) because

1. The Tower of London (which the Petitioners formerly accounted a defense and
safeguard to them) is taken out of the Custody of Persons of honor and trust;
a number of Cannoneirs with their Laborers drawn into the same, many
pretending attendance upon the Bishops, reside there, the new Warders lately
put into the same, are many of them Alehouse-keepers, and most of them, of
loose Conversations, yet have great trust in the Tower; and the Trained
Soldiers of the Hamlets, who watch in the Tower, are confined unto strait
places, where, for want of power and number, they can neither prevent any
desperate design, which may possibly be attempted, nor be any way serviceable,
for the defense of the Place.

2. Diverse words (some whereof are particularized in the Schedule annexed) have
been spoken, by sundry Persons dwelling in the places above said, tending to
the disuniting of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, to the defamation
of diverse Members of this honorable House, and intimating some bloody design
in hand, against the well affected of the Kingdom, under the names of Puritans
and Brownists.

3. One Richard Cray, a new Warder in the Tower, and a Constable of a large
Precinct near Wapping, has (besides his dangerous speeches) endeavored to
raise men in Arms, to keep those whom he calls Puritans and Brownists, from
coming to Church, and has with many others, his partakers, greatly opposed,
the two worthy Preachers at Stepney, Mr. Buroughs, and Mr. Greenhill.

4. On Thursday night last, when the Citizens of London were up in Arms, for
their defense, upon the rumor of approaching danger, diverse of the Petitioners
having Armed themselves also, for their own defense, and being peaceably in
their Watch, to prevent further inconvenience, the said Cray in a violent
manner took the Arms from some of the Petitioners, threatened the rest, and
said, if he had known, he would have been better provided for them, meaning (as
they conceive) either to hurt, unarme, or oppose them.

The Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that they may have Authority from this
honorable Assembly, freely to put themselves into a Posture of defense, for
the better enabling of them, to maintain his Matesties Person and Authority,
the power and Privileges of Parliament, and their own lives, liberties and
estates, according to their late Protestation: And that they may have liberty
to that end, to choose Officers for their better guidance and instruction, to
exercise themselves in Military Discipline, and to provide Arms and
Ammunition, that some speedy course may be taken for the better ordering of the
said Tower, and to prevent the dangers by fireworks and otherwise, which may
arise from that place: And that the said Cray and others, who have threatened,
or opposed the Petitioners, may answer the matters laid to their charge, and
receive such condign punishment as this honorable Assembly in your great
wisdoms shall think fit.

And the Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.
The CHEDULE.
5. RIchard Cray a Constable of the Parish of Stepney, and one of the new
Warders in the Tower of London, has lately since the last Pacification with
the Scots, and the happy union between these two Kingdoms, affirmed that the
Scots, are all Rogues and Rebels; That he hopes all Puritans and Brownists
shall be worse hampered, tortured and torn, then ever the Papists were, and
that he himself would help to do it, and this he delivered with a great deal
of vehemence, smiting his hand upon the Table

Matthew Owen on the 5th of January instant, affirmed, that Mr. Pym, and the
other four, did carry two faces under one hood, that the Papists would be
quiet enough, if they might be let alone, and that it was long of the Puritans
that all this stir is.

John Walter of Lime-house, on the 27th of December last, being asked why the
Drum did beat, did enter into many railing speeches, calling diverse people of
honest report, a company of damned Puritan-whores and rogues, and said he hoped
ere long, to see all their throats cut, or they hanged, as those are in
Ireland.

Thomas Bungie affirmed, that he would join with the Papists against the
Puritans and Brownists, if the Papists should rise.


