To the High and Honorable Court of Parliament.
The humble Petition of sundry of the Nobles, Knights, Gentry, Ministers,
Freeholders, and diverse thousands of the Inhabitants of the County Palatine of
Chester, whose names are subscribed to the several Schedules hereunto annexed.
In Answer to a Petition delivered in to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, by
Sir Thomas Aston, Baronet, from the County Palatine of CHESTER, concerning
Episcopacie.

Humbly show;
THAT whereas diverse Petitions, by the practice of the Prelates and our present
Diocesan, have been lately posted about this County for the continuance of our
present exorbitant Hierarchy and Church Government, under which the whole
Kingdom has long time groaned, and the hands of many persons of sundry
qualities (solicited to the same by the Prelates agents) with intent to be
preferred to this Honorable House, which we conceiving, not so much to aim at
our Church and Prelates Reformation, as at the maintenance of their absolute
Jurisdiction and Innovations both in Religion and Government, which will give
the greatest advantage to the adversaries of ou^ Religion: We hold it our
duties to disavow them all, especially that lately tendered to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, by Sir Thomas Aston Baronet.

And humbly pray, that we incur no mis-Censure, if any such scattered Papers
have (without our privitie) surreptitiously assumed the name of our County.

We, (as all other Counties of this Realm) are deeply sensible of the many
common and heavy Grievances (under which the whole three Kingdoms suffer)
occasioned by the Prelates, and have just cause to rejoice at, and acknowledge
with thankfulness, the pious care already taken by your Honors for the
suppressing of the growth of Popery; the better supply of able Ministers in all
places to instruct the People; removing of all Innovations, and for your
endeavors to suppress and remove our Lordly Prelates, the sole Authors of all
our present miseries, Innovations, and most professed enemies of the Gospel:
and we doubt not but in your great Wisdoms you will not only regulate the
rigor of their exorbitant Ecclesiastical Courts, but likewise wholly
extirpate them, as neither suiting with the Temper of our Laws, nor the nature
of Freemen.

And when we consider, that Diocesan Lordly Bishops, superior to Presbyters,
were neither Instituted, nor heard of, in the time of the Apostles, who always
ordained Acts 11. 30. c. 14. 23. c, 15. 2. 4, 6. 22, 23. c. 16. 4. c. 20. 17.
28. c. 21. 17, 18. c. 22. 5. phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 17. c. 3. 1. to 9. c. 4. 14.
Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. Iam. 5. 14. 1 pet. 5. 1, 2, Rev. 4. 10. c. 5. 11. 14. c. 7.
11. 13. c. 11. 16. c. 19. 4. If than it be of Divine and Apostolical
institution, that there should be many Bishops and presbyters in every
particular Church; Then it is point blank against it, to erect one Bishop over
many Churches, and one Archbishop over many Bishops, one patriarch over them
and one pope superior to them all: And if one man's possessing of a plurality
of Churches has been ever held infamous and unlawful in all ages, because he
cannot discharge their cure, much more must one Bishops Superintendencie over
many hundreds or thousands of Churches, which he cannot duly govern and
instruct, be more unlawful.
sundry Bishops in every particulor Congregation, and those all equal in
Authority; not one Bishop over many hundred Churches, and he paramount his
fellow Presbyters: That our See Bishop Usher Do Brit. Eccles. primordiu c. 1,
2, 3, 4. 6, 7, 8. c. 16. page 800. Fordon Scotchton l. 3. c. 8. Major de Gest.
Scoter. l. 2. c. 2.
Church of England (with that of Scotland) from the first plantation of the
Gospel here, in the Apostles days, for some hundred of years after had no
Bishops at all to govern it. That Bishop Usher De Brit. Eccles. primordiu c.
5. p. 56, 57, 58, 59.
all ancient Authors and Historians unanimously record, that our Archbishops
and Bishops, succeeded the Heathenish Arch-Flammines and Flammines here planted
in times of Paganism, both in their Institution, Jurisdiction and Seas; and so
are only of Ethnicall or Diabolical, not Apostolical Institution. That they
were the greatest firebrarnds of contention, and Authors of Cent. Magd. 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9. cap. 8.
all the Schisms in the first general Councels, and Primitive-Church. That so
many of them have sowed the tares of Heresy, Popery, Schism, Rebellion,
Sedition, See Baleus de vitis pontificum. The Imperial History. Morney his
mystery of Iniquity. The English and French Book of Martyrs, Holingshead,
Speed, and Goodmans Catalogue of Bishops.
opposed, excommunicated, dethroned, yea murdered Christian Kings, Emperors,
and raised up many bloody wars to the effusion of much Christian blood, in
all Kingdoms, where they have swayed; preserved and rescued Popery and Heresy
from utter extirpation in this and former ages; exceeded the Primitive
persecuters in Martyring and shedding the blood of Gods dear Saints. That to
them we owe the corruption of the purity of the Gospel we now profess, with
Romish Errors and Superstitions, as your Honou^s have already unanimously
voted. That many of them for the propagation of Popery, and suppressing of the
Truth (especially the Archprelate of Canterbury, William Laud, accused by your
Honors, and committed to the Tower of London for See his Articles.
High Treason against his Majesty, our Laws, and established Religion; Bishop
Wren, Bishop Mountague, Bishop Pierce, Bishop Goodman, and others now in
question before this Honorable Assembly) are like to become glorious Martyrs
in the Roman Calendar. That (not diverse, but) most of them lately, and yet
living with us, have been very great Oppugners of our Religion, endeavoring to
reduce or captivate it to the common enemy of Rome. And that their
tyrannical, Papal, Lordly government has been so long oppugned by See
Catalogus Testium veritatu: Flagellum pontificu the last Edition, and a
Catalogue of Testimonies in all ages, etc. lately Printed.
infinite godly Martyrs and writers both at home and abroad; established
(through their own over-swaying power, and undermining subtlety) by the Common
and Statute Laws of the Kingdom made only in times of Popery, but often
exploded or restrained by sundry Laws and Statutes since the time of
Reformation, though with little good success: And as yet there is nothing in
their Doctrine (generally taught, when they rarely preach) but what is
dissonant from the word of God, or the Articles ratified by Law. In this case,
not to call their government, a perpetual vassalage, an intolerable bondage.
And ( prima facie, though not, inaudita altera part, of whom your Honors have
heard so much evil already in the Committees for Religion; for the High
Commission, Bishop Wren, Bishop Pierce, the Ministers Londoners, and other
Counties Petitions against Prelacie) not to pray the removal of them, and not
to seek the utter desolation and ruin of their Offices as ^^^hristian (as
diverse Counties else have done in their Petitions to your Honors,) we cannot
conceive but to relish of injustice, and uncharitableness, both to the So^^^^
Bodies and Estates of us and our Posterity; nor can we join with them who
petition for their continuance.

But on the contrary, when we consider the Tenor of such writings and Books as
by the Prelates and their agents have been lately spread among the people with
their public allowance (as the Prelates New Canons, Oath, and act for a
malevolent Benevolence, for non payment whereof every Minister shall at first
bout be ipso facto deprived, without the benefit of any Appeal, Bishop
Mountagues, Dr. Heylins, Dr. Pocklingtons, Shelfords, Doves, Reeves, Francis
Salis, Franciscus de Sancta Clara, their late Books, with others: and our
Prelates Letters in nature of Commissions, for the collecting of the late Lone
for the maintenance of the Wars against the Scots, which Bishop Pierce
affirmed in sundry speeches to the Clergy of his Diocese, to be Bellum
Episcopale, the Bishops War, using it as the chief motive why they should
liberally contribute toward it. When we again ponder the Tenants preached
publicly in Pulpits, and the Contents of many Printed Pamphlets swarming
every where amongst us, See the Archbishops Articles, n. 2.
against the frequencie power and use of Parliaments; the Right and Liberties
of the Subjects, the propriety of their goods; in advancing the exorbitant
Jurisdiction of Prelates, their Inj^nctions and Courts under the name of the
Church; their asserting of his Majesty's absolute power both over the Laws,
Goods, Lives and Liberties of the Subject, and the like; all of them
dangerously tending to the introduction of a lawless tyranny, and arbitrarie
form of Government both in Church and State; to rob his Majesty of the hearts
and loyal affections of his people: And then further consider, not only the
Bishops several usurpations of the sole power of the Keys, and Ordination,
but likewise their intimations of their desire of the full power of the Sword,
that they in their several Courts (as they do in all their High-Commissions)
may execute both Ecclesiastical and Civil Censu^es within themselves. We
cannot but express our just fears, that their intention is to introduce an
absolute Innovation of tyrannical and Papal Government: Whereby we who are
now governed only by the Common and Statute Laws of this Realm made in
Parliament, shall be governed (as our Anti-petitioners confess we are) only by
the Canon and Civil Laws (which the now See the Archbishops Articles Art. 1.
Archbishop of Canterbury professed he would introduce and govern us by) made
and dispensed only by twenty-six Ordinaries and their Underofficers (or rather
only by one over-potent Arch-Prelate) not easily responsible to Parliaments,
for their deviations from the Rules of Law, so long as they enjoy such ample
Lordly Revenues, continue Lords in Parliament, Lords of the Privy Counsel,
and greatest swaying Officers in the Realm, Archbishops Articles, Ar. 13.
able to dissolve even Parliaments themselves in case they attempt to question
them (as we know by many late experiments;) whereas if we were governed (as was
the Sea the Answer to an Humble Remonstrance. Gersonius Encerus de Gobernat.
Ecclesiae.
Primitive Church) by a numerous Presbytery and ruling Elders, (far less in
power, though more in number) according to the Laws of God, and those this
Honorable Assembly (not the Convocation, or every Bishop in his Diocese at his
mere pleasure) shall prescribe; we dare assure our selves, no such
inconveniences shall be found in that Government, equivalent to those of
Episcopacie; which how corrigible they have been by Parliaments and Councels,
how ill consistent with a Monarchy; and how dangerously conducible to an
Anarchie; their incorrigiblenesse, Treasons, Rebellions, Conspiracies, with the
Wars and tumults occasioned by them in all former ages, and now, abundantly
manifest. And therefore we have just cause to pray against their continuance, as
fearing their consequences would prove the utter loss of piety, Liberty,
unity, peace, Laws, and divine learning, and necessarily produce an
extermination, if not of Nobility, Gentry, and Order, yet certainly of
Religion, and all true piety.

With what vehemency and arrogancy of Spirit the Prelates and their
Instruments have prosecuted all good Ministers and people of all sorts, even to
the loss of Members, Blood, Liberty, Life, Goods, Fortunes: and how many
thousands of his Majesty's good Subjects they have driven out of the Realm
into Foreign parts; and how plausible your Honorable proceedings in this
present Session of Parliament against their Innovations, Canons, Exorbitances,
(yea, and their very Callings too) have been to the whole Kingdom (who daily
bless God for them) we need not represent to your honors. And therefore humbly
pray, that some present speedy course may be taken, as in your Wisdoms shall
be thought fit, to suppress all Lordly Prelates; together with the importing,
Printing and dispersing of all Popish and Arminian Books, and the calling in
and burning of those forenamed, (especially of the late Canons, Oarh, and Act
for the Benevolence) which have produced dangerous discontents both in the
Clergy and common people, We having great cause to fear, that of all the
distempers which at present threaten the welfare of this State, there is none
more worthy the mature and grave consideration of this Honorable Assembly,
then to stop the Torrent of such ambitious Spirits, as lie masked under our
Lordly Prelates white Rochets, before they swell beyond the bounds of
Government, and drown his Majesty's three whole Kingdoms in a deluge of blood,
and utter desolation. Then we doubt not but his Majesty, persevering in his
gracious inclination to hear the Complaints, and relieve the grievances of his
Subjects in frequent Parliaments, it will so unite the Head and the Body ( (k)
Archbishops Charges Art. 14. Mr. Nathanael Fines Speech in parliamett, Febr. 9.
p.
severed principally by the practices and continuance of the Prelates) and so
indissolublie cement the affections of the people to our Royal Sovereign;
that without any future government at all by Bishops, he shall be a more
absolute and happy Prince then any of his Predecessors, and shall never want
revenue, and honor, nor his people justice.

We have presumed to annex a Copy of several Petitions exhibited to your
Honors against the Prelates this Parliament, and of sundry Positions preached
by their instruments in this and other Counties, which we conceive imply matter
of dangerous consequence to the peace both of Church and State: together with a
brief Remonstrance of sundry Grievances, Innovations and Persecutions, under
which we of this County (especially those of the City of Chester) have
miserably suffered, by means of our now Bishop, and the High-Commissioners at
York. All which we humbly submit to your grave judgments, praying that they
may be read, and redressed.

Subscribed to this Petition, Eight Noblemen. Knight Baronets, Knights and
Esquires, ninescore and nineteen. Divines, one hundred and forty; not one of
them a maker, taker, or approver of the new etc. Oath and Canons. Gentlemen,
seven hundred fifty seven. Freeholders and other Inhabitants, above twelve
thousand.

All of the same mind, and County, and not one of them a Popish Recusant.

