TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS AND Burgesses of the Commons House in
PARLIAMENT Assembled.
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON in Common Council Assembled.
SHOWS;
THat your Petitioners having heard that such Propositions and offers have been
lately sent from the House of Peers to this Honorable House, which (as we
greatly fear) if yielded unto, would be destructive to our Religion, Laws,
and Liberties: And finding already by experience, that the spirits of all the
well-affected party in the City and Counties adjacent, that are willing to
assist the Parliament, both in person and purse, are much dejected thereat, and
the Brotherly assistance from Scotland as well as the raising and maintaining
of Forces our selves, thereby likely to be retarded (All which the Petitioners
refer to your serious Consideration) And considering our present sad
condition lies upon us in a special manner, through the incensed patience of
the Almighty, by delay and want of execution of Justice upon Traitors and
Delinquents. And having an opportunity yet afforded us to speak, our humble
desires are:

That you would be pleased so to persist in your former resolutions, whereupon
the people have so much depended, and wherein you have so deeply engaged your
selves (though you should perish in the work) that sustice may be done upon
offenders and Delinquents. And that since we are as willing as ever to expose
what we are and have for the crowning of so good a cause, you would be pleased
by speedy passing the Ordinance hereunto annexed, or one to this effect, to put
us into a probable way for our and your defense, wherein your Petitioners will
by the blessing of God be never wanting; But will ever pray, etc.

THis Petition being presented the 7. day of August 1643. by the Petitioners
abovesaid, to the House of Commons, was well accepted, and thanks returned by
Mr. Speaker for their care of the Kingdoms welfare, with promise that the
particulars desired should be speedily taken into consideration: and to
consider of an Ordinance to the purpose in the Petition mentioned, which was
referred to a Committee.

August 9. 1643.
London printed for Thomas Under (...) 1643.


