TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE LORD FAIRFAX GENERAL OF THE FORCES RAISED FOR THE
DEFENSE OF THE KINGDOM. The Humble Petition or Remonstrance of the Well
affected Inhabitants of the County of Rutland.
May it please your Excellency,
THe Consideration of the Honor which God ha h put upon You since these
troublous Times began, has cast our eyes on You, as (under God) the means of
our further good; And therefore we thought fit to make our Addresses to your
Excellency for counsel and relief in our present condition, which is very
grievous, and is like to be worse, he present evils being but presagements of
future woes. Indeed our miseries are at that height already, that if some
speedy course be not taken; we are like inevitably to be ruinated. But God
having so appeared for his faithful ones already, gives us much ground of
confidence that he will not forsake us nor his own cause; which is, the
deliverance of his people, the advancement of Justice, and the punishment of
malicious offenders. And we are persuaded of You also, tha^ you will not be
wanting to do us good, or omit to seek the welfare of this poor Nation, nor let
go the blessed opportunity which the God of heaven has put into your hands to
do us good. And in order to your furtherance herein, we desire that your Honor
would be pleased to open your gracious ear to our (as we judge) weighty motions
or Proposals, which are the Declaration of our griefs, lawful desires, and firm
resolutions; that which in the first place we do offer as a grievance of our
distressed souls, is not so much what we have lost in our Estates already, as
our undone estate if our greatest enemies shall be made our Judges and chiefest
Governor (or King) in order to which, and to the enslaving of us for ever, we
conceive this Treaty with our conquered enemy was intended by some, which
Treaty gives a check to all the Parliaments former Declarations, and heroic
Votes concerning the King, which Votes and Declarations we thought had not bin
easily altered; the crossing of which adds so much to our sorrows, as we are
not able to express, and also by this means a horrid contradiction is made to
the Parliaments Declaration and resolution concerning no more Addesses: Indeed
it is a giving them the ly, as though all that they had said of him, as
touching the betraying of Rochell, the death of his Father, the Irish
rebellion, bringing in the German horse, the violence done to the Parliament at
the beginning of their sitting, with diverse other evils of a high nature which
they laid to his charge, had no truth in them, but a mere Flourish to defame him
and deceive the people.

If all these things were justly charged upon him, (as in honor to the
Parliament we believe they were,) oh how durst our Parliament think of Treating
with such a man! And that which also melts our very souls, is the much blood
already spilt, and yet we like to return into our former slavery. This is
intolerable, and that which leaves us without all hope is this, we see the
Parliament intend not any more to hear our cries, but do lay aside all our
Petitions; and though they burned them not by the hand of the common Hangman,
yet they make us hang in torment between hope and fear, and so we are like to
do if this Honorable Army help us not. Do you not lay it to heart how many
Noble and yet Humble Petitions they have laid aside, as that from the faith
full Citizens of London, that from the Town and County of York, that from
Kingston upon Hull, and that well-grounded and reasonable Petition from the
Town and County of Leicester, and many others to the same effect. Thus many
men's desires, all men's good, is laid aside to feed some wicked men's humors: oh
for Gods sake lay these things to heart. And further that which vexes our
hearts and thousand righteous souls of the Commons of England is, that still
our Worthies are privately murdered, and all our ruins plotted, as appears
by a Libel scattered abroad our County, and as you may see threatens the
destruction of those honest Gentlemen that were forced to leave the Parliament
House and fly to the Army; and also them of the Army which engaged at Newmarket.

And further when we see the freedoms of the People, and the security of all
the Parliaments Soldiery depend upon the consent of a King, whom they have
conquered, and this security to be for years, and if the Militia be intayled to
the Crown, then if the King die before these years be expired it must be
returned to the Crown again, for the Father cannot give away the sons
inheritance: whereas if the House of Commons had declared themselves the
supreme Authority of the Nation (as they ought to have done) our security had
been firm.

And further it may be justly conceived, that what things are done by
constraint are void in Law: and concluded by the Kings party that whatsoever he
signs are done by constraint: What shall hinder him (being once empowered) to
urge the Letter of the Law against the Parliament and all that adhered unto
them, to their utter ruin. And if the King could raise so great an Army when
he was in Carisbrook Castle, what will he be able to do when he comes to London
among his now Desparadoes, may he not easily gain the Militia in one month,
and overturn all that has been accomplished with so much difficulty? And now
if you and the Well-affected in the Army do forsake us, in respect of the help
of man, we are utterly undone: and pardon us if we say, We fear God will
forsake you, and let you fall by those hands in which you leave us.

These are some of those sorrows in which we must sink, or resolve to take some
more noble course, even to defend our selves by our sword, judging it far
better to die honorably in the field in one hour, than to live slaves in our
houses for ever. Now the Lord teach you and us what to do; if we sit still, we
are like to be massacred in our beds, or as our beloved Rainsborough was, whose
death adds to the life of our sorrows: Oh trusty Rainsborough! thou art but
what we are like to be; but what shall we do? We beseech your Excellency tell
us, or hear us with patience, and we will relate what we intend.

First, We will pray to your God and to our God, and when we have powered out
our tears to him, and our complaints to one another, as we have in some measure
done already; then we will resolve to stand up with you and the rest of the
faithful in the Nation, and declare further what we resolve to have: Only
(Right Honorable) we thought good to make our humble Addresses unto you, and
beg your aid, your countenance, and your prayers, your grave Counsel, and
Christian advice in this matter. We thought it good as Mordecai did Hester, to
put you upon endeavoring our deliverance, and let us in all humility and
faithfulness tell you, that if you fail, God will find some way to set us free;
but how you will answer your neglect, we cannot tell. In times past we have
found you ready to venture life and limb for our good, which gives us much
assurance you will stand for us and with us still, for our Just Rights.

We are no complementers nor flatterers, but well-willers to the good of our
Country, for which we assure you we will venture life and limb with you, for
the suppressing of Tyrants, taking away oppressive Laws, and all grievous
burdens under which the Commonwealth groaneth. Thus having imparted our
Desires and present Condition to your Excellency, we commit you to the
Teaching, Guidance, and Protection of God, and rest,

Yours, The Inhabitants of the County of Rutland.

This Petition was presented to the General on Friday the 24 of November 1648.
by Lieut. Freeman, accompanied with three Gentlemen of the same County.

To which the General returned this answer, Gentlemen I have sent to the House,
I hope they will do that which will be good for the Kingdom; if not, I will
venture my life with you for Justice: and return you Thanks.

LONDON, Printed by James and Joseph Moxon, for William Larnar, at the
Black-more within Bishopsgate. 1648.


