TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the several Parishes of Clement
Danes, Savoy, Covent Garden, Martin in the Fields, Giles in the Fields, and the
Parishes and Places adjoining in the County of Middlesex.
SHOWS,
THat upon a Petition exhibited by the Justices of Peace of the said County of
Middlesex, in pursuance of a former, from the Inhabitants and Freeholders of
the same County to the late Parliament, upon a full debate before a Committee
of the late Parliament, for regulating Markets, the 18. day of January, 1652.
the said Committee did declare, that they conceived it would conduce very much
to the Public good, to have a Market in Clements Inn Fields, where Buildings
useful are erected for that purpose; And did therefore order, that an Act
should be drawn for the keeping of an open Market in the said place in
Clements-Inne fields on every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday in every week, and
Mr. Hill and Mr. Letchmore, two of the said Committee, were desired to prepare
the same, and present it to the Committee, to the end the said Act might be
reported to the Parliament: And the Parliament did on the 4* of Febr. 1652.
order, that the said Committee for Markets should bring in their Report, and
the Act prepared by them for the said Market.

That a Bill being drawn and agreed on by Mr. Hill, and Mr. Letchmore, the 17.
day of the said February, 1652. a Draught thereof was presented to the said
Committee (a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed) and was read and ordered by them
to be reported to the Parliament with all convenient speed by one of the said
Committee: But by reason of other business, the same was not done sitting the
Parliament.

Now, although the said Market having continued diverse years, and found not
prejudicial to London or Westminster, yet for want of establishment, the
country people suffer much, and many abuses creep in.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly beseech this High Court, That the said
Market may be established and settled, according to the said intended Act, as
this High Court, in their great wisdoms, shall think fit for the public Good.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

