To the Honorable the House of Commons assembled in Parliament Cambridge.
ALSO, His Majesty's Message to both Houses of Parliament upon His Removal to
the City of York.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners most thankfully acknowledgeing the wonderful mercy of
Almighty God, the wisdom and goodness of his Majesty, the constant endeavors
of your Honorable Assembly, and the inestimable benefits which we have already
received by your unwearied pains, in the enacting those many wholesome Laws,
for the maintaining of truth and peace amongst us, notwithstanding the daring
insolences, and desperate plots of the malignant party, from which being (by
your vigilancies) delivered, we and the age to come are no less in
thankfulness obliged to our merciful God, than for those former deliverances,
whose memories we yearly celebrate, Are by those maine pledges of your
undaunted pious resolutions, for a through Reformation in the Church and State,
now at length imboldened to present to your gracious acceptance. This as a
testimony of our readiness to lay down what you have redeemed, our lives and
livelihoods in your aid toward the perfecting so pious and blessed a work,
And humbly to beseech you to believe us in our particular grievances. But above
all to go on in your wonted zeal for the general, especially for the
advancement of Gods glory in settling his worship according to his Word. That
able and painful Ministers may be encouraged and placed in the rooms of
scandalous and insufficient: All their unwarranted Orders and dignities taken
away; The smaller Livings comfortably augmented with a strict means, for the
recovery of their dues. The Universities thoroughly purged from Popery and
Arminianisme, with their incroaching privileges. And that their government may
be ordered acording to the Laws, and that Orthodoxall and prudent Governors
be there in placed, to provide that purer Authors may be read to Students, and
severer courses taken to prevent their future insolences toward the Country,
which at the last Assizes did violently break forth upon their discontents (as
we conceive and some of them did then express) because the Doctors and Heads
of the University, were by the late Act left out of the Commission. That there
may be a Synod of the most pious, zealous, and learned Divines. That Papists
may be confined, their subtle conveyed estates, to avoid forfeiture may be
prevented, and they speedily disarmed. That Wills and Testaments be proved, and
Legacies recovered in temperall Courts. That the Bish^p of Ely's vast
Jurisdiction may be limited, and his prejudicial government taken away. That
our County and Huntingtonshire may be reunited under one Sheriff as formerly.
That sale of honor and office be prevented, Ill Counselors removed,
Delinquents presently and deservedly punished, Ireland speedily and powerfully
relieved, and for the timely prevention of many eminent dangers from thence and
otherwise. That the Militia of the Kingdom be forthwith put in a warlike
posture of defense.

In all which and other your future indevours herein for the good of the
public; the safety and honor of our King, and the glory of the King of
Kings, according to the late Protestation hereby signified to have been most
cheerfully taken by us, we shall be always ready, willing to aid and assist
you, And continually pray, etc.

HIs Majesty being now in his Remove to His City of York, where He intends to
make His Residence for some time, thinks fit to send this Message to both
Houses of Parliament.

That He does very earnestly desire, That they will use all possible industry,
in expediting the business of Ireland, in which they shall find so cheerful a
Concurrence by His Majestry, that no inconvenience shall happen to that Service
by His absence, He having all that Passion for the reducing of that Kingdom,
which He has expressed in His former Messages, and being unable by words to
manifest more affection to it, then He has endeavored to do by those Messages
(having likewise done all such Acts as he has been moved unto by His
Parliament) Therefore if the Mis^fortunes and Calamities of His poor
Protestant Subjects there shall grow upon them (though His Majesty shall be
deeply concerned in, and sensible of their sufferings) He shall wash his hands
before all the World, from the least imputation of slacknesse in that most
necessary and pious Work.

And that His Majestry may leave no way unattempted, which may beget a good
understanding between Him and his Parliament; He thinks it necessary to
Declare, That as He has been so tender of the Privileges of Parliment, that He
has been ready and forward to retract any Act of His own, which He has been
Informed has Trencht upon their Privileges, so He expects an equal
tenderness in them of His Majesty's known and unquestionable Privileges
(which are the Privileges of the Kingdom) amongst which, He is assured it is a
fundamental One, that His Subjects cannot be Obliged to Obey any Act, Order,
or Injunction to which His Majesty has not given His consent: And therefore He
thinks it necessary to publish, That He expects, and hereby Requires Obedience
from all His loving Subjects to the Laws established, and that they presume not
upon any pretense of Order, or Command (to which his Majesty is no party)
concerning the Militia or any other thing, to do or execute what is not
warranted by those Laws, His Majesty being resolved to keep the Laws himself,
and to require Obedience to them from all His Subjects.

And His Majesty once more recommends to His Parliament the substance of His
Message of the twentieth of January last, that they compose and digest, with
all speed, such Acts as they shall think fit, for the present and future
establishment of their Privileges; The free and quiet enjoying their Estates
and Fortunes; The Liberties of their Persons; The Security of the true
Religion now professed in the Church of England; The mayntaining His Majesty's
Regal and just Authority, and settling his Revenue; His Majestry being most
desirous to take all fitting and just ways, which may beget a happy
understanding between Him and His Parliament, in which He conceives his
greatest power and riches does consist.

London, Printed for John Frank, 1641.


