TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and Burgesses of the Commons House of
PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Ministers,
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the County of Stafford, Delivered May 14
1642.
Shows,
THat in their own names, and in the names of many thousands of the Inhabitants
of the County of Stafford, your Petitioners with hearts fuller of
Thankfulness, then their tongues can be of Expression, humbly acknowledge
their sensiblenesse of the unparalled Travel, and indefatigable endeavor of
this Honorable House already spent in the discharge of that Trust deservedly by
the Commons of all the Land vested in You; whereby an ample Testimony is given,
as of your faithfulness and courage in the exposure of your selves and
Fortunes in these desperate times: so likewise of the good hand and providence
of God carrying you through many difficult straits, and dangerous conspiracies
of the Popish and malignant party, who have hitherto waylaid your proceedings.
All which your Petitioners take as very promising beginnings, and fair pledges
of the healing of the unsupportable Grievances both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
which the Church and State groan under. And do concurrently and freely confess
their Contributions to the work under your hands, not only by their prayers,
but also by the devotement of their lives, power, and estates, according to
that wise and religious Protestation set forth by you, conceiving their own
lives and safeties to be shipped in one bottom with Yours.

And your Petitioners further show, That it is not the least part of their
comfort, That you have continued the Militia of this County unto so Honorable a
Lord, in whom they may safely (under God) confide.

And your Petitioners do humbly pray, That the unexampled miseries, and almost
expiring estate of our brethren in Ireland, may be considered by an expedite
dispatch of seasonable succor, and that they may from time to time during
their miseries, be looked upon by you, not only as English and
Fellow Subjects, but as Protestants, and professors of Gods truth, under which
notion they suffer these Extremities. And that the Insurrection of the Papists
there may be reckoned of, not only as a Rebellion; but a horrid persecution of
Christ in his truth and members, that so the Interest of God and his Cause may
quicken your Sympathy with, and endeavors for them.

That the Papists (who are in great number in this small County) may be
thoroughly and speedily disarmed and so disposed of, that they be not formidable
to your Petitioners, by being able either to keep us in Jealousies by their
practices at home, or to foment that fire kindled by their party in Ireland.

That the Church in her Government, Officers and worship may be ordered
according to the rule of Gods holy Word, The particular Accommodation of which
we humbly leave to the wisdom of this Honorable House to determine, by the
assistance of an Assembly of godly and learned Divines.

That the present state and condition of the Church may be thought upon for
Ministry, maintenance and supply of an able preaching Ministry, pluralities
suppressed, the Fountains of Learning cleared, all insufficient for the work of
the Ministry, all grossly scandalous and negligent in their functions, removed,
that they may no longer remain a Burden to keep out others.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

London, Printed for Thomas Banks. 1642.


