TO THE HONORABLE THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT: The humble
Proposals of a VVell-wisher to Englands Prosperity.
Humbly presented and submitted unto your most judicious considerations,
wherein are demonstrated sundry ways to raise Money, both speedily, for the
present necessities of the Kingdom, and certainly, for a lasting Annual
Revenue: Whereby the industrious People of this Nation may be eased, his
Majesty truly and faithfully served, general Taxes for the future lessned,
Pole-Mony and Donatives spared; and the Government under his Majesty's most
Royal Person (which God grant in mercy to this Nation may be for many years
over us) splendidly and magnificently maintained and supported.
IN order to which, by way of Introduction, History does make it out, that it
was held as a Maxim amongst the wisest Counselors of State, and greatest
Politicians, to be ever the safest, best, and most pleasing way to any
civilized People, to raise the Revenue for the support of the Government, out
of those ^^es which generally they found their People were most inclining or
addicted unto: ^s supposing on the one hand, that by Pecuniary mulcts men would
be very much ^^^wn from viciousness, merely to save their purses; So on the
other hand, that when ^^ties are laid on viciousness, it seldom meets with
opposition, but is easily admit^^ proving ever the most lasting Revenue of any
whatsoever (...) that although they are at never so great a charge to please
their fancies and appetites they will not restrain themselves, counting it
Gallantry to purchase their pleasures at dear rates, glorying in the
profuseness of expense therein.

Therefore, how much better is it (seeing Vice is so hard to be exploded from
Mankind,) that out of it a Revenue, for the expense and support of the
Government, should be raised, rather than out of the Industry of laborious and
ingenious men.

And to satisfy all Persons concerned herein, that it is no new thing to have
Money raised out of the vices of a Nation for the support of the Government,
but that it is practiced among very knowing and politic People: Russia, Italy,
and Spain, will afford us fit examples, as at this day is practiced amongst
them.

First, In Russia, The Emperor of those large Territories receives his
greatest Incom out of his Cabacks, which in our Language is either
Tipling-Houses, Drinking-schools, or Alehouses, either of which that word will
bear.

Secondly, Italy, As Rome, Naples, and other parts, the Princes of which
Territories do raise great Revenues from their licenced Stews; though I think
it very unfit, that among us who profess the purity of the Gospel
such-wickedness should be countenanced or tolerated upon any such Account as to
raise Money in this Nation thereby.

Thirdly, Spain, whose great Monarch, for Tobacco vended in smoke and sneezing
as also out of Play Houses, and other Recreations permitted in his Kingdom,
receives yearly a very considerable Incomb.

So that you see the forementioned Nations, through a discreet Policy have
laid their greatest burdens upon Vice merely to spare the virtuous.

Are we in England so free from Vice, that we cannot find whereon to lay the
like Impositions, but that most of all Taxes generally must be laid upon the
Industrious party? Surely no, for although England is fuller of virtuous
persons then any Kingdom in the World, yet it is conceived by Juditious men,
there is so much vice nourished among us, that if what is practiced, were
laden with pecuniary dutys, will raise a very considerable Revenue toward the
expense of the Government, and thereby greatly ease and encourage Ingenuous and
virtuous men. Which, that it may be ha^ into consideration, and that the Ease,
Pride, and Luxury of this Nation may bear the burden, to the sparing of the
Industrious and laborious, I proceed to show the waye^ and means concurring
thereunto, whereby I hope, in the Close, it will appear, tha^ merely out of
that which may be termed the viciousness of the Nation, not only a considerable
annual Rent may be raised, but a very large supply had for the present
nece^sities which at this time so presses the Kingdom.

First, That no person throughout England and Wales be permitted to Retail Be^^
or Ale in any Chandlers or Cooks shop, Victualling-house, Tavern, or any other
wa^^ whatsoever, without License: And that for such License, to pay a Fine, and
year Rent, according to the drauft they have and place where they are seated;
and the bett^^ to prevent disorders, and to ascertain and secure their rent,
none to be admitted to L^censes but able responsable men for estate, and of
good lives and conversations.

The which houses may be reduced to a certain set number in each Town, City,
(...) Parish, according as the Magistrates of the said City, Town, or Parishes
shall think (...) (...) ^udicious knowing persons, there may be one (...)
thousand throughout England and Wales, Annual Rent.
which computed at 3 l. Fine one with the other, Ready Money.
and as much yearly rent, amounts unto three hundred thousand pounds present
money, l. 300000
and the like yearly. l. 300000
For though in some places 20 s. may be enough, in others ten and 20 l. would
be but little enough.

The Retaylers of drink being thus established, and the forementioned Revenue
raised upon them, then may the Excise which the Brewers now pay, and is so
stumbled at, (because not any person that brews their own Beer, does pay one
farthing to the Excise) be totally laid aside, and likewise that design of
raising Excise on Malsters, for those that make their own Malt, will have the
like privilege as when they brewed their own Beer: For as the Excise is now
gathered, only the poor and such as have their drink from Brewers, and set out
Ships, bear the whole burden thereof. And such as are able, and brew their own
Drink; of which thousands of Families there be in England and Wales that do so,
go scotfree.

But because it may be alleged; It is not equal that the Retaylers of Beer
and Ale, should only be charged with a duty toward the support of the
Government, seeing all in the Nation reap alike benefit, and ought to bear
their proportion; before I end, you shall see every one, by one way or other,
be they Rich, or be they Poor, will be brought in for a share, that it shall
not lie altogether upon particular shoulders.

Secondly, That none be permitted without License to Retail Tobacco, which
superfluous smoky Weed, is so viciously used in England, and Wales, that there
is no one thing vended in this Nation, which can bear a greater Fine and yearly
Revenue then it; especially if the excessive and exorbitant gains which the
Retaylers obtain thereon, be in any reasonable measure considered; for that
which the Ware-house-man, and Retailing Tobacconist buys of the Merchant,
reckoned Verginia, ordinary sort, at 5 d. and 6 d. per pound, he utters again
for 18 d. and 2 s. per pound, and what they buy of that which they call, sweet
scented Verginia of the Merchant for 10 d. and 12 d. per pound, they utter
again at 3 s. and 4 s. per pound, nay, oftentimes they have as much for the
ordinary sort, as for the sweet scented. And when the Retailing Tobacconists
vend these sorts to Vintners, Alehouses, and Chandlers, and who utter it by
the Pipe, they sell it for six and 8 s. per pound; and for the better sort by
the Pipe, obtain 12 s. and 16 s. per pound: which considered, is there any
thing that merits more to have a duty raised thereon, then this Weed Tobacco?
For if dear or cheap, none uses it the less, or will do so, that Calculating
the multitude of Warehouse-men, and Tobacco-shops, retailing Tobacco, and then
those that use it in Chandlers and Cooks shops, Victualling-houses, Alehouses,
and Taverns; it may be value at twice as much as Retailers of Beer and Ale, the
gains be so excessive and exorbitant, and a useless Commodity: but if
Calculated only after the rate of the Retailers of Beer and Ale, l. 300000
it will produce three hundred thousand pound present money, l. 300000
and as much yearly rent.

Thirdly, That without License, no person whatsoever to Retail Wine in London
or elsewhere, neither Coopers, Vintners, nor any that keep Cellars to furnish
the Country, or private persons, there being many, especially within and about
London, that may give a round sum for License to retail Wine, besides the
Vintners, which, though in London, ought to pay for their Licenses, they
selling their Wine retailed as dear, if not dearer, then they that do retail it
in the Country, and pay for their Licenses; so that if all Retailers in and
about London, as well as other Cities of England did pay for their Licenses,
40000 l.
it would well amount all together, 40000 l.
unto forty thousand pounds Fine, and as much yearly Rent.

Fourthly, That without License, none should Retail Aquavitae or Strong waters,
of which there be many thousands in England within and without London, and
other parts of the Kingdom, which added to these other sorts of foreign
drinks, as Sherbet, Tea Medea, Coffee, and Chicholatae, and other such like
liquors, which being brought under one and the same form; the Revenue that
would be raised thereby, 20000 l.
may be computed to rise unto twenty thousand pounds present money for Fines,
20000 l.
and as much yearly Rent.

Fifthly, It being already in this Kingdom established, that no Stage Plays,
Sights, Opera's, or such like Recreations, are to be used or set up without
License, then those that set up such things, should be engaged to pay good
Fines for License, and a yearly Rent, which if computed at 2 s. in the pound,
out of what they daily gather in, 30000 l.
it may arise to thirty thousand pounds per annum, throughout the Kingdom,
30000 l.
and they may very well give as much more present money for Fines.

Sixthly, In regard Vanity, Ease, and Pride sway so much with us in England,
and is maintained to as great a height in our Nation, as in any part of the
World, which will sufficiently appear, if observation be but taken of those
numbers of Coaches daily set up and used almost by every one in this Kingdom,
upon which Vanity, Pride, and Ease, there may very well be laid a burden
toward the Nations Charges; and the rather, because such persons for the most
part are exempted of paying any duty in reference to their expense of Beer and
Ale in their Families, by brewing their own drink, and no way in a manner
liable to Excise, or any duty, as those a^e that have no drink, but from the
Retailers thereof; fore to be helpful in their station to bear a part of the
Nations Charge, there can be no way so convenient to raise a duty from such,
but to Enact it, That no person shall keep a Coach in England or Wales without
License, for which to pay five pound Fine, and five pound Annual Rent for a
Coach of two Horses, and of four, 7 l. 10 s. and of six, ten pounds; and so pro
Rato for one two, or more Coaches that they may keep, of two, four, or six
Horses, be they Nobility, Gentry, Citizens, Stage, or Hackney-Coaches, it being
supposed, that throughout England and Wales, there may be used twenty thousand
Coaches when least; which at five pounds Fine, and five pounds Annual Rent,
will amount unto one hundred thousand pounds ready money, and as much Annually.
l. 100000
And what person is he that for his Ease, Vanity, 10000
or Pride, will refrain the keeping of a Coach for 5 l. License Money, and as
much yearly, for, and toward the expense of the Government, being, if
considered, it will be saved to him otherwise in Taxes, which generally come
to much more.

So that it will appear, by the six foregoing proposals, there may easily be
raised for the present necessities of the Kingdom, l. 790000
seven hundred and ninety thousand pounds ready money, 79000
and as much Annual Rent, which will go very far toward the expenses of the
Government, and the taking away of Taxes, which can never be levi'd to raise
money so equally and conveniently, or so much to the ease and content of the
People, as by such ways as these; which if drawn into a right Channel, and the
collecting of this money which will yearly be paid in upon Licensed Alehouses,
and Retaylors of Tobacco, besetled upon the present Receivers throughout
England and Wales, it will be done at a very easy Charge: And then the Auditors
keeping the Accounts, as they do of his Majesty's other Rents in each County,
will be a means that no Arrears be suffered, or uncollected, to the great
satisfaction of those Towns and Parishes in each County that are to pay the
same.

In a Book called, Trade Revived, published about a year since, as will appear,
in fol. 49. of that book, and so forwards, the proposal of raising money by
Licenses upon Beer and Ale, Tobacco, and other Liquors, was set forth; and
besides these, other forementioned Proposals of raising money upon Coaches,
and Pastimes, in this Paper inserted, there be sundry other ways propounded
for the like use, as well for a present supply, as an Annual Rent; which if
taken into consideration with the rest, happily may be of good use and furnish
men's to do what ever work is to be done in this Kingdom, without trouble or
vexation to the people, but rather to their quiet and advantage. And because it
is the gene^^^ (...) Trade Revived lying by them, not to look back, or to take
the pains to turn over Papers (if mislaid) thereby to inform themselves of what
may be necessary for the good of the Nation to promote the same when
opportunities offer. I conceive it may be acceptable enough, briefly in
reference to this our purpose, once more to bring in view, what was therein set
down touching these things, which are as follows.

First, To have public Registers throught England in all Towns, Cities, and
Ports, as well to Register Lands as Shipping, vho upon their admission, to pay
a Fine and yearly Rent. Secondly, All such as Register their Estates in Lands
and Shipping, whereby a certain and assured benefit will accrue, not only to
themselves and Posterity, but to the whole Nation at their Registring their
said Lands and Shipping, to pay 3 d. 4 d. or 6 d. in the pound, according to
their Annual Rent, toward the present necessities of the Kingdom, and 3 d. 4
d. or 6 d. per Tun, of Shipping. Thirdly, That public Notaries may be
established throughout England and Wales, at whose admission, to pay a Fine and
yearly Rent. Fourthly, That public Brokers may be established for the use of
the Commerce, and none else admitted to use that Calling, and at their
admission to pay a Fine and yearly Rent.
The use of which four-recited particulars, (both as to the advantage of the
Nation in general, and every particular person) is at large in the said sheets
of Trade Revived, and fol. 49. before mentioned, set forth, being purposely for
brevity sake here omitted. And when the benefit and advantage which the Nation
will receive by the aforesaid settlement is taken into consideration, as also
calculation made of the present advance of money thereby, and future Rent that
will come in therefrom, surely it will apparently be cleared to all, that a
most plentiful increase will be had thereof, both present and to come, much to
ease the people from Taxes, which let them be never so small, are both
burdensome, and ill rescented; all which together, may arise unto as much as
the six first Proposals.

And to accompany the fore-recited means to raise a Revenue for the support of
this Nations Government, the duty of Customs upon all imported Manufactory,
and superfluous Commodities. And Excise upon our own Manufactory consume among
our selves, is the most innocentest and equallest way that can by mankind be
thought of in a Nation, and as good a way to bring in a constant and certain
Revenue as any whatsoever, if regulated and fitly ordered and collected,
without burthening the people (...) Rich and poor according to their expenses,
so that therein none need to envy one the other, for all pay proportion, as they
be in quality, which duties are not burdensome in themselve would be so
accounted, were they not made so by the irregular way in their colle^^ of
which, concerning the due regulation of the duty of Excise. By the Author o^
forementioned Book of Trade Revived, in fol. 25. and so forwards; it is at
large decl^^^ some things whereof, since his Majesty's most happy restoration,
have bin both re^^^ed, and regulated, by which the Commerce at this day does
find, not only ease, (...) benefit, to their great encouragement and hope,
that in due time, all things else are amiss therein, will receive the same
Issue and amendment.

Having engaged your Honors patiences thus far to read and observe what is
ex^^sed in the foregoing Proposals, I was minded here to rest, and to spare my
(...) thoughts, till I saw what effect those things would take already inserted
in this Pa^^^* But fearing I might not have the like opportunity, and also
knowing the necessiti^e the Nation for want of Money to be very great; as
likewise that perchance so^ (...) the particulars mentioned may be stumbled at,
because either not rightly unders^^^ or that they may happily draw a duty from
some that are unwilling to bear any cha^^^ (...) the public themselves, so it
can be imposed any ways upon others, or that it may (...) the Nation into a
quieter condition for the future, and lessen their present fees, (...) diverse
persons are so hard to part with, that rather then lose a penny of their
prese^^ ^^com, will be content to suffer their own Posterity and the Nation
eternally to lie (...) opressive misery, whereby in time no man will dare or be
able securely to deal one (...) the other, and if they do, certainly and
assuredly couzned. In consideration of which (...) forasmuch that some things
which are proposed, not being settled rightly, may no^ answer expectation. To
supply the deficiency whereof, and complete what th^^ may fall short, I shall
lay down one way more to raise money for the Public^ which is, That Sealed
Paper may be Introduced and used in this Nation, as it is (...) Kingdom of
Spain: And if so settled here in England, it will bring in so consid^^^^^^ a
Revenue for the support of the Government, and of his Majesty's most Royal
(...) that after it has once taken place, it will issue from every person so
easily and i^^^^^^bly, that no rational man can any way repine thereat, for
that none of the poor (...) way be burdened therewith, arising chiefly from
such as are able, and will be (...) to pay the same without grudgings: And so
certain will this Revenue be, as n^^^ can be more, issuing from so many small
springs, that constantly running through several Channels into one, will
increase the same into so fair a stream, that it w^^^ (...) the greatest burden
of the Nations expense, and so become the only means to set from all other
future Taxes.

I would not be mistaken in this proposal of raising money, by introducing
Paper, that here I mean, that all Paper used in England should be monopolized,
sue sealed from one hand, no, no.

But that a certain sort of Paper be sealed, and used in all public occasions
th^^ (...) or may appear in Judicature, and at several prizes, according to the
occasions, a^ (...) some Months since presented to his Majesty, the
particulars whereof being sub^^^^ to your honorable Considerations, are as
follows.

That there be an (...) for the (...) o^ Paper and Parchment for pub^^^^ use, a
stock thereof will be prepared for a very small sum of Money to begin the (...).

That this Paper so Sealed, may be of one sort for proportion, that so the
Records (...) places, may answer their duplicates, when transcribed and
transmitted unto the (...) Office, which said Paper according to the several
uses for which it is to be appli^^ ^o be of distinct prizes, which is to be
expressed by the Seal; the Parchment to be ^^ed according to its uses, in small
or greater Panes, labells, or pieces.

That only the first sheet or page of every Evidence or writing which shall
con^^^^ ^f more sheets or pages then one single sheet or page, to receive only
the Seal, and ^^^y of the rest following the first sheet or page, but to be of
common Paper unsealed.

That these Seals being of several Prizes; the first Seal, to be valued at a
penny ^^eet or page, and this to be used for all manner of Receipts,
Acquittances, Ente^^^^ ^t the Custom House, Discharges, Petitions, Affidavits,
Certificates, and other the (...) ^rdinary occasions.

^^e second Seal to be of 3 d. a sheet or page, and this to be employed for all
Agree^^^^s, Sales of goods, Bonds, Bills, to fifty pounds, and under.

^^e third Seal to be at 6 d. the sheet or page for all Bonds and Bills, and
above 50 l. (...) ^00 l.

^^e fourth Seal at 12 d. the sheet or page, for all things, as before, above
100 l. but (...) ^^ceeding 500 l.

^^e fifth Seal at 2 s. the sheet or page, for all things from 500 l. to a 1000
l. and un^^^ ^^is Seal may be comprehended all Declarations, Bills, and Answers
in Chancery, ^^^er Courts, Judgments, Pleas, Executions, and Decrees, which
concern Suits in ^^r Chancery.

^^e sixth Seal at 4 s. a sheet or page for any sum above 1000 l. for all
Leases, Pur^^^^^^, Mortgages, Rent-charges, Conveyances of Land, Houses, or
Offices, Wills and ^^^^ents, and such like.

(...) seventh Seal at 20 s. a sheet or page, comprehending all matters that
pass under (...) ^^eat Seal, or Privy Seal.

(...) eighth Seal at 40 s. comprehending all Honors under the degree of a
Ba^^^^^

(...) ninth Seal 4 l. for a Baron, and all other Superior Honors.

(...) tenth Seal at 10 l. a sheet or page, comprehending, and having reference
unto ^^vernments, Domestic or Foreign, whether of Provinces, Cities, Towns, or
Ca^^^^ ^r any other such like commands, to which is annexed an annual stipend.

(...) as to the difference of these Seals, they may be fewer or more at less
or bigger (...) as it shall be thought convenient for each purpose, to which
they may or shall be ^^^d. And as touching the management and settling this
design, that it may do the (...) for which it is proposed and intended, if it
be approved, and that your ^^rs shall desire to be further informed therein,
the Author of this Proposal (...) ^ost readily obey command, and questions not
but to make it evident that no one ^^^n more easilier be established, and
produce an Incomb more pleasing and with ^^^^evance to the Nation then this
will, for none shall be compelled to use this Paper, unless they of their own
accord will, there being not any person that shall use ^t, but will one way or
other find an advantage thereby: And for the public advantage that will arise
in reference to the incomb thereof, let consideration be had of the effect it
produces in Spain, where for this many years it has bin used, and is found
the most readiest, greatest, and insensiblest Incomb of any, and has brought
into the Spanish Coffers, vaste sums yearly, to many scores of thousands of
Duckars, although they are for people few in number, and very mean in
negotiations; and it was in the time of Spains greatest extremity and want,
amidst their late wars with France and Holland, first set afoot; which very
thing, and the Revenue Spain received thereby, had it bin paid in Silver, as it
was in black money, it would well nigh have supplied the best of his expenses
for those French Expeditions; but as it and all other the King of Spains
Revenues of his Crown are gathered in, in Cope-money, the loss thereby is so
great, that it lessens his whole Incomb one half, and has ruinated Spain, so
as never to be recovered without a Miracle: and should we ever here in England
suffer Coper Coin, or debased money to pass for current amongst us, we shall
soon make England worse then Spain. Considering then of what a value this
settlement was to Spain, a poor depopulated Kingdom, how much more considerate
will it be to England, whose large Commerce and dealings, both abroad and at
home, carried to a greater height through the infinite multitudes of people,
all whose transactions will be as so many riverets adding still to the filling
of the Cistern, that it cannot but in reason be granted to be a settlement
worthy the taking into consideration, for hereby such Publick-Faith Debts, or
other Debts which shall be thought fit to be paid, to such as have suffered so
much for their loyalty to their King and Country, may receive a quick and easy
satisfaction, of which there are sundry Poor of all sides, that merit relief
therein.

I have now done, and I hope none will think their labor ill spent in the
observing or reading what in this paper is set forth, or blame the Author for
publishing the same, such things as these being only fit for National meetings,
and by them to be considered, the which blessed be God, we now enjoy with all
freedom, so it is my hope, and I cannot but believe, that whatsoever may any
ways advance the Public good, will be with much earnestness (now in this
present Parliament) preferred and perfected to the glory of God, his Majesty's
Honor, and the Nations ease and Prosperity, which I heartily wish, and when
any of the particulars herein mentioned, has bin, or is by any other person
made public, it will very much rejoice me to find, and know that there be
assenters to these my thoughts and Judgment, and that have like public spirits
as to wish well to their native Country and brethren inhabitants therein, and
who also desire to do good, for good sake; for undoubtedly would every man leav
off self interest in its exorbitancy, and strive to promote the common good,
staying a while and striving the advancement of the one, it would make them in
due time attain unto the other, when as its most probable by striving only for
self, both the one and the other come ^o ruin; I wish it were not so much the
present fin of the Nation, its not to late to be amended, and I hope it will be
mended before it grow too late, which once happening, there will be no going
back. Concluding therefore with this Prayer, That if by presuming to publish
and present these to your Honors, I have erred, let the zeal I have for the
peace and prosperity of England, and the desire to promote his Majesty's
service, obtain a pardon for him, who begs of God, that he will give you
Wisdom and Courage to settle this poor Nation, that has so long lain under
misery, in unity and peace, both i^ Church and State, and also so to strengthen
his Majesty's hands with power, and his Coffers with Money, that he may be able
to withstand and subdue all his Enemies, and reward his friends, that under him
and his Government, the people of England may live a safe peaceable and happy
life.

FINIS.

