TO THE HONORABLE Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, of the Commons House of
Parliament. The Humble Petition of the Lords Knights and Gentlemen of the
Kingdom of Ireland now in Town,
HVMBLY SHOWING,
THat your Petitioners have received many and particular advertisements from
all parts of the kingdom of Ireland, which set forth the universal
desolations made in such plantations of the British, both English and Scotch,
wheresoever the barbarous Irish rebels have come, to the utter destruction both
of the persons there inhabiting, and extirpating of the reformed protestant
religion there set up, through the royal care and piety of King James of
blessed memory, and his Majesty that now is, and prosecuted by the great
industry and pious endeavors of near 40 years travel by those who have spent
their whole lives in reducing that Kingdom to civility, which is now utterly
desolated, by the proceedings so matchles^ely cruel, that no age nor story can
parallel their inhumanities; some whereof your petitioners are informed have
been touched upon, by advertisements already brought to this Honorable House,
whereof there is so great variety, that volumnes were but little enough to
contain the particulars; many thousands of men women and children, lying
mangled on the face of the earth, crying loud to God and their neighbor
Kingdoms for relief against those monsters, whose conspiracy is now so
universal, that small aides will be not only inconsiderable to effect the
work, but a means to lengthen the war, with the loss not only of the
treasure applied therein, but also of the persons employed, who being but few
will be in danger to be given up to the cruelties of the rebels, by that means
(which God prevent) will they gain not only great access to their number,
but (which is much more considerable) that experience in war and use of
arms, as may render them infinitely more able to make resistance against the
hereafter supplies; these particulars your petitioners, out of the deep sense
they have, of the calamities incumbent to that, and in danger to fall on this
Kingdom, with all humility crave leave to present; most humbly desiring, That
in pursuance of the zeal and fervency already shown to the Glory and Worship
of God, of the Honor and Renown of his most excellent Majesty (both which are
now strongly assaulted and pusht at) and out of the tender commiseration
already expressed for the relief of that bleeding Kingdom;

That this Honorable Assembly will represent such prevalent arguments to his
sacred Majesty, and the House of Peers, that the ten thousand men tendered by
the Kingdom of Scotland and accepted of by this Honorable Assembly, may be
speedily ordered to resort into Vlster: Not but that we do also desire there
may be as great a proportion of soldiers sent out of this Kingdom, as soon
as they can be prepared, if so it may please his Majesty and both Houses of
Parliament, the contagion of rebellion in Ireland having spread it self over
so many other parts of the Kingdom, and yet daily more and more increasing, as
will require the service of those who shall be sent out of England, for the
subduall of the Rebels, and comfort of his Majesty's good subjects in the other
provinces.

But forasmuch as your petitioners many of whose whole estates, and some of
whose wives, children, and nearest kindred and friends are already in the hands
and possession of those barbarous and bloody rebels of Vlster, and that they
may have more then ordinary cause to fear, that the remaining protestant
party, together with the important Towns of Caricfargus, Londonderry and
Colerane, being the chief Bulwarks and Fortresses of that Province, may for
want of speediest relief be surprised and destroyed, and by that means the
rest of the Kingdom extremely endangered, to the irrepairable damage and
discomfort of his Majesty, and all his good and loyal Subjects of all his
dominions; Therefore your petitioners do most instantly supplicate this
Honorable Assembly, to endeavor the hastening thither with all possible
expedition the ten thousand men out of Scotland, whose assistance being
within three hours sail, may be soonest conveyed, and whose constitutions
will notably match with the rebels, being well able (as many of these
petitioners have known by former experience) to follow them through the bogges
and moorish places (frequent in those parts) during the winter season, which
other supplies possibly may not be so fit for at present; This number added to
those raised and to be raised in those parts (through Gods blessing) may soon
check these insolences, and contribute much for reducing that kingdom to due
obedience, and yield unspeakable comfort, and relief to many thousand
disconsolate bleeding protestant souls, who have long languished in
expectation of aid from that and this kingdom, the longer retarding whereof
will carry loud cries to heaven against those who cause the same.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Adam Viscount Loftus. Thomas Lord
Folliot. Henry Lord Blayney. Robert Lord Digby. Theodore Lord Docwra. Francis
Lord Mountnorris. Sir George Blundell Baronet. Sir Edward Loftus Knight. Sir
Faithful Fortescue Knight. Sir John Clattworthy Knight. Sir Robert King
Knight. Sir Robert Parkhurst Knight. Arthur Annesley Esquire. Robert Wallop
Esquire. Richard Fitzgerald Esquire. Arthur Jones Esquire. John Moore Esquire.
Nicholas Loftus Esquire. Ralph Whisteler Esquire. Richard Perkins. John Davis.


London Printed, Anno Dom. 1641.


