TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The humble Petition of the Major, Aldermen; and Common Council of the City of
London.
MAY it please your most Excellent Majesty, the often expressions of your
Majesty's gracious acceptance, of the manifestation of the Petitioners duty,
and Loyalty, and the frequent declarations, of your Majesty's great care, of
the good and welfare of this City, and of the Protestant Religion, and of
protecting and preserving the persons and privileges of your great Council,
Assembled in the High Court of Parliament. Has encouraged the Petitioners, to
represent the great dangers, fears, and distractions, wherein the City now is,
by reason of the prevailing progress, of the bloody Rebels in Ireland,
fomented, and acted, by the Papists and their adherents; and want of aid to
suppress them; and the several intimations they have had, both foreign and
at home, of the driving on of their designs, tending to the utter ruin of the
Protestant Religion; And of the lives and Liberties of your Majesty's loyal
Subjects, the putting out of Persons of honor and trust from being Constable
and Lieutenant of the Tower, especially in these times, and the preparations
there lately made, the fortefying of White Hall with men and munition in an
unusual manner, some of which men, with provoking language, and violence,
abused diverse Citizens passing by, and the drawing diverse swords, and therewith
wounding sundry other Citizens in Westminster Hall, that were unarmed: The late
endeavors used to the Innes of Court; the calling in diverse Canoneeres, and
other Assistants into the Tower, the late discovery of diverse fireworkes in the
hands of a Papist, and the misunderstanding betwixt your Majesty and
Parliament, by reason of mis-informations, as they humbly conceive.

Besides all which, the Petitioners fears are exceedingly increased by Your
Majesty's late going into the House of Commons, attended with a great multitude
of armed men, besides Your ordinary Guard, for the apprehending of diverse
Members of that House, to the indangering of Your Sacred Person, and of the
Persons and privileges of that Honorable Assembly.

The effects of all which fears tend not only to the overthrow of the whole
Trade of this City and Kingdom, which the Petitioners already feel in a deep
measure, but also threatens the utter ruin of the true Protestant Religion,
and the lives and Liberties of all Your loyal Subjects.

The Petitioners therefore most humbly pray Your Saecred Majesty, that by the
advice of your great Council in Parliament, the Protestants in Ireland may be
speedily releived; the Tower put into the hands of Persons of trust, that by
removeall of doubtful and unknown persons from about White Hall, and
Westminster, a known and approved Guard may be appointed for the safety of
Your Majesty and Parliament, and that the Lord Mandevile, and the five Members
of the House of Commons lately accused, may not be restrained of Liberty, or
proceeded against, otherwise then according to the privileges of Parliament,

And the Petitioners, as in all duty bound, shall pray for Your Majesty's most
long and happy Reign.

Printed at London by R. C. for Joh. Bellamie, and Ralph Smith. 1642.


