TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty, The humble Petition of Us the
Inhabitants of Lancashire, whose names are hereunder written, in the behalf of
our Selves and diverse others, being Recusants:
Humbly shows,
THat whereas we and the rest of the said County, Your Majesty's most loyal
Subjects, are disarmed, and not sufficiently provided for the defense of Your
Royal Person and our own families; Our most humble Supplication to Your
Majesty is, That we may be received into Your most gracious protection from
violence, have our Arms taken from us, re-delivered in this time of actual
War, and by Your Majesty's special directions be enabled further to furnish
our selves with competency of weapons for the security of Your Royal Person
(if we be thereunto required) our Countries and Families, who now are not only
in danger of the common disturbance; but also menaced by unruly people to be
robbed: And when by the Almighties assistance Your Majesty's Kingdom shall be
settled, in case we be again dis-armed, that a full value in money in liew
thereof to us may be restored:

And we shall daily pray, etc. W.G.C.Tr.C.T.Chr.An.Io.C.

To Our Trusty and Welbeloved Sir William Gerard Baronet, Sir Cecill Trafford
Knight, Thomas Clifton, Charle Townley, Christopher Anderton, and John
Clansfield and other of Our Subj^^^^ Recusants, Esquires, in the County of
Lancaster.
CHARLES R.
Trusty and Welbeloved,
We greet you well, whereas by reason of the Laws and Statutes of our Realm,
by which all Recusants convicted are to be without Arms, your Arms have been
taken from you; so that now in this time of immiment danger, wherein there are
Armies raised against Our Commands, and contrary to Our Proclamations, and are
marching against Us, and diverse of Our good Subjects, for obeying Our lawful
Commands and opposing the rebellious proceedings of others ill-affected, are by
strong hand seized upon and imprisoned, their houses plundered, and their goods
taken away; and the like is threatened to our selves, who as all others Our
Subjects ought to have Our protection against all unlawful violence and force:
And the Laws made for dis-arming Recusants were made only for a provision to
prevent danger in time of peace, and were not intended to bar you from a
necessary use of Arms in time of actual war, for your own safety, or for the
defense of Our Person against all Rebels and Enemies, which by your duty and
allegiance you are bound unto; which is not, nor ever was meant to be
discharged or taken away by any Act; And whereas the Arms which were taken from
you, ought by Law to have been kept and preserved to have been made use of by
you in such time of open war, or of such others as you should provide: yet
under the specious pretense of dis-arming Recusants, and persons ill-affected,
your Arms have been disposed and dispersed into the hands of several persons
ill-affected, and for the most part Fomenters and Exciters of these Commotions
now raised in this Kingdom; Our Will and Command therefore is, and We charge
and require you upon your Allegiance, and as you tender the safety of Our
Person, and the peace and welfare of Our Kingdom, That you with all possible
speed provide sufficient Arms for your selves, your servants, and your
tenants, which We authorize and require during the time of open war raised
against Us, to keep and use for the defense of Us, and of your selves, and of
your Country, against all Forces and Arms raised, or to be raised against Us,
or against Our consent, or contrary to Our Proclamations, by color of any
Order, or Ordinance, or Authority whatsoever: And We shall (according as We are
bound to all Our Subjects) use Our utmost powers for the protection of you and
yours, against all injuries and violence. And whenever these Arms which you
shall so provide (after it shall please God to put an end to these dangers and
distractions) shall be taken away from your custody, by reason of Our Laws now
in this force; We do hereby assure you, We will allow you for the same, so
much as you shall have dispended in provision thereof.

Given under Our Signet at Our Court at Chester, the 27* of September, in the
eighteenth year of Our Reign. Sir William Riddell. Sir Edw. Widdrington. Sir
Era. Howard. Sir Nic. Thornton. Col. Tho. Howard. M. Lance Errington. M.
Errington of Befron. M. Geo. Wray. M. Ralph Mellet. M. Chr. Wray. M. Lambton.
M. Hodgeson. M. Smith. M. David Errington. M. Pudsey. M. Antho. Bulmer. M. Jo.
Bulmer. M. Askwith. M. Geo. Collingwood. M. Forcer. M. Evers. M. Holtby. M.
Evers. M. William Fenwicke. M. Ratcliffe. M. Haggerston. M. Forcer. M. Edw.
Gray.


These are the Names of diverse of the Colonels, Lieutenants Colonels,
Sergeant Majors, Captains, and Lieutenants that are Papists, and Commanders in
the Army, under the command of the Earl of Newcastle.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.



FINIS

