TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND,
The humble Petition of diverse well-affected, and constant adherers to the
interest of Parliaments, and their own native fundamental rights and Freedoms
therein concerned, Youngmen and Apprentices of the Cities of London and
Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and parts adjacent.
SHOWS,
THAT it is extremely to our grief and astonishment, that M. Lilburn a
Freeman of England, and Free Citizen of London, should be suffered by you to
be so violently pursued for his life upon an Act of the late Parliament, which
not one of you but knows in your own consciences to be most unjust, bloody, and
tyrannical, and against the very end and tenor of the Trusts of Parliaments,
and in destruction and subversion of our fundamental and indubitable native
Rights and Freedoms: It being hardly credible, but that we know it, that you
have not been prevailed withal to declare the same null and void in Law, by
the many just, rational, earnest, and legal Petitions hither to presented unto
you.

You no sooner sat, but you voted your selves the Parliament of the Common
wealth of England; notwithstanding you all know you wanted the legal, formal
election from the people, due to that Trust. What was it then, that induced you
so to Vote, and afterward to declare your selves so to be? Certainly, if any
thing justly moved you thereunto, it was your real purpose, that the Justice,
life, and power of a Parliament of the Commonwealth of Englaand should be
visible amongst you, and acted by you; and that you intended to do the proper
works of a true Parliament, which without doubt, are to deliver the Captive,
and set the Oppressed free; and being so, what greater proof can you give,
either more agreeable to the known L^w of the Land, or more acceptable to all
true Lovers of the ancient Liberties of the Nation, then to deliver M. Lilburn
out of this snare causlessly laid, purposely to entrap his life?

You see by those many Addresses of the people to you on his behalf, that they
are sensible, as we are, that what is done unto him, may be done (at the lusts,
wi^s, and pleasures of men in power) unto every man, and that the common
liberry has been, and is highly violated in this unjust and most unparalled
cruelty toward him.

You see also, that waving the manner of your Election to the Parliamentary
Authority, that they nevertheless owned you, in hopes to find the life and
power of a true Parliament amongst you, a condescension in them very much
deserving your highest regard, and most zealous resolutions to answer their
just and sober expectations, and to grant their just desires concerning Mr.
Lilburns safety, which every one discerns to be just; and wonder* exceedingly
at your deferring there of, Principally, if not only by your just and
righteous works, you can be known to be a Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, part of whose works you do, in repeoling that bloody and insnaring,
and not in the least to be spoken or pleaded for unjust Act; and in restoring
him to his estate and freedom, etc. When upon any respects you decline such
works, you decline your own being: and when you cease from doing of them, do
you not cease also from being a Parliament. Consider we beseech you, Is it not
a rule that cannot deceive, His you are, whose works you do; the cruelty you
suffer to be done unto him, being in your power, and duty to prevent, in the
sight of God and Man you do it, and are gilty of it. O therefore fear the
Almighty God before the mightiest of men, and courageously do this and the
Nations work, deliver this captive, and set this oppressed man M. Lilburn free
from all his trouble and causless hazards of death.

And should such a Jury be found (more like Devils then Christians) that should
find him guilty of Felony upon so vile a By-Law* (without any the least act of
Felony at the Common Law laid to his charge) a thing so contrary to the true
Law of England; how know you, but your power of pardon may be restrained by his
potent adversaries, and his death hastened before you can redeem it, as it has
already been threatened? the court and place of his trial having been terrified
and frightened already with a party of Horse. No, we beseech you to be
persuaded, though by us the youngest and weakest of men, who yet may live, and
prove to be, as we heartily desire, a Seed-plot and Nursery of preservers to
you and yours, and our native and just fundamental rights, not to defer to
grant these our humble and but just desires so much as one moment, but
vouchsafe us the favor as to be the immediate messengers to him of your just
respects, and his deliverance from his most unjust captivity.

And we shall ever pray, etc.

