To THE Kings most Excellent MAJESTY. The humble and grateful acknowledgement
of many Ministers of the Gospel in, and about the City of London, to his Royal
Majesty for his gracious Concessions in his Majesty's late Declaration
concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs.
Most Dread Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects, Ministers of the Gospel in
your City of London; having perused your Majesty's late Declaration concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs; And finding it, to the joy of our hearts, so full of
Indulgence and Gracious condescension, We cannot but judge our selves highly
obliged, in the first place to render our unfeigned thanks to our good God, who
has so mercifully inclined your Majesty's Royal heart to this Moderation, and
next, our most humble and hearty acknowledgements unto your sacred Majesty,
that we may testify to your Royal Self, and all the World, our just resentment
of your Majesty's great goodness and clemency therein expressed.

May it please your Majesty,
THe liberty of our consciences, and the free exercise of our Ministry in the
Work of our great Lord and Master, for the conversion and salvation of souls,
ought to be, and are more dear to us, then all the profits and preferments of
this world; And therefore your Majesty's tenderness, manifested in these so
high concernments, does wonderfully affect us, and raise up our hearts to an
high pitch of gratitude.

We cannot but adore Divine Goodness for your Majesty's steadfast adherence to
the Protestant Religion, notwithstanding all temptations and provocations to
the contrary, and your professed zeal for the advancement and propagation
thereof, Declaring, that nothing can be proposed to manifest your zeal and
affection for it, to which you will not readily consent.

Your Majesty has graciously declared, That your Resolution is, and shall be,
to promote the power of Godliness, to encourage the Exercises of Religion, both
public and private, to take care that the Lords day be applied to holy
Exercises, without unnecessary divertisements; and that insufficient,
negligent, and scandalous Ministers be not permitted in the Church. Your
Majesty has granted that no Bishop shall Ordain, or exercise any part of
Jurisdiction which appertains to the censures of the Church, without the advice
and assistance of the Presbyters, and neither do, nor impose any thing, but
what is according to the known Laws of the land. Excluded Chancellors,
Commissaries, and Officials from Acts of Jurisdiction: so happily restored the
power of the Pastors in their several Congregations; and granted a liberty to
all the Ministers to assemble monthly, for the exercise of the Pastoral
persuasive power, to the promoting of knowledge and godliness in their flocks.
Your Majesty has graciously promised a Review, and effectual Reformation of
the Liturgy, with Additional forms to be used at choice: And in the mean time,
that none be punished, or troubled for not using it. Your Majesty has
graciously freed us from subscription required by the Canon, and the Oath of
Canonical obedience; And granted us to receive Ordination, Institution and
Induction, and to exercise our function, and enjoy the profits of our livings,
without the same. Your Majesty has gratified the consciences of many, who are
grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, by indulging to, and dispensing with
their omitting those Ceremonies, viz. Kneeling at the Sacrament, the Cross in
Baptism, bowing at the Name of Jesus, and wearing of the Surplice.

All this your Majesty's indulgence and tender compassion (which with delight
we have taken the boldness thus largely to commemorate) We receive with all
humility and thankfulness, and, as the best expression thereof, shall never
cease to pray for your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign; and study how in
our several stations, we may be most instrumental in your Majesty's service:
And that we may not be defective in Ingenuity, We crave leave to profess, that
though all things in this frame of Government be not exactly suited to our
judgment, yet your Majesty's Moderation has so great an influence upon us,
that we shall to our utmost, endeavor the healing of the breaches, and
promoting the peace and union of the Church.

There are some other things that have been propounded by our Reverend
Brethren, which, upon our knees with all humble importunity, we could beg of
your Majesty, especially that Reordination, and the Surplice in Colleges may
not be imposed; and we cannot lay aside our hopes, but that that God, who has
thus far drawn out your Majesty's bowels and mercy, will further incline your
Majesty's heart to gratify us in these our humble desires also.

That we be not further burdensome; We humbly beg leave to thank your Majesty
for the liberty and respect vouchsafed to our Reverend brethren in this weighty
affair of accommodation. The God of heaven bless your Majesty, and all the
Royal family,

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects Sa. Clarke Tho. Case Jo. Rawlinson Jo.
Sheffield Tho. Gouge Gab. Sanger Will. Cooper Will. Whitaker Tho. Jacomb Tho.
Lie Jo. Jackson Jo. Meriton Eli. Pledger Will. Bates Jo. Gibbon Mat. Poole with
many others.

This Address was presented to his Majesty at Whitehall, Nov. 16. by some of
these Ministers, to whom he was pleased to return a very gracious answer.
LONDON, Printed by his Majesty's approbation for Joh. Rothwel, at the sign of
the Fountain, in Cheapside in Goldsmiths Row. 1660.


