To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Gentry, Ministers and Freeholders of the County
Palatine of Chester, and of the Inquests serving at the Assizes for the body of
of the said County. Presented to His Majesty at York, MAY 7. 1642.
Humbly shows,
THat though our heart breaking Griefs have been many and great, though a
lively apprehension of our woeful disstractions, which have been of late much
increased by this long night of your absence from your great Council; yet we
have had some surviving relics of hope, that the sighs and groans, the
tears and prayers of so many dutiful and well affected subjects from all
parts might (in time) have been accepted and at lenght have proved powerful to
have melted your royal breast into Compassion, and with (such a loving and
pleasant violence) might have won you to embrace again with all tenderness
Your whole Kingdom, as it is at this present represented in Parliament.

But now we lament that even those hopes appear to us gashly as brea^hing
their last, having little vigor remaining in them to uphold our hearts for our
sorrows are doubled our fears multiplied, by the report of your Majesty's
Resolutions to undertake a dangerous) voyage into your Kingdom of Ireland,
whereon we look with much wonder and astonishment, far be it from you (dread
Sovereign to blame our hearts, which (guided by the strength of law and duty)
cannot consent to a Journey so perilous, by which your Royal person (wherein
we challenge so great an Interest, that it is no more Yours than ours) shall
undergo variety of dangers by Sea and Land, wind and waters, having no
difference betwixt a King and his meanest vassal.

And if God (the Guardian and preserver of Princes) shall safely waft you over,
what valuable security can be given us of Your life being amongst such Papish,
barbarous, and cruel Rebbels, as (having banished the sense of all Religion,
Piety, and Humanity, and rejecting God, and You their King from reigning over
them,) do continue to murder daily Your innocent and Protestant subjects, of
all ages, sexes, and conditions, and which they would persuade the world they
do act by Your Authori^^e, Approbation and Command, thereby heaping vengeance
upon their own heads, and rendering them incapable and unworthy, the thoughts
of the least grace and favor, let Your Justice, we beseech Your Majesty have
its proper work upon them, and your mercy upon Us, by granting our most humble
prayers to these particulars.

To comfort our hearts by your residing where you may with best Conveniencie
Consult with your great Council before you thus hazard your person and your
people.

To Consider to what danger hereby you expose us by the popish faction, when
your Majesty shall leave us naked, and not put into a posture of defense, to
repel the rage and attempts of the enemies to our religion when we have too
just cause to fear that they do but wait for an opp^rtunity to bring to birth
their Cruel Conceptions. And what so great advantage can they hope for, as
would be this of your absence.

To advise whether this Journey would not much retard the intended relief for
Ireland since (upon the first rumor) many who were minded to subscribe
thereto, do demur in their proceedings, and others wish they might recall what
they have subscribed.

Not to deprive Us at once of that poor remainder of hope we have to reap
further good by the endeavors of Your Parliament whereof we shall despair
when Your presence shall be wanting to infuse life in their life proposalls and
Conclusions.

To believe that a Journey to White Hall will be the more for Your Honor and
safety, and far more acceptable to Your truest Subjects then a Voyage to
Ireland.

To view at our humble entreaty that part of King David's story, who being
resolved in person to War against his own Rebels, acquainted the people with
his Intention in these words of Resolution, I will go with you my self also,
but his best Subjects (that were ready to hazard their lives for him, would not
suffer him to venture his regal Person which was to them so perilous) opposed
him these Terms, Thou shall not go forth, neither did David reject them as
presumptious, knowing that their confident expression in that particular was
the issues of their duty and love, but gave them this mild and satisfactory
reply, (which we humbly beg may be Your Majesty's Answer to Your Parliament:
Us, And all other Your good Subjects) what seems You best, that will we do,

So shall We ever pray, etc.
London Printed for Richard Lownes at his shop adjoining without LVDGATE 1642.


