To the Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY
The humble Petition of the County of CORNWALL.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects in all duty render unto Your Majesty
all thankfulness for Your Majesty's Unexempled favor and Grace in granting
unto your Subjects, by the Concurrence with Your Parliament, such Laws and
freedoms, which have most fully expressed Your Majesty's gracious goodness
unto Your People; And we most thankfully receive Your Majesty's free offer of a
General Pardon, whereof we most humbly desire to be made partakers.

And we most humbly beseech Your Majesty, Never to suffer Your Subjects to be
Governed by an Arbitrary Government, nor admit an alteration in Religion.

And your Petitioners being most feelingly grieved for Your Majesty's
discontents (partly occasioned by diverse scandalous Pamphlets, and seditious
Sermons, and no way lessened by unlawful Tumults) do wish a confluence of all
Comforts, Honor and Happiness unto Your Majesty, and do most heartily pray
for the Reconcilement between Your Majesty and Your Parliament:

And in all humble thankfulness for Your Majesty's said Grace and Goodness,
your Petitioners do offer themselves most ready to maintain and defend with
their lives and fortunes Your Majesty's Sacred Person, Honor, Estate and
lawful Prerogative against all persons whatsoever, according to the Oaths of
Supremacy, and Allegiance.

CORNUB.
John Grills high Sheriff. Warwick Lord Mohun. Sir John Trelawney Knight and
Baronet. Sir William Wrey Knight and Baronet. John Arundell of Trerise Esquire.
Charles Trevanion Esquire. Walter Langdon Esquire. Peter Courtney Esquire. Samuel Cosowarth
Esquire. Richard Prideaux Esquire. John Arundell Esquire. Renatus Billot Esquire. Francis Jones
Esquire. Robert Rous Esquire. Edward Trelawney Esquire. Nevil Blighe Esquire. William Bastard
Esquire. Charles Grills Esquire. Nathanael Dillon Esquire. William Arundell Gent. William
Courtney Gent. Edward Courtney Gent. Walter Glin Gent. Edward Cook Gent. Hugh
Pomeroy Esquire. Ambrose Billot Gent. John Samuel Gent. Nichol. Kendall Major of
Lostwithyell. Obadiah Ghoship Cler. John Kette Cler. Thomas Harrison Cler.
Thomas Porter Cler. Simon Lann Cler. John Peter Cler. George Brush Cler.
Barnard Achim Gent. Theophilus Laugherne Gent. William Guavas Gent. Nicholas
Sawell Gent. William Robinson Gent. Thomas Robinson Gent. Joseph Jolly Gent.
Thomas Trear Gent.

THe foresaid Gentlemen Subscribed at Lostwithyell unto the Petition directed
to His Majesty, together with seven thousand more, Esquires, Gentlemen,
Freeholders and other Inhabitants which subscribed and subsigned the said
Petition in their several Parishes.



His MAJESTY'S Answer to the Petition of Cornwall, At the Court at YORK. 26.
June 1642.
HIs Majesty is so very well pleased with the duty and affection of this
Petition,* That He has commanded me to signify His good acceptance of it, and
thanks for it to the County of Cornwall, and to assure them, That as He will be
always ready to increase the happiness of His People, by consenting to such
good new Laws, as shall be proposed to Him for their advantage, so He will be
forward to venture His life in maintenance of the Religion and Laws
established, which He doubts not, with the assistance of the Petitioners, and
other His good Subjects He shall be able to defend: His Majesty will be ready
to grant such a general Pardon to the Petitioners as they desire; And will no
longer expect the continuance of their duty and affection, then Himself
continues true to those Professions He has so often made of maintaining and
defending the Religion and Laws of this Kingdom.

Falkland.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: and by the Assigns of JOHN BILL, 1642.


