To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of your Majesty's most loyal and obedient Subjects of the
County of BVCKINGHAM, Presented at OXFORD the 15. day of December, 1642.
Most Gracious Sovereign:
THe sense of that Duty and Service which we owe unto your Sacred Majesty, and
our earnest affection to the good and welfare of this your Realm of England,
have moved Us in all humility to beseech Your Royal Majesty, to give us leave
to offer unto your Princely wisdom the apprehension which we and other Your
faithful Subjects have conceived of the great distempers now threatening the
Church, State, and your Royal Person, and of the fittest means by which they
may be removed and prevented.

The evils and Dangers whereof your Majesty may be pleased to take notice are
these, viz.
FIrst, That your Sacred Person is exposed to hazard and danger in the present
expedition, and by the occasion of the present War, your Revenue is much
wasted, your Subjects burdened with Coat and Conduct money, billetting of
Soldiers and other Military charges, and diverse Rapines and Disorders
committed in several parts of this your Realm, and your whole Kingdom become
full of fear and discontent. Secondly, the sundry Innovations in matters of
Religion. Thirdly, the great increase of Popery and employing of Popish
Recusants, and others ill-affected to the Religion by Law established, in
places of Power and trust, especially commanding of Men and Arms both in the
Field and in several Counties of this your Realm, whereas by the Laws they
are not permitted to have Arms in their own houses. Fourthly, the great
mischiefs which may fall upon this Kingdom, if the Jntentions, which have bin
credibly reported of bringing in foreign and Irish forces shall take effect.
Fifthly, the heavy Charges of Merchandise, to the discouragement of Trade.
Sixthly, the great grief of your Subjects, by the death of their nearest and
dearest Friends.
For Remedy whereof, and prevention of the Dangers that may ensue to your
Royal Person, and to the whole State, We do in all Humility and
faithfulness, beseech your most Excellent Majesty, that You will be pleased to
Countenance your PARLIAMENT herein, That thereby the Causers of these and other
great Grievances which your poor people lie under, may be taken away, and the
Authors and Counselors of them may be brought to such Legal trial and
condign Punishment, as the nature of their offenses shall require, and that
the present War may be composed by your Majesty's wisdom, without any more
Blood, in such manner as may conduce to the Honor and safety of your Majesty's
person, the Comfort of Your people, and the Continuance of the Unity of all
your Kingdoms against the Common Enemy of the reformed Religion.

And your P^titioners shall daily pray for Your long and happy Reign, etc.


