To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY. The humble PETITION of diverse of your
Majesty's loyal Subjects inhabiting the County of Bedford, amounting to the
number of 3800.
Most humbly
SHOWS unto Your MAJESTY, that many are the miseries your Subjects suffer,
and their fears are beyond their miseries. We are not able to relate what
unspeakable Calamities, a War, much more a Civill-warre, and that in the
Bowels of your Kingdom, will inevitably produce, your MAJESTY having been
lately a sad spectator of some unhappy effects thereof; besides continual
fears and perplexities, decay of Trade and Tillage, exhausting of Treasure,
impoverishing of your Subjects, and dispeopling of your Land, whereby it may
lie open to Foreign Invasions, and your Subjects disabled to defend your
Kingdom, Pestilence and Famine being the undoubted consequences of such a
War in which those of the nearest relations are likesy to imbrew their hands
in each others blood and the whole Kingdom (like a distracted man) lay violent
hands upon itself, your MAJESTY has been graciously pleased to declare your
sense of those heavy pressures under which your Subjects groaned before this
Parliament: And not to acknowledge with due thanks your MAJESTY'S Acts of grace
in the removal of some and promise of remedy for the rest, were the highest
point of ingratitude, especially considering your MAJESTY'S frequent and
solemn professions to that effect divulged to the world. Now amongst the
miserable Calamities which yet remain without remedy, the difference betwixt
your MAJESTY and your great Counsel (the Parliament) is the greatest as that
indeed which blocks up the way, that should lead to the remedy of all the rest,
pardon therefore your distressed Subjects, (most gracious Sovereign) if in
these heavy times they become your most humble (though importunate)
Petitioners. That your MAJESTY abandoning all Ielousies would be pleased to
lend a gracious Ear to such Propositions as your Parliament shall present,
tending to your MAJESTY'S Honor; the establishment of the true Protestant
Religion, the freedom and Privilege of Parliament, and the future good of the
Commonwealth, by this the wrath of God may be appeased, his Judgments averted,
the peace of Church and State procured, Gods true Religion maintained, your
MAJESTY'S Royal Throne established, and your Subjects may more cheerfully,
without distraction, yield unto you (as by their Allegiance they are bound) all
due obedience and Subjection. These are the earnest desires of your most humble
Suppliants, who daily pray for your MAJESTY'S safety, and the peace of all your
Kingdoms.

At the Court at Oxford, the 24. day of December. 1642. His MAJESTY has
graciously considered this Petition, and has commanded me to return this His
Answer.
THat He fully concurres with the Petitioners in their sense of the present
distractions and Calamities of this Kingdom, the prevention whereof His
Majesty has so much labored, that well foreseeing the Miseries of a
Civill-warre, Himself (notwithstanding so many provocations, well known to the
Petitioners, and to all the world) forbore to raise an Army for his defense,
till he was almost swallowod up by a desperate and unnatural Rebellion, what
he has done since, toward the removing those horrid preparations, and
dissolving the Clouds of Iealousies and discontent, by his several Messages,
to invite and desire a Treaty, and how those Messages have been entertained, is
well and generally known too. And if the care of others had been as great in
the observation and execution of the Laws, as his Majesty has been to make
such Laws* The Peace and security of the Kingdom had not been now disturbed,
neither would it have been in the Power of a few furious Persons to have raised
this misunderstanding between his great Council and his Majesty. And therefore
the Petitioners shall do well (not being deterred by the reception other
Petitions have found) to apply themselves to both Houses of Parliament, for
composing the present Distempers; and if they can prevail with them, to make
such Propositions to his Majesty, as he may with Honor and Justice consent to,
That is, such Propositions as may tend to the establishment of the true
Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, His Majesty's just rights, the
Liberty and Property of the Subject, and the just Privileges of Parliament, if
his Majesty consent not to them, he is contented to be thought a Promoter of
this present war. But if no such Propositions shall be made to him, (all his
desires that such should be made, having been rejected) He hopes the
Petitioners, and all the world will be easily disabused, and will not suffer
them, who have raised, and do foment this Odious Civill-warre, to lay the
Envy, and impute the miseries of this War upon His Majesty, whose heart
bleeds at the sufferings of his People.

EDW. NICHOLAS.

The true Copy of a Petition framed and composed by a Party in the City of
London, and intended by them to be presented to the honorable House of COMMONS.
Shows,
THat the present sense of our Miseries and Apprehensions of inevitable Ruin
both of Church and Commonwealth) makes us to become humble Suitors to this
Honorable Assembly (the likeliest means under God for our relief to consider
our distressed state, and to provide a speedy remedy for our present and future
evils.

Earnestly desiring you to weigh the Care and Judgment of your Predecessors,
who by a known Law settled and preserved our Protestant Religion, our Liberties
and Properties, with a right understanding between King and Subjects, which
produced peace and plenty in our streets. And to reflect with serious thoughts
upon our present Distempers, violating Religion by Papists, and Sectaries,
engaging our Nation in a Civil, bloody, and destructive War, in invading our
Laws, and Liberties, indangering all our Lives, and utterly disabling us to
relieve our distressed Brethren in Ireland.

We beseech you likewise to consider the effect of a Civil War, as the
Destruction of Christians, the unnatural effusion of blood, Father against
Son, Brothers by Brothers, Friends by friends slain; a Famine and sickness
the followers of a continued War, making way for a general confusion and
Invasion by a foreign Nation, while our Treasure is exhausted, our Trade
lost, and the Kingdom dispeopled.

These things weighed and enlarged by your Wisdoms, we doubt not will be as
strong motives in you to labor, as in us to desire a speedy Peace and happy
Accommodation.

Wherefore we humbly crave that not lending an ear to any Fomenters of the
present War under what pretense soever, nor remembering ought that may
increase Iealousies or continue Divisions, between his Majesty and his Houses
of Parliament; you will speedily render his Majesty (according to his Royal
Intimations) such Propositions for Accommodation as he may with honor and
safety to the whole Kingdom accept. For effecting whereof we shall be ready to
assist you with the best and utmost of our abilities; and whilst you endeavor
Peace, we shall send up our Prayers to Heaven for a blessing of Peace upon you,
and all that desire it.


