TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of the NOBILITY and
GENTRY of the County of DORSET.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE cannot but with all Humility and Thankfulness Admire and Adore the Infinite
Mercy, and Immediate Goodness of Almighty God, when we seriously consider, how
beyond all humane expectations and endeavors he has by his gracious
Interposition only of his own Power and Wisdom, thus miraculously and without
Effusion of blood Restored Your most Excellent Majesty in Honor and Safety to
Your Throne and People; our hearts hereby and the hearts of all Your most Loyal
and Obedient Subjects that were formerly filled with longings and prayers for
Your Majesty's safe return, are now revived and enflamed with most earnest
desires to serve and obey you, and therefore we most humbly and heartily tender
to the gracious acceptance of Your most Sacred Majesty the most affectionate,
loyal, and obedient hearts of all those whose names are subscribed, who will
according to the bounden duty with the greatest cheerfulness that may be, and
with the hazard of of their Lives and Fortunes be always ready to advance Your
Majesty's Service, and to maintain Your Crown and Dignity.

God Almighty grant Your Majesty long and prosperously to Reign over us, that
this Land, the Church and Kingdom may flourish and grow great again, as in
those happy days of that Glorious Martyr Your Royal Father, and Your
Grandfather of ever Blessed Memory: And that you may vanquish and overcome all
Your Enemies, these are, and ever shall be the daily Prayers and the faithful
Endeavors of

Your MAJESTY'S most humble And most dutiful Subjects John Strode Sheriff. Earl
of Lichfieled. Lord John Digby. Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper Baronet. Sir George
Morton Baronet. Sir Gerrard Napper Baronet. Sir John Strangwayes Knight. Sir
Francis Fulford Knight. Sir Ralph Banks Knight. Knights of the Shire for the
County. John Fitz-James Robert Coker
Esquires. Giles Strangwayes Thomas Freak Humphry Weld John Norton John
Tregonel the Elder Joh. Tregonel jun. John Tregonel of Auderston John
Strangwayes John Hunham George Pit Thomas Fowns Robert Culliford William Okedon
John Rives of Daveneth Robert Lawrence Nathaniel Napper Edmund Hull Delaine
Hussy John Rogers Edmund Uvedal John Turburvile Henry Butler Bullen Ryves
Robert Seymour Arthur Radford George Ryves sen. Thomas Baynard George Fulford
John Rives William Thomas William Frampton
Esquires. VVollie Miller Edward Hooper Matthew Davies George Brown Thomas
Philips Will. Constantine Thomas Fitz-James Henry Fitz-James John Trenchard
Edmund Hawles Francis Morton John Laurence Oliver Laurence Edmund Hull jun.
John Strangwayes Robert Napper Maximilian Mahun Francis Mahun Robert Mahum
William Mahum Thomas Hussy George Hussy John Freak James Gould Robert Freak
Henry Whitaker George Savage Robert Basket William Churchil VVynston Churchil
William Collyer John Jefferies William Filcoll John Henly VVil. Fantleroy se.
VVil. Fantleroy ju. John Abington John Oldis Henry Hastings Bruerton Ancetil
John Harding John Colzer Georg Groy John Pawlet William Gardner James Baker
Esquires. Richard Bishop Humphrey Bishop John Gould Anthony Ettrick John
Gallopp Samuel Pit Edward Pit John Mitechel Thomas Meggs Thomas Thorenacks
William Chaldicott Richard Swayne Rich. Swayne junior William Swayne Humphrey
Bishop John Samwaies John Pawlet George Rives junior Thomas Turbervile Ham.
Ward Doctor of Physic. Will. Okeden sen. Robert Heveing John Doleing Robert
Erenly William Fillwill
Gent. Amos Fulford John Laurence Breven Laurence Edward Laurence Hen. Carrant
senior Hen. Carrant junior George Okeden Joseph Hussy John Bennet William
Bowls George Barber James Gould George Turbervile Henry Constantine Giles
Lockett Edward Malcott Ferdinando Burly Th. Thorneacks jun. Andrew Buckner
Gent. John Ironside Henry Thovehult John Abarove Richard Frampton George
Frampton John M^niford Jacob Tailor Francis Chaldicott Jo. Butler of Hauly
Peverell Meggs Hubert Arnold Henry Arnold Laurence Harris Christopher Pit
William Wear Robert Lewen Robert Leven junior Giles Stagg William Russell
William Russell of Kingston Thomas Gillingham Andrew Ettrick Giles Lockett John
Strode George Strangwaies John Bishop John Child George Gould John Gould
Nicholas Gould George Style Robert Napper jun. Audely Gray Henry Gray Nich.
Strangwayes George Daubery John Miller John Loope Thomas Loope Will. Chamberlyn
Will. Fantleroy jun. Simon Eggerdon William Eggerdon John Coker Luke Coker
Gent. James Giar Thomas Arnold Richard Fulford William Bennet Edmund Lane
Edmund Chaffin Robert Hoddmott Robert Bonie Thomas Speed John Cutler Edward Guy
Thomas Frampton Thomas Basket Philip Roots Richard Jolliff Nicholas Fill Roger
Thague Philip Nicholas Henry Lewen Edmund Laving Edmund Dirdo William Young
Thomas Pit Henry Rives Robert Fry Francis Fry Henry Bower Christ. Willoughby
Edmund Frampton Thomas Loop George Arnold Thomas Arnold Arthur Langford John
Ernly John Kerly, John Child senior Laurence Harris Nathaniel Gould William
Wake Robert Pit Robert Palmer Samuel Palmer Edward VValcot



The above written Address was presented to his Sacred Majesty at Whitehall
the 12. day of June, 1660. by the Earl of Litchfield, Sir Anthony Ashly-Cooper,
Sir John Strangwaies Colonel John Fitz-James, Colonel Coker Knights of the said
Shire, Colonel Giles Strangwaies, with diverse other of the abovenamed persons
of Honor and quality; His Majesty expressing his most gracious acceptance
thereof.

LONDON, Printed for R. Clavel at the Stags-bead in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLX.


