To the Honorable, the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Commons of
England, in Parliament Assembled.
The humble Petition of diverse Inhabitants of the County of [(...)] in the
behalf of the poor of this Nation.
SHOWS,
THat as nothing is more acceptable to God then releeving the Oppressed, so
nothing is more Constantly practiced by wicked men then grinding the Faces of
the poor: And that the neglect of Justice, upon such Offenders has much
imboldned them, As to bring many to poverty, so to keep them in a Famishing
condition by withhoulding from them many Stipends and Legasies, And keeping
them from the due benefit of Free-Schooles, Hospitalies, Almes-Houses and
Lands; As also of many Fenns, Chases, Forests, Heaths, Mountains, Playnes,
Greens, Leezes, Leacons, Woods, Copses, Highways, and other Commons, which of
right and due belong unto them; As also by Trading with unlawful I Beams,
Weights, and Measures.

The extremity they are brought unto by such unjust dealings: Together with
the want of employment, engages your Petitioners (new some obstructions are
removed) to make known their desires to this Honorable House.

1. That some punishment may be inflicted upon all those, that know of any kind
of benefit belonging to the poor, and shall not forthwith discover the same,
to such persons as shall be appointed by this Honorable House.

2. That all that have any moneys, goods, or necessaries in their possession,
belonging to the poor, may be enforced to perfect their accounts.

3. That the poor may enjoy all Moneys, Goods, Victual, Firing, Clothes, and
other necessaries belonging to them.

4. That all Free-Schooles, Hospitalls, Almes-houses and lands, may be put to
the uses for which they were given and bequeathed.

5. That all Fenns, Chases, Forests, Heaths, Mountains, Plains, Greenes,
Leezes, Leacons VVoods Copses, Highways, and other Commons, which have been
wrongfully enclosed, may forthwith be laid open, and employed only to the use
of such as do (Indeed) stand in want of the same.

6. That those that have any way wronged the poor, may suffer according to
their demerrits.

7. That the weights and measures allowable in this Nation, may be alike in all
places of the same: And that no man presume to buy or sell, by any other weight
or measure, then what shall be sealed, and agreeable unto the standard of the
same; but shall rather alter the price of the commedity, then the weight or
measure by which it is bought and sold.

8. That some effectual course may be taken to set the poor on work; that
those that are able to work and will not, may neither be suffered to beg, nor
recive any benefit belonging to the poor; And that those who are not able to
work, or cannot in any wise by their labor maintain their charge, may be kept
from perishing by some more equal way, then the alms of that particular
parish wherein they dwell.

And we doubt not but the equity and great necessity of these our just desires,
will prevail with you for a speedy remedy hereof. In so doing, you may with
confidence expect a blessing from God, and will also engage the hearts of your
Petitioners, and other good men, the more firmly unto you, who in the beholding
of Justice,

Will pray for a blessing upon this honorable House. POSTSCRIPT.
It is desired that this Petition be read in the Parish Churches, and that all
the subscriptions gathered thereunto, be sent to the House of William Wallis a
Hosier, at the sign of the Gun at Algate, London, upon, or before the 14. day
of March, 1648. (At which place you may have coppies of this Petition)




