To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc.
The humble Petition of diverse of the Inhabitants of the North Riding of the
County of York; in the behalf of themselves, and the well-affected of the
Nation.
THat we do humbly acknowledge the mercy of God in preserving this Nation
against the many Attempts of the Enemies thereof: and we likewise hope, the
same God has in mercy called this Assembly together by his providence, for the
peace and good of this Commonwealth, to be an healing to it, to loose the bands
of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and let the oppressed go free, and
to break every yoke. In confidence of which, we do hereunto present our humble
Desires,

1. That, when it may stand with the safety of the Commonwealth, and the honest
people thereof, the Taxes may be abated, to such a proportion as may suit with
our safety. Nevertheless it is our desires, that the Nation may not be left
without visible Security; and that not in new-raised Forces, but of the old
Army, who under God have been our protection: and that toward the
extraordinary charge thereof, the Burden may lie upon such as the Nation has
most cause to suspect Danger from; namely, the Royal party, and such persons as
in time of danger and common disturbances did reserve themselves in Neutrality,
to join with the prevailing party; and whose judgments and practices do
incline them to admit of things which may reduce us to no better state, then
the beginnings of our Troubles found us in; and who will be apt to join with
any people tending that Way. And this we conceive to be just, both to indulge
those of the well-affected who in times of danger under God must be our
strength, and to lay a proportionable punishment upon that party, whom we have
most cause to suspect were universally approving or knowing of the late
Distempers to introduce Charles Stuart and his interest, in the late Plot and
attempts in these and other parts of the Nation.

2. That this Assembly, by the blessing of the Lord, would incline to Thoughts
and Councels of Uniting and Healing of those unhappie Distances and Differences
which have fallen out between those Good people of the Nation, who in time of
Hazard and Combustion were joined in heart and prayer, and did hazard all which
was dear unto them, for the good of the Nation.

3. That for this purpose, all prejudice be put in Oblivion; and that, as one
man, you would set your selves to pursue those just Ends which have formerly
been in profession, and publicly declared for, both by Parliament and Army.

4. That without respect of Persons or Interest, the execution of Justice and
Right may be reduced to that end for which it was ordained; namely, to do
equal, cheap, and speedy right; and that evil administration of Justice, in
Courts of Justice, in what persons soever, may be duly and severely punished:
and that such of them as shall be found to overruled, decline, or evade the
Laws, may be brought to condign punishment.

5. That the Judges of all Courts may, according to ancient and late Laws and
Resolutions in Parliament, take no Reward, Fee, or Salary, but what Salary is
appointed by the State; and that such as have practiced otherwise may be made
exemplary.

6. That it may not be in the power of the Upper Bench, or of any other Court
in Westminster, by Certiorari or otherwise, to stop proceedings in any
inferior Courts, but where corruption or injustice is proved by two Witnesses
upon Oath, and in public Court, or by Writ of Error after Judgment.

7. That all persons employed in the Magistracy, may be persons disowning the
Malignant party, just, ruling in the fear of the Lord, and active in the
discountenancing of Looseness and loose persons, and protecting of all
conscientious and sober people.

8. That a competent Guard may be appointed for the Northern coasts, for the
better encouragement of Trade.

9. That the Tax of Excise may be so considered of, as to abate it, if it may
stand with the necessity of the Nation: however, that the way of levying it may
be less arbitrary in the Officers, who get great profit to themselves, and
bring little to the State.

10. That a standing Court or Courts may be erected in these Northern parts,
for the administration of Law and Justice, and for the dispatch and ease of the
Country.

11. That a Register may be settled in this County, for the probate of Wills,
and granting Administrations, and likewise for the Entering of all Contracts,
Evidences, Purchases, and Conveyances; for the preventing of Frauds, and to
avoid the multitude of Controversies and Suits.

12. That the Treasure of the Nation may be managed with Frugality, that it may
be applied only to the necessary Occasions of the Commonwealth, and not
otherwise: and that some orderly way may be set down, that all persons
entrusted with Treasure, may give frequent and due accounts, and such accounts
may be made known to Parliaments.

13. That care may be taken to keep this Assembly purged from all persons who
have any way aided, abetted, or assisted the late King against the late
Parliament, or Charles Stuart his or their designs; and from such persons, who
in their deportments have always expressed themselves indulgencers and
countenancers of such practices, and discountenancers of the wellaffected; and
from all persons loose and profane in conversation: to the end, by the blessing
of the Lord, your Assembly may consist of such (and no other) as are of known
integrity, fearing God, and of good conversation; that the Lord may delight in
you, as instruments in his hand for our good.

14. That all persons who shall hereafter be admitted to any Office Civil or
Military, may have the like qualifications.

All which, we in all humility offer to this Assembly, as our Tender; and
desire it may be taken into effectual consideration.

And we, as in duty bound, shall pray, etc.

Read the 23 of December: Presented by the Right Honorable George Lord Ewre.
And the House ordered his Lordship to return his Countrymen (the Petitioners)
the hearty Thanks of the House for their good affections expressed in that
Petition.

LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel. 1656.


