TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
The Humble address of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, of the six Counties
of South Wales, and County of Monmouth. PRESENTED TO, AND MOST GRACIOUSLY
RECEIVED BY, HIS MAJESTY, The 16. of June 1660.
WE your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, do, in all humility and thankfulness
to the Divine Providence, acknowledge the goodness of God, as well in the many
miraculous deliverances of your Sacred Majesty, from the practices of men
incomparably wicked; as in restoring us, at length, to the fruition of our
hopes, even the breath of our nostrils, as Your Sacred Majesty, once our
Prince, and now our Dea^ and Dread Sovereign Lord and King, Whom God long
preserve!

In the next place, We may not, without the highest ingratitude, forget to
acknowledge the great Immunities and gracious Favors conferred upon our Nation
by your Royal Grandfather, and the Glorious Saint and Martyr, Your Father, of
ever blessed memory; our grateful-sense whereof, we shall testify by the
effusion and expense of our dearest Blood and Fortunes, when your Majesty's
Interest and Service shall require it. And, as we have had the honor to trace
your Majesty's footsteps in your afflictions (according to our proportions);
So, to testify our obedience to your Majesty's Commands, and our submission
to the Divine Will, we resolve and declare, that we will imitate (what you have
most livelily copied out from your Great Master's Original,) your incomparable
Charity; and unite our selves, under your Majesty's Protection and Government,
with those who differed most from us; so far as they shall study to preserve
the spirit of Obedience in the bond of Peace. Yet because we cannot but with
horror and detestation, look back upon the fatal Actors in that bloody Tragedy
of your Father's death, and the lamentable Devastations and Sacriledges
perpetrated upon the, once most glorious and Ancient, British Church; So we
cannot but be highly satisfied, when we observe, that as your Majesty has
referred the vindication of the former, to the wisdom of your Parliament; so we
hope for a speedy restitution of the latter to her Primitive Splendour, as to
Doctrine and Government, according to the known Laws of England.

We shall now conclude with a double Petition, First to God, That he would be
pleased to receive your Sacred Majesty into his especial care and protection:
Next, to your Majesty; That you would accept of this our humble Address;
Pardon the deficiences of it, and receive us into you Majesty's Protection,
and gracious Favor, as we have and shall espouse your Interest above all other
Concernments.

Subscribed by The Lord Marquess of Hertford. The Lord Marquess of Worcester.
The Earl of Pembrooke. The Earl of Monmouth. The Earl of Carbery. The Lord
Abergaveny. The Lord Herbert of Cherbery. The Lord Herbert of Ragland. The Lord
Herbert of Cardisse. The Lord Vaughan. Mr. Justice Jenkins. Herbert Price. Sr.
John Aubrey. Sr. George Probart. Sr. Richard Basset. Sr. Richard Price. Sr.
Edward Rice. Miles Button. William Lewis. Thomas Lewis. John Vaughan. William
Herbert. Walter Vaughan. Thomas Matthews. Thomas Lewis. Jonathan L Loid.
William Morgan. William Basset. Edmond Lewis. Nicholas Kemys. Edward Kemys. Ed.
Kemys. Rowland Gwin. Richard Lewis. George Gwinn. John Jefferys. Henry
Williams. Thomas Lewis. Evan Davis. Essex Meirick. Isaac L Loyd. Robert
Griffes. John Cannon. Dr. William Morgan, Physician to his Majesty. Henry
Proger Herkert. Miles Matthews Pensioner. Charles Proger Herbert. Hugh L Loyd.
D. D. Dr. William Basset. William Morgan. Col. Rice Powell. Col. James Progers
Herbert. Leiut. Col. Thomas Stradling. Leiut. Col. Milborne Williams. Major
Stedman. Major Matthews. Major Lewis Thomas. Capt. Thomas Vaughan. Capt.
William Button. Edward Thomas. Lewis Thomas. Richard Basset. Thomas Basset.
Herbert Evans. Edward Vaughan. John Carne. Christopher Perkins. Charles Carne.
Howell Carne. Phillip Mansell. John Herbert. Thomas Williams. Lewis Morgan.
James Penry. David Evans. David Jenkins, of the Chancery. Robert Williams.

With many more Gentlemen that this Paper cannot contain.

