To the Parliament of The Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Jreland.
The humble Peticion of several well affected persons purchasers of the estate
of William Lord Craven for and on the behalf of themselves and others the
Purchasers of the estate of the said Lord Craven.
Shows.
THat your Peticioners being invited and encouraged by an Act of Parliament
Dated 4th of August 1652. Whereby amongst other things the said estate is
declared and adjudged to be justly forfited to the Commonwealth for Treason
and appointed to be sold for the use of the Navy, and looking upon an Act of
Parliament as the highest assurance and greatest security, and out of a Deep
sense of the utgent necesity of the then Parliament for considerable Sums of
money to defray the vast charge of the Navy, of this Commonwealth engaged in
the war with the Duch, upon the prosperous conduct and good success whereof
depended the welfare if not the very being of this Commmn-Wealth; did willingly
advance upon the security of the said Act, some their whole estates others very
considerable Sums of money for the use of the said Navy, That your Peticioners
have since purchased most part of the estate of the said Lord Craven, paid or
secured their purchase money amonting to Two hundred and fifty thousand pounds
or thereabouts and the premises so Purchased are legaly vested and executed in
your peticioners according to their rspeective contracts.

That nevertheles your peticioners understand that the said Lord Craven, has
peticioned this high and Honerable Court that so much of the said Act as
relates to him, and his estate may be repeald and Consequently your Peticioners
outed of their lawful estats Purchased as aforesaid, which besides the ruin of
your Peticioners, and friends, will graifie your enemies and open a Door to all
delinquents, to make appeals to this* Or succeeding Parliaments Upon pretense,
of jnivry don them in sale of their Estates yea one president of this nature.
Will shake the Titles of all men who have purchased any Dilinquents estates,
Acts of Parliament will be rendered contemptible and no better then broken Reeds
to be relied upon, the Faith of Parliaments Blemished and no assurance left in
publque transactions either with Foreign Nations Or at home to be confided in
with safely.

Therefore your Peticioners humbly implore your honors to be very tender of
your Petitioners Jnterest and just Estates purchased as aforesaid, and be
pleased rather to confirm by a further act of Parliment. Their said Purchases
as the last Parliament, did in the case of the Purchase of the Estate of Sr.
John Stowell, Knight then upon any Pretense to weaken and jnvalidate the same.

And your Peticinors shall ever pray etc.

