To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
A Petition presented to the Kings Majesty at York, the first of April, by the
Inhabitants of the County of Nottingham, and the County of the Town of
Nottingham, subscribed by 4540 hands of Knights, Esquiers, Gentlemen,
Freeholders, and the Mayor, Aldermen, and other Inhabitants of the Town of
Nottingham.
We your loyal and peaceful Subjects, Inhabitants of the County of
Nottingham, and of the Town of Nottingham, do humbly crave leave to show, and
pray, as follows;
THat whereas after many straight Yoakes, and heavy burdens in the late long
intermission, or interruptions of Parliamentary Justice, by the predominance of
evil Counsels imposed on us, and with much patience borne by us (though to
the extreme pressure of our persons, consciences, and estates) we were in the
midst of many troubles, dangers, and extremities, to which this Kingdom was
thereby reduced; at last by Your Majesty's grace in calling this Parliament,
relieved, and eased, and by so happy a constitution of a Parliament, as this in
many blessed effects has appeared, together with the late mutual
correspodence of both Houses, we were revived with fresh and pregnant hopes,
that all our former evils, with the cause of them, should by this Parliament
(with Your Majesty's gracious Assent) be henceforth removed, and greater good
wrought and established to us, than we or our forefathers have seen: Yet now
by Your Majesty's late withdrawing both Your Person and former grace to such a
distance from Your Parliament, we feel our hopes fainting, and almost extinct;
new fears raised of the old, and greater evils toward us; and foresee all
ordinary remedy like to be removed, or the timely application thereof to
extreme danger, retarded: Especially, by the advantage which the malignant
persons within us, and our enemies abroad (both in Ireland, and elsewhere) may
make of such your distance from your Parliament, and distrust of it, to the
promovall and accomplishment of their mischievous designs (by your Parliament
faithfully represented) and the overwhelming of this Kingdom in the sad effects
of intestine discord.

We your poor Subjects therefore, from deep and bleeding sense of miseries of
all sorts, thus growing on your Self, on Yours, on us, on all, do humbly
presume to beg, That your Majesty (weighing the premises in your Princely
Thoughts) would be pleased to vindicate your Kingdoms from approaching ruin,
your Self to security, and restore us to our now-languishing hopes.

1. By rejection of evil counsels and counselors, as have fomented Jealousies
or differences between your Majesty and Parliament, and therein, or other
ways, obscure your Native luster from your people, making you appear less
amiable then (we believe) you are: and next, without which, we can expect no
good.

2. By a timely return to some place near your Parliament, where they may have
such ready recourse as the exigencies of the times require, and your Royal
Ancestors have ever vouchsafed their Parliaments; and also to your good opinion
of them, and trust in them, as the best supporters of your Wealth, Honor, and
Sovereignty.

And if your Majesty shall be pleased to renew and continue this your wonted
gracious regard to, and concurrence, with the best advice of your Parliament,
for manage and settlement of your Kingdoms Affairs (which their fidelity may
deserve, and your frequent promises have made your people expect) the effects
will undoubtedly prove the glory of God, your Majesty's truest Honor, the
terror of your enemies, safety of your Kingdoms, and joy of your good
Subjects, especially of us, who shall so clearly, according to our
Protestation, with our Lives and Fortunes maintain and defend your Majesty's
Royal Person, Honor, and Crown, With the Power and Privileges of Parliament,
The Rights and Liberties of your Subjects, And the Power and Purity of
Protestant Religion.

And we shall ever pray, etc.
April 13. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.


