TO THE MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY OF THE KING, And to the most Honorable the
Lords and Peers of this Realm. AS ALSO, To the Honorable the Lords and
others, Knights Citizens, Barons and Burgesses in the Commons House of
Parliament, now assembled The most humble Petition of the Churches of God in
England, and of every Lively member of the same, whereof the Lord Christ Jesus
is the Head.
SHOWS,
THat J am, is the God of unity and Order, But his enemy (Satan) is the author
of division and disorder; as appears by the first Adams fall, and the second
Adams reparation when to prevent the malice of Abaddon, God united his Diety to
humanity in the person of his dear Son, and him sent to seek and save, all
poor lost sinners believers: That in the hipostaticall Union, there are three
distinct Offices, Prophet Priest, and King, of all which (in his humanity) the
Lord Jesus had possession, yet alleged that his kingdom (as then,) was not of
this world, remaining now and ever since at the right hand of his most holy
Father in Glory until his enemies shall be made his footstool. That in 1642.
years from the Incarnation, the Almighty has already vindicated the
Prophetique and Priests Offices to his Son, against all Turks, Jews, Papists,
infidels: The Regal Office only remains undetermined: And the axe is now
laid to the root, he that will not take the Lord Jesus Christ for his King
must be brought out and slain.

That your Most Excellent Majesty (the fountain of piety and Justice, and the
life of the Law unto us your most humble Petitioners and obedient Subjects)
have set to your seal and in acknowledgement of Gods truth, have subscribed,
Christo auspice Regno. Posui Deum adiutorem meum, and the like.

That your Lordships and Honors have likewise come in to the same Government,
contending against those Laws and Customs, opposite to the Law established by
the Lord Jesus, and which Elutherius prescribed to Lucius first Christian King
of this Nation, and to both the Doctrine and Discipline settled by the Apostles,
when at Antioch the Disciples were first called Christians.

That the recovery of that name Christian will expel the By names, Papists,
Protestants, Lutherans, Brownists, Sectaries, Roundheads, Prickeare, and what
not disgracefully put upon the Chrtstian Subjects of this Kingdom. Quiet the
present distractions and distempers, clear all fears and Iealousies, settle
the true Religion, and fundamental Laws of England, Your Majesty's
Prerogative, the Parliaments privilidge, and the Subjects Propriety and peace,
will so be all at one, to your general contentment, and the saving of All in
All.

May it therefore please Your most Excellent Majesty, and Your Parliament to
agree speedily upon that one thing Necessary, and prevent the malicious
intendments of the Common adversary.

For which your Petitioners are daily suppliants at the Almighties throne, and
your Laborious servants.

