TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
THE HVMBLE GRATVLATION; AND Petition of the Trained Bands, and Freeholders,
and others the Gentry, and Communalty of the County Palatine of Chester, whose
Names are underwritten. Delivered upon Hoole-Heath, by the Trained Bands, a
Coppie of the same being hung upon the top of every Colors; Subscribed by the
several Companies, and so Presented to the KING.
Your Petitioners,
WIth inexpressable joy of heart do acknowledge and render all humble thanks,
for this great pledge of your Majesty's favor, and affection toward this
Country, that in this time of so much trouble and distraction, you have
revived their dejected spirits with the real comfort of your Royal presence,
and entrusted Your sacred Person amongst them. And Your Majesty's most loyal
and affectionate Subjects, knowing there is no Seed so pure amongst which
spring not up some Tares, they humbly pray that by Your Princely Wisdom and
Providence, they may be secured from the just jealousies of such malignant
Persons amongst them, who envying the peace of the Country, they have too much
cause to fear, wait but for an opportunity to make spoil of them, whiles
they with such fidelity and diligence endeavor your defense, as becomes their
duties. And though they cannot but with great regreet and sorrow of heart
apprehend, that notwithstanding all those unexampled acts of justice, mercy,
and grace, wherewith you have for ever obliged this Nation and People, in the
greatest bonds of gratitude, ever put by Prince upon his Subjects, that there
should still remain any cause, or shadow of fear and jealousies amongst any
of Your Subjects, pretending loyalty or gratitude, much more that there should
be actual levying of Arms, and waging of war within this Nation, to the
barbarous assascination and ruin of one another.

Yet since diverse of our fellow Subjects are destroyed, slain, and plundered,
by those forces, under pretense of public good, and that Your Majesty has
thought fit to disavow Your assent to such leavyes, to prohibit them by Your
Proclamations, and to declare them raised against Your Sacred Person, and to
take away Your Life, we being no Judges of the grounds of such jealousies as
should justly occasion those Arms. And declaring to all the world that we see
no cause for them, do humbly pray, that whiles Your Majesty is amongst us, you
will be pleased to call before you the Collectors of such moneys as have
been levied upon this County, under pretense of releife of Ireland, (whose
miseries we see daily increase) to give account in whose hands the same
remains, or to whom transmitted, that by your piety and providence it may be
so disposed, that the right end may not be abused, nor the Subjects own
moneys, inverted against them to their own ruin, whiles they are employed in
Your defense, who as they are bound by their oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance,
and the late Protestation, are ready with their lives, fortunes, and utmost
power, to assist and defend Your Sacred Majesty, against all conspiracies,
power, and attempt whatsoever, made or to be made against Your Royal Person,
Crown, and Dignity, or any of Your Princely issue, whose long, peaceable, and
prosperous reign, over all your three Kingdoms, in your full rights, power
and glory, your Petitioners unanimously pray God to continue.

London, Printed for M. T. 1642.


