TO THE LAW, AND TO The TESTIMONY: OR, A Proposal of certain Cases of
Conscience by way of quaere; chiefly touching the public worship of the New
Testament; and other things either necessary or profitable for Christianity;
presented to those Churches and Societies of Christians, which profess the
Scripture of the Old and New Testament for the only Rule of Faith and Manners.

Wherein the true and genuine way to reconcile Christians is laid open

Translated out of Latin into English by a lover of Truth and Peace.

LONDON, Printed for George Whittington at the Blew Anchor in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange, 1648.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader; That the Authors name, and other circumstances of the Work,
are not here expressed, know it was done for thy sake, to prevent sinister
prejudice, which is wont commonly to arise from such undertakings, especially
when men write pro and con: Otherwise there is no reason why they should not be
published to all men. In the mean time, if thou know any thing belonging to
this design, conceal it; till the Author, when he shall judge it expedient,
manifest himself. Farewell, Read, Judge, Answer: but on this condition, that
thou remember it spoken to thy self and others, John 7.24. Judge not according
to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

A PREFACE.
WHosoever shall diligently enquire into the stirs and tumults that are every
where to be seen amongst Christians, will find them chiefly to arise from
hence, that the Leaders of almost every Party claim to themselves a divine
authority, as if they were true Preachers, and men of God. Upon which ground
they are so busy in stirring up, not only private Christians, but also
Magistrates to engage themselves in the quarrel of the Church (that is, of the
Priests,) esteeming the determinations of the Church, as the Oracles of God.
Constantine the Great, though otherwise a sage and excellent Prince, was yet
brought into this fools paradise, and so exceedingly doated on the Priests, as
that he stuck not to say, that the voice of three hundred Bishops met together,
was no other then the voice of God himself, and accordingly employed his power
in persecuting those whom the Bishops had voted Heretics. In whose steps
Christian Princes have ever since for the most part trodden, to the great
disturbance of their Subjects, and many times to the hazard of their own
Crowns. Wherefore it much conduces to the Peace and Welfare of Christian
States, that the vanity of the claim which the Priests lay to divine
Authority, should be detected and made known to the world, that Christians may
cease for shame to prosecute any longer their interests, perceiving their
office to be but an ordinance of man. For if they, as they pretend, had
received a Commission from God, they would not only know when they received it,
and what the particulars of it are, but would also be able to make it appear
to others. For it would be unsuitable to the wisdom of God, to send
messengers on other terms, since he would thereby expose not only them, but
his own Majesty to scorn and contempt. For who would not laugh at such a
Prince, as should send Ambassadors to treat of some weighty affairs in his
Name, without a Commission or Letters of Credence to give assurance of their
Embassy? But the Preachers of our times can neither tell us when the Word of
God came to them, as being instituted of man without any divine Revelation, nor
do they know what the particulars of their message are, as learning all their
skill out of books like other men, and therefore being uncertain of the truth
of the Gospel, they preach contrary to one another, yea the same person
oftentimes preaches contrary to himself, crying up that one while for truth,
which another while he cries down again for error; nor can they make their
calling apparent to others, in that their speech and preaching stands only in
the plausible words of man's wisdom, but not in the demonstration of the Spirit
and of power, and yet they presently take on, if we receive them not as
speaking in the Name of God; not waighing, that whosoever speaks in the Name
of God, intituleth God to whatsoever he publishes, and consequently if his
doctrine be false (as that of our Preachers must needs be in regard of the
contrarieties found therein) intituleth God himself to false doctrine, which
is a grievous impiety. Upon these grounds therefore let us compare the
Preachers of our times with Christ and his Apostles, which heretofore spoke in
the Name of God, and we shall the better perceive how unlike our Preachers are
to them, and therefore cannot be their successors, as they pretend, nor true
Messengers of God, but rather false Prophets, against whom God himself
denounces a woe, for running, when he has not sent them, and prophesying,
when he has not spoken to them. For Christ and his Apostles were certain of
the doctrine that they preached, and therefore constantly taught in one and the
same strain; but our Preachers are altogether uncertain of theirs, and
thereupon bewray so much sicklenesse in their teaching. They required not that
men should believe them as coming from God, unless they did the works of God;
but our Preachers, though destitute of divine power, do yet fall foul upon
all those who do but make a question of their calling. They, though they were
both themselves infallibly assured of their doctrine, and could by miracles
make their hearers also infallibly assured of it, yet never desired that
Refractories should be compelled to embrace it; though thereby they should have
been compelled to nothing but the truth; but our Preachers, though they be at a
loss, as to the exact and entire truth of the Gospel, and not able to beget a
certainty in their hearers, yet never cease to importune the assistance of the
Magistrate to force the people to submit to their doctrine, though most
commonly it be contrary both to Scripture, and to common sense. But let us
leave prosecuting these false teachers in the Name of God any further, lest we
too much forestall the reasons that are held forth in this ensuing excellent
discourse, which does so canvase the pretended divine authority that the
Preachers of our times challenge to themselves, and so drive them from post to
pillar, that they know not where to set their foot; so that if they would but
seriously weigh what is here offered to their view, they would soon pull down
their crests, and cease to exalt themselves above their brethren, acknowledging
their own institution to be (as it is indeed,) merely humane, and that their
doctrine ought not to be any further received, then the hearers perceive it to
be agreeable to Scripture and reason. Which if they did, the Christian world
would soon be at peace, and truth be daily more and more discovered, since God
is not to be found either in the whirlewinde of passion, or in the earthquake
of persecution, but in the still voice of love and mutual forbearance. And I
make no doubt, if this course were once taken, but God would meet us going on
in his way, and confirm his truth by some clear and infallible demonstration,
that so all contentions about Religion might at length receive a quiet and
happy Catastrophe.

TO THE LAW AND TO The TESTIMONY.
Article 1.
IN the first place we are to hold, that God has built the Christian Church on
no other foundation but Jesus Christ, who by the price of his blood has
purchased her to himself for a peculiar possession, as being her Lord, Husband,
and Lawgiver: and therefore that all right and authority of lawful and due
Ecclesiastic Administration ought to be derived from Him alone; and
consequently that the means and manner of that Administration neither can nor
ought to be any other, then such as argue Christ to be their Author: so that if
in the right, authority, means, or manner of the Administration, both
heretofore, and at this day used, there occur any thing, of which it is
certain that it was never instituted, commanded, or well-pleasingly permitted
by Christ, or at least whereof it may justly be doubted, that very thing
neither, can nor ought to be made use of to the lawful and due administration
of the Church.

2.
Wherefore since the promise of Christ, whereby he has engaged himself to the
Church, behaving her self faithfully in the Covenant of God, that he will be
present with her to the end of the world, graciously and effectually to
confer and continue the things aforesaid, consists herein, that his Spirit
and Word never depart from that Church: It is to be considered by all and
singular Assemblies of Christians, who acknowledge the Scripture of the Old and
New Testament for the only Rule of faith and manners, especially such as are
under persecution, whether that promised Spirit and Word of Christ be present
with their Churches, lest by the absence of both they appear to have broken the
Covenant, and to be without due and lawful Ecclesiastic Administration, and
consequently so far forth without Christ.

3.
As Christ is sole and singular, in that he admits no other person or
persons to share with himself in the special work for which he was given to
the Church by the Father: so is the Word of Christ sole and single, because it
admits no other word or words to share with it self in the aforesaid
special work, for which it was given to the Church by God.

4.
It is agreed upon amongst all Assemblies, that acknowledge none but the
Scripture of the Old and New Testament for the only Rule of faith and manners,
that that promised Word of Christ was therefore, amongst other things
pertaining to that work, given to the Church by God, that it might be a wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true outward means, whereby in an
ordinary way she might attain to salvation.

5.
For if that Word were not such a means, the belief of all things built upon
it must needs stagger; neither could any man thence challenge to himself that
undoubted certainty of faith; and consequently no true certainty of faith, but
only opinion should possess the minds of all Christians; which God forbid.

6.
Since therefore the ordinary outward means given to the Church by God, for the
attainment of faith and salvation, is that sole and single promised Word of
Christ, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, whose native
character it is, to be free from all, even the least error, and to be mere
truth: It is to be considered, whether God and Christ to this end would have
the chief worship of the New Testament (to wit, the due and lawful preaching
of the Gospel, which is to be performed in the Name of God, by Ministers
specially and duly called thereunto, as the chief part of Ecclesiastic
Administration) begun and set on foot by that promised Word only, or not.

7.
Certainly if you consider the first preaching of the Gospel, performed by
John the Baptist, by our Lord himself, and his Apostles, you cannot deny, that
God would have it at the first begun with that promised Word only, being, as it
has been said, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true.

8.
Wherefore the first lawful preaching of the Gospel was performed by word of
mouth, and that such as was sincere, sound, unblamable, abiding for ever and of
which it might be truly and undoubtedly said, Thy Word is Truth.

9.
In like manner you cannot deny, that the aforesaid Beginners and Preachers of
the Gospel, being specially and duly called thereunto, preached that Word in
the name of God, or in the stead, and by the authority of God; so that being
Ambassadors for God, they sustained his person, and consequently, to hear them,
was as much as to hear God himself speaking by them; so that their word was
wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, and both they that
preached it, and they that received them for Ministers preaching in the name of
God, were infallibly assured of the truth of that word, as of the very Word of
God.

10.
Now as there is but one Gospel, a Gal. 1. ver. 6, 7. so there is but one true
and genuine word of the Gospel, b ver. 8, 9. which is, and is called the truth,
c Ioh. 17. v. 14.17. the word of truth, d Ephesians. 1. ver. 13. the sincere
rational milk, e 1 Pet. 2. v. 2. not the word of men, but as it is indeed the
word of God, f 1 These. 2. v. 13. which was not yea and nay, but yea, g 2 Cor.
1. v. 18, 19, 20. with chap. 7.14 also the word of God that abides for ever, i
1 Pet. 1. v. 25. that is, the promised word of Christ, wholly, intrinsically
undoubtedly, and merely true: to declare which, they that were sent as
Ambassadors for Christ, had an express Commission, and were furnished with
sufficient gifts for the due performance of their Embassy, as cannot be
denied, vid. l 2 Cor. 5. v. 20. 1 These. 2. v. 13. m Ephesians. 4. v. 11. n 1 Cor. 2.
v. 12, 13, 16. Acts 5.20. Romans 6.17. and chap. 16. v. 17. 1 Cor. 4. v. 17. 2
Ioh. v. 9, 10. Jude v. 3. o 2 Cor. 3. v. 5, 6. and chap. 4. v. 1, 2. and chap.
6. v. 4, 7. and chap. 7. v. 14.

Gal. 1. v. 6. I marvel, that ye are so soon removed from him that called you
into the grace of Christ, unto another gospel:

v. 7. Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would
pervert the Gospel of Christ.

v. 8. But though we, or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you,
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

v. 9. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other
gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be accursed.

Ioh. 17. v. 14. I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them,
because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

v. 17. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth.

Ephesians. 1. v. 13. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of truth,
the gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise.

1 Pet. 2. v. 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby.

1 These. 2. v. 13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because
when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received is not as
the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually
works also in you that believe.

2 Cor. 1. v. 18. But as God is true, our word toward you, was not yea and nay.

v. 19. For the Son of God Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us,
even by me, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was
yea.

v. 20. For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him amen, unto the
glory of God by us.

chap. 7. v. 14. For if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I am not
ashamed; but as we spoke all things to you in truth, even so our boasting which
I made before Titus is found a truth.

1 Pet. 1. v. 25. But the word of the Lord endures for ever. And this is the
word which by the gospel is preached unto you.

2 Cor. 5. v. 20. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's steed, be ye reconciled to God.

1 These. 2. v. 13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because
when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as
the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually
works also in you that believe.

Ephesians. 4. v. 11. And he gave some, Apostles: and some, Prophets: and some,
Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers.

1 Cor. 2. v. 12. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the
Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to
us of God.

v. 13. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the holy Ghost teaches; comparing spiritual things with
spiritual.

v. 16. For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But
we have the mind of Christ.

Acts 5. v. 20. Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people, all the words
of this life.

Romans 6. v. 17. But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye
have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you.

chap. 16. v. 17. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions
and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

1 Cor. 4. v. 17. For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my
beloved son, and faithful in the Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance
of my ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every Church.

2 Ioh. v. 9. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ,
has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father
and the Son.

v. 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed.

Jude v. 3. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation: it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye
should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints.

2 Cor. 3. v. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing
as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God.

v. 6. Who also has made us able ministers of the new Testament, not of the
letter, but of the spirit: for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life.

chap. 4. v. 1. Therefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have received
mercy we faint not.

v. 2. But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking. in
craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

chap. 6. v. 4. But in all things approving our selves as the ministers of God,
in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses.

v. 7. By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of
righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left.

chap. 7. v. 14. For if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I am not
ashamed; but as we spoke all things to you in truth, even so our boasting which
I made before Titus is found a truth.

11.
Now for as much as the Ministers of particular Churches were in the Apostles
times given by Christ, a Ephesians. 4.11. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 14.37. to preach
the true and genuine Word of the Gospel, b Tit. 1.5.6, 7, 9. and cap. 2.7, 8.
2 Timothy 2. v. 2. Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 14, 15. by way of Embassage for Christ, c 2
Cor. 1.19. and chap. 5.20. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7. and 1 Cor. 4. v. 1, 2. 1 These. 1.1.
and chap. 2. v. 13. d 2 Timothy 4. v. 2. and cha. 2. v. 2. Tit. 1. v. 9. It is
evident that they also had an express Commission, e 1 Cor. 1. v. 1. with chap.
2. v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. also 2 Timothy 1.13, 14. and chap. 2. v. 2. Tit. 1.9,
10, 11. Acts 15.24. Romans 6.17. and chap. 16. v. 17. 2 Ioh. v. 9, 10. and were
furnished with gifts sufficient for the discharge thereof, f 2 Cor. 1.1.19. with
chap. 3. v. 5, 6. Acts 14.22, 23. and chap. 20. v. 17, 18, 20, 21. etc. 2 Timothy
2.2. Tit. 1.9, 10, 11. and consequently were able to perform it in a due
manner, g Acts 20.28, 31, 32. 2 Timothy 2.2. and did accordingly perform it, (as
it shall by and by be related) h 2 Cor. 1.19. with chap. 4. v. 1, 2. and 1 Cor.
16.10. Acts 15.35. Apoc. 2.8, 9, 10, 12, 13.18, 19. and chap. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Ephe. 4. v. 11. And he gave some, Apostles: and some prophets: and some,
evangelists: and some pastors and teachers.

Tit. 1. v. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had
appointed thee.

v. 6. If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children
not accused of riot or unruly.

v. 7. For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God: not self-willed,
not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre.

1 Cor. 14. v. 37. If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual,
let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you, are the
commandments of the Lord.

Tit. 1. v. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had
appointed thee.

v. 6. If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children
not accused of riot or unruly.

v. 7. For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God: not self willed,
not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre.

chap. 2. v. 7. In all things showing thy self a pattern of good works: in
doctrine showing uncorruptnesse, gravity, sincerity,

v. 8. Sound speech that cannot be condemned, that he that is of the contrary
part, may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.

2. Tim. 2. v. 2. And the things that thou have heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also.

Ephesians. 4. v. 12. For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:

v. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ:

v. 14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive:

v. 15. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things,
which is the head, even Christ.

2 Cor. 1. v. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and
Timothy our brother, unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, with all the
saints which are in all Achaia.

v. 19. For the Son of God Jesus Christ, who was preached among you: by us,
even by me, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was
yea.

Chap. 5. v. 20. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

Tit. 1. v. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had
appointed thee.

v. 6. If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children
not accused of riot or unruly.

v. 7. For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God: not self willed,
not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, nor given to filthy lucre.

1 Cor. 4. v. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of God.

v. 2. Moreover it is re^quired in Stewards, that a man be found faithful.

1 These. 1. v. 1. Paul, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, unto the Church of the
Thessalonians, which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ: grace
be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

chap. 2. v. 13. For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when
ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the
word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually works
also in you that believe.

2 Timothy 4. v. 2. Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering, and doctrine.

chap. 2. v. 2. And the things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses
the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.

Tit. 1. v. 9. Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he
may be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.

1 Cor. 1. v. 1. Paul called to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ, through the will
of God, and Sosthenes our brother.

chap. 2. v. 12. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the
Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to
us of God.

v. 13. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches; comparing spiritual things with
spiritual.

v. 14. But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

v. 15. But he that is spiritual, judges all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man.

v. 16. For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But
we have the mind of Christ.

2 Timothy 1. v. 13. Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of
me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

v. 14. That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep by the Holy Ghost
which dwells in us.

chap. 2. v. 2. And the things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses,
the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.

Tit. 1. v. 9. Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he
may be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.

v. 10. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, especially
they of the circumcision:

v. 11. Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake.

Acts 15. v. 24. Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from
us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye must be
circumcised, and keep the law, to whom we gave no such commandment.

Romans 6. v. 17. But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye
have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you.

chap. 16. v. 17. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions
and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

2 John v. 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both
the Father and the Son.

v. 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not into your houses neither bid him God speed.

2 Cor. 1. v. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and
Timothy our brother, unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, with all the
saints which are in all Achaia.

v. 19. For the Son of God Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us,
even by me, and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was
yea.

chap. 3. v. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as
of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God.

v. 6. Who also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the
letter, but of the Spirit: for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
Acts 14. v. 22. Confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to
continue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the
Kingdom of God.

v. 23. And when they had ordained them elders in every Church, and had prayed
with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed.

chap. 20. v. 17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of
the Church.

v. 18. And when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know from the
first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all
seasons.

v. 20. And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have
showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house,

v. 21. Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

v. 25. And now behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching
the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.

v. 26. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood
of all men.

v. 27. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.

v. 32. And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified.

2. Tim. 2. v. 2. And the things that thou have heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also.

Tit. 1. v. 9. Holding fast the faithful word, as he has been taught, that he
may be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.

v. 10. For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, especially
they of the circumcision:

v. 11. Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not, for filthy lucres sake.

Act. 20. v. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock,
over the which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

v. 31. Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years, I
ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.

v. 32. And now brethren, I commend you to God and to the word of his grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an in inheritance among all them
which are sanctified.

2 Timothy 2. v. 2. And the things that thou have heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also.

2 Cor. 1. v. 1. Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and
Timothy our brother, unto the church of God which is at Corinth, with all the
saints which are in all Achaia.

v. 19. For the Son of God Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, even
by me, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea.

chap. 4. v. 1. Therefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have received
mercy we faint not, v. 2. But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty,
not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God.

1 Cor. 16. v. 10. Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without
fear: for he works the work of the Lord, as I also do.

Act. 15. v. 35. Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and
preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.

Apoc. 2. v. 8. And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna, write, These things
says the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive,

v. 9. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and
I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews and are not, but are the
Synagogue of Satan.

v. 10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer: behold, the devil
shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
crown of life.

v. 12. And to the angel of the church in Pergamos, write, These things says
he, which has the sharp sword with two edges,

v. 13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is,
and thou hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith, even in those
days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where
Satan dwells.

v. 18. And unto the angel of the church in Thyatyra, write, These things says
the Son of God, who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are
like fine brass,

v. 19. I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy
patience, and thy works, and the last to be more then the first.

chap. 3. v. 7. And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia, write, These
things says he that is holy, he that is true, he that has the key of David,
he that opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens;

v. 8. I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no
man can shut it: for thou have a little strength, and have kept my word, and
have not denied my name.

v. 9. Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, (which say they are
Jews, and are not, but do lie) behold, I will make them to come and worship
before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.

v. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee
from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them
that dwell upon the earth.

v. 11. Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou have, that no man
take thy crown.

12.
Since therefore the doctrine of the aforesaid Beginners and Preachers of the
Gospel, as also of the particular Ministers, to which both were called and
gifted by God, and which they could rightly discharge, was that sole and single
promised Word of Christ; there can be no difference therein, as to the mere
essential truth thereof: but the persons which ought to preach it in the Name
of God, did herein differ from one another, that some of them did always
continue in the mere purity of that word, and neither would, nor could depart
from it, such as were the Apostles, and their like: but others might either
depart, or not depart from it, such as were the aforesaid Ministers of
particular Churches: Again, of these persons, some, though they might depart,
yet did not depart, such as were those who kept the mystery of the faith
deposited in a good conscience, and made use of it to the public Ministry in
the Name of God, as Timothy (1 Cor. 16.10. 1 Timothy 4.6.) Titus, (2 Cor. 8.23.
and chap. 12.18.) Epaphras, ( Col. 1.7.) Tychicus ( Col. 4.7.) and their like,
(2 Cor. 8.23.) but others, though they might have continued in the mere purity
of that word, yet either through the neglect of their gifts, or through the
loss of a good conscience, or by the abuse of their affections, or of set
purpose, did depart from it, such as they may be accounted, who built wood,
hay, and stubble upon the foundation, (1 Cor. 3.10, 11, 12.) who taught strange
doctrine, (1 Timothy 1.3, 4.) and were deceitful workers, (2 Cor. 11.13.) and
grievous wolves, not sparing the flock; and speaking perverse things to draw
away the Disciples after them; ( Acts 20.29, 30.) as ambitious and prating
Diotrephes, (3 John ver. 9, 10.) Hymenaeus, Alexander and Philetus, (1 Timothy
1.19, 20. 2 Timothy 2.16, 17, 18.) and other false teachers of that age: (1 John
2.18, 19, 26.) Finally, others, though they continued in the mere purity of
that word, yet being indulgent to some particular affection, did not procure
the unanimous edification of the Church together with other Ministers, such as
they may be accounted, of whom the Apostle speaks, Philip. 1.12, 13. etc.

Philip. 1. v. 12. But I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things
which happened unto me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the
gospel.

v. 13. So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in all
other places.

v. 14. And many of the brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds, are
much more bold to speak the word without fear.

v. 15. Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also of
good will.

v. 16. The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add
affliction to my bonds:

v. 17. But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the
gospel.

v. 18. What then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in truth,
Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

v. 19. For I know that this shall turn to my salvation, through your prayer,
and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

13.
But since the people of that age had an infallible ointment, and knew the
truth, (1 John 2.20, 27.) were confirmed therein, (1 Pet. 5.12. 2 Pet. 1.12.)
were replenished and enriched with all necessary knowledge, ( Romans 15.14. 1
Cor. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.) had mutual faith with the Apostles, alike precious, and
most holy, ( Romans 1.8, 12. 2 Pet. 1.1. Jude ver. 20.) had learnt the doctrine
of the Apostles, and had believed it as it was preached by them, and had
received it, ( Romans 16.17. 2 These. 2.15. 1 Cor. 15.11. Heb. 10.26. Acts 8.14.)
could retain that doctrine as it had been delivered to them, (1 Cor. 11. 2.
Acts 2.42.) did altogether abound in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and
all diligence, (2 Cor. 8.7.) had the truth of the Gospel abiding with them, (
Gal 2.5.) had been sealed with the holy Spirit upon the word of truth, or
Gospel of their Salvation, ( Ephesians. 1.13.) had the sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth, (2 These. 2.13.) had the form of the Apostles
doctrine, ( Romans 6.17. Jude v. 3.) could try the Spirits whether they were of
God, (1 John 4.1, 2, 3. 2 John v. 9, 10. Heb. 9.10.) might be, and was sound in
the faith, ( Titus 1.13. Apoc. 2, 25.) might continue in the faith, grounded,
and settled, and not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, which they had
heard, ( Col. 1.23.) knew how they ought to walk and please God, (1 These. 4.1,
2.) and consequently knew that one only faith, ( Heb. 11.6. Ephesians. 4.5.) etc.
since, I say, the people of that age were endued with the aforesaid faculties,
they could easily observe what particular Ministers did depart from the purity
of that Word; and therefore though the Ministers of particular Churches, by the
neglect of their gifts, or otherwise, might depart from the truth, yet were not
the people, using their gifts to the end aforesaid, endangered thereby, since
they could easily detect it. a 1 John 2 20, 21, 24, 26, 27, 28. and 2 Ioh. v.
9, 10.

1 John 2. v. 20. But ye have an unction from the holy One, and ye know all
things.

v. 21. I have not written unto you, because ye know not the truth: but
because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.

v. 24 Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning:
if that which ye have heard from the beginning, shall remain in you, ye also
shall continue in the Son, and in the Father.

v. 26. These things have I written unto you, concerning them that seduce you.

v. 27. But the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: and ye
need not that any man teach you: But as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him.

v. 28. And now, little children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we
may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.

2 John v. 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both
the Father and the Son.

v. 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not into your house, neither bid him God speed.

14.
Nevertheless, though some Ministers did revolt, yet the integrity of the gift
it self wherewith they were instituted and endued, remained safe and sound
with all other particular Ministers, who kept the mystery of the faith in a
good conscience, inasmuch as they both might and did duly perform that
Embassage to which they were called and furnished by Christ: for though the
particular Ministers of that age might revolt, and there were some amongst the^
that did indeed revolt, yet that does no more derogate from the integrity of
their institution, which was with the word of the Gospel wholly,
intrisincally, undoubtedly, and merely true, then the fall of our first parents
derogateth from the truth of their original integrity, wherein they were
created by God; for as their fall hinders not but that they were created in a
spotless condition, and were able to have persisted in it: so likewise though
those particular Ministers might revolt, and did revolt, yet it cannot be
denied that they were instituted with the word of the Gospel, wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, and might accordingly have
persisted in it.

15.
Besides, as there were some amongst those particular Ministers that did indeed
revolt, so also were there others that did not revolt; to wit, those who by
patient continuance in well doing proved themselves, to be good trees by their
good fruits, such as many then were, and in the first beginning of the Gospel
all, (though afterward some by degrees revolted.) so as the faithful of that
age were not wont to try the spirits of those Ministers of the Gospel, whom
they had found by experience to be true and faithful servants of God, as it is
evident from 1 John 4. 1. for it is not said there, that they should not
believe any, but not every spirit, and that not because of the true and
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, who were already known and received, but by
reason of false Ministers and Prophets, who had either revolted, or intruded
themselves into the Church: for it was a different case, when those lawful
Ministers were not as yet received for such by the people, and known by
experience, as it is manifest both by our Saviors speech to the Jews, ( John
7.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.) and the example of the Beroeans, ( Acts 17.10, 11, 12.)
for in that case the word of the lawful Ministers of the Gospel was left to
be examined by the people that doubted of it, not as if any error either were,
or were to be found by the people therein; but that the doubting examiner after
a due search might be infallibly assured that no error either was, or was to
be found there; which is so true, that whether the examiner of that word said
or believed that he had found an error therein, or affirmed that he had found
no error therein, yet their word remains, as before, wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true: (1 Cor. 14.37, 38.) but after they had found
those Ministers to be true and lawful, that of the Apostle takes place, [1
These. 2.13. For this cause also we ( Paul, Sylvanus and Timotheus) give thanks
to God incessantly, in that when ye received the word of God, preached by us,
ye received it not as the word of men, but, as it is indeed, the word of God,
which also effectually works in you that believe.] Wherefore as at this day
none suspecteth godly. Ministers, who are known and received for such, that
they in their preaching wilfully depart from the known truth, but is rather
persuaded that their whole endeavor is to keep close to it: so likewise it is
to be granted, that the people of that age were fully persuaded of their
Ministers, who were known to be godly, that they rightly employed their gifts:
which Ministers, since they might continue in the mere purity of that word, and
not depart from it, must needs perform that which they desired, and were able
to do, and consequently there was no reason that the faithful of that age
should have any sinister suspicion of such Ministers, until by contrary proofs
of evil life and doctrine they had rendered themselves unworthy to be accounted
lawful Ministers of God: which if they did, it could easily be discovered by
the faithful of that age, as we have already shown in the thirteenth Article.

16.
But though some particular Ministers in the time of the Apostles did indeed
revolt from the word of the Gospel, yet did they not presently forfeit their
Ministry, because as they might revolt, so they might repent, and return
again into the right way; [a Apoc. 3.1, 2, 3, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, Col.
4.17. 1 Timothy 1.3, 4.] and therefore there was hope that they would revert to
the integrity of their first institution, wherein Christ had given them a
faculty to preach the Gospel by way of embassage for God; which faculty they
had both reduced into act in the beginning of their preaching, and though they
had afterward revolted, yet, if they were not wanting to themselves, might
again renew it: and therefore, because according to the institution, and will
of Christ they had been furnished with a word that was wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, and had been specially, and duly called by
Apostles, or Apostolic men to officiate for God; likewise, because they might
persist in the original truth of their institution, or if they revolted,
return unto it again; for this reason, I say, they did not presently forfeit
the title and function of Ministers of the Gospel, because there was hope that
they would again return to those divine beginnings: which would have had no
place, if either their doctrine had not at first been instituted by Christ,
that they by it might officiate for God; or they had not gotten a faculty to
preach a word wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true; or they
could not have persisted in that truth, though they endeavored it never so
much; or there had been no hope that they could attain to the truth of the
first institution of the Ministers of Christ; or in a word, if they had never
before really performed, or were not as yet able to perform the things that
were requisite to the first institution of Christ; [ Ephesians. 4.11. etc.] for in
these cases it necessarily follows, that they who had never stood in such or
such a condition, cannot be said to fall from it, much less that they are able
still to persist in it.

Apoc. 3. v. 1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, Write, These things
says he that has the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars, I know thy
works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead.

v. 2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to
die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

v. 3. Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast, and
repent. If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and
thou shall no know what hour I will come upon thee.

v. 14. And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans, write, These things
says the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation
of God,

v. 15. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou were
cold or hot.

v. 16. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will
spue thee out of my mouth.

v. 17. Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need
of nothing: and know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.

v. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may
be rich; and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of
thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou
may see.

v. 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore and
repent.

Col. 4. v. 17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou
have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

1 Timothy 1. v. 3. As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus when I went into
Macedonia, that thou might charge some that they teach no other doctrine,

v. 4. Neither give heed to fables, and endless genealogies, which minister
questions, rather then edifying, which is in faith: so do.

17.
Wherefore, since in the institution of Christ, regard is to be had to the
gifts wherewith particular Ministers were instituted by him, and not to the
wilful or careless abuse of those gifts; and since it is certain that Christ
gave to the Ministers of particular Churches a power to preach such a word as
was wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, and that all those who
were godly and faithful amongst them, accordingly could and did perform their
message; but those who did not cannot be reckoned in the number of faithful
and godly Ministers of Christ: let us omit those who negligently or purposely
departed from the known truth, and consequently from the first institution and
gifts of Christ, and consider them only, who at that time conformed themselves
to their first institution, such as were the Apostles, and their like, as also
the Ministers of particular Churches, faithfully using their gifts in
officiating for God; both which were instituted and gifted by Christ, and began
and continued their commission with such doctrine as was wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true; and therefore those that heard them might in a
manner be said to hear God himself speaking by them; insomuch that their doctrine
was wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, and both the Ministers
themselves, and those that received them for Ministers, preaching in the Name
of God, might be and we infallibly assured of their doctrine, as of the very
Word of God.

18.
These things being premised touching the due and lawful Word of the Gospel,
and the commission of Ministers speaking in the name of God, and their ability
to perform the same: It seems necessary, in a plain style to propose unto you
certain questions, as most grave cases of conscience, to be examined seriously
and without prejudice, according to the Scripture, in the fear of God who
searches the hearts and reins; that by the true and clear decision of them,
the light of the Gospel may more evidently appear. To this end therefore, it is
first to be enquired; whether God has any where in the Scripture commanded, or
wellpleasingly permitted to the Ministers of his Church, or others, that the
due and lawful preaching of the Gospel, which was at first instituted in the
name of God with none but the promised word of Christ, wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, of which both they that preached, and they that
heard it were infallibly assured, as of the very Word of God; I say, that the
due and lawful preaching of the Gospel, should afterward be continued by them
in the name of God, with a word which was not wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, and of which both the continuers themselves, and
those that received them for continuers in the name of God, cannot be
infallibly assured as of the very word of God? Likewise, whether God has
commanded, or welpleasingly permitted that any preaching of the Gospel should
be begun and continued in his name by Ministers, specially and duly sent, given
and called thereunto, which should be performed by them or others, with a word
which was not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true?

Now in a matter of so great consequence, as is the quality and administration
of the Gospel to be preached in the name of God, it ought not to seem strange,
when the question is concerning it, that some previous institution, or some
command, or at least some welpleasing permission of God should be brought from
Scripture, according to which the Christian Church may behave her self: for it
cannot be that God has built this most weighty Article of Christianity, and
chief worship of the New Testament, together with the reason thereof, upon none
of the things aforesaid.

19.
If to the aforesaid question it be answered, that God has somewhere in
Scripture commanded or welpleasingly permitted, that it should be begun and
continued, let the place or places be produced, and we will thoroughly examine
the matter.

20.
But if it be answered, that God has no where in Scripture commanded, or
welpleasingly permitted it: Then both the Ministers and people of your Churches
may be asked, whether, since there is no command, or welpleasing permission of
God touching this matter extant in Scripture, it be lawful for any one to
continue the genuine preaching of the Gospel, in the name of God, with a word
not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, though it were begun
and instituted with a word wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true?
Also, whether it be lawful for any one, to begin, continue, institute, and
perform with a word not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true,
any preaching of the Gospel in the name of God?

21.
If it be said, that it is lawful for some body, let the place or places of
the Scripture, together with the reasons whereby it may be proved, be produced,
and then we will accurately consider of the whole matter.

22.
But if it be answered, that it is not lawful for any man: Then it is to be
enquired, whether they, who without any command, institution, or welpleasing
permission of God in Scripture, continue the genuine preaching of the Gospel in
the name of God, with a word not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely
true; though it were begun and instituted in the name of God with none but a
word that was wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true? Also, who
first begin, continue, institute, and perform any preaching of the Gospel, in
the name of God, with a word not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely
true; whether, I say, they do thereby administer the worship of the preaching
of the Gospel as God would have it administered in his name, or only as it
seems good to themselves, and they please?

23.
If it be said, that they do thereby administer the worship of the preaching of
the Gospel as God would have it administered in his name, let them produce that
will of God, and the reasons thereof, that we may weigh them.

24.
But if it be answered, that they do thereby administer the worship of the
preaching of the Gospel not as God would have it administered in his name, but
only as it seems good to themselves: Then it is to be enquired, whether they
who administer the chief worship of the New Testament in the name of God, from
the beginning thereof and so forwards, not as God would have it administered in
his name, but only as it seems good to themselves, do not thereby incur the
crime of wilworship? Especially after they once know, that God would have it
otherwise done, than they do it; also, after they are able to take that worship
of theirs away.

25.
If it be said, that such persons do not incur the crime of wilworship, let the
reasons be produced, that we may consider of them.

26.
But if it be answered, that such persons do by that worship of theirs commit
the very crime of wilworship: Then it is to be enquired, whether God has any
where in Scripture commanded, instituted, or welpleasingly permitted any
mission or calling to perform worship in his name, which from the first
original thereof, and so forwards, is tainted with the crime of wilworship?

27.
If it be said, that God has somewhere in Scripture instituted, commanded, or
welpleasingly permitted such a mission or calling, let the place or places be
produced, that we may consider of them.

28.
But if it be answered, that God has instituted, commanded, or welpleasingly
permitted no such mission or calling in the Scripture: Then it is to be
enquired, whether they who are tainted with the aforesaid crime of wilworship
in that service which they perform in the name of God, have any lawful
calling, and such as is welpleasing to God, to perform such a service, by means
of such a preaching of the Gospel, used to the people in the name of God?

29.
If it be said, that such persons have the aforesaid mission or calling, let
the reasons of such an Assertion be produced, that we may consider of them.

30.
But if it be answered, that such persons have no such mission or calling: Then
it is to be enquired, whether such persons, using such preaching in the name of
God, may erect or gather Churches in the name of God, with any command, or
well-pleasing permission of his, by such preaching to which they have no
lawful calling?

31.
If it be said, that they may nevertheless erect and gather Churches, let that
command, or welpleasing permission of God, together with the reasons thereof be
produced, that we may consider of them.

32.
But if it be answered, that such persons by means of such preaching, cannot in
the name of God erect and gather Churches, with a command, or welpleasing
permission of God: Then it is to be enquired, whether they, who gather Churches
in that manner, be condemned of themselves therein and sin against their own
conscience? Namely, after they know, that they in their preaching ground
neither upon any command, nor well pleasing permission of God; as also, after
they refuse to take away that will worship of theirs, when they are able to do
it.

33.
If it be said, that such persons are not condemned of themselves, nor sin
against their own consciences, let the reasons be produced, that we may
consider of them.

34.
But if it be answered, that they are therein condemned of themselves, and sin
against their own conscience: Then it is to be enquired, whether the people,
after they are ascertained that the Ministers of their Churches, are condemned
of themselves, in that they ground on no command, or wellpleasing permission of
God in their preaching; as also, because they refuse to take way that
will worship of theirs, when they are able to do it; whether I say, such a
people may then be persuaded according to the command, or welpleasing
permission of God, that they may be gathered by such Ministers into a Church in
the name of God?

35.
If it be said, that such a people may be persuaded thereof, let the reasons be
produced, that we may consider of them.

36.
But if it be answered, that such a people cannot be persuaded thereof: Then it
is to be enquired, whether such a people who suffer themselves to be gathered
into a Church in the name of God, by such persons, and by such preaching, do
well therein, or not?

37.
If it be said, that such a people do well therein, let the reasons be
produced, that we may consider of them.

38.
But if it be answered, that such a people does not well therein: Then it is to
be enquired, whether it agree with the command, or wellpleasing permission of
God, that a people should be gathered to God, and in the name of God, by such a
word, as is intrinsically, and undoubtedly of the same truth and nature with
that word, by which God began and instituted the preaching of the Gospel in his
own name, or by such a word as is not so?

39.
If it be said, that it agrees with the command, or welpleasing permission of
God, let it be produced, together with the reasons thereof, that we may
consider of them.

40.
But if it be answered, that it agrees with the command, or welpleasing
permission of God, that a people should be gathered to God, and in the name of
God, by such a word as is intrinsically, and undoubtedly of the same truth and
nature with that word by which God began and instituted the preaching of the
Gospel in his own name: Then it is to be enquired, whether the holy Text of the
Old and New Testament be intrinsically, and undoubtedly of the same truth and
nature with that word by which God began and instituted the preaching of the
Gospel in his own name, or not?

41.
If it be said that a word not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely
true, is intrininsically, and undoubtedly of the same truth and nature with
that word wherewith God in his own name began and instituted the preaching of
the Gospel, let the reasons thereof be produced, that we may consider of them.

42.
But if it be answered, that the holy Text of the Old and New Testament is so:
Then it is to be enquired, whether it agree with the command, or welpleasing
permission of God, that a people should be gathered to God, and in the name of
God, by the very Text of the Old and New Testament, wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true; or by a word not wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true?

43.
If it be said, that it agrees with the command, or welpleasing permission of
God, that it should be done by a word not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly,
and merely true, let that command, or welpleasing permission, together with the
reasons thereof be produced, that we may consider of them.

44.
But if it be answered, that it agrees with the command, or welpleasing
permission of God, that a people should be gathered to God, and in the name of
God, by the mere Text of the Old and New Testament: Then it is to be enquired,
whether there be any word as yet amongst men, besides the written word of the
Old and New Testament, which is intrinsically, and undoubtedly of the same
truth and nature with that word wherewith God began and instituted the
preaching of the Gospel in his own name?

45.
If it be said, that there is such a word as yet amongst men, let it be
declared and produced, that we may consider of it.

46.
But if it be answered, that there is no such word as yet amongst men, (besides
the written word of the Old and New Testament) which is intrinsically, and
undoubtedly of the same truth and nature with that word, wherewith God began
and instituted the preaching of the Gospel in his own name: Then it is to be
enquired, whether that written word of God, as it is, and lies, without any
explications thereof, be a means to beget faith in the name of God, or by way
of embassage for God, as that word was, wherewith God began and instituted the
preaching of the Gospel in his own name?

47.
If it be said, that that written word of God, as it is, and lies, etc. is not
such a means, let the reasons be produced, that we may consider of them.

48.
But if it be answered, that that written word, as it is, and lies, is such a
means, in that it is intrinsically, and undoubtedly of the same truth and
nature with that word of mouth, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely
true: Then it is to be enquired, whether the hearing of that written word, as
it is, and lies, be the hearing of the word of God, by which hearing in the
name of God, saving faith is procured to a man; as the hearing of that word
was, wherewith God began and instituted the preaching of the Gospel in his own
name?

49.
If it be said, that the hearing of the written word is not such a hearing, let
the reasons thereof be produced, that we may consider of them.

50.
But if it be answered, that the hearing of the written word is such a hearing:
Then it is to be enquired, whether the bare hearing of that written word be
sufficient to procure that faith to a man in the name of God?

51.
If it be said, that the bare hearing of the written word be not sufficient
thereunto: Then it is to be enquired, whether those things which ought to
supply the bare hearing of the written word, used in the name of God to the
aforesaid end, be better, equal, or less than the aforesaid hearing?

52.
If it be said, that they are better, let them show where they be, and produce
them, that we may consider of them.

53.
If it be said that they are equal, let them likewise show where they be, and
produce them, that we may consider of them.

54.
But if it be said, that they are less then the aforesaid hearing: Then it is
to be enquired, whether those less things be intrinsically, and undoubtedly of
the same truth and nature with the word of that hearing, that is, wholly,
intrinsi ally, undoubtedly, and merely true; or else not wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true?

55.
If it be said, that those less things be intrinsically, and undoubtedly of
the same truth and nature with the word of that hearing, let them be produced,
that we may enquire whether they, if they be such, may by right be termed
less? And when that is dispatched, we will then consider of them.

56.
But if it be said, that those less things are not intrinsically, and
undoubtedly of the same truth and nature with the word of that hearing: Then it
is to be enquired, whether God in his written word has any where commanded, or
well-pleasingly permitted, that to his written word, wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, should be added the supplement of a word not
wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, whereby that which is
wanting to the written word of God, to procure saving faith, by the bare
hearing thereof, might be supplied?

57.
If it be said, that God has somewhere in his written word commanded, or
welpleasingly permitted it, let the place or places be produced, that we may
consider of them.

58.
But if it be answered, that God has no where in his written word commanded,
or welpleasingly permitted it: Then it is certain, that such a word is not by
way of supplement to be added to the written word, by means whereof the
hearing of faith comes in the name of God; and consequently, the affirmative
of the question, set down in the 49th. Article, is to be held, namely, that the
bare hearing of the written word of God is sufficient to procure saving faith
to a man, in the name of God, without any other additions whatsoever.

59.
But if to the question of the 49th. Article it be answered, that the bare
hearing of the written word of God, as it is, and lies, without any Comments,
Expositions, or Glosses, is sufficient to procure saving faith to a man in the
name of God: Then it is to be enquired, whether the hearing of the written word
of God be publicly to be used as the true and genuine public means of saving
faith, in the public worship performed by that hearing in the name of God?

60.
If it be said, that that hearing ought not to be publicly used to that end,
let the reasons thereof be produced, that we may consider of them.

61.
But if it be answered, that that hearing ought to be publicly used to the end
aforesaid: Then it is to be enquired, whether another public hearing besides
that, may according to the institution, command, or wellpleasing permission of
God, be used as a true and genuine public means to procure saving faith to a
man in the name of God?

62.
If it be said, that another public hearing besides that may be used, let the
place or places of the Scripture, together with that hearing, be produced, that
we may consider of them.

63.
But if it be answered, that another public hearing besides that, cannot,
according to the institution, command, or well pleasing permission of God in
the Scripture, be used in the name of God: Then it is to be enquired, whether
heretofore, and at this day, it come to pass, according to the institution,
command, or welpleasing permission of God in the scripture, that the
concionatory hearing of Ministers is publicly used; as the true and genuine
public means to procure saving faith to men in the name of God, and is
varnished with the title of the true word of God preached, and preferred before
the public hearing of the written word of God? since it is apparent that that
hearing, which is by means of such Sermons, is not the hearing which may and
ought to be used in the name of God, since such a hearing ought to be of a word
wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, such as was that word of
mouth, whereby the true and genuine preaching of the Gospel was at first begun
and instituted in the name of God, and continued in the time of the Apostles;
as also the written word of the Old and New Testament: and not the hearing of a
word not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, such as your
Ministers themselves confess their concionatory word to be.

64.
If it be said, that this notwithstanding comes to pass according to the
institution, command, or welpleasing permission of God in the Scripture, you
must produce the places of the Scripture, together with the reasons thereof,
that we may consider of them.

65.
But if it be answered, that this comes not to pass according to the
institution, command, or welpleasing permission of God in the Scripture, and
therefore neither can nor ought to be used to the true and genuine
administration of the Church, which ought to be performed in the name of God:
Then it is to be enquired, by what means that concionatory word, which is used
in the name of God, as a true and genuine public means to procure faith to
men, may fitly (as the state of things now is) be taken away, that it may not
hence forward be obtruded in the name of God, as the genuine word of God, and
chief worship of the New Testament?

66.
If there be any means, I would have them produced, and we will weigh them.

67.
But if nothing be produced concerning that matter: Then it is to be enquired,
whether the written word of God, as it is, and lies, be a sufficient outward
means to make children, yongmen, and fathers in Christ, each whereof may obtain
salvation thereby as a means used in the name of God to procure it?

68.
If it be said, that the word is not sufficient thereunto, let the reasons be
produced, and then we will consider, whether the same arguments will not refute
whatsoever has been produced for the sufficiency of the Scripture from the
49th. Article to the 57th.

69.
But if it be answered, that the written word of God is sufficient for the
things aforesaid: Then it is to be enquired, whether in the written word of
God, as it is, and lies, there be milk for children, bread for young men, and
wine for fathers in Christ?

70.
If it be answered, that the things aforesaid are to be found therein: Then it
is to be enquired, whether children in Christ, by the bare hearing of the
Scripture in public or private, used in the name of God, may obtain their
milk, and young men their bread, and fathers their wine, without any other
outward means, used in the name of God?

71.
If it be said, that they cannot obtain thence the things aforesaid: Then it is
to be enquired, whether that happen, either through the insufficiency of the
Scripture, or through the obscurity thereof, as to children, young men, and
fathers in Christ, or through the diffused latitude and bigness of the
Scripture, or for some divine prohibition served on the persons aforesaid, to
the intent that (as the case of Christiany now stands) they might not fetch
milk, bread, and wine, from the mere reading of the Scripture?

72.
If it be said, that it happens through the insufficiency of the Scripture:
Then it is to be enquired, wherein that insufficiency lies? since it has
already been confessed, that milk, bread, and wine for those three states of
Christianity, are to be found in the Scripture. Next, who can, and ought to
supply, in the name of God, that insufficiency of the Scripture, and with what
word?

73.
If it be said, that it may and ought to be supplied with a word wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true: Then it is to be enquired, whether
there be any such word extant, besides the Scripture? And if so, let it be
produced, that we may consider of it.

74.
But if be said, that that insufficiency of the Scripture may and ought to be
supplied with a word not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true:
Then it is to be enquired, whether the written word, being wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, can, according to any command, or
welpleasing permission of God, be supplied with such a word in the name of God?

75.
If it be said, that it may be done in that manner: Then certainly this
assertion is coincident with that which was before alleged for the
insufficiency of the Scripture; for there we saw that the Scripture neither
can nor ought to be supplied, in the name of God, with a word not wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true; I likewise crave that a divine
command or welpleasing permission touching that matter be produced out of the
Scripture, and then we will consider of the whole business.

76.
But if it be answered, that the Scripture cannot in the name of God be
supplied with a word not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true;
then it is certain, that the Scripture is not insufficient for the procuring of
milk, bread, and wine, to all those states, by the bare hearing thereof.

77.
But if it be said to the question of the 70th. Article, that children, young
men, and fathers in Christ, cannot from the bare hearing of the Scripture, used
either publicly or privately in the name of God, get milk, bread, and wine, by
reason of the obscurity of the Scripture in relation to those states: Then it
is to be enquired, wherein that obscurity lies, and why the Lord left it in
the Scripture to that end? Next, by what means, and in what manner that
obscurity may, and ought most certainly to be taken away? And finally, whether
there be any persons, given, called, and ordained by Christ, to take away that
obscurity, in the name of God, and who they be?

78.
If it be said, that the concionatory word at this day used, is that means,
whereby that obscurity may and ought to be taken away, in the name of God:
Then it is to be enquired, whether the Ministers of that word were given,
called and ordained by Christ, to take away, in the name of God, all obscurity
of the Scripture whatsoever, or only to take away some part thereof?

79.
If it be said, that the Ministers of that concionatory word are given, called
and ordained by Christ, to take away, in the name of God, all obscurity of the
Scripture whatsoever: Then it is to be enquired, whether all in gross, or at
least some of them, are able duly to perform that thing? If it be said, that
they can; you must show and produce those Ministers that we may consider of
their lawful calling, ordination, commission, and ability thereunto.

80.
But if it be said, that those Ministers are given, called, and ordained by
Christ, to take away, in the name of God, some part only of the obscurity of
the Scripture: Then it is to be enquired, whether any Ministers of that
concionatory word precisely know what is that part of the obscurity of the
Scripture, to take away which, in the name of God, they say they are given,
called, and ordained by Christ?

81.
If it be said that they precisely know that part: Then it is to be enquired,
whether those Ministers are given, called, and ordained by Christ, to take
away, in the name of God, none but the obscurity of things precisely necessary
to salvation; or of them also which are not precisely necessary to salvation?

82.
If it be said, that they are given, called, and ordained by Christ, to take
away, in the name of God, none but the obscurity of things precisely necessary
to salvation. Then it is to be enquired, whether they are there clearly enough
proposed by God himself, according to the capacicitie of every Christian of the
three foresaid states, hearing or reading the Scripture in the fear of God?

83.
If it be said, that they are not there clearly enough proposed by God for
them: certainly, then you recede from the public confessions of your Churches,
and go over into the tents of the Papists, whom your Churches blame upon that
very ground. But if notwithstanding you persevere in that opinion, Then it is
to be enquired with what word they will do that; with one wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, or with one that is not so? Again,
whether they exactly know what things are precisely necessary to salvation? for
instance, whether the same things are necessary for every man, or diverse,
whether more, or less, or which, how many, and of what kind? As also, which,
how many, and of what kind those things are, which are precisely necessary to
salvation?

84.
If it be said, that those Ministers precisely know, which, how many, and of
what kind those things are, which are precisely necessary to the salvation of
all and every man: Then it is to be demanded of them, that they would set down
those Heads and Articles in writing, and plainly show that none but those
things precisely, neither more or less, are precisely necessary to the
salvation of all and every man.

85.
But if it be answered, that those Ministers do not know what those things
precisely are, which are precisely necessary to the salvation of all and every
man: Then it is to be enquired, how they can here precisely know, what they are
given, called, and ordained to explain in the name of God? since they cannot
tell the bounds of that their calling and ordination, and consequently they may
perhaps be called to more or less than they think: in which doubtful case
nothing can or ought to be performed in the name of God.

86.
But if it be said to the 80th. Article, that those Ministers are given,
called, and ordained by Christ, to take away, in the name of God, the
obscurity of those things which are not precisely necessary to salvation: Then
it is to be enquired, how they can precisely know those things, since they know
not the things that are precisely necessary to salvation? Again, whether they
were ordained by Christ to explain all those things, in the name of God, or
only some part of them?

87.
If if be said that they are ordained by Christ to explain all: Then it is to
be enquired, whether those Ministers can duly explain, in the name of God, the
whole Scripture, as to all those things not precisely necessary to salvation
and if it be said, that they can; then those Ministers are to be desired, that
they would in that manner explain the whole Scripture in all those things not
precisely necessary to salvation, and when they have done that, when we will
consider of the whole business.

88.
But if it be said, that they are ordained by Christ, to explain, in the Name
of God, none but a part of those things not precisely necessary to salvation:
Then it is to be enquired, whether they exactly know what that part is?

89.
If it be said, that they exactly know what that part is: Then those Ministers
are to be desired, that they would set down that part in writing, and make it
plain, that they are ordained by Christ, to explain, in the Name of God, that
part alone precisely, and neither more nor less of that kind; and when they
have done that, we will consider of the whole business.

90.
But if it be answered, that those Ministers do not know, what part precisely
of the things not precisely necessary to salvation they are ordained by Christ
to explain in the Name of God: Then it is to be enquired, by what means they
can rightly know, that they neither straighten nor go beyond the limits of that
their Ordination and calling, in quality whereof they give out that they come
by way of embassage for God to explain such things? for this thing ought to be
rightly known and performed, when any come by way of embassage for God. Such an
Interogatory would soon puzzle those Ministers; and therefore since they are
not ordained by Christ to preach in the Name of God such a word as is not
wholly, intrinsecally, undoubtedly, and merely true, nor to explain the whole
scripture, or any part thereof in things precisely necessary or not precisely
necessary to salvation, Certain it is that nothing either ought or can be
explained by them in the Name of God, or by way of embassage for God, by the
mediation of such a concionatory word, not wholly, intrinsecally, undoubtedly,
and merely true, in favor of children, young men, and fathers in Christ.
Wherefore to that which was demanded in the sixty ninth Article, it is to be
answered affirmatively, namely, that children, young men, and fathers in Christ
may draw and fetch, milk, bread, and wine, from the bare public or private
hearing of the scripture, performed in the Name of God; since it is certain,
that the sufficiency and clearness of the scripture, (as it is and lies,) as
to the salvation of those three sorts of Christians, being asserted, no
hinderance but rather help can be alleged from the largeness of the
scripture, wherein the same things are frequently repeated, and inculcated, and
to contract which, in the Name of God, there is at this day no man given:
especially considering that there is no prohibition extant in the scripture,
whereby the aforesaid persons are forbidden to procure their salvation in that
manner, as the case of Christianity now stands.

91.
Wherefore (that we may at length directly answer to the question of the 64th.
Article, touching the due removal of that concionatory word, hitherto used in
the name of God,) it is to be enquired, whether in the stead of that
concionatory word, not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true,
which neither ought nor can serve those three states of Christians, in the Name
of God, it be agreeable to the command, or well pleasing permission of God,
that his written word, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true,
should be substituted, since it is profitable to all of them: or whether it be
agreeable to the command or welpleasing, permission of God, that in the public
worship, which ought to be performed in the Name of God, in stead of the
written word of God, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, there
should be substituted that concionatory word, not wholly, intrinsecally,
undoubtedly, and merely true?

92.
If it be said, that either word, according to the command, or welpleasing
permission of God, may and ought in the Name of God to be used in the public
worship: Then it is to be demanded that some command, or welpleasing,
permission of God, be produced out of the scripture touching that matter, and
then we will weigh them.

93.
But if it be said, that it is agreeable to the command, or welpleasing
permission of God, that in the public worship, which ought to be performed in
the Name of God, that concionatory word should be substituted in stead of the
written word of God: Then it is to be enquired of them that say so, whether
they do not as yet observe the mystery of iniquity, to strengthen which there
can be nothing found in the written word of God? or if they think there is
something there concerning that matter, I would have it produced, and then we
will weigh it.

94.
But if it be answered, that it is agreeable to the command, or welpleasing
permission of God, that in the public worship, which ought to be performed in
the Name of God, the written word of God should be substituted, in stead of
that concionatory word: Then it is to be enquired, whether that written word
alone (since it sufficiently and clearly affords milk for children, bread
for young men, and wine for fathers in Christ) may and ought to be, in the Name
of God, a sufficient catechism, and confession for all Christians, serving
them in stead of the analogy of faith to limit and direct their private and
public worship in the Name of God?

95.
If it be said, that the written word alone by it self neither can nor ought
to be the things aforesaid: Then it is to be enquired, whether there be any
other word extant, that may in the Name of God perform and fulfill the
aforesaid office of a catechism and confession, either better and more
coneniently, or a like well and conveniently?

96.
If it be said, that there is another word extant: Then it is to be demanded,
that that word should be produced, to the intent we may consider of it.

97.
But if it be answered, that there is no other word extant: Then it is to be
enquired, whether heretofore and at this day it come to pass according to the
institution, command, or welpleasing permission of God, that another word then
that of God is used in Churches in the name of God, for a sufficient catechism
and confession, serving them instead of the analogy of faith to limit and
direct their public and private worship in the Name of God?

98.
If it be said, that this is done according to the institution, command, or
welpleasing permission of God. Then it is to be demanded, that the reasons be
produced, as also, that the institution, command, or welpleasing permission of
God, be alleged out of the Scripture, about making a catechism and
confession, not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, to serve
Christians as the analogy of faith to limit and direct their private and
public worship in the Name of God? And when that is done, we will consider of
the whole business.

99.
But if it be answered, that this comes not to pass according to the
institution, command, or welpleasing permission of God; and consequently
neither can nor ought to be made use of to the due and genuine administration
of the Church, which ought to be performed in the Name of God: Then it is to be
enquired, by what means those catechismes and confessions may now be duly
removed from that authentic Station which they have gotten in the Church.

100.
If there be any means, let them be produced, and we will weigh them.

101.
But if nothing be produced concerning that matter: Then it is to be enquired,
whether, as the case of the Church now stands, the Scripture it self be
sufficient, as it is, and lies, to perform all worship, wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, in the name of God?

102.
If it be said, that the Scripture is not sufficient thereunto, let the reasons
be produced, that we may consider of them.

103.
But if it be answered, that the Scripture is sufficient thereunto: Then it is
to be enquired, whether, since by means of the Scripture, (as it is, and lies)
there may be had in the name of God such a word preached, as is wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, wherein milk, bread, and wine,
for children, young men, and fathers in Christ, are afforded; with songs and
prayers, wholly, intrinsically, undoubly, and merely true, and such a means of
making vows, and entering into Covenant with God, as is wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true: whether, I say, by means of the Scripture alone
(as it is, and lies there may be had, in this state of the Church, by those
points, the entire worship of God, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and
merely true, and consequently an authentic catechism and confession in the
name of God, serving as the due analogy of faith to limit and direct the
private and public worship of Christians.

104.
If it be said, that the things aforesaid, may not then be had, let the reasons
thereof be produced, that we may consider of them.

105.
But if it be said, that it may be doubted thereof: Then it is to be enquired,
whether it may be doubted, that he, who upon all the promises and threats
contained in the Scripture, enters into a covenant with God, to direct his
knowledge, faith and manners, according to none but the prescript of the
Scripture, and that, as he heartily desires and wishes to be made partaker of
those promises, and to be freed from those threats: whether, I say, such a man
(since there is milk, bread and wine for all states of Christians in the
Scripture,) has then his authentic catechism and confession, then which none
either better or so good, to the end aforesaid, can be given.

106.
If it be said, that it may notwithstanding be doubted, whether such a man has
those things, let the reasons be produced, that we may consider of them.

107
But if it be answered, that such a man has the things aforesaid: Then it is
to be enquired, whether in stead of those catechismes and confessions, not
wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, and not authentic, which
cannot serve as the analogy of faith to regulate the private or public
worship of Christians, in the name of God: whether, I say, it be agreeable to
the institution, command, or welpleasing permission of God, that in stead of
them there should be substituted in the Church the very written word of God,
wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, as the authentic
catechism and confession of Christians, to be used by them in the name of God
as the true and genuine means to regulate their private and public worship:
or whether it agree with the institution, command, or welpleasing permission of
God, that in stead of the very written word of God, as the authentic
catechism and confession of Christians, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly,
and merely true, there should be substituted in the Church in the name of God
those catechismes and confessions, neither wholly, intrinsecally, undoubtedly,
and merely true, nor authentic?

108.
But if it be said, that catechismes and confessions of both kinds may and
ought, according to the institution, command, or welpleasing permission of God,
to be used in the Church in the name of God, to the end aforesaid: Then it is
to be enquired, whether any proof of such an institution, command, or
wellpleasing permission of God can be produced out of the Scripture? and when
it is produced, we will consider of it.

109.
But if it be said, that it agrees with the institution, command, or
welpleasing permission of God, that in stead of the written word of God,
wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, as the authentic
catechism and confession of Christians, there should be substituted in the
Church in the name of God to the end aforesaid those catechismes and
confessions, not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, and not
authentic, let that institution, command, or welpleasing permission concerning
this thing be produced out of the Scripture, that we may consider of it.

110
But if it be answered, that it agrees with the institution, command, or well
pleasing permission of God, that in stead of those catechismes and confessions,
not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, and not authentic,
there should be substituted in the Church in the name of God, the very written
word of God, as the authentic, and wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and
merely true catechism and confession of Christians to the end aforesaid: Then
it is to be enquired, whether those forms of catechismes and confessions,
wherein men heretofore and at this day are bred up and instructed in the name
of God, and wherewith as well their private as public worship is regulated in
the name of God, ought to be abolished as such, and to be laid aside out of
their hands? since the very written word of God, wholly, intrinsecally,
undoubtedly, and merely true, performs all that to Christians by it self.

111
If it be said, that those catechismes and confessions ought not to be
abolished, and laid a side out of men's hands, let the reasons thereof be
produced, that we may consider of them.

112.
But if it be answered, that those catechismes and confessions ought to be
abolished, and laid a side out of men's hands: Then it is to be enquired,
whether all and singular Ministers of Churches heretofore and at this time
being, who from the beginning of their preaching and so forwards, either
wittingly or unwittingly, publish to the world another word (as the public
service of the true and genuine preaching of the Gospel,) then that wherewith
God at first began and instituted in his own name the preaching of the Gospel;
again, who prefer the public hearing of their own word, varnished with the
title of the true word of God preached, before the public hearing of the
written word of God, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true;
finally, who use in the name of God another catechism and confession then the
very written word of God, and yet are not able to produce any lawful mission
or calling to perform such things, and present them to men in the name of God,
by any divine institution, command, or welpleasing permission of God in the
Scripture: whether, I say, they be able to produce any warrant from the
Scripture, wherein God and Christ institute, command, or welpleasingly permit,
that such men should have right and authority to erect and to gather Churches
in the name of God by the means aforesaid, and to govern them according to
their liturgies and forms, and consistoriall, classical and synodall acts,
not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly and merely true; and consequently either
by themselves or others to institute and dispense the calling, ordination,
mission, administration, office and cure of Bishops, Pastors, Doctors,
Presbyters, Deacons and other Ecclesiastical Officers?

113.
If it be said, that such an institution command or welpleasing permission can
be produced out of the Scripture for their aforesaid proceedings, let it be
produced, that we may consider of it.

114.
But if it be answered, that there is no institution command, or welpleasing
permission extant in the Scripture, concerning such kind of men: Then it is to
be enquired, whether the Ministers of Churches, heretofore and at this time
being, proceed according to the institution, command, or welpleasing permission
of God and Christ in the Scripture, in assuming to themselves a right and
authority, by such means, and in such a manner, to erect, gather, and govern
Churches in the name of God?

115.
If it be said, that they do the things aforesaid, according to the
institution, command, or welpleasing permission of God and Christ in the
Scripture: let the reasons and places of the Scripture be produced, that we may
consider both: which we will likewise do, if perhaps they doubt whether they
proceed therein according to the institution, command, or welpleasing
permission of God, and produce the reasons of their doubting.

116.
But if it be answered, that those Ministers do not perform the things
aforesaid according to the institution command, or wellpleasing permission of
God and Christ in the Scripture; and therefore that they neither can nor ought
to be made use of to the true and genuine administration of the Church, which
ought to be performed in the name of God: Then it is to be enquired, whether it
be not expedient, that the usurped right and authority of those Ministers, as
also the erection and gathering of Churches, together with the government of
the same, performed by them in the name of God, should be taken away?

117.
If it be said, that it is not expedient, let the reasons thereof be produced,
that we may consider of them.

118.
But if it be answered, that it is expedient: Then it is to be enquired, in
what manner it may conveniently be done, as the case of the Church now stands?

119.
If there be any expedients, let them be produced, and we will weigh them.

120.
But if nothing be produced touching that point: Then it is to be enquired,
whether a Church which from the first beginning of her preaching and so
forwards, is destitute of that word of mouth, wherewith the Gospel was at
first begun and instituted in the name of God; again, which substituteth her
own word, varnished with the title of the true word of God preached, in stead
of that word, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, wherewith
the Gospel was at first instituted and begun in the name of God; again, which
prefers the public hearing of her own word, not wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, before the public hearing of the written word
of God, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true; again, which
uses catechismes, confessions, liturgies, forms, together with her
consistoriall, classical and synodall acts, not wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, and consequently, neither can nor ought in the
name of God to erect, gather or govern Churches by the means aforesaid in the
usual manner; whether, I say, such a Church, can with any reason deny, that
she has departed, and revolted from the first institution of Christ as
touching his promised word, and from the erection, gathering, and government of
Churches thereby in the name of God, and is so far forth apostolical?

121.
If it be said, that it may with reason be denied, let the reasons be produced,
that we may consider of them.

122.
But if it be answered, that such a Church cannot with any reason deny that she
has in that manner departed, revolted, and apostatized: Then it is to be
enquired, whether such a Church can duly take away and amend her revolt and
apostasy, by restoring, amongst other things, that word of mouth, wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, wherewith the preaching of the
Gospel was at first begun and set on foot?

120.
If it be said, that she can even at this time duly perform that: Then such a
Church is to be desired that she would be pleased to perform it in that manner
out of hand; and after that, we will consider of the whole business.

124.
But if it be answered, that such a Church cannot at this time duly perform
it: Then it is to be demanded, whether God has instituted, commanded, or
welpleasingly permitted in the Scripture, that such a revolted Church, should
in any wise erect, gather and govern Churches in the name of God?

125.
If it be said, that God has instituted, commanded, or welpleasingly permitted
it in the Scripture, let that institution, command, or welpleasing permission
be produced, that we may consider of them.

126.
But if it be answered, that God has neither instituted, commanded, or
welpleasingly permitted it in the Scripture: Then it is to be enquired, whether
God has instituted, commanded, or welpleasingly permitted in the Scripture,
that that such a revolted Church should gather and govern Churches, not indeed
in the name of God, but only by Ecclesiastic authority, in the name of the
respective members of the Church, and by right of common calling?

127.
If it be said, that God has instituted, commanded, or welpleasingly permitted
it in the Scripture, let that institution, command, or welpleasing permission
be produced, that we may consider of it.

128.
But if it be answered, that God has neither instituted, commanded, nor
welpleasingly permitted it in the Scripture: Then it is to be enquired, whether
God has instituted, commanded, or welpleasingly permitted in the Scripture,
that such a revolted Church should gather and govern Churches in the tolerance
of God, and connivence at the aforesaid defects of his people: not indeed in
the name of God, but (as I said) in the previous connivence of God, and as near
as may be in such a manner and by such means as are wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true: yet by mere Ecclesiastic authorititie, in the
name of the respective members of such a Church, and by right of the common
calling of such Christians, so that error both may and ought to be tolerated in
such a Church?

129.
If it be said, that God has instituted, commanded, or welpleasingly permitted
it in the Scripture, let that institution, command, or welpleasing permission
be produced, that we may consider of them.

130.
But if it be answered, that God has neither instituted, commanded, nor
welpleasingly permitted it in the Scripture: Then it is to be enquired, whether
in this revolted state of the Church, any Churches may be erected gathered, and
governed, or not?

131.
If it be said, that no Churches can then be instituted, let the reasons
thereof be produced, that we may consider of them.

132.
But if it be answered, that in this revolted state of the Church, Churches may
be gathered and governed: Then it is to be enquired, in what manner that may
conveniently be done?

133.
If there be any ways, let them produced, that we may consider of them.

134.
But if nothing be produced touching this matter: Then it is to be enquired,
whether there be any places in the Scripture, (wherein it is not indeed
instituted, commanded, nor welpleasingly permitted, but) from whence it may be
in some measure collected, that it is tolerated by God, that in the aforesaid
revolted state of the Church, Churches should be gathered and governed, by such
members thereof, with the greatest submission of mind, in the tolerance of God,
and connivence at the aforesaid defects of his people: not in the name of God,
for that ought to be done in such a manner, and by such means as are wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, of which requisites, both in
former times, and at the present we are destitute: but (as I said) in the
previous toleration and connivence of God, and as near as it may be in such a
manner, and by such means as are wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and
merely true: yet notwithstanding by mere Ecclesiastic authority, in the name
of the respective members of such a Church, and by right of the common calling
of such Christians, so that error both may, and ought to be tolerated in such a
Church?

135.
If it be said, that there is nothing set down in Scripture concerning that
Ecclesiastic manner of gathering, and governing Churches in the tolerance and
connivence of God: Then it is to be desired, that they which say so, would
first accurately advise with the Scripture touching that matter; as also that
they would show in what other manner Churches may be gathered and governed, as
the case of Religion now stands, and then we will consider of it.

136.
But if it be answered, that there are places extant in the Scripture, which
warrant the gathering and governing of Churches in the tolerance and connivence
of God, by mere Ecclesiastic authority, and right of the common calling of
such Christians: Then it is to be enquired, whether those places are extant in
one part of the Scripture, or scattered through the whole volume?

137.
If it be said, that those places are extant in one part of the Scripture, let
them be produced: which done, it may be enquired, whether it be certain, that
there are no other places to be found else where in the Scripture concerning
that matter? And when that is performed, then we will consider of the whole
business.

138.
But if it be answered, that those places are scattered up and down through the
whole Bible: Then it is to be enquired, whether we ought to judge of that
matter according to some part of the places, or according to all and singular
places, extant in the Scripture concerning it?

139.
If it be said, that we ought to judge of that matter, according to some of
those places contained in the Scripture, let the reasons thereof be produced,
that we may consider of them. But by what means can they, who speak so, be
certain in their own judgment? since it may be, that in other places passed
by, more may be spoken for the contrary part, than is spoken on their side in
the places which they allege; or at least since the places passed by may
suggest some means, not found in the places which they have taken notice of;
and therefore how can a solid judgment be made concerning the whole business,
when only a part of the places has been considered and weighed?

140.
But if it be answered, that judgment ought to be made according to all and
singular places found in the Scripture touching that matter: Then it is to be
enquired whether all and singular places touching that gathering and governing
of Churches may be exactly known, (according to the rate of the gifts that are
extant in this revolted state of the Church;) unless those things that are
expressed or implied in the Scriptures, according to their original tongues,
Chaldee Paraphrases, Greek, Syriack, Arabic, Aethiopick, Armenick and other
Translations, (for as much as this thing concerns all Christians, being now
revolted,) together with ancient and modern Commentaries of what language
soever, and other helps both literal and spiritual; I say, unless all the
things set down in Scripture touching that matter be without prejudice argued
on both sides pro and con, and the weight and force of every place accurately
scanned, to the intent that all those places being set down, discussed, and
weighed on both sides, judgment may at length be made, according as the
manifest truth shall present it self to the view in some one of those parts,
immediately confronted together?

141.
If it be said, that there is no need of so laborious an enquiry after the
truth in this matter, let another way to search it out alike certain (in this
revolted state of the Church) be produced, and then we will consider of it.

142.
But if it be answered, that in this state of the Church nothing can be
certainly known or determined concerning that matter, unless we proceed in the
manner aforesaid: Then it is to be enquired, whether any men either have been,
or are now known, who, in this revolted state of the Church, have so performed
that thing?

143.
If it be said, that there are some, let the persons be named who have sought
out and endeavored that gathering and governing of Churches, by all the means
that have heretofore been, or now are.

144.
But if it be answered, that none either have bin, or are now known, who, in
this revolted state of the Church, have taken that course: Then it is to be
enquired, whether it can any longer be doubted, whence so many and so great
contentons and schisms have sprung up in the Christian Church, and do as yet
spring up; since it is apparent, that the neglect of this search has been, and
still is the cause of those stirs, in that Ministers, not observing, or not
regarding the want of fit persons and gifts for the administration of the
Church in the name of God, have yet adventured to continue in the name of God
those Churches that were at first duly gathered and governed in the name of
God, or to erect new ones in the name of God by such means as were not wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true. Whereupon it came to pass, that
every one pretending to be a lawful Minister in the name of God, did captivate
the people with his doctrine as duly proposed in the name of God, and
consequently to be strickly observed; and so divided the people, being zealous
for their Ministers, into diverse factions: whereas they ought to have measured
themselves by their own module, and after the want of fit persons and gifts, to
have gathered and governed Churches, not in the name of God, but only by
Ecclesiastic authority, and right of common calling, and in the name of the
respective members of the Church, (but as near as might be in such a manner,
and by such means as were wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely
true,) according as God in the Scripture gives a toleration in such cases?
Also, it is to be enquired, whether the aforesaid collection and ranging of
places of Scripture be esteemed a thing impossible, or not?

145.
If it be said, that it is esteemed a thing impossible: Then I say, that it is
also impossible, in this revolted state of the Church, to gather and govern
Churches in any convenient manner; for how will it appear that it is done in a
convenient manner, if you proceed otherwise?

146.
But if it be answered, that the collection aforesaid is not esteemed a thing
impossible, since few places are found in Scripture concerning this gathering
and governing of Churches, in that the Scripture was given to institute,
conserve, and introduce the exactness of worship to be administered in the name
of God, and not to prescribe the worship of the apostolical Church in the
tolerance and connivence of God: Then it is to be enquired, whether the
Churches, which during the want of fit persons and gifts for the due
administration of the Church in the name of God, have been, and still are
gathered and governed, neglecting to enquire the aforesaid manner of
constituting Churches could and can accurately know, whether they have been,
and are well gathered and governed?

147.
If it be said, that they could and can accurately know it, let the reasons
there of be produced, that we may consider of them.

148.
But if it be answered, that they neither could, nor can accurately know it,
and therefore justly ought to doubt, whether that administration and
constitution of Churches, which has heretofore passed, and at this day passes
in the name of God, be instituted, commanded, or welpleasingly permitted by
Christ: Then it is to be enquired, whether all and singular persons, who after
the foresaid want of gifts and persons, have not followed that course of
searching out and constituting Churches, but have continued in the name of God
those Churches, that were at first duly gathered and governed in the name of
God, or erected new ones in the name of God, by such means, as were not
wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true; whether, I say, all such
persons, and their Churches ought to have been very shie of preaching in the
name of God, a word not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true; of
making in the name of God catechismes and confessions, not wholly,
intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true; of administering Sacraments in the
name of God; of slighting and excommunicating other Churches; of calling,
ordaining, and sending Ministers in the name of God; of examining men about
their faith; of governing the Church; of exercising Ecclesiastic discipline in
the name of God; of framing and imposing liturgies, and consistoriall
classical and synodall acts, and Ecclesiastic decrees, in the name of God: of
imploring the secular arm to punish such as they call Heretics and
Schismatics; of publicly blessing the people in the name of God; of praying
publicly for all the people, as if they were Ministers sent to discharge an
embassage for Christ; of making hymns to be publicly sung in the Church as a
part of divine service; of making forms of administration of baptism and the
Lords Supper, of ordination of Ministers, Elders and Deacons; of making forms
of marriage, excommunication, reception and admission into the Church, of the
deposition of Ministers, of the visitation of the sick, and of private prayers;
of making forms to bid public fasts and days of humiliation; of making
forms to appoint holy days, rites, and ceremonies in the Church; all which
forms have been made as by Ministers sent in the name of God: Moreover they
ought to have been shie of translations of the Scripture, of written
commentaries, of written Sermons, of common Places, Theses, and the like, made
and proposed to the people as by Ministers officiating for God; also of
opening, erecting and governing Schools and Universities; of callings,
elections, confirmations, and ordinations of Doctors, Bachelors, and Professors
of Divinity; of licencing books; of opening and shutting the press; of
ordaining public Readers of the Scripture, Clerks, and Visiters of the sick;
of forbidding to converse with Christians of other societies; of forbidding the
mutual edification of Christians in public; of requiring of Christians a
public profession of their faith; of prescribing a way to convert those that
go astray, and those that are ignorant; also of all other things, which ought
not to be done either in the name of God, without a previous due mission and
calling; or in the tolerance and connivence of God, by Ecclesiastic authority,
in the name of the respective Members of the Church, and by right of common
calling, without that accurate search and direction of the Scripture.

149.
If it be said, that they ought not therefore to abstain from such things; let
the reasons thereof be produced, that we may consider of them.

150.
But if it be answered, that these persons and their Churches ought to be very
shie of such things; Then it is to be enquired, whether they are not worthy of
great pity, because in this revolted state of the Church, they notwithstanding
bear Ecclesiastic offices; stoutly and zealously maintain their
Ecclesiastic government and discipline, together with those other proceeding
of theirs adorned with specious titles, and exercise them in a proud
magisteriall manner against those that are of a different opinion; and either
directly or indirectly draw to themselves the spiritual rights of the true
Ministers of God, and (as much as they can) the secular rights of the civil
Magistrates, (in all which they have neither part nor portion,) and that under
pretense of continuing, gathering, and governing the Church in the name of God,
or in the stead, and by the Authority of God.

151.
If it be said, that such persons and their Churches are not worthy of great
pity, let the reasons thereof be produced, that we may consider of them.

152.
But if it be answered, that such persons and their Churches are worthy of
great pity: Then it is to be enquired, In what esteem a Christian now a days
(since all, either more or less, have continued, or gathered and governed
Churches in the name of God, without any previous institution, command, or
welpleasing permission of his in the Scripture) in what esteem, I say, a
Christian ought to hold such a Church and society wherein he lives?

153.
If any thing be produced hereupon, we will consider of it.

154.
But if nothing be produced; Then it is to be enquired, whether all and
singular Churches, which in the revolted state of the Church, have neither been
erected, gathered, nor governed in the aforesaid manner by mere Ecclesiastic
authority, but vaunt themselves to be either continued, or gathered and
governed in the name of God, ought to be accounted imperfect and presumptuous?
Imperfect, because amongst other things their Ministers want a word of mouth,
wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, to be uttered in the
public worship in the name of God; Presumptuous, because in stead of a word,
wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, which ought alone to be
uttered in the public worship in the name of God, they substitute their own
concionatory word, not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly and merely true, and
having excluded all the people, claim to themselves alone a power and right to
speak in the Church contrary to the custom both of the ancient Jewish and
primitive Christian Church, which manner of the primitive Christian Church was
subordinate to the direction of the Apostles, wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, and consisted not in the promiscuous explication
of any texts whatsoever, destitute of such an effectual direction, (as it has
been heretofore, and is at this day corruptly done in Churches by means of
Sermons:) Moreover, whether they ought to be accounted presumptuous, because
they perform their gathering, government and discipline of Churches, and all
their aforesaid practices in the name of God?

155.
If it be said, that they ought not to be accounted for such Churches and
societies, let the reasons thereof be produced; and let it be declared what
manner of Churches they ought to be accounted, that we may consider of it.

156.
But if it be answered, that all those Ecclesiastic societies ought to be
accounted for such: Then it is to be enquired, whether, and in what manner one
may notwithstanding continue and communicate with them?

157.
If there be any expedients, let them be produced, and we will weigh them.

158.
But if nothing be produced concerning that matter: Then it is to be enquired;
(since the worship of such societies, being not wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, cannot, for the reasons often specified, be
accounted for the genuine worship, performed in the name of God, according to
his institution, command or welpleasing permission, although those societies
were by their authors erected according to the Scriptures alone, as well as
they were able:) It is, I say, to be then enquired, whether, all such
societies, as long as they sin out of ignorance, may by the judgment of
charity in some sort be accounted for societies erected, gathered and governed,
merely by Ecclesiastic authority, and right of common calling, and in the name
of the respective members of the Church, in the tolerance and connivence of
God, as it has been said? that is, for such societies, wherein none either
rules the Church, or speaks in the name of God, or by way of embassage for
God; and wherein error both can and ought to be tolerated; and with which
societies ignorantly vaunting in the name of God, (though imperfect, because
amongst other things they want a word of mouth, wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true; and presumptuous, because they boast their own
concionatory word, not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, for
divine service performed in the name of God; and because Ministers alone speak
therein, and that concerning any points whatsoever, and perform the gathering,
government, and discipline of their Churches in the name of God;) yet
notwithstanding, in regard of the edificative worship performed there by their
Ministers and people, though defectively and abusively, a Christian may in
charity communicate with them, applying to them (as near as it may be) that of
the Apostle, Despise not prophesyings, prove all things; hold fast that which
is good; 1 These. 5.20, 21. and making use of the Sacraments there, as they are
public professions of the salvation of God gotten by the death and
resurrection of Christ, and common to all Christians; without any regard had of
the persons that administer them, and their calling.

159.
If it be said, that we ought not to account the foresaid societies for such,
by the judgment of charity, let the reasons thereof be produced, and let it be
declared what manner of Churches they may by the judgment of charity be
accounted, that we may consider of it.

160.
But if it be answered, that they may be accounted for such Churches, wherein
edificative worship is performed, by every Christian respectively, that abides
in them without reluctance of conscience: Then it is to be enquired, whether
one ought perpetually to communicate with those societies in that manner, or
not?

161.
If any thing be produced touching this matter, we will consider of it.

162.
But if nothing be produced; Then it is to be enquired, whether it be lawful
to communicate with those societies in that manner any longer, then is
sufficient for them, being informed of the foresaid way of gathering and
governing Churches by Ecclesiastic authority, duly to examine their gathering
and governing of Churches in the name of God, and publicly to declare their
opinion touching the same, whether those things are genuine that are done in
the name of God, or not; again, then is sufficient for them, after they have
found and published that these things are unlawful, which have been done in
the name of God, to institute in their stead, in the connivence of God, a
public worship drawn out of the Scripture; that by this means, the members of
those societies, abiding every one in his own society respectively, may
decently, and in order, without any seditions or schisms addict themselves to
that worship of connivency, and persist unanimously therein, being backed with
the concurrence of other like societies? For if they either neglect or protract
that examination, or when they have made it, refuse to declare and publish
their opinion touching the usual gathering and governing of their Churches,
but on the contrary traduce, vex, and persecute those who have persuaded them
to it, and admonish them to publish it, and so add obstinacy to their error;
or after they have found and published that those things are unlawful which
they have hitherto practiced, causing them to be performed in the Church in the
name of God; yet notwithstanding neglect, protract, or refuse to institute that
worship of connivence: in short, if such self condemned societies
nevertheless neither forsake their former worship, nor institute the aforesaid
worship of connivence; Then, I say, it is to be enquired, whether it be
necessary in that case for Christians to separate themselves from such
societies, every one from his own respectively, accounting them not longer
Churches of God, but malignant societies; whereinto the soul of a man fearing
God and only following the written word of God, wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, ought not to enter.

163.
If it be said, that it is not necessary for a Christian in such a case to
separate himself from his own society, let the reasons thereof be produced,
that we may consider of them.

164.
But if it be answered, that it is necessary for him to do so; Then it is to be
enquired, whether he ought to depart silently from that society, without any
declaration? or having first used a declaration? or first silently, and
afterward using a declaration?

165.
If it be said, that he ought to depart silently without any declaration, let
the reasons be produced, and we will weigh them.

166.
But if it be answered, that he ought to depart, having first used, or
presently after using a declaration, or first silently, and afterward using a
declaration: Then it is to be enquired, How a Christian ought to behave himself
in point of religious worship, after he has duly forsaken that vain society?

167.
If there be any expedients, let them be produced, and we will weigh them.

168.
But if nothing be produced touching this matter; Then it is to be enquired,
whether it be not better for a Christian, with a good conscience, to perform
privately a worship, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, by
making use of the Scripture as it is, and lies; than contrary to his conscience
to be present with an assembly, publicly performing, in the name of of God, a
worship no wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, though
convinced in their own hearts of the unlawfulness thereof?

169.
If it be said, that it is not better for him, let the reasons thereof be
produced, that we may consider of them.

170.
But if it be answered, that it is better for him to perform privately a
worship wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true: Then it is to be
enquired, whether in the case aforesaid, namely, when there is no public
worship found whereof a Christian can partake with a good conscience; where, I
say, it can be doubted, but that pivate worship performed by means of the
Scripture, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, does then
supply the place of true public worship?

171.
If it be said, that it may be doubted concerning that matter, let the reasons
be produced, that we may consider of them.

172.
But if it be answered, that it cannot be doubted concerning that matter: Then
it is to be enquired, whether or no, or how long a Christian fearing God ought
to continue in that practice of private worship only?

173.
If any thing be produced touching this matter, we will consider it.

174.
But if nothing be produced; Then it is to be enquired, whether since the very
Scripture, as it is, and lies, is publicly proposed for the only catechism
and confession in the name of God; also for the only means of the whole public
worship, to be performed in the tolerance and connivence of God, in this
revolted state of the Church, merely by Ecclesiastic authority, and right of
common calling, and in the name of the respective members of the Church; also
for the only means, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, of
Ecclesiastic government in common fundamentalls, and of mutual public
edification by speech, which are subordinate to the very Scripture it self,
and in their exercise come nearest to be wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly,
and merely true; also for the fitting means of mutual tolerance; since, I
say, the very Scripture it self is proposed in the foresaid manner by some
Christians fearing God, who in this revolted state of the Church, have canvased
the whole Scripture pro and con, touching that gathering and governing of the
Church in the tolerance and connivence of God, and have sincerely communicated
their collections to all the world; and all Church gathering, worship,
edification, government, and tolerance, according to the most evident
determination of the Scripture in those collections, is settled merely by
Ecclesiastic authority, and right of common calling, and in the name of the
respective members of the Church, with a ear always open readily and
thankfully to receive better information; whether, I say, it be then seasonable
and profitable for a Christian, having proved the things aforesaid the best he
can, and sincerely and freely approving them, to join himself to that
society, to worship, praise, and profess God in a public manner unanimously
with many; and mutually to edify his neighbor in conference, with those
common fundamentalls; to the intent that others may do in like manner; and
consequently according to the rate of the gifts in every age of such a Church,
the will of God may be done by all Christians unanimously in the earth as it is
unanimously done in the heaven?

175.
If it be said, that even then a Christian cannot join himself to such a
society: let the reasons thereof be produced, that we may consider of them.

176.
But if it be answered, that a Christian then may do it, and it is profitable
for him; Then it is well, and we have enough: for now they are brought to
another public worship; namely, from that which is now in use, and is in its
own nature turbulent, imperfect, and presumptuous, not wholly, intrinsically,
undoubtedly, and merely true, and yet by means of a word of mouth, government,
catechism and confession, not wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely
true, boasts it self for the genuine worship of God; to a worship in its own
nature peaceable, erected indeed merely by Ecclesiastic authority, and right
of common calling. and in the name of the respective members of the Church, in
the tolerance and connivence of God: yet notwithstanding by the very written
word of God, wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly and merely true, and by means
of government, subordinate to the very Scripture it self, and in its exercise
coming nearest to be wholly, intrinsically, undoubtedly, and merely true, both
Ministers and people are now brought.

177.
And these indeed are the questions, that were first to be proposed, as well to
the people, as to the Ministers of your Churches: there should now follow a
fuller deduction and explication of them, as also a consideration of all and
singular states of man's life; likewise the other help of due Ecclesiastic
administration promised by Christ to the Church, I mean the Spirit of Christ;
together with a proof and enumeration of the sundry uses and commodities of
the worship of connivence, and of the many discommodities of the worship at
this day performed in the name of God; after that, a solution of objections,
and many other things: But because I would not be tedious, and in that your
answer to the questions proposed ought to go before, I will now omit those
matters, which (if God permit) shall be communicated to you in their season.
Farewell; and laying aside all prejudice, remember to give to God the things
that are Gods.

FINIS.
In page 72. line 26. for Apostolical, read Apostaticall.

THE AVTHORS ADMONITION.
WHereas since the year 1645. no Answer has hitherto been made to a Book
entitled, To the Law, and to the Testimony; for this cause they who are
therein concerned are desired, that, if they have any thing to answer, they
would at length produce it. But least being carried away with the preposterous
prejudice of the cause, they should fight and trifle with their own vizards,
(as a certain Buffon, according to the humor of that faction, basely did, to
ingratiate himself with those of his own side, and to stir up the hatred of the
People against the Author, in a late silly and senseless Pamphlet of his, not
worthy of a confutation:) let them not cavil with the words, and imposing such
glosses upon them, as are quite besides the mind and meaning of the Author, go
about to refute them, and gull their poor credulous disciples: but let them
closely grapple with the very context of the book, and true state of the
controversy (not that fained one of their own making) most clearly set down in
the 18th. Article; and let them either refute the positive part thereof, and
answer to the questions, or yield the bucklers. By this means they shall not
be thought to have sported in serious things, nor to have offered violence to
their consciences. But if they shall slight this admonition, let them thank
themselves for the aspersion of deserting a desperate Cause, and usurping a
Papal jurisdiction, which will thence arise; and for whatsoever they would not
have to come to pass from this neglect of theirs.

Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up.
Matthew. 15.13.

Hearken; fear; beware.


