To the Kings most excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of the Knights,
Ministers, Gentry, Freeholders, and many thousands of the Inhabitants of the
County of LEICESTER, who assembled on the Horse-fairlays ready to accompany
this PETITION if, they should be required.
The humble Petition of the Knights, Ministers, Gentry, and Freeholders of
Leicester.
MOst humbly shows with one unanimous consent, that your Petitioners and
obedient Servants of Leicestershire; situated in the midst of your Kingdom
of England, and in the midst of our great fears and apparent dangers, by
your taking up Arms and levying Forces (as it is thought) against your
Honorable, Loyal, and Illustrious Parliament, thereby to rout, to ruin and
disappoint their manifest, good and godly purposes, and the more fully to
effect this Design, never heard of (except in the Reign of the Eleventh of
Richard the Second) you have (as we rightly conceive) by the ill Advice of your
pernicious Council morg^ged, pawned or sold the glory of the Land, the Jewels
and Treasures of the CROVNE, which ought as highly to be prized as the MILITIA,
or any Magazine whatsoever: the one chiefly serves to secure what is Yours in
Possession; the other (being so easily parted with, abateth the luster of Your
KINGDOM.

Therefore may it please your Majesty to hearken to the Worthy and
well-deserving Men of your Kingdom, your hopeful and our happy Parliament:
and become more near in Person, and join in affection with your trusty and
grave and solid Council and great Court of Judicature, for surely that high
Assembly with Gods Blessing and your assenting unto them can soon procure your
and our safety, and annihilate all distractions and distempers.

And that you would freely consent or put our County (because we are in such
emminent danger, Southward and Northward, having neither Castles or any other
places of strength by Sea or Land, or approved friends besides the Parliament)
in a posture of defense, and that you would recall your Warrants prohibiting
our Traynd bands to muster, the rather because we desire to follow the good
example of our neighbor Country Men of Lincolneshire and others, and to join
your self with your Parliament.

Otherwise, when they shall declare and nominate the particular disturbers of
Yours and Our peace, the procurers of your and our fears, iealousies and
amazments out of their known experience, we shall take upon us the boldness
to remove from your Majesty such Prosecutors as are enemies to the State and
hindeers to the tranquillity of the same.

Therefore we your dutiful faithful Subjects and servants humbly sue, that
your Majesty would accord with your Parliament, and comply with them to
restrain the violent malice of the bloodthirsty Rebels in Ireland. To settle
a Godly, Learned and Industrious Ministry. To disarme the Papists seeing they
rejoice in this discord, and insolently speak words full of Arrogance. To
separate from you that subver^ing Council who dare not stand to the goodness of
their Cause nor can endure the Test. To cashire those Cavaliers and other
unnecessary vndependants. Fully and clearly to acquit the Lord Kimbolton, and
other the worthy Members of the least suspicion of Treason against your
Majesty or State, one of them being chiefly entrusted for the good and
welfarre of our County. To believe in the faithfulness and Loyalty of your
Parliament, who regulates the oppressions of your Kingdom. And other the
Premises.

And we with our lives, and Estates, and Fortunes shall be obedient and loyal
unto your Majesty. And pray, etc. June the 18.

