To the Right Honorable both Houses of the Parliament of England; assembled at
Westminster.
The humble Petition of the Grand Jury at the Assizes holden at Chelmsford, for
the County of Essex, the 22 of March, 1647. as it was presented to both the
Honorable Houses of Parliament the 4. of May, 1648. by diverse thousands of
Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the same County.
Humbly Shows:
THat your Petitioners taking into their serious (yet sad) considerations the
great distractions and calamities of this whole Kingdom, and being also very
sensible by woeful experience of the great and many pressures and grievances of
their own particular County, and taking notice also with all thankfulness of
the honorable resolutions of this House, in giving encouragement to the just
desires of the oppressed in a Petitionary way (the undoubted right of the
Subject) and the very life of their liberty it self, out of a tender fellow
feeling of others, and the deep sense of their own miseries, have made this
humble (yet necessary address to this Honorable House) conceiving both the
present and future happiness of themselves and the whole Kingdom to be
concentred in these their ensuing desires.

And first, considering that it is impossible the sad and direful effects of
this late War should cease without the principal causes be first taken away
and removed. And considering likewise his Majesty's absence from his two Houses
of Parliament, has been one maine cause of increasing jealousies, and
continuing a misunderstanding betwixt Him and his great Council (the original
and source of our unhappiness) And humbly conceiving, that a timely and ready
concession to his Majesty for a personal Treaty with his high Court of
Parliament, may prove the most effectual and speedy means for the removeall
of all such misapprehensions and fears, which are yet the unhappy obstacles of
the peace and quiet of this our Kingdom.

Secondly, considering the excessive charges and almost intolerable burden
this County, with the rest of the Kingdom do at this present groan under,
which although for a time they may possibly bear with patience, yet if
continued, will certainly and inevitably ruin themselves, their families and
posterities. And withal considering that the most hopeful means of settling a
well grounded peace, and the surest way of preventing future troubles, consists
in the due satisfaction of all just complaints and interests. And that this
Army who have faithfully discharged their trust to your selves and Kingdom,
do much complain for the want of their Arrears.

We therefore your humble Petitioners do most earnestly desire, that you would
be pleased to take these Premises into your grave and serious considerations,
and to condescend to the royal intimations of his Majesty for a Personal
Treaty, to expedite such a course which in your wisdoms you shall think most
meet for the satisfaction of the arreares of the Army, with a disbanding of the
same.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
The twelfth of April it was resolved at Chelmsford, upon the meeting of the
Petitioners there, as follows:

I That five hundred Copies of the Petition should be forthwith printed and
sent to the Gentlemen and Petitioners of the County. II That Friday the twenty
eight of April, at the Talbot in Chelmsford all the subscriptions of the said
Copies should be sent unto Stephen Smith Esquire. III Thursday the fourth of
May, the Petitioners have appointed to meet at the Crown at Stratford Lancton,
about eight of the clock in the morning. IIII Its desired that those who shall
subscribe the Petition, would show themselves in person in the presenting of
it, if it may stand with their convenience.
Die Jovis, 4 May, 1648.
THe Lords have commanded me to return thanks to the County of Essex, for the
good affections which they have expressed to the Parliament and Kingdom; they
have likewise commanded me to let you know: That they will take your Petition
into their serious and speedy consideration, and do assure you, that they will
not be wanting to contribute their utmost endeavors for the recovering of the
present pressures and burdens, and for the composing of these unhappy
differences, so as the Kingdom may enjoy a safe and well grounded peace.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Iovis, 4 May, 1648.
THe House being informed that diverse Gentlemen of the County of Essex were at
the Door, desiring to prefer a Petition to the House, they were called in,
and Major Stephen Smith did present a Petition, the which (the Petitioners
being with-drawne) was read, and was entitled, The humble Petition of the
Grand Jury at the Assizes holden at Chelmesford for the County of Essex, the 22
of March, 1647. with the Freeholders and Inhabitants of the same County.

The Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker by Command of the
House, upon Vote upon the Question gave them this Answer; That this House does
take notice of the great Service, and good affections of that County to the
Parliament, and are very confident they will so continue. As to their Petition,
the House is now in Debate concerning the speedy settlement of the Kingdom,
and do not doubt, but what they shall conclude thereupon will give
satisfaction to the said County, and to all the well-affected people of the
Kingdom.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed at London for Joseph Hunscot. 1648.


