To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Address of your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects of the Clergy in the
County of KENT.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
AS we cannot look, but with an holy amazement upon that Divine hand of
Providence, which with most admirable and indiscernable progresses has
restored your Sacred Majesty to your undoubted Birthright, and into the arms
and hearts of your loyal Subjects; so we conceive it to be our duty, to express
unto the world our abundant thankfulness to that omnipotent God, and testify
our joy in that miraculous and happy Restitution: It being evidently and
eminently apparent, that not by might, nor by power, but by his Spirit has the
Lord brought you forth through variety of difficulties and oppositions, as our
Zerubbabel, and has made the Great Mountain a Plain before your Sacred feet;
in whom we see concentred all those Excellencies which we are confident will,
through Gods mercy, make this Church and Nation under your Majesty's Government
and protection completely happy.

And as we never did formerly make the least Addresses to those prodigious
Usurpers, which had involved this Church and Kingdom in diverse Labyrinths of woe
and misery, and well-nigh blasted the most-flourishing and Catholic Religion,
-- and the best constituted Monarchy upon Earth: So we must needs be sensible
of this blessed alteration, under the warmth and spreading rays of your
Majesty's benign and most auspicious constellation, whereby our stifled hopes
have recovered such strength, as to revive us into an expectation, that your
incomparable piety and wisdom will restore and establish the purity of
Religion, together with that Primitive and Apostolic Government which is most
agreeable to the Word of God, whereby this glorious Church and Kingdom shall be
again the astonishment of our adversaries, and the rejoicing of all sincere and
faithful Christians, both at home and abroad. Wherein as you will appear the
true Defender of the Faith, so it will remain as an indelible character, and
eternal monument of your admirable wisdom, and singular goodness.

And we cannot but with all demonstrations of joy, and expressions of
thankfulness to your Majesty, bless and praise the God of Heaven, who has put
it into your Royal heart to appear so seasonably and zealously in the Cause of
God, against the Viciousness and Profaneness of this Age. And we daily pray,
that God who has stirred up your Divine Soul, will also enable your Royal
Hands to obviate, and give a perfect check to those Debauches which are so much
a dishonor to God, a scandal to the Nation, and a reproach to the Gospel which
we profess.

And now, Dread Sovereign, in all humility we beg leave with our hearts and
hands, unanimously and cheerfully to testify and subscribe our Obedience and
Loyalty: And though our hands be weak, yet we shall lay forth our hearts in our
prayers (which are the Churches best and only weapons) to the God of Heaven,
That he (who in such a continued series of wonders, has hitherto preserved
your Majesty from the hands of your Enemies, and now restored you to your Regal
Throne in Peace) will be pleased to bless you with length of days, and Crown
you with his loving kindness and tender mercies, and be a wall of fire round
about you, to scare away all Foraign Invaders, and preserve you in safety from
Domestique Conspiracies, and so fasten you as a nail in a sure place, that your
Throne being established in righteousness, your Crown may never be shaken, till
you change it for that Immarcessible Crown of glory which is prepared in the
highest Heavens for all those that love the second coming of the Lord JESUS.
This Address was presented and read to his Royal Majesty, on Tuesday the 24
of this instant July, by several MINISTERS of the said County, some of whose
Names are hereunto annexed.

John Lee of South-fleet. Thomas Morris of Ash. Robert Hasselwood of Sutton at
Hone. Henry Cunningham of North-fleet. Samuel Grymes of Hadlow. Thomas Stansall
of Longfield. Richard Bosse of Seavenoke. John Stevens of Seal. Francis
Collins of Norkhols. Samuel Sharp of Sundridge. John Beadle of Eynsford. Walter
Drury of Sandherst. John Cottingham of Halsted. Robers Mills of Chelsfield.
James Hickford of Igtham. Edward Clerk of Cheevening. John Codd of Leyburn.
Thomas Brown of Farningham. John Lingue of Yalden. Isaac Sanderson of
Plumstead. George Eves of Hartley. James Peate of Bidborough. Edward Master of
Kingsdown. John Stileman of Tunbridge. William Lister of Melton. Thomas Plume
of Greenwich. Robert Litler of Deptford. Thomas Depup of Crayford. Thomas
Smoult of Depup. Edward Archbole of Trottescliffe. Robert Beadle of Wilmington.
John Stacey of Rydley. Thomas Lee of Leigh. Thomas Jones of Nusted. Oliver
North of Teston.

