CHRIST KNOCKING AT THE DOOR, OR, The Substance of a SERMON Intended to be
Preached in PAUL'S upon the Sabbath Day which fell upon the Fifteenth Day of
April last: But not Preached, by reason of a sudden Obstruction of that
Liberty which was promised him, being indeed unworthy to be the Servant of
Jesus Christ in any such ministration for ever.

Published by the Author PHILIP TANNY commonly TANDY.

London, Printed by A.M. and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the Black
Spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's, and Simon Miller at the Sign of the
Star. 1655.

To his Highness OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland.
May it please your Highness:
IT is now almost nine years, since I appeared in a Pulpit, except once only at
London-stone, where, I thank God, through his blessing, I did not wholly lose my
labor.

I did endeavor before that to have preached at Paul's upon a Sabbath day in
the afternoon, in Dr Burgess his substitutes room; but he being surprised on a
sudden, with some strange relations touching me, (wherein it may please God at
length to vindicate me, to the shame of all my enemies,) (for I account my
professed friends, by reason of their injurious actions toward me little
less,) on a sudden; when I came with intention to go into the Pulpit, to
deliver the substance of what is herewith printed, with some enlargements, as
my affections should have dictated; I was to the wonder, I think of many, I am
sure of diverse, who came to hear me with honest affections, I doubt not, denied
the liberty which was very civily promised me.

May it please your Highness, I thank God I can say truly (and my heart and
conscience bears me witness to my own integrity in saying so) that I can be
content to become a spectacle to God, Angels and men, since he has been
pleased most strangely and unexpectedly, to find out a way to show compassion
to such a sinner as I am: of which I was so hopeless for a long time together
(though I must confess at the beginning of my despair, I received the greatest
support by your Highness speaking to me, that ever I had from any man living,)
that I must needs say, that for almost, if not full out nine years together, I
never clearly hoped for the reconciled face of a loving God again: For this
reason, I say once again, I can be content, through the goodness of God, to
become a spectacle to God, Angels and men for Jesus Christ's sake, who I trust
has had mercy on my soul, and has pardoned my transgressions, there having
been never such a sinner in the world as I have been. Such a compassion being
showed to such a sinner, the like I say again, was never yet in the world, it
has begotten in me a suitable, and I hope I may say, a Christianlike
resolution, to pass by such wrongs and injurious transactions used toward me,
as I may truly affirm, that, all circumstances considered, there were yet never
the like of them in the world done to any private man, in a peaceable
government: God continue this government upon your Highness shoulders, and make
them strong for their service, which is very great, nay greater then you are
aware of, if I know any thing of God, or of Jesus Christ aright.

The reason why I have troubled the Press with my affectionate meditations,
upon the action of Christ knocking at the doors of our hearts for the
entertaining of his mercies, is, because

1. By this I shall revive in my memory the many transactions which Christ in
his patience has used toward my self, and be humbled for my own disobedience
and rebellion.

2. That it might appear to all, that I am no sower of sedition, there being
nothing more affectionately springing in my soul, then my longing desire to see
this poor Nation, wherein I was born, and have lived (I thank God honestly
toward man, though sinfully toward God) the larger half of my days (in humane
reason,) settled and established in truth righteousness and peace.

I put truth first, for if our intellectuals be not better principled touching
many differences that are amongst us, I am certain we cannot be stablished in
righteousness, and if we be not stablished in righteousness; I am as sure and
certain, that we cannot be stablished in any true and truly comfortable peace.

I am not without hope, notwithstanding all difficulties, yet to see such a
peace. And indeed to speak truth, one reason of my hope is, that I see
generally in all men's expectations, so little hope of it. For, do not men's
hearts say within themselves, How can these things be? shall a Nation be born
in a day? It may be it will; for when the Lord returns the captivity of his
people, shall they not be like them that dream? Who knows what a day may bring
forth?

We have long looked for a day generally heretofore, but of late men have
labored in the very fire, and yet expected no good, but to live, and not to be
slaves. Bear up yet a little longer, O England, it may be thy Savior will yet
pity thy longings; thou see no help, it is the more likely, that help is nigh
at hand: me thinks I see a little, which though appearing but like the palm of
a hand, may yet increase to a great cloud, which shall overspread the heavens,
and bring forth rain to refresh the earth.

In this Expectation I do with much comfort of heart assure my Soul, your
Highness has a great part to act, a great Stage to act upon, you know not how
large: Be pleased to look to your station in Jesus Christ strongly and
suddenly, if your feet shall be fixed upon that rock, and your goings stablished
in him, this Nation will have reason to bless God for you, but if your
Highness falter too much, if you consult with flesh and blood too long, if your
affections to Jesus Christ and his poor ones cool, or grow indifferent, or that
you look too much upon principles of Policy, which are an Egyptian Reed, and
will deceive you, and all the Princes in the world. You may expect a sudden
hand of Gods vengeance and displeasure, that shall overturn your Counsels, and
bring them to foolishnes, and God shall bring deliverance another way, and
restore comforts to his Mourners by another hand. I beseech your Highness
pardon my plain dealing, I dare not but speak the things which in some little
measure I see. I have spoken herein words of soberness and honest affection to
your Highness, and to this Nation wherein I live; God Almighty give you
understanding in all things, which concern the public and your private peace.
I am

Your Highness most truly affectionate, and thankefully humble Servant. PHILIP
TANNY vulgo TANDY.

CHRIST KNOCKING AT THE DOOR.
REV. 3. Ver. 20th. Behold I stand at the door and knock.


IF we take this whole Book of the Revelations, and look upon it in a more
general view, it seems to me to consist of these grand parts: First, Of
several Exhortations, full of life, which St John received from Christ the
author of them. Secondly, Of certain high and heavenly predictions, which
represented to St John the state of the Church till the end of the world. The
Exhortations are set down in the 2d and 3d Chapters: The predictions from
thence to the end. Which he concludes so sweetly, as if he knew not whether he
were out of the body or in the body; witness those words of ravishment, Rev.
ult. ver. 18. And the spirit and the bride say come, and let him that hears
say come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him take of
the water of life freely. And those other gracious words ver. 20. He which
testifies of these things says, surely I come quickly, Amen: even so come
Lord Jesus.

As for the first Chapter, I look upon it as containing principally three
things:

First, The Title of the whole Book in the three first verses.

Secondly, The Preface or Dedication of the whole Book in the three next
verses.

Thirdly, A solemn and majestical description of Jesus Christ the Author of
the whole Book, which I find something scattered in diverse parts of the
Chapter.

This description seems to be in 4. fragments.

One is set forth by St John in his Preface.

A second is aimed at in the terriblenesse of his coming to judgment, ver. 7th.

And the third comes to us in the words of Christ himself, ver 8, 11, 10.

A fourth is presented to St John in a vision, and in that vision to us; if we
have eyes eyes to see and ears to hear: from v. 13. to v. 17.

This vision was so full of amazing majesty, that when St John saw it, he fell
at Christ's feet, but Christ soon lays his right hand upon him, and revives
him, saying unto him, I am the first and the last, I am he that lives and was
dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, and have the keys of hell and of
death.

This vision being over, and St John having got to himself again, Christ
gives him directions to write: 1. The things which he had seen. 2. The things
which are. 3. The things which must be hereafter.


That is, as Pareus in effects observes,

First, Transactions which St John himself had been witness of from the first
preaching of the Gospel after Christ's ascenfion, till the time of Domitian.

Secondly, Things, which at the time of St John's writing were then on foot.

Thirdly, Things which from thence forwards should come to pass till the end
of the world.

But whether some other transactions touching the condition of the Church
before Christ, were not withal aimed at in some of those visions, which were
represented to S. John, and are mentioned in this Book of the Revelations, I
must confess I am yet to learn.

But to close as fast as I can. You see the maine body of the Revelations,
branched by me into Exhortations and Predictions, or rather Representations.

My Text you see falls out to be part of the Exhortations, being part of the
third Chapter, which concludes them.

These Exhortations are inscribed to the several Angels of several Churches.
Touching which let me give you one note of Pareus, Caeterum non ad solos
Episcopes, says he, sed ad ipsas quoque Ecclesias spect are Epistolas, ex
Epilog is intelligitur.

But from the Conclusions its evident, that these Epistles (I have called them
Exhortations) do not only belong to the Bishops, but also to the very
Churches themselves: for each Epistle ends thus, He that has an care to hear,
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

But what are the names or distinctions of these Churches, to whose Angels or
Bishops these Exhortations are inscribed? I will barely name them and haste to
my Text.

The first is the Church in Ephesus, Chapter 2. v. 1.

The second the Church in Smyrna, Ch 2 v. 8.

The third the Church in Pergamus, Chapter 2. v. 12.

The fourth the Church in Thyatira, Chapter 2. v. 18.

The fifth the Church in Sardis, Chapter 3. v. 1.

The fixth the Church of Philadelphia, Chapter 3. v. 7.

The seventh and last the Church of Laodiceans; or as the margin of the great
Bible has it, in Laodieca, Chapter 3. v. 14.

I might give you a note here, that the Churches are called Churches in
Ephesus, in Smyrna, in Pergamus, in Tbyatira, in Sardis, in Philadelphia; nor
would any objection cross me in the tendency of my note, that the last Church
is called the Church of Laodiceans, or in Laodicea, but I promised you the
naming of the Churches only, and therefore I press not my note, but haste
according to my promise.

At length you see plainly and methodically, that my Text is part of those
Exhortations or Epistles which were directed by Jesus Christ to the Church of
the Laodiceans. Which if Mr Brightman observe aright, in making it a type of
our Church here in England, it must be granted that we are the more concerned
to hear what the Spirit of Christ says unto this Church; let me cite his note,
which having lately seen in his Latin edition only, I think I may give you
the sense of them in english thus: But why does he say that he stands at the
door and knocks? Why does not himself open the door? Why does he not
directly enter in? especially seeing he has the key of David, by which he
opens nor does any shut, as v. 7. And then he adds: These things, says he,
are most significantly spoken, pro ratione Laodicensis nostraeque Ecclesiae,
with a sutablenesse to the Laodiceans and our Church in which Christ stands
before the doors, but our hearing (says he) is in a manner quite stopped or
intercluded.

I will not dispute here whether the Spirit of Jesus Christ intended the Church
of the Laodiceans to be a type of the Church in England or not; But be it as it
will, this both you and I and all of us in England must yield him, that the
reproofs and accusations fastened upon this Church, are as fit to be spoken and
charged upon us as upon any Church this day in the world.

Let us take the words as they lie in our way, what more true then that Jesus
Christ knows our works? that we are neither hot nor cold? and so because we are
lukewarm, how justly may we fear, yea, fear and tremble that Jesus Christ will
spue us out of his mouth, if ever we were in it? for we are generally so wicked
that it may be questioned. How justly may Christ charge us as the Laodiceans,
that we say, We are rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing,
and know not that we are wretched and miscrable, and poor, and blind, and
naked.

How fit are we in some sense, viz. in respect of our condition, for that
heavenly and spiritual counsel of Christ, v. 18? I counsel thee to buy of me
gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment, that thou
may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness doc not appear, and
anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see.

Being such sinners, such lukewarm professors, how suitable is it, that we
should be put in mind of afflictions, and of the chastenings of the Lord,
especially if he shall be pleased to rebuke and chasten us in love.

To conclude: How exactly seasonable and agreeable is the exhortation to
repentance immediately before my Text, be zealous therefore and repent? How
does the fire of Gods judgments, and his late judgments of fire, conspire as
it were to set on this Exhortation to repentance? but if Jesus Christ do not
set it on too by his own powerful spirit, all is to no purpose. But for this
end, I hope we shall find Jesus Christ knocking at the doors of our souls,
as heretofore he did at the hearts of the Laodiceans; and happy are we if we
hear him knocking and open our door; for if any man hear his voice and open
his door, Christ will come in to him and will sup with him and he with Christ.
Behold I stand at the door and knock, this is my Text, and you see how I am
come to it, be pleased to observe in it:

First, A note of preparation, Behold.

Secondly, A declaration of an action which Christ did to this Church of the
Laodiceans, he stood at their doors and knocked.

The note of preparation fixes us upon two Considerations:

First, That the thing which follows after it, is worth the marking, and
therefore Mr. Perkons calls it a note of Attention. Pareus to the like purpose
says thus; Ecce ex: itantis particula, pulsat aures and corda ut dict is
attendant; This behold, says he, is a particle of stirring up, it forcibly
strikes upon the ears and heart, that they should attend to those things that
are spoken: both agree in one, that the words of Christ here spoken, werr
diligently to be headed by the Laodiceans, for they were written to them: and
that they are diligently to be heeded by us likewise, for I suppose we take it
for granted, that they are written for our instruction.

Oh then let us hear him, let us hear him; pity it is we should turn the deaf
care upon him for ever: we have refused him enough already, have we not? ask
your own consciences, commune with your own hearts upon the point and be
still, and I am confident they must say, they will say, we have, we have
refused him enough, but shall we refuse him still? is that fit? is it
reasonable? What? shall we keep Jesus Christ out of doors, though perhaps his
head be fi^led with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night; shall we
let him knock till his heels ache, as we say? nay till his heart ache? rill his
provocations arise to such a height that he will be gone and leave us; has
Christ deserved this of our souls? or do our souls stand in no more need of
Christ, then thus to serve him, thus to set him packing, with a construction of
unkindness, that we would not so much as open doors to him? Does this sound
well, or will it sound well in our ears, to be charged with this at the day of
judgment? Is it well for Christ, or well for us, or well for any, but
particularly is it well for our Children, that we should be so disobedient, so
gainsaying, so mad? not well for Christ sure; for what friend can but take it
unkindly to be so dealt with? Not well for us neither, for being so dealt with,
what can we expect, but that Christ being thus denied, thus refused, thus
driven away, as I may say, he should resolve to do with us, since the times of
the Gospel, as God did in the old Testament, before the times of the Law, My
spirit shall not always strive with man? In a word, what can we look for, but
that he should call no more, knock no more, wait no more? and then may we not
justly say unto our souls? Woe unto us for we have exceedingly sinned.

When Christ was dealt unkindely with by the Spouse, Cant. 5. (Consider the
passage and you will see how nearly it concerns us) you will find what pains
it cost the Spouse before she and her Beloved met again. At the 2d verse we
find she sleeps but my heart awaketh; says she, that is well, her awaking
heart heard the voice of her Beloved, It is the voice of my Beloved that
knocks, saying, Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled; Oh how
sweet are these words! how heavenly these transactions! how ravishing are these
passages to such as understand them and the loving kindness of Jesus Christ
in them; Well, Christ does not only knock and call, and it may be these or such
like were the words which Jesus Christ used to the Church of the Laodiceans,
notwithstanding their wickedness, (and indeed I am apt to think so by an
inclination of my spirit, which seems rationally to lead me this way, and that
is the reason, that whenever I shall have ended my Sermons upon this Text, I
shall follow them with these words of Christ in this 5th of Cant. v. 2. and the
middle part only, and then return to this 3^ of Revelations, and the residue of
this 20th verse) But this by the way. To return where I was, Jesus Christ does
not only knock and call as I said, for he would fain come in, but he reasons
the case, and pleads for entrance, Open, open, my Beloved, for my head is
filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, as much as if Jesus
Christ should have spoken in other words thus, Pray thee my Spouse, my Love, my
Sister, my Undefiled, my Dove, my Delight, my any thing, my every thing that is
delectable and sweet to me, Pray thee open door, thou little think what
pains I have taken to come to thee to night; Alas, I am wet, I do not say all
over, but my head is filled with dew, and my locks are full likewise of the
drops of the night, thou know not, but I may catch cold with thy staying;
Open quickly, my dear sweet friend, my Sister, my Love, if thou love me that
am thy husband, open and let me stay no longer: Well, you see the plea, but
does it prevail, a man would think it should, it is strange it should not, but
it does not; The Spouse reasons Christ away, and in reasoning him away reasons
her self into sorrow, as you may see by what follows: Jesus Christ being dealt
unkindely with withdraws himself, and it gone, the Spouse then gets up when
'twas too late, it seems that he had pleaded so long that she was just rising
as I may say, when he was going; It seems likewise that directly at parting he
spoke a word for a farewell that pierced her to the very heart and soul, it may
be 'twas no more then in one word, Farewell, or I am gone, I will stay no
longer, you use me coursly, unkindely, as if you loved me not: What ere the
words were it is sure they stung, for she says expressly, her soul failed when
he spoke; Well, but what follows, sad work, Christ knows and your souls know
too, if you have any acquaintance with Christ, I sought him but I could not
find him, I called him but he gave me no answer, No! what? Christ give no
answer when a poor afflicted soul calls, that is sad, my brethren, but thank your
selves for it, he calls often, and you will not answer him, and therefore it is
but just with him, that when ye call he likewise should not answer you; 'twas
so with the Spouse and ha^h been so with us, if we have any experimental
knowledge of Christ as a Beloved. The Spouse under this transaction finds
things go sadly with her, afflictions come tumbling on her like waves one upon
the neck of another, and truly no wonder seeing Christ is gone, Woe unto you
when I depart from you. But see how she is put to it, she hunts after her
Beloved when he was gone, she now sees 'twas better rising before; as she
hunts and seeks about, she lights upon the watch and the watch upon her, she
was catched abroad at unseasonable hours, after midnight belike, it may be
about four of the Clock in the morning, but how did the Watch serve her? they
smote her, and the blows were no small ones, we use not to strike children so;
it is said they wounded her, nay, it should seem they left her dead, else it is
like they would have carried her to prison, but by them she is left belike, and
then she falls into worse hands, at least not better, for the Keepers of the
Walls light upon her, and they take away her Veil; Beaten, Wounded, Robbed, you
see she is, this was great affliction, hard usage, but all this is nothing to
the loss of her Beloved; 't was he, 'twas he that was gone that had withdrawn
himself, her soul failed when she spoke, for him she is sick, sick at heart,
sick of love; and I tell you my Brethren and Sisters, love-sicknesse is heavy
sickness, What sickness like it? It Is an affliction greater then beating,
wounding, robbing, especially if spiritual, the Spouse tells you that plainly,
for though beaten, wounded, robbed, and ^ob'd by those that should have
comforted her, yet all her complaint seems to be, that her Beloved was gone,
that he had withdrawn himself that she could not find him, and therefore being
wearied with searching, she seems to sit her down, panting under her
affliction, and as if she were able to do no more, she cries out to the
Daughters of Jerusalem, (by which I think you may understand such afflicted
souls as are beginning to look after Christ, and being young do groan like
little young children after him) To these I say she cries out, (as being most
probably likely to tell her some news of Christ, because of his tenderness to
such souls, as being perpetually ready to succor them) And how does she cry
out to them? truly she speaks as if she were now fainting, and could do no more
for her self; I charge you O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, that if she find my
Beloved, ye tell him I am sick of Love; And what think ye now (my sweet
Friends) is it good slieghting of Christ? Is it good refusing of him? Does the
Sppuse think so? No. And What can you think so that have heard this experiment?
Take need, Take heed, my Brethren, what ye do; You see what it cost her, you
know not what it may cost you, if you deal unkindely with him; If ye refuse to
hearken and to yield up your affections as well as your ears to the words which
he speaks, what know you whether he will speak again for ever? You cannot say
absolutely, but that the spirit of Jesus Christ may be speaking to you in me
now, at this very time, season, and moment, I say nothing whose I am, God in
due time will bear me witness, and bear witness with me, if I am his; Fly not
like the moth too busily about the Candle of your own Consciences; If you
slieght the burning light of that Candle, yet consider betime, that it is too
great a boldness, to play and dally with the Spirit of God, who is a consuming
fire: Oh kiss the Soune lest he be angry, if he be angry, yea but a little,
blessed are all they that put their trust in him. For Gods sake, for Christ's
sake, for the Conversion of Souls sake, for your Childrens sake, methinks these
concernments should have some prevalency with you; By all these, and all the
mercies of God, if ever Christ knocks, deal but as civilly with him as
generally we do with strangers, ask him, Who Is at door? he will answer you
doubtless, It Is I, It Is I, Pray you open and let me come in, for this he
knocks, calls, cries. But what will he do when he comes in? He will do any
thing that is good for us, he will sweep the house, cleanse our hearts, wash
away our sins, wash our garments, or clothe us at least with clean white
linen; These things done, he will make ready a Feast for us, a Feast of fat
things, and when all is ready he will sit down with us, he will sup with us,
nay, his Father will sup with us too, he with him, both with us, we with them;
Come, Come, my hearts, I am again your Petitioner, for Christ's sake, for your
Souls sake, for your Childrens sakes, little do you think how much they are
concerned in the account of your yielding; yield, yield, great hearts, throw
down the bars, away with your oppositions, your lusts, your sins; Let me break
open doors at this time with those words of the Psalmist, Psa. 24.7, 8, 9, 10.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and
the King of glory shall come in. Who is the King of glory? the Lord strong and
mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, even lift
them up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this
King of glory? the Lord of Hosts he is this King of glory.

I have done with the word Behold, as it is a note of Attention, but I told you
it sixeth us upon two Considerations; and the second Consideration is point of
Admiration, I must say something of that too.

The word Behold is often used in such a tendency of signification; Behold a
virgin shall conceive with child. I need not quote Texts for that which is so
obvious; it is a note of Wonder, and let it be granted so to be here, for
surely it is matter of admiration, that Jesus Christ should stand at the doors
of such a wicked people, such ungodly, hypocritical professors as this Church
of the Laodiceans was, we are: but behold he does it, though it be a strange
thing for us to pattern such a patience, yet it is not a strange thing for
Christ to set us such a copy: this is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in
our eyes, that he is so good, so gracious, so patient, so that we must needs
look a little upon this word Behold in this sense of wonder; and truly
wonderful it is, if either you consider,

1. Who it is that declares himself, it is I, says Christ.

2. What he declares himself to do, he stands, Non dicit venio, sed sto,
says an honest Expositor, He does not say, I come, and I sit, but I stand.

3. But where stands he; look and wonder I beseech you, he stands at the
door, Cur non aperit, says Mr. Brightman, Why does he not open the doors?
nay, Cur non effringat fores? Why does he not break open doors? say I, he can
if he will, but he does not, but there he stands.

But is the door open? no: the more wicked they, we, all, it is shut, yet he
will not be gone, for my Text says, he seeks for entrance fairly, he knocks.

He knocks says my ^ext: but if you look into the following words in this
very same verse, you shall find he calls too; for it is said. If any man hear
my voice, and open the door, etc. Surely a voice, a call, could not be heard,
nor supposed to be heard, unless there were a call, unless there were a
voice, both then must be yielded; he knocked, he called, he did so to them, it
may be he does so to us: Let me only put you in mind, before I come to closer
examination, that it may be we shall find this true, that pulsando vocat, and
vocando pulsat, imo demum effringit fores: that by knocking he calls, and by
calling he knocks, nay at length breaks open the doors. You know what Christ
says to this purpose, if we rightly understand it, The hour is come, and now
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and those that
hear shall live.

The first point of Admiration, lies in the Consideration of the party who
declares himself, it is I, Behold I stand at the door and knock. I, Who is
that? ver. 14. tells us,

Ver. 14. These things says the Amen, the saithfull and true witness, the
beginning of the creation of God.

He is called the Amen; in the Greek it is (...), ille Amen, that Amen: and who
is that Amen? the next words tell us, it is the faithful and true witness. And
who is this fairhfull and true witness? let the Scripture tell you plainly,
Rev. 1.6. Grace be unto you, and peace from him who is, and was, and is to
come, and from the seven spirits whih are before his throne, and from Jesus
Christ, who is the faithful witness, described after to be him that loved us,
and has washed us from our sins by his own blood. Anselme has a very
useful note upon this very word, quia dicturus erat (scilicet Christus) rem
mirabilem. quod tepidi excommunicandi and de ore suo projiciendi essent, qui ab
hominibus boni credebantur (subaudi nec tamen essent) ideo promittit se veracem
esse, and ut in his fibi credendum esse videatur, ideo dicitur ille Amen, or to
this purpose, and very near these words, Because, says he, Jesus Christ was
to speak of a wonderful thing, viz. that lukewarm persons were to be
excommunicated by Christ, and that these were to spued out of his mouth, who
were of men believed to be good, and yet were not so, he premiseth therefore
that he is a teller of truth; and that in these things it might appear that he
ought to be believed, therefore he calls himself the Amen, or that Amen, as much
as to say, My words shall be found to be true, I warrant you, Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, but one jot of my words shall not pass away; When therefore
you hear Jesus Christ by his Spirit, in his Servants and Ministers, threatening
to spue you out of his mouth for your lukewarmnesse, (for do not your
consciences tell you to your faces, that you are neither hot nor cold, nay, are
many of you of any Religion at all) do not think that when your consciences are
told of these things Christ dallies with you, or that he will suffer himself to
be dallied with for ever, or that it is nothing to be spued out of Christ's
mouth, or to take his Candlestick from you, in case you think you have it;
Believe it, eleeve it Gentlemen, If Christ find you in such a condition and
course of sinfulness as to do this to you, Evemere ex ere, to spue you out of
his mouth, I must be bold to tell you, that it were better for you, that you
had never been born, or that so soon as you had been born, you had every one of
you a millstone tied about his neck, and that you had been cast into the midst
of the Sea; You will find these things true at the length, for he that
testifies these things which I have spoken of, is the Amenille Amen, that Amen,
not only in whom omnes promissiones, as one observes upon the place, All the
Promises are yea, and Amen, but from whom you will find likewise Omnes
comminationes all the threatenings of Christ will be yea and Amen, to those that
are out of him, to those that have no part nor portion in him, or whom he shall
spue out of his mouth.

You see then who it is that stood at the doors in my Text, it is Christ, and
truly this consideration might be improved a little, the better to fix upon our
affections if we remember

1. The greatness and Majesty of Christ.

2. That he is the party offended.

3. The great concernment of souls, that Jesus Christ is pleased to stand at
the door of any of us.

1. If we consider the greatness and majesty of Christ, In that place of the
Psalms which I quoted to you before, he is termed the King of glory. In the
Vision which was presented to St John, Rev 1. you find amongst many other
majesticall expressions, that he is described having eyes as a flaming fite,
his feet were said to be like fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace, in
his right hand, he is said to have the seven Stars, the Churches, implying, he
could protect them or do with them what he would, he could throw them away if
he pleased, Out of his mouth it is said there went a sharp two edged Sword,
that could cut as fast as it spoke, nay, Heb. 4.12. Christ who is there called
the Word of God, is said to be quick and powerful, and sharper then any
two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughter and intents of
the hearts; My Masters do you think to deceive him? you will deceive your own
souls if you think so, but to come to St John's Vision again. His Countenance is
said to be as the Sun shines in his strength: In a word his Majesty was so
great, so amazing, and so full of astonishment, that when St John. saw him he
fell at his feet as dead. His friend, his servant, fell down dead at the sight
of his Majesty, what shall his enemies do? If the green tree be thus shaken,
how shall the dry tree stand, when Jesus Christ shall appear in his glorious
and terrible Majesty to judge the world in righteousness? If the righteous, if
a Saint be thus terrified, What shall lukewarm Hypocrites and ungodly sinners
do, when he comes with clouds? as v. 7. tells you he will: If we go on with
that verse we shall fee what they will do, Behold he comes with clouds, and
what then? Then every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him, as
you do spiritually, when you desperately stand out against his workings of
loving kindness unto your souls, even ye which shut him out of doors, shall
see him or feel him some way or other to your shame, to your sorrow, for it is
said in the next words, and all the kindreds of the earth shall wail because of
him; All ye then that are the kindreds of the earth, whose hearts are set upon
earth and earthly things, for as for the godly they are more properly the
kindreds of heaven, for a like reason in the contrary; See what will come on
you if you go on in your rebellions against the Lord Christ and his Kingdom
that is now coming toward you, you will not sea; him; you will not take notice
of him now, but when he comes with clouds, shall ye not see him then, how can
ye avoid him? Ye shall not then only see him, or feel him, or both, but ye
shall wail because of him, nay and your wailing shall be for ever; To conclude
this, If ye refuse his mercies now, if whilst he stands at your doors and
knocks, ye will bid him be gone, and shall say to him as those desperate wicked
ones in Job, Depart from us for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: What
is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we
pray unto him? If we serve him thus, or not serve him at all, or bid him be
gone, as I said, Christ will pay us with a Lex talionis, he will have a Be gone
for us as broad and as long as ours to him; Go ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the devil and his Angels: nay, your own personal miseries and
Judgments will not be all, God will lay up your iniquities for your Children,
be will reward you and ye shall know it, Job 21.19. he will reward you, nay, he
will reward your children, your sweet babes (do not your bowels earn at this?)
for your wickedness; What else can the meaning of that threarning be, He will
visit the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children.

I have done with the first Consideration which makes it wonderful that Christ
should thus stand and knock.

The second thing in him which improves the wonder is this, that he is the
party offended, My Brethren, my Brethren, we have wounded him by our
transgressions, we have broken him by our sins, and yet he is so willing to be
friends, he longs so much to be reconciled, to be at one with us, that he
stands at our doors and knocks, calls, cries, and he seeks entrance and
reconciliation though he be the party offended; What a Christ is this? what
sinners are we? and yet it may be we think we do not sin against Christ at all,
but doubtless we do; when we sin against the motions of Gods Spirit,
pressing the riches of Gods goodness upon us, and striving by it to lead us
to repentance, do we not sin against Christ? indeed some of us know we do, but
should we do so still? Shall we sin against him, offend him for ever? What? so
good a Christ so ill entreated? (...), God forbid, my Brethren, says St James
in another case, These things ought not so to be.

3. There is yet one Consideration more which raises the wonder, and that is
the concernment of this rich mercy, if Jesus Christ will be pleased to stand at
the doors of our souls and knock, My Friends, do ye rightly consider what
Christ is doing when he is knocking at your doors? I doubt ye do not; But I
will tell you, he is striving to make us Kings, and Priests, and Prophets to
our God, that with him we may reign for evermore, he is striving to come in,
that he may show us that the Father has forgiven us our sins; he is striving
to come in, that he may reign over our corruptions, and subdue our sins to us,
that he may tread Satan under our feet shortly, and are these concernments of
no value with us? Believe it, believe it, the Lord Jesus Christ it may be will
never knock at your doors, if you make no estimation of these things, but if
you prize these things he will knock, he will call, yea, he will wait to be
gracious, dut I beseech you put him not to wait too long, especially when he
comes to you in the night, I mean in the night of your soul afflictions: Alas,
when he comes, then remember, his head is full of dew, and his locks are filled
with the drops of the night; What? shall we keep him out in the cold? far be
it, you see how it concerns you to open and make him welcome, Open, Open ye
poor souls, let him come in, he will do you no harm, yea, he will do you all
good, and he will ease you of that burden that troubles you most, that is,
your sins, why else does he call you so eagerly so affectionately, Come unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you: Will Christ say it,
and will he not do it? What will not the Amen say Amen to his own promises? ye
wrong him; yea, ye do him one of the worst of injuries to think it, to believe
it.

I have done with these 3 Considerations that render it wonderful, that Christ
should stand at any man's doors and knock, but I have not yet wholly done with
his transaction of knocking.

I have a little application behind, and if I on the behalf of Jesus Christ,
can make any knocking work upon your souls, I shall bless my God that ever I
was born, that have long been afraid that Christ had knocked me off for ever,
because being a Minister I have been so long silent, and held my peace, but God
has heard my prayers, and he has had mercy on me, even because he had a
favor unto me: And now I hope I shall speak, God willing, and God I hope will
help me to speak to his glory and the good of your souls.

From the Person then declaring himself, (for you see who it is,) it is I, it is
I, says Christ. Here is 1. Comfort to the drooping soul. 2. Terror to the
rebellious.

I begin first with Comfort to the drooping soul, and indeed it is pity but
these should first be comforted, before the other be terrified, it is for these
mourners sakes amongst others, and those others that shall be brought to this
condition, that the world stands, for if once the number of Gods Jewels shall
be completed, God will then go to gathering up of his Jewels, Jews and
Gentiles together, and they shall be mine, says the Lord, in the day when I
make up my Jewels. To you then let me first speak, you see who stands at the
door, and from whom those motions of Gods Spirit come, whereby your hearts are
at any time wrought upon, whether terrifyingly in the work of conviction upon
your souls for sin; by the right preaching and application of the Law, or
comfortably by the sweet strivings and wooings of the Preparations to the
Gospel, whether at this or at other times; from whom come all these things? My
Text tells you in effect, that they come from Christ, and is not Christ your
friend think ye, why are ye afraid? O ye of little faith, yea perhaps I may as
yet say, O ye of no faith.

In the 14th of St. Matthewes Gospel, we find that Jesus had constrained his
Disciples to get into a Ship, and to go on the other side of the sea there
mentioned, whilst he sent the multitude away: the Disciples no doubt hoped
that Christ would not be long after them, nor was he; for we find that when
the Ship was tossed with waves in the midst of the sea, (for the wind was
contrary) about the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went to them walking on
the sea: The Disciples seeing this were troubled, they thought they had seen a
spirit, and they cried out for fear; but Christ quickly comforts them, Be not
afraid, says he, be of good checre, it is I. How fitly is this applicable to
your souls, ye sons and daughters of affliction: Jesus Christ has
constrained you to get into a Ship, a Ship of soul-affliction, let that be
supposed to be the Ship: in this Ship ye are tossed and tumbled with waves, for
the winds are contrary, and ye think poor souls ye shall never come to your
haven: stay, stay a little my sweet daughters of Jerusalem, do not droope too
much, loose not your Anchor hold so easily; look about you a little, and
perhaps you will discern Christ walking in this sea of your troubles. Perhaps
not knowing him, when ye see him, nor being well acquainted with him, ye will
mistake him, and be troubled, and think it is a spirit that will destroy you,
and that he is your enemy; 'twas thus with the Disciples, why may it not be so
with you? But see ver. 27. Jesus straightway spoke unto them saying, be of good
checre, it is I, be not afraid. If ye can hear Christ saying it is I, it is I,
be of good cheer, be not afraid, will your afflictions trouble you then? Waire
then upon the Lord patiently, you know not how soon Christ will show himself
to you; I can assure you it is now toward the fourth watch of the night, and
it is not long till the morning; wait comfortably under your storm, your
afflictions cannot last long, the day star will arise, and if Jesus Christ
give you the morning-starre, will it not be worth all your afflictions, all
your sorrows, all your tossing in these waters? all the troubles you have
undergone in your fears? Be of good cheer, it is I, it is I. Would you have more?
when you hear him and see him, catch him in your arms, and cry out with old
Simeon, The Lord now lets his Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
his salvation: or as Philip which spoke to Nathanael, I have found him of whom
Moses in the Law, and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of
Joseph, Ioh. 3.45. I have done with you at this time.

I come next to the rebellious: and forgive me, if professing my self a true
Minister of Jesus Christ, I come to you, like Christ, with clouds, with the
clouds of Gods indignation, with clouds of darkness and trouble upon your
souls for your sins, in suffering Christ to knock so often, to call so long, to
cry so loud, so that it may be truly said of him, as Christ's mother, and
brethren and sisters said touching themselves, in seeking Christ, he has
sought you sorrowing; and you have been the cause of it, for ye have many a
time suffered him to strive, knock, call, cry, cry aloud, and yet ye have given
him no entrance; he is out of doors still, the door is locked still; nay ye
have set strong bars of opposition to keep him out, nay to keep him out
purposely. You think perhaps you have not, but I can make it apparent ye have,
nay and God willing I shall make it appear in a spiritual enquiry after some
soul transactions, before I have ended all my endeavors upon this Text. And
what will ye say then touching your wickedness? must ye not, will ye not say
then, it is of the Lords mercy we are not consumed? how ye should say less I
know not: But to prepare you herein (for this Sermon will be but the shell, the
outside, the kernel is to come) be pleased to remember from that which I have
already spoken, that when ye sin against the motions of Gods Spirit (which I
am confident has been long struggling with you,) that in so doing, ye sin
likewise against Christ; against that Christ, that it may be has washed us
from our transgressions by his own blood, and we not know it. This
consideration of sinning against Christ, was a tender thing once with the
Apostle St Paul, 1 Cor. 8.12. where reproving the Corinthians for offending the
consciences of the Brethren, in eating things offered to Idols, (a thing too
usual in a spiritual sense in these days) he reproves them, and terrifies
them in so doing, by fastening this upon them, that they sinned against Christ;
But when ye sin so against the Brethren and wound their weak Consciences, ye
sin against Christ; as much as to say: and what, will ye do that? will ye do
so indeed? What, we Christians sin against Christ, that has made us so, that
has washed us from our sins by his own blood? what we do it! Tell it not in
Gath. Let others do it if they will, do ye do it if ye will, but I tell you
plainly, I Paul will never do it, God willing: wherefore, if meat make my
brother to offend, I will eat no flesh whilst the world stands, lest I make
my brother to offend. His words by plain and ready arguing, with half an eye,
you may see to come to thus much; that rather then I will sin against Christ
(which I must do if I make my brother to offend) I will not eat a bit of flesh
as long as the world lasts. Beloved, we use to say, when we are averse to a
thing, Before I will do such a thing, I will never eat bit of bread: such a
kind of zeal, and such a kind of expression may you imagine St Paul's to have
been, in his resolution of not sinning against Christ, and yet how many are
there that make no bones of this? but let them take heed, that God make not
their bones and their hearts into the bargain ache for it. Sure I am, the new
converts in the second of the Acts, were pricked to the very heart at this very
consideration: see the place, Acts 2.37. You may observe St Peter, ver. 14.
beginning to preach his first Sermon after the ascension, his first work is to
take off a mistake, a misapprehension from the people, touching themselves,
These men are not drunken, as ye suppose. At ver. 22. his Sermon begins to
pinch close, for he speaks plainly, Ye men of Israel, hear these words,
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you, by miracles, wonders and
signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves know. Ver.
23. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,
ye have taken and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. He follows this
argument close all along, heightning the sin, by the consideration of Gods
exalting of Christ: and in ver. 36. he puts Gods goodness to Christ, and their
wickedness against Christ both together, and with this, as with a great and
irresistible hammer, God pricks their hearts in Peter's Ministry: yea he breaks
them all to pieces; for see ver. 37. Now when they heard this, they were
pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles,
Men and brethren what shall we do? When they heard this, that the same Jesus
whom they had crucified, was exalted by God to be Lord and Christ; when they
heard this, and that they had thus sinned against their Lord, their Christ,
their King; this, oh this pricked them to the quick, this shivered them all to
pieces, this divided betwixt the joints and marrow, it broke down all
opposition, Men and brethren what shall we do? such wretches, such vile
creatures as we are never were in the world. What! is that Jesus that we have
crucified, is he our Christ, our Lord, have we thus wronged him, thus dealt
with him? Woe umo us that we have sinned. Thus you see how far this
consideration strikes terror here: it did strike terror into their hearts, may
it not strike terror into yours? for know assuredly, that that same Jesus, the
motions of whose spirit, or of Gods Spirit, you have stood out against (I
suppose you look upon it, as all one, for he and the Father are one,) is that
very Jesus, whom God has exalted-heretofore, yea and will exalt him again, and
he will make him actually both Lord and King in all the souls of his people,
and over all the world; and this is he whom ye sin against, whom in a
spiritual sense ye crucify again as it were, even the Lord of glory: nay let
me go further with you, and drive you up closer; I must tell you, that whilst
ye rebel against the workings of the Spirit of God, ye do at once sin
against Father, Son and holy Ghost, all at one stroke (as I may say:) A time
bath been, and that in my days, when a man's naming the sin against the holy
Ghost in the Pulpit, would have made many a heart to tremble; I am sure it made
mine tremble when I was a boy, and minded nothing but pastime and pleasure: but
though I tell you (and I shall make it appear) that in resisting the motions of
Gods Spirit, ye have sinned against Father, Son and holy Ghost, and that your
actions especially in some, have entrenched and bordered much upon the channel
of such actions as do lead directly to the grand sin, the unpardonable
sin, even the sin against the holy Ghost, which you know Christ says shall
never be pardoned in this world, nor in the world to come, yet who trembles,
whose heart quakes? nay do we not mock at fear? and have not some sucked in
such principles that do utterly overturne all shaking, all trembling, either
at the apprehension of their sins, or of Gods judgments due to them for
their sin? My friends (for as yet I am no man's declared enemy in the world,
do not I tell you the truth? Do not your hearts and consciences bear me
witness and witness for me? If so, though you are so hardened that ye cannot
cry out, What shall we do? Yet God has so softened my heart toward you, that I
cannot but ask What ye will do? Will ye go on? I trust in God your hearts will
not let you say, We will go on, and we will do what seems good in our own
eyes, and as for these words which thou have spoken to us in the name of the
Lord, we will not hear thee; No? will ye not? Are ye resolved thus? if you are,
I will break your resolutions if I can, and rather then suffer you to run on
thus headlong into your destruction, I will kindle a fire in your very bones, I
will vex your very souls, and bring you with David to cry out as he Psa. 6. My
bones are vexed O Lord yea, my soul is vexed, but thou O Lord how long?
Consider then in the fear of God what I assert, what I insist upon, viz.

That he that sins against the strivings of Gods good Spirit, sins against
Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

That he sins against the Father is evident,

1. From those words which Christ uses, Joh. 15.23, 24. He that hates me
hates my Father also, If I had not done among them the works which none other
man did, they had not had sin, but now they have both seen and hated both me
and my Father also Would you have a clearer Text? He that hates the Son hates
the Father, by the same argument. He that sins against the Son sins against
the Father, and indeed he and the Father are one, or else Union with Christ
would not be enough to make Christ's poor ones one with the Father, but that
this is sufficient you may most remarkably see from that heavenly piece of
Scripture, Joh. 14. from v. 7. to the middle of the 11. verse. If (says
Christ) ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also, and from
henceforth ye know him and have seen him; The Disciples stumbled at this, but
Philip particularly says to him, Lord, show us the Father and it suffices us;
Christ seems to stumble at them, as much as they at him; for he speaks to
Philip as in their stead, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou
not known me Philip? He that has seen me has seen the Father, and how say
thou then, Show us the Father? Would ye have things clearer yet? viz. that
Union with Christ is sufficient to make up Union with the Father, and
consequently he that sins against Christ must needs sin against the Father;
Would you I say have it clearer, then go on to the 10th verse, Beleevest thou
not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; The words that I speak unto
you, I speak not of my self; as if he should say, The Father speaks them as
well as I, nay, The Father that dwells in me he does the works too, and then
he proceeds, Believe me (Philip) that I am in the Father and the Father in me;
Plainet words then these surely cannot be used to assert the Point in hand,
That sins against Christ are sins against the Father: My next work must be to
prove that they are sins against the holy Ghost likewise, and then I have done
in point of proof.

To evidence this clearly and plainly, I suppose we take it for granted, that
the holy Ghost and the holy Spirit are all one, that being granted me as a
Suppositum not so much as disputed by your selves; Let me put you in mind of
some Texts of Scripture, wherein the same actions being spoken of, you shall
find are in one place implied or expressed plainly to be sins against God, by
which I understand to be meant the Father, in another place they are termed
sins against Christ, by which name we understand the Son, and in a third
place sins against Gods holy Spirit, by which it is already supposed we mean and
understand the holy Ghost. These Scriptures being produced, and asserting the
thing in hand, I suppose I have gained the Cause. Compare then these three
Scriptures together, Numb. 21.5. 1 Cor. 10.9. Isa. 63.10. Let us look first
upon Number. 21.5. The people of Israel it should seem were in great affliction,
they wanted bread and water, and their soul lothed the Manna, they call it this
light bread; Being in this distress and affliction, it is said expressly, They
spoke against God and against Moses, saying, Wherefore have ye brought us up
out of Egypt to die in the Wilderness? for there is no bread, neither is
there any water, and our soul loatheth this light bread; here you see plainly
the Israclites sin of murmuring under this affliction, is said expressly to be
against God, They murmured against God and against Moses, by which word God (I
hope) you will give me leave to understand the Father, and never trouble your
selves with much scruple or dissatisfaction in the business: Let us now go to
the next Scripture which ye shall find, 1 Cor. 10.9. Neither let us tempt
Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents; The
Question will be, how it appears, that the same sin is spoken of in both
places; To make this sure, I must turn you back to Numb. 21.6. again, which
tells us that God for their sin of murmuring immediately before, sent fiery
Serpents among the people, and they died; Now read the verse I have quoted out
of the Corinthians, Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted,
and were destroyed of Serpents, Do you desire I should argue now? Is it not
plain that that which was called murmuring against God in the Book of Numbers
is called tempting of Christ in the Epistle to the Corinthians? For what did
the Lord send fiery Serpents among the people? for murmuring against God: For
what were they destroyed of Serpents? for tempting of Christ: These then were
both one, unless you understand any other destruction of Serpents to be
intended by St Paul, then this which was by the biting of the fiery Serpents,
mentioned in the Book of Numbers.

My proofs touching Father and Son I have done with, My next labor must be
touching the holy Spirit or holy Ghost as we call him; For this view my third
Text, Isa. 63.10. where the Prophet having in the verse before mentioned the
gracious and general loving kindness of the Lord toward his people in the
days of old, sets down in the next words in the beginning of the 10th verse,
the general demeanor and carriage of the Israelites his people toward God; And
what was their carriage? 'Twas sad I confess, I fear ours is so too, They
rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit; Their general posture of actions against
God is termed here you see a rebelling and vexing his holy Spirit, certainly if
all their wicked actions come under this expression; then this action likewise
of murmuring against God, or tempting of Christ being one of their actions,
must needs do so too. And now I think I have gained my cause.

Having done with my proof, let me now treat with you a little, you that have
sinned so often against the motions of Gods Spirit, and therein in some sense
trodden under foot the Son of God, for Gods sake, What do ye think of your
selves? have ye done well, think ye, thus at one blow (as it were) to strike
Father, Son, and holy Ghost in the face? Is this recompense for his mercies in
sending Jesus Christ to shed his blood for your sins, a fair recompense to the
Father? Is it equal that such a Lex Talionis should be returned to the Son,
that we should thus grieve and vex the holy Spirit? Certainly if there be any
fear of God before out eyes, the doing of these things cannot rightly please
our hearts: But because ye are so hardened in your wickedness and rebellions
against him, who will either glorify you, if ye willingly submit to him, or
torment you for ever, if still ye persist, be ye under what Form or
Administrations ye will; For I love not to flatter you in your imaginary
shadow^ taken up of your own heads, nor do I place godliness or wickedness in
external Forms, but rather in submitting or walking contrary to Christ.

Let me press you a little eagerly to consider what ye are doing, when ye are
sinning against the motions, workings, and pleadings of Gods good Spirit,
striving within you, as doubtless sometimes he does, or else things go very
sadly with you; Be as merry as ye will; Shall I mind you in one word what ye
do? ye sin against Father, Son, and holy Ghost all at once, ye do in a
sense (as I told you) tread under foot the blood of Jesus Christ the Son of
God, for this treading things under foot what is it? it is an expression,
whereby we signify our scorning and lothing of a thing, as when we say, If I
could, I would tread thee under my foot, My Brethren, my brethren, what do ye
less when ye do so resist the motions of Gods good Spirit, that ye cannot
endure to hear him speak to you? Nay, how many are there, who when the Spirit
of God would plead with them, and reason them into godliness, or into the
omission of this, or that, or the other particular sin, as of whoredom, jeering
at good things, drunkenness, covetousness, or the like, presently they take
the first occasion they can of setting themselves against their own mercies,
they cannot endure the Lord to speak as it were one word more: And therefore
choking him as soon as they can, they run presently into a Refuge of lies,
good fellowship, drinking, music, some pastime or other to stop the mouth of
conscience which would be convincing them of sin, of righteousness, of
judgment to come, and by arguments drawn from thence would stagger them at
their sinful courses, but none of that I thank you, their sins and they cannot
part company so easily, and therefore the Spirit of God is looked upon by them
as their enemy, because it tells them the truth, and will not flatter them, nor
suffer them to run so quietly to their own destruction; With some perhaps he
gets a little faiter quarter, they will hear the reproofs, consider the terrors
of Gods judgments which are threatened spiritually to their inward man, to
reclaim them from their sins, but when they have heard all, they think to make
up all with a little humiliation, a few tears, a little rugging and striving to
cry to God for mercy, and if upon a duty of prayer or humiliation they find a
little peace and quietness, though Gods intention in giving it, be but barely
to bear up their hearts under soul affliction, until the times of a more full
and more gracious dispensation comes, then up they get upon their tiptoes
presently, their afflictions are all vanished or banished in a moment; God is
their God now sure, for (say they) he has heard our supplications, he has
forgiven our sins; herein miserably mistaking a little arbitrary consolation,
which God grants in a design of supporting the soul, till it be fit for a more
gracious dispensation, for a sure signification of forgiveness of sins; the
groslenesse of which mistake, I shall clear upon some occasion or other, in
Gods good time, and it may be before I have ended my meditations upon this Text.

Some the Spirit of God prevails so far with, that

1. They are willing to be reproved and chidden for their sins, but from thence
are too apt to conclude a sure estate of soul.

2 The work of conviction being strong upon their souls, they are apt to make
many fair promises, many strong engagements, that they will do so no more.

3. But then thirdly, when Gods back is but turned (as I may say,) or that they
think him but out of sight, they start aside like a broken bow, and neither
promises, Covenants, or any other obligations prevail with them at all, but
they turn with the dog to their own vomit, and with the sow to the wallowing in
the mire; and if the motions of Gods Spirit press them to consider their
breach of vows and Covenants, and their promises of better obedience, they
either heal their hurt slightly, with a few prayers and tears, and then they
think all is well, as I observed before: or secondly by a long practice of such
ungodly eourses they come at length to such a desperate hardness of heart,
that they conclude there is no hope, and so conceive it to no purpose to strive
any more, to pray any more, to be humbled any more, to hearken to the motions
of Gods Spirit any more: the final conclusion is, as they throw off all hope,
so they throw off all duty, and let Christ by his Spirit say what he will, they
think all is to no purpose, to hear him or obey him; and this last and worst
part of this character, has been my own case for almost this nine years or
thereabouts, till within this year and a half; about which time, apprehending
some abatement of those judgments, which my apprehensions had been long
terrified with, for my grievous sins, especially for hiding my little Talent,
which I looked upon as given me by God, not to hide, but to publish: I was
about a year and half since, resolved to submit my self to be at Gods
disposing, and to serve God as well as I could, though I looked for nothing but
hell as my portion for ever, only I hoped it would be hell mitigated, and me
thought I had strange kind of hopes, that in hell I should find a little
comfort, and a little strength to endure it, and to dwell with everlasting
burnings, because I was willing to submit; but these strange hopes soon
vanished and became nothing: for about a quarter or half a year after, I was
thrown down again into the dreadfullest apprehensions of Gods eternal
judgments, that ever were presented to any mortal man upon Gods earth, since
the creation of God, or that the world began: with this heavy load of
apprehensions I walked for above half a year together, viz. all this last
summer, and some little part of the beginning of winter; but at length the
spring is come, and the chirping of Birds has been heard by me, there was
never such mercy showed, such compassion manifested to any soul in the world; I
am alive, and the loving kindness of God has appeared to me: But I tell you,
my brethren and friends, my rebellion against Jesus Christ, my standing out
against the motions of Gods good Spirit, has cost me dear, and so dear, I
would not for a hundred thousand worlds endure the like horrors again: It would
amaze you all, nay almost affright you out of your wits, to tell you what I
have seen, but God in Jesus Christ I trust has delivered me for ever; and God
strengthening me, I will praise him for it, yea I will magnify him as long as I
have my being.

And now my dear friends, I am set forth to you as an example of Gods terrors
and judgments, if ye shall rebel against Christ, and perpetually resist the
motions of Gods gracious Spirit striving with you as I have done: I am withal
a mirror of Gods infinite rich mercies, in the pardoning of iniquities, and an
example of heartning to you, if God shall be pleased to give you repentance
from your sins and from all your ungodly courses, as to me I hope in God he
has done in some measure: but if having such a warning given, in such grievous
judgments, if the riches of Christ's mercies in finding a way to pardon such a
sinner as I am, if neither of these, nor both together prevail with you, nor
be a means to hearten you, and to cause you to live in some hope, at least,
that it may be the Lord will have some mercy, some compassion for you as well
as for me: If I say, thesethings will be no means to reclaim you, then I must
be bold to tell you, that I cannot say so much as a Judge to a condemned
person, Lord have mercy upon your souls, I must leave you to God; only at
present let me put you in mind of these things which follow,

1. That it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb.
10.31. for our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29.

2. That certainly you have sucked in some desperate principles touching the
decree and election of God, which do so poison your souls with hopelesnesse,
that, if ye come to hear a Sermon, it is for very shame of the world, lest men
should account you of no religion, accounting it in all other respects vain and
unprofitable, either to hear a Sermon or to serve God at all; and the truth is,
I much suspect this latter, it having had a strong influence into my own
troublesome and dreadful apprehensions for so long together.

3. That you will find it dangerous indeed, to dally with Jesus Christ a
little longer; he is now coming in a solemn manner, to treat about the
business of leaving of our sins and turning to God, and this I hope to
evidence clearly, as occasion shall offer it self, if I can have the liberty of
a public Pulpit as I desire; but if I cannot, I trust Jesus Christ who is now
nigh at hand in his spiritual coming, will vindicate me from the charge of
being guilty of other men's transgressions, which (God willing) I will endeavor
to my utmost to prevent (if I may be suffered,) but if I alone must be hindered,
I hope God will regard my innocence, and men will at length know my integrity
and affection to their souls.

FINIS.

