To the Parliament of the Commonwealth OF ENGLAND, The humble Petition of
diverse well affected persons of this Nation, Adhearers to the Parliament, and
faithful to the Liberties of the Commonwealth. With the favorable Answer
from the Parliament to the Petitioners.
Shows:
THat forasmuch as the original ground of our many years burdensome Wars and
Miseries has been from the Encroachments and Innovations which have been
frequently made, and enforced upon the people, at the pleasures of some men
ruling merely according to their will, and power: And forasmuch as those many
Victories, mercifully vouchsafed by Almighty God, in approbation of his Cause,
have not been obtained at a low and easy rate, but as through a Sea of blood,
and all kind of miseries, whereof we have had a large proportion, thereby
rendering the Cause more precious to our thoughts: And whereas amongst the rest
of the grievances of this Commonwealth, The unlawful, Antichristian,
unsupportable oppression of Tithes, and forced Maintenance is not the least, by
which our Consciences are ensnared, our Estates destroyed, our persons
imprisoned daily, for that which has no foundation nor warrant from Christ, or
his Apostles, throughout the whole word of the Gospel.

We are therefore imboldned in conscience toward God, and You, to present
these our just desires for the welfare and preservation of this Commonwealth,
which will be established by righteousness, And therein implore your serious
endeavors, that this unjust oppression of Tithes and forced Maintenance may be
abolished, as a testimony of your resolutions, to instate this Commonwealth in
all their just Rights and Liberties, and in so doing, you will engage the
hearts of all the honest and godly people of this Nation, who have been bowed
down under this Oppression; And all being disengaged, from corrupt and self
Interests, will cheerfully adventure their lives and Estates for Your
preservations and the Nations Peace, being the just end of our Wars, the
proper and long hoped for fruits of righteousness, bringing glory to God, in
discharge of your trust to him, and to this wearied Commonwealth, in loosing
the bonds of wickedness, and setting us free from Antichristian Tyranny.

Thus will your light break forth as the morning, and your uprightness go
before you. And your Petitioners shall, etc.
This Petition with many thousand of hands was presented to the Parliament on
Saturday the 16. of July, 1653. and Thanks was returned from the House by the
Speaker: And the Answer to the Petition from the House was, That the thing that
was petitioned for, they were debating upon it.

LONDON: Printed by F: Neile in Aldersgatestreet. 1653.


