TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ASSEMBLY OF KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and Burgesses of the
House of Commons. The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the City and
Liberty of Westminster.
SHOWS,
THAT your Petitioners being sensible of the miserable effects of War, and
the Ruin and Desolation that will unavoidably overwhelme this miserable
Kingdom, now distracted and much divided, and engaged in an unnatural
intestine and bloody War, and in their own particulars having already
tasted of some part of those Miseries, by the death of some of their nearest
and dearest Friends, and great Losses in their Callings: And also taking into
consideration the lamentable and miserable effects that the late unhappie
Civil Wars have produced in Germany, and by the present Rebellion in
Ireland; And that if this War and Dissension still continue in England, the
same will not only greatly prejudice, but also hazard the Religion, Estates,
Lives, and Liberties of their poor distressed Brethren in that Kingdom, they
cannot but seek Peace (the only Cure of their Miseries) both by their Prayers
to God, and in their humble Petitions to this Honorable Assembly, desiring your
concurrence with the House of Peers, to whom they are bold to make their
humble Addresses.

Wherefore the Petitioners most humbly and heartily beseech you to take into
your most Honorable consideration the miserable estate of this Kingdom, in
which your Petitioners Calamities are involved, and thereby (if it be possible)
to prevent the further Miseries thereof, and the effusion of more Christian
Blood, by a speedy, seasonable, and happy Accommodation between his gracious
Majesty and both Houses of Parliament; wherein they doubt not but you will, to
the glory of God, settle the true Protestant Religion in the purity thereof,
as in the best times since the Reformation, against all Papists, Sectaries, and
Schismatics, that shall dare to oppose it, to restrain all profaneness of the
Lords Day, and establish the orderly Worship of God in his House, and to
provide for the preservation of the Person and Honor of his sacred Majesty,
the upholding the just Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and the present
and seasonable settling of the Peace of the Kingdom, whereby they may enjoy the
benefit of the Laws (the great Protector) of their Lives, Liberties, and
Properties.

And they shall pray, that the God of Peace will bless you in this work of
Peace.
The like Petition is to be delivered to the Right Honorable the Lords now
Assembled in the House of Peers in Parliament.

December. 15. Printed for Thomas Purslow. 1642.


