HEar, O Earth, ye earthen men and women: The Heavens have given Fire to
lighten the Cabbal in man; and a voice from that enlightenedment shall be
declared from the Lords Tent, standing in the bounds of Eltham, called by name,
The middle Park. And on the sixth day of June next, three days together, shall
be declared from the Lords Tent the Law literal, with its ingresment into its
spirituality, which is the Gospel; and what the Gospel is, and its end. In
these two cyphered names, Law and Gospel, lies included the whole wisdom of
God; but not to be reached by dead men's spelling.

And in the Lords Tent is the Creation vivificated, in color, manner, and
matter, and to be viewed by any one, until the end of the days of Dedication.
And unto the Lords Tent is indrawn the Geographical Trine, which is the Tent of
Judah: its leadans is for carrying back the Captivity of the Jews, and the
re-building the Temple in Jerusalem. And unto the Tent of Judah is combined
the Tent of Ephraim, which is the Cosmographical imbindement, which does
typifie the ten thousands of Ephraim.

Brethren, for the building the Lords Tent, has the Lord laid my habitation
waste; I have dwelt amongst Dragons; my soul has suffered its destruction: the
arrows of God have stuck in me. But now my bitterness is past, past, past.

Brethren, ye Jews and Gentiles, this is my second Voice or Edict: I have but
once more to lift up my voice for my peoples gathering.

Ye Wisemen, I do not look at what does appear in corporality, but I see in
Fire, what by Water, Earth, in and by the Wind or Air, shall be produced. HO
for the holy Wars in these Nations, beginning at France; that is one Exce.

Astrologers, this I do demand, Whether in Ignis Cassopeah the Lion be
effuigitated before Man, or Man before the Lion; that is an Exce for ye. By
that, know where I modiate my consanguinement to speak your words.

Priests, this Insert is my Text for my three days above mentioned, if the
devils spirits do not hinder me.

May 8. 1654. By me Theau Ram Taniah, Leader of the people. Named,
Theauraujohn. Called, Thomas Totni, Goldsmiths, at the three golden Lions
without Temple Bar.

depiction of sword crest

