TO THE King's most Excellent Majesty.
THE FAITHFUL PROTESTATION AND HUMBLE REMONSTRANCE OF THE Roman Catholic
Nobility and Gentry OF IRELAND.
YOUR Majesty's faithful Subjects, the Roman Catholic Nobility and Gentry of
your Majesty's Kingdom of IRELAND, out of a deep Sense of those prodigious
Afflictions under which the Monarchy of Great Britain has been, and out of our
sad Thoughts, which daily bring more and more Sighs from our Breasts, and Tears
from our Eyes, for, not only, the still as yet continued Miseries and
Sufferings of the Catholic Natives, of that our unfortunate Country, even
amidst and ever since the so much famed Joys and Triumphs of your Sacred
Majesty's most Auspicious Inauguration, but also of the Causes, whereinto we
have made the most narrow Search we could, of these our own peculiar
unparalleled Calamities: And upon Reflection on that Allegiance we owe, and
ought by all Divine and Human Laws, and which we are, and have been always
ready to Swear and Perform to your Majesty, our only Sovereign Lord on Earth:
And on the Scandal (notwithstanding) which some Persons (who are unwilling to
understand aright our Religion) cast upon it, as if it were not Consistent with
all dutiful Obedience, and Faith to the Supreme Temporal Magistrate: And upon
Consideration likewise of a further Tie of Conscience on us for endeavoring,
as much as in us lies, to clear your Majesty's Royal Breast from all Fears and
Jealousies whatsoever; if any, peradventure, your Majesty entertain of us,
through the Suggestion of such as hate our Communion, or Nation; and to wipe
off that Scandal, and allay the Odium under which our Church has lain this
last Century of Years, among other Christian People in these Nations, of a
different Way from our's in the Worship of GOD: We humbly crave your Majesty's
Pardon to vindicate both our Selves and our Holy Belief, in that Particular, of
our Allegiance, by the ensuing Protestation; which (in Imitation of the late
good Example given by our CLERGY, and pursuant to the general Doctrine and
Practice of the Catholic Church) we make in Sight of Heaven, and in the
Presence of your Majesty, sincerely and truly, without Equivocation, or Mental
Reservation.

WE do acknowledge and confess Your Majesty to be our true and lawful KING,
supreme Lord and rightful Sovereign of this Realm of Ireland, and of all other
Your Majesty's Dominions: And therefore we acknowledge and confess ourselves to
be obliged, under pain of Sin, to obey Your Majesty in all Civil and Temporal
Affairs, as much as any other of Your Majesty's Subjects; and as the Laws and
Rules of Government in this Kingdom do require at our Hands. And that
notwithstanding any Power or Pretensions of the Pope or See of Rome, or any
Sentence or Declaration of what Kind or Quality soever, given, or to be given
by the Pope, his Predecessors, or Successors, or by any Authority Spiritual or
Temporal, proceeding or derived from Him, or His See, against Your Majesty, or
Royal Authority: We will still acknowledge, and perform to the utmost of our
Abilities, our faithful Loyalty and true Allegiance to Your Majesty. And we
openly disclaim and renounce all Foreign Power, be it either Papal or Princely,
Spiritual or Temporal, in as much as it may seem able, or shall pretend to
free, discharge, or absolve us from this Obligation, or shall any way give us
Leave or License to raise Tumults, bear Arms, or offer any Violence to Your
Majesty's Person, Royal Authority, or to the State or Government: Being all of
us ready, not only to discover and make known to Your Majesty, and to Your
Ministers, all the Treasons made against Your Majesty, or them which shall come
to our Hearing; but also to lose our Lives in the Defense of Your Majesty's
Person and Royal Authority, and to resist, with our best Endeavors, all
Conspiracies and Attempts against Your Majesty, be they framed or sent under
what Pretense, or patronized by what Foreign Power or Authority soever. And
further we profess, that all absolute Princes and Supreme Governors, of what
Religion soever they be, are God's Lieutenants on Earth; and that Obedience is
due to them, according to the Laws of each Commonwealth respectively, in all
Civil and Temporal Affairs: And therefore we do here protest against all
Doctrine and Authority to the contrary. And we do hold it impious, and against
the Word of God, to maintain, that any private Subject may kill or murder the
Anointed of God, his Prince, though of a different Belief and Religion from
his. And we abhor and detest the Practice thereof, as damnable and wicked.

These being the Tenets of our Religion, in Point of Loyalty and Submission to
Your Majesty's Authority, and our Observance and Veneration of, or Communion
with, the Sea of Rome, in Matters purely Spiritual, no way entrenching on that
perfect Obedience, which, by our Birth, by the Laws of GOD and Man, we are
bound to pay to Your Majesty, our Natural and Lawful Sovereign.

Prostrate at Your Majesty's Feet, We most humbly beg, That all your Majesty's
Roman Catholic SUBJECTS of IRELAND, who shall by Subscription, or Consent,
concur to this public Protestation of LOYALTY, be protected from Persecution,
for the Profession or Exercise of their Religion, and all former Laws, upon
that Account, against them, Repealed.
Luke Earl of Fingall. Morrogh Earl of Inchiquin. Donogh Earl of Clancarty.
Oliver Earl of Tyrconel. Theobold Earl of Carlingford. Edmund Viscount
Mont-Garet. Thomas Viscount Dillon. Arthur Viscount Iveagh. William Viscount
Clane. Charles Viscount Muskerry. William Viscount Taaf. Oliver Baron of Lowth.
William Baron of Castle Conel. Colonel Charles Dillon. Lieutenant Colonel
Ignatius Nugent. Edward Plunket, Esquire. Nicholas Plunket, Knight. Matthew
Plunket of Dunsany. Christopher Plunket of Dunsany. James Dillon, Knight.
Colonel Christopher Bryan. Robert Talbot, Baronet. Ulick Burk, Baronet. Edward
Fitz-Harris, Baronet. Vallentine Brown, Baronet. Luke Bath, Baronet. Henry
Slingsby, Knight. John Bellew, Knight. Colonel William Burk. -- John
Fitz-Patrick. -- Bryan Mac-Mahun. -- Miles Reily. -- Gilbert Talbot. -- Milo
Power. Lieutenant Colonel Pierce Lacy. -- Ulick Burk. -- Thomas Scurlog.
Esquires and Gentlemen.
Jeffrey Brown of Gallway. John Walsh of Ballynvoher. Patrick Bryan. James
Fitz-Gerrald of Lacach. John Talbot of Malahyde. Thomas Luttril of
Luttrilstown. John Halliwood of Artaine. Henry O Neil, Son to Sir Phelim O
Neil. Dudley Barnel of Dunlickny. Henry Druycet of Mornanton. Edward Butler of
Monihore. Nicholas Darcy of Platin. Patrick Sarsfield of Lucan. John Macna-Mara
of Greatlach. James Talbot of Bela-Connel. Robert Balf of Barrastown. James
Talbot of Templeoge. Patrick Archer. Luke Dowdall of Athlomny. Philip Hoar of
Kilsalcan. James Barnwell of Bremore. James Allen of St. Wolstan's. Thomas
Cantwell of Ballamakedy. John Cantwell of Cantwell's Court. Edmund Dillon of
Streamstown. John Flemming of Stahallmock. Peter Sherlock of Grace-Dieu.
Christopher Archbold of Timolin. Patrick Moor of Dowanstown. Nicholas Haly of
Towrin. Pierce Butler of Calan. Pierce Butler of Killvealegher. John Segrave of
Cabrach. Richard Wadding of Killarry. Thomas Brown of Glandon. Oliver Cashel of
Dundalk. Patrick Clinton of Irishtown. Captain Christopher Turner. John Bagot.
William Grace. John Arthur of Hogestown. Marcus Lassan of Greastown.
Christopher Aylmer of Belrath. James Plunket of Gibstown. Thomas Saint John of
Mortlestown. William Barryoge of Rincorn. Richard Strange of Rockwel's Castle.
James Butler of Ballinekill. Anthony Colclough. Thomas Sarsfield of
Sarsfieldstown. Pierce Nangle of Monanimny. James Wolveston of Stelergan.
Michael Bret. Patrick Boyton of Ballyturnymacoris. James White of Chambolly.
Major Lawrence Dempsy. Edward Nugent of Culvin. Patrick Porter of Kinstown.
Major Marcus Furlong.
FINIS.

