THE AVRAVJOHN His THEOUS ORI APOKOLIPIKAL: Or, Gods Light declared in
Mysteries. Salem Ori ad te Israel.

Beware of false Prophets, that come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly
are ravening wolves.

But behold, Christ has told you, By their fruit you shall know them.

Beloved, God is love, and love is light, and in it is no darkness at all.

So then know, he that is in light, acts in love, not lust; and he that acts
not in love, is in darkness even till now.

I will pour out my Spirit in the last days, and that Spirit shall be your
alone teacher, says the Lord my God.

Jehovah Ire ad te, O England.

Theauraujohn Tanni.

Dedicated to the Army and the risen people in all Lands, coming forth in the
first fruits in the Evangelical operation.

Rev. 14.1. And so a lamb stood on Mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty
and four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads. To these
is the dedication of this Book; and their eyes behold the Truth, none else. I
have added to this Book the particular Charges in the Indictment against
Captain Robert Norwood and myself, and my Defense against the Charge.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the
Black-Spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1651.

Dearly beloved,
THe word grafted in our souls, makes oneness in unione in our lives and
conversation, for God teaches us to be like himself in love. Dearly beloved, I
am constrained to publish to the view of the world the writing I have declared.
It is to a tittle without alteration, as every Epistle stands in his place
without adding or diminishing one tittle upon my oath I will affirm, though
sometime I was out of my self, yet the Charge of calumny upon me being so
great. I am forced to declare my greatest weakness, which might have been in
obscurity. But I beseech the courteous Reader, know that the great sound and
name of things are not the very things themselves; for if so Christ and his
Apostles suffered justly all whereas charged upon them, but Christ and his
Apostles were one truth and the dark world persecuted them even unto death; now
know that the new heaven and the new earth is not yet erected in the
generality, and till that work of Grace and power come, there is, and must be
enmity betwixt light and darkness: condemn not things by another man's sight,
but know, that thou whosoever thou art, must be saved in thy own sight and
light, and not in another man's. Every man must give an account of himself but
brethren I am accounted a blasphemer, now I am come to try the truth in your
Gospel, the Gospel in me that you account blasphemy, has made me act
strangely; and whether truly or no, according to the truth in the same Gospel,
I commit to judgment. Now if you condemn me for blasphemy, and my actions are
the very substance that Gospel or writing points at or unto; I say that then my
blasphemy is holiness, and you are found blasphemers with your high cry of
holiness. Now brethren I must have you come from your high cry of names, and by
things you are and must be justified, and I will put in my actions in the
balance, because I am but one, and many against me. First know, that after
fourteen weeks in humiliation, in fasting and Prayer frequently, Then the power
fell upon me in my shop, and smote me dumb, then after blind, and then dead,
in the beholding of hundreds of people; then I was corded and bound in my bed,
and then I received instruction, which afterward I was forced to put the same
into action: which was this Distribute all to the poor Release all pawns,
without advantage, give back to them that were not able to redeem; fain to
proclaim if I had injured or wronged any man to restore him fourfold,
according to the Law. Brethren, the name of this would not serve me, for I was
forced to act the thing, I durst not act any thing. O beloved, the Gospel is
peace in it self, but it is a fiery Law to flesh and blood. Now how have I
walked since my affliction? can any man charge me either for drinking,
swearing, whoring or deceiving, or lying, or uncivil walking? which do you
know, and all the world, that blasphemy is the root on which them names depend;
and where a godly life is, there these actions are not to be found; and where
godliness is not in the root or soul, these are and will be: for know, that
blasphemy is only the tie in the soul of man, loosed from its principle of
obedience, and from that looseness, comes a dissoluteness in life; and take
Christ's own word, which is this, By their fruits, that is actions, you shall
know them. Again, what end or advantage have I sought to my self, ever since,
as my Epistles will declare? now I say, the love of Christ has constrained me
hereunto, which is not blaspemy; but love in truth, without deceit. Now
brethren, you that are so high in holiness in name, I come to see what things
you declare, for the Gospel is not a lying name, but an over-powring and
commanding thing; who amongst you is gone beyond this blasphemy I have stated,
and who is but short of what I have spoken and done he is a blasphemer and a
perjured man, for it is written, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy
God in vain: and have ye not all learned and heard that it is not speaking, but
doing, is the justification of him that does it, and a declaration to the
world, that God has done his work in him from whence this doing does proceed?
So then, be ye hearers no more, deceiving your own selves, but doers. O how
many high expressions of Christ, and holiness and the Lord help you, before
five pound to help to relieve him in need; nay, five shillings; now if you say
that the Gospel is true, I say it is made a lie by you, for that being truth,
commands thee not to speak without acting, and thou speakst all and acts not,
which action is the life of the Gospel; and in truth, and indeed, how many of
you are without the Gospel for your cloak? Jam. 1.27. Pure religion and
undefiled, before God, even the Father, is this, To visit the fatherless and
widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of the world. Brethren
this is a metaphorical expression, but I will give you the literal meaning,
that is this: the fatherless hold in it all that are in need; for as the Father
is the staff on which the whole Creation depends, so the fatherless amongst us
is all that are in want, so as God in his mercy and love condescends to our
relief: so to condescend to the fatherless, is no less then helping all in
need; and the widow is but the same, for to give out to the capacity of our
knowing our duty that we may be left without excuse, for we that make a God of
the letter, for if we dwell in the letter, that is, in the knowledge of the
letter, that letter shall condemn us, and Gods judgment shall find us; for woe
unto him that does acknowledge the letter to be true, and he not reformed in
outward obedience to the same,

Yours to serve you in unfeigned Love. Theauraujohn Tanniour Allah al Sabbah
Skribahjail.


Errata.
PAge 3. line 16. add her. p. 7. l. 6. for d^ited r. deitied. p. 11. l. 6.
after, we could be, r. A Sambah, or your Sam^ch, o^ strength in God. p. 13. l.
12. for here, r. there. Ibid. l 36. for Arminia, r. Armen^a. p. 15. l. 10. for
sapait, r. sapuit. p. 17. l. 29 and 30. for Noon, r. Moon. p. 18. l. 15. r. any
thing less. p. 22. l. penult. for rea, r. arc. p. 26. l. 30. for basist, r.
basis. p. 27. l. 27. for netet, r. nedet. Ibid. l. 36. for essence, 1. offense.
Ibid. l. 4. for addi^^, r sad^^ne. p. 28. l. 34. for aone, r. love. p. 29. l.
14. for in, r. in o p. 31. l. 1. for sobao, r. sobaos. p. 34. l. 3. add no^.
ibid. l. 33. for would, r. will. ibid. for doing, r. dung. p. 39. l. 23. dele
that ibid. l. 26. for gran^, r. grav^. ibid. l. 32. for cackt, r. act. p. 40.
l. 3. for they, r. thy. ibid. l. 33. for Olimet, r. Clim^t. p. 42. l. 16. add
a. ibid. l. 37. for God, r. Ghost. p. 43. l. 19. add the. p. 44. l. 26. for
illstration, r. ^llustration. p. 45. l. 9. add ^u an. p. 46. l. 34. r. all
the. ibid. l. ult. for tying, r. lying. p. 47. l. 4. r. to come. p. 51. l. 34.
r. that are you lo^h to own. p. 55. l. 28. dele God. p. 56. l. 22. for time, r.
Trin^. p. 57. l. 18. add the. p. 59. l. 8. for cause, r. cause^s. p. 60. l.
14. ^or the, r. th y. p 62. l. 17. for from, r. for. p. 63. l. 25. for reader,
r. leader. bid. l. penult. for in. r. its. p. 64. l. 37. dele of. ibid. l. 40.
for b^ound, r. bound. p. 67. l. 15. for humany, r. humanity. p. 68. l. 5. for
deely, r. deeply.

Dr. Ba. Jhones his Letter of Queries to Theaurau John Tanniour.
Dear friend,
I Have often wondered that men should so jangle about the circumstance of
Religion, whiles the end of the thing it self (if we may properly so call a non
entity) remains so obscure. The end of Religion I take to be the well being of
man after death. To which is necessarily required an ability to compare
qualities, and then (at leastwise opinionately) to judge of them: Which, how it
is retained in and after death, the more I search for in the Books of the
Learned, the more I confess I remain dissatisfied. So that I know not whether
more properly to address my self for this point of knowledge, then to you. The
accounted madman of the times, who can speak somwaht experimentally thereof;
as having had at least one foot in the Boat already, and therefore better
prepared for Revelations of this kind, then any other I know. Give me leave
therefore to ask you:

1. Whether the Soul be a created substance, distinct from the Body; and
consequently departs from the Body, in the moment of death; A perfect
Creature, understanding not only whence it came, but also knowing Acts, etc,
If so, to what end is the resurrection of the Body? Or what need the Soul be
reunited to it?

2. But if you find that the Soul is traduced with the Body, Then when is its
separation? Whether (though this be a Question unbecoming a Philosopher to ask)
in the moment of death? or upon the putrefaction of the Body? (which seems to
be somewhat proved by the aparition of some men's shapes; some months after
their decease?) otherwise I should propound to you this third Question, viz.

3. Whether the whole man does not rest in the grave until the last Trump?

4. And lastly, In what part or principle of the Creature does this Germen of
knowledge reside?

5. And after the dissolution of the compound, by what Organs actuated?

To enlarge my self to you on these were impertinent, since you resolved me
that at other times you cannot reason those discoveries that are revealed to
you in your transportations.

For the Practical Part of Theology, enough to me is, That one Precept of (let
not the Authors name affright you) Mahomet in his Alkaron, viz. To resign my
selt unto my God, and be an honest man. However, if you could reconcile that
fatal necessity of the Stoics, with the free will of Arminius, I conceive you
would thereby put an end to most of the controversies now on foot amongst the
Sectaries. I am

From my Lodging by James' fields this 7 March. 1650. Yours affectionately Ba.
Jhones.

The Answer to this Letter follows.

Theaurau John his Salvat-ori, or the true knowledge in light.
Honored Sir,
I Have here inserted the state, and the discovery made to me:

First, as for the soul, it is no created substance, for it is the divine breath
of God, or it may properly be said (if radically understood) the life of God,
in the humane body; not of the body, but enclosed within the circumference of
the body, That is to say, the living life of our Spirit, yet entire in it self,
free, absolute, unnecessitated, acting truth; this is the Image of God in Man:
Now at the departure, the life returns to the fountain from whence it had its
Origin: The gross material body Bestial, returns into the influences; for
know, the influences from the stars, draws with the Sun the Foy^on, from the
water under the Earth, through the earth into the receptacle of the Moon, for
the Moon is a receptacle, of the updraft from the earth, as well as she is a
receptacle of the celestial influences, into her Conclave, to let down his
congealment, into the Terrestrial Orbs. This is touching the corporal, or
earthly body; now the spiritual body in Man, is of a divine nature; for there
is a natural body and a spiritual body.

The Divine or Evangelical body is Spiritual; That cannot be viewed with humane
eyes, which has a restoration, after the putting of this earthly body: That
body is life, understanding, and a restoied body by Christ, that is the life of
God; that is the Paradaical body: Now this body is not capable of any sorrow
nor joy, for it is perfect, and perfection admits of no more; for if more, or
less, not perfection; but it is Joy it self: Now this is Christ's body of his
Saints; the Resurrection is at the parting the bodies at death; To say the Soul
reenters again into the body, it is madness; for know that this body is but the
case, and the wisdom remains within the inmost body that is spiritual, and
departs with that: The body earthly is clay and dung. Now to the short
definition. The Soul, or Spirit, Is, the life of God in our Spirit, absolutely
free, unnecessitated, which at its separation returns to its center.

The gross body earthly into the Influences: The spiritual body into the
Evangelical living, with it all wisdom and knowledge in the perfection: So
there is the Death, Resurrection, and Restoration, the Judgment, Execution,
and condemnation: For the humane tastes death, that the Spirit may take life;
for Paul says, We groan and are burdened, and would be unclothed, that
mortality might be swallowed up of life.

A sack ally Oly Sabbat allu sah. The light returns, and departs to the
everlasting God. An si sabie corpus solat or arryre xx. And the body remains
with the Metals to be refined. Cax-alli sabdi one apolo mo onabfi. The
remainder of its adherents returns into Generations. Callu Evangelious insem
sabat al. The Evangelical body is buried in the high thing, that is God, or
Christ, Jah, or Jehovah: So that here you see, the body saved, the body
destroyed; the soul centered: Tu est vita ammi mem: The life of my people is
perfection in me: O O solo ogagous in suolo sabdi sapuit: O the high wonder in
man, is the Light of God. Glory to him alone.

Now for the practical part of Theos-logi: But to render it in your own term,
It Is improper: For the Negation does tie up the Affirmation, for the word in
its proper essential center is Theos-ologi, that is to say, Gods Light in the
excellency of his declaratives, or as you will have it, his declaratives of his
excellency; so much for Theologi, or in propriety of speech Theos-ologi. Now
Theos-ologi is derived from (...) Samba, or and your Theology is derived from
(...) the Hebrew Radaxes is Thausi alli; that is thus much: The high
declaratives of truth from those Characters (...): Non tu resignatus, non se,
sed oli operat ad te oli; thou resignest not thy self, but light takes thee
into it self: As for Mahomet, he is blindness or darkness, his name denominates
no less, for it is derived from Mazzum.

For the declared truth by man: know, it cannot reconcile the difference
betwixt men; For if it could, then man could confer Gods gift; but though God
do cause in man the declarative of truth, that has his Seal upon it, yet men
do not always assent to it, by reason of the darkness in themselves.

But for the fatal necessity of the Stoics, it is a grammered learned learning,
that will not be unbottomed easily, though clearly confuted, that in this short
abstract, I leave to the Judgment of all.

For the necessity of Salvation, It Is not to be obtained by Man, neither is it
lost by Man: Thus, that that man can attain, it is not God; for then the
attainer, is as great as the attained, or greater; undeniable by any, for the
maxim will hold, and will not admit of any Negation in the coertive part, for
in that state there cannot be two equals, as to say two Gods, and never a
Creation; but you must hold God, and the Created by God.

So much for attaining Salvation. Now man cannot lose his Salvation. Thus: That
that can be lost, that can have no center; and take your own words, the Soul
lives ever, and all times is a center in one time; that is, in God. Now know
that the Soul as you a^ count it, is essenced in God, and if the Soul could
deliuate or detract its Essence, then it is a greater God then he that gave it
a being in himself.

Now for Free Will that the Arminians hold, It Is blindness in their seeming
center: For Free Will is free obedience of will, to him that gave it a being,
of his own free will in Light; which Freewill is Christ's free obedience, which
is Gods free mercy; which is called Christ the Savior: But to speak home, the
number of names of things are all but the Hyroglificy of one thing, in which
that one delights; in the goodness of the beholding his things made: One
more, Heaven, Earth all things, are but a case for the Divinity to operate or
act forth in.

Lest you should object and say, That Free Will is not fully confuted, Take
this: The Free Will in man, is but his free conceit, of his Free Will; in which
Will he is loosed from the tie of his center: Thus, his will is Free, in that
his will is freed by Christ's freedom; but then it is not his will, but it is a
Divine Will; freed by the Free Will of Christ's obedience. Satis est.

Epistle I.
BEloved by divine inspiration, I being lighted in the Evangelical and Sacred
Mystery, and History, which is divine in it self, and by polluted man, the
divine and evangelical light in its species is so far vilified, that the
lusture is buried in the grave of man's carnality: O the Transcendent Excellency
in the divine being, that it that is all, and all things, should be so far by
man's wisdom turned to another thing, that is Adam in corruption: His work now
to unwork this Adam, and unbury this buried truth; it is God his work, in the
restoring him, and giving him his that was at first, a perfect name that is
(...) Hamah: Now this name, named on, and in by God, on and upon his new
Creature, it is life and stability; for he that gives that name confers himself
into that new thing named by himself. Now beloved I being named by God, that
name being Reuben Theaurou John, the extent of the signification, is the first
strength in the evangelical and divine light, in the transcendency of its own
excellency, that is into God himself: Beloved this new name, named by God; the
effects flowing from that ingrafted stem, it is love, and for your sakes my
brethren, for God is union, yet distillative into three persons, but from and
into unions Deity, so to be named by God, the name causes the named to be
turned into a distillative, that this name has received, the effects that
flow, is love, else not new named: Beloved to be named by God, it is to be
restored by Christ, this glory shakes your rotten foundations, that, that is
may remain unshaken.

Now Adam in darkness is the Law in its demonstrative, but Hamah in Christ is
restoratived in and unto from whence he was fallen: Now beloved comes the true
state of Adam, as you read it: The thing in your intendant is truth, but
spelled by a salfe name: Now Hamah was the first Light that gave a being to its
adherent; for it was the essential Deity, deited in and unto it self, in se,
and in se, and in sc, enfolding, enfolding, enfolding in it self; unfolding is
created by, and from the infoldings of himself, he unfolded and we came forth,
not into a garden, but upon the species of the earth: Be not ignorant, could a
Garden compass and confine his creative? No, no, the creations of numerous men
and women at once, and your Adam is not man and woman but the whole creation of
God, which is his declaratives of his Excellency, in and from him that cannot
be limited for millions of millions, Nay all that were that is, and is to
come, is but one to him, which is your Adam and my Hamah: But the difference
is, your intendant Adam was light and became dark; My Hamah is and was light:
Look to it, for both light and darkness in one name, Hamah not in your Adam;
for Adam is death, because a lie, and Hamah is light, and was and to come the
same: Hamah is Jesus, Jehovah, Eloal, L. The all of all, and in all things: Now
in this state all God, no man: In Adam all man, no God; but by God yea are:
Beloved I beseech you mind, for it is not man's words, but the eternal Spirit
renewed in me dictating it self into your understanding, to cause you forth to
arise out of your despicable destroyed estate, to make an inlet into that Holy
of Holies, Christ the hope of Glory in me, in you both into one, to bring the
eternal unchangeable Decree to its Center and extended Period, which is
himself: Now to open Hamah truly it is to show you the bosom of the Father,
which no Adam can do, because he is in a lost condition, but Hamah can open
himself: Mind this state, it is the greatest Mystery that ever was opened; Nay
it is the sealed Book that none was able to open, that caused John to weep: Now
is come the judgment of the Great Day that shall burn as an oven, and all the
proud shall be stuble for that Flame.

And I looked and behold no man was worthy to open the Seals: what are the
seven Seals? they are perfection pointed unto: That state is allusive to the
glorious transcendency in the eternal rest; that them seven Seals pointed unto,
for John knew that God would manifest the opening of them seven Seals, at the
appearance of Jesus in his transcendant effate, which all have pointed unto
that has been prefedent, that is, that the Glory of Glories should be
manifested to the sons of men: Now I beseech you mind, God is one and in
himself, yet varieties in and from that one; God created all things: (That
state is undeniable) by Jesus Christ, he made the world: Now what Jesus Christ
is, will be made known, that say you was Joseph's son the Carpenter, and the
Virgin Mary (thank the Popish translation for that if it be worth it) but the
truth in the eternal being, is, That Jesus Christ is the bosom of, nay in the
Father, yet farther it is the wisdom of God, nay it is himself: And he could
not be properly be said to be born of One, that was the Birth of all; but one
is God, and from that God all came forth: Now Jesus Christ I acknowledge; but
to be inclusive in the womb of the Virgin Mary, I deny, the intendant of your
story (as is sited) I must deny? thus that that holy thing, and the Virgin
stated, is an allusive state transcendant, the composing in one that is all:
yet let me tell you, that the Virgin that shall conceive and bring forth her
first birth, it is another thing intendant in the explacatory influe, for it is
the birth of God in and forth from our spirits: The Vir gin is the womb of our
souls, not souls but spirits, not spirits but the spirit of the spirits in the
conclave, assome, or bottom, in the which is inherent the Deity; this is
somewhat to the matter: Now the Virgin is Jesus: Christ the son is the Virgin,
the work the same: This is the true Trinity, figurative in the earthly man,
that is the representative of the Deity: God dwells in us by his Spirit: Now
this Spirit is Christ in us the hope, nay it is the Fathers glory: I
acknowledge a man named Jesus Christ, that he was the evangelical Life of God,
as Paul was the evangelical Life of God, and the rest were so; but he was the
first in the first Trine, and the spirit dwelt in him in its flue, that is in
its fullness, that I acknowledge glory due to, is to the perfect Spirit, that is
Light, that is in its union, God himself, and in his declarative Christ with
us, that is his Spirit in us, which is Christ.

Now I beseech you Brethren be careful, that you graspe not to your selves a
God and Savior that God never sent you, that is the body of Christ so named;
take heed that you adore not that, that is not, and let slip that that is: For
I tell you the flesh of Christ's fleshly body profits you no more then your
own flesh, nor the words that are named of him unto you; but it is this that is
your salvation, that Spirit that was in that Body, that is, he that is not
touched with humanity, and yet dwells in flesh, and not flesh, but Spirit; that
is, the divine Deity, which is the mercy it self saving you, by causing a
resurrection of it self to arise in you, and by that you are renewed from Death
to Life, that is, Christ the Son of the eternal God: Now the body of Jesus
cannot be defined, for it carries in it the inclue of every thing, for it is
all things, and in all things, and by it all things are continued: The body of
Man, is not this beastial body; for the true essential body of Man, is Christ.
Now to the Body Bodily of and in Man; Be amassed at the description: The body of
Man as you term it, is a Person, a Person I grant, yet no Person but three
persons; for it is the created of the three Unions Deity, and the Life of all
them Three live in Man, and not Man, and by it man is, and was, and shall be:
Now how could Man fall, having three persons in himself: Thus he fell, how? Not
by eating an Apple, but by being nothing, That is, he is nothing, and nothing
can be nothing, Thus, he was not at first: I was, not he; he is by me: O Lord
how wonderful is thy marveilous hidden depths. I made man in my own Image: he
defaced it, how could he; by being more then I would impart: That is the Tree,
if so accounted be.

January 30. 1650. (...) The aurausohn Tainniour Sabbah Skribahsail.
BEloved, This day is fulfilled that holy Prophecy that says, I will gather
into one fold, Jew and Gentile, and David my servant shall be their king. That
is Herogliphically, allusive, or pointing to another: Now my Brethren, both
sews, and Gentiles; I am a sew, begotten by the Gospel, Circumcised both in
flesh and spirit: By the life of Jesus restored from Adam (as you call him)
into Hamah, that extent is into God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; a
Priest after the order of Melchizedeck, after Aaron, after Jesus, after Paul,
after Luke, after John, whose substance I am: I beseech you mind, here is the
Divinity declared in the Humanity, and yet not humanity, nor touched with
humanity; The depth of the mystery the spirit is the decerner, and not flesh.
Now beloved, the Jews were lost when the Gospel was preached: The Gentiles lost
in their Jesus, and Jesus another thing then the Gentiles worship: so both
lost, that in one both may be found.

January 20. 1650.


Epist. II.
Beloved Brethren,
THe Divinity of Christ is the beloved of God the Father, the Son in us; we in
the Father: This is the restored Hamah, or Adam. Beloved, having been drawn
into the bosom of the Father, by the eternal spirit, in the which Spirit I
dictate forth unto you the hidden depths of the eternal wisdom, and
foreknowledge of God, (...) though declared in the appointed time, in himself,
(...) for the (...) bringing in variety (...) into unity (...) that is into
himself, and in him both Jew and Gentile is one; and shall be one in
themselves, that is in Love (...) and that root is God himself; for we are his
offspring. The divine Law is a coming to take its regency in the species of
this world, that (...) strength shall come in the wisdom, power, and excellency
of it; yea the earth shall be enlightened with the luster and transcendency of
that divine light (...): Now to state the state that we are lost (...) sin is
the cause now (...) O (...) O (...) O (...) O orarau in salem absi sissere, O
the morning light, that does bring us again from our buried condition (...)
that is the Star in Jacob our Father, O the transcendency of the divine wisdom.
(...) O the excellency in truth, the declaratives thereof shall be illustrated
to the confounding self-righteousness, and inherent pride shall become abortive
in the species of this world, (...) sin shall be discovered, her foundation
raced, her rubbish cast into the abyss, and on her foundation shall
righteousness reign: for where (...) sin does abound, grace shall much more
abound; O wonderful the foundation of the great-deep is, and shall be opened
unto the view of the (...) Creation: Beloved, What is Hamah or Adam? To let you
know, Hamah is God, it is Man, it is Earth, it is Air, it is Fire, it is Water; it is
all, and the all of al things: This is Hamah in his first principle, or your
intendant Adam: Mind the Mystery, Hamah or Adam in God all things, in him even
in Adam or Hamah: Look you curious generation that are Eagleev^^, whose souls
are cast off with the quickness of your understanding: the truth in the heart
in the same man, that formed innocent Babe in the center is a lie in the
evaporation and utterance: O the Head, the head, the head spoils many a
declarative truth (...) Now truth is the p^radice, the Vita, the Evangelicales
in rem, the Evangelical living in the that thing intendant in this state is
schovah, that Jehovah our Throne, where we shall reign in union; Man is God,
God is Man; this is the garden that is fained Paradise, but the true intendant
is Adam, or Hamah in his first principle, that is he in the eternal Spirit, it
in him, both in one; both unclothed, clothed is the fall that is being (...)
when we could not be said to be; we no looner were, but we ^ell by weakness:
What ignorance so stupid, that does not perceive, that within himself is a
straining to the Center: That is, the weak Babe would go to the Mother to be
clothed upon; that word of Paul's is dubious, it is better said to be taken into,
which is the proper Orthodox word.

Ori absait sedet me: O, when shall I sit in the divine Light! Arrat a sapit ad
me mecam, the divine light takes us into himself (...) abdi abat oli oso ari
(...) scle teuei mem nebet ammi nisan addi oon olo hissait arri soan abni
allati, nesat ole abbi denat absi orat hosaret alua tueat adni beneat, oli
sana, absi meltah: The derivacie. Hem oen sanu eal abse hocat all a cuti oau
seen even sele lona mam sebat abbi hosaret seui neat adma hosana alleu ene oi
pele terte euan asabdi husuoli inse meat adni tele peen peutai tran in lagoas a
salla hori pean tebe hele phecatt adni avit ille next averrit hui medet alvat
absi tele nene ori appa sabb osoli dele mean nan sagat absi teucoesalvah eni
ori absaet steutolen in se abat anni tere eset ackri in le menet hosaten oli
pead adma amanet addesh shela ariei sele terte sebat adma ^uan asadi dene avat
olo hosaret a malta uanni tebe onat anni men sola os^ret alvah -- (...) The
English derivacie.

Now if you the Paradise would see,
It Is the height felicity;
It Is the paradaical throne,
In which is only unione.
It Is the glory Celestial,
It Is the life Evangelical,
It Is the pavement of our God,
It Is the Lilly, it is Aarons Rod;
It Is the sparkling glory in that sky,
It Is inhabited withal all unity,
It Is the Aurorau, it is the morn
It Is the inclue our birth our born.
It Is the union in three.
It Is the Tran his excellency.
It Is the light Celestial.
To be inhabited vestual.
It Is the glorious glory Throne,
That is the perfection in unione,
It Is the Rod that rules the sky
It Is the influe, nay Eternity
It Is the holy holy, holy one
It Is the Deity in una unione
It Is the three that Celestial be,
It Is the only, only, only one;
That never was but is in one
And still the same remains in three
Here is unfolded a glimpse of Paradicitee,
Here is a glimpse of glory from that sky
That is that was, and shall be Eternity. Allah sabat.
(...) This we were: Now from this our fall begins (...)
Now all you unvailed may plainly see,
The Fruit typ'd out by the forbidden Tree.
Know the fall is being created, for when we were not created, and uncome
forth, we were as he is; that is in perfection: But coming forth from, we fell
into these earthly forms as Sensitables, and Vegitables, yet again we were in
innocence, then being so, but the Spirit of the great world took us into it,
and so we became one with that; and two in our selves, that were unions in our
selves, before we were his thirteen Radiases, unions in themselves; yet in
Multiplicities in the Influences in their understanding: Now to find this
weakness out, and to discover it to the open view of blind men I cannot, for
it will trouble seeing men, to see into it; for the not seeing is the not
knowing, and in that state man is a beast and no more; now we were, and
presently we were not; this state is mysterious, for that may truly be said to
be a mystery that is not, nor cannot be known. Remember John's sealed book, and
that is not opened to this very day: Now to the unfolding that Mystery, that
has been hid from the view of the sons of men, it is Paradise, what that is,
what jesus is, what Mary is, what hell is, that Abaddon that deceiver (...)
what Paradise is from man's first principle, that is Jehovah: He and the
Creation issued forth from the womb of the Deity, nay the Deity issued forth
from itself into itself; desentive, that is thesecond declarative, which is the
Son, the second person in the Trinity operative, for he said, Let there be
light, and behold the Sun, the life in all things, this is Jesus, this is our
Massah which is called the second person in the Trinity desentive operative,
yet this is not the Son, it is the Father, it is not the Father nor the Son; it is
one, and that union from whence all things do proceed, Proceed is the third
person, for it is the product of both the other, neither one nor other, but
either of, and in each other; and neither each other, but all three one; and
they in union: This is Trinity in Unity, in se, in himsalf; but the great
mystery is how these three, yet one, dwells in the Creation, and not the
Creation, nor in the Creation; yet in him, and by them all things do subsist
(...) in irineis sem fratris: Mary is perfection from these Radaxes, she is
wrote (...) well knew the Papal saction, that the perfection in the name, would
cenceal the thing; But time will not admit truth to be declared in the
lusturous excellency: What hell is, hell is stated for the wages due to this
(...) sin charactar: Now to discover what them two are, them two are three;
nay, them are one (...) sin; Now (...) is no character in the whole Alphabet
that carries the peats as (...) does, but stands as it were rooted in the earth
(...) Sambah she stands like (...) on her soul (...) phe carries an half sole
(...) caph a quarter sole, now these four Characters (...) yet (...) carries
her three points open upward, and her demonstratives is to open upward, for the
opening upward, and the soul tied in the earth, is the cause of sorrow; and
weakness is the same, that is the character (...) Now (...) Sambah stands on
her soul entire, as (...) does, but she is closed and barred upward, I speak as
they are Hebraically wrote in their first Apparition: Let there be light, and
it wae so.

Allah Rosoli samat albo bonoso raal ma shener ephrait solo monete, avar sallu
ponderah al, hosonare raalma pedu oriko, soonne pelma nataras, hosi pekod oli,
deon hosonari apaet, elma rationalem sobat arri sele lokatar albo, boonna
stonus selat arri peke non habemus, sobeanus salmoa, monita avariena, sammat
arri: Now beloved, Our brother Paul wished that they could speak all Languages,
but interpretation is to the understanding to edification, these gifts both,
God has been pleased to communicate to me, the unworthiest of all men, to
confound the worldly in this wise seeming seeing age; but never more dark in
the general then now: The Gosspel is hid, the illustrations thereof are buried
in the grave incredulity; now to awaken and enlighten the dark corners of the
earth in man, is this light manifested in me, and the rest of my Brethren that
God is bringing to the view of the world.

The derivacy from the tongues, but it is but one language, because it is the
major part wrote in the Tartarian tongue, in the east Armenia, the third
descent. Now a descent is a third refining since that being a tongue: For the
restitution is restoring things to what they were, the Major includes the Minor
in writing, though it consists of many tongues, take notice of this.

Allab: High light is coming or rising to the night-people, that thereby they
may be made day and light: for the purpose of God is to unseal the hidden
secrets of darkness, through the manifestation of light, in its illustration,
and by that light turn all into union, that is into love:
Take notice there is two alls, a light all, and a dark all, and God but one
all to them two alls; Light and darkness to him are one (I was forced to break
the derivasie by reason I would give you notice of two alls, light and
darkness, and yet in their essential being but one all: Love is that great day
that shall burn as an oven, for love is fire, and jelosie by which God will
burn up that that seems and is not, and by the consumption of the one, inlet
the other, and so bring the one all by light into himself, for God will utter
his voice from his Throne and that voice shall shake terribly the earth to
nothing, that he may be all: This is the extent of that language cited, but it
tuns in more strength in it own tongue, for the derivacy is always weaker then
the radax, as it is the herogliphiks of God and his creations.

January 8. 1650.
Epistle III.
Beloved Brethren,

THe Excellency of knowledge, is to know the divine Truth, which truly none
can know, but those that the divine Light takes into it self: It is the eye
that sees it self, and all things in it self, which is God, for we have an
unione with him, through one spirit: Now beloved having his eye, that is all
things, and sees all things as they truly are, and not as they seem; this sight
is descentive from, being drawn up into himself, that is, the Light and Life of
all things, which is God, the Center, in which all things, centred do subsist,
and exsist, and are impeaded by the same power.

Now Beloved, God does send down his declaratives through his Son Jesus Christ:
Now I entreat you brethren, look well, and the Lord unvail your understandings
in this coherent discovery, for it is the Mystery that is hid in the eternal
wisdom unto this day: Mind these words, Christ shall come in the glory of the
Father, which is the full clusteration in the lightning the whole creation,
made by himself: Now to know Christ, is eternal life: Now I beseech you
understand, for the knowledge here intended is perfection, which is God
himself; for to behold Christ, is in truth the turning us into himself, and so
into the Father by the Son, who is the Light of the Father, so an union is
made; but this is mysterious: Now consider what Christ is, what Hell is, what
Abaddon that deceiving Devil is, what the Fall is, what Mary is, what the
Virgin is, and what death is: All these things will the Spirit dictate forth to
our understandings in due time: Ye take your selves to be Christians; can ye be
his, yea know not, for Christ is the wisdom of the Fathers Glory; he is the
first and the last, The declarative of the Farthers Excellency, the truth of
God, nay God himself, the demonstratives of God are declared in and by his Son:
Paul says the Son is the lively Image of the Father, the Text is better; read
thus, he is God, Glorious in his ellustrations, in the Transcendency of
himself: O orarau in salmoas in sem anus in se sapu^: O the morning peaceful
Person in the Divine being, the wisdom of the Father: This is one glimps of our
Massah or Throon, or L or Christ: Iesous Christos in vita in se hominem: Jesus
Christ in himself, is the Life of men: Athra nati se at atti pel: He is the
self in the whole created: Ola ogoas asaluat ol: He is the Light in the light
world in Man: Hoso ovallo othronia salem: He is the alone Peace to the created
by himself: Hevi e en eseu neke pele pel: He is the safe Rock, in the fullness
of all things: Ova asa ralau hosonaret arki: He is the strong rocked strength
in the whole creation, by himself: These expressions of Christ, is but the
outside bark, your eye must see within that bark. Now beloved to know Hell, is
to truly know Heaven; And again, to know Heaven, is to know Hell; thus to know
our selves lost, is truly to be taken into, that paradise which is God: Now to
begin, Hell is this earthly Mansion, whereon, and in we dwell: Hell is a
separation from happiness: Hell is the restraint from enjoyment: Hell is the
obstruct of all goodness: Hoss, se adma in rem: It Is the alone separating thing
from it self: Non fratris sed abbi selat arbe hosonaret raalma pedit me at kad
ola vose neck habuise in sem laudat abieter rone sabat It Is the deep world in
the lowest center; it is the assome, bottom, abyss bottomless, it is the nothing
in the thing, but an empty arie vanishing, in orat-^mor, ormoas sabi, atta,
allah: It Is the deep height in the bitterness in morning: I beseech you mistake
not, there is a height in deepness, as there is a deepness in the height: O
allamana sapuit, O the height and and depth of wisdom is in it self, that is
in God, who is the all of all things: know when I speak (of) it is to speak to
you capacities, but the state in me is an other intendant.

Beloved he descended forth, and behold we were, and are Gods essential
descents; thus the all things descended from the all, that is, thus much the
creation came forth from God: thus God said let it be, and behold we came
forth. Now consider whether that forth, or in, in this state stated, be proper;
for to be in God, is the Paradise in pleasure, but to be forth as is said, it is
a dubious word, and must be exactly looked into; thus though we are forth from
the fountain, we are in him essentially: Now the water in the fountain is in
peace, but distilling from the fountain is trouble to the same that was one
with the Fountain in the head, or Center, by the variety of ascents and
descents, that it does encounter with, in its course: Now beloved in him was
peace to us, nay is peace, and shall be peace in Glory; not that we can be
greater then we were in the fountain, which is God, but our restoration is to
be taken into what we were, for God is no greater but ever the same. Now we
come to the point of all points, pointing into the Center, that Center is God:
Now mind I beseech you brethren, here is the aurora samoas in sem deus sepe
pauvisse nisi nedarat: Here is the morning peace to the fainting soul in this
low world of darkness; Oh! he that made all things out of himself, and yet he
the same, and not the less nor lessened: This is our Jehovah, this Jehovah is
the first Person in the Trinity, The unfolding into the creation, is the second
Person, which is Christ the Son, the Glory of the Father: Now know that the Son
is the light of the Father; the demonstratives into streams makes varieties,
yet from that one unione, the life of those varieties is God illustrated in the
second Person, which is Christ, manifested in flesh, and not flesh: I am the
life of the world, them is Christ's own proper words as the second Person in the
Trinity operative: Now the third Person is the produced forth from the two
Persons, that is, not vive vosa, but vosa vive; not the living voice, but the
voice living: Look well to this distinction; thus the Father and the Son are
one, I and my Father am one, I work, and the Father works: Now there is a
living, living voice, and a voice living: Thus he said let there be light, and
behold the sun, the life of all things; this is the living voice, that created
all things: Now the voice living, is the Holy Ghost, the third Person in the
Trinity, which proceeded from the Father and the Son; thus the opening of the
Father is the Son, the conjunct of both is the produced creation: Let us make
man in our own image, that is, the Holy Ghost, (as you name it) but there is
more inherent in that state, for the Holy ghost in man, is the image of God,
the Holy ghost in its Center is equal with the Father; for they three are but
one in the Godhead: Now to come to the original of the being of things, Thus
God, the Son, the Holy ghost all one entire, O sela sapuit pecatam nedet ad me
mekavisse selem sam addi pedet arki all ah hos onneret peko oli ben: O the
heavenly divine being, that reaches us into it, to declare it to us, us to it,
in its origin, in its womb, in its influe, in its fullness (...) kevah ausait
adki olat obediah allah hon: The evangelical operation in it self finding us
eyes to see, us it, it us, both one and in one, O obuisse selat mem: O the
seeing eye that sees it self all, we nothing that is all. Look well into this
state: Here some glimpses you may see a beginning opening to the Mystery: For
the Devil or Satan that deceiver. To know the Devil, you must first know man,
for man is the beginning, the middle, and end of the Devils work. Now what was
man? I answer, in his first principle he was God; how did he fall, by coming
forth, he no sooner was, but he was not, and yet he was, by, but not in? Mind
and consider this state; thus God could not make any thing greater, or
gloriousser then himself, he being the fountain: Now man being come forth into
the creation, there was the first fall: It Is said that Lucifier was cast down
from heaven, and Michael and his Angels fought with the Devil and his Angels,
here lies the sem sapuit, the knowledge in the thing: Abuisse senarder olo
ophron pero, these words will not be brought into English, but lose half their
strength in their importance in their original exemplification, but thus much
(...) the Angel fell, that with him many were wounded, the expression is dark,
so was light when it took darkness; thus that Lucifer, or Satan, or Devil, is
the spirit in man, that is not the spirit of God, but by God this Devil is
suffered. Now how this Lucifer was an Angel of light, he was in the fountain in
light in God, from whom all things in their origin had their being, it is
undeniable: Now know that man no sooner but a Devil, there cannot be one word
betwixt man and Devil, for they are one, thus the man Devil, the Devil man: Now
this Angel of light here intendant is the essence of God in man, which fell or
descended into earth, to imbody it self in it, being imbodyed it could not be
light as it was in the fountain, for descents must be from ascents, in this
state here intended: Se absat L he is the glory, glorif^ing all things: Now
that light descended, took earth and that earth became light in it self,
deriving light from that true light, and yet it self a false light: Thus the
Sun is the true light, the Moon is a false light, her self as she stands in
competition with the Sun, for she receives from the Sun and shows to us as it
were her own light, and that is a false deceit; for when we say the light of
the Moon (of) is proper in that state, because it is an asseveration, for the
light from the Moon is in the Sun, and through the Moon, and not in the Moon,
for nothing can properly be said to be in, but that that is substantially the
same: Now if our eyes were fully opened, then we might see the full state, for
the whole mystery lies in the Sun, and Moon, of which the creation ciphereth
out, and are in their center herogliphicks temporal of the trines celestial:
But to this Lucifer, this Devil, it is man and not man, it is the false
conception in the heart in man, that is the spirit of man, that is the Devil;
as Christ said yea are of your father the Devil, the Devil and Satan is a
deceiver, and a dweller in the heart in man, that is the spirit of man; But for
the hell that is as the Papists say, and we ignorants say it is a lake of fire:
Now I desire to know in what world it does center, if in the Air, the wind
would cool it, and that is light, and not utter darkness; If in the earth,
there the cumbustible stuff cannot contain it, for fire must ascend upward: O
that times could hear with truth in the highest and deepest things, but they
cannot I see by the hintings of the spirit in me, and the knowledge it does
reveal unto me: Hos se sapuit adma mali meded mekam ad se sepit nedat oli dene
derat alvah: The height and extent in things is to be declared, and the people
are fitting to receive the same, but weakness impeads them; O alva holy seon
^s^: O thou highest help, thy lowest to obtain the thing which is thy self.

February 16. 1650.
Epist. IV.
THe Query insisted on at our last meeting, was held that the spiritual man is
not God: The which Negation I deny; Thus to be short: God is the Spirit, and
not man; and to be spiritual is perfect God; we are an union with him in one:
The same spirit is in us the glory of God, nay our glory; thus God has made
man his outwork, demonstrating the inward life; for the life of the Creature is
from within, and within is the Spirit, and that inmost Spirit is God in his
Creature, that is Gods Spirit in Man: Now God could not dye, I answer No, but
man must dye; therefore was he made, not that by his dying God could be any
thing more, or any thing less; for he is the same, though we go and come, it is
his life operating in the Creation; I say nothing dies, but changes, from glory
to glory, and so returns to the perfection, from which perfection it came
forth: Now perfection in the beginning, weakness in the way, perfection the
end: Now in this lies the whole concernative in the thing: Now if ye were all
able to bear, what is but truth, in the point concerning Jesus Christ at
Jerusalem, what he suffered, what it was that he suffered, and what he did
effect by his sufferings; The mystery is hid to this day in that text, and all
the texts coherent to that intendant, and mind the Translation is rendered: to
truth it is abom nable, and a monster, and an abortive birth, because the being
is not centered in the truth.

That Man is wholly Passive, the state was denied, But man is wholly passive in
the new Creation is proved manifestly. Thus Man is nothing but the case, or
garment, in which God does act his own will, and man's acts are a declarative of
what God has done in him: Now to prove God to be all in man, man nothing, it is
easy to be done; but to prove man to be God is hard: because the teached
principle has took so great an impression in us, that are a teached, yet an
unknowledged people; for man cannot teach God, but God does teach man;
knowledge and teaching, these two be one in God, and two distincts in man, for
it is God, and the called devil, it is Satan, it is that deceiver, for it is the
name, and not the thing, but knowledge is both the name and the thing, and that
thing knowledge in its full is Jehovah, who is knowledges; that we account
knowledge, it is weakness, and in him is the all of knowledge, a sapit arri,
True light is the true discoverer, which is not man but God.

Hogoous also sona in sam ackki pele leat al: The height discoverer is Jehovah
discovered, discovering himself; for Paul says that we know not but by his
Spirit, for our Spirit is enmity against God; now the Spirit of God is himself,
for the Spirit of God, moved, and behold the Creation. NOw to prove man God,
it is thus: Man is a flower flourishing from that root that is life in it self,
and that life is God, the life of all things; now then you answered, that If
God be all, and man nothing, then it is God, teaching God. No: I say not
neither, it is the eternal spirit teaching its weak image in man.

Assaniel vertet al orome mem tuli eldrate naxi phele sem in asata alma hosaet
addad ollo sola mem: It Is the God instructing his image in the Creation in man,
and not man; This is the life of God within our spirits which spirits being
enlightened by the eternal power, it is the resurrection to life visible, and an
union made with the invisible spirit, it does receive, and does convey the
thing into the heart: Now that is the Spirit of God, which in its proper
essence is God, for know all things make not God, though that God be all
things, for the things made, are but part let down from the maker, as much as
to say a demonstrative of God himself, and them in him, why then man in God, I
grant it in part: Can that that made all, and by that God all consists, and
exists, and are influed, and by the same they are impeaded; can that properly
be said to have part in any thing: no it is all, the thing is all, that all is
God; and that is part of that Gods Creation, so man is part of Gods Creation,
and God is man's all. Si Ego soon allah avaret eckko o^ ede in sem attar albah
absoalo mon dia tele athrat raxi sebat arri all neck olo son: Thus if I be
all, how can any thing be part; there can no state be stated to hold competency
with the eternal being:
But thus man cannot properly be said to be any thing, because that in a moment
the glory of it is withdrawn, that is the life; which life is Gods essence in
the called thing: but to understand thing in its origin. There is in reality
but one thing, and that one thing is God, which is the thing; and we and the
whole Creation is but cifrates of that one thing, thing and no more: yet again
in the terrestial orb, counting the numbers, I find man to be the chief thing
amongst the things named by the thing: I say God named the created things, and
not Addam, for Addam came forth from God, and God demonstrating his light and
knowledge in himself named the created, for take your name spelled in Genesis,
God made man perfect, then that perfect man was perfect God; for no perfection
but in Jehovah, but I know beyond that is translated in that state; the Spirit
of roots is the rooted root: Now to come to the thing that we call man, it is in
two parts, but diverse, for the soul is in the body and not the body, for it is
divine; the other part as the body you call, is humane, subject to weaknesses,
which the life, that is the soul, or Spirits spirit; it is all one intendant in
this state, the Spirit of man is his wisdom, and that is properly called man,
which wisdom is but imagery, and notion, and vanity, and a lie; this is man's
wisdom in himself as he is descentive from his first descent, being united, for
obedience is a tie that ties man to God, which tie is Love: But to draw the
states close to the view of all in a short compendious method, expressing the
full significants controverted, thus the state is stated; Man is not God, it is
not true, for man is God, that is true; all lies in these words, thus; God is
man, that is true, for man is not, God is true, to be true man is perfect God,
for true God became perfect man, and perfect man is true God; for perfection is
restoration into whence we came forth.

The spirit of man is nothing as I said before, but imagery; and nothing is not
God, for God is all things, and no name, all things so called, is but names and
not thing; therefore not God.

Here is Logic you may account it, but it is the height divinity; so to be
short, God speaks to his own Spirit in us, teaches us, that is, his spirit
brings our nothing to a conformity, for I count man's outside, and outward
actings shadowy and nothing.

But now to come to the divine evangelical demonstration: It Is love perfect,
what is that? It Is God himself, creating us to act that love upon, and into
viva voce, in the Ecle living voice: Ecle is perfection, and it is an Indian
word radical, and it is proper in that tongue derived from (...) Ecleo is the
proper compound word: Nox saggi erocloi dele mem tabithai nelle meat arki ally.

The eternal perfection is clothed with all things, and is in all things and
comprehends all things, and yet not seen, for the life of all things cannot be
seen, felt, heard nor understood: This is God.

Now to come to Isa. 8.10. which points to this very day, as the Spirit does
dictate forth to me: Let the rest inlightend judge, the text read from the
original root in the Caldean tongue: Ousono oon a sabat olemus mem derata abbat
a lus beneal sabat allu phene solamoas inter apti sagat mem: Take not counsel,
for I will destroy the thing that I have made, and thereby take adventage to
bring my chosen again; that is the true intent of the Spirit in them words, but
it would bring in the next verse, and part of the twelfth veise, but in this
text is the whole discovery of what I affirm, and for what end God has raised
me up, to declare to the world the hidden depth that lies involved in the
inside spirit of this outside letter; but beloved, I am but one, and the whole
world against me, the groundsel or foundation of man's building, since Christ
his time, I must unty their tied ceremony, and destroy their foundation, and so
a discovery of the everlasting gospel shall be preached, and received; Hosaick
alba abmon absi sola menderata alvah holo oon sabdi deat al tagoas sabin dele
mem.

The perfectest perfection is the strength of the Law, the perfectest
perfection is the strength of the Gospel; the strength of the Law is God, the
strength of the Gospel is God; neither Law nor the Gospel, for they are but
names lettered out, typifying that God who is the substance of that shadowy
pointing out, Paul says, The strength of the Law is sin, now what is sin in
Paul's true intent and extent? it is the Creatures weakness, and the weakness
cannot be avoided by reason of the humane clothing; the Law is weakness, for
it is but the name of a thing, and not the thing; so the Law, and the Creation
are both but Gods weakness, thus the Law is but name of the thing, the Creation
is but name of the thing, now here they are both one.

Now it remains to show how these two names of one thing can destroy one the
other. The Law says Do this, the humanity cannot do this the Law commands; now
for not doing this, it is death; to what? to the name of that that is in
another, so the Law is nothing in effect, because in another; that is God:
therefore the Law is death, because it is name, and not thing; in doing the Law
is death, because it is but name and voice of a thing; and not the thing: but
the death by the Law is life in God, the doing the Law is the life in it self
in outward actings and not in God, ogoas in sem albat arri neelet me erko al
sabbat ar siat al; The Law is death to life, the life is death to the Law; they
both dead in themselves, that they may be, nay they are alive both in God; for
God taking up his lettings down, that is man, and the Law; for Law and man is
one in him; nay, in their essencied essence, for they came from God, and are
taken into God through Christ, then there is neither man, nor Law; they are
both made one by the Gospel, which is peace, love, Christ, God, Jah, Jehovah;
Now where is your riddle of Law to be ridled out? it is for want of knowledge,
that the bondage of the Law lies so hard on and upon the Creation,
for the Law to light is ignorance, and man to knowledge is ignorance, so both
one; the Gospel is light, and that causes ignorance to pass away; but it is not
the name Gospel, but it is the Gospel named thing that works this effect.

O agallo moon sabi all neck sedit arri pele mem arbat al alsane mem. The
divine truth is the true discoverer in the depth of Mystery, for our eyes
reaches not the living center: Now know Brethren, that God that has let down
to us his glorious invitations, eiphered out by alluring words, mind it is but
Je^ovah conversing with his Son in the humane nature, or with his Angel in
flesh, for we are the vegetables of the Deity tied to himself by the Angel in
us, for our Angel converses with him: Now an Angel is the true discover of us
to God, God to us, and the unione Maker with God, the Cavenanter with God, the
Covenanter with man, the both, the one, the all, that is, God conversing with
himself in the humanity by his spirit in us, we in it; Mind that state.

February 24, 1650.
Epistle V.
Beloved Brethren,
THe word of the Lord came unto me upon the seventeenth day being Monday at
four a clock in the morning, and did command me to write: Addam I keep your
state, though my intention is another name, and thing; but for your dispute and
contest, here is satisfaction, that God has been pleased to discover unto me.
I beseech you mind, for this Mystery is not yet revealed to the sons of men.
The Apostles themselves were ignorant in this Mystery, that you are ye think so
perfect in: You shall see they knew it not, else they would have declared it,
in some one place or other. Now you are so confident that every one knows it,
but the wisdom of God is only the confounding of man, and so to bring him unto
himself: Now mind, Addam you say was man, so say I, with the woman, for know
that a man is not a man without the woman; for they two are but one flesh nay
one spirit, if they be once brought to be man: Now man being descended from his
first principle which was God, know that the desent must be sub under the
ascent, and man is Gods descent: Now the very being created, was a fall, you
cannot deny, for created must be the workmanship of the Creator, this cannot be
denied: Now man was made, you hold man to be one man as we account, I say
multitudes of men, and women; for understand the distarings of the spirit, for
a million is to him but one; all that was, and is, and is to come, ^ea but one
man: I let the Query lie in your own name Addam. Now his descent forth was a
fall, but we must understand that state was happy, because innocent (mind I
entreat) Now to be innocent is the state that God stated man in; Now knowledge
is the fall, and I prove knowledge to be the restoration, thus weakness is man's
accounted knowledge, but that that man accounts to be is not, for it is nothing,
and nothing cannot be knowledge, for God is all knowledge, and man as we
account man no knowledge, for man is a vain thing, and a vain thing cannot be
knowledge, but God is knowledge, and all things are in him: Now this point will
open way to dispute, but I would bar it out, you will say, if all things are in
him, why then sin is in God: I beseech you mind, sin is nothing, therefore not
in him: thus, it is the invention in man, that is not in God, for as man is a
desent from God, so there may be properly said to be desents from man; Now to
be desents in man, it turns him from being God like, in his essential being,
for God made him one, and he not content in being one he became multiplicity,
but it was in imagination, and that overthrew him and us; for the wisdom of man
is creating allways false creatives, which is like God but it is not God, and
yet sits in the seat of God, this is man's spirit, lift up by himself out of its
center: Now Addam in this first desent was happy, because innocent; Now how
became he unhappy? in not being innocent, what was the cause he lost that state
innocence? it was seeming knowledge, that was a false conception in the heart;
what was the garden? it was God his command to be obeyed in love: Look well
brethren, for Addam was no more then you are, if yea Be, mind that B, in that
lies the mystery; The garden was not a place fenced in, but it was a command,
that man ought to have obeyed, then it gave fruit that was life, but
disobedience threw men out from the command, then man became a wanderer: Mind
in your selves, how does love tie you to obedience? how does hate untye that
that love has tied, judge ye. Now to find this serpent, that deceived Eve,
it is the Devil, turned into an Angel of light, it was no created thing that
ticed Eve, neither was Eve ticed, but the man and woman are accounted one in
that state, for the woman is the glory of the man; why Paul said so, and he and
I know so; thus God made man and woman, not as that story says, of a rib of
the man, I deny that: Now you will say I deny the Scripture, I say no; First
prove you that to be the Scripture, and then you are able to erect your
sentence: but let me tell you both in the Old and New Testament, I see too much
of the serpentine knowledge, involved in with the divine Truth; for where light
in the intendant spirit was repealed, man by his wisdom would connex, and so on
to make his nothing something, and indeed by so doing, has indeavored to make
that that was not, to be: Now what is the woman intended in that state, it is
the creation of God, what is the man, it is Christ, that is the true intendant
as the Lord lives, and fancy what you will, till you come to this center, you
are lost. Thus the creation of God is the declaration of himself, in earthly
voices and semblances, or hieroglyphicies temporal of the Deity celestial:
Christ is the glory of God, the wisdom of God, the strength of God: Now God let
down the creation by, and through, and in Christ, that is the strength of God
conveyed through Christ into the creation, and by the same strength, that is
Christ, will God restore his fallen creation, and the creation restored is
Christ's Bride, and his glory, so the creation restored is the glory of the man,
which is Christ, the Son of the living God: This is the true intent of the
intention in that hieroglyphicie, in Addam and Hevah. But to come to the
tractat declarative, declared, which is Addam and Eve: Addi sele localis in sem
abbiuisse selemus abdi selat ori asabat arri: The Addam is Eve, and the Eve
Addam, both one in flesh and spirit, in me their spirit and life: Ory sabie
selat arri nedat merki allat maby solemus abde s^gat ally penat ori apaet nedet
me: The beginning was the fall, the end the restoration, the depth height, the
height depth, God all, and in all things, for the essential being in things,
is God declared in voices, and semblances, and the creation created is Gods
hieroglyph^ie: So now Addam and Hevah (...) that is her proper name, and her
derevacie is from (...) Heth, that is from God, Heth is Gods strength, Hevah is
the created by God: Look into the state of them two Characters (...) in their
hieroglyphicie, now look into their pronounciations, Heth, Hevah; Heth is one
pronounciation, Hevah is two: Now if you could but understand them two
Characters, they are the creation in God, for know God cannot be God, but by
declared creatings, nor the creation in God, but by him in it, here is the
mystery of mysteries, you cannot spoke God but in the creation, and that
creation is himself in himself, for he is the life and continuance, in his
created by him in him, and to him: Mind and do not study disputes, for here is
matter of minding, not of disputing; I beseech ye, that if any be disputive for
Masteries, state your state, and I will answer in writing, or I will give the
state in writing, and if you can answer, I shall submit to judgment.

Now the being made in innocence, how came they to be tempted? it was from
within, for though the allurements are, as we think from without, it is within:
Now as it is read God made the Serpent, it is utterly false, for then he laid the
snare, and who could escape, being he created all, and he put enmity betwixt
the seed of the woman and the Serpent: Now what was this Serpent? his
hieroglyphick was the beast, that was endued with wisdom, above any thing in
the material creation, next under man, and he tempted the woman; and Moses
said, that man that lies with any beast shall be put to death, here is an
outward disobeying, produced from the false conception in the heart, for she
tasted the forbidden fruit of knowledge, but the delusion was from within, in
not obeying, and Addam he was tempted by her to act things not convenient: So
the creation became vain in their uninnocent actings: Still the Devil is
within, that is the deceiving heart in man, is always hatching his own
deformity: The Angels that fell, were the Light of God in our innocent state,
eclipsed by our fall; for an Angel is light, light an Angel, this Angel in us
is fallen from to be restored to the center, they fell from, that is, into God by
Jesus Christ, who is the Angel of the everlasting Covenant, he is Chogoas sola
sol, he is the high alone rising Sun: Hezeche el parat attah esaboyne sabat
allah occare, he is the beams illustrating Gods excellency in his full
creations: Sabbah al, holy, or high holy, this is the Angel of the Covenant:
Now an Angel is God, and the Sons of God are his Angels, that is, the Light of
God in man, is Gods Angel in man: An Angel is refined man, or man unbodied or
unvailed, for vailing is a fall, because it is not capable of the glory it dwelt
in before imbodyed, or invailed and our Angels behold his face in glory, this
is an allusive speech to Peter, our Angel or his Angel: It Is thus, an Angel in
Commission, then he can do what God does please, as to destroy multitudes, but
in his operative course, he is the convertor, and converfor with his
fellow-Angels in us men and women: We are come unto the innumerable company of
Angels, in rem sopience in the wisdom in the thing: O ovallo in samoas in sepe
pauvisse sem allat ori deni potarum ablah solamus in so soollah abbi selorum
agoaus a pater orbis selat appi sele oramus in ormoous in se sola: The vigor in
the thing, is the life of the thing, and the thing is in it self one thing, and
that one thing all things, and all Times, and Titles, and Triumphs, and
Trophies, and Conquests, Advantage, and Death, and Life, and Mortality, and
Immortality and all things, and the thing nothing: This is the thing in things,
and it self nothing, and out of that nothing all things came forth, this is
(...) Heth God, Jesus, or Christ, that cannot fall or lessen, he is always the
same; this is the true derivacy from the tongues into English.

Epistle VI.
Belove,
THe Divine and Evangelical being is in God, from which fountain we issued
forth, by the strength of God in the declarative of his Son; for the Son is the
Father, and the holy Ghost is the product, and he is the Father in the first
Center, but he is operating in the creation, nay the life of the Creation, for
he is perfect truth, and perfect truth is perfect God (mind the state) There
is a perfect truth in every created Creature, which is the essential being of
God in the same; for that that is not cannot be properly nor unproperly be said
to be any thing, for know, that truth must be truth and admit no negotiation,
but must be it self, and that self taken into it self,
is perfect God; Now man he is the Lie as we account him man; for we account
and name weakness capable of sorrow man; That is the Lie, for it is accounted
for the thing, and is not the thing, as man accounts it: Now to be man is
truth, and drawn up to his center, is perfect God, in his first perfection,
mind, perfect man is perfect Christ, Christ is God; Now know that man is
nothing, till he be in Christ, now when is that, when we are centred in him who
is our man, and we are but names till then, but he it is that made us names,
that is, weakness, and he it is that makes us things, one thing in himself, and
one in God, through the everlasting Covenant: what is that? it is the mercy of
God himself, that is Christ, mind that indraft, for to speak the Deity proper,
it is unione, that is Jehovah: Declaratives are the persons, as you call them,
which is but the height of motion of Jehovah: Now know that God and Christ is
all one, ever was and to come the the same: Now Christ promised was God
himself, that would take the life of the world into a more near living life
into himself, by illustrating himself in the beams of words, they being let
down to allure his people, which inside spirit of them outside spellings, or
words is, Jesus the Son of God; for the life of Jesus is the declarative of God
in the life of our life, for there is a natural life and a spiritual life: Now
you are alive in Christ, when your self is dead unto your self, and his power
raigns and rules in you, and ye are ruled by it wholly, then ye live, before ye
are dead though living, for if we live it is being one, in the unione: Mind
well, and you may discern the basis on which the Scripture the truth of it is
founded; for I deny all to be inserted in the book called Scripture, to be
true; for in the main point of the new Testament, is stated the Lie for the
truth, that is, the outside man, for the anointing or inside spirit, as I shall
open: Now brethren by creation, that you cannot deny, brethren by restoration,
to you, to all, to one and every one, is this my Meathod laid down, not to
persuade any or all, but to the quick-headed and unknowledge-hearted: I know
what I speak, and again to the heart-knowledged, whose receptacle or knowledge
resides there, that in that strength, has brought not only the head to go out
from the heart, but has brought the actions to be witnesses, what is done by
the Spirit of God in the heart. Now these two states will hold all people, for
there is but light and darkness in the Creation; Now mind and all stand upon
your own Center, whilst I open this veiled, veiled, and veiled Vail, that is,
the Divinity, buried with the Heads, and Hands, and Tongues, and Pens of
Humanity: Christ was promised that he should come, and restore fallen man; what
was that? It was restoring the buried Divinity up in the humanity, that is,
Christ in us the hope of Glory, for without Christ no hope, nay, no glory, he
is our glory, and he is the gathering us into himself; then gathered we are in
strength, and strength is man, man is Christ, and Christ is God: So then there
the beginning has taken its end into it self, so an unione in one, that one is
God. Now know that Christ is God, God is Christ, both one, the product are we.
Now mind, Selat ori alter arbe opat mem siddei sem arbat al ogo ^oon addi nex
homo: The eternal purpose was reconciliation in himself by man, not man, both
God and man, and neither God nor man. Here lies the unridled mystery, that lies
hid from the world, I beseech you mind,
for it is not my voice that is here uttered, it is the eternal spirit dictating
forth unto you its own instruction, to cause your veiled ignorance to taste
death, by the living life offered unto you, in its transcendeant life: Allu
saba ar dele mem selos in re facit me (mind:) I am the high living rest to the
restless thing, that is man and the creation: Selos abbi a salmoas in re
facissere ad amalam orbeus sabat al: The high denomination of God in man, is
the resting in wisdom in himself, that is, God. This state is dark, but it is
true, for the beginning and middle are brought to center in the end, that is,
God: Now know that Christ created the world, he is the life of the world, the
creation is Christ's spouse; know that the humanity is but the case, for the
divinity to act and operate in; Now how could he that was the life of all
things, made all things, and by him all things did, do, and shall consist, and
subsist, how could he dye? vox populos in sem alba arri nedet erko on: The
peoples voice in the thing, is not the true thing; for know that the proper
humanity could not dye, for then the whole creation must dye at once, neither
the life of the Creator could not be confined (in one) that was and is all; now
let me speak truth, he died not, he suffered not, he sinned not, he saved not
by any act that was done; for it is the Priests trade from the Popish descent:
Christ has been the great Priests market, they have bought and sold him, they
got the name and knew not the thing. But to state the text, Its origin was
Latin, these words, ver non homo, sed in loca paucaveret: A man not a man, but
in place of offense: The Text in the Chaldean tongue, Alla alarm in sam sagaus
sab, the meaning is the same with the Latin Text: The true Greek Text in his
first origin, Ous te anagramon in sem seala alar ophrone adriei sebat: The
Hebrew in the root, (...) The Hebrew in word, ack ack L^addi ne, that is, he
is, and is not the God; the Hebrew Text will not admit no more bending to
illustrate the state, for to hold the truth in the truth of word, it will not
couch to your mind or will; for mind and will must yield to the word. I
beseech you think on that last state stated, for it is the divine truth: Now to
begin or enter into this alyso or deep sea, I entreat you mind, one Text
says, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head: Mind that Text, I
prove that false, and the Scripture is true: So I deny not the Scripture, but
the Lie that is added to, or set for Scripture. Now I shall declare how you may
know I know it to be the Scripture, and I tell you how you shall know it to be
the Scripture; Thus, when the life of Jesus is your life, and your spirit taken
into that Spirit that wrote the Scripture, who is, and none else, the true
expositor of his own intendants: Mind them words, the intent of the spirit was
in that false translated text (...) Hevah, for know that woman is Hevah, which
is weakness, that is the woman, for the creation is the weak woman of God, and
Christ's spouse; The truth that lies veiled in that Text, or Lie, I count it no
better, neither is it: Now the truth that lies veiled, the intendant in that
Text is, the strength of the woman shall overcome weakness, which you account
sin. Now who is the strength of the creation: is not Christ? for till you are
in Christ, you are woman, that is weakness; in Christ you are man, that is, a
strong conqueror through him who is the strength of the woman, the woman and
man one in him, that is, Christ: The next is, A Virgin shall conceive and bring
forth her first born, and they shall call his name Emanuel, I give you this,
though the Text does not hold in full; what is this? the intendant is Christ:
Who is this Virgin? it was not Mary, and it was Mary, that you have confined
Christ to be born of, It Is the spirits intent, the whole birth, born, and
brought forth in the whole creation, was, is, and to come the same; this is
Mary, that is, perfection, for where Christ is born, a pure Virgin does
conceive and bring forth, for he himself is Virgin, birth, and bringer forth of
himself. Now you whose reaches are tied to the traduced, not understood letter,
called Gospel, or word of God, you begin to swell: Let not swelling turn to
rage, but desire knowledge of him who is the true Expositor of his own
intendants. Now to come to your name Christ, confined to Jerusalem: I am a Jew
of the Tribe of Ruben, begotten by the Gospel, by the life of Jesus Christ,
Jah, Jehovah, L, Emanuel, a One, Tele, Thre-on, Pell, Sanah, Eloah, Ad, Eval,
Allu, Haso, Apal, Venat, On, Sele, Tran, All these names in their Tongues and
Languages the same, and but one name, that is, God or Christ, both one, one
both. I say the man Christ suffered as you say, so say I, you understand not,
that do I: Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, was put to death, suffered by
the hands of wicked men, rose from the dead, descended into hell, would you
have any more? I acknowledge all this. Says one Text, He sits at the right
hand of God, and makes intercession for us, That I deny, and charge it
blasphemy; but before I prove the blasphemy, know them words is the sealed
book, not opened yet; therefore mind I beseech you for Jesus sake (that is
your own word and my spirit) mark that state. To begin with the first, that I
have declared, Christ was put to death, and suttered by sinners, here lies the
ridled riddle: First, Christ created all things, is the life of all things, he
could not dye, for with him the whole creation, nay God himself, in that state
it must stand thus for the divinity of Christ: Secondly, the humanity of Christ
could not dye, thus, if the humanity must dye, then the whole altogether, the
whole creation, no part left nothing, nor no earth, for that is Christ's
humanity, as well as we. Now know you hold that Christ must be perfect God, so
say I, then know that two perfections at once cannot be, that is to say, two
Gods, for names make not things, but things make names, there must be a living
thing before a name; there is another Mystery, one of the greatest in the
Scripture. Know my learning is not of man, nor by man, but I am taught of the
living God, who is the true Expositer of his own intendants. He desended in
hell; where was that coined? at Rome, from the Papal diabolical doctrine, the
Panther that is a destroyer ineagling is quick catched, and the carrying the
Ty, or catched into that fatal place. The spirits denomination was, the
Panther, or the ineagling the Tie into that fatal place, the state was let down
to me in them words at first, I cannot reach it, my manhood yet, for know he
that created all things, was all things, and is all things; how can he be said
to go into any local place? for the intendant Jesus must descend into one
place, but Jeius must descend into Hell, what is that? that descent is into us,
who are Hell or Devils, for ye are of your father the Devil, what is the Devil?
he is not love: then you know what is the contrary in man, Christ's descent into
Hell was to redeem us, it is true in the intendant, for know they and we are but
one spirit, he descends now into us, as he did then into them; for his
descending into our Hell, is his own resurrection in us, in him, by one the
very same spirit, if the spirit of Jesus be in ye, ye are risen from death to
life; so says the true Scripture. But now to that Text that says, He sits
at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us, I charge it to be
absolute blasphemy: Thus God is one in the unione his Deity, glorify me with
the glory that I had with thee, before the world was: There was but one God, is
but one God, one glory in himself, that is to say himself in himself. Can one
God intercede to another? no, Neither has God hands, neither any fear, neither
any place, for he is all and nothing, this is God: Now for you to speak God
truly, you cannot; for thus the all of the creation, the beauty, strength,
wisdom, excellency, and knowledge cannot spell his name: All named together is
his name, that spell ^ehovah (...). Thus Christ died not, he suffered not, he
sinned not, he saved not, by any act that was done, for the life of all things
could not suffer, which was his divine essence, the humanity could not dye,
then the whole creation, and God himself, for if the (...) of the subsistence
be taken away, the subsistence is dead, for the humanity is all things, the
divinity the life of all things, and they cannot be separated; Christ is the
life of God, and if the creature can destroy the Creator which is the life of
it self, judge ye, it may cause its own likeness to suffer, that is, a part of
the humanity of Christ; so Christ's body being part of the humanity of God, it
suffered as man, and no more, for he was the transcendant pipe, in which the
Deity passed through, to illustrate the will of his own commandings; he was the
first birth of the brethren, the anointed above his fellows, that was
spiritual, that could not suffer undeniably; For know if God could suffer, then
he is no God, but man, he saved not by any act that was done, for mind, the
acts of humanity cannot satisfy divinity: or thus, the obedience of man,
cannot satishe God, for then you would make God weakness, as you are weakness,
so by consequence, you are as great a God as the eternal being, which I deny,
and you will not affirm for the spirit of Jesus (look to your own state) Jesus
is a Savior, a Savior cannot suffer, for then no Savior; mind and the Lord
give you understanding. For if he could be angry, no God, for anger is
weakness, that is, in us, not in God, if he should but think at such a time he
would satisfy himself for the sins of the people, then that thought makes him
no God, but do you know that you were, when you were not that that now you are,
and shall be? God is unchangable, for know that which we account to be, is not,
and that we account not to be, that is, for though we be dark in our selves, we
are light in him, and when we are light in our selves, then is our greatest
darkness; thus God does stain the glory of man, you must be captivated by his
love, that is, your restoring to life, for in this main scope of scripture (for
want of knowledge) is the Nations loss, that God may have mercy, for they have
stated the humane body, God, to suffer to the divine Deity, God, when it is but
one very thing, for the divinity and humanity make up perfection, and that is
God in unione, and we have made them by accounting two Gods, hanging one in
another: The word is proper according to your own riddle. Ox te sabdi el dele
mem, The God is alone all in all things; mind that state well: So mind these
two states: Selos in rem a sabar: the heavenly thing cannot suffer: Humanitas
in rem saddi ne: The humanity could not satisfy for the thing: O a palaram in
sam madaous in selous in aberemus soas alah al: The high living light could not
suffer to it self. So that riddle of bondage to the creation is unridled, if
understood and believed, that is, my Gods work, and not mine, for my work is
alah al, to unseal the hidden mystery in the Scriptures, added by man's
invention, and false construction, and when this is done, Behold and see, for I
Theaurau John did behold and have seen the precious pearl, the souls delight, O
the Apples of life that my soul thirsts after! oh the paradaical fruit, O so
^^^ah halalujah al, oh the divine being is the inravishment of the soul, o^ the
evangelical enjoyment in the paradaical essence! O amorum in sobao; se, O the
the lovely divine being is in it self! O the pictures of gold, in apples of
silver! O the perfume in Paradise is the enjoyment of himself! O beloved, our
loveliness is there! But my brother John saw the new Jerusalem descend, what is
that, it is to attract our souls to its lovely center, this is the time that
the new Jerusalem should be letten down, which is the light and knowledge in
the everlasting Gospel, they shall all know me, how? they shall all be taught
of God, that teaching is knowledge, that knowledge is God; the new Heaven, the
new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness; for where knowledge lays the
foundation, Jesus Christ erects his Throne: O a saba ormoas sabdial. O rest to
wisdom, wisdom rest.

Epistle VII.
Beloved,
WE disagree in names, and not in things; For thus we account the natural man,
when the Scripture calls the spiritual man, that is to say, man risen out of
the corruptible estate, for now man is man in term or name, accounted by man;
that is, in the account of his own figures, for we are figures one of another;
and a one figure of the Deity by Creation: this is the outward figure man, but
the in-being figure, is the life of this outward figure; and the living of that
is God in us: which is in Scriptures called man, or the image of God, or the
Trinity in man, figurative, which figure, nay which life is God, Jesus our
Savior: For to give a narration of that whole contested for, not understood,
for understanding causes contests and disputes to cease, that is concerning man
fallen from light to darkness, and man restored from darkness to light: what do
you understand by the sealed book? there lies something to be declared, that is
the everlasting Gospel to be preached; this the word holds forth: Now what is
this, but a greater discovery to us, of the light of God in us; men and women,
that thereby we may discern and know the mystery of the sealed book, which is
the Scripture or word of God, as you call it, to unvail the veiled truth that
lies hid and buried by man's invent on, and that lie took off; and then that
truth in its first purity entire, inserted with illustration of it, and the
connection of that truth, that God is a bringing forth in man; for ye shall all
be taught of me says the Lord.

Now here is stated the high mystery of all, that has been so contested for in
the world, since man was, it is short, but mind I beseech you, for the mystery
is all in the thing, and the Spirit must guide you to the true light of the
discovery, discovered, Nos se exce in meam gloria adoramus: We in him did
behold his glory, and did worship; this was before we came forth into bestial
bodies, to which text holds this declarative, it is imbodied in them words;
when the Angels praised me and sang together Jobs words: This was before a
visible Creation.

Now those angels fell, the word will hold with the original thus, they fell
because they descended into Vegitables, and left their first habitation: Here
is the mystery, how did they lose their first state? They disobeyed the
command, what was that? Love: for the duty of heavenly enjoyment is love in
perfection. Now they detracted from that; how could Angels detract? as it was a
Creature, yet purely the life of them essenced in the Creator, for though the
life of them was essenced in God by acts Evangelical, yet detracting; for know
there is a motion in every state or thing, but that one of which, all the
Creation are but semblances: He stands, and all the Creations move, and their
motion is their homage due to God by Creation, yet the life of all them are
essencied in God: Now the detraction caused a diminution of that glory they
possessed in that state. And do you, and all the people and Nations know, that
that way is, and them Angels became men, and that was Addam in the Garden,
though essenced in God still.

Now my Hamah holds more full, and an unione state, Now the Angels fallen
created them bodies to act in, as fleshly bodies to act in, proved from this
text: The Sons of God came in to the daughters of men, and saw them beautiful:
Now how was that? it was thus: the motion in them did assume unto themselves a
comeliness, that was but weakness, that text makes this forth, for they sowed
fig leaves to cover their nakedness with, that is the truth: and God himself is
witness: Now you will say man made himself: I entreat you mind, if I am
essencied in another, there is acts of my own from that essency, as I am a
descent, descended from that essential essence, which is God himself: still
know man's detraction is in himself, absolutely free: only the life of the
being is essenced in God: Well, now when these Angels were imbodied in flesh, a
command came from that essence, that is to say from the Lord Creator, to his
first, second, and third descent: Look now here is work, none but the livened,
or living by, and in the new living life of God can reach this high mysterious
truth, which style is the Trinity in the humanity. Now this Law was weak, in an
equal balance, ballancing the Creature, and it self, just, just, just, to
destroy one another, to save both. Now this was the called Christ or God, which
by illustrating in light, into the invisible principle, to cause a resurrection
of himself, or as you say, his image in us, to a living life in himself; This
is Mary, this is Jesus, and no other: for know there remains the true figure of
the Trinity in man, that cannot be defaced quite; that is the tie in man to
God, as sovereign: and that tie in man, looks for mercy, from that sovereign,
which is thus much, the tie acknowledges digression, inlivened is remission,
that is Christ's resurtection in us, this is Christ and no other, which is Gods
mercy taking us into himself; and then an unione is made: for beloved, be not
so stupid in this point, to think that God could die, or suffer, for know, you
all know the soul is chief, and that ye say never dies, but is in joy, or
sorrow. Now you state this name Jesus to be a Savior, what a madness if duly
considered, it is, To think that a Savior could die! then your Savior is less
then your own soul, so then by this rule your soul is a greater Savior, then
he that should save you.

Thus brethren, the same thing, according to your belief, being man's lie, I
believed it, stood for it, but when the Lord came upon me in power, and called
me to the Ministry of his truth, he smote me dumb, blind, and dead; and my
sufferings were unexpressible: then I saw the sufferings of the body of that
man Jesus, my brother.

Now let me tell you, many men suffer more then he did. I beseech you mind, I
speak truth; let not received opinion delude you, but desire God to enlighten
you, that you may set your spirit upon the truth of the thing, and not be
deceived by the name; which holds nothing, but the thing is the life of God,
the mercy of God taking you into it, this is Jesus our Savior, the son of the
eternal God.

Brethren, that I speak here, I shall declare to the whole world; and all
things I speak is set down in writing, and I am ready and do desire, that the
whole Assembly of Divines, if they please to except against any point, If I
prove not by the true Scripture, confounding the false falacie of men, inserted
in the book called Scripture, I am willing to suffer; I desire no more favor.
And from this day know I am not mad, as they have accounted me; but it is the
blindeness in them, that counts it madness in me.

The name Jesus has deceived the Nations, taken from this word in Hebrew (...)
Massah, which height of expression is thus much in the full, it is the
all-saving, the all, his things, this is the true text as the Lord lives, from
Massah.

That text with this text, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head;
And a vigin shall conceive and bring forth. Now let me say, that both Mary and
Jesus is both perfect names, but Jesus is no name, but the thing of things; he
is the life, glory, excellency of the Father; He is the Father, and the Son,
and Holy Ghost, as you call them; but calling does not confirm it to be so, for
many a time a false name is put upon a true thing. But I beseech you brethren,
let me speak truth to you, for I cover after you, not yours: I preach not to
prey upon you, that is to enrich my self by constraint from you, as too many of
our diabolical dumb dogs, Tythe-mongers I mean, do, for they misunderstand this
text, Feed my people, and instead of feeding, they fleece the people; to your
shame the Ministers of the Gospel, as you call it, to you I speak, for doing is
the true demonstrative of what we are in Christ; for know we in England have
got the name Jesus in our mouth, which is a lie unto us, for doing is Jesus,
for not be that hears my words, but he that does what I command, he is
Christ's disciple.

Now let me tell you brethren, our Savior in the most of us, lies too high in
us; the word is proper thus, Christ in the head is a lie, without being in the
heart; that is to say in curious terms and names, but without action from the
heart, it is a lie, and nothing, but a dead vanishing; but if Jesus be in you,
ye are risen from death to life, how is that? thus, the head has lost the
strength of the name, and the hands from the heart, by declaring, distributing
acts of love, and relief to the necessity of the poor, that is the thing; there
is not one among you but is a namer of Jesus, but how few are ye, that do as he
has commanded? Brethren, till ye be doers, ye are a lie, and are deceived,
your Religion is of the devil; for ye name Jesus to effect another end, but
love is Jesus acting, by a living distributing life, to his members.

But let me tell you, there is a day of vengeance a coming from the Lord to try
all flesh, and purge all dross; and then the door shall be glorified, and the
sayer or liar shall be tormented.

Now this in the presence of God, and his elect Angels, I can speak in truth of
heart; I have coveted no man's gold or silver, nor nothing; though since the
Lord has called me to preach, and declare the truth, in the everlasting
Gospel, no man's breach, and suffering like mine, both in body, and estate, yet
I joy, because I know my work shall be rewarded, which is I know, multitudes of
people, are to be gathered by my ministry, before the great overflowing scourge
come.

Beloved, all things below himself, and my work in him, to declare to you the
people, that the Lord will deliver out of bondage, is doing to me, all things
to me; (but love to you received from him) is dead, and not esteemed of by me.
O my soul is drawn into that fountain of love, which is God; and from thence
being thereby enlighned, I account all things at a true value, for before we
are enlightened, we value things not as they are, but as they seem, and so are
deceived; for we account that to be which is not in truth, and then nothing.

Now beloved, John in his Revelation, when he let down the mysterious mystery,
his eye reached us, and this day we are in; for he said that the everlasting
Gospel should be preached, which is the love of God: but in such a powerful
manner, that it should turn all things up, and down, to make an inlet for it
self; And know, sufferings brings man to stability, and the lifted up fatteth
for the day of slaughter, which Saint John saw, when he had wrote this book,
called the Revelation of God. Now mind there is not one, of all the rest, was
so high for mystery, as he was, and yet his, is called the Revelation, which is
meant, a declaring clearly to the understanding of men; now if that be the
Revelation, what is the mystery? the mystery is the Revelation, the Revelation
the mystery; so the everlasting Gospel is the true discoverer both of history
and mystery.

Thus I John saw, what was that? I Theaurau-John saw, what John saw. Now mind,
The, is from the Greek word Theos, a compound; now The stands before in my name
given by God, which is to say the eye, or Gods eye; discovering the light, in
the hidden mysterious mystery of John. For know, it is Gods eye that must give
light, and sight of his own intendants.

Brethren, let me speak; you know not me: I am in you, ye know it not; I am
your life, and ye understand it not, nor what I speak. From this very
expression, is forged the humanity of Christ to be very God, when the truth is,
the speech is spoken by the inside spirit, as it is essencied in the eternal
being, who is your essence, if ye are risen, and so an unione in one.

Brethren, let me speak unto you; the Lord swore unto me, saying, Theaurau-John
my servant, I have chosen thee my shepherd. Now time will speedily manifest
whose I am. Brethren, this I know, that all the whole Scripture I shall
abstract into a short scope, and then the abstract of that, with that that God
will declare and manifest by signs and wonders, for God will confirm the
testimony of his servant; but I am a child as yet, but my strength is daily
increased, but I remember nothing at all, for what I have given me, it is
suddenly, in the word I utter, and no other ways.

Eltham the 25th of March.
O Lord, demonstrate thy self in the beauty of excellency, that all may know
thee, O Lord, for thou art a great, and glorious God, clothed with Majesty. The
Earth, the Heavens, the All, is but Thee; and thou O God art that All. From
which All, all things came forth, and being here refined, they return, to their
centred being, which art thou, O God.

The prayer is but short, but in this short abstract, lies imbodied, all that
can be spoken.

Epistle VIII.
Brethren,
THat that you charged upon me to answer, what I had declared, and stand and
say Gods gift is perfect; I besecch you hear me, and mind my words: know, it is
the glory of the message, if admited the weaker the person is; for my not being
able to dispute the thing, it is my glory that I am taken into that thing, and
lost in my self. Now if you would be judicious you might see clearly, it is God
all in me, I dead in the thing, to my coined invention, and it self
demonstrating it self; because man shall have no glory, but in being it self
man's all. So brethren, mind Paul's words; I am dead to live, not I, but he in
me, surely you forget this text. Now beloved, here lies the great difference
betwixt knowledge and lying learning: he that has knowledge, his labor is to
keep close his heart, that a motion stir not, to think a thought, but even to
be dead clay, before God; The learned labors, to know names, and words of
excellency of expression to please men, for his own credit and repute; but
brethren, I tell you, that now since I spoke to you last, I know no man shall
be able to stand before me in knowledge, although I am thus weak at this day.

Beloved, John in his Revelation, saw the variety in the unione, from whence
comes unto us this letting down, I am Alpha and Omega, the end, and the
beginning. Now to render the reason, to your capacity, why I hold not the word,
as the original holds it forth, the reason is; my brother John was a beginning,
flowing forth in that makka demikal expression, I come to put an end to that
makkademikal expression; therefore as he said, I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end. Now I Theaurau-John say, Omega and Alpha, and
eloustrationes, heck duo nose in videmus summum, in abstrackcie in reamus ol
seen sebat allah-en; The derivaey, the end to man is better then the beginning,
for the beginning is trouble, the end is rest. So beloved, I say Omega and
Alpha, the end and beginning: I am to inter, or bury the falfe gloss, put upon
the true Scripture, in the grave of oblivion and darkness, and likewise to
cause Christ to reign, in the true divine Evangelical expressings, which at
this day lies murdered, by the greekish composive, in the New Testament, so
called. O aloe senate annai sele rem. O the hidden truth shall have an
^lustrative, Evangelical expression. Id via in reamus salma onch hal ab oli
penan reasana alphi sele. O the divine truth shall have a peaceful glorious
resurrection, reigning over the Kings of the Earth, in full transcendency; O
the riches of God shall be letten down to men, to attract their beatious souls,
to the beautified builded, and center, centered, in it self, which is, God
himself; now the pearls that the soul of of man lusts after, shall be letten
down, even to the enjoyment of it; and the soul shall embrace its delight, in
the eternal being, which is God. This is the everlasting Gospel that should be
preached, which is God dwelling with men, by a divine Evangelical living in
them, they in it, here lies the mystery; Theos est Deus in cor alla sapuit ad
amalam in re. The derivacy; God is God, when he rules in the heart, in the
height, here is a Negative read from an Affirmative state. The heart lives in
God, when God lives wholly in the heart: Now here is the mystery. Thus God
lives in us, he cannot live out of us, it is so stated, therefore it is true,
because it is declared by God himself; but man lives not in God till God live
wholly high in the heart of man; here lies the riddle of this expression, God
is good, and all is God, mind when the heart of man does live wholly high in
God, then the saying is true, but when God does live in man, without man living
in God, then the state is false. Further thus, God lives in us by property in
creation, thus his essence is our life, now know he cannot live our of us,
except he live out of his own essence; which can never be now you will say that
God lives not in wicked men, but I Theaurau-John say and know that God lives in
wicked men, thus, God is the life of all; and every appearing thing is but a
representative outwardly, of that inward essence which is God living in us, as
we are descended from the essence of God, which is our life in life; mind that
state stated. Now for God to live in all things, if duly considered, it is not
strange, for it is truth, and truth is not strange, for things not true is
strange, for that is a stranger, that has no center or dwelling, and that a
lie has not; for it is nothing: and nothing can have no center.

Now then God living in us, by our blind rule it follows, that then we must
live in God, no it follows contrary, so that our rule is false, that we have
measured our certainty by, for in that state your negative will not hold the
affirmative to center in; thus I beseech you mind, the point is great, God is
good undenyably by any, but for all his creation to be good in themselves, that
is denied, Thus, the essence creative in us is good, for it is Gods image, but
our discenting from that living life in us, causes the evil in us, and for want
of sight of that good essence, causes our detraction to go a whoring after
other Gods, then we are loosened from the Tie within us, yet still the essence
of God is in us, but by the detracting acts, we declare, that we are not in
God; or as you say of God: for Christ says you are of the devil your Father,
for he was a murder from the beginning, how was that? he was darkness and
light, neither darkness nor light, what then? he was the opposer of light, and
his stength was to unbase the light, or unfoundation the light, to erect his
own foundation which is darkness, and the prevalency of the one, is the
extirpation of the other, that is, murdering one another. Now know that the
light is God, darkness is suffered by God, which lies in these two great
declaratives, of day and night; for the day is, the night is not, the night is,
and the day is not, this is to us, but to him that is both night and day, all
is but one; for light and darkness is both one unto the Lord. These two
hieroglyphics of day and night, were they but looked upon with enlightened
eyes, they hold all in them, and do fully represent all things, and contain
under their hieroglyphicie whatsoever is and is not, for it is time; O noble
time! O glorious time! this time is our time of our glory, but though we are
contained in time, in time we are loosened from time, so time is nothing to us,
we nothing to that: we are two in our distincts, both one in God, for to him
all things is but one, but God living in us, is manifest, but our living in God
is; Aufnah allah non, That is not descernable in any height, as the
declaratives of England do manifestly declare, for we have a name of the thing,
but it is a bare name, without the thing.

O Loadicca, truly Englands true Emblem, neither hot, nor cold, but lukewarm;
therefore is thy judgment coming, like a smoking ^ea, that will overwhelm
thee with violence: O the time of thy peace is past, destruction begins to
enter thy Orb, or habitations, for thou labourest to bare rule and sway by
violence, that is not the Gospels rule, but it is a false rule of thy own
making, making a noise of acting righteousness in name, but the truth in the
root is another thing. God looks not at thy outside paintings, but sees thy
secrets, and thy secret actings, yet know, that God lives in thee, but thou
live not in God: Thus, God lives in thee as thou art essenced in him, but thy
living in him is not found in thee: This is a strange state, but to open it, it
will appear too true, to thy sorrow, and unexpressable sufferings that are to
come. Thus, mind, I prove, though God lives in thee, thou live not in him,
for thou live in thy self, for actions is the true declarative of living; the
reason is, the action is more ponderous or weighty, then the word, and is a
visible declarative to men, what is in the heart, for the living in God, must
be declared from the heart obedience, to be declared in acts of love, mercy,
compassion, long-suffering patience, this is a demonstrative of God living in
thee, nay thy living in God then is truth, when the negative comes to be read
from an affirmative state; that is thus, when thy will is unwilled, and willed
again in obedience to act righteosness, then thou art in God, and God in thee,
and both in one. This was spoken by Paul, when he was in his updraft, the life
that I now live, is in the Son of God, and it is not I, but he in me, I in him;
Here was before an affirmative, and a negative, then by acts secondly two
negatives, thirdly both affirmatives, fourthly one acting distributive, which
is mercy, mercy is God; and man drawn into that center, is made one spirit, so
an unione betwixt God and man: I speak your term to let you understand: but men
is not man, but I pass. Now you will say that man has free will, and again man
has not free will, here is the main work, in the disputing creation: First, I
say man had free will in his first state, now you are pleased, then I say that
man has not free will in his second State, now you are pleased: But to define
what is meant in this mystery; The Spirit of God is the true establishment of
both, First man was man, which in his proper essencial center is perfect God,
we in him did act his will, because we in that will were ^ncluded, in what act
soever he acted, we in it, all our all was in him: Now mind, we by and in that
will issued forth, still the will was free; but mind that state held not long
after we were created, For Angels will was strength, and that strength, and the
motion by that strength, caused the fall, from the freedom of will; then out of
this fall came we, that we call men, which declarative of number, is a
declarative of weakness being in count with us, for strength is when the
numbers are drawn into one, that one is God, the centred centred Center. But to
come to term or name Addam, that is as you conceive, as we are, but you say he
was perfect, that point will not be convenient in that state to speak to, nor
at that this time. Thus the will in Addam was free, though he was in flesh; but
thus, the motion of that will was tied upon the principle of obedience: now
obedience denied free will buried, but not lost, for from that grave, in which
the stem lies buried, the celestial strength causes a resurrection to
obedience, and then free will is produced out of that grave, that held the
free will in captivity; then your will is freewill, because in obedience, and
obedience is free will, and no other thing. Now men has not free will, by
reason of weakness, it is comprehended under that term, men, but when you come to
be proper man, then free will is your proper strength, to ca^^t in
righteousness, for Christ is the freedom of will, nay your obedience will. Now
as man had in his first strength free will, so in Christ restored, man has his
freedom of will, renewed to his first original Principle, that is in God, by
obedience in Christ, that is, our freedom in him, for we are bound in our
selves, and free in him, for if the Son have made you free, then shall ye be
free indeed: Glavo osana olla sabinai el ono ophrates elma rationalem ad me
amalet ter seek on saddi audit petro ogamus sola rem sadit al, The glory of
excellency of the creature, lives in free obedience of will, to will its will
in obedience to his will, that gave it a being in light, of his own free will,
O selos sapuit in rem moum rationalom cudit erko on s^le rem. O the heavenly
wisdom! is divine obedience in the thing required, by wisdom required, by
wisdOm obeyed, then Christ in us, we in him, both in God.

But the opinion of many is, I may cut my own throat, or destroy my self, and
say they, is not this free will, and an act of my own? To both which states, I
answer, it is thy self, and the acts declare it to be only thy self, but not
in free will, for thou mistakes free will grows on this foundation, that is,
Christ freeing us from bondage of our corrupt conceived free will, planting us
in him, he in us, then is man in free will, but before in bondage to his own
lust, which he through the blindness of his deceived imagination, appropriates
to himself free will, when in truth it is bounden bondage in himself, in which
every natural man lies buried. Another objection is this, from the same blind
principle: I can eat, drink, walk, do this, or let it alone. Now know, that in
them actings is not freedom, for know they are centred in thy self, and thy
life bound in darkness, that thou see not thy freedom; therefore thy acts
must, and are bound up in thy thick darkness, and as the Primum mobile is, so
is the issuing declaratives all in bondage, for Christ's freedom is perfect
freedom, both in body and spirit, and declared by outward acts of mercy, pity,
and compassion, and thou art unmerciful to thy self, and by thy increasing
darkness, thou labourest to extinguish the light that should unprison thee, and
so thou becomest a fighter against thy God. Now you will say how can men be
fighters against God? Now know you must understand, when I speak men, you
account man, and when I speak man, you take it to be one man, when both the
holy writ, and my spirit intend Christ the Savior; alas till you come to these
distinctions, you see not, for your heart is veiled: But beloved, I in the love
I have to the gathering the Lords people, my brethren, I would become to be the
soal for to let the lowest tread upon, to raise him equal with the highest:
Hoso avallo onso oli rebeah sal, The divine light humbles men to the lowest
center, to give an equal rising to all in the thing, that thing is God, but the
tongues will not bear it in proper word, to hold truth in word and composure: O
agoremus in sabie senate allah phiei sebat: Them two last words are the Greek
words, to bring the meaning down from the original, to a composure of Olymet
under the equinoctial; for do you know the word must be truth, in the word, in
composure, and adjunct, and conjunct, and in the very horizantal must bear
equal witness with the word, else not truth, but this is Gods word, when it is
writ in truth of word, in truth of place, in truth in time; these three make it
truth, and it cannot be truly Gods word, if any forecited thing be wanting in
the English derivacy of the forecited state: O! the glory of the thing is, to
have its obedience due unto it self: O! allah in rem sapuit allah sanatar al:
The height of obedience is, the glory of the tied thing, to return to the free
thing, that free thing is God, unto whom is obedience due, as he is the
Creator. Now beloved brethren, to come to the explicatory point of points,
which is this, God in man, man is in God: God cannot be properly out of any
thing, for the all things make but his essence, which essence is truth, and
taken up to the center is God in perfection. Now then will you say that God is
all: understand but your own word, and then you will say as I say, for if he
had not been your all, you had had no being: Now this is his essence all, which
is a divine all: But I shall show you another all, to you, but both alls, is
but one in him; for there is a regency all, as well an essency all, and a
regency essence as a regency all: Thus the regency essence is, when we are
taken into it, it operateth in us all obedience, that is, the essence regency:
Now the regency all, is this, when the regency essence is taken up into the
regency all, then and not before to us, all is all, and then we are that all,
from whence we came forth, but yet a creation; but of Angels, for then our all
is his all, his all is our all, and together both one all.

The express of man and woman holds forth the true emblem of this saying, for
the woman and man are but one flesh, nay the woman and the man then are but one
spirit; This hieroglyphicy of man and woman, holds forth more then can be
fetched out with men's learning, but not such matches as we make, for we in our
blindness make a trade of matching; It Is matching indeed it is no more then
buying and selling one another: this is not the man and woman spoken of in
unione, but it is of the Devil, and unlawful, whatsoever man's law says to that
and lust says to that, I say by the grace given unto me it is whoredom and
adultery, and the time is at hand, that God will punish for these things: Man's
laws cannot make Gods paths, but Gods paths ought to be the rule of man's laws,
O England then! where is thy pretended holiness? but know pretense is a lie,
and not the thing: Vis in se in afflictionem in tran humanitas in sal elomon:
Th^^ wilt see when affliction is centered in thee, then is the time that my
word will take place: Remember what I speak this day, for the time of
visitation hastens, O se, o se, o se, O thy self! oh thy self! oh thy self! is
thy own ruin, yet these words will not print in thy spirit, but when
afflictions have made naked thy vains, then thy lancing is near, then the
plaster will be seasonable, but not before, then a word will enter, when
affliction has made the way, thou art too high to hear, I was too high to
speak, but know I am thy true emblem, but mine is in mercy for thy at last
healing, I know what I speak: O I dare not pray for thee, because I know thy
punishment is sealed, and the sentence is gone forth: O amorum is turned to
bellum, that is, O thy loveliness is war, which is weakness: O how has our
religious ones purchased to themselves by blood, The foundation shall not
stand: O afuah al seen am ardine aam sab oli open sera vertet al: O the
perverseness of men, slaying one another for naught, nay nothing, for the glory
of a name of dung, o so agaous sal been neck sissere mem: The nothing which is
dung, slays the nothing for dung, which is not perfection, but weakness: O that
you were, that you say you are, then would mercy flow forth as a rising Sun,
but ye are not that you say you are, your actions are true declaratives of what
you are, for they are of greater weight then your words. But to come to the
divine Mystery, which is God himself in himself, and all times, in one time,
and that time is God. Now beloved, something is let dwon to lighten you,
concerning the promises promised to the ancient people the Jews, my brethren
according to the flesh. Beloved, do but read the Bible, and mind how the
scope of scripture does coatrefie one another, to insert the entire certainty
of the Jews return from whence the Lord has scattered them: O England thou
Akeldama to that people! O! thou have murdered without mercy, know that root
shall unroot thee, for thy judgment hastens, and thy sin is brought in
remembrance before the Lord. Beloved, we many of us pray for the conversion of
the Jews, do you declare from the heart the thing you utter. Now know, I am Jew
of the tribe of Ruben begotten by the gospel, which is Massah, El, Jah, or
Jehovah, Jesus, or Christ, all these are but names of that one merciful thing,
that is God. Now beloved, all you that have prayed for the conversion of the
Jews, ought to return praise to God that one is converted to the gospel, and
thousands by that one, shall be brought forth in time, and ye Gentiles shall
rejoice with his people, it is Paul's own words, saying, Rejoice ye Gentiles with
his people: Paul saw this time, by the spirit that is produced by us: for ye
shall all be taught of God, that teaching is turning all Jews: Mind them
words, for it is not one outwardly, but he that was one inwardly, that is a
spiritual one. Now Paul was a Jew, both outwardly and inwardly, as I by the
grace given unto me am. He of the tribe of Benjamin, I of the tribe of Ruben.
Now know God who is all, can take and choose, and change when he pleases, and
where he pleases, and no change in him from eternity, but in us is his
changing; the Priesthood in Levi, the Priesthood is now in Ruben, for the
gathering all the whole Tribes, and Gentiles into one root, that is Massah, El,
Jah, or Jehovah: O arorum in sabie el sede cleckci per quod non hock ackki el
sele orata in se meam operati el pekod oli in rem.

The saying of the holy Ghost (termed by you Gentiles) is but the speaking by
the same spirit in the prophecy of the Prophets; for that that you call the
holy Go^, or the holy Spirit, it is but the same, the truth of God in the
messenger, or Prophet speaking forth the received light, to elustrate into the
understanding, to cause a resurrection unto obedience. Now the words that are
rendered in the New Testament, is thus denominated, Try the spirits whether it
be of God, or no: these very words are false translated from the Original, to
hold up lying learning. The word in truth of words is, Penan al sede mem dene
en sane, The meaning is, The spirit of God tries all things. Now I shall
appeal to every judgment, to weigh these two Texts: First consider, man
naturally is blind, for the natural man perceives not the things of God, for
they are spiritually descerned; then how can the Expositor bend his exposition,
for the word stated holds all times, and ages, and people, for it is an
admonition to blind people without eyes, which is thus much, I know a man
stone blind, and I bid him judge of colors: Weigh it well the Maxim will
hold, in veras veritatas. Now to the spiritual man, it is his sight, it is as
much as to say, see your own eye, when the eye is its own sight. So do but
consider judiciously, you will begin to be sick of your learned lying
believing, and a hundred more of the like consequence is stated to hold up the
Priests trade, but now the light will unbottom all that have bottomed
themselves, or their self ends, which is the teaching of God in a transcendant
manner: Ezeche el sele mem deos in se penan ori oramus in se salma apanar sele
mem: The derivacy in English, The divine teaching is the spirit inspiring
knowledge into the understanding of man, which teaching is unavoydable true,
for it levels all before it, and erects its own center in despite of
opposition: this is Gods teaching. We do but name the thing, from the
experience we have in thing, but God himself does inlet the thing, for it does
require no less strength then his own omnipotency. Now know, I am in my way as
Moses was, for the Jews was read to: Our words stand stated, and cannot be
turned by the airy notion of an empty spirit, to make they know not what. What
I have laid down, let all look upon that please, this shall stand, I have the
Lords Seal to confirm my testimony: Sele mem, sele mem, sele mem, This is the
heavenly perfection in truth: Humanitans in cor selorum in reamus mem, These
are the lettings down to mortals, to draw their minds to perfection, which is
in God, O ormoas in selem sabie el deorum, sapuit dolma apanitorium selum: O
the lovely evangelical dwelling, is in the peaceful dwelling, which is in the
paradaical essence, which is God himself, and our safe Center. O beloved! if
your souls were but touched with that elixer, or that evangelical Light, O it
would be so great an atrackt, that your eye would so dwell upon that: All below
that would be donge unto you, but ye dwell in your selves, and your own life is
your rule, for you are ruled by base corruptable things: O skubulo orkas, the
donge of donge. O beloved! do not dwell upon that, that is not, stand and look
and expect the light of salvation from the Lord: Not that I can say do this or
that, for know that doctrine lessens the merciful mercy; as thus, if any thing
in me, then it is a help for me, but nothing in me, then he is my free all:
Allah asanal oli dene mem, He is the height in restoring the hidden thing: O
avan aszi sele al ogoas sabdi an selorum, O the contrary doctrine labors to
deceive the thing, but the essence Tie, holds the tied thing unto the high all,
and at last brings it to the heavenly rest: O in sanctum sanctorum metrobilorum
in a nasah al oli dele mem, The holy of holiest is the receiver of the divine
thing, into it felf, unto which place bring us, O God, through Christ thy mercy.

Epistle IX.
Beloved brethren,
GOd who is the true Elixer, and that Atrackt of beauty, that atra^teth, by his
beauteousness, all things, to a stand, or maze, and ^n that standing maze,
their beholding his glory of excellency, in a m^m^nt are turned into himself,
the fountain, yet rest to all, for the transcendency of his excellency is over
all, and that all is all things, and yet that all, is not comprehended in any
one thing, or all things, for it is himself comprehending himself, and all
things are but subserviant unto him, that is, their all without them, yet they
not without him. This is Jehovah his name, and to it obedience is made the same
in love. Beloved, God in his foreknowledge saw the creature would detract, by
reason of the strength of motion in the will, for the strength of motion was
the fall. Now the free will in God, caused the creation, so the free will in
God is our restoration by Christ, which is but the mercy of God, letten down to
take his created into himself: Hos se annus solma anni deed mem: The letting
down the creation was a declarative of Gods excellency: In evan sam seen allah
en sele mem, The taking up the life created into him, is the bringing his
wearied creative into perfection in himself: O avallo eternitas in sem sadei
mel tedet alli ne pekod ol on, The point of election is not in any original,
but for want of the true understanding, the true intent of the spirit in that
place of the Romans, concerning election and reprobation. Now brethren I
beseech you by the mercy received, if not my words are in vain, for it is that
mercy that gives you eyes to see mercy, even but it self, in a higher
illstration, for the truth of mercy, is as true in the essence all, as it is in
the regina, or reigning all, that is, when the essence is taken up into the
regency, that is to say, God in himself, reigning in himself, that is, when the
essence is taken into himself: Thus you are derivacy from and in that essence,
you are a derivative, derived from that essencial essence. Now your tie, or
life, is in the essence you came from. Now when you that are the derivative,
are unessencied, that is, thus much when your soul is taken away (which is your
essence) into the regency all, then you cease to be a derivative here, but you
are a regency in that all, that you were but essenced too and from before.

Brethren, you weak ones, I cannot let the state down to you, but God will
build you to it; for the spirit that I come forth in, is to confound the Giants
in notional knowledge, or learning; for since man inhabited the Globe, was not
there a greater show of light, in name, but bring it to truths rule, then its
center will not be found; for it is man's conceived thing, but it is not the true
thing that is centred in God; but ayry vanishing lie. But now beloved, I
Theaurau-John am sent to unlock the locked depths of man's darkness, and unvail
the truth, that lies buried in the Greekish composure, or the New Testament so
called, amongst us Gentiles, but the true Jew, has the true sight, to make a
clear discovery of the truth in that called Testament.

Now to the point of points, the all points. That is stated in these words;
Gods election from eternity of some, and Gods reprobation to eternity of
others. O my God open your understanding, for this riddle shall be unridled
before you all.

Aloe seen mem deloos in sabiet elma aparata al. Mind, the divine God,
thinks not man's thoughts, but in himself is free. I beseech you mind that
word free, for that word carries the whole import in the state. Segos al
beneam addi en even selet alpht segat ar-ab in se. Neither does God call man to
an account, as we account it; for mind, Hels, or I Am. Now if the truth were
but reached out of Is, or I Am, disputes were at an end, but for want of the
true knowledge in that short state, come the multiplicity of writing and
disputing without end. But beloved, now to come close to the point; that is,
first Gods eternal decree or election of some, or rejection of other some.
First, we will reason as Brethren, as men, then I will show the cited word,
from the truth, but no original that root has to grow on, but it is a foysted
weed privately crept in, to lessen nay destroy, the sweet fragrancy of the true
beauteous delectable flowred flowers growing in Gods garden, which is the
spiritual spirit, in the heart of man, then you shall see the coherent of the
written word, called Scripture, both Old and New.

But to begin to reason as men, First know, that God Is, that is unione, his
acts are entire, One, always the same; now know, that if it should be, as is
declared, the very words would destroy God, and make him no God at all; For
thus you make God partial, like man, which God does condemn all along in
Scripture, the words of God are, do just, without partiality, know Gods
commands are like himself, nay they are himself; now mind, for God to take
part of his essence, and destroy part, know you God cannot do it, for he Is,
and cannot be otherways. I beseech you mind, Is, is the mystery lies in that
state, though so short yet you reach it not, though it is clear as the light,
but thus, for God to receive part of his essence, and cast away the other, it is
as much, as I should pluck out one of my eyes, and affirm I have two, and see
with both, when all people that views me know the contrary. But one more, look
to this contrariety, if God should but act as you speak, I declare before all
the world, he could not be God, the receiving some say you is mercy to them,
the rejection of some, is justice upon them.

Now I Theaurau-John demand of you my Brethren, what was it that created and
gave life to all things, as well as men and women, and farther what were they
made of, you must all say that God, or the Spirit of God, caused this produced
creation, now I demand, what caused God to create, was it not his will alone;
no, he has no will, for he Is, and Is has no will, for it is, and that Is,
God, in his free all, where is no will; therefore, in the whole current of the
Old and New Testament, that word will is false, for Is, is the proper
demonstration of his excellency; yet Brethren again, God could not chose, for
it was himself essencying himself, in created appearances, what a madness below
men, to think that God could chose, when all was but himself, what could he
choose, when all was to come forth of himself.

I tell you there neither was, nor could be chosing, when all was wraped in the
womb of unione. One step farther, thus, what a God would you make, if he could
choose, or not choose; be pleased, or be angry; by this very doctrine you make
him, that is all, one entire figure or simblim, of the weakest in all his royal
royalty, in his whole creation, that is to say the weakest man, for a strong
man will scarce be angry.

But now to come to his refusing or damning; that word is like a sheperds dog
to the sheep: for to fright the sheep to the fold.

Brethren that word from his fatal habitation, raised Apollyon, or Abaddon;
that is, the greekish Faulkon, to fly home to their preying upon, that is thus
much, the priest holds you in aw, with a devil, and damnation, and while you
are all your days pondering upon that torment, they in plain terms pick your
pocket; for that was the great noise that has deceived the people, and brought
them in miserable bondage in spirit, and perpetually inbondaged them to the
Clergy tyranny. O if no Tithes, then shake Abadons chains, then make the all
people tremble. But now to come to the original word, from whence this cheat
came upon the Notions. Patroas in sol ori in saba al opiei pelma abadit el seek
avaron, The ancientest Fathers saw a Sun, in which this cheat had no center.

Now mind, nothing can have a being, but from and in God; now this lie of
darkness, has no being in light; for it is nothing but a mere cheat, of the
Romish Clergy, to hold up themselves, and the Popes supremacy.

Now to come to the originalest of things, Then Priests your essence, which is
the Greek tongue, or lying tongue; you must search you a Father, which must come
at last to take Sanctuary: the truth that is veiled in the Greek tongue, must
come to be radified in the Hebrew Alphabet; there I shall espy your shifting
cheats.

Now to come to the word from whence this Amazonian whore takes unto her her
regency, the fatal derivacy, this was the whore that John saw, that the peoqle
committed fornication withal, it is the greekish composure of lies, to entangle
men withal, with her whorish-forehead; look in England, is she not dyed in
skarlet, is not religion the color for us to act all our vilany under, if not
a notion New Testament man, then there is no marching in our whorish train, for
we are gone a whoring aster other Gops, for that God I know is love, mercy,
goodness, patience, which is not found amongst men, that cry up a name, to
effect another thing.

But for these dubious words, from the Hebrew I find none, no nearer the
devil, or hell, or damnation, then Thou (...), The derivacy in English, is Gods
truth, that's hell to darkness; now you Scholars will say (...) sin, now to you
great Magies, I say, and you must say, that the true originality of the
pronunciation is (...), it is your pointing her on her left peat, that make you
read her (...) sin (...) know you read her shin, siin, sin, but Brethren, ye
Priests, I know thirty seven distincts, besides your three in that character,
when you know so far of that Character, you are no nearer finding me, then
light to darkness, for then I can make the knowledge of that Character, run in
motion, in the Celestial influences, and deliver that Character, into the
center from whence she issued forth, that is in God himself, you know not what
(...) shinn is, I will give you a denomination of (...) shinn, shinn is proper,
not without two n^n her significant in her origini^, is the impeader of Sambah
or Sam^ch (...) she is shinar in the clue, in the fraternity of the Planitor an
Sheem; Beloved I entreat your patience, while I repeat these high declaratives
of Gods wisdom, showen me, not of me, but it self expressing it self, through
this vail of flesh, these are let down to confound the wise worldly men, to
unbottom them, that God may lay the foundation himself.

Now (...) shin the English is a declarative of beauty, or the illustration of
cleerness, though (...) shinar be an impead to Sambah, that is the strong king
(...) of the Plannets, yet the impead of his strength, is by (...) or Shiner,
but from that impead of Sambah, his strength (...) Shinns cleerness, or beauty,
beautifies Sambahs strength, so in them two Plannets, is beauty and strength,
strength and beauty that product is produced, in the terrestial orbs, by the
species of their influences. So much for shin and (...) thau, them are the
Hebrew radicals.

Now if I come to the greek, the original and first word coherent in his
tongue, holding in weight with the Hebrew, it is Othroas, the exact significant
in English, is thus much, a departing, a detraction, a diminution anihilating,
or a falling away, this is neither devil nor damnation; so much for Othroas.
Then one word more, a greek word it is, Penan, now the ancient expositors have
laid more upon this word Penan then it can bare, for they have stated an
irrecoverable state upon it (as we term it) thus much damned, that as we in
our unruddered English runs, lost for ever, which the word will not bare, for
to hold truth in word, it is but the very same with Othroas, that is a
division, or separation, or diminution, or lessening. But to come near your
lying original, this word Eusei eel, that is the greek wrote from the hebrairak
(...) kof in mo^hes, that you understand not Eusei eel, now Eusei in your
expression is lessening, add but eel to Eusei, then eel, makes and takes into
it self, what Eusei had lessened and detracted, that is thus much; in se operat
al asabi el dele mem. The detracting detraction is taken into him, that is
perfection, that is in plain terms man taken into Ged, and then is perfection
to man.

Now I come from the place of torment in the words, I search the Author of the
place, what is he, it is rendered in the greek Abadon, or Apollyon, now what is
the weight of these words, in their import; Brethren, I would not deceive you,
nor know I cannot deceive you, and yet I shall deceive your supposed truth,
thus, if I demonstrate the light, and pull down your builded darkness, then my
light deceives your darkness, and being thereby deceived, in your own
foundation, we are made both one in light, then your loss is gain. But to come
to Apollyon, or Abadon, these two names are rendered for one very supposed
thing, now the true import of the words will hold thus much, a deceiver, or (I
will give this, that you have attracted an accuser, now to show what this
deceiver, or accuser is, this is the mystery. The deceiver is in man, that is,
the dark spirit in man, that Paul terms to be enmity against God, that is
the deceiver, the accuser, nay I give your own translation (though it will not
bare it) the accuser of our brethren, what is this, he that does deceive the
very same does accuse, that is still the dark spirit of unbelief in man, that
is the called devil, that must be cast forth into ntter darkness where, and
when, when the spirit of light is taken into the center of light, which is in
God himself, the body Evangelical, into the paradaical living, the evil spirit
or lust, or deceiver, or destrover into darkness, in the grave, or hell, for
the grave, is denominated hell, or the grave. Now the papal faction, has made
this fine cheating definition. Ouse se antimon ante tere elomon in se evan
Haluleiah in se been n^l pethrat alli evan asareth sephi.

The Hegemonians or Papists do declare, that there is three states, for the
refining the soul of man. The first is here by penance. Secondly, In Purgatory
by indulgence. Thirdly, in the bosom of Abraham, which is rest after refinement,

This opinion is not new, for Pope Boniface the first, was the inventer of this
exhausting sum of sums, into the Clergies tuition, for you being not perfect,
hereby Penance may have your indulgence, or remission out of Purgatory for
money, and so by consequence the kingdom of heaven is earned by Prayers, or
purchased by money, forgetting the word of Saint Peter, their main pillar, that
when money was offered to purchase the holy Spirit, by the Sorcerer Simon Magus,
Thy money perish with thee, so say I, thy Prayers, that are founded on that
foundation, to purchase, or payfor Gods free mercy, they perish and come to
nothing.

But beloved, know there is nothing lost, but all that is come forth is
refined, acting his end he came for, and returns to his center, Now beloved
know, that the New Testament we have at the third hand, for the originality is
in the Bible, and must hold coherent in unione with the truth there, for it is
but an illustrative by the Spirit of that unione maxim, now to come to the
Bible, there is truth and the lie in the insert, but that came through innocent
ignorance, in not knowing the weight, or import of the originality, of the
various maxims, that are herogliphically typed out in the Hebrew radiases, for
one radax by the litteral man, is taken for another; for only the spirit that
is light, does demonstrate the truth from his own lettings down, which learned
man cannot reach.

Now to cite the radaxes, where the first error took denomination; the first is
(...) phe, for she is read in many places for (...), being both much like our
English great C standing with her points backward in the English Alphabet, the
one is in the interpretation, an impead or hinderance, and and the other is the
great influ of all the radaxes, for the (...) phe, she is the cleerness of
obscurity, or the transcendency of beauty ^n her state, now she is in her self
radical, 3, 4, 5. she is the golden number, thus cleerness comes from her root;
for she is bottomed on (...) shinn, for that state but (...): before Shinn, and
then the state will bare perfection, for they are both one; now to know by
stating a Character, by another, the mystery is to know the weight of both
together, several by themseves, in any place of adjunct: or conjunct, in
essency, and derivacy, and in examinacy, and in definacy, and admonicy, in
admittancy, and conjuncksie and disjuncksie, etc. but to come from these high
spears, and to begin to plow in this terrestrial field. I
Theaurau-John-Eval-alsi-al allah al, do declare this day before all you people,
and desire you to declare from me this day, That though Election, and
Reprobation be stated in the New Testament so called, it is absolute blasphemy,
and I in my masters Majesty, do challenge the whole world to answer, and clear
the stated lie, for it has no originality, and it is fathered upon Paul, which
is a fained fiction, and he that ended the Revelation of John the Expositor to
lay a curse upon him that adds, or diminishes, it is false, and no original
^or its ^oundation, but to bind men in an obedient fear, to bring them in, and
keep them subject to the Popes supremacy. Brethren though you do idolize that,
that has set the world on fire, it is but a bead Idol, composed to hold men in
obedience, to time, and state, This I shall shortly declare, for the life of
all things is Christ the Lord, which is the mercy of God taking us into it
self, that is the summum bonum, the chief all, or the chief good, but it is not
so proper in that state as the chief all.

Now Brethren, your Bible and New Testament, their originality is truth, for
it is Gods declarative, but for you to conceive the Book, called Old and
New Testament, to be true, that is false; for know, their descent to us, is
from the Romish fingering, interweaving, and painting in, their traduced
opinion, now we have that, they have added to, for there is an addition, but no
diminution, but making multitudes of riddles, to keep the peoples brains from
idleness, to keep all inslaved unto themselves.

Now Brethren let me speak plainly to you, what have they, or you to do with
the writings of the Apostles, why truly nothing at all, for they were that
thing that you have gotten the bare name of it, this was such a ones words,
what is that to thee, except his Spirit that is the substance of these lettered
names, be in thee, then thou art it, it thee, before thou art but a liar, and
thou art a thief, for thou look to come in by the name, which is not the
thing, neither the true way, for the truth of Paul's words, are the spirit
seated in thee, and thou by that spirit art made to act outward obedience, from
that enlightened, and renewed principle, which is centered within thee, from
whence flows acts of mercy, relief, and pity, and compassion, nay thou come
to be one acting distributive, then Paul's words are thy words, nay Paul is
thee, thou art Paul, for light is but one spirit; O agomeon in se alphy sele
rem. O the hidden thing, when light is centered will show it self, elohim ackki
el selos in re affermater in rebeah sal oli penan arri afaniel. The English.
The God of strength does cause a resurrection from death to life, by his own
quickening.

Senate ori alsiel, The living God does give life to all. Now Brethren,
concerning hell, and the devil, as you take them words, in their center there
is none, as the Lord lives, for hell and torment is, when the light begins to
appear, and casts forth darkness, into utter darkness. But to lay down some
method to prove it, thus, I entreat your patience; First know, that there is
but one originality, out of whose product all things is produced, this you
cannot deny, then God said all was good, it is Gods own word, therefore true;
but if you will make a devil, from whence had he his originy, you will say from
God, well, then, ad Gods word the Creation is good, Gods word is himself;
therefore true; now how, and what, and where was this devil, the first original
that you know of, was in the story of Creation, in Genesis, do you understand
what Genesis does import, it is thus much, the genuine understanding in the
practick part, of Theos-ologi, now many of you are as near in the name Genesis;
Genesis is an Hebrew word, compounded of all compounds, for it is wrote from the
Hebraick (...) in mophes, that is the tied strength, or combinings, combined
into short simblems or radiases, that in a short scope all may be viewed, that
was the Prophets Cabalesterial inclue, and their methodical method, that was
much upon the ^^undation of hieroglyphicy, that is to say a short map, to view
the Land by, there in Genesis according to their germine lighted light, in that
age; for cleerer and higher discoveries are in me to come forth, for no less
then the full opening, both Law and Gospel, and shutting them together in one
entire truth, though now they lie jarring one against another, by reason of
expositions made by men, but the thing is one, the truth in both one, that is
truth; but not all in both, but in both false, through man's invention, which
will be opened in the great day; that is but thus much, the illustration of
Gods truth, that is the resurrection from dead. Anni selorum in sabeah el
zedeck alphi elosterationem induo in enim una and reamus in se segoas sal
almenienna in transaluorum in rem sabie pelma aurauret eloah al et el seek em.
The English derivacy from this golden number, being the five oriental
languages, the year of glory to the earthly man, that is Peace let down from
God on high, but war and discord it shall beget, because of its transcendency,
at length the Lion and the Lamb by it shall be made one, no hurtful thing shall
in my mountain be, for I the Lord will alone be King.

But for the demonstration of the Devil. In Genesis it is said, he was more
subtle or wise, then the rest of the beasts, I entreat you mind but your own
words, or you are the same beast that he was, for he was the quick life and
motion in the bestial body, which is but darkness, which is but a confused
Chaos, before that light of the spirit of life rise, and cast down, and cast
forth, this Giant of our own understanding, and God erect his center, in the
clear manifestation of his glorious excellency, and then and not before, you
see your beastlike knowledge, by reason of the inward indowment, you are higher
enlightened, and organized, otherwise then other bestial bodies are, but all one
dung, in the center of dung, that are you to the two own, but it is true;
therefore by men ought to be owned.

Now to know this subtle beast in the field, in Genesis, was the lustful
desire that took hold within the woman, for what representation soever
outwardly cannot attrackt the eye of the soul, unless it be unruddered, or
loosened from the tie of obedience within, for if obedience eye his principle,
the devil that lustful deceiver, desirer, destroyer, cannot act, nor seduce us.
Now there is a mystery in Genesis, concerning the woman, you would have me keep
unione, only Eve, and she the mother of us all, I shall add but one hebraick
sentence, to hold my intent; though locked from you, and I will plead with your
named Eve, but my knowledge is locked in this state. Avil, seal, sine, sean;
them four words will hold me true, though I discourse with you in your sained
truth, thus say you: Eve was Addams wife, made of his rib, and that you know is
crooked, the woman was straight, and not crooked then, for Gods works are
straight and perfect works, the maxim will hold straight; But to come to terms
in knowledge, it would be Quered who wrote the book called Genesis, or
Theos-ologi, which word will hold the declarative of God, but now it is written,
it is not Gods declarative, for to come home, Gods declarative cannot be
written. Thus, God commands man to write, gives him what he should write, still
this is not Gods declarative, for we the living simblims or figures, we are
Gods declaratives, and that writing is but a dead name, of the living things,
of the thing, that thing is God, the living life of all things.

But to come to the woman in the called Garden, she took an apple, and it was
death, and it was death to them both, I beseech you all people mind this
abominable aspersion, cast upon the great, true, holy, and righteous Jehovah,
for God (says your riddle) saw that it was not good for man to be alone, but
says the same riddle, Let us make man in our image, who was that was spoken
to? Now fetch your Greek names, and then comes persons, in one essencial
essence, but I pass from that point, that is too high for our English Scholars
to deal with; but let us come to the woman, that God first saw it was not good
for man to be alone, but he would make him a meet help to destroy both; I
beseech you mind in many places the translator has represented the glorious
God Creator, to have less wisdom then a weak man, nay a very lying Idiot, ye
stand out for your translated Baal, for the lying translation; because it is
wrote so, therefore it is so, say you, But I Theaurau-John say, it is a lie,
though writ so, I will prove it so, and all men living that stand in de^ending
it so.

Now I beseech you, judge judiciously, and does the woman stand in your riddle
a meet help for the man? certainly you understand not Gods word, for you will
make God to be a liar, or cheater, or deceiver, but whatsoever you term him to
be, less then truth, the all truth, you do endeavor to undignifie him, for he
Is, that Is truth it self, neither going backward by detraction, or coming
forward by elosteration, but he is. Now you may say, What is he? the highest
expression, if duly understood, and considered, the main that can be said, he
Is, and that is the all things in appearances, visible, and invisible, and yet
not visible, for the inlivening life of all things is not seen, that is the
essencial being of God in that appearance, and the outside appearance is moved
from within the inmost spirit. But to come to this poor woman liking an apple,
and it brought death says your riddle, or Bible in that place of Genesis; give
me leave to treat with you, I say there was no Apples, neither Trees; I prove
it to your own state, for you say God made man perfect in the Garden, then know
there cannot be a help in perfection, for that destroys perfection; neither
Apples nor fruit for meat, for do you understand but what perfection is, and it
admits no help, no desire, no lust; now judge ye seriously of your own riddle,
and when you are returned from me, declare to your lying Ministers, saying,
That they are liars in tongue, though the truth be in the heart, for they prate
they know not what. I desire but any or all would engage me, in any matter of
Old or New Testament; surely they have taught to a fair end, that they dare not
maintain what they have spoken, otherwise they are content to live upon the
prey of the people, and hold that, but this I know, I shall shorten their
methods, and put an end to their Tithes, for people will nor, neither shall
they be blinded any longer, to part with their labor for the telling of a lie
by the Priest.

Now you may say to me, You find fault with them, and you teach the same: now
I answer, I teach not, that you may all perceive, by my weakness in defending
any state, know if it were a composure of man by learning, then man could
answer the objection, but know this day that God has raised up unto you the
Prophet that was promised in Mal. 7.5. but that is not in our insert, but the
coherence is one with Mal. 3.2. but who may abide the day of his appearing? for
he is like fullers soap, a refiners fire, he shall even fine the sons of Levi,
now I beseech you mind, who is the spirits intent in me to drive at, but at
the sons of Levi, and their work, which as the Lord lives I must effect; for
which work since I saw and spoke to you, I have a stronger strength added to my
name, that is Eval alsiel. Scholars, when I sound L, hebraick, you know what it
means.

But to come to the woman and the mystery, and the inticement spoken of in
Genesis, or the entire meaning; this is the spirits meaning, for this you say
was wrote by Moses, which I say was not; my Negation is as strong as your
Affirmation; nay stronger, for say you, Moses entered not the Land, what is
meant by Moses, and the Land, in the true hieroglyphicy to hold qualification
with its inherent diameter? Scholars, that word diameter, must in that state be
read backward, as well as forward; for as Genesis is a denotat^on stammeringly
of things below, so it is a point of compass in the spirits hand, to show the
celestial center, (...) which center is all things perfect; and from that
center all, even it self came forth; now it is perfect in its center, and
imperfect in its demonstration; for it is Gods weakness in his appearances,
which taken up into its regency all, it is perfect.

But go come to Moses, the original of that word is Musshah, that is a proper
word in the hebrew, the derivacy to cause the composure of the word, is from
the hebrew Alphabet wrote (...). Now Scholars, read Musshah from them three
radical radaxes, then you will see what Moses is, and what the import of the
word bears in his originality, it is thus much, a dark discovery of the truth
in light, now Moses ties up less in his inclue then his true originality will
bear. Well, you say he entered not into the Land, why? by reason of being
impeded with darkness, which is (...) he braick wrote, and where God gives a
name, if (...) be there he is impeded, and after him shall a discovery of a
higher nature be manifested.

The next that came was Jesus a Savior or a Redeemer, to raise the truth out
of Moses his darkness or dark discovery; but how comes Christ? that very C is
his impede, that is the humanity that locked in the divinity, this will not
serve, for all men are locked in flesh, but the word Christ is derived into
English from the Greek word Kristos; now the ancient Greek wrote it, that is
the same with the hebraick (...), though not the Character, a derivacy in
strength, from the hebraick (...) kof, so the strength of import was the same
in the Greek, as Massah in the hebrew, for they were but one; in one strength,
for the Greek is understood from a true derivacy from the hebrew, is as true as
the he brew is, if it be held in meeter and method, which must be done by one
spirit in both tongues, and all tongues, as I have laid down before. But to
come to Moses and that story of Genesis, the woman first, I say Moses wrote not
Genesis; thus, that book was wrote before Moses time five thousand years, and
you write but five thousand years and odd since the Creation; give me leave to
put one question to you: How long was it since there was a God? You will say
ever, I say not: Ever stops in the center, but God Is, that Is all time, and
all things, at once ever the same; in that state ever will stand, but Enock the
seventh from Addam, what wrote he? for he was higher then any; where is the
hieroglyphics he wrote in? where is that there was such a man your riddle
says, and that man wrote more, then all the Old and New-Testaments, and we
have none of them, where are they? the ancient Jewish root have them in the
East Orcades, in the clue of the Moon, under Saturn, this state is strange to
our Astronomers, but at length we shall see this product produced.

Now Moses led the children of Israel from Egypt to Canaan, that I grant, but
for him to write Genesis, I deny, prove you that he did, and then I am
satisfied.

But to come to the verity of the mystery inserted, It Is this, Gods letting
down his royal essence in appearances, which lies involved in these words,
Theos-ologi, that is Gods light in his declared Creation; now that word is
proper Genesis, for now I come to propriety of speech. Now, the woman cited in
that riddle, and named Eve, do but mind the weakness of the combine, for that
word lies open in the very originality of it to misprision.

Now to come to grapple with you in that citation, it is necessary that we
state the point, that cannot be evaded; from this rule I lay down, to
demonstrate forth from that you cannot deny: God created all things say you, No
say I: there is one thing essencied, in all things that are. Mind the being of
your termed things.

Now you look that I must keep to the riddle or Scripture (as you term it)
well I will, though I know but the Scripture, yet I know beyond the insert
there inserted, that is not, neither has a foundation, though there inserted
and stated.

Now the man say you, God made of the dust of the earth, I pass that for
greater maxims sake.

But the woman, the poor woman deceived by the Apple, and her meetness of help
was destruction to both.

Weigh it well, and bring forth true judgment to determine in truth, but the
help that is to patch up this lie withal, is this: God suffered it to be so,
for man's greater glory; Now mind, could man have greater glory, then he had
when he was included in the essence of God, in the reigning all, or essence
regina, or reigning in God?

Mind, what does this produce? thus much: God was little before, and he would
be greater now, that makes no God at all; else he would bring man to greater
glory (in reverence to his Majesty I speak) that was to no glory at all; thus I
prove if greater or less in the essence of God, no God at all.

Farther thus, God cannot admit of more or less, then no God; I speak in his
Regency essence.

But now I come to his declarative essence creating, to speak to that, thus:
that God that made all, is the all; of that all accounted things.

Now man and woman are one figure, the chief in the terrestrial field, the
highest flower: Now for God to give it an help to overthrow it, to woe and
misery, and the help made by Gods word good, God how will this stand in the
riddle ridled forth? God that is just, holy and good, for to give a help to
destroy both, how could it stand with his essencial essence?

But to come to the true originality of things, God did give a good help to
man, now I prove the woman good and a meet help to the man, thus, the desirable
mind of man is to lust, the woman takes away that lust that desired, in that
state the woman was good, you men and women understand what I mean, but this
will not hold in full with Gods word, for good by God, is always good, and at
all times to eternity, no end of goodness if by God spoken, thus the woman is
perfect good; for the woman is the she, out of whom is produced the whole issue
of the appearance in Creation, in that state she is good.

But to come to term, the woman is weakness to strength, and that is good, for
it does like a foil set off the luster of the diamantal perfection, thus God
could not declare his strength, unless a weakness to work his strength upon;
thus if all strength, no variety; and variety is the declarative of uniones
strength, for it is the sole for unione to erect, (I may say) his foundation
upon.

But to come to this poor woman in fault, it is stated Hevah, or you say Eve,
now to come to prove the woman a perfect help to the man, according to the
word; the woman there is taken for the increase of weakness to strength, thus
God out of unione that was and is strength, produced all things, so the woman
that the spirit drives at, in that state is Hevah, that is the bringing the
weaknesses in creation, to strength in the end perfection; for what the woman,
that is weakness did produce, is by the strength of the Creator taken into
perfection, that is strength, that is the head of weakness, or the woman's head;
that is Christ or God.

But to come to this poor simple woman, it is man, for man and woman make both
but one flesh, so says your Scripture; alas poor woman accounted the weaker
sex, when in truth the strength of both was in one spirit; mind them words,
they are your own translation; for the woman is not without the man, neither
the man without the woman in the Lord; they two be one flesh, and the spirit of
Jesus makes them two; and himself with the Creation but only one, in the
unione; mind that stretch in that drift of extent.

Still the poor woman that is so hardly thought upon by ignorant man, it is
himself without eyes, for there the woman is the weak figure of Christ in the
time, in the humanity. Sala operal el and al in se humanitantibus in se oly
dele mem. The light divine does inlighten the dark light in man and woman, to
see their originality from whence they came. Selos in se, scoli pekad addet on
et on in se separati aal in se perna aquitarian et elosterationem.

The Divine All gives eyes to see it self, the soul in all things, and all
things is but an eloustration, from that radical root, which is the thing of
things.

Now beloved, if you could but see this rooted Root, of and from that radical
root you descencially descended, into what you are, then you would not look at
the woman as in that dark manifestation she was looked upon, but the truth in
looking is to see both one, in the unione.

Now mind, to wind up all, Abrahamus et Sarahi, et in duo sed una in rem:
Abraham and Sarah were two in show, but one in the All Thing, that is obedience
in God, now the reason that the woman is outwardly the weaker figure or
semblem, this is the reason, for she is dubious in generation, that is to say
the doubtful gender or geneos, that word is the ancient Calde signifying
generation, in that state stated, but the word will hold with other maxims,
importance of multiplicity, or numbers; yet the radical root lives in the
terminine qualification; but to take this asperse from this poor woman, this it
is, as the Lord lives, the woman is the man's weakness, the woman in that state
is the Creation representing Christ in the flesh that was subject to vanity,
and perish to outward appearances, but in that displace, they are placed in him
in the eternal center, from whence they came forth; Now mind, God Created all
say you for his grory, no say I, his glory is the all created; for he could not
be greater nor less, but still and always the same; remember but the rule of
perfection, and it does not admit of degrees; but to shut up the sum in a short
state, it is in short thus much, God in appearances, they in forms of Essency,
are weaker then in regency: Now there is all writings, disputations, all
election, reprobation, all sinning, all saving, all learning, all truth, all
teaching; in that short state, the man the woman in the Garden, Paradise
typified out, if duly weighed (...) the spirit that inditeth it.

O agor^^^ns in salvorum in se operted ad amalum in sambah alin phiei sele mem.
O the height of things in their center, is beautiful, but in their obstruct is
darkness, being from their centered center.

The major of this Epistle was wrote at Eltham by me Theaurau-John Eval alsiel
allah al sabbah skribah Jael Tanniour the Jew.

April the 5th. 1651.
Epistle X.
O ye Babes,
YE glorious figures of eternal Deity! Beloved, God has letten the state down
this day to your capacity. Beloved, the glorious unione, in the transcendent
excellency of the divine knowledge has declared unto nay in us, by his spirit,
the divine knowledge which is himself, thus God from all eternity did create
states and degrees in Creation, though but one Creation; and no degrees unto
himself for glory, or not glory; to him is but glory, nay one glory; for when
as we say, to do well, it is all one to him; or when we do ill, it is the same,
neither adding to him, nor diminishing from him, who is asa oli pene mem delos
in se salu in rem emanet al. The goodness in man proves no advantage to God,
or the evilness in man hurts him not; for know once come to be man, that is
in propriety of speech, you cannot act out of his will, as you call it, but God
has no will, for he Is, and Is has no will.

Now to come to lay down unto you some methodical method, that that you may
take from that some instruction, or inlighten your understanding.

The Text is this, Love one another. O allu selos in rem Evangelies in se arri
el. O the loveliness turns men into Angels with God himself in the Celestial
center. O avaran in sal moniam in re faciunter ad amalam. The Love in us ties
us to one another in love, and being made in love, by that love, are taken into
the heavenly center of eternal rest. O amorum in se salvorum in re semper
apellorum. O the loveliness in love, is the extract of beauty, from God himself.

Beloved, That you could but see your selves to be your true selves, then
loveliness is your royal ornament, in the excellentest transcendent
magnificentest manner.

O noble love, that unnobles the noblest Nobles, of their accounted nobility,
and implants its nobleness in them, then are they truly nobled noble.

Beloved, God did let down the nobility of his royal Creation in unione, that
is in love, and how came thence detraction? it is for want of love in
themselves: Thus God loved us, that he gave his son Jesus which is a Savior,
for to suffer for us, this was love. Now how this Savior suffered, it is not
understood.

First, God created all good, then the detraction, or falling away was the
fall. Thus for God to have a detraction in him, it cannot be; for God cannot
detract from himself.

Now beloved, man detracted or fell, what was the reason? it was for wanting
love; now I beseech you mind, as man detracted for want of love, it is the same
in you; for love ties the true-loves knot; for love there is no end of it,
neither beginning; for it is God himself, in himself. Selose, in, re, ex, id,
in, amalam, ar. Love is the heavenly and divine beautifyer of that, that was
evil in it self; thus thy envy, malice, and lust, and every contrariety, if
once love come to erect his throne, thou art turned into love; thy acts are in
love, so far that from night, thou art turned into clear day.

O beloved, I can but speak what I know of love; but I cannot confer it to you:
the naming it to you will not confer it to your precious souls.

Now beloved, I shall speak a strange doctrine to what has been taught unto
you by your Ministers; they say Do this, and do that good work; now mistake me
not, for in that good work, though good to another, yet it is not thy goodness,
for know until thou be crucified in thy self, thy actions are dead, though
never so great and good to another. Thus says the Scripture, Be dead to live,
how is that word meant? that word is a glorious truth in its originy, for he
that speaks it is the Lord; whose power is in that word, to cause a death unto
thy lustful living life, and from that death raises himself in his own power,
then thou actest from the true living principle; for thou art crucified to the
world, through the operation of Gods spirit, then thou art in unione with God,
through jesus Christ, which was Gods mercy letten down in the power of that
word, and by that power did cause a death in thee, to bring forth himself in
thee; thou declaring by acting mercifulnesses that thon art in God, he in thee;
so an uni^ne a marriage is made, betwixt thee and God, by the living word of
his power; that causes such an effectual death, to cause his glorious life, in
thee to reign in glory unto himself.

So beloved, You see that man is nothing but passive, in propriety of speech,
and nothing but God is man's free all.

Now beloved thus I prove it, thus man had, nor has, no true originality but
in God; for forth from him, in the power of his word were we created; there was
our first state, in created appearances; well, we no sooner were men, but we
were in need of mercy; for I say that the created was tied upon the obedience,
which obedience implies, and cannot be denied, but there is some wanting, and
then not perfection in man's first state created. Now I shall brethren discover
to you through Gods mercy, that, that is hid to the sons of men; I beseech you
mind for Jesus sake, these words are perfect in their center. Thus, Jesus is
the Savior, which is but thus much, the declarative of Gods mercy; Now I prove
by reason, and you shall all be witness to what I say, and let no man's passion
be prevalent over his understanding; thus God gave forth a Creation, Now mind,
God gave in that creation a life that was not created, neither could nor never
can detract. This is in the whole Creation, in every figure living; and
accounted dead with us: for there is in every appearance a living life, that
though it is the primum mobile, yet it is not of the body, nor receives from
the body; but it is it self reigning in all storms and tempests in man, which
thing is typifyed out, in that typication of Moses; and Paul saw it, it lies
within the inmost vail, which must not be looked upon, no the High Priest must
go into that vail but once a year. That was thus much typified, that, that one
year was a time, representing every one entire figure or man, that must be
looked upon at the time in Gods mercy.

Now beloved, That time of Gods looking into that inmost vail of ours, it is I
may say, the opening all the other vails; and that is our departing from this
world, and then he takes that living life of our spirit into himself, for that
is the divine nature that cannot detract his essence; this is Gods figure in
man, for mind who is it says, Let us make man in our own image, says the
Bible or riddle. Now them words are falsely translated.

I will insert the true Text. Anni Elohim Sambah allu salvah in re, them two
words of Latin, are to make the full import in the state.

The true declared text is this, Be thou like me in the humanity of my
Creation. Beloved Brethren, in that state Re lies the import, it is the
Creation, for we count Re a thing, and Re is Gods Creation, that is Gods thing.

Now to open the meaning of these words to the learned; though as the Lord
lives, I neither can, or ever could read, any Hebrew, or Greek or any tongues
but English; neither do I know any Hebrew but my own Characters, and them I had
all in one day, before night. I could write them, but knew not the meaning of
any one of them; only it was said to me by the Spirit, they were Hebrew, and
then my corrupt mind desired to be satisfied by man, and then he said they
were so: but this was weakness in me, and sin as you account it; but I beseech
you give me leave to declare to the learned, the meaning of the words in the
Hebrew; The copy I insert in his proper Radiases entire as the were first wrote
in; there was but seven Characters, for Scholars if you truly know seven in his
origini^, that is perfection (...) the first Character is Sambah, or your
Samech, the next is Thau, you say many times Tau, the third is Koph, the fourth
is Mem, the fifth is Jod, you say Joth, the sixth is Pe, the seventh is Caph;
now Scholars you admire if highly read, or else you cannot admire; for as God
the glorious Creator, in whose presence we all are, I in my masters majesty
declare the very same Characters, as was let down to the first created by God,
and the true demonstration of the fore cited Text is the full import to and of
the mind of God.

Now for Kaph (...) I will clear your judgment; (I speak to you high and
learned ones) (...) is the impead, in the perfection, now how can an impead be,
in perfection? no it cannot be, but thus it is, perfection takes fleshly
appearances to act in, and appearances is perfection, there Kaph (...), in that
state is no impead, because she is a state stated in perfection: Now in her
letting down, she and all the rest is but one perfection, and every one in them
is perfections; but when we come to place them, to understand by them, they
become countable or numeral. But I pass to other matter of concernment.

But beloved, To make a clear discovery in the point, in the Image of God in
man, thus, God said, be thou like me in the humanity of my Creation, now I
beseech you mind.

The same that said, Be thou like me, was let down to us sensible creatures,
for the senceable is next of God, so I may say is not speaking or sound, for
God is the substance; of and from his substance, all things and appearances is
but sounds, for beloved, we are but sounds, or figures of that substance; which
is God in every sound, for know there is nothing that sounds, but God is the
substance of that sound, now beloved, I beseech you mind the trouble that
comes to us, it troubles us because we are but sounds, but the substance is not
troubled, neither Brethren, when our sounds are taken into him, that is the
substance of all things, that is Christ or God; then we are at rest, because
our sounds or shadows are in the substance, in which substance is perpetual
rest; for I beseech you mind, that that truly is, cannot suffer, but that that
is not, is that suffers; for there is nothing that can properly be said to be,
but God, and he is unione; therefore in him all have rest, for he is the center
of rest to all and all things. Now you will object and say, that wicked men
they have no rest in God: Mind your own words, God does create all, and
nothing can create it self, then know that God is the fountain whence all
issued out.

Now then presently you will catch and say, that I say wickedness come from
God, because I will give you more hold before I consute your opinion, and make
a clear distinct betwixt God and sin.

Thus, mind, I lay down the rule, that shall cause the product. First there
was no sin, for say you, God was alone, it is granted, But say I that God
created all things, and sin as you account it, is in that thing that God made.
Now I say if God had not made man or Angel, they could not have sinned, I speak
your own term sin, though I know what sin is, now had there not been a seeming
something, there could not have been a sound of something: and indeed that
seeming something is but a sound, and that sound nothing; then where is that
that is but a sound of that nothing?

So I beseech you mind, flesh and blood cannot inherit eternal life, that Text
is almost full read from the originality of its root or radi^al expression, the
Text. Ante selem in re sabat alli jah in huri beneam sallu sebat. The true
words rendered in full to a tittle.

The earthly man is corrupt and cannot stand in light, them very words are the
true import of the Text in his true originality.

Now I will show you the odds or difference in those two citations, your
translation says, flesh and blood cannot inherit eternal life; now I say the
earthly man is corrupt, and cannot stand in light: now where is these Texts
variation? no where: though the words alter much, for both the Texts concludes,
that that is not cannot be. There the scope is full weighed, but the words vary
in expression, thus: flesh and blood is not the earthly man, for flesh and
blood is, when the life of that fleshly man is gone: now know that without the
life that is absent, flesh and blood could not be acted.

Now mind, for the earthly man carries in it, whatsoever was offensive (as you
call it, and that cannot stand in light, for it is all darkness in which the
light was hid, and the light then is taken into light, and the earthly man
which is meant the serpentine knowledge, in that earthly body, for flesh and
blood is not knowledge; for flesh and blood is, when life and knowledge of the
natural man is gone: So you see there is more, then flesh and blood to be
understood in that Text, for the spirit of man-shall not enter into eternal
life, as well as flesh and blood, but the life of these lives, is taken into
God; for (as with reverence I may speak to his divine Majesty) it is part of
himself, nay all himself; in that appearance both part and all, and all things,
this is God our Savior, taking us into himself, these words time cannot bear
unlocking, that is concerning Christ, for Christ is not yet known; the mystery
lies in these words, Christ shall come in the glory of his fathers wisdom, and
knowledge is with him, nay himself.

Now I beseech you weigh seriously, If the substance of man be but a noise of
his own center, as that life does plainly manifest, which is our sole, and that
word is translated soul; Now mind the difference in them two words, and the
full import of both; and of either distincts, For foul is properly Gods essence
derivative, essenced in flesh, now know that sole is our being in darkness,
that is without the discovered light of God risen in us, for they are no more
agreeable to one another, then light to darkness; for the one holds the natural
man, the other the spiritual light in that natural man; but the word sol, is
read form soul, and soul is read for sole; being derived from the Hebrew (...)
kof, for (...) kof, holds an infinire, and a definitire, being the second
orig^ni in the declared strength, as (...) Sambah first, (...) kof, next. Now
know Scholar, that the infinitire is read when (...) kof, stands radical, that
is the first letter, or leading letter; let kof be placed the third radical,
then he is read definitire, the word that is the ancient Hebraick word is
ouksi, that is definitire, now the word infinitire, in the virgin state, in the
true orthodox Hebraick is Keva, now in this word there must be understood ad
infinitum de faciendam in re, that is to say, To the infiniteness, a making a
thing, that is sole to the soul, though soul is the proper essence, or life of
sole, thus intricate is Jehovahs ways, and every work do him praise, think you
what you will; even that, that is the Creterrised noise, that you count sin,
it is God his greatest praise though it be but a noise from the Creature, and
nothing in nor to God, for sin keeps men under from breaking forth into
outrages, which they both, are but the noise of the Creature, for God cannot be
pleased, nor angry, for if pleased not God, if angry not God; for God Is, and
that is God, but how? neither angry nor pleased, both angry and pleased, and
yet all this is but one Is, and that is God, for know, all that can be said of
God he Is, or I am; or the all of all things.

Now to come to the perfect theory of God. Now mind you great learned ones,
that inwrap the poor blind and ignorant ones, within the swaddle-bands of your
own invention, tying them to your selves to ride on, the maxim will hold, now
though I am unlearned, in what I declare for I am not well englished, for many
words I understand not; neither have I memory. Now you cannot say to me, as was
said to Paul, Much learning has made him mad; now I say, and many know, that
by madness I came to knowing, and in time God will make me speak plain
knowledge, that by all shall be acknowledged, not only England, but many Lands
and Nations.

But Scholars, my Teacher has no books, nor I have none to read, neither will
I, for my Teacher is Is, that is God, now ye Priests, my brethren by Creation
cannot be denied, to come to Gods perfect Th^^sologi the English is Gods light
declared in Creations, now I begin. S^los in re arkad el. That is a short
state, then if you have true light, it is truly viewed in a short scope, but
Scholars, it is wrote in the golden numerals, that is the golden numbers ruled
rule, being five significants, but though unlearned, I will give you the true
exposition, now thus I prove it to be truth, mind, I return a strange answer
that has not been returned in multitudes of ages that is this. I know they are
both true because I know neither of them false, by reason that I have not
knowledge; therefore the thing is, that is God.

Now you curious Scholars will say I have cited the words, but not the derivacy
or English of them, and speak of two and both true: Thus I said it was the
golden number; and in propriety of method, the derivacy comes after; though it
lies in it own life, in the root; but I will declare the words again, and the
English by them; you will say it is false, I know it is true. Selos in re arkad
el, That is thus much, heavenly affirmation is in and from God; now what word
is it hold both a Negative and an Affirmative distributive? I will tell you,
the word is arkad, being wrote in moyhes, in the meadish method (...) k bares
the^isud state, and yet the radical leader in that state, the word stands
stri^^, or barred by reason of (...) kof, for mind* kof or k raises into the
third masculine, now that word arkad is the golden number, as proper as the
whole state stated, for it is a Negative and an Affirmative distributive, that
is the whole maxim or foundation of the golden number, you Scholars here is one
glimpse of my next coming forth, for though I cease for a time, it is to come in
more power, this I know so sure as the Lord lives, to the confounding all men;
therefore, though I be detracted for a time it is to come and drown all your
learning; for it is a derivacy from the Greek tongue, it is that whore that
has made all Nation, drunk with the wine, but wind is the propriety in
speech, for the Greek Testament has made the Nations drunk with the wine of
her fornication. Jesous Christos hook die et in eternitas et in^oternitates
salem^m re^s bat el a^le mem: Josus Christ to day and for ever to eternity
suffering, and no end; for judge ye, Christ suffers us in our unthankfulness,
and yet takes us into his rest, which is perfection, this is the scope of the
whole Gospel; but thon where will be had a stipend for this whore the
New Testament, that John saw, risen out of the bottomless pit, for to maintain
her pride in skarle^, that is the bloody robe; that has had in origini out of
the New Testament, if not as we are in judgment; put to death: when the Gospel
is to be pitiful, to the blind and ignorant, so in truth the Gospel is only
a lie, made by men to fetch about their design.

England, you have the greatest seal to set to this, to make the greatest
impression, when the truth in the Gospel is mercy, pity, Justice, but look I
beseech you, you great ones.

O how for God, and the Gospel, when your hearts went after another thing; and
God gave you prevalency to declare your own hearts, and then by acts you have
declared, that you never intended what you declared; but have made your lie to
stand, but it lies a lie open to the view of all Nations, for you have
forgotten the living God; and embrace Gods of gold, and silver, Lands, and in
heritances; that you shall not hold (mind them words) and the maxim I prove it
by, is this, take notice all people; Gods glory he will not give to another,
and woe unto us in England, we have clothed our actings with the name of Gospel
while we were weak; and when we were strong, we in the face of the Sun, have
declared that we were hypocrites, crying that glorious name Gospel to make it a
stalking horse to accomplish our own covetous wicked ends.

O actions in England, I in the presence of God do call for your testimonies,
which is murder, oppression, and deceit; now I demand if these fruit grow upon
that root that you and I my self held forth to the people, which we said was
for the glory of the Gospel, liberty, law, righteousness; do you remember all
these named snares, the word is proper, for the end is the clear manifester of
our heart acting, and God is the witness of my soul, I lie not.

Now let us see our purchase purchased, by this we have attracted, we in power
by your own strength, are murderers of that number murdered, and their blood,
and the cry of their distressed ones, both join in one crying for vengeance
against you, your estate is their blood, your bread is their blood, you eat and
drink the blood of them you have cruelly murdered: I prove it thus, We all
engage in the reality of our hearts for one absolute good, the thing is good in
it self, good to all and all posterity, by our combinining together the end is
effected: Now our loss is great in lives and estates. Now comes the winding up,
That crowns our labor, and it is wound quite contrary to most that engaged,
and a few make prey to themselves by another way that the rest never thought
upon: Now in this act they have brought upon them, (...) all the blood shed,
and are robbers of all the rest, and stand indicted before the Lord for to
answer for the fact; yet beloved, let me tell you, your safety with my own lies
now in these men, and you are b^^und to uphold these men; for you have a being
amongst these men, and if the other prevail, as the Lord lives you shall
neither have being nor breath amongst them, now God will purge these men
himself, this I know.

But beloved, the time hastens on that Israel shall return to his own Land. O
beloved cry unto our God, that he may hear and have mercy upon us, for our
bondage in flesh and spirit is very great. O for thy sake O Israel I have
forsaken all, I have emptyed my self to support thy children and in thy work. O
sepe peon alu^ sele et terra in re et in me. O Jerusalem my joy, thou art my
sorrow in earth: Non tempus orrattah ellah sallu edereat alpi sele mem: It Is
not time for me to deliver thee.

But thy deliverance my eyes in this flesh shall see thee in glory and majesty.
O pall penan alli neat allu perereat allu Jah sede sophim. The Lord thy God
will restore thee in the pinch of time in mercy, when thy people are thoroughly
purged from iniquity that they may weigh Gods mercy at a true value. O
apolinariam in sabine L. Then the people shall praise the Lord and sing unto
him in glory and dignity; beloved what is here spoken, the Prophets my brethren
have confirmed and affirmed, that the Lord will make good his promise to the
whole house of Israel.

Beloved, this day I declare to you my quietus est, that is I hope rest to my
self, for I shall now be silent for a season, in which my spirit rejoices, but
it is but the retracting for a time, for to speak in a higher light, in the
divine and Evangelical expressing, for the work of God shall stand, in which
work I know I must labor, for the Lords harvest is great in England, for
brethren you poor dejected ones, you cast off ones; you, even you shall
rejoice, for our redemption hastens, and the time is near; but such sorrow and
troubles is at hand to the worldly men, that the like has not been in any age
since man inhabited the Globe. This I know by the Spirit of the Lord.

My next resurrection shall come in Print speedily, Called Theaurau-John, his
second part of his Theous-Ori Appokolipical, or Gods light declared in
mysteries.

Theaurau-John Tanniour allah al, High Priest.

March 6. 1650. Positions to the Clergy, so called; Or, The Priests, so called.
Know there is a name and a thing, and all names are no thing, and God is the
Thing, and all things are but the name of that Thing; For when you leave una,
in duo is the Creation, for Jehovah his opening is the creating the Creations.

1 WHat is that God ye teach to the people?

2 What is he you your selves affirm ye know?

3 What is the humanity of Christ in his first principle, in his second
principle, and in his third principle, that is flesh? I have half opened this
state for you.

4 What stories do you teach out of your own fancy, for the divine truth?

5 Now you have done this, how came you by your holy calling as you call it?
but know call is a lie, and so are ye Priests that are not radaxed in your
foundation, and the intendant foundation is God.

6 What is the height you attain in your learned learning? This I answer my
self, to show you it is the learned lying lie. Now that is the height your
studied lie can reach, for a lie reaches a lie, and no further.

7 What is the Celebrating the body of Jesus as you call it?

8 What is the Deity in the humany, that can or could be offered up?

9 What is the trine of Sol, in the humane part of this terrestial body?

10 What is the operation of the Moon in Sol?

11 What is the influx in the Trine of Sol?

12 What is the Dameter in the Sea?

13 What is meant by the bands of Orion spoken of in Job?

14 What is Venus her operation in the Moon?

15 What is light in its essential being from God? Search deely, it is not the
Sun.

16 What involveth the Waters into the great deep? The secondary cause I
require.

17 What is the inlet to these, and the knowledge in them? You say God: Mind
what follows, then your answer excludes Man; and in this state man is but dead
earth: for the things of God are revealed in truth by his Spirit in Man, and
not Man.

18 What is the Deity in the humanity?

19 What is Christ the Son in the Trinity operative?

20 What is the Virgin that brought forth Emanuel or Jesus?

21 What is Addam in the Garden?

22 What is Rebecka that brought forth Isaac? Know, all temporals are
Hieroglyphics Celestial.

23 What is the Trine in the Deity that is placed in humanity?

24 What is the influx in the Celestial spheres in every generation, and
Creation Created?

25 What is the intendant in truth in this figure (...)?

26 What influences from the Celestial bodies inheres in us?

27 What is the influe in the Matrickx and womb in the Morning?

28 What is the transcendency in the Aurora?

29 What is the stays in the watery world or Abyss Orbis?

30 What is the inherent in the Philiades?

31 What is the Sperm in the whole Creation in the Generator?

32 What is the influx that causes the procreated in the tertia loca; or bottom?

33 What is the inherent inclue in the Trine of Sol?

34 What is the Radicak radack in the Lunan constellative, or the constellative
of the Moon?

35 What is the inlet into the Philiades in his operative part?

36 What is the Tobass Celestial, or alclu in the spheres in their Trines
Celestial?

37 What is the end of all Querie from God to man, from man to God, from both
to one?

MY ANSWER Added to the CHARGE against Me.
Brethren,
THrough the great Calumny of aspersion laid upon me, I am forced to publish to
the world what I have declared; and withal I have added my Defense against the
copy of my Indictment: that the Book it self will manifestly declare how they
have traduced my words through ignorance or envy; what I did declare, and this
is a command, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. And in
judgment and righteousness only shall thou swear: For I am a holy God, and
will visit the false swearer. I have inserted all the points in the copy of the
Indictment.

1 They charge me with A dissoluteness in living, and breaking all humane
society.

Now for living, that is, obeying what God has commanded; know that no man is
perfect, but there is a closure and consenting to all that is commanded; which
is declared by outward actings, and for that I shall not desire any favor at
any man's hand; but this, I desire you to search my life in actions thtorowly,
and I shall prove unto you a Lookingglass, whereby you may discern your own
spots and foulness, and wilful failings. So much for the first Charge.

2 The second Charge is, That I deny Gospel Ordinances.

To which I Answer, That I do not nor cannot, for the Ordinances of the Gospel
are in truth, the power of God; upon whom soever it lights, it makes them
obedient to the commands of God, and that is love distributive, and to that I
say I was forced to make a distribution a releasing and a satisfaction; now
this was Gospel in power, which power you my persecuters know not; for ye have
the name Gospel, but the power of it is not known unto you; for then you would
love the afflicted, help the needy; but alas, your Gospel lies in your head by
parratlearning, and not in the heart, wrote by digitus Dei in Cor allah, that
is, the Gospel is not in your hearts, writ by the finger of God; for if it
were, persecution would cease, and acts of mercy would flow, and deceit vanish;
your constant guest, or constant inmate. So much for the second.

3 The third was, That I said, That the Bible was a riddle. And I leave it to
the world to judge of; is it not a riddle, a mystery, a Microcosm to the world;
nay to you? if not a riddle and a thing that you understand not; wherefore is
not obedience due unto it rendered; for you make it worse then I do: For a
riddle is as proper a word as mystery, but you make it a lie, by your not
obeying the things therein commanded, and declare your self-actions to be truer
then that? for if you know it to be true, wherefore not adored by you? But ye
cry the name Gospel high, but you are a Gospel to your self ends, for the truth
in the Gospel is doing deeds of mercy, and not in disputing names of dead
letters; and for the translations, they are false in many places, and one thing
stated for another thing intended; that many knows.

4 The fourth is, that I should say That there is no such thing as Hell, as
your Ministers hold forth.

You will see in my Book what is spoken to it. But I say Hell is not as the
Ministers hold it forth, neither as it is denoted in your insert: Hell is a
separation from an enjoyment; and give you the definition, and that is all that
can be said: but I refer you to the Book, to see what I have said, and know
that there is nothing, but must be denoted in word, and then the main Quere is,
What that word does include in it self, and what the spirit does intend in that
word? it is not what we conceive to be, but what it in truth in it self is, and
thus none but the Spirit is able to make forth or define.

5 Fifthly, That I said The soul of man is essencied in God.

I say first, There is a God, that cannot be denied, then this God essencying
himself in every created appearance; and again, all these appearances essencyed
in God does appear from these words, In him we live, and move, and have our
being; now Priests your rule will be confounded, thus: know nothing below
himself can bear or hold a state in competition with the Lord, who is all, and
yet nothing, this is Jehovah, who is nothing, and yet the thing in things, not
of the things, nor by the things, but he the life of all things, and he in
regency and essency, and in derivacy, and definacy, and still he is unmovable,
always, for ever to come the same, and yet Jehovah cyphered is his name; here
is one of my makka demical expressions, allegorically alluding to the point,
into which all points; but to come down from this sphere, God is a spirit, you
say the soul is a spirit, I will be one with the simple, or I will dwell with
the meek spirit, says the Lord: now how is a spiritual dwelling? not to be
defined by natural men, for they hear and understand not, so says the true
Scripture: a spiritual dwelling is being entirely one, for these bodies of clay
hold us at a distance, as witness the spirit derivative in its growing to be in
unione, that is into the Essence, regency, in these words the state lies, we
groan and would be unclothed, that mortality might be swallowed up of life,
these are both pointing to that oneness which is in God in unione. Now know
that the soul is spiritual light, and light is God; now by this rule, envy,
would say I say that the soul is God: no, it is in us a derivative from God,
essencied in God, and at the unmoddeling every figure its figured in, returns
to the essence Regina or God reigning, and is one in the unione in glory,
transcendent for ever, now know in a spiritual being, that is light, it is in
oneness with that great light, it came forth from this One; or God letting down
his oneness, caused that oneness to appear in appearances; now the appearances
retracted, the oneness is received into himself, so then that light in the
derivacy is taken into the essences regency, and then unione, a beginning, and
an end; no end, but a beginning, neither beginning nor end, but the middle, and
that is the center, and that is God in his reigning all.

6. That I did say that The Old and New Testament was false and interwoven.

Know, that is easily answered, for the whole printing is man's connection or
interweaving together; and for the Translation, it is false in many places, I
say so still, and in the point of Jesus our Savior is the main.

7. I said, That God must save the devil.

This state is altered to what I declare, my Book will show it, I say, that
Christ came to save men-devils, devils men; Christ said as much, if duly
understood, for I come not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; is
there not in our understanding a devil in this word Satan? did not Christ say
unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, or devil get thee behind me? you know
that there is but two spirits in your account, as good and bad; then know, not
of God, then of the devil; there is your state stated short. Make you what you
will of it, it is not what you conceive, but what it in truth is.

8 That I said that God had just mercy to save all, and no more.

He that says the contrary, is a blasphemer, for I say God had just strength
to create, and not a tittle more; and just mercy to save his created, and not a
tittle more: what a height in Christ's School are ye, seeing that this is a
paradox to you! I need not go no further for to search the reason of your dark
actions, for if you did know God, you must know him to be just, and just is
perfection, and perfections is just, for if he were in himself more or less,
then know he could not be perfect, or if he were more at one time then at
another, he could not be just, and God is a just God, and holy perfect God: and
because you do not know God as he is in himself; but you have a God of your own
gotten by learning and by hearing therefore, you persecute them whom God has
taught himself, and planted himself in by his spirit of light.

9. That I said that the New Testament is a lie.

So in the truth of true speech it is, for you say, It is the holy Gospel of
Christ, and the holy word of God; and I say, It is but a name of dead letters
set together with much interweaving of man's invention: and more, many places
translated to hold up the Pope and the Clergies supremacy, and burdening the
People to their tyranny, and It is not Unione in it self, therefore not Gods
declarative in truth of name, for a name is but a shadow of a substance, which
substance is Christ the Lord, you understand me not, nor one in ten millions
knows not truly what Christ is, nay not one in the Creation; (now are you
stound or are amazed) I will prove it against all opposers; therefore it is not
looking for an outward Christ, at Jerusalem, but a living life of righteousness
within your selves, that gives you sight toward Christ; this you say it is the
word of God, and I say it is dead letters set together; and is that whore that
has deceived the Nations, now know that truth which is Gods Gospel of peace to
the soul, is not got by hearing an outward name named by a Priest; for naming
what God has done in me, cannot confer the substance thing to you, which is
Christ in the soul: the name does deceive you, but the substance cannot; for it
is Gods strength, that is, Christ the Lord, taking you into himself; then that
is true Gospel not wrote in and upon Paper, but upon the soul of man, but my
book will open it, in the first and second part, to the full view of all men;
here lies the state, you say that the Testament is the word God, I say it is
but the name of the word of God, and much false spelling in it, and I say God
is the word himself, converting you without that written word, by his free
mercy, which is Christ a substance and not a lettered name, for you may learn
the name and deceive your selves not having the thing, which is Christ the
substance converting you unto himself: now I speak Allegorically, and you
understand literally, so you wrong me, and cause my true innocent and harmless
intention to suffer. Brethren, let us not fall out in names, but let us live
honestly in things.

10 I said that he that added or diminished to the Book of the Revelation,
there is a curse stated on them, which I say is not in the truly true original,
but added by the Pope to cause an adorative worship to be tendered to he knew
not what, and that is blasphemy: thus, for man to state a word to cause
obedience to that word stated, is blasphemy, because it is stated in the seat
of God and is not God; and this is the whole book called holy, and it is an Idol
robbing God of his glory, for there is none holy but the Lord, and no created
or made thing is holy, but God alone; where is your holy named Gospel in
letters? there is not two holies, but one holy, that is God; and holy is not
names of letters, but the Lord living by his spirit in the souls of men, and
not confined. Brethren, out of love, not for lucre of gain, have I communicated
what God has made known unto me; and my desire is, that you should not shut
your eyes against the light, preferring your own reason and self-will, wedded
to the letter, of whose translation you know no^: ye shall all be taught of me,
says the Lord, but you will have your God out of them written dead names
called Scripture.

11 And that I said that there is neither election nor reprobation.

That I say still, for know, God Is, and Is is no chuser or refuser, but Is:
search you that out. Only I give you this Query, How could God choose, when all
was wrapped in the womb of unione? you say, From all eternity: declare you the
product, and then I will answer, for in this state I lie barred in unione
without product.

12 They say that I said, that God was not for ever. Which I protest I never
spoke, and though it is not lawful for to draw consequences to prove or produce
evidences, yet in your own Charge, you say that I said, The soul was of the
essence of God, and say that the soul cannot suffer; mind what you make; that
is the soul God: in denying what I truly spoke; for that that cannot suffer is
a God, for all things must suffer but one thing, and that is God, and the
suffering of all things to that God is the due homage they ow unto God as he is
their Liege Lord. Now I say before all men, you my accusers are blasphemers,
and I am not; but rage not, I can pass it by, God give you more light to see
the beauty of his excellency, that you and I and the whole body may be g^thered
into one, then peace.

13 I said that God was neither angry when men did ill, nor pleased when they
did well.

Ye weak Babes, who in your weakness do ye liken God unto? Is he like man? The
lowest of men? Nay weakest men, I desire you to bring anger, and see how you
can make it stand in Gods perfection, and bring pleasing to Gods justness, and
see how it will stand there. Thus if God can be angry in his essencial essence,
I say he is no God, for anger is weakness, and God Is, and that is all
strength, and therefore no anger, what can God be pleased in his essencial
essence? then no God; for God is neither pleased nor angry, both pleased and
angry, and yet neither pleased nor angry; for God Is, and Is is God: here is a
mystery that is not made known to the sons of men, unto which I shall not speak
at this time; only know, that in perfection there is neither pleased nor
anger, for more or less, not perfection, I am, that is perfection; therefore ye
sons of Jacob are not consumed.

14 And that I said that Sin is Gods highest praise.

Thus, sin is weakness, which is the creature in his corrupt estate, now comes
light from God, and does cast forth this sin or weakness, and then plants
light: then from that that was dark, that is sin did reign, there grace does
reign to the glory of God in a transcendent measure, because it is the work of
the third person, but the unione spirit if not sinful, we needed no mercy: from
sin obstruction is righteousness reigning, and so sin does elosterate the
strength of Gods mercy, and Gods mercy does elosterate sin to the full viewing
of its ugly deformity; this is safe, nay your own Scripture, for we being taken
into light, praise God for our deliverance, that is redeemed from death, and
placed in life, then we value Gods mercy and not before.

15 And that I said God was little before the fall, and the fall of man did
raise God.

Now this point is clean traduced, and never such a word spoken, as the Epistle
will show.

The point was this, that it is said that man fallen was to be raised to a
greater glory, now I demand what greater glory could man be raised unto, when
man was wrapped in the essence of God before he came forth in appearance? you
must hold in all Gods declaratives him to be the perfection, so man can but be
raised to the same state, and no more; for God is neither greater nor less but
always one always the same.

Brethren, had you been in the Gospel as you are too much in the name of it,
not knowing the substance, you would have commiserated my sufferings, not
persecuting me without a cause; but God is just, and in his good time he will
restore my breach. Luke 12.33. Sell that ye have, and give alms, have you not
read thus? but who practices according to the command? Yours to serve you and
the Nation.

Now know all people, That blasphemy is this, and no other, that is, for man to
deny trine or Trinity, and Unity in Trinity, and there is no other blasphemy;
as thus, for man to say that there is no God, and for man to deny the operative
Trine or Trinity, these are accounted blasphemy, and there is no other. Now you
are not to draw consequences to prove or produce evidences, for if not denying
in plain English words the God or Godhead thus named, though no man living
knows what it is, yet in that state it stands stated, that if any man shall
deny the Trinity and Unity in Trinity it is death by the Law, and do you but
read thus, that the Sun is of the Father is blasphemy, in our English tongue,
for of is a Negative proper in our English writing, though you read it an
Affirmative, would you be glad to suffer for wrong pronounncing God? no, the
Law requires it not; but it is the devil, envy got into the heart and head of
the notional called Christians, now before this time you have heard me disclaim
the word Of, as it is in print in my Book called Anroran Tranlagorum. For God
has caused me to write all, and not speak to dispute, you are my witnesses now
I come and refer you to your belief, that is thus written, and the Catholic
Faith is thus, That we worship one God in Trinity and in Unity and Unity in
Trinity, says the writing, there is one person of the Father, another of the
Son, and another of the holy Ghost; there is the Negative denying the
Affirmative in that state, I prove it thus: the Father is one, the Son is one,
and the holy Ghost is one; and not three ones, but one only one, who is the
all three in unione. Brethren, I desire that this main maxim in divinity may be
resolved, though stated by the mad man, thus: How you can assert from a
spiritual unione, a person or from a spiritual Trine, three persons, for know
you that in the spiritual essence, that there can be no person, and yet three
entire ones, and these three, one in unione; and this Trinity I shall speak a
little to, what is discovered to me in this mystery, and refer it unto them
that have a clearer eye and deeper judgment for God has confounded my
knowledge as a man, but as my desire is that truth may flourish, and that mist
we are in; received by tradition from Rome, as our Books are too full of their
subtle pointings, which I see plainly, and in this that I shall speak to is
the main. First, know that there is one essencial offense, from whence all
things descencially descended into created appearances, this is undeniable by
any. Now to state this essence in a person, it is to confine, nay vilisie the
living life it self; for know that the living life in the whole Creation cannot
be person, but spirit; now God is a Spirit, therefore no person; judge ye for
God Is, and Is Is God, that is all can be spoken; so much for the Father, the
Son is Secundus viva vita, the second living life in the Creation: Now know
that Christ says, I am the life of the world. Now I would not have you think
that I intend that that Jesus that you account and I know suffered at
Jerusalem, that he as he was then, was the life of the world, but the light of
life in the soul of that Jesus as he was one with the Father in the regency or
reigning essence; so and no other was he the life of the Creation; do not
deceive your selves with a body of your own earth, the Son of God was this upon
whom thou see the Spirit descend, that is he this was spoken to John the
Baptist.

Now brethren, I would not have you to state an adorative opinion, upon the
Books called Scripture; for know, that they were but wrote by men, and they
themselves point us to a higher discovery; that shall be manifested, that is
the calling the Jews, and the preaching the everlasting Gospel as it is said in
the last days says God, I will pour out of my Spirit, and your sons and
daughters both old and young shall Prophecy says the Lord. And what height of
mystery is not yet known, nor how God will teach in the last days, is not
manifested but in a transcendent manner, shutting up the glory of the Law and
Gospel in a most glorious glory magniphiciencically expressing his truth out of
both them dark vails so long by us contended for. Heva Assa al oli mem. This
Hebrew state I open not not that I want light.

Brethren, ye priests ye would be always talking the conversion of the Jews,
but you would never have it come to pass as you have pratingly prayed for the
conversion of the Jews, and now you begin to persecute Us Jews, all this is
because, you are afraid your trade of lies must down, now brethren, I would not
have you be angry because the Gospel is love, if you be true Ministers that is
truly called, then know Christ has preached in you this lesson, Fly from
anger. But I shall state six Queries, to which you shall do well to answer, ye
Priests my brethren.

First, How came the holy Apostolic calling conferred to you for above this
sixteen hundred year together, and the world never knew nor heard of it,
brethren, you are men that will hide nothing that may advance the glory of your
trade.

Secondly, You must be Ministers of Christ's second coming, and that is in
greater signs and miracles then before, as all the Scriptures manifest and what
have any of you done, but tell us over dead names.

Thirdly, What have you to do to make a trade of the Apostles dead names, as to
abuse their writing in exhorsism, being you have not their spirit, that that
was truth in them is a lie in you, for they were that spirit of which ye have
and are but the dead name.

Fourthly, Ye deny the Scripture, making your self-will Scripture, and under
that name you cloak your covetousness, and are perjured men, for Thou shall not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, and let all the people judge, do not
you exact Tithes from your brethren, that Gospel Ministers have no warrant to
do: So Gods word is taken in vain, because his word is your color to act your
own will, and word, and Law in and by, he that but names Christ must depart
from his evil way; and you preach Christ to maintain your evil way.

Fifthly, Whom Christ called and sent, they never studied, for the light of
study is but the witch of the mind, deceiving the simple man in the same body,
for know if by study Christ can be attained, then not Gods free gift, for God
gives wisdom to the simple, and makes the tongue of the stammerer speak
plainly mysterious mysteries, yet unlearned; this I know, and from sense I
speak, this is a riddle to you, Ajaxk al Saby oli el dele mem, Who was my
teacher here? None but the Lord: I read no books, though I am mad, I tell you
by madness I am instructed, ^ was as serpentine wise as any of you, but God
has destroyed it in me, me in it; and I am become a fool and a babe. Sed
selose in Re aggarim el pethrat alvi seen accorata. The English though I
understand not the Latin nor Hebrew, here is another riddle, yet the English of
that state is this, But the heavenly light does give light to view the deep
mysteries of it self in the terrestrial Creation, now you will say, this mad
man speaks some Latin, some Hebrew, and some greek; and confound in broken
words, this reason I render you, it is to confound you great ones, Rabbis I
mean: Now know that the spirit is not confined, but speaks one entire language
in the whole Creation, combining and conjoyning all languages into one truth,
what think you to that reason, is it not strange? Now know that my teacher is
my God who has afflicted and broken me for his own use, to confound you and
all men; for know, that in England Babel is a declining, and covetousness
reigning.

Sixthly, Wherefore if ye were the Ministers of Christ, do you fly to the
secular power to defend your cause with their sword, and not commit your cause
to Christ, willingly rendering a reason of your Faith, being entreated earnestly
thereunto. This know, that Christ you own, is a dead Christ as your selves
declare, by reason that your strength lies in the Magistrates sword, now then
speak plainly, that we may know, that the Magistrate you serve, and his sword
is your Christ; nay I will give you a plainer definition, you are many of you
Magistrates and Ministers of Christ, but you hang him by your sides, Are ye not
turned mercinary Captains? Now show me in your word of God, that ever your
master Christ, whose servants ye pretend to be, ever preached with a sword to
convert men into another world, I desire a Text in the word of God to bare out
these actions, nay I pray you give me leave, you have got swords, that if now
men will not pay Tithes, you are able to fetch them in your selves. I beseech
you bare with me if I tell you the truth, have we not all engaged against
Popery, and to show the zeal we have against it, we have made holes in all our
Church Windows, in show of abolishment ye Statesmen, this is but Mince and
Commin, but the great thing of righteousness is neglected, this day I say by
your own Acts, Covenant and Engagement, That whomsoever in this Nation or in
our Dominions, does pay his Tithes according to what he did customary, that man
or men are perjured persons, and the Law of the Land requires their ears, and
the Law of God they shall not escape; again, they that reign by forcing men to
pay Tithes, are perjured by the Law and Engagement they have made. I say, not I
but the Lord, woe unto the perfideous generation, that makes a Covenant of
deceit, and themselves condemn themselves, by the same Law. I beseech you by
the mercy received, that this may be broke off, it is now time, and hightime to
turn from evil, for the harvest is ripe, and the sickles is ready.

Selat ^ry a saba arri nedat me.
The divine light cannot be measured by humane learning.
Arri sele oli supuit nedat mecum.
Nor the divine light stoop to man's capacity.

Ye grudging Priests at my name and me,
I challenge ye all to dispute in the mystery;
That is in the divine expressing Evangelical,
The light, the depth in mystery magical,
In earth, in air, in fire or water
In Orbs in Earbs or any material matter;
In Sun, in Moon, in Star or Stars, or all,
The depths beneath, the spears Celestial,
Exse me non literas homo,
Sed devitie insperati alvat.
Hackkarim elvah halileuah sam
Arbi selorum madad allah al,
Vita madad ai el sonarum.
Alma a facti osonet me.
The English out of this mysteyous state is this,

The lightest light that ever shone,
Is now letting down from Unione:
Which shall unvail men's lights to see,
The only one that they in Unione be.
FINIS.
My Book called Arorau Tranlagorum will show my discenting from all Sects
printed the 25 of February 1650. It will clear many points of aspersion laid on
me.

Yours to serve you in love, Theaurau-John Tanniour the Jew. Eval alsiel Sabbah
Skribahjail.



