To the Honorable the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland. The humble Petition of diverse Citizens of London on behalf of
themselves and otbers who have advanced Moneys for the use of the Commonwealth
and doubled the same at Weavers-hall.
SHOWS,
THat whereas your Petitioners upon tht securities held forth in two Ordinances
of Parliament, viz. the 13 of May, and 3 of June, 1647. advanced and lent by
way of dubling at Weavers-hall the sum of 484000 l. to be repayed in such
order, course and manner as by the said Ordinances of Parliament is directed
and appointed. And whereas several persons have been satisfied their
proportions of money by them Advanced and Doubled by the Purchase of the late
Bishops Lands, and others which have not Purchased have had some doubts arising
in them touching the time of payment of the remainder: The Parliament did upon
the 16 of December 1652. Enact and Ordain, that the Commissioners of the Excise
for the time being should out of such moneys as should come to their hands upon
the receipts of the Grand Excise immediately from and after the 31 of December
1653. make payment of the said money or of so much as should at that time
remain due and payable, in such order and form as is directed and appointed by
Ordinance of Parliament of the 13 of May 1647. and at the expiration of which
term, application was made to the late Commissioners of the Excise demanding
the said money, and it was alleged by the said Commissioners that they were
restrained from the payment thereof by an Order dated the 31 of December 1653.
of his Highness the Lord Protector and his Council till they should receive
further Order; which restraint we find to continue upon the present
Commissioners to this day. Now for as much as the Parliament did upon the 29 of
June 1649. Enact, that no sum or sums of money advanced and lent remaining
and standing charged upon the Grand Excise, whereof the money now due to your
Petitioners is part, should be taken or transferred from the said Excise upon
any other security whatsoever, nor be paid otherwise then in their proper
course, wherein they first were charged upon any exigent or occasion
whatsoever; and for as much as his Highness the Lord Protector has likewise
declared in the 39 Article for the Government of the Commonwealth, that the
securities given by Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, or any sum or sums
of money payable by the Grand Excise in course, or by any other public
revenue, shall remain firm and good, and not be made void and invallid upon
any pretense whatsoever.

The consideration of all which, together in relation to the honor of his
Highness the Lord Protector and the Parliament, as also the pressing
necessities of your Petitioners, gives us boldness to make these our humble
addresses to your Honors, praying that you would take the premises into your
grave and serious consideration, and to give such further order as may be of
effect for the payment of all your just debts as is directed and appointed by
former Acts and Ordinances of Parliament in that behalf.

And your Petitioners shall for ever pray.

