To the Right Honorable, THE LORDS, In the High Court of Parliament assembled.
THe humble Petition of the Cause of the poor Alms-men of East-ham now
depending before your Lordships, together with a Letter to the Right Honorable
the Lo: Gray of the Chair from the Honorable standing Committee of Chelmsford
in the County of Essex. Shows the difficulty and great charge the poor are
and have been at to get their Pensions paid them, and also how uncertainly it
is to be paid hereafter.

It ought to be paid quarterly; but there is now our Lady day, Midsummer,
Michaelmas, and almost Christmas due. And the poor notwithstanding the help of
the said Committee at Chelmsford, and all other means they could use, have
gotten but 6. l. of the said Lady days rent, 4. l. of Midsummer* and 4. l. of
Michaelmas rent paid them, being but the sum of 14. l. which is all that five
poor men have had to live upon these twelve months, there being justly due
unto them 40. l. per ann. from the Tenant, according to his covenant with the
Lo: keeper, and Mr. Draper, son to the Lady, and Mr. Coniers, Purchaser. And
the Tenant his positive Answer to the Committee, is, That he will pay no more.

They therefore most humbly pray your good Lordships to pass your judgments
upon the point in Law, and matter of fact or equity, submitted to your
Lordships judgment, and give a final determination to their said Cause.

And they as in duty bound shall ever pray, etc.

In further consideration of the said Cause, may it please your good Lordships
to vouchsafe to peruse some particulars of the proceedings thereof.

1. It was brought from the Honorable House of Commons, by Petition to your
Honors, and not dismissed.

2. It was read before your Honors, and referred to the Lo. Brampston, who did
certify that the purchased Land was not of value to the devised Land, and
above 30. miles distant from the Poores Almes-houses. And the point submitted
to by your Lordships judgments, was, Whether the poor might have the first
devised Lands, which was of better value, and more convenient, or must accept
of the other.

3. Your Lordships hearing it again, then the Sense of the House was to all
that heard of it, That your Lordships intended the poor should have their Land
that was first devised: And ordered that the Judges, and the Kings Council
should certify whether your Lordships had power to alter a Decree made by he
Lo: Keeper without an Act in Parliament, which cost the poor some charge, and
trouble to be resolved.

4. The Judges did certify that your Lordships had power to alter any Decree
that was contrary to Equity and good Conscience, as that was.

5. The 10. of August then following, your Lordships appointed to hear the
said Cause again; and as we apprehended it, to judge and determine the point
submitted to your Lordships: and therefore came unprovided of Witnesses, or
Council to open the point in Law, and matter of fact, to your Lordships; Only
one Council to open the point in Law, (conceiving the proofs had been
sufficiently made before) which was, that a personal trust dies with the
person trusted: And that no Purchaser can act that, that the Trusty should
have done in his life time; especially when the Purchaser has confirmed the
trust by his own act, and with his own knowledge, approbation, and joint
consent, as the Lady Kemp did with Sir Giles Allington in this Cause. All these
are at large in Print, if your Lordships please to command them.

6. There no Age, Time, Chronicle, Record, neither in Parliament, nor out of
Parliament, that can show that a Case so honest, just, and lawful, has been
so many years heard, read, debated, and approved of in both Houses; referred,
certified by witnesses and sufficient testimony, that ever was dismissed a
Parliament without relief. But our hopes yet are, that the justice of a
Parliament will not permit so unjust an act as this of the Lady Kemps is, to
pass uncensured, wherein is so much Law and Equity as is in this. If your
Honors make doubt of it, the Witnesses are yet living to testify the truth,
if they may be admitted to speak, as the Lady Kemps have been.

The Copy of a Letter to the Right Honorable the Lord Gray of the Chair (to
the Honorable House of Peers) from the standing Commit at Chelmsford in the
County of Essex.
May it please your Lordship.
THe crying necessities if the poor Almes-men of East-ham, and these
continual Petitions and clamours unto us to help them unto their means (which
is not in our power) enforce us to recommend their sad condition unto the
Honorable House of Peers, from whom is their only hope of redress. And the
situation of the Hospital within this County, does in the apprehension of
these poor men, entitle us to this boldness of interceding for them, and
assisting their Petition with these lines. The case is not new to your
Lordship, having had several debates in that Honorable House. But they make
it appear to us by their present miseries, that the intent of the Testator
Master Breame, who provided a comfortable subsistence for them at the Hospital
doors, is frustrated (as we are informed) by the Decree and other orders of
Chancery, procured by the means of the purchaser the Lady Kemp: which has put
the poor men into a starving condition, whiles they expect their means above
thirty miles off, being not able to keep Bayliffes to gather their Rent that
should feed them, or to sue an untoward Tenant that will pay nothing or very
little, but by compulsion. We shall not need to use importunity to that most
Honorable House in a Cause so just, and for the poor. And therefore humbly
praying your Lordship to acquaint them with this our senes of the case, We
present our selves

CHELMSFORD, 29. Nov. 1644. Your Lordships most humble and devoted Servants,
Tho. Honywood. William Goldingham. Henry Holcroft. Robert Smith. Robert Crane.



