THe Amendment of the Silver Coins, being looked upon as (...) Matter necessary
to be Performed, i^ is thought convenient that this Report should be Printed,
to the en^ that any Persons who have Considered an Affair of this Nature, m^^
(if they please) Communicate the^^ Thoughts, for Rendering the Desig^ here aimed
at more Perfect or Agreeable to the Public Service.

THE PETITION and CASE OF THE Embroiderers, Flourishers, Raisers and Stitchers
of East India Silks, and other Goods, and Stainers thereof,

Together with those that Employ them, And of many others, etc.

TO The Right Honorable THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal, In PARLIAMENT
Assembled.

THE PETITION and CASE OF THE Embroiderers, Flourishers, Raisers and Stitchers
of East India Silks, and other Goods, and Stainers thereof, Together with those
that Employ them, And of many Others; In Relation to the BILL, FOR Prohibiting
the Wearing of East India and Persia Wrought Silks, Bengals, etc.

London, Printed Anno, 1696.

TO The Right Honorable THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal, NOW Assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
May it Please Your Lordships,
WE Humbly Address this Paper to Your Lordships in General: But adventure in an
especial manner ^o Implore the Favor of You, Our good Lords, the Bishops;
because Matters relating to Piety and Virtue are more immediately under the
Care of Your Lordships.

The Late Queen, of Ever Blessed Memory, well knowing, That most Vices have
their Original from Sloth and Idleness, did by Her own Good Example, give great
Encouragement to all kind of Works with the Needle, and otherwise, relating to
your Petitioners respective Employments; where by those of Better Quality might
find Diversion and Employment, and the Meane^ Sort receive an Honest
Maintenance.

There is hardly any Country in the World, where the Women have been so much a
Burden to the Public, as in England; whereas, in other Nations, they
Contribute a large Proportion to the Livelihood of their Families.

But the Countenance Her Sacred Majesty did give to Needle Works of all kinds
has made them for these Six Years last past so Fashionable, and of such General
Use in this Kingdom, that many Thousands of Women do thereby Maintain
themselves their Aged Parents, and Young Children.

By which Means the Weaker Sex have been preserved from those Temptations t^
which Want might otherwise incline them and, by this Houswisery, many Mode^^
Virgins have recommended themselves t^ Frugal and Industrious Husbands.

We must crave leave to lay before Yo^^ Lordships, That the long War Abroa^ the
Civil War in Ireland, and other Acc^dents at Home, have made great Chang^ in
Families heretofore Rich and Prosperous. And we the Principal Employers of
these Embroiderers, Stitchers, etc. in and about London, (if it were fit and
proper) could make it appear to the Parliament, That very many Gentlewomen of
good Birth and Education, have not any Bread or Subsistence, but what they Earn
Daily by their Work, as it is delivered to us.

We have not thought it Dutiful or Decent to trouble either Houses of
Parliament with Complaints or Clamours, Not but that our Numbers are exceeding
great, and our Case full as deplorable as that of the Weavers.

We shall not pretend to Calculate how many Hands are thus employed, but this
in some measure may be guessed at, by Considering, of what general Use, from
the highest, to the lowest, those Indian Goods are, which we improve in England.

If, as some People apprehend, the intended Prohibitions should Occasion the
entire Loss of the East India Trade, we may venture to affirm, That many
Thousand Families will thereby be utterly ruined who have no Other Subsistence
than by bettering those Sort of Goods by their Skill and Fancy.

If the Prohibitions should so Opperate as as to loose the Trade, it would undo
some Hundreds of Families, who live by Printing, Dying, and Staining the
Courser Callicoes. For in such a Case those who set these Men at Work, must be
forced either to buy Callicoes of the Dutch, or Scotch-Cloth at near double the
Price.

Many Thousand Hands are likewise employed in Stitching Callicoes, and
Flourishing Muzslings, which must entirely lose their Work, if these
Prohibitions should destroy the East India Trade; no^^ other kind of Linen
being proper for that Use, but fine Callico and Muzslin.

But may it please your good Lordships, The intended Prohibitions will
certainly ruin yet a greater Number of People, who entirely Subsist, by
Staining, Painting, Printing, Embroidering, Stitching, and Flourishing a great
part of the Ginghams, Plain Damask, Bengals, Taffaties and Satins, and several
other sorts of Goods that come from India.

If it should be Objected, That this Workmanship may be employed upon Silks
Manufactur'd at home; We humbly Answer, That it will not be Worth Our while so
to do, and that it cannot be practicable, because many of the forementioned
Wares, come as Cheap into Our Hands, as the Silk comes into the Weavers Reed.

As for Example, The first Cost to us, of an Indian Silk may be Two Shillings
the Yard, which when We have improved, by Embroidering, Stitching, or
otherwise, may Sell for Nine Shillings per Yard, whereby there is gained for
the Manufacturers Livelihood Seven Shillings per Yard.

A Silk of very little better Substance, either brought from Italy, France, and
Holland, or Wrought at Home, shall Cost Nine Shillings per Yard:
Notwithstanding which, the Indian Silk so improved by us, shall do equal the
Service, and be More acceptable to the Customer than any European Silk.

And, may it please your Lordships, generally Speaking, We can afford Wares so
improved, Cheaper, as Serviceable and more pleasing to the Eye, than any
Silkman, Because among the Silk-Weavers, a good Workman will expect half a
Crown a day, and not work hard from Six in the Morning to Six at Night, whereas
Our People begin at Five, and are at their Needles till Nine at Night: and much
the greatest part of them earn not above Six Penc^ by the Day.

It must without doubt import an^ Country that the prime Cost in Manufactures
wrought from foreign Material^ should be as low as possible.

And those Manufactures are to be encouraged, which Employ many Hands though at
small Wages, because the Profi^ thereby arising, becomes, so, more dispersed
among the Common People.

And it is humbly hoped, such Work may be Countenanced by the State, tha^ Employ
hands which would otherwise b^ Idle.

We who Employ many Thousand F^milies in the second Manufacturing an^ Improving
East India Goods, are ready t^ make it appear before Your Lordships when called
upon, by the Oaths of Credible Persons,

First, That the Prime Cost of ou^ Goods is so low that we can affor^ to let
the Poor Manufacturers be reasonable Gainers by Us.

Secondly, That this Gain is widely dispersed among the Common People, reaching
to Parts very distant from London.

Thirdly, That we Employ some Thousands of Children and Women, who probably
could not otherwise get an honest livelihood.

And, Lastly, May it please Your Lordships, We shall perhaps be able to prove,
That upon the whole, not many fewer Families Subsist by Improving East India
Goods, than by means of the Silk Manufacture.

All which will appear plainly to such as consider, how great the Consumption
is, of these Wares, by both Sexes, and among all Degrees of People.

The Head-Dressings for Women, Waste-Coats, and Night-Caps for Men, Stitched
Quilts, Embroideries, and Flourished Muzslins for both Sexes, with many other
things that might be enumerated, must of Necessity set many Hands at work upon
different Manufactures, of which the Prime Cost of the first Materials at the
East India Sales, is not, one with another, above a third; the other two thirds
being divided among the Poorer sort, and such as Employ 'em.

We are afflicted from the bottom of Our Hearts at the Case of the Poor Weavers
who want Work, but we must Crave leave to lay before Your Lordships, That We
the Employers of these Embroiderers and other Manufacturers are credibly
Informed that the Weavers want of Business does not arise from the Importation
of East India Goods, but from other Causes. For,

First, Before the War, when much greater Quantities of Wrought Silks were
brought from India, they had full Employment and there was no Complaint.

Secondly, The Excessive Price of Raw Silk, and the present Scarcity of Money
(occasioned by the War) are Causes that the Head Weavers cannot set the Poor
to Work.

So long a War must needs afflict all the different Ranks of Men, and the
Weavers bear but their proportion in the Common Calamity.

The Nobility and Gentry pay in Taxes a Fifth part of their Revenues, besides
well nigh double for all Materials of a Foreign Growth.

The Merchant pays more now for Freight and Seamens Wages than ever, besides
the hazard he runs from an Enemy, who has diverted his whole Naval Strength to
a Pyratical War.

The present Want of Species makes Trading dead every where, and we who are now
Petitioners before Your Lordships, have Our full Share in this general Misery;
being forced to keep at Work, and Pay Our People, though Our Goods can have but
little Vent.

But we live in hopes that the High Wisdom, and Valor, of the King, will
restore Our Affairs either by a Peace, or by His Victories Abroad.

And in the mean while we Your Petitioners humbly submit it to the
Consideration of Your Lordships, how far it may be Consistent with Your Piety
and Justice to relieve one sort of Men at the Expense of others, a yet more
helpless People.

We hope the Blessed Memory of Her Sacred Majesty, now Deceased, will prevail
upon Your Lordships to take Our Case into Your Thoughts, and the sad Condition
of such as depend upon Us, who are generally Orphans, Poor Widows, and Young
Virgins, who must be deprived of their Subsistence, if the Prohibition of
East India Goods passes, which is now Proposed in Parliament.

The Hearty Prayers of Widows and Virgins We hope will undoubtedly bring
Success to Your Lordships Councils, and Prosperity to the Kings Arms, who will
be shortly Contending in the Field for the Liberties of Europe.

Not only some Thousands of Women subsist from Work merely occasioned by
East India Goods, as well as very many Families of other Manufacturers, but
many Virgins also have been thereby preserved from Vice and Corruption; And
it is upon this Score chiefly that we presume to Implore Your Lordships
assistance, who are the Principal Protectors of Modesty and Virtue.

The Protection of the Weaker Sex, and the keeping of them within the Bounds
of Modesty and Goodness, have been always the Care of Wise Governments;
because in all Countries the Courage of Men does very much depend upon the
Virtue of their Women: For at all Times, and in all Places, where the Women
have grown Vicious, either through too much Wealth, or too much Want, the Men
have immediately become Fearful and Effeminate.

The Premises considered, We humbly hope Your Lordships will not think it
Advisable, nor for the Public Good, to pass this Bill now Proposed for
Prohibiting the VVearing East India and Persia Wrought Silks, Bengals, etc.

And Your Petitioners, as in Duty bound, shall ever Pray for the Welfare and
Prosperity of your Lordships.

FINIS.

