TO THE Supreme Authority of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND, and The Dominions
and Territories thereto belonging, the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT,
The Humble Petition of the peaceable and Well-affected People of the said
three Nations,
SHOWS,
THat for as much as William Prynne Bencher of Lincolnes Inn, has for many
years last past been an indefatigable and impertinent Scribler, and has almost
nauseated the sober part of these Nations with the stench of his Ca^ion
Pasquils, and Pamphlets, for some whereof he has suffered under the Hierarchy
in the time of the late King, how justly we know not, and for some others
since; and for as much as he is arrived at such an Athletick Habit in the
carreer of writing, that if he may not scrible and print too, he cannot live,
and if he live, he must write, and if he write, it must be against Governments
under which he may live peaceably; and for as much as for fear of the brand of
Idleness, and of Ignorance of the State and Condition of every present
Government, under which he lives, he must scrible something against that
Government, what ever it be; the best, or indifferent, or the worst of
Governments; and for as much as he is old, and not only unfit but unwilling to
be taught better manners; and for as much as he thinks himself wise, and we
other wise; and for as much as Snakes, Toads, and other venomous vermin are by
the wise providence of God useful and necessary to many good purposes; and for
as much as Prisons, Fetters, and Pillories, or worse, are those things he aims
at, or deserves as the only rewards of his sc^iblings;

We Humbly Pray,
1. THat Mr. Prynne may have an Act of Amnesty and Pardon for all his Treasons,
Seditions, Jesuitismes, contempts of Governments, misunderstanding of
Scripture, Law and Reason, misquotations and misapplications of authorities to
his Pasquils, and for his nonsense, contradictions, uncharitableness to good
men, and generally for all the willful and other villainies committed and
perpetrated by him from his birth to this day, as far as they are pardonable
by man, and that they may be pardoned whether he will or no.

2. That if his Conscience dare give him leave, (and you in your wisdoms think
fit to permit it) he may have free leave and liberty to run at the mouth,
(though it be not natural that excrements should come up stairs) and to scrible
still without check or control, because (as we humbly conceive) all the danger
of him is want of vent, the more he is prohibited the more he will do that
which he is forbidnen by Lawful authority, and the more he will think himself
considerable, if opposed by them that he rails at: for we remember an old Rule,
Naturam expellas furca licet usque recurret.

3. That no Subjects of this Commonwealth may waste or consume their money in
buying his books, their time in reading or answering them, except only Asinegos
of the like female reason, and unhallowed principles with himself.

4. That in case your Honors should enact the particulars before mentioned,
and Mr. Prynne should grow angry, that he has no Antagonist, or that such a
famous scribler, and such a Cock of the Game as he is, should not have
opportunity to become bloody with the blood of others, and no man regard him,
he may have liberty to draw his own blood, and to write against himself, as he
has already often done, ( viz.) That William may have Liberty to write
against Prynne, Prynne against the Esquier, the Esquier against the Utter
Barrister, the Utter Barrister against the Bencher of Lincolnes Inn, and
retrograde, till he himself (when he shall become himself) thinks fit to have
leisure to desist and to be quiet.

In the year of Mr. Prynnes latest excrements, and in Anno Domini, 1659. And
your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc*

