To the Right Honorable, the Trustees of the English Nation Assembled in
PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of diverse Englishmen, in the behalf of
themselves, and the whole Nation.
SHOWS,
THat whereas your Honors in pursuance of the duty of your high place and
calling, have solemnly undertaken and entered into various engagements before
God and the World, for to endeavor the restoring of this Nation unto her just
Freedom, Rights and Happiness.

And whereas your Petitioners looking into the true state of things do find,
That notwithstanding any thing whatsoever, that has been, as yet, done, or
attempted by this or any precedent Parliament, in the behalf of this Nation:
and after so much English blood spilt under that pretense; The Nation is still
suffered to remain (as it has done almost these six hundred years) in
Captivity to the Right, Title, Exercise, and disgraceful Badges of the Normane
(pretended) Conquest over us, as is manifest by the tenor of that Title by
which (with the consenting sufferage of our Parliaments, Laws, and Lawyers, as
yet un-repeal'd) the Crown of England is still enjoyed, and by a great part
both of the matter and form of those Laws, by which we are still governed.

Now forasmuch as until the Bands of this our National Captivity be
dissolved, all else that is done or endeavored, (how gloriously so ever
pretending) being all terminated in the abatement of the Royal Prerogative,
and is 1 not only of lower concernment, as to the service of this Nation, but
2 also very irregular and insufficient for atteining the Ends proposed; the
first, for that is undeniably less contrary unto Honor and true Freedom in a
Nation, for to be under arbitrary Government, legitimately instituted (as were
the Jews under their anointed Kings, and the Romans under their Dictators) then
under the most moderated Sovereignty that springs from and is the exercise of a
Conquest; the latter, for that while this Kingdom (or the relation betwixt our
Kings and People) continues grounded on the Conquest; the Sovereignty cannot
legally nor (consequently) validly be so moderated, but that the Supreme Laws
will be still (not In all public Acts and Writings emitted in this Kingdom
since the (pretended) Conquest, the Honor of the King has bin constantly set
before the Good of the People, where e're they are conjoined.
Salus Populi, as has been lately, and not till lately, fondly talked in this
Kingdom, but) the Honor and Will of the Prince, as sufficiently appears (to
omit other Testimonies) from the fate and issue of some Acts of Parliament in
K. Edward the 3d time, which See Master Pryns Sov. Pow. part. 2. p. 38. and 39.
and the Book of Stat.
fell to the ground, and were nullified by the Kings bare Authority joined with
the consent of the Lords, for being prejudicial to the Royal Honor and
Prerogative, as which are and will be the Fundamental and Supreme Law in this
Kingdom, while it continues so grounded as abovesaid. And for as much as the
said Title of Conquest and Depravation of our Laws, are not only Destructive
(while they continue in force over us) to the Honor, Freedom, and Happiness
of our Nation, but also contrary to the Fundamental Constitution of this
Kingdom, as being usurpantly and perfidiously introduced; for that (according
to the unanimous testimony of Records) the Normane Duke was by this Nation
admitted to the Crown, in respect of his Claim by Saint Edward's If any object
(as many do) that the Normane Right and Title must be either by Conquest, or
none at all, for that the Title of Legacy was insufficient, It is answered,
that the Legacy of the deceased King joined with the Nations Admission (which
followed) was equivalent to an Act of Parliament, and so sufficient to regulate
and dispose the Crown, as no rational man can deny.
Legacy joined with his Victory over his Competitor Harold, and upon his Oath
to preserve our Laws and Liberties, and not otherwise; Insomuch that the Title
of England's Conqueror may as justly be affixed to the Names of Henry the
Fourth, Edward the Fourth, and Henry the Seventh (who all made good their
claims by Victories over their Competitors) as to the name of the said Duke.

And for that also these Abuses are not only thus prejudicial and injurious
to our Nation, but also very Derogatory to the Honor of our Kings and to their
Interest in the Peoples affections, as founding their Right and Rule on an
usurpant original, and on the Ruins of the Honor and Freedom of this Nation,
and thereby casting the seeds of irreconciliable hatred betwixt them; Insomuch,
that there is none in this Kingdom can stand up in the maintenance of these
Injuries, without declaring themselves open Enemies, and the most flagitious
Traitors both to their King and Country, that ever were.

And for as much as it has now pleased Almighty God to put that power and
opportunity into your hands for the Redress of these Evils, which was never
heretofore afforded to your Predecessors, and that ye are now upon a Treaty
with his MAJESTY, for new forming the Fabric of this State.

May it therefore please this Honorable House, now at length (before it is too
late) to take such order, That our Kings may no longer reign over us by the
Right or Pretense of Conquest, thereby trampling under foot our chief Rights
and Happiness, But that the Title of the Normane Blood unto the Crown of
England, may be grounded (as of right it ought to be) on the Legacy of St.
Edward, joined with the Nations Admission granted (and to be still granted)
upon the Coronation Oath taken, and not otherwise: And that the Right and Title
of the said (pretended) Conquest, being thus abolished out of this Kingdom, the
disgraceful and needless Badges thereof still remaining among us,
(particularly in the matter and language of our Laws) may, in convenient time,
be likewise redrest, whereby the English Nation may now at length (after so
many ages unjust sufferance) be restored from out of the Quality, Title, and
Vesture, of a Captive, under a foreign blood, unto her just Honor, Freedom,
and Happiness, and that so (through your worthy endeavors, in thus putting an
end to your Countries long Bondage) there may be laid amongst us a real and
lasting Foundation of glory to God on high, of Peace in this Kingdom, and of
good will betwixt Prince and People, which otherwise is altogether impossihle
to be done.

And your Petitioners, with the whole Nation and their Posterity, shall ever
pray, etc.
Imprimatur,

G. M.

LONDON, Printed for R. L. September 29, 1648.


