To the Right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS now assembled in PARLIAMENT. The
Humble Petition of the Prisoners in the Fleet.
Shows,
THat there are many ancient and late presidents remaining with the Warden of
the Fleet, That Prisoners of all sorts in his custody whether upon Action or
Execution have from time to time upon occasion had and obtained Writts of
Habeas Corpus out of the Courts of Common Law and Chancery, to go abroad to
prosecute their Law suites, and compound with Creditors, and to provide for
subsistence: Which Writts have been granted successively by the most learned
Judges, as also by the Lord Chancellours and Lord Keepers of the great Seal in
their several times without in termission, until now of late that the Judges
of the Common Pleas have refused to grant the same, which will tend to the
utter undoing of many of your Petitioners, howbeit these sad times might rather
crave a more merciful and charitable inclination toward the afflicted and
distressed.

Wherefore your Petitioners are most humble Suitours to your Honors that your
said Petitioners may be allowed the former favors and benefit of the said
writs of Habeas Corpus according as heretofore they have anciently and usually
had.

And your Petitioners shall have cause to pray, etc.
Breife Reasons for granting Writs of Habeas Corpus to Prisoners in Execution,
especially in the Fleet.
1. Anciently the Warden of the Fleet might without Writ send any Prisoners
abroad with their Keepers upon all occasions, till the Statute of 1 Rich. 2.
Cap. 12. restreyned him, unless he had the Kings Writ or command for it.

2. They are Prerogative Writts or Writts of Grace which the King never denies
to any of his distressed Subjects upon just occasions: Either for his own
service or for their preservation as well in their Persons as Estates. And
therefore the Exchequer frequently grants them to the Kings Accomptants
Debtors and Farmers in Execution, for the raising and levying of His Majesty's
Debts and Revenues. And the Chancery awardeth them to remove Prisoners into the
Country out of the Fleet when the infection is in London; and when they have
Law Suits, to Solicit their own causes.

3. The Fleet is a special Prison of the Kings for civil matters, As the
Tower of London is for Criminal, and thither are men committed for Debts to
the King and for contempts of Orders and Decrees in Chancery and all other
Courts of Equity. And if any other Prisoners for Debt be removed thither, they
have ever been allowed the privilege and benefit of those Writts as well as the
Kings Prisoners.


