TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF PEERS Now assembled in Parliament.
The Humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders and others
Inhabitants of the County of Oxford.
Shows,
THat the Petitioners being very sensible of those pressures under which the
whole Kingdom growneth; and having ever since this happy Parliament began,
with patience waited for a final redress, and a perfect reformation of the
Church and State; seeing much has been indeavored for the ease of our
grievances, and much more might have been done, had it not been (as we humbly
conceive) for the opposition of the ill affected parties of Popish Lords and
Bishops; as not being the first in this way of Petitioning, are constrained to
represent to your Honors our just fears and distractions, arrising from that
Barbarous and bloody rebellion in Ireland, wherein innocent blood of many
thousand Protestants has been cruelly and inhumainely shed, without respect
to Age or Sect, threatening the subvertion of the Protestant Religion, and the
irreparable loss of that Kingdom; to the emboldning of the Popish and
malignant parties of this Kingdom to the like attempt if opportunity be put
into their hands, which may produce (which God forbid) as sad effects in this,
from the not passing the Bill for impressing of Soldiers, whereby a sufficient
aid may be sent, to the speedy relief of our Brethren in Ireland, from the
late unparalleld breach of the Privilige of Parliament, from the not putting of
this Kingdom into a posture of defense, and the Cinque Ports into safe hands
in whom the King and Parliament may confide; notwithstanding the many Petitions
put up in this behalf: from the Papists not being disarmed, and forsaking
their own houses, and privately living in places where they are not known:
which justly casts jealousies into us, that they have in hand some desperate
plot as yet undiscovered: from the great increase of Arminianisme in our
University, and the insolency of that party: From the not punishing of
Delinquents; and from the continuance of many corrupt and scandalous Ministers,
which grow more impudent and incorrigible by the delay of punishment: Lastly,
from the not concenting of this Honorable House with the House of Commons, in
the passing of many motions for the common good. All which have been the cause
of the total decay of Trade and want of coin throughout the Kingdom, to the
great impoverishing thereof, and without which it will not be able long to
subsist.

We therefore your Potitioners, do humbly pray, that a speedy remove all of
these our grievances with the causes; and of the Votes of the Popish Lords and
Bishops out of this Honorable House, which (we humbly conceive) are not
consistent with the Honor of the King and Parliament, and the safety of this
Kingdom, and your Petitioners to the utmost hazard of our lives and estates
will be ready to defend the King and Parliament against all opposers whatsoever.
The Heads of the Petition.
1. Thanks, to be given to the Lords for voting down the Bishops, with our
earnest desire that they would do as much for the Popish parties.

2. That our sea Towns, Forts, and Castles, may be speedily guarded and put
into the custody of such, which in whom we may safely confide.

3. That the Kingdom may be put into a posture of defense.

4. That for the better disarming of Papists an oath may be administered, not
only to the Masters of Families, but to their Servants and Tennants, for the
better finding out where their arms are, since the former courses of searching
only, are most commonly frustrated.

5. That all Papists may be enjoined to keep their own houses in these
dangerous times, that they may not have their meettings in London and
elsewhere, whereby they may know each others minds, and so enabled to put in
execution their dangerous designs.

6. That they would be pleased to have an especial eye unto the University of
Oxford, that that Seminary might not be overwhelmed with Popery,
Arminianisme, and superstition, that their Alters, Images, and Crucifixes, may
be demolished, that Governors of Colleges may be questioned, wherefore they
did not demolish them, according to the order set forth by the House of Commons.

7. That a Preaching Ministry may be planted throughout the whole diocese,
since there are near upon 280. Parishes, and not above thirty Ministers that
are constant Preachers.

8. That they would be pleased to take into consideration the multiplicity of
dignities and preferments that some Heads of Houses, every where you shall
find some to enjoy a rich Lordship worth many 100. per annum, a Denery, a
Preband, and two fat Parsonages, and seldom Preach at either.

9. That further care may be taken for the suppressing of the Rebels in
Ireland.

London, printed for F. L. and W. W. 1641.


