TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS AND COMMONS In the high Court of PARLIAMENT
now assembled.
THE HUMBLE PETITION of the well affected PRENTICES and Yong-men of the City of
London and Suburbs.
In humble manner shows,
THat your former gracious acceptations of Petitions from persons of as mean
quality as our selves, together with your late kind imbracement of that
Petition from our Masters, and others of eminent quality (for which we present
our humble thanks) has concited us (though in regard of our present condition
not so much considerable) to address our selves in all humility to this
Honorable Assembly (whom we conceive the only means under God for our
redress) beseeching you to endeavor a period to these ruinating distractions.

And though the present calamity does not so immediately reflect upon your
Petitioners, yet we considering the loss of so many of our fellows lives, and
the daily hazard the rest are exposed unto, and foreseeing the face of our own
ruin in our Masters present condition, as also prizing our Parents and friends
loves and livelihood, as dear as our own, holding our selves engaged by the
Laws of Conscience and Nature, to be no less Solicitors for the bleeding
Miseries of the Church and State, in regard (though Servants) we are Subjects,
and humbly conceive our selves concerned herein.

We come therefore in the still voice to embowel our grievances, and zealous
desires before you, not presuming to dictate to your graver judgments, but
humbly desire you to pardon our boldness in petitioning; and unanimously
beseeching you to consider the present distractions, the continual and
increasing violation of our Religion by Papists and Sectaries, the breach of
our known Laws, the invasion of the Subjects Liberty, and general decay of
Trade.

Reflecting also with serious thoughts upon those inevitable dangers that hover
over our heads, usherd in by a Civil unnatural and bloody War, whose
effects are the impartial destruction of Christians, the effusion of much
innocent blood, the impoverishing and dispeopling of the Kingdom, and exposing
the body of the State to the merciless Tyranny of Famine, Sickness, Invasion,
the Prodroms of an universal confusion.

All which (better known to your apprehensions) we humbly desire you to
ponder, and leave no just way unatempted which may conduce to the settlement of
the differences that the undiscerning Sword be not Vmpire to decide
controversies of so near concernment, neither give audience to the fementors
of this War, whose only aim (we fear) is to prey upon the Lives and Livings
of his Majesty's loving Subjects, that so the Gospel of Peace need not be
maintained by War, but that these semented joints of Church and State may
hold firmer, the bond of Unity, to the glory of God, the good of his Majesty,
the preservation of Parliament, the only happiness of this Kingdom, and
enablement for a supply of the necessities of our destressed brethren of
Ireland.

And your Petitioners as in duty bound, shall daily pray for a blessing upon
your consultations. To which we subscribe our hands and hearts, each ready to
sacrifice his life for the accomplishment hereof.

London Printed for John Johnson, in the year. 1642.


