To the Right Honorable the Lords in the High-Court of Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of the Parishioners of Ackeliffe in the County Palatine of
Durham. April 6. 1642.
Humbly shows,
THat the Petitioners have a long time been destitute of a Conscientious
Minister to the great prejudice of their souls, and grief and sorrow of
heart, and about the Month of June last their Vicar Doctor Carr, who was
Chaplain to the late Earl of Straford, and Prebend of Durham, died, and about
September last, M. Daniell Carwardine was nominated for a Clerk to the said
Vicaridge of Ackeliffe by M. Smart senior, Prebend of Durham, according to the
Customs and Statutes of that Cathedral Church, whereby your Petitioners were
exceeding joyful in hopes and assurance that their souls should have been
committed to the charge of one so able and conscientious, and one whom they in
their souls approve of and desire; but the Prebends of the said Church refused
to confirm the said M. Carwardine so nominated as aforesaid, whereupon your
Lordships were petitioned, and the said Custom exactly proved, by the
testimonies of Nicholas Hobson about 90. years of age, and Robert King in
October last, since which time the great affairs of the Kingdom not admitting
the full and final determination thereof, M. Smart took institution for the
said Vicaridge himself in favor to your Petitioners, and for preserving his
own rights, least the said Uicaridge should fall into the Lapse: And the
Bishop of Durham did write Letters directed to the Churchwardens and others,
appointing M. Carwardine to officiate in the said Parish as Curate until the
business were determined by your Lordships, and thereupon M. Carwardine did
enter, and was admitted.

But so it was that one George Leake who was Curate under Doctor Carr, who
daily goes from Alehouse to Alehouse, where he continues drinking whole
days and nights, and when he comes from Church justifies others to go with
him, being a most scandalous, deboist, drunken man, has violently entered into
the said Church, locked up the Pulpit-doore, broke violently into the said
Uicaridge-house, expelled the said M. Carwardine without any lawful authority,
so as your Petitioners are deprived of a godly, learned Preacher, and the said
Leake, to the great sorrow of your Petitioners, and scandal of Religion does
officiate the place.

May it therefore please your good Lordships to commiserate the sad condition
of your Petitioners, and by an express Order of your Lordships House settle
the said M. Carwardine in the Vicaridge of Ackeliffe, or to appoint the said M.
Carwardine to officiate according to the former appointment of the Bishop of
Durham, and direction of M. Smart until the full determination of the
business before your Lordships, and that the said George Leake may be summoned
before your Lordships to answer such his ryotous disturbance and other his
misdemeanors aforesaid,

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

