TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the House of LORDS, now assembled in Parliament.
The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of LAMBETH. Presented February 20. 1642.
Shows,
THat ever since Captain Andrews Company under the Command of Colonel
Manwayring, came to Lambeth-house, they have carried themselves very
insolently, by threatening speeches; break^ng the Church windows, and
terrifying the Officers of the Church, that they were constrained to ^hut up
the Church doors, and hindering the Minister in the burial of the Dead: And
upon the last ^ords day, 4. or 5. of them came into the Church in an unreverent
manner, with their Hatts on their heads, and saying to the Parrishioners make
have to your Porrage, And one Edward Jones, an Inhabitant of the said Town
(having the Lord Generals Coullours there about him) being in the Church, one
of them asked him, why he stood there to hear that fellow (meaning the
Mini^ter) stand babbling there in the whores smock: Thereupon the said Jones
answered, that by the grace of God, he would stand there (it being in the time
of Divine Service) and hear it, and if they did not like it, they may get them
forth; And thereupon they pressed upon him with their Swords drawn in the
Church, and said that if he would not help them to fetch him out (meaning the
Minister) they would fetch him and the Minister out by the ears: And thereupon
Jones endeavored to thrust them out of the Church, whereupon they did fetch
more Company, and fell upon him and wounded him cruelly in the Churchyard, and
one of them called to his fellows asking them, why do you stand with your
Swords, saying that they had better weapons, and thereupon they rann and
fetched their Muskets, and shot one Thomas Coe a Servant quiet dead (in the
Churchyard) And one of their Officers cried out Shoot, shoot whereupon another
Soldier shot Jones quite through the thigh, who is since dead. And they having
laded a great piece of Ordnance, with scattering shot, and put the mouth of it
out of the gate, intending to discharge it at a great multitude of the
Inhabitants, which would have destroyed Men, Woman, and Children, in great
abundance, if it had not been prevented by the Suckler, who staid the Gunners
hand from giving fire. And Doctor Laytons wife (her Husband being house keeper)
hearing that one of the Inhabitants was killed; and another hurt, said it was
no matter if five Hundred more were slain; And the night before, Doctor
Laytons man threatened our Pastor Docter Featly, and said publickely that if he
came to dispense the word on the morrow (being the Lords day) he were best to
come featly indeed.

Whereas it is objected that some of the Parishioners of Lambeth should first
abuse the Soldiers. It is Humbly certified that Captain Temple and his Troop
lying billetted at Lambeth, There was a falling out betwixt them and the
Red-coates, and they called the Troopers Parliament Rogues, and that they did
ride about to cheat the Country. And this is testified by David Hughes, Robert
Dolley, Jane Game, Alice Trevitt, Dorothie Pierce, with others.

They therefore Humbly pray your Honors to take their great sufferings into
your serious Consideration, and to afford them speedy releife, they being in
great and hourly danger of the^r lives, their Wives and Children; And that the
said Company may be forthwith removed and the man-slayers responsable to such
Legal Trials, As your Honors shall think fit.

For which they shall ever Pray for your Honors happy Proceedings.
The Answer of the LORDS to the said Petition. Tuesday February, 21. 1642.
Upon the reading of the said Petition the Earl of Manchester presently
returned this Answer from the Lords, Comanding them to enquire the names of
the man slayers, and that being done* they granted A warrant for the
apprehending of the party that killed the man, and to Commit him to Prison, the
Surgeon coming there and certifiing the Lords, that the other party wounded
was not likely to live, they Granted a second warrant to apprehend him that
wounded him, who is now in custody in the messengers hand and to be Committed to
the jail, (in regard the party wounded is since dead) and the Law to proceed
against them.

Likewise they have granted A warrant for the remooving of Captain Andrews
and his Company, which was done forthwith, and another to be placed there in
his stead, according to the desires of the Petitioners.

LONDON, Printed for J. T. 1643.


