To the Supreme Authority of England, the Commons in Parliament assembled. The
humble Petition of many freeborn people. Together with a Copy of the Order of
the Commitment of five of the Petitioners, viz. M^. Th^mas Prince, and Mr.
Samuel Chidley in the Gate House. Capt. Tailor, Mr. William Larner, and Mr.
Jves in Newgate. As also some Observations upon the said Order.
Shows,
THat as the ground of the late war between the King and you, was a contention
whether he or you should exercise the supreme power over us, so its vain to
expect a settlement of peace amongst us, until that point be clearly and
justly determined, that there can be no liberty in any Nation where the Law
giving power is not solely in the people or their Representatives.

That upon your Invitation, the people have hazarded their lives, consumed
their estates, lost their trades, and weltered in blood to preserve that your
just authority, and therein their own freedoms.

That notwithstanding, for attributing the supreme authority of this Nation to
this Honorable House, which alone represents the people, we have been
accounted the off-scou^ing of the land, we have had our Petitions burned, our
persons imprisoned, and many other ways abused.

That when the ears of the chosen deliverers were stopped, the Law of Nature
enjoined us to address our selves to the Army, from whom we had reason to
expect relief, according to their many promises and engagements.

That those promises seeming to be wholly forgotten by the ruling part of the
Army; it pleased God to raise up the spirits of some Agents therein, to
consider of an agreement of the people upon grounds of common right; and to
offer it to the General Council of the army for their concurrence; the matter
wereof (seriously debate being had thereupon) was so far from being
dis-allowed, that a necessity of ending this Parliament at the day prefixed
therein, wae concluded; the providing for a constant succession of Parliaments
thought necessary, that the people should be more equally represented was
confessed; and a certain rule to be set between the people and their
representative was judged fit, and the supreme authority of this nation
acknowledged by that Council to be where the Agreement places it: And
particularly Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Commissary General Jreton
declared, that in case they did not Act for the settlement of those freedoms,
yet they would never oppose.

That those Agents in further discharge of their duty to their Country; did not
long since present unto this Honorable House the said Agreement, with a
petition relating thereunto.

That the same Agreement, with another Petition, was lately offered to the
General, by a worthy Commander, and diverse Officers of the Army, at the first
general Rendezvous near Ware: and all that was done in a further prosecution,
was a peaceable proposing of the same Petition, to the Soldiery, for their
concurrence: and we wonder that we should now be reputed mutinous, to offer a
Petition to the Soldiery when it was esteemed formerly good service to draw
them to an engagement.

That notwithstanding all this clear open and legal dealing, in those our
friends, for the performance of their solemn engagements, both they and we,
who adhered to them, are reproached and slandered with imputations of plotting
and designing not only the Kings death, in a base murderous way; and of
imbru^ing the nation in blood, but of strange endeavors to level all men's
estates, and subvert all Government and although the scandals are but the same
which the open enemies formerly cast upon your selves, yet our just endeavors
for freedom, are so ill resented by this means, that some of us are
imprisoned, and others threatened to be proc^eded against as persons disaffected
to this Honorable House, whereas the true object of our enemies malice is,
that authorit^e of yours, which we labor to preserve. Yet such is our sad
condition, as our actions and intentions are in like manner mis-apprehended by
you, though we doubt not but the Agreement duly weighed, will demonstrate all
such reproaches to be only the invention of wicked men to ex^sperate you
against us.

And therefore we beseech you in your bowels of compassion to an oppressed
people, to review and debate impartially the particulars of that Agreement of
the people, wherein many thousands have already concurred: And to suffer us by
your countenance, to use our Native Liberty, in moving the people for an happy
union amongst themselves, in settling those foundations of Common freedom; that
thereby this honorable house, may with more assurance of the peoples
assistance, proceed forthwith (without attending for the assent and concurrence
of any other) to deliver them from all kind of tyranny and oppression.

And that you would be pleased to account of the sufferings of our dear fellow
Commoners Co. Ayers, Ca. Bray, and others at the several Rendezvous of the
Army, only for their just and peaceable persuance of Freedom.

And especially that you will make inquisition for the blood of that Soldier,
viz. Richard Arnall of Col. Lilburns Regiment, which was shot to death near
Ware.

And we further desire, that without prejudice against our persons, it might be
laid to heart, that the large effusion of blood, and the many spoils made in
the late War, cannot be justified upon any other ground, then the settlement of
those freedoms contained in the Agreement, and in your just endeavors to clear
and secure those you may expect the blessing of peace and prosperity,

And your petitioners shall pray.
Die Martis. November, 1647.
Resolved, that Thomas Prince, Cheesemonger, and Samuel Chi^^ey be forthwith
committed prisoners to the prison of the Gate House, there to remain prisoners
during the pleasure of this House, for seditious and contemptuous avowing and
prosecuting of a former Petition and paper annexed, styled an agreement of the
people, formerly adjudged by this house, to be distructive to the being of
Parliaments, and fundamental government of this kingdom.

Hen. El. Cl. Par. Dom. Com.

By virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, these are to require you to
receive from the Sergeant at arms his deputy or deputies, the bodies of
Thomas Prince, Cheese monger, and Samuel Chidley into the prison of the Gate
house Westminster, and them safely to detain as your prisoners, until the
pleasure of the house be signified to you to the contrary, and for so doing
this shall be your Warrant.

William Lenthall, Speaker.
Dated 23. November. 1647.
To the Keeper of the prison of the Gate house of Westminster.
O men of England that love your freedom* I beseech you observe the injustice,
arbitrarynesse, and tyranny of this your Parliament, who have invited you, and
caused your dear friends to expend their blood upon pretenses to deliver you
from injustice and arbitrary powers. S^e their Rmon. of May 26. 1642.

1. Observe their palpable injustice in stiling an humble, rational and just
petition (presented in a peaceble manner) a seditous and contemptuous, avowing
a former petition, these men declared formerly, that they ought to receive
petitions, though against things established by law, and now when a petition
striks at their corrupt interest, its seditious because its against a vote of
theirs, and what damnable endeavors here are to deceive you Commons, they
represent these men's petition as a contempt of them when they rendered them the
highest honor in their petition.

2 Observe their injustice in committing these your brethren without laying any
crime to their charge, by the law, sedition nor faction is no crime, for no man
knows what is sedition or faction, but they put unknown reproachful terms
upon their just petition to deceive you, and let me inform you, that these
treacherous dissemblers that put these infamous terms upon the petition, durst
not suffer this petition to be printed with their votes concerning it, for when
they ordered the votes should be printed, an honest member moved that the
pe^ition it self might be printed with them, that the people might see the
reason of such votes, and these Hypocrites opposed it with rage and fury, will
ye be always thus abused O ye Commmons.

3. Observe the falsehood and lies in their vote. First, these petitioners did
not avow any former petition or paper annexed, as this vote say they did. 2ly.
The House did never adiudge the Agreement to be distructive to the being of
Parliaments, etc. but only the petition of the Agents of the Army, they never
durst debate the Agreement, lest they should be forced by the strength of
reason to consent to it, they shut their eyes and will not see, for many of the
greatest opposers have confessed its just, but they love not the light because
their deeds are evil. But seeing it was never* debated in one particular,
could a judgment be passed upon it, and have you not a wise, faithful
Parliament, that would not debate the particulars of such great concernment to
settle a peace.

4. Observe how these men exercise an absolute tyranny over you, ruling by
their crooked wills, and damnable lusts, they commit your fellow Commoners to
prisons amongst Thieves and Murderers, only for begging for their fredoms, and
this during their pleasure, that is, till their base malicious humors be
satisfied. According to law and justice, imprisonment is only for safe custody
of persons, until the appointed day of trial in the ordinary Courts of
justice, and it was the Council table and High Commission that ruled by their
lusts, which imprisoned men during their pleasure, and yet these Apostates dare
in the face of the sun proclaim their wickedness and a^bitrarinesse, by
committing men during their lust. Certainly their consciences tell them that
these faithful, honest petitioner did not offend, for if they had known any
offense, they would have been ready to have proceeded against them, or reserved
them for trial which they intend not. O ye Commons of England! can you still
bear it? to see your freedoms undermined, and your brethren abused, and
presidents made daily for inslaving you to the wills and lusts of tyrants, when
will you show yourselves English men? O now! now is the opportunity. O! that
you might see even in this your days the things that belong to your peace and
freedom, before they be hid from your eyes.

Vale.

