TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS AND COMMONS NOW IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED. The
humble Petition of the Knights, Gentry, Ministers, and Freeholders, of the
County of York, now met at the Assizes there holden.
Shows;
THat our oppressed hearts, in the midst of fears, sends up daily prayers to
Heaven, for your unwearyed cares and endeavors for the public safety, and in
our saddest apprehensions, we first offer our hearty prayers for you, it being
most just to prefer those to our selves, who for our sakes neglect themselves,
and all particular interests, and thereby raise in us a firm confidence (by
Gods blessing) to receive from you a continual stream of prosperous Counsels
and resolutions, for the benefit of this State and Kingdom, which being
apparently sick of general distraction, we humbly submit to your wisdoms
and directions, whether there be any cure or remedy under heaven, so proper and
natural, as concurrence and unity, which we have still observed to be the
aim and scope of all your proceedings, and therefore in pursuance thereof,
lately petitioned his Majesty to declare such fit means and expedients, as
may take away all distances and misunderstandings (the copy whereof, together
with his Majesty's answer, we send hereunto annexed) which having not produced
any new overtures or expedients not formerly declared, (as was hoped) we
likewise address our selves to your wisdoms, (that as your determinations
do always tend to the general happiness,) So you would please to declare
such fit means as may take away all distances and misunderstandings, in such
manner as conduces to that end, and consists with the honor of his Majesty,
and the assured safety of the true Protestant Religion, and his Majesty's
Dominions wherein we are most confident that your wisdoms will equally
provide, that neither his Majesty's just prerogative, nor the declared
liberties of the subject, of which the privilege of Parliament is the most
eminent) shall in the least measure suffer diminution; All which particulars,
by the Protestation generally taken in this County, we are bound to maintain:
And your Petitioners (who acknowledge and give hearty thanks for the excellent
Laws and freedom which we have received and enjoyed since the beginning of
your Assembly,) shall daily pray that the progress of your endeavors may give
perfection to your great work and pious intentions; And that the Almighty
would crown you and them with all blessings and continued protections.

Martis 12 Aprilis 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Petition be forthwith Printed
and published.

Jo. BROWN Cler. Parliamentor.

Printed at London by E. P. for John Wright, dwelling in the Old Bailey. 1642.


