To the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons Assembled in the High Court of
PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, sitting at WESTMINSTER. The Humble Petition of diverse
Well-affected Citizens of the City of London, and parts adjacent. Together with
a Paper annexed, of their Humble desires, for the allaying and removal of the
jealousies and discontents, the visible causes of our sad Divisions, and
Distractions.
Humbly showing,
THat the many Treacherous Plots and Contrivances working by the Common enemy
in some parts, their open appearing again in Arms in other parts of this
Kingdom, their great hopes, and high assurances they boast of generally by a
second War, to obtain their wicked ends, the destruction of this Parliament,
together with the ruin of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; And the sad
Divisions and Distractions which your Petitioners do at the same time (to their
great grief of heart) behold amongst those who have formerly been engaged with
you in one and the same Cause, now weakening their hands, and Counsels,
alienating their affections one from another, and fitting them only to be a
prey to the Common Enemy; do necessitate your Petitioners out of their
abundant sense, and sorrow for these things, to open and unfold the visible
causes thereof to this Honorable Court in the Paper hereunto annexed, together
with those things your Petitioners humbly conceive may be healing remedies.

Therefore your Petitioners do humbly pray, that this Honorable Court will
take the said Paper annexed into their serious consideration, and that they may
be so understood, as whatsoever is therein presented, is out of the sincerity
of your Petitioners hearts, and their zeal to the Honor and Happiness of the
PARLIAMENT and KINGDOM, and wholly with submission to your Honors Wisdom, and
Determination: And if by what is suggested therein, your Petitioners shall in
the least measure be isntrumental to the healing of those wounds which are
made by the Divisions among us; as they shall have great cause to bless God,
so they shall for ever acknowledge the wisdom and goodness of this Honorable
Court, and be further encouraged to adheere thereunto with their lives and
estates.

And Your Petitioners etc.
THat the present great divisions and jealousies in this Kingdom, in referrence
both to Church and State, among those that have been formerly United and
engaged in the cause of the Parliament and Kingdom, have given great advantage
to the Malignant party, to make their late Insurrestions, and to lay the
foundation of a Second War; and that the jealousies and discontents throughout
the Kingdom, are such, as Principally concern Parliament, City, and Army.

Those concerning the Parliament seem to arise from apprehensions and fears.
I. THat the Parliament intend not really to settle Religion according to the
word of God, and the solemn League and Covenant, nor the execution of Justice
upon Delinquents; but that what they do therein, arises more out of the
several Exigents they are brought into, then out of a love, and liking of the
things themselves, and full resolutions to maintain them.

II. That they intend to alter the Ancient and Fundamental Government of this
Kingdom, by King, Lords, and Commons.

III. That they intend not only the necessary continuance of the Army at
present, and to make use thereof for subduing the Common enemy, and quieting
the distempers of the Kingdom, but to Govern the Kingdom by an Army, to be
perpetually maintained to that end; and consequently, the continuing of Excise
and Taxations.

IV. That they intend not really to make a Peace with the King, though they
might have it with safety and security to Religion, Law, and Liberty.

For Remedy whereof, it is earnestly desired,
I. THat the Parliament would please fully and effectually, to declare their
sincere resolutions to perfect the work of Reformation according to the word of
God, and their solemn League and Covenant, with execution of Justice upon
Delinquents, and their resolutions to remain steadfast and unmovable therein,
notwithstanding any pressure of a Popish and Prelatick party, and the influence
of any other party or forces whatsoever.

II. That they publish to the Kingdom their resolution not to alter the
Government thereof by King, Lords, and Commons.

III. That the Parliament will proceed with all cleernesse and possible speed,
to obtain a Peace upon terms that are secure for Religion, Law, and Liberty,
and for those that have adventured their lives and estates for the Parliament.
For that end, that the Treaty the Houses have resolved upon at the Isle of
Wight, or shall resolve upon at any other place, may be so managed, that it
may be a real Demonstration to the Kingdom, that as the Parliament will not
recede from the grounds of their Cause, so there shall be no other just cause
given, either by delay, or obstruction, to a safe and well-grounded Peace on
their parts.

IV. That upon such a settlement, timely care may be taken of easing the people
of the Burden of Armies and Taxations, and encouragement given to the Advance
of Trade.

Iealousies concerning the City.
I. THat they seem to recede from their former sound Principles, upon which
they have engaged with the Parliament, in their earnest pressing the Parliament
for Peace, for a Personal Treaty, and the Kings coming to London, without the
like expressions of their zeal for the Reformation of Religion, Freedom of
Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject to be provided for in that Treaty, and
secured in the settlement of Peace, whereby they have too much gratified and
strengthened the Common enemy in their late destructive designs.

II. That the former readiness of the City to discover the secret Plots of the
Malignant party, and to oppose them when they are discovered both in City and
Country, seems to be much abated, and that the listing of horse and foot, and
preparation of arms by many in the City and out parts, for the late
insurrections in the Counties adjacent, together with the Genesis withholding
their Contributions to the forces that should oppose them, raises a jealousy
of the Cities affection to the Parliament, and that the late confidence taken
by a Private person coming from the Scottish Army into the City, to leavy money
upon the the faith of the Kingdom of Scotland, for their Army invading the
Kingdom of England, causes a jealousy; that secret Complyances are held, and
aides given to that Army by too many in this City.

For Remedy whereof, it is desired,
THat the Parliament would recommend it to the City, that they do declare, that
as they have earnestly desired a Treaty with the King for Peace, so they are
resolved to assist the Parliament, with their lives and estates, to obtain
safe Concessions for the preservation and security of Religion, Law, and
Liberty, and that they declare their great dislike, and detestation of the late
tumults in the City, and Insurrections in the Countries, and the revolting of
the Ships and Castles, and their readiness to assist the Parliament, with their
lives and estates against them, and the late Invasion by the Scottish Army, now
joined with the Malignant and Popish Party in the North, and that they will
cherefully submit to the wisdom and determination of the Parliament, in all
the weighty affairs of the Kingdom.

The discontents and jealousies concerning the Army, etc.
I. FRom their aversnes to the settlement of Religion in Doctrine, Worship,
Disipline, and Government, according to the word of God, and the solmne League
and Covenant, and their Countenancing by their power multitudes of persons of
unsound Judgment, and those opposite to such a settlement.

II. Their not submitting formerly to the Parliaments Commands, and
intermedling with the Transactions of State, and their disaffection to the City
of London, both Ministers, and People well-affected, who have been faithful to
this Cause, and stand for Reformation.

III. That if by the assistance of the persons and estates of the well-affected
(who are mutually engaged with them in the public Cause) they should be
enabled to overcome the present insurrections, and Armies raised against it,
they would turn their Success to the advancement of their own private power
and ends.

For Remedy whereof,
IT is desired that the Parliament would recommend it to the General,
Commanders, and Officers of the Army, That they do declare their resolutions to
submit to what they shall do in the Establishing of Religion, the settlement of
the Peace of the Kingdom, the preservation of the fundamental Government
thereof. And that they declare an amicable respect and agreement with the City
of London, and that when the Parliament in their wisdoms shall think fit to
lessen, or disband the Army, that they accordingly yield obedience.


