To the Right Honorable The Parliament of England Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
The humble Petition of ARTHUR HASLERIG.
SHOWS,
THat your said Petitioner has ever since the beginning of these troubles been
a man of a most turbulent and vexatious spirit; and finding himself grown a
little popular among the rude multitude, he made the best use of it he could to
the ruin of his Country; So that should your Petitioner reckon up to your
Honors all the Crimes and Tyrannical actions which he made a shift to justify
while he was in Authority, his Petition would swell into a Volume, and his
impatience would hardly give him leave to tarry till you had read it. Truly, he
is afraid all the sand in the Sea might run through an Hourglass before you
could perform that task. Your Petitioner also shows, that he should be loath
to be called to his answer four and forty times, as Cato was, who was likewise
so many times acquitted; for he is afraid that one time would be enough to find
him forty times over guilty. The pride of whose heart has ever been greater
then Satan's; and he questions not, but that if he had been an Angel of Light
in Heaven before the Creation, he had had the same fall with Lucifer; at the
pooreness of whose spirit he much wonders; for that if it had been your
Petitioners case, he should not have rested so well satisfied at the change of
his Government, and have given over without so much as contriving one Plot for
the recovery of it again. The aim of his Ambition being so high, that had he
ability according to his desire, he would destroy the King of Spain, the Pope,
the great Turk, the great Mogul, the Duke of Russia, with all the rest of the
Potentates and Princes of the World, not because they are either Idolators, or
Pagans, or Enemies to Christ and his Doctrine; but out of his insatiable desire
to domineer over the whole World. He also further shows, that the Reason why
he has forsaken Christianity, is, because the Ministers tell him that Christ
must Reign over him; and he does hereby manifest to your Honors his great envy
to Tamberlain, because he had so great a Power over one of the greatest
Monarchs in the World, as to lead him up and down in a Cage, and always made
him lie at his Horse side to tread upon, when he got up into his Stirrup; which
honor he always coveted, though now he finds himself in a small possibility
to obtain it, he having done all that possibly he could to enslave his Country
to the Tyranny of two or three Usurpers besides himself, who had promised that
he should be their Supreme, as one who was resolved to have stopped his ears
against all the clamours of the oppressed People, and with a fury and violence
to have carried on his Great Work; He also does acknowledge, that he always
had a great kindness for Dionysius, Sylla, Caesar Borgia, Nero and Caligula,
because they were great Tyrants and Oppressors of their Countrymen. Your
Petitioner in the last place further declares, that he bears an immortal and
unremoveable Spleen, Hatred and Malice to his Excellency, and your Honors, for
interrupting his designs, which has so increased his stomach, that he could
eat both your Honors and him with Salt; Nevertheless he is now constrained to
sue unto you for pardon, and

In consideration of the Premises, he humbly craveth of your honors, that you
would in the first place set a Mark upon him, as God set upon Cain, least the
People whom he has so much wronged should slay him wherever they meet him.

Secondly, That he may have the Liberty to wear a Brass Helmet to secure his
rash head from Stones and Brickbatts, for that he finds the Freeborn Boys of
England very much enraged against him.

Thirdly, That he may have an Army of ten thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse
to guard him from outrages, which if your honors please to grant, he will not
only use it to his own advantage, but to the confusion of all your good
Endeavors.

Fourthly, That your Honors would fully forgive your Petitioner, and give him
an Act of Indemnity, he having an Estate able to satisfy most persons that
shall now call him to an account, which upon assurance of your gracious favor
he promises (though very unwillingly) to do, provided you will not suffer his
Children to go a Begging.

Fifthly, That you would be pleased to give your Petitioner and Coll. Lambert a
Certificate to Gog and Magog, to give us a Command at the Battle of Armageddon,
For that we understand, that if the Saints get the better at that fight, all
confusion will be at an end in this World, which we should be very sorry to
see.

Lastly if all, or any of the former Particulars may not be granted, That your
Honors would be pleased to hang him out of the way, for that it was his desire
on Thursday was seven-night, and because he also promised it before one of the
Lords Commissioners, if his cause went against him, which happened accordingly.

And your Petioner shall never Pray, etc.
Printed, for Any Body.


