TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS AND PEERS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and
other Inhabitants of the County of Stafford.
Humbly shows,
THat the Conjuncture of the benign aspect and influences of this Right
Honorable House, upon your Petitioners, with those of the Honorable House of
Commons; as in many other great concernments, so especially in your happy
correspondency to put the Kingdom into a posture of War, for the defense and
security thereof, against both Domesticke and Foraigne enemies, is resented
with exceeding thankfulness by your Petitioners, as that which clearly
manifests unto them your Honors zeal, and good affections for the opening of
such obstructions as have hither o^rerarded the Cure of their pressing
grievances, fears and jealousies, and promises the serening of their yet
remaining Distractions and Distempers in Church and Commonwealth: in all
faithfulness engaging themselves to serve his Majesty and this Honorable
House of Parliament, as occasion shall require, with lives, power, and estates;
as conceiving their lives and safeties, in a subordinate way, to be wrapped up in
one with your Honors.

Praying,

That the right Honorable house would be pleased to represent unto his most
excellent Majesty their loyal duties, humble desires and fears, that his
Majesty would be graciously pleased to consent to the Militia agreed upon: and
that his Majesty would lean upon the hand, and be gr^ciously pleased to follow
the Councels of the Honorable and high Court of Parliament.

That the bleeding wounds of our brethren in Ireland may be bound up by speedy
and effectual applications, and therein reparations made of the honor of this
Kingdom; which suffers in so long delay of Succors designed, that the guilt
of innocent blood cry not in the ears of the Lord of Sabbeth against us.

That your Lordships would improve your high wisdoms and power to bring to
the birth these noble desires and designs of the house of Commons, mentioned
by them in their late Remonstrance.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
To the honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgeses of the Commons House of
PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Ministers,
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the County of Stafford.
Shewe^h,
THat in their own names, and in the names of many thousands of the
Inhabitants of the County of Stafford, your Petitioners with heart fuller of
thankfulness, then their tongues can be of expression, humbly acknowledge
their sensiblenesse of the unparell'd travail, and indefatigable endeavor of
this honorable House, already spent in the discharge of that trust, deservedly
by the Commons of all the Land, vested in you; whereby an ample testimony is
given, as of your faithfulness and courage in the exposure of your selves and
fortuues in these despirate times: So likewise of the good hand, and providence
of God, carrying you through many difficult straits and dangerous conspiracies
of the Popish and Malignant party, who have hitherto way-led your proceedings.
All which your Petitiones take as very promising beginnings and fair pledges
of the healing of the unsupportable grievances both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
which the Churh and State groan under. And do concurrently and freely
profess their contributions to the work under your hands, not only by their
Prayers, but also by the devotement of their lives, power and estates;
according to that wise and religious Protestation set forth by you, conceiving
their own lives and safeties to be shipped in one bottom with yours.

And your Petitioners further show, That it is not the lest part of their
comfort, that you have continued the Militia of this County unto so honorable
a Lord, in whom they may safely (under God) confide.

And your Petitioners do humbly pray, That the unexampled miseries, and almost
expiring Estate of our brethren in Ireland may be considered by an Expedite
dispatch of seasonable succor; and that they may from time to time during
their miseries, be looked upon by you, not only as English and
Fellow Subjects, but as Protestants and professors of Gods truth, under which
Notion they suffer these extremities. And that the insurrection of the Papists
there, may be reckoned of, not only as a Rebellion, but a horrid Persecution
of Christ in his Truth and Members: that so the interest of God and his cause
may quicken your sympathy with, and endeavors for them.

That the Papists (who are in great number in this small County) may be
thoroughly and speedily disarmed, and so disposed of; that they be not
formidable to your Petitioners, by being able either to keep us in jealousies
by their practices at home, or to foment that fire kindled by their party in
Ireland.

That the Church in her Government, Officers and worship may be ordered
according to the rule of Gods holy Word; the particular accommodation of which,
we humbly leave to the wisdom of this Honorable House to determine by the
assistance of an Assembly of godly and learned Divines.

That the present state and condition of the Church may be thought upon for
Ministry-maintenance, and supply of an able Preaching Ministry: Pluralities
suppressed, the fountain of Learning cleared; all insufficient for the work of
the Ministry, all grossly scandalous and negligent in their functions removed,
that they may no longer remain a burden to keep out others.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
Printed for Nicholas Vavasour, 1642.


