Die Martis, 26 Maii. 1646.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That the
Remonstrance and Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of
the City of London, this day exhibited to the House of Peers, and their
Lordships Answer thereunto, shall be forthwith Printed and Published; And that
the care for the true Printing thereof, is hereby specially recommended unto
Colonel John Bellamie; who is by this Order authorized and required to Print
and publish the same accordingly: And none else are to presume to Print and
publish the same, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS ASSEMBLED IN HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT: The
Humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of
the City of London, in Common Council Assembled.

Together with their LORDSHIPS ANSWER thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Gotes, for John Bellamie. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS Assembled in High Court of PARLIAMENT: The
humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of
the City of London, in Common Council assembled.
OUR duty, In the first place, does lead us to begin all our Addresses, as we
most heartily and humbly do these, with all due and humble acknowledgement of
the great Labors and endeavors which Your Lordships have, these many years,
employed, in Reformation both of the Church and Commonwealth, and in
preservation of both, with the humble tender of our constant devotion to serve
the Parliament, according to our Covenant made before Almighty God.

In the next place, we most humbly crave pardon, although we do presume to
return again unto your Lordships, and humbly, yet plainly, lay open the
sorrows and fears of our hearts, even in this season, when as God has
blessed your Armies with the greatest successes, and that Man might persuade
himself that the War is almost at an end.

For first, Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, page 19.
when we remember that it has been long since declared to be far from any
purpose or desire to let loose the golden Reins of Discipline and Government in
the Church, or to leave private persons, or particular Congregations, to take
up what form of Divine Service they please, when we look upon what both Houses
have resolved against Brownisme, and Anabaptisme, properly so called, when we
meditate on our Protestation and Covenant.

And lastly, The Parliaments Declaration, upon his Majesty's Declaration after
the Battle at Edghill. p. 659.
when we peruse the Directory, and other Ordinances for Presbyteriall
Government, and yet find private and separate Congregations daily erected in
diverse parts of the City, and elsewhere, and commonly frequented (and
Anabaptism, Brownism, and almost all manner of Heresies, Schisms, and
Blasphemies, boldly vented and maintained, by such as, to the point of
Church Government, profess themselves Independent) we cannot but be
astonished at the swarms of Sectaries, which discover themselves every where,
who, if by their endeavors, they should get into places of Profit and Trust,
in Martial and Civil affairs, it may tend much to the disturbance of the
Public Peace both of the Church and Commonwealth.

We also cannot but call to mind what Vows we have made to God in the same
Covenant, as well as our former Protestations, to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority* in the
preservation and Defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our Consciences, of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions, to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness, and do humbly rest in the assurances we have received in the many
former Declarations of both Houses, concerning their intentions toward his
Majesty, his Royal Posterity, and the Peace of this Kingdom, which we doubt
not but your Lordships will pursue with all speedy dispatch of Propositions to
His Majesty, now whilst God does so mercifully and miraculously go along with
your Armies in all the parts of the Kingdom.

We may not in the next place forget our Brethren of Scotland, how first they
were invited to engage with this Kingdom in Gods Cause, when yet they were at
Peace at home, in what Covenant this Nation is mutually linked with them, at
what time, in relation both to the weak condition of our Forces then, and the
season of the year, they adventured upon an Enemy warmly lodged, and well
armed, and prepared; what they have since suffered for this Cause in their own
Kingdom, how successful ever since God has made our Forces in suppressing
the Common Enemies of both Nations, and what present hopes we have of a
well-setled Peace, while we continue in this mutual Amity; And then cannot
but lament the many jealousies which the Enemies of our Peace, Union, and good
Government, do now strive to beget between both Nations, and tremble at the
sad effects thereof, if not timely prevented by the wisdom of the Parliaments
of both Kingdoms.

We cannot also omit humbly to represent unto your Lordships consideration,
how many Citizens have already suffered, and how many more will be undone, if
your Lordships shall still make use of that ancient Privilege, to protect your
Selves, the Assistan^^ of this Honorable House, and the Servants of both, and
others from being proceeded against in any course of Law for Debt, which now
because this Parliament has already sat so long, and is likely by reason of
the unsettlednesse of ^ffaires to sit much longer, would especially require
some expedient for relief of so many as otherwise must daily suffer under this
Privilege.

And now that the Kingdom is almost reduced, by which meane^ the Revenues of
the Kingdom will be unburthened, and the Customs and Excise increase, and the
public charge of the Kingdom decrease, now that Delinquents do daily come in
and compound, and now that the Enemy has but few Holds left, we hope that the
great and extraordinary Taxes and burdens on this City and their Trade, shall
be in the future abated; that the Debts owing to the City and Citizens of
London, either by particular Assurances of the Parliament, or upon the public
faith of the Kingdom, be taken care for and discharged, as well as those
assigned upon the Excise, and may not be diverted from the uses appointed by
former Acts and Ordinances.

And we humbly crave leave to present to the consideration of this Honorable
House, the Committee of Haberd^shers-hall, as being one of the greatest
grievances of this City, and which; so long as it is continued, does hinder the
concourse of people thereunto, and tends much to the destruction of the
Trade, and Inhabitants thereof.

And now also we doubt not but God will give the Parliment some better means
and opportunity for the relief of our bleeding Brethren in Ireland, and the
suppressing of those horrid Rebels, and reducing of that Kingdom, wherein,
besides the public and common interest, we are particularly concerned.

Lastly, we should have much to say for this City, if we could imagine that its
fidelity and constant services and devotion to the Parliament could either be
questioned or forgotten, that little we shall express on the part of the City,
is, not to repeat how zealous we have been in the cause of God, and this
Parliament, how we have spilt our blood and spent and laid out our selves and
our Estates in maintenance thereof; how many public acknowledgements we have
by us of the favorable acceptance of them, and promises to leave Testimonies
thereof to all future ages; but only to beseech your Lordships to consider how
much our hearts may justly be dejected, now that God has followed your
endeavors, and our prayers, with so many successes, and brought the War to a
probable period, as to the sense of Man: That the Enemies of our Peace should
strive now to sow jealousies between the Parliament and this City, as has been
too evident of late, and particularly should so far prevail, as to be able to
render the chief Magistrate of this City, the Lord Major, suspected; unto whom
we cannot but give this just Testimony, that he in his place has faithfully
behaved himself, and carefully discharged his Office.

We could add much more of the daily invectives against us from the Pulpit,
and other places where the Boutefew's of these Sectaries are admitted, the
scurrilous and seditious Pamphlets daily broached in, and against the City: And
the great contempt of, and discouragement unto the Ministers of the Gospel, who
adhere to the Presbyteriall Government: But we shall conclude with this brief
and humble representation of our Petitions and desires to your Lordships in the
name of the whole City.

I. That some strict and speedy course may be taken for the suppressing of all
private and separate Congregations. II. That all Anabaptists, Brownists,
Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and all such Sectaries as conform not to
the public Discipline established, or to be established by Parliament, may be
fully declared against, and some effectual course settled for proceeding
against such persons. III. That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdom, so all
may be equally required to yield obedience unto the Government set forth, or to
be set forth by the Parliament. IV. That no persons disaffected to the
Presbyterial Government set forth, or to be set forth by the Parliament, may be
employed in any place of public Trust. V. That your Lordships will please to
hasten Propositions to his Majesty, for settling of a safe and well grounded
Peace amongst us, after so long and unnatural a War. VI. That your
Lordships, according to the Covenant and Treaties, will please to study all
means to preserve the Union between the two Nations of England and Scotland,
and to remove all jealousies which may endanger our mutual agreement. VII.
That your Lordships will please to consider of some means whereby the
privilege which the Members of this Honorable House, and their Assistants,
and the Servants of both, and others enjoy by being protected and exempted from
being proceeded against for their Debts, may be so qualified, as that the
Subject may be able to recover his own in some due time. VIII. That all
public Revenues and Receipts may be employed to public uses, that so the
Taxes of the City may be abated. IX. That the Estates and Compositions of
Delinquents, may, according to the engagements by Ordinances of Parliament, be
applied to discharge the great sums owing to this City and Citizens. X. That
the Plymouth Duty may be taken off the Trade, especially now that the West is
reduced. XI. That the Committee at Haberd^shers-hall may be presently
dissolved; or at least so limited and regulated, as that the City may have no
cause of complaint. XII. That the reducing of the Kingdom of Ireland may be
taken into consideration, before the good party there be too far wasted and
discouraged. XIII. That the Lord Major of this City may be fully vindicated.
XIV. And lastly, and above all, That your Lordships will please not to look
upon any expressions of this our Remonstrance and Petition, as charging any
thing upon your Lordships, or as intended to entrench upon any privilege of
this Honorable House, but favorably to accept thereof, and so to interpret the
same, as from a single and humble heart it is sincerely, and without any
by-ends, or to comply with any Party whatsoever, intended and breathed forth
from the sad heart of the Petitioners, who are overwhelmed with many fears on
all sides. And who call God, the Searcher of all hearts, to witness, that
according to their Covenant and duty, their zeal, devotion and obedience, is
as fervent and prostrate as ever to serve the Parliament with their Lives and
Estates, against all the Enemies of our Peace, and to conjoyn the City more and
more to the Parliament, and to maintain the Union of both Nations against all
Opposers whatsoever.
All which we humbly submit unto the wisdom of this Honorable House.
26 Maii. 1646.
THE Answer of the Lords in PARLIAMENT TO THE Remonstrance and Petition of the
City of LONDON.
THE Lords are very sensible of the great fidelity and constant services of the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, to this
present Parliament, which they shall never forget; They acknowledge their
zeal, expressed upon all occasions in the Cause of God and this Parliament,
and how readily they have spilt their blood, and spent and laid out themselves
and their Estates in the maintenance thereof.

They are well satisfied with your Expressions and Care to settle the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, according to the Covenant, and with your desires
to have all Heresies, Schisms, and Blasphemies suppressed, as also with your
respect to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, the Liberties of
the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend his Majesty's Person, and Authority
in the preservation of the true Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
his Royal Posterity, and the Peace of the Kingdoms: As also for your desires
for the continuance of that union between us and our Brethren of Scotland; Of
whose Services and sufferings we shall not only hold a grateful memory, but
upon all occasions give a Retaliation. Unto all which we hold our selves
equally with you obliged, by our Solemn League and Covenant.

As to the Person of the Lord Major, the Lords hold a high esteem of him,
according to his merit, and have commanded me to let you know, that nothing
has passed this House at any time in prejudice of him; And when the
particulars wherein he finds himself agrieved shall be made known unto them,
they shall be ready in a Parliamentary way, to do him right.

The Lords will take the other particulars of your Petition into serious and
speedy consideration; And have commanded me to give you hearty thanks for the
Real Testimonies of duty and good affections, which not only by your words,
but by your Actions, you have constantly manifested unto them.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

