TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE PEERS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT. The humble
Petition of the high Sheriff, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Ministers,
Freeholders and others Inhabitants of the County of BEDFORD,
Shows,
THat we are unable to express our joys, or declare the thankfulness of all
our hearts, for the happy concurrence of your Lordships with the Honorable
House of Commons, upon which the prosperity and welfare of our Church and State
depends; only in this ye are able (by the blessing of God) to effect great and
high achievements, and to lay prostrate the desperate plots and devices of our
wicked adversaries, whose chiefest design (as we have just cause to believe)
has bin to cut in sunder this Gordian knot, and by dividing to triumph in our
ruin and confusion. We most humbly therefore supplicate your Lordships that
this blessed consent and unity may long continue, and at this present (being a
time of great distraction) for the perfecting of what you have so happily begun
for a full and complete reformation of the government, and grievances of this
Church and Commonwealth: And we, to the last of our lives, and utmost of our
estates and fortunes, are resolved of defend His Majesty's Royal Person and
State, and your Lordships in these your joint and honorable proceedings. And
though you should have no cause to need our swords, yet for this happy consent
and union, and for your Lordships prosperity, shall ever be the daily and
hearty prayers of your Petitioners, etc.

Sir John Burgoyne Baronet, who was entrusted with the delivery of this
Petition, had further direction personally to declare their particular thanks
to the Lords for their Concurrence with the House of Commons, in the late
Ordinance concerning the Militia, together with a desire, that the same may be
(speedily) put in execution; for which especially, as for the rest in general,
their Lordships returned them hearty thanks.

TO THE HONORABLE, THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND BURGESSES In the Commons House
of PARLIAMENT assembled. The humble Petition of the high Sheriff, Knights,
Esquires, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders and others Inhabitants of the
County of BEDFORD.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners are truly sensible of your pious care, in the
reformation of Religion from those scandalous and superstitious innovations,
which were introduced into the Church, with intent to subvert the Protestant.
Religion; as also of your incessant labors, prudent Deliberations, and
undefatigable pains for the Commonwealth; and that with all humble
thankfulness they daily bless Almighty God, the Kings Majesty, the Peers,
and this Honorable Assembly, for many excellent Laws and Ordinances, made and
enacted in this present Parliament, and especially for providing against the
long intermission of Parliaments, suppressing the eruptions, and preventing the
revivall of illegal taxes, abolishing the Courts of Star Chamber and high
Commission, regulating of other exorbitant Jurisdictions: For taking away the
Bishops Votes in Parliament, and disabling of all persons in holy Orders for
exercising any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority; and for the late Ordinance
for the disposing the Militia of this Kingdom into the hands of such
honorable and faithful personages, as are therein expressed. That your humble
Petitioners are immutably resolved with the hazard of their lives and
fortunes, in all just and lawful ways, to maintain and defend you in your
Rights and Privileges against the enemies of God, the King and State,
according to their engagements in the late Protestation; and in all humility do
pray the continuation of your Honorable endeavors, that there may be a speedy
advancement of all dispatches for the relief of IRELAND. That for the removing
of our just and increasing fears, and preventing of imminent dangers, the late
Ordinance for the Militia may be fully and speedily executed. That the Seas may
be strongly and safely guarded under the conduct of persons of honor, worth
and ability. That the Papists may be dis-armed and the most dangerous of them
secured; That the Mass both public and private be abolished; That the
undoubted reputation of your late accused members may be repaired, and the
Privileges of Parliament effectually vindicated; The suffrages of the Recusant
Nobility be excluded from the House of Peers: And that there may be a further
discovery and removal of those evil Councillors, by whose pernicious
practices the happy progress of the great Affairs of this Kingdom is
retarded; That all delinquents, especially those that have been the principal
causes of our miseries, may be speedily brought unto exemplary and condign
punishment. That all possible means may be used for the prevailing with his
Majesty that he would be graciously pleased to repair to, and abide near his
Parliament; And that the Prince, and the rest of his Majesty's children, may be
under the care and government of such persons, in whom this Kingdom may
confide; That Manufactures and Trading be upheld; That all burdensome and
scandalous Ceremonies be taken away, and such an Ecclesiastical Discipline and
Government as is agreeable to Gods word may be settled, by such ways and
means as to your wisdoms shall seem expedient. That the Universities be
purged and reformed. That corrupt and scandalous Ministers may be removed, a
learned, pious and conscientious Ministry generally settled, and sufficiently
maintained, (having an especial regard and care to Market Towns and populous
places.) That the pious and painful Divines, who for unjust, and
inconsiderable causes were deprived by the Bishops, or their Subordinate
Officers, may receive ample reparations. That for the completing the
happiness both of Church and State, there may be as well a faithful
Magistracy, as a painful Ministry.

And your humble Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
Die Mercurii, Martii 16. 1641.
It is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That Mr. Speaker,
in the name of the House, shall take particular notice of, and give the
Gentlemen of Bedford-shire particular thanks for their desire of the Kings
return to Parliament, and of their desire to have the Ordinance of the Militia
speedily to be put in execution.

Hen. Elsinge Cler. Dom. Com.

Both which Petitions, being presented the 16. of March 1641. by the aforenamed
Sir John Burgoyne, accompanied with about two thousand persons, were gratefully
received, to the ample satisfaction of the Petitioners.

Printed on Bread-street-hill by a true copy, with the Petitioners approbation,
at the charge of John Chambers, 1641.


