To the Right Hoble, the Lords and Commons, etc.
The humble Petition of Troubled Minds.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners having been prohibited of serving God after their
accustomed manner, and by a Directory put upon a public worshipping the
Almighty by Extemporarie prayers, groundlesly without a Liturgy, presuming (as
they suppose) to imitate the miraculous Founders of Christian Religion, who
then for planting of Churches had special assistance of the holy Ghost, by
which many signs, Joh. 14. 26.
wonders and miracles were wrought, for they then spoke as the Spirit gave them
utterance: But our Divines wanting those Apostolical gifts, neither in verity
have they the holy Ghost as the Apostles had, whereby their utterance and
frail memories might be helped, and understandings from errors be preserved,
but in these things are subject to miscarriages, and therefore according to
their weak abilities as they stand opinionated in judgments, a strange
worship of their own inventions is oftentimes produced, whereby it comes to
pass, that in praying they have strange words and passages, not according to
godliness, but instead of a solemn sacred Service to a Divine Majesty (as our
former Prayers were, composed by a conjunctive help of many men learned and
holy, Mart. 2. Vol. page 660. Edit. 1641.
yea such as were Martyrs, and who as the Author of the Book of Martyrs says,
and the Act of Parl. made to confirm that Service in the time of King Edw. 6.
performed it through the aid of the holy Ghost) we have now a Model by a
single, weak, yea and sometimes an heretical brain, which presumes to pour
out prayers simple or senseless; yea sometimes heretical, or passages tending
to blasphemy; sometimes treasonable, or passages tending to sedition;
sometimes superstitious, or passages tending to Idolatry; sometimes malicious,
tending to revenge, murder, bloodshed, all which though not expressed in
plain, but doubtful terms, according to the corrupt cunning of deceivable
men, whose perverse opinions, For the Antiquity of Churches, and a Christian
Church-Liturgie, within 40. years of our Lord, see Eusebius. lib. 2. chapter 17.
their seduced followers complying with, think they have performed a holy
sacrifice to God: But your Petitioners tremble, they should now be forced, or
the Almighty limited in his public Worship, to such Prayers and strange
Service, which till this Age neither they nor their Forefathers ever knew.
Moreover, if the memory or utterance of those Divines that be orthodox and
godly shall fail, then does the solemn worship of Almighty God which the
Directory has made to depend upon those men's weak memory fail also. This much
troubles your Petitioners, who finding the prayers of these former rehearsed
opinionated men, the most part naught, and these last though they be for life
and doctrine unblameable, yet by reason of an unperfect or weak memory, their
extemporarie prayers, to which our Synod has limited Gods public Worship,
prove not perfectly good. And besides, your Petitioners in hearing strange men,
or every day new extemporarie prayers, whilst their understandings are
exercised, how lawfully to diverse passages and Petitions they may say Amen,
their devotions in the mean time which with zeal and fervencie ought to be
fixed upon the Almighty God, are by distempered thoughts extremely weakened, and
made cold, if not totally lost:

Wherefore the inconvenience of extemporary prayers being considered, we your
Petitioners, Members of the Church of England, do humbly pray for the sake of
God and our Savior Christ, and for that Mother-Churches sake wherein your
selves have received Baptism, Faith, and Grace, whereby you stand stated in
hope of the glory of God, yea that Christian Protestant Church, Reformed not by
the blood of others, but her own patient sufferings in her own blood, that
you will suffer her children to worship God in their accustomed reverentiall
manner: And we humbly pray that you would be pleased to consider, that the
Judaicall Christians were not forced to leave their Jewish Customs, Act. 21.
though abolished by Christ: Constantine the Great forced neither Pagans nor
Heretics to Christianity, Eusebius. of the life of Constable. lib. 1. chapter 38.
but made Edicts to the contrary. The Turk in matters of Religion does not
force men. Yea the very Church of Rome, although they think themselves
infallible, yet in all places do not force men, and why will ye, who being
more modest, Lib. 2. 55.
do judge your selves subject to errors, force men to that now, from which
upon better information ye may depart to morrow? Lib. 2. 59.
we pray you to consider, and help us troubled minds, and allow us to serve God
according to our former Liturgy,

And we shall ever pray, etc.

