To the Right Honorable, the Council of State: And to the Honorable Committee,
by them appointed in the Case of the Post-Masters.
The Humble Petition of the Post-Masters of the several Roads of England.
Shows,
THat with all readiness they have from time to time, and at all times with
much care and pains, faithfully, not only carried and re-carried all Letters
and Packets belonging to the State at usual times in their Weekly Mayles sent
forth, by which they have saved the State 6000. l. per Annum; but have also
with the like diligence carried all extraordinary Packets and Dispatches
amounting to a very great Number, and a very considerable Charge, as may appear
by the testimonials of some here present: For all which Service we acknowledge
our selves to be by Mr. Attourny General fully satisfied.

We therefore humbly pray, that your Honors will be pleased so to own us in our
Employment and present Station, and by all Lawful means so to assist us, That
we in our Estates may not be ruined, Your Honors great Service aforesaid
neglected, which we Your Servants in the behalf of our selves, and all the rest
of the Post-Masters, do promise to our utmost power, still to continue
faithfully, and carefully to perform, and allow unto the people the same ease
in their Rates of Letters, which is by others declared, And shall for your
Honors peace and happiness

March, 24. 1652. Always as in Duty bound, pray etc.
Signed by Warrant, and on the behalf of all the Post-Masters of the Several
Roads of England. Plymouth and Portsmouth Roads.
Samuel Northcot, Postmaster at Plymouth. Andrew Raddon, Postmaster at Exon.
Francis Pyke, postmaster at Crewkern. Robert Ring, postmaster at Salisbury.
Nathaniel Hole, postmaster at Hartlerow.
Bristol and Southwales Roads.
John Lewin, postmaster at Bristol. Onesiphorus Tapp, postmaster at
Marlebrough. John Donn, postmaster at Gloucester. David Bayley, postmaster at
Swansey.
Chester Road.
Robert Girdler, postmaster at Birmigham, Robert King, postmaster at Coleshill.
Richard Farmar, postmaster at Tossiter. George Parker, postmaster at Chester.
George Gleave, postmaster at Namptwitch.
Northern Roads.
Ralph Salkeld, postmaster at Berwick. Thomas Errington, Postmaster at
Newcastle, Robert Morley, postmaster at Tadcaster. William Collins, postmaster
at Stamford.


THe Council having Read the Petition of the Post-masters of the several Roads
of England, and other Papers presented, and taken into Consideration how
Requisite it is for the better carrying on, and mannagement of the Affairs of
the Commonwealth, and especially necessary in the present state of Things,
That the Inland Post should be in a settled Condition and a posture of
Readiness to Expedite it, and give Dispatch unto the Mayles of Letters and
other Missives of Public Concernment the Nature of which, does frequently
Require the Speediest Conveyance that is possible; and finding the due settling
and executing of this Office to be of such Consequence and Concernment to the
Service of the Commonwealth, as does Require the special Care and inspection
of the State thereunto, and a fit Person in whom they can Confide, for the
Execution thereof they have thought fit to Recommend and entrust the
Mannagement of it unto you: These are therefore to Authorize and Require you,
To Receive and take upon you the Charge and Care thereof, and to Transact and
Execute the same according to such Orders as have been formerly made by the
Council on that behalf: And for the better Enabling of you to effect and
perform the same according to the Trust reposed in you, all Officers, both
Civil and Military, are hereby Required to be Aiding and Assisting unto you, or
such Post-Masters or Agents as shall be employed under you in the said
Post Office upon all Occasion, wherein the Execution of the same may be the
better furthered and expedited.

Given at the Council of State at White Hall, this Thirtieth day of March,
1653.
To Edmund Prideaux Esquire, Attourny General for the Commonwealth.
Signed in the Name and by Order of the Council of State appointed by Authority
of Parliament. Dennis Bond, President. Ex. John Thurloe Clerk of the Council.


