To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council Assembled. The Humble Petition of diverse
Well-affected Householders and Freemen of the said City,
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners cannot but thankfully acknowledge the Just and Prudent
Resolution of this Honorable Council, expressed in your Declaration of the
20th of December last past; And are unshakenly Confident, that that God who put
your thoughts and Councels on the Resolve, will strengthen your Courage in
prosecuting of those Lawful means that may lead to the attainment of that just
and necessary end A Free Parliament, without which the undoubted Birthright of
the English Nation, in their Persons, Estates, and all Liberties, both
Religious and Civil, can never be preserved: And should this Court submit
themselves to any other Constitution of men, then such as may Rightfully claim
the Legislative power of the Nation, and by acting on any other Authority in
Assessing or Levying any sums of Money on your Petitioners Estates, your
Petitioners humbly conceive that this Court shall give the whole Nation cause
of very sad Reflections on your defection from your said Declaration, with
which the most part of the other Countries and Corporations have freely
concurred: And your Petitioners may have occasion to complain, that they have
most unhappily been cast into the world in a Generation that has at once made
a costly purchase of present misery to themselves, and perpetual slavery to
their posterity.

And therefore your Petitioners humbly pray, That it may please this Honorable
Court to Act worthy of your Predecessors, and Your own professed Resolutions,
by Declaring to the World, or at least assuring your Petitioners, That you will
not Act your selves, or concent that any other Power or Person shall Impose any
Law or Tax upon any of those Citizens, with whose general Concernments this
Court is Entrusted, until the Authority thereof may be derived from a Full
and Free Parliament, as being the rightful Representatives of the people, by
whom every individual does consent. By which, and which only, next under God,
Your Petitioners can rationally hope their languishing Trades may be revived,
and their Hearts and Purses together enlarged to a cheerful and liberal
Contribution toward their lawful Government and Protection, According to
Magna Charta and the Petition of Right.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
This Petition was presented by diverse Citizens of quallity the 8th of
February, 1659.

The Answer whereunto was,

That the Court had read this Petition, and will take the same into
Consideration so far as concerns this Court: And did give the Petitioners the
Thanks of the Court for their respects and patience.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. 1659.


