TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE SUPREME AVTHORITY OF THIS NATION. THE COMMONS OF
ENGLAND in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of firm and constant
Friends to the Parliament and Commonwealth, Presenters and Promoters of the
late Large Patition of September 11. MDCXLVIII.
Shows,
THat having seriously considered how many large and fair opportunities this
honorable House has had within these eight years last past to have made this
Nation absolute free and happy; and yet that until this time, every of those
opportunies have (after some short space of hope) faded, and but altered, if
not increased our bondage.

When we call to mind what extraordinary things the Army undertook (and this
honorable House approved) in behalf of the liberties of the people, in the
year 1647. and that nevertheless, the first fruits of their great and
unexpected success, was a more oppressive Ordinance for enforcing of Tyths,
than ever had bin before, and which has bin severely executed, and is still
continued, to the extreme vexation of Friends, and encouragement of Pulpit
Incendiaries; And how that great and wonderful opportunities wasted it self
away in contending with, and imprisoning of cordial Friends, or in tampering
with known enemies, and at length ended in a most dangerous and bloody war;
whereas rightly applied, it might have given peace and security to the Nation
for many Generations.

These things considered, although we exceedingly rejoiced in your just and
excellent Votes of the 4. of this instant January, as a people who had long
suffered the reproaches of Sectaries and Levellers, for maintaining the supreme
original of all just power to be in the people, and the supreme Authority of
this Nation to be in this honorable House, (which our burnt Petitions, and
that of Sept. 11. do fully witness. Yet since we understand, that within few
days after you admitted a message from the House of Lords, and gave an
accustomed respect thereunto. We have bin very much troubled, how already the
same does essentially derogate from your foresaid Votes.

And since also, we have seen a printed Warrant of his Excellency the Lord
General Fairfax, directed to his Marshal General, for suppressing of unlicensed
Books and Pamphlets, authorizing him (upon the oath of one witness) to take all
persons offending into custody, and inflict upon them such corporal
punishments, and levy such fines upon them, as your Ordinances impose; and not
to discharge them, until after payment and punishment: And further, to make
diligent search in all places where the said Marshal shall think meet, for
unlicensed printing presses, employed in printing scandalous, unlicensed
pamphlets. Books, etc. and to seize and carry away such printing presses, etc.
And likewise to make diligent search in all suspected printing houses,
warehouses, and other shops and places whatsoever, for such unlicensed books,
etc. And in case of opposition, to break open (according to your Ordinances)
all doors and locks, and to apprehend all persons so opposing, and take them
into custody, till they have given satisfaction therein. And all this by virtue
of an order of yours of the fifth of this instant January. Since we have seen
this, we profess, we cannot but already fear the issue and consequence of those
excellent Votes, nothing more dangerous to a people, than the mis-application
of their supreme entrusted Authority; and therefore we entreat herein to be
excused, though we appear herein, as in a cause of very great Importance.

For whatever specious pretenses of good to the Commonwealth, have bin
devised to over-aw the Press, yet all times fore-gone will manifest, it has
ever ushered in a tyranny; men's mouths being to be kept from making noise,
whilst they are robbed of their liberties; So was it in the late Prerogative
times before this Parliament, whilst upon pretense of care of the public,
Licensers were set over the Press, Truth was suppressed, the people thereby
kept ignorant, and fitted only to serve the unjust ends of Tyrants and
Oppressers, whereby the Nation was enslaved: Nor did any thing beget those
oppressions so much opposition, as unlicensed Books and Pamphlets.

A short time after the beginning of this Parliament, upon pretense of public
good, and at the solicitation of the Company of Stationers (who in all times
have bin officiously instrumental unto Tyranny) the Press again
(notwithstanding the good service it immediately before had done) was most
ungratefully committed to the custody of Licensers, when though scandalous
Books from or in behalf of the Enemy then at Oxford was the pretended occasion;
yet the first that suffered was M. Lawrence Sanders, for Printing without
license, a book entitled, Gods Love to Mankind; and not long after, M. John
Lilburn, M. William Larnar, and M. Richard Overton, and others, about books
discovering the then approaching Tyranny; whilst scandalous Pamphlets
nevertheless abounded, and did the greater mischief, in that Licensers have
never bin so free to pass, as good men have bin forward to compile proper and
effectual answers to such books and pamphlets: And whether Tyranny did soon
follow thereupon, the courses you were forced unto in opposition, and the
necessities you were put upon for your preservation, will most clearly
demonstrate. And if you, and your Army shall be pleased to look a little back
upon affairs, you will find you have bin very much strengthened all along by
unlicensed Printing; yea, that it has done (with greatest danger to the doers)
what it could to preserve you, when licensed did its utmost to destroy you: and
we are very confident, those very excellent and necessary Votes of yours
forementioned, had made you a multitude of enemies, if unlicensed printing had
not prepared and smoothed your way for them, whereas now they are received with
great content and satisfaction.

And generally, as to the whole course of printing, as justly in our
apprehensions, may Licensers be put over all public or private Teachings, and
Discourses, in Divine, Moral, Natural, Civil, or Political things, as over the
Press; the liberty whereof appears so essential unto Freedom, as that without
it, its impossible to preserve any Nation from being liable to the worst of
bondage; for what may not be done to that people who may not speak or write,
but at the pleasure of Licensers?

As for any prejudice to Government thereby, if G^vernment be just in its
Constitution, and equal in its distributions, it will be good, it not
absolutely necessary for them, to hear all voices and judg^ments, which they
can never do, but by giving freedom to the Press; and in case any abuse their
authority by scandalous Pamphlets, they will never want able Advocates to
vindicate their innocence. And therefore all things being duly weighed. to
refer all Books and Pamphlets to the judgment, discretion, or affection of
Licensers, or to put the least restraint upon the Press, seems altogether
inconsistent with the good of the Commonwealth, and expressly opposite and
dangerous to the liberties of the people, and to be carefully avoided, as any
other exorbitancy or prejudice in Government.

And being so, we beseech you to consider how unreasonable it is for every man
or woman to be liable to punishment, penal or corporal, upon one witness in
matters of this Nature, for compiling, printing, selling or dispersing of Books
and Pamphlets, nay to deserve even whipping (as the Last years Ordinance, an
Engine fited to a Personal Treaty) does provide a punishment, as we humbly
conceive, fit only for slaves or bondmen. But that this honorable House, that
is now by an extraordinary means freed from that major part, (which
degenerating from the true Interest of the people, were the unhappy authors of
that Ordinance) and reduced to that minor part, which we always hoped did
really oppose the same, should now approve thereof, and of all other Ordinances
of like nature; and not only so, but in cases so merely Civil, to refer the
execution thereof to a Military power: This is that which in the present sense
and consequence thereof, afflicts us above measure; because according to this
rule, we may we know not how soon, be reduced under a military jurisdiction,
which we humbly conceive, we ought not to ^e, and which above any thing in this
world, we shall desire in this and all other cases for ever to avoid.

And therefore we most earnestly entreat, First, That as you have voted your
selves the supreme Authority, so you will exactly preserve the same entire in
it self, without intermixing again with any other whatsoever.

Secondly, That you will precisely hold your selves to the supreme end, the
Freedom of the People; as in other things, so in that necessary and essential
part of speaking, writing, printing, and publishing their minds freely; without
seting of Masters, Tutors, and Controulers over them; and for that end, to
revoke all Ordinances and Orders to the contrary.

Thirdly, That you will fix us only in a Civil Jurisdiction, refering the
Military to Act distinct, and within it self, except in cases of warlike
opposition to Civil Authority.

Fourthly, That you will recall that oppressive Ordinance for Tyths, upon treble
damages; that so, as we have rejoiced in the notion, we may not have cause to
grieve, but to rejoice also in the exercise of your supreme Authority; and that
the whole Nation in this blessed opportunity may receive a full reward of true
Freedom for its large expense of blood and treasure, and by your Wisdom and
Fidelity, be made happy to all Future Generations.

Die Jovis, January 18. 1648.
THe House being informed that diverse Inhabitants within the City of London
and Borough of Southwark, were at the Door; they were called in, and then
presented a Petition to this House; which after the Petitioners were withdrawn,
was read, and was entitled, The humble Petition of firm and constant friends
to Parliament and Commonwealth, the Presenters and Promoters of the late large
Petition of Sept. 11. 1648.

Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that the said Petition be
referred to the Committee appointed yesterday to consider of Petitions of this
nature.

Hen. Scobell Cler. Parl. Dom. Com,

The Petitioners being again called in, M. Speaker by command of this House
gave them this answer. Gentlemen, The House have read your Petition, and have
referred it to a Committee to consider of the matters of consequence therein;
and have taken notice of your continued good affections to this House, and they
have commanded me to give you thanks for your good affections, and I do
accordingly give you thanks for your good affections.

Hen. Scobell Cleric. Parl. Dom. Com.


