To the Right HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament,
The Humble Petition of many of the Gentry, Ministry, Freeholders, and other
Inhabitants of the County of KENT; the City and County of Canterbury, and other
Corporations within the said County agreed on at the General quarter Sessions,
holden at Maidstone April 20. 1642.
Most Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners or many of them have heretofore exhibited to both Houses
of Parliament, a Petition concurring with those of the Renowned City of London,
and other several Counties of this Kingdom, expressing their zeal to true
Religion and the pure worship of God, and their loyal affections to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, both Houses, and Kingdoms.

That your Petitioners do with all humility, return their utmost thanks unto
this Honorable Assembly, for your favorable and gentle acceptance of their
Petition, your great care, vigilance and uncessant labors, for the advancement
of the true Reformed Religion, the honor and welfare, of his Majesty and his
Kingdom. For your continued endeavors for a right understanding between his
Majesty and Parliament. For your instant addresses to his Majesty, to dissuade
him from his personal expedition into Ireland, and especially for that to us
so welcome a Declaration of the Lords and Commons April 9. 1642. concerning
your pious intentions for a necessary Reformation which revives our hopes, and
will further your reckoning in the day of the Lord. And that your Petitioners
do most heartily rejoice to behold the happy Union of both Houses of
Parliament, and the mutual concurrence of them and the whole Kingdom, wherein
under his Majesty, the safety of the three Kingdoms does consist,

Yet your Petitioners cannot but plainly express with what sad hearts they
think on the many evil occurrents which interrupt your unparalleld pains and
intercept the fruit of your faithful Counsels from us, among which this is
not the le^st viz. A Petition as we humbly conceive of dangerous consequence,
contrived by some and published the last Assizes, holden for this County at
MAIDSTONE. And then, yet advanced for Subscribers and intended to be exhibited
to this Honorable House the Petition of the whole body of the County, to
cause the whole Kingdom to believe that Petition to be the Act of the whole
County of Kent or the major part thereof, whereby a great scandal is brought
upon this loyal and peaceable County, the same Petition being styled the
Kentish Petition, which we know is not the Act of the County, as it seems to
speak, for as much as it was disavowed by many of the then Grand Jury and
Justices of the Bench, and since by all us your Petioners whose names are under
written.

Wherefore your Petitioners humble and earnest prayer is, that your Honors
would be pleased to accept this our Vindication of our selves and County, who
utterly disclaim the said Petition, humbly leaving it to the wisdom, justice
and clemency of this Honorable Assembly, to difference between the active
Contrivers and Promoters and unadvised subscribers of it.

To list up your hearts above all discouragements in the ways of the Lord,
according to that your so religious resolution of reformation in the Church,
for a consultation with godly and learned Divines, and for the establishing of
a Preaching Ministry throughout the whole Kingdom.

And we your Petitioners (being sensible, that to oppose or slight his
Majesty's Parliament and the Orders thereof, were to hazard the safety of his
Royal Person and all his Kingdoms, and to further the designs of our
enemies, who hope by causing our division, to triumph in our confusion) are
unanimously resolved to maintain and defend as far as lawfully we may, with
our lives; powers, and estates his Majesty's Royal Person and dignity, as also
the Power and Privileges of his Parliments, according to our Protestation.

And shall daily pray, etc.
Iovis. 5. Maii, 1642.
The Lord Keeper by the directions of the House of Peers, gave the Petitioners
this Answer, which was agreed and penned by order of the Lords. (viz.)
Gentlemen,
I Am commanded by the Lords to let you know that they are very sensible, and
receive much content in the good affection which you have expressed to his
Majesty, the Parliament, and the whole Kingdom in this your Petition, wherein
you have vindicated so considerable a County as Kent, from that imputation
which some few malignant and ill affected persons by their undutifull and
sedicious practices were likely to have cast upon the whole County, which is
the more seasonable in respect of the danger that such evil designs aimed at.
The Parliament has faithfully advised the stay of his Majesty's Journey into
Ireland, and humbly Petitioned his return to his Parliament. There shall be
(as you desire) no endeavors wanting on their part for a happy settlement of
the government, both of Church and State.

Jovis 5. Maii. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, that this Petition and the answer
thereunto* shall be forthwith Printed and published.

John Brown Cleric. Parli.

London Printed for John Wright. 1642.


