To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, at
WESTMINSTER.
The humble PETITION OF THE Knights, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty of the
County of Kent, subscribed by the Grand Jury, the 11th of May 1648. at the
Sessions of the Judges, upon a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, then
executed at the Castle of Canterbury for the said County.
Shows:
THat the deep sense of our own miseries with a Fellow feeling of the
discontents of other Counties exposed to the like sufferings, prevayleth with
us thus humbly to present to your Honors these our ardent desires.

1. THAT our most gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, may with all speed he
admitted in safety and Honor, to Treat in person with his two Houses of
Parliament, for the perfect settling of the Pence both of Church and Common
Wealth, as also of his own just rights, together with those of Parliament.

2. That for prevention and removal of the manifold inconveniences occasioned
by the continuance of the present Army, under the Command of the Lord Fairfax,
their arrears may forthwith be Audited and they disbanded.

3. That according to the Fundamental Constitution of this Common Wealth, we
may for the future, be governed and judged by (the English Subjects undoubted
birthright) the known and established Laws of the Kingdom, and not
otherwise.

4. That according to the Petition of Right, our properly may not be invaded by
any Taxes or Impositions whatsoever, and particularly that the heavy burden of
Excise may no longer be continued, or hereafter imposed upon us.

All which our earnest desires, we humbly recommend to your grave and serious
considerations; not doubting of that speedy satisfaction therein, which the
case requires, and we humbly expect: Whereby we may well hope to see (what
otherwise we cannot but despair of) a speedy and happy end of these sad and
heavy pressures and distempers, whose continuance will inevitably ruin both
our selves and our posterities; your timely prevention whereof by a cheerful
condescent to what we here propound in order thereunto, shall oblige us ever to
pray etc.

By the Deputy-Lievtenants of the County of Kent, the City and County of
Canterbury, at their general meeting at Maidstone, the 10. of May 1648.
Whereas we understand that diverse persons have given out, that they intend to
assemble themselves toward the latter end of this month, or the beginning of
the next, at several days and places, upon pretense to carry a Petition to
the Parliament, which does concern matter against the authority of both
Houses, and tends to the raising of Seditions and tumults within this County,
we having lately received a special command from the House to use our best
endeavors to preserve the peace of the County do hereby in order thereunto,
advise all whom it may concern, to forbear all occasions of public
disturbance by any such tumultuous assembling of themselves, and from raising
of parties and factions against the Parliament, upon this or any pretense
whatsoever; and if any well affected Persons have been abused and misled so as
to sign and procure hands to any such seditious paper under the name of a
Petition, and upon false giving out that the Deputy Lievetenants of this County
do approve thereof, to the end that such well meaning persons may be undeceived,
we having seen a C^py of the said pretended Petition, do hereby signify our
utter detestation of such seditious practices, and do advise all well-wishers
to their Countries peace, to take heed thereof, and to counsel and persuade
their Neighbors accordingly: And if any pretended Coppies of such pretended
Petition come unto, or be in their hands, to deliver up the same unto the next
Deputy Lieutenant: And we do hereby require the Ministers of the several
Parishes publicly to read this signification in their Parish Churches upon
the next Lords Day after the receipt hereof, immediately before they begin
their Morning Sermon^ and the Churchwardens of the several Parishes are
hereby required the next day after the time appointed, for the said
publication to certify wh^^ has been done therein, under their hands un^o
the next Deputy Liev^enant; who is hereby direct^d forthwith to transmit the
said Certificate unto the standing Committee at Maidston, that so notice may be
taken what Ministers and Churchwardens, or other persons do their du^ies
therein: And such as shall be found wilfully faulty may be proceeded against
accordingly.

Anthony Wilding. John Rivers. Richard Lee. Thomas Lewis. Ga. Oxinden. Rich.
Beale. Tho. Seyliard. Law. Godfrey. Win. James. Io. Bix. William Keniorash.

To the Mayor of Gravesend, who is hereby required to cause Proclamation hereof
to be made in open market next day after the receite hereof in the height of
the Market, by the common Crier, and afterward to deliver it to the Minister
of the said Parish, to read it in the Churches, as abovesaid.



The Petitioners Vindication and Answer to the Deputy-Lievtenants Declaration
against the said Petition.
WE the Knights, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty of the County of Kent, who
have subscribed, and do intend to present, the real Petition (which is
abusively called a pretended one, and a seditious paper) to the Honorable the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament at Westminster, according to the just
Rights and Privileges of the Subjects of England, in pursuance of the
subscriptions of the Grand Jury of our County the 11. of May 1648. (who are and
ought to be the representers of the sense of our County) have taken notice of a
late Order or Declaration of the D^pu^y Lievtenants of our County of the 16. of
May 1648. ^ending to the discountenance and suppressing of our said Petition;
and untruly charging the same to contain matter against the Authority of both
Houses, (to whom it is addressed) and the Petitioners to be raysers of sedition
and tumults. In a deep sense whereof, and indignation of such false scandalls
imposed on us, we do declare to the world.

That the matter of our Petition, contaynes in it nothing but what is just and
fit for free borne Subjects to demand, and tends to the preserving of the
Peace, not only of our County, but of the whole Kingdom.

And the manner of our inten^ions to prosecute the same, shall be so peaceable
(on our parts) as shall not give occasion of tumults or public disturbance.

We do protest against raising any factions against the Parliament, to whom we
address our selves for a just relief of ou^ grievances: in pursuance of the
right of Subjects, and their own Ordinances, and (our desires being so just,
and our intentions so peaceable) we must declare, that (notwithstanding all
the menacing threats published to our discouragemen) we shall go on to
prosecute our just rights and desires, in such a way as shall neither render us
guilty of sedition, or public disturbance, nor of betraying our selves to the
violence of such who shall unjustly endeavor to oppose us.

And we do desire all persons of our County, well affected to the said
Petition, not to be discouraged from the just prosecution thereof, upon any
threats or orders whatsoever. Our intention being (if it shall please God so to
dispose of us) to sacrifice our lives and fortunes in the prosecution of those
our just rights and desires.

We have not a desire to deceive any, nor have we endeavored to mislead any
with pretending the Deputy Lievtenants of our Counties approbation of our
Petition. Nor do we desire any to join with us, but those whose reason and
conscience dictate to themselves the sense of our Petition.

FINIS.

