To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, now Assembled
in the High Court of Parliament.
The Petition of the Masters and Workmen Printers of London.
Humbly Shows,
THat whereas sundry of His Majesty's Predecessors, Kings and Queens of this
Realm, have in their several Reigns made sundry wholesome Ordinances for the
good government and regulating of Printers and Printing, and thereby given
great encouragements to the Professors thereof for their cheerful proceeding
in the said Mystery; And whereas tertio and quarto Philippi and Mariae, the
said Printers together with some Booke-Binders and Booke-Sellers, were
Incorporated by the name of one Master, two Keepers or Wardens and the
Commonalty, and Entitled under the name of the Company of Stationers, since
which time the said government (by what power we know not) has been altered,
and there has been invested diverse persons under the name of Assistants, who
together with the said Master and Wardens being Booke-Sellers and Strangers to
the said Mystery, have assumed and taken upon them the sole Government and
Ordering of the Science and Mystery of Printing, which is an Art they are
altogether ignorant of, whereby the State has been, and still is like to be
much disturbed and abused by multitudes of seditious Books and Pamphlets daily
Printed and published, and the said Art of Printing much debased in
workmanship, and otherwise, to the great dishonor of our Nation.

Now for that this Art of Printing much concerns the good both of the Church
and Commonwealth, by propagating the Gospel, and advancing all other Arts and
Sciences within his Majesty's Kingdoms and Provinces; And for the further
preventing of such Seditious Books and Pamphlets privately Printed here, and
also imported from beyond the Seas, and that Books may be Printed on better
Paper, and yet sold at cheaper rates than formerly, as also that Printing may
be every way as graceful and beautiful in these his Majesty's Dominions, as
in any other part of Christendom (which we are well able to perform, and
which good work has long been hindered by the ignorance and unskilfulnesse of
the aforesaid Governors.)

It is therefore the humble suit of the Masters and Workmen Printers in
general, That for the performance of the premises, We the said Artificers, by
special grace and favor from his Majesty and this high and honorable Court,
may have power to regulate the said Art, and every person now using, or
hereafter professing the said Art: And also considering the great number of
poor Workmen belonging to the said Mystery, We the said Artificers may alone
be stated in all those lawful immunities and privileges, which at any time
heretofore belonged and appertained to our Predecessors, or that at any time
hereafter may of right belong unto us.

And we shall daily pray, etc.
May it please this high and Honorable Court, our Grievances are very many,
but especially four Patents. viz.

I.
A Patent granted to Christopher Barker, and Robert Barker his son, in the
late Queen Elizabeth's reign, for the sole Printing of all Bibles, Testaments,
etc. in English.

II.
Another Patent granted first to Richard Tottle (as we believe) and lately
confirmed to John More, for Printing of all Law Books whatsoever, prohibiting
all others to Print the same.

III.
A Patent granted first to John Norton, and since descended to Roger Norton his
Kinsman, for the Printing of all Bibles, Testaments, Grammers, etc. in Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew, together with an Introduction to Grammar in English, and
sundry other Books.

IV.
A Patent lately granted to one Thomas Symcocke, for Printing of all things,
that are, may, or shall be Printed upon one side of a sheet, or any part of a
sheet; provided one side thereof be white Paper.

We beseech your Honors to consider, that none of the aforesaid Patentees were
at all acquainted with the Mystery of Printing, or ever served any time to any
Printer: yet have they and their Assigns, hitherto enjoyed their said Patents
(being the sole livelihood of Printing) to the great prejudice of us the said
Artists, and the whole state in general: for if it may stand with your Honors
good liking, to make void these Patents, the Commonwealth shall be far
better served with these and all other Books, they shall be better Printed,
and on better Paper, and yet shall be sold one shilling in four shillings
cheaper then now they are, and every Workman in the said Art shall have a
competent livelihood, to maintain them, which we are not as yet able to have,
by reason of the aforesaid Patents.

And we further humbly pray, that for the better encouragement of poor
Workmen in the said Mystery, all those Books formerly given and granted by his
Majesty, or otherwise, for their relief, may by the special grace and favor
of his Majesty and this high and Honorable Court, be confirmed to them.


