TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS AND BVRGSESES OF THE COMMONS
HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of some of the Parishioners in the Parish of Chigwell in
the County of Essex and diverse others.
Humbly Shows,
THat Dr. Emanuall Vtey now Vicar of the Parish Church of Chigwell aforesaid
has erected an Altar in the said Church, and does use frequent and offensive
bowing and cringing thereunto, compelling others to do the like, and has
kissed the Altar three times in one day, and does constantly read the Prayers
in the Divine Service with his face toward the Altar and back toward the
people, so that many of them cannot hear what is said.

That the said Vicar, openly in the Pulpit of the said Church, has spoken
these ensuing words, or words to the same effect, viz.

1. That his Fathers Soul was in heaven, making intercession for his, and that
it was lawful to pray unto Saints if the time would permit.

2. That the Commands of the Archbishop of Canterbury (whom he compared unto
the high Priest) were equally to be obeyed with Gods command in his word.

3. That the said Vicar has said, that the King is not Supreme head of the
Church next under Christ, and being demanded who then was? he ansvvered, the
Bishops; and said further, that no Minister, who understood himself, would
pray for the King as Supreme head of the Church under Christ, and that there
has been no true Religion in England these 40. years, and being then told he
was a friend to the Pope, answered, that he loved the Pope with all his heart,
and affirms that the Pope is not Antichrist, whosoever he is.

4. That the said Vicar has declared, that whatsoever any person (who had
entered into holy orders) did speak, he spoke by Divine Inspiration, and being
urged, that then they differed not from those that wrote the holy Scriptures,
he made no answer to that, but impudently and blasphemously persisting in his
former opinions said further, that, if the Devil could have orders put upon
him, whatsoever he should say, should be by Divine inspiration.

5. That the said Vicar has said, that if a man usually meet with occasions
of Drunkenesse or Fornication and be actually overcome by them, yet such a man
does not sin, because he sought not the occasion.

6. That the said Vicar has been oftentimes seen drunk, and his wife has
reported that he was a Papist in heart, and did wear a Crucifix in his bosom
and kept one in his study, and that he so bitterly threatened her for not
bowing to it, as she was constrained to cry out for help and hide herself.

7. And lastly, the said Vicar has said, the house of Parliament has nothing
to do in matters of Religion, but if any things were amiss, complaint ought
to be made to the Bishops, and they were to reform it, and has also uttered
many other words tending to the dishonor of the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament.

All which premises containing Popish and superstitious Ceremonies, corrupt
and dangerous opinions and Tenants contrariant to the established Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England, scandalous and blasphemous words tending
to the dishonor of Almighty God, and (as they conceive) the subversion of his
Majesty's Royal Supremacy, and the abridgment of the power and authority of
the High and Honorable Court of Parliament.

Your Petitioners humbly implore the sudden removeall of the said Vicar, with
a reformation of the said Innovations and such censure upon the offender, as to
the grave Wisdom of this Honorable assembly shall be thought meet. And your
Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
To the Courteous Reader.
IT is obvious to the judicious, that the Prelates have been the original
cause of all the divisions and Schisms in the Church, as well since the
Reformation as before, as may appear by their withstanding of it in the
beginning, and also ever since by their imposing things upon men's consciences,
contrary to Gods Word, and to the uttermost of their power persecuting all
zealous and Godly Ministers, because they would not be obedient to their
ungodly commands, and in the mean time maintaining and countenancing a dumb
idle and scandalous Ministry, so long as they would be conformable to them, yea
Popish Ministers and Popishly addicted; as may appear both by this Petition
and many other presented to this Parliament, and to diverse former Parliaments,
but the Prelates bare such a sway that no good could be effected. Wherefore let
every good Christian pray earnestly unto God, that he would put into the hearts
of his Majesty and this Parliament, utterly to abolish this Antichristian
Hierarchicall Govenment, Which has been the chief hindrance of a through
Reformation.

Printed in the Year, 1641.


