To the Right Honorable the Lords now assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the High Sheriff, Knights, Esquiors, Gentlemen,
Ministers, Freeholders, and other the inhabitants of the County of Berks.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners with all joy and thankfulness of heart, acknowledge the
happy concurrence of your Lordships, with the honorable House of Commons, to
the effecting of many great and excellent things; And we hope of a full and
perfect Reformation in the Government of this Church and Commonwealth; Whereby
so many threatening dangers to this Kingdom both at home and from abroad, by
your great wisdoms may be prevented, to the perpetual Honor of your
Lordships and this Parliament.

We humbly pray the continuance of this happy consent, and joint endeavor for
the public good, earnestly desiring your Lordships assistance, in putting our
County, together with all other Counties of this Kingdom into a present
Posture of defense, and we shall be ever ready with our Lives, Powers, and
Fortunes, to maintain and defend His Majesty's Person, Honor, and Estate, your
Lordships in that happy concurrence, and the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament.

And shall ever pray, etc.
To the Honorable Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons now
assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the High Sheriff, Knights, Esquiors, Gentlemen,
Ministers, Freeholders, and other inhabitants of the County of Berks.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners acknowledge with all dutiful and most hearty thanks,
the great Piety, courage and constancy of this Honorable House, in your
unwearied labors, for the good of this Church and State, whereby great things
are done for us already; for which we bless God who has made His Majesty and
you, the happy instruments thereof, and enlarge our hopes of a prosperous
continuance of the good success of your endeavors. We do with like zeal and
affection to your proceedings, humbly crave leave to Petition, That all
Innovation in Gods worship, may be removed. Such as take upon them the Function
of the Ministry unauthorized, and those who are Popishly affected, and oppose
the due Reformation of Church Government may be disabled from hindering your
pious intentions, and such things established, as are most agreeable to Christ's
Gospel, and most advantageous to His Kingdom. That scandalous Ministers may be
displaced, and Gods people enjoy the comfort of zealous and painful Preachers
in their Rooms. That known and professed Arminians and Socinians may not be
entrusted in any place of Government. That our Liturgy may be reviewed, and
purged of all things not warranted by the Word of God, and justly scandalous.
That you would be a means to His Majesty, and the House of Peers, that the
Votes of Popish Lords in the House of Peers, may be taken away; and that the
frequent assemblies and consultations of Priests, Jesuits, and their adherents
plotting mischief against this State, may be prevented and punished, and a
watchful eye had over them, that they strengthen not themselves, with new
supplies of Arms, which we conceive they may be apt to do, unless the
Justices of peace may have power to examine the abuses upon oath. That this
Kingdom may be put into a fit Posture of defense, and the Militia thereof
settled according to your prudent advice and purpose. That the Persons of the
most active Papists may be secured, the Laws duly executed upon them, who are
the evil Counselors, raisers, and fomentors of the troubles, and distempers
of this Commonwealth. That Churches and Chapels of ease, may be endowed with
competent maintenance for preaching Ministers. That you will please to continue
your care of our poor distressed Brethren, in the bleeding Kingdom of Ireland.
That the Statute for Roberies may be reviewed and amended. The Forest Laws
assertained. The abuses of Purveyors, and Cart-takers reformed. That you will
take into your speedy consideration, to advance the trade of Clothing, a chief
support of many poor of this County, the general present decay, whereof may
breed great mischiefs; unless by your Wisdoms it be speedily prevented. For
these particulars, and many others, which you can better understand then we
express, we know your Wisdoms are so prudent, that we would have been silent
still, but that we begin to doubt our silence may encourage the malignant
party, to think we are of their opinion. Your Petitioners being ever ready with
all cheerfulness to hazard our lives, power, and estates, to maintain, and
defend His Majesty's Person, Honor, and Estate, this Honorable House, and the
Privileges of Parliament.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
These Petitions were delivered by the chief Gentry of the County, Subscribed
with above 3000. hands.

March 5. London, Printed by John Raworth. 1641.


