To the Right Honorable, The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons
House in Parliament assembled, THE HVMBLE PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen,
and Commons of the City of LONDON, in Common Counsel assembled: Delivered the
16th. of this instant MAY, into the Honorable House of COMMONS.

Together with the ANSWER of the said House to the said PETITION.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Petition, and Answer, be
forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for Edward Husbands, May 24. 1644.

To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the
COMMONS-House in PARLIAMENT Assembled; The Humble PETITION of the Lord MAjOR,
Aldermen, and Commons of the City of LONDON in Common Council Assembled.
Shows,
THAT the continued Industry, Courage and Constancy which this Honorable House
have manifested in all Affairs concerning the Public; The Faithful
Endeavors of the LORDS and COMMONS of the Committee of both Kingdoms, the
special Care taken in putting the Tower of London, and Castle of Windsor into
safe Hands, and Your favorable Resolutions not to dispose of them otherwise
then as may stand with the Security and Satisfaction of this City, Have laid a
great Obligation of Thankfulness upon the Inhabitants thereof and their
Posterity, and Encourage the Petitioners, Humbly to Represent their
Apprehensions and Fears arising from the Discontinuance of that Honorable
Committee, Especially at this time, when our Enemies are so Active, and all our
Armies in Mot^on; From the want of Execution of Justice upon Delinquents, the
not putting of Tilbury Fort in safe hands, and from the Endeavors of diverse
Members o Parliament to be Readmitted into that great Council, who have
contrary to the Trust in them reposed Deserted the same, kept Correspondency
with the Enemy, joined in other Council, and taken up Arms against the
Parliament.

For Removal of which Apprehensions and Fears, and prevention of the sad
Consequences thereof, Your Petitioners make it their earnest and Humble suite
to this Honorable House;

That the Committee of both Kingdoms may be so sp^edily Re-established, as the
present Exigents of Affairs require.

That the Tower of London, and Castle of Windsor may be continued in safe
hands, and the Garrison at Windsor timely and constantly supplied with Money
and other Necessaries; And the Fort of Tilbury well manned, and put into the
hands of Persons of Trust, and that have Abillity to Discharge the same.

That a Course may be forthwith taken for the Trial and Punishment of
Delinquents.

That none of the said Members of Parliament may be Readmitted without
special Assurance and Satisfaction first given to both Houses of Parliament
for their Fidelity to come.

That this Honorable House will Persevere in Your Endeavors and Resolutions
tending to the Public good, notwithstanding all Discouragements.

And to rest Assured, that the Petitioners for the Promoting thereof, will
cheerfully Obey Your Orders and Directions from time to time, and Adhere unto
You, to the utmost expense of their Lives and Estates, according to their late
Solemn Covenant.

Michel.

18. May. 1644.
THe House of Commons, having received the Petition of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council assembled,
delivered unto them upon Thursday, the 16. of this instant May, by the
Sheriffs, Aldermen, and diverse others, appointed a Committee from the said
Common Council; After serious consideration of the Contents, Do return this
Answer:

THey do acknowledge it, an especial blessing of Almighty God, that their
endeavors, (wherein they have done but their duty) have been so well
understood and accepted, by this famous City; without whose constant affections
and assistance they could not have brought this great Work to that hopeful
condition, wherein (by the mercy of God) it now stands.

To the particulars desired, they have esteemed them so necessary for the
public good, that the settling of them has already been resolved upon, in
this House.

For the continuance of the Committee of both Kingdoms, an Ordinance is
depending for that purpose; the speedy perfecting whereof, they will endeavor.

For the Tower of London, Castle of Windsor, and Fort at Tilbury; They will
take such further course as shall be for the security and satisfaction of the
City.

For the Trial and punishment of Delinquents, the House has already resolved
upon an Ordinance, for the settling of a constant Council of War, within the
Lines of Communication.

For the not re-admitting of such Members of Parliament, who contrary to the
trust reposed in them, have deserted the same, and adheared to the Enemy, this
House has passed an Ordinance as is desired, and will endeavor the speedy
perfecting thereof.

For the Expressions of adhearing to the House of Commons in the endeavors of
promoting the public good, they have been demonstrated by action in times of
greatest difficulty; wherein the City has spent their dearest blood, and vast
sums of Treasure, omitting no possible supplies of persons and Purse.

In their most seasonable desires, offer, and promise they now make, (never to
be forgotten by the House of Commons) they manifest, their affections can admit
of no decrease; which are great encouragements to this House, to persevere in
the endeavors, and resolutions desired, wherein (by the blessing of Almighty
God) they will persist, to the utmost hazard of their lives and fortunes,
against the greatest discouragements; until the affairs of the Church and
Commonwealth, receive such a happy conclusion as all good men desire, and pray
for.

And in return for their great affection, the House of Commons does declare,
They will in a most peculiar manner be mindful of the merit of this City,
which upon all occasions they shall acknowledge, and will endeavor to requite;
And in the mean time, they give them most hearty Thanks.

FJNJS.

