To the Right Honorable the Supreme Authority of the Commonwealth of England
in PARLIAMENT assembled. The humble Petition of diverse Freeholders and others
Inhabitants in the County of Hartford.
SHOWS,
THat we have been filled with an holy admiration at, and rejoicing in the
special hand of God for good (we hope) toward us and the whole land in this
late fignall providence toward you, in restoring you with honor and freedom
to the exercise of the supreme Authority of this Commonwealth; in the
management whereof how the Lord of hosts owned and eminently appeared for you,
by a continued series of miraculous salvations both by land and sea, to the
refreshing the hearts of your friends, and astonishment and amazement of your
adversaries at home and abroad, far and near, as it will (we trust) be fresh in
your remembrance as an incitement and encouragement to follow God fully, and
wholly to put your confidence in him, in a vigorous and faithful discharge of
the trust reposed in you, so we find it is indellibly written in our hearts as
a foundation of faith and hope, that he that has begun the good work of
settlement by you, will also honor you as instruments to perfect and complete
it, that Englands Commonwealth may be the Tyrants and Oppressors terror, the
enslaved and oppressed's succor and shelter, throughout the Nations of the
earth. And whereas some of us were hereupon drawn forth in our spirits
immediately upon your returning to your places to expedite an Early address
unto you, principally to manifest our cordial affections to you, and our
faithful perseverance in adhearing to the Good old Cause, to the encouraging
our hearts, and strengthening our hands in God, against the flood of opposition
in all malignant and maligning enemies, both old and new: purposely omitting
the presentation of our grievances or desires relating thereunto in the Crisis
of public affairs, which being now by the good providence of God somewhat
over, and matters referring to the security of the being of our liberty, and
your just authority, in some measure provided for, which only we then desired,
and now thankfully acknowledge your care therein. We hope it will not be judged
impertinent or unseasonable to spread before you the thoughts of our hearts
concerning some most material things which we humbly conceive are necessary
(at least) to our wel-being, which are as follows:

1. That timely provision may be made for the settling and establishing a
Commonwealths constitution, upon principles and rules of common justice,
universal freedom, reciprocal consistency, and necessary dependency of
interest between the Governors and governed, that the government may not
through any failer therein degenerate either into Monarchy or Anarchy. And that
a Committee may be appointed to receive such proposals from any persons who
shall offer to them any light therein.

2. That care may be taken that the conduct and command of the Army may be so
settled as may be consistent with the nature and interest of a Commonwealth.

3. That a speedy and through inspection be made into the laws, that such which
are burdensome or oppressive to the people, whether of a religious or civil
nature, may be repealed, and that the administration, as to its dilatoriness,
and chargableness, may be effectually regulated; or rather that a new model of
the Laws, consistent with a Commonwealths interest may be made and
established, that that which is ordained to be the peoples hedge and fence may
not become their snare, and instrument of ruin.

4. That consideration may be had of the present way of the Nations Ministeries
maintenance by Tithes, which is offensive to many tender consciences,
oppressive to the Husband man, whose livelihood depends upon tillage, tends to
devide between Ministers and people, and renders their labors for the most
part abortive and unprofitable, and that redress may be afforded therein.

5. That as you thought fit to take away all Wardships as a badge of the Norman
yoke, to the great ease of persons of great estates (though they much increased
the public treasure) so you would take some effectual course for the
alteration of arbitrary Copy hold tenures, as a great mark of tyranny, that the
poor tenants thereof may not be left to the mercy of the Lords of such Manors,
whilst great men are made free; but may all have a proportionable taste, in
their capacities, of the benefit of a Commonwealths freedom.

6. That the payment of the public Faith debts may be no longer delayed, to
the dishonor of the Nation, and the undoing many poor zealous friends, who
lent beyond their abilities, and now want bread.

7. That all debts contracted by private persons for private uses, may not be
paid out of the public treasury.

8. And lastly, that the same persons may not always continue in the exercise
of the legislative power, but that all may come to taste of subjection as well
as rule; and in order thereto that in convenient time provision may be made for
the succession of equal Representatives, with such due qualifications of the
Electors and Elected, as may consist with the interest of the Commonwealth.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
This Petition was presented on Tuesday June 21, by Sir Henry Blount Knight,
accompanied with diverse Gentlemen, Freeholders of the County aforesaid. At the
delivery whereof the said Sir Henry among other words used these following
expressions: That our subscriptions had bin much more numerous, but that care
was taken to make use of no more hands then of those persons who are eminently
affected to your government and a Common wealth. And the Petitioners being
commanded to withdraw, after reading of the Petition, and some debate upon the
same, they were called into the House again, and received this answer from the
Speaker: Gentlemen, Your Petition has been read, and every part thereof,
wherein the House have observed many expressions of very good affections, and
they believe of good intentions also, and has commanded me to give you thanks
for the same: and I do give you the thanks of the House accordingly.

London, Printed for Tho. Brewster, at the three Bibles at the West end of
Paul's. 1659.


