To the Supreme Authority of this NATION in PARLIAMENT assembled.
The Humble PETITION of the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen of the CITY of
LONDON.
HUMBLY SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners acknowledge the wisdom and goodness of this Parliament
in the Acts of the last year, for regulating Elections of Aldermen,
Common-counsell men, and other Officers of this City; and do humbly conceive
that several of the same limitations may again conduce to the good of this
City. But in that particular concerning the Subscribers to the Personal
Treaty, in which we know many faithful men were surprised in that hour of
Temptation, who have constantly acted very really for the public good of this
Commonwealth.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, That if it may stand with the wisdom
of this Parliament, Liberty may be granted in that particular; Which we humbly
conceive will much tend to the greater peace, union, and happy government of
this City, and be a more sure engagement of many persons very well affected to
this Commonwealth.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray etc. J. Sadler.

The Parliaments Answer Declared by Mr. Speaker upon this Petition.
GENTLEMEN,
THE Parliament has taken into consideration the Petition presented by you,
and has commanded me to return you this Answer, That the Parliament does take
notice of the good affections of the Petitioners; And likewise having had in
consideration yesterday the substance of that Petition now presented, did then
pass an Act, and therefore the Petition coming so late, they do not think fit
to make any alteration therein: but shall in convenient time take the desires
of the Petitioners into consideration. And as to such persons as do constantly
adhere to the Parliament, and have always adhered thereunto (saving in that
business of signing the Petition for the Personal Treaty) when the Parliament
shall be informed of such persons in particular, the Parliament will take the
same into consideration for such indulgence to such persons as have and still
do manifest their fidelity and affection to the Parliament, as shall be thought
fit.

Hen Scobel Cler. Parliament.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes 1650.


