TO THE SUPREME AVTHORITY OF THE NATION, The Parliament of the Commonwealth
of ENGLAND. The humble Petition of the Common Council of the City of LONDON.
SHOWS,
THat this City has taken notice of a Vote of your Honors, of the second of
this instant September, importing your pleasures, that John Ireton the present
Lord Mayor of this City, do continue and execute the Office of Lord Mayor for
the year ensuing, recommending it to the City of London to see the same done
accordingly; touching which, your Petitioners do not at this time apply to your
Honors, out of any exception to that Honorable Person therein mentioned; but
entrenching upon our ancient Charters, Customs and Privileges, a breach upon
which, would exceedingly hazard, if not totally destroy the Peace, good order,
and happiness of the most Ancient, and most Well-governed City, We had almost
said in the World, but surely We may say in this Nation, when as the multitude
of Inhabitants in and about it is considered. Our Government stands upon two
supporss, The laudable Custom of it time out of mind, and several very Ancient
Charters, which have been confirmed by sundry Acts of Parliament; And in them
these are essencial, That the Mayor of the City aforesaid, be chosen by the
Citizens of the same City; That the Mayor of the said City remain not in the
said Office above one year together; And that the Supreme Power of the Nation,
may be fully satisfied in our Choice, We are to present him there for
aprobation, which We cheerfully submit to, and assure our selves, That among
several very worthy Persons (whom God and his good Providence has given us in
succession) there may be chosen such a fit Person for the year ensuing, as will
be serviceable to the Peace, and Safety of the City and Nation; and acceptable
to Your Honors.

In the consideration whereof, We make this Our Petition, persuading our selves
no alteration will be made by Your Honors, in Our so Ancient, Good and
Peaceable Custom and Charter: especially, when We call to mind the long Peace,
and Happiness this great and populous City has enjoyed under this Government;
And that the disturbance of the (though but in the minds of men) may prove
dangerous thereunto: As also, the great Love and correspondency that this
Election has maintained in all times, between the Mayor and Citizens; But when
We look into the Records of Parliament and Our own Courts, what
acknowledgments, Promises and Engagements this City has received from Your
Honors, We might well abhor Our own dis-ingenuity, if We should fear the
breach of Our Charters, Customs, or any mark of hardship and displeasure from
Your Honors. For We do find,

13. January 1643. Fo. 85. Both Houses distinctly, make great acknowledgement
to the City, with assurance never to dissert it; but to make it their greatest
care, to watch all opportunitys to advance the honor and happiness of the
City, which under God has been the principal means of preserving the
Parliament.

6 May 1644. Fo. 95. 115. A Committee from both Houses, signify their sense of
the Cities readiness to assist the Parliament upon all occasions, and that
therefore the Parliament is likewise ready, to express their gratitude to the
City in the most essencial manner and way they can find out, and therefore
being about to make Proposi^ions to the King, in behalf of both Kingdoms; They
offer it to the Common Counsel, to think of some Propositions to be prepared in
behalf of the City, for the Honor, Safety and Good of it, and that the
Parliament will present to his Majesty.

Fo. 108, 115. Accordingly the City prepared Propositions, of which one was,
for confirmation of all the Charters granted to the City, and of all Liberties,
Customs, Privileges, notwithstanding Nonuser, Misuser or abuser, That they
shall not be drawn out of the Liberties to War without their own consent.

May 18. 1644. Fo. 98. The Commons acknowledge it an especial blessing of
Almighty God, that their endeavors have been so well understood, and accepted
by this Famous City, without whose constant affection and assistance, they
could not have brought that great work to the hopeful condition wherein by the
Mercy of God it then stood.

That the City have demonstrated their adherence to the House of Commons, by
Actions in the times of greatest difficulty; and have therein spent their
dearest Blood, and vast Sums of Treasure, omitting no possible supplies of
Purse and Person; That they (the Commons) will never forget the great
Encouragements that they received by a Petition from the City: And in return
for their great Affections, The House of Commons do Declare, That they will in
a most peculiar manner, be mindful of the Merit of the City: which upon all
occasions they shall acknowledge, and will endeavor to requite.

The Fruits of all which, We do persuade Our selves, can never be wanting to
the City, whilst Your Honors that made them, has Power in Your hands to make
them good. And we hope the Common Enemy both to You and Us, shall never have
cause to rejoice in this, That Our City shall want the benefit of Your
Engagements to us, in the days of Your and Our streights; Much less loose any
of Our former Privileges by Your Hands in the days of Peace.

Therefore, in a deep sense of the Cities concernment therein, and the Duty
incumbent on Us, and all Freemen of the City, by Virtue of our Oaths, We do
most humbly pray, That Your Honors will lay no restraint upon the Peoples free
Election of Our Mayor; And thar our Ancient Charters, Customs, Rights and
Privileges in this and all other things may be continued to Us.

And We shall ever pray, etc.
LONDON, Printed for John Johnson, 1659.


