TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Commons of England In Parliament Assembled.
The humble Petition of diverse well affected Persons inhabiting the City of
London, Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, Hamblets, and places adjacent.
With the Parliaments Answer thereunto.
SHOWS,
THat although we are as earnestly desirous of a safe and wel-grounded Peace,
and that a final end were put to all the troubles and miseries of the
Commonwealth, as any sort of men whatsoever: Yet considering upon what grounds
we engaged on your part in the late and present Wars, and how far (by our so
doing) we apprehend our selves concerned, Give us leave (before you conclude as
by the Treaty in hand) to acquaint you first with the ground and reason which
induced us to aid you against the King and his Adherents. Secondly, What our
Apprehensions are of this Treaty. Thirdly, What we expected from you, and do
still most earnestly desire.

Be pleased therefore to understand, that we had not engaged on your part, but
that we judged this honorable House to be the supreme Authority of England, as
chosen by, and representing the People; and entrusted with absolute power for
redress of Grievances, and provision for Safety: and that the King was but at
the most the chief public Officer of this Kingdom, and accomptable to this
House (the Representative of the People, from whom all just Authority is, or
ought to be derived) for discharge of his Office: And if we had not bin
confident hereof, we had bin desperately mad to have taken up Arms or to have
bin aiding and assisting in maintaining a War against Him; The Laws of the Land
making it expressly a crime no less that Treason for any to raise War against
the King.

But when we considered the manifold oppressions brought upon the Nation, by
the King, His Lords, and Bishops; and that this Honorable House declared their
deep sense thereof; and that (for continuance of that power which had so
oppressed us) it was evident the King intended to raise Forces, and to make War;
and that if he did set up his Standard, it tended to the dissolution of the
Government: upon this, knowing the safety of the People to be above Law, and
that to judge thereof appertained to the Supreme Authority, and not to the
Supreme Magistrate, and being satisfied in our Consciences, that the public
safety and freedom was in imminent danger, we concluded we had not only a just
cause to maintain; but the supreme Authority of the Nation, to justify,
defend, and indempnifie us in time to come, in what we should perform by
direction thereof; though against the known Law of the Land, or any inferior
Authority, though the highest.

And as this our understanding was begotten in us by principles of right
reason, so were we confirmed therein by your own proceedings, as by your
condemning those Judges who in the case of Ship money had declared the King to
be Judge of safety; and by your denying Him to have a Negative voice in the
making of Laws; where you wholly exclude the King from having any share in the
supreme Authority: Then by your casting the Bishops out of the House of Lords,
who by tradition also, had bin accounted an essential part of the supreme
Authority; And by your declaring to the Lords, That if they would not join with
you in se^ling the Militia, (which they long refused) you would settle it
without them, which you could not justly have done, and they had any real share
in the supreme Authority.

These things we took for real Demonstrations, that you undoubtedly knew your
selves to be the supreme Authority; ^ver weighing down in us all other your
indulgent Evpressions concerning the King or Lords. It being indeed impossible
for us to believe that it can consist either with the safety or freedom of the
Nation, to be governed either by 3. or 2. Supreams, especially where experience
has proved them so apt to differ in their Judgments concerning Freedom or
Safety, that the one has been known to punish what the other has judged
worthy of reward; when not only the freedom of the people is directly opposite
to the Prerogatives of the King and Lords, but the open enemies of the one,
have been declared friends by the other, as the Scots were by the House of
Lords.

And when as most of the oppressions of the Commonwealth have in all times bin
brought upon the people by the King and Lords, who nevertheless would be so
equal in the supreme Authority, as that there should be no redress of
Grievances, no provision for safety, but at their pleasure. For our parts, we
profess our selves so far from judging this to be consistent with Freedom or
Safety, that we know no great cause Wherefore we assisted you in the late Wars,
but in hope to be delivered by you from so intolerable, so destructive a
bondage, so soon as you should (through Gods blessing upon the Armies raised by
you) be enabled.

But to our exceeding grief, we have observed that no sooner God vouchsafes
you victory, and blesses you with success, and thereby enablet you to put us
and the whole Nation, into an absolute condition of freedom and safety: but
according as ye have bin accustomed, passing by the ruin of a Nation, and all
the blood that has bin spilt by the King and his Party, ye betake your selves
to a Treaty with him, thereby putting him that is but one single person, and a
public Officer of the Commonwealth, in competition with the whole body of the
people, whom ye represent; not considering that it is impossible for you to
erect any authority equal to your selves; and declared to all the world that
you will not alter the ancient Government, from that of King, Lords, and
Commons: not once mentioning (in case of difference) which of them is supreme,
but leaving that point (which was the chiefest cause of all our public
differences, disturbances Wars and miseries) as uncertain as ever.

In so much as we who upon these grounds have laid out our selves every way to
the uttermost of our abilities: and all others throughout the land, Soldiers
and others who have done the like in defense of our supreme authority, and in
opposition to the King, cannot but deem our selves in the most dangerous
condition of all others, left without all plea of indemnity, for what we have
done; as already many have found by (loss of their lives and liberties, either
for things done or said against the King; the law of the land frequently taking
place, and precedence against and before your authority, which we esteemed
supreme, and against which no law ought to be pleaded. Nor can we possibly
conceive how any that have any ways assisted you, can be exempt from the guilt
of murders and robbers, by the present laws in force, if you persist to
disclaim the Supreme Authority, though their own conscience do acquit them,
as having opposed none but manifest Tyrants, Oppressors and their adherents.

And whereas a Personal Treaty, or any Treaty with the King, has been long
time held forth as the only means of a safe and wel-grounded peace; it is well
known to have been cried up principal^y by such as have been disaffected unto
you; and though you have contradicted it: yet it is believed that you much fear
the issue; as you have cause sufficient, except you see greater alteration in
the King and his party then is generally observed, there having never yet been
any Treaty with him, but was accompanied with some underhand dealing; and
whilst the present force upon him (though seeming liberty) will in time to come
be certainly pleaded, against all that shall or can be agreed upon: nay, what
can you confide in if you consider how he has been provoaked; and what former
Kings upon less provocations have done, after Oaths, Laws, Charters, Bonds,
Excommunications, and all ties of Reconsilliations, to the destruction of all
those that had provoked and opposed them: yea, when your selves so soon as he
had signed those bills in the beginning of this Parliament, saw cause to tell
him, That even about the time of passing those bills, some design or other was
one foot which if it had taken affect would not only have rendered those bills
fruitless, but have reduced you a worse condition of confusion than that
wherein the Parliament found you.

And if you consider what new wars, risings, revolting invasions, and plottings
have been since this last cry for a Personal Treaty, you will not blame us if
we wonder at your hasty proceedings thereunto: especially considering the
wonderful victories which God has blessed the Army withal.

We profess we cannot choose but stand amazed to consider the inevitable danger
we shall be in, though all things in the Propesitions were agreed unto, the
Resolutions of the King and his party have been perpetually violently and
implacably prosecuted and manifested against us; and that with such scorn and
indignation, that it must be more than such ordinary bonds that must hold them.

And it is no less a wonder ^o us, that you can place your own security
therein, or that you can ever imagine to see a free Parliament any more in
England.

The truth is (and we see we must either now speak it for ever be silent,) We
have long expected things of an other nature from you, and such as we are
confident would have given satisfaction to all serious people of all Parties.

1. That you would have made good the supreme of the people, in this Honorable
House, from all pretenses of Negative Voices, either in King or Lords.

2. That you would have made laws for election of representatives yearly and
of course without writ or summons.

3 That you would have set express times for their meeting Continuance and
Dissolution: as not to exceed 40 or 50 days at the most, and to have fixed an
expressed time for the ending of this present Parl.

4. That you would have exempted matters of Religion and God, worship, from the
compulsive or restrictive power of any Authority upon earth, and reserved to
the supreme authority an un compulsive power only of appointing a way for the
public whereby abundance of misery, presecution, and hart-burning would for
ever be avoided.

5. That you would have disclaimed in your selves and all future
Representatives, a power of Pressing and forcing any sort of men to serve in
wars, there being nothing more opposite to freedom, nor more unreasonable in
an authority empowered for raising moneys in all occasions, for which, and a
just cause, assistants need not be doutbed: the other way serving rather to
maintain in justice and corrupt parties.

6. That you would have made both Kings, Queens Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords,
and all Persons, alike liable to every Law of the Land, made or to be made;
that so all persons even the Highest might fear and stand inlaw and neither
violate the public peace, nor private right of person or estate, (as has been
frequent) without being liable to account as other men,

7 That you would have freed all Commoners from the jurisdiction of the Lords
in all cases: and to have taken care that all trials should be only of twelve
sworn men, and no conviction but upon two or more sufficient known witnesses.

8. That you would have freed all men from being examined against themselves,
and from being questioned or punished for doing of that against which no Law
has bid provided.

9. That you would have abbreviated the proceedings in Law, mitigated and made
certain the charge thereof in all particulars.

10. That you would have freed all Trade and Marchandising from all
Monopolizing and Engrossing, by Companies or otherwise.

11. That you would have abolished Excise, and all kind of taxes, except
subsidies, the old and only just way of England.

12. That you would have laid open all late Enclosures of Fens, and other
Commons, or have enclosed them only or chiefly to the benefit of the poor.

13. That you would have considered the many thousands that are ruined by
perpetual imprisonment for debt, and provided to their enlargement.

14. That you would have ordered some effectual course to keep people from
begging and beggary, in so fruitful a Nation as through Gods blessing this is.

15. That you would have proportioned Punishments more equal to offenses; that
so men's Lives and Estates might not be forfeited upon trivial and slight
occasions.

16. That you would have removed the tedious burden of Tithes, satisfaying all
Impropriators, and providing a more epual way of maintenance for the public
Ministers.

17. That you would have raised a stock of Money or of those many confiscated
Estates you have had, for payment of those who contributed voluntoarily above
their abilities, before you had provided for those that disbursed out of their
superfluities.

18. That you would have bound your selves and all future Parliaments from
abolishing propriety, levelling men's Estats, or making all things common.

19. That you would have declared what the duty or dusines of the Kingly office
is, and what not, and ascertained the Revenue, past increase or diminution,
that so there might never be more quarrels about the same.

20. That you would have rectfied the election of public Officers for the
City of London, of every particular Company therein, restoring the Comunalty
thereof to their just Rights, most unjustly withheld from them, to the
producing and maintaining of corrupt interest, opposite to common Freedom, and
exceedingly Prejudecal to the trade and manufactures of this Nation.

21. That you would have made full and ample reparations to all persons that
had bin oppressed by sentences in high Commission, Stare Chamber, and Council
Board, or by any kind of Monopolizers, or projectors, and that out of the
estates of those that were authors, actors or promoters of so intolerable
mischiefs, and that without much attendance.

22. That you would have abolished all Committees, and have conveyed all
businesses into the true method of the usual Trials of the Commonwealth.

23. That you would not have followed the example of former tyrannous and
superstitious Parliaments, in making Orders, Ordinances or laws, or in
appointing punishments concerning opinions or things super-naturall stiling
some blasphemies others heresies; when as you know your selves easily mistaken
and that divine truths need no human helps to support them: such proceedings
having bin geneaally invented to divide the people amongst themselves, and to
affright men from that liberty of discourse by which Corruption and tyranny
would be soon discovred.

24. That you would have declared what the business of the Lords as, and
ascertain their condition, not derogating from the Liberties of oither men,
that so there might be an end of striving about the same.

25. That you would have done Justice upon the Capital Authors and Promoters
of the former or late Wars, many of them being under you^ power: Considering
that mercy to the wicked, is cruelty to the innocent: and that all your lenity
does but make them the more insolent and presumptuous.

26. That you would have provided constant pay for the Army, now under the
Command of the Lord Genesis Fairfax, and given rules to all Judges, and all other
public Officers throughout the Land for their indempaity, and for the saving
harmless^ all that have any ways assisted you, or that have said or done any
thing against the King, Queen, or any of his party since the beginning of this
Parl. without which any of his party are in a better condition then those who
have served you; nothing being more frequent with them, then their reviling of
you and your friends.

The things and worthy Acts which have bin done and atchived by this Army and
their Adherents (how ever ingratefully suffered to be scandalized as Sectaries
and men of corrupt Judgments) in defense of the just authority of this
honorable House, and of the common liberties of the Nation, and in opposition
to all kind of Tyranny and oppression, being so far from meriting an odious Act
of Oblivion, that they rather deserve a most honorable Act of perpetual
remembrance, to be as a pattern of public virtue, fidelity, and resolution to
all posterity.

27. That you would have laid to heart all the abundance of innocent blood that
has bin spilt, and the infinite spoil and havoc that has been made of
peaceable harmless people, by express Commissions from the King; and seriously
to have considered whether the justice of God be likely to be satisfied, or his
yet continuing wrath appeased, by an Act of Oblivion.

These and the like we have long time hoped you would have minded, and have
made such an establishment for the General peace and conrentfull satisfaction
of all sorts of people, as shoulp have bin to the happiness of all future
generations, and which we most earnestly desire you would set your selves
speedily to effect; whereby the almost dying honor of this most honurable
House, would be again revived, and the hearts of your Petitioners and all other
well affected people, be a fresh renewed unto you, the Freedom of the Nation
(now in perpetual hazard) would be firmly established, for which you would
once more be so strengthened with the love of the people, that you should not
need to cast your eyes any other ways [under God] for your security: but if
all this avails noteing, God be our Guide, for men shows us not a way for
our preserva^ion.

The house received this Petition, and returned answer thereunto which was to
this effect viz. That the house gave them thanks for they, great pains, and
care to the public good of the Kingdom, and would speedily take their humble
desires into their serious consideration.

FINIS.

