TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Council of State.

THE REPORT OF ALL THE Births, Baptizings, and Burials, WITHIN THE City of
LONDON, And Liberties thereof: Together with the Out-Parishes thereunto
adjoining: And the City of WESTMINSTER; With the Parishes of LAMBETH, etc.

From the (...) day of (...) to the (...) day of (...) 16

Buried in the Ninety seven Parishes within the Walls of LONDON. B. P. ALbans in
Woodstreet Alhallowes Barking in Towerstreet Alhallowes in Breadstreet
Alhallowes Great near the Stilyard Alhallowes Honylane, in Cheapside Alhallowes
Less, at Cole harbor Alhallowes in Lumbardstreet Alhallowes Stainings in
Marklane Alhallowes Wall, near Broadstreet Alphage within Criplegate Andrew
Hubberd, near Little Eastcheap Andrew Undershaft, in Leadenhallstreet Andrew by
the Wardrobe Anne within Aldersgate Anne in Blackfryers Antholins in
Watlingstreet Austins at the Oldchange Bartholomew at the Exchange Bennet
Finck, by the French Church Bennet Grace Church Bennet at Paulswharfe Bennet
Sherehog, in Sithes-lane Botolph Billingsgate, in Thamestreet Christ's Church
Christophers behind the Exchange Clement by Eastcheap Dionis Backchurch, in
Limestreet Dunstans East, near Towerstreet Edmund in Lumbardstreet Ethelborough
within Bishopsgate Faiths, under Paul's the Cathedral Fosters in Fosterlane
Gabriel in Fenchurchstreet George in Botolphlane Gregory's by Paul's Hellens
within Bishopsgate James in Dukes place James at Garlickhithe John Baptist near
Dowgate John Evangelist in Fridaystreet John Zachary, lower end of Fosterlane
Katherine Coleman in Fenchurchstreet Katherine Creechurch within Aldgate
Lawrence Jury near Guildhall Lawrence Pountney near Canningstreet Leonards in
Eastcheap Leonards Fosterlane, in St. Martins Magnus by London Bridge Margaret
in Lothbury Margaret Moses in Fridaystreet Margaret in Newfishstreet Margaret
Pattons in Roodelane Mary Abchurch, near Canningstreet Mary in Aldermanbury
Mary Aldermary, in Bowlane Mary le Bow, in Cheapside Mary Bothaw, at Dowgate
Mary Colechurch, lower end of Cheap. Mary at Hill, near Billingsgate Mary
Mounthaw, near Broken wharfe Mary Somerset, at Broken wharfe Mary Stainings,
near Albans Woodstreet Mary Woolchurch, at the Stocks Mary Woolnoth in
Lumbardstreet Martins Iremongerlane Martins Ludgate Martins Orgars, near
Canningstreet Martins Outwich, in Bishopsgatestreet Martins Vintree in
Thamestreet Matthew Fridaystreet Maudlins Milkstreet Maudlins Oldfishstreet
Michael Bassishaw, near Guildhall Michael Cornehill Michael Crookedlane Michael
Queenhithe Michael Q^e^n, upper end of Cheapside Michael Royal, near St.
Thomas Apostles Michael Woodstreet Mildred Breadstreet Mildred in the Poultrey
Nicholas Acons, near Lumbardstreet Nicholas Coleabby, by Oldfishstreet Nicholas
Olaves, on Breadstreet hill Olaves Hartstreet, in Crutchet Friars Olaves in the
Old Jury Olaves in Silverstreet Pancras by Soperlane Peter's Cheap, at the
Cross in Cheapside Peter's in Cornhill Peter's near Paulswharfe Peter's Poor in
Broadstreet Stevens in Colemanstreet Stevens in Walbrook Swithins at London
stone Thomas Apostle Thinity Parish, in Trinity lane

Buried within the Walls in London this Week Whereof of the Plague
The 16. Parishes and the Pesthouse without the Walls, being part within the
Liberties, and part without. B. P. Andrew Holborne Bartholomew Great
Bartholomew Less Brides near Fleetstreet Bridewell Precinct Botolph without
Aldersgate Botolph without Aldgate Botolph without Bishopsgate Dunstans West,
in Fleetstreet George in Southwark Giles without Cripplegate Olaves in
Southwark Saviors in Southwark Sepulchers without Newgate Thomas in Southwark
Trinity in the Minoris The Pesthouse

Buried in the several places last aforesaid (being part within the Liberties
of London, and part without) this week Whereof of the Plague
The out Parishes without the Liberties of London. B. P. Clement Danes without
Temple Bar Covent Garden Giles in the Fields James Clarkenwell Katherine near
the Tower Leonards in Shoreditch Martins in the Fields Mary at Whitechappel
Magdalens in Bermondsey-street Savoy in the Strand

Buried in the aforesaid out Parishes this Week (...) Whereof of the Plague
(...) The Total of the Burials in all the several places aforesaid this week
(...) Whereof of the Plague (...) The Total of the Births and Christnings in
all the several places aforesaid (...) Parishes clear of the Plague this week
(...) Parishes infected this week (...) Borne and Christened Males (...) Females
(...) In all (...)
Buried Males (...) Females (...) In all (...)
Plague
^^creased in the Burials this Week (...)
In the 7. Parishes following.
Margaret in Westminster Born and Christened (...) Buried (...) Plague (...)
Lambeth Dean Born and Christened (...) Buried (...) Plague (...)
Mary Newington Born and Christened (...) Buried (...) Plague (...)
Rotherith Parish Born and Christened (...) Buried (...) Plague (...)
Mary Islington Born and Christened (...) Buried (...) Plague (...)
Stepney Parish Born and Christened (...) Buried (...) Plague (...)
Hackney Parish Born and Christened (...) Buried (...) Plague (...)

Born and Christened in the 7. aforesaid Parishes this Week (...) Buried (...)
Plague (...)

