TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS AND COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, The
humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of LONDON
in Common Council Assembled.

As it was presented by the Sheriffs, Common Council, and other Citizens of
the City of LONDON, May the 9th. 1648.

With the Parliaments ANSWER thereunto, and VOTES upon the same.

Likewise the Petition of the Grand Jury at the Assizes holden at Chelmsford
for the County of Essex. And the Answer thereunto.

Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbot.
May 9. 1648.
London, Printed for Joseph Hunscot. 1648.

To the right Honorable the Lords assembled in Parliament, The humble Petition
of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of LONDON in
Common Council assembled.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners do thankfully acknowledge the great favor of this
honorable House in the speedy greeting their desires expressed in their late
petition. And upon consideration of a Letter from the Lord General to the
Speaker of the honorable house of Commons, and by them communicated to the
Petitioners, They do humbly conceive that there is an expectation that the
Parliament should be guarded by the forces of the City and places adjacent. The
which with all willingness your Petitioners are ready to do (according to
their late undertaking) being put into a capacity to perform the same, by
settling the Militia of London, and being authorized so to do.

That they have received intimation by a petition from diverse worthy and well
affected Citi^ens, that the bringing in of Bullion is much impeded, and
merchantdizing greatly diverted (of which your petitioners are very sensible)
by reason that your former favor afforded to the City in the nominating of the
Lieutenant of the Tower has been of late suspended, and many soldiers therein
placed unknown to the City, whereby trading is much decayed, and poor people
for want of employment in extrea^ misery, and the City greatly endangered by
their important nece^sities.

That your petitioners (being encouraged by many former favors received from
this honorable House) are bold to make these their addresses, and humbly pray,

That the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Comm^ns in Common-c^uncell assembled may by
Ordinance of Parliament be authorized to nominate and present to both houses o
Parliament a Committee for the Militia of the said City, as by several
Ordinances has been formerly granted, whereby Commanders and Soldiers may be
the better united and encouraged to perform their duties for the safety and
p^eservation of the Parliament, City and places adjacent; and that the command
of the Tower of London may be put into the bands of ^uch a person as shall be
nominated and presented to both houses of Parliament by the Lord Major,
Aldermen and Common Council of the said city; and that the Soldiers now there
remaining may be removed: which will give good satisfaction to the City, and
remove many fears and doubts, and be an invitation and encouragement unto
Merchants (both English and strangers) to bring in Bullion, and an occasion to
increase Merchandising, and quicken trade, and consequently a comfort to poor
people in having employment, for their subsistence.

And your petitioners shall humbly pray etc.
THis Petition being presented to the House of Peers, the Speaker in the name
of the house returned this Answer, That the Lords gave them much thanks for
their constant good affection to the Parliament and Kingdom, and returned
answer, That they would take the particulars in the Petition into speedy
consideration.

To the Right Honorable the Commons in Parliament assembled. The humble
Petition of the Lord Major Aldermen and Commons of the City of London in Common
Council Assembled.
Shows,
That your Petitioners do thankfully acknowledge the great favor of this
honorable house in their speedy granting their desires expressed in their late
Petition, and in communicating unto them the letter of his Excellency the Lord
General, upon consideration whereof your Petitioners do humbly conceive that
there is an expectation that the Parliament should be guarded by the forces of
the City and places adjacent, The which with all willingness your Petitioners
are ready to do (according to their la^e und^rtaking) being put into a cap^city
to perform the same by settling the Militia of London, and being authorized so
to do.

That they have received in^imation by a Petition from diverse worthy and well
affected Citizens that the bringing in of Bullion i^ much imp^ded, and
M^rchandizing greatly diverted (of which your Petitioners are very sensible) by
reason that your former favors aff^rded to the City in the nominating of the
Lieutenant of the Tower has bin of late suspended, And many soldiers therein
placed unknown to the City, whereby trading is much decayed, and poor people
(for wart of employment) in extreme misery, and the City greatly endangered by
their important necessities.

That your petitioners being encouraged by many former favors received from
this honorable house are bold to make these their addresses, and humbly pray:

That the Lord Major Aldermen and Commons in Common Council assembled may by
Ordinance of Parliament be authorized to nominate and present to both houses of
Parliament a Committee of the Militia of the said City as by several
Ordinances has bin formerly granted whereby commanders and soldiers may be
the better united and encouraged to perform their duties for the safety and
preservation of the Parliament, City and places adjacent; And that the command
of the ^ower of London, may be put into the hands of such a person as shall be
nominated and presented to both Houses of Parliament by the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City; and that the Soldiers now there
remaining may be removed, which will give good satisfaction to the City, remove
many fears and doubts be an invitation and encouragement to Merchants (both
English and Strangers) to bring in Bullion, an occasion to increase
Merchandising and quicken trade, And consequently a comfort to poor people in
having employment for their subsistence.

Die Martis 9. May, 1648.
THe house being informed, That the Sheriffs, Common-counsell, and other
Citizens, and Freemen of the City of London were at the door, They were called
in, and Sheriff Bide after some short preamble did present an humble Petition
from the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Council, the representative Body of
the City of London, in all humility to this house.

The Petition was read, and was entitled, The humble Petition of the L. Major
Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in Common counsel assembled, The
which, the Petitioners being withdrawn, was read.

Resolved, etc.

Resolved, etc.

Resolved, etc.

Ordered, That the Citizens that serve for the City of London do prepare, and
bring in an Ordinance according to these Votes.

The Sheriffs and Citizens were again called in, and Master Speaker by the
command of the House acquainted them, That the House had read their Petition,
and taken it into serious consideration, and That by the Votes passed, the
affection of this House to the City, and the trust they reposed in them will
appear, and they doubt not but are consident that it will be answered with
Love, Trust, and Obedience; and then acquainted them with the substance of the
Votes passed.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

To the Right honorable both Houses of the Parliament of England assembled at
Westminster.
The humble Petition of the Grand Jury at the Assizes holden at Chelmsford for
the county of Essex, the 22 of March 1647 as it was presented to both the
honorable Houses of Parliament the 4 of May 1648. by diverse thousands of
Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the same County.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners taking into their serious (yet sad) cons^derations the
great distractions and calamities of this whole Kingdom, and being also very
sensible by woeful experience of the great and many pressures and grievances of
their own particular county, and taking notice also with all thankfulness of
the honorable resolutions of this house, in giving encouaagement to the just
desires of the oppressed in a petitionary way (the undoubted right of the
Subject) and the very life of their liberty it self, out of a tender fellow
feeling of others, and the deep sense of their own miseries, have made this
humble (yet necessary address to this honorable House) conceiving both the
present and future happiness of themselves and the whole kingdom, to be con^ed
in these their ensuing desires.

And first, considering that it is impossible the sad and direful effects of
this late war should cease without the principal causes be first taken away
and removed. And considering likewise his Majesty's absence from his two houses
of Parliament has been one main cause of increasing j^alousies, and continuing
a misunderstanding betwixt him and his great counsel (the original and source
of our unhappiness,) And humbly conceiving that a timely and ready concession
to his Majesty for a personal Treaty with his high court of Parliament may
prove the most effectual and speedy means for the removing of all such
misapprehensions and fears, which are yet the unhappy obstacles of the peace
and quiet of this our Kingdom.

Secondly, considering the excessive charges, and a most intolerable burden
this county with the rest of the Kingdom do at this present gro^n under, which
although for a time they may possibly bear with patience, yet if continued,
will certainly and i^evitably ruin themselves, their families, and
posterities. And withal considering that the most hopeful means of settling a
well grounded peace and the surest way of preventing ^uture troubles, consists
in the due satisfaction of all just complaints and interests. And that this
army who have faithfully discharged their trust to your selves and Kingdom, do
much complain for want of their Arrears.

We therefore your humble Petitioners d^e most earnestly desire that you would
be pleased to take these premises into your grave and serious considerations,
and to condescend to the Royal intimations of his Majesty for a personal
Treaty; to expedite such a course which in your wisdoms you shall think most
meet for the satis-faction of the arrears of the Army with a disbanding of the
same.

And your petitioners shall pray, etc.
Die Jovis, 4 May. 1648.
The Lords have commanded me to return thanks to the County of Essex for the
good affections which they have expressed to the Parliament and Kingdom; they
have likewise commanded me to let you know, That they will take your Petition
into their serious and speedy consideration, and do assure you that they will
not be wanting to contribute their utmost endeavors for the removing of the
present pressures and burdens, and for the composing of these unhappy
differences, so as the Kingdom may enjoy a safe and well grounded peace.

J. Brown, Cler. Parliamentoru^.

Die Jovis, 4 May. 1648.
The House being informed that diverse Gentlemen of the County of Essex were at
the door; desiring to prefer a Petition to the house, they were called in,
and Major Stephen Smith did present a Petition, the which (the Petitioners
being with draw^) was read.

The Petitioners were again called it, and M. Speaker by command of the House,
upon Vote upon the Question gave then this answer, That this house does take
notice of the great service, and good affections of that County to the
Parliament, and are very confident they will so continue. As to their Petition,
the house is now in debate concerning the speedy settlement of the Kingdom, and
do not doubt but what they shall conclude thereupon, will give satisfaction to
the said County, and to all the well affected people of the Kingdom.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

