TO THE Right-honourable the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND.
The Humble Petition of the Real Lenders, upon the Public Faith, the
Clothiers, and all others in the Counties of Essex, and Suffolk, in the behalf
of themselves, and all others the like, that are unpaid.
Shows,
THat whereas the Noble Representatives of our body Politic, have in former
ages, acted so for Honor, as that they promoted the public above themselves,
Estates, or Liberties, insomuch that their names, and successors were truly
honored; who being in exigencies, Anno 1642. the real Members at their motion
were willing to extend their assistance, by lending Moneys, Plate, Horses,
raising, and maintaining Forces, as volunteers at their proper Charges, etc.
The which free offering of the people was so honored by the God of heaven,
that the effect thereof was, and now is the enjoyment of all Proprieties, of
Powers, Honors, Estates real and personal, to all persons whatsoever in the
Commonwealth. And thereby all Lands enjoyed by Inheritance, or Purchase, are
liable to be taxed (as your Petitioners humbly concieve) until the just, and
real public debts are paid, and are at the command of your Honors (as
Administrators to your Predecessors) insomuch as your Honors stand engaged to
perform them by Assesments upon the Revenues, or waste Lands, Discoveries, and
forfeitures of Buildings, etc. As any entire body Corporate are to pay their
Debts borrowed under their Seals. And where as your Petitioners in their zeal
for the Honor of God, and the public good, did extend themselves with the
very first, and beyond their abilities, being Tradesmen (and having no moneys
by reason of bad trading) did join whole Towns, and diverse persons together,
and borrowed money upon interest: And for example, to excite other Counties,
Cities, and places, did lend in proportion 10. times more, than the generality
of the people did: But by the continued distractions by Wars at Sea, Trading
has been so obstructed, and your Petitioners so disabled, by the Non-payment
of the Debts, due upon the public faith (which they depended upon, as the best
security in the Commonwealth, being so generally esteemed) that it has
occasioned the undoing of thousands of persons, and whole families of your
Petitioners; some are in prison, some of Traders turned to work men, and others
relieved by Alms; and all impoverished greatly by damage by Interest, and
loss of credit: Wherefore also, for that, as your Petitioners were Leaders to
incite others to lend, so they have not been wanting by their importunity for
them, to the several Representatives for 13 years past, (besides 15. weeks
attending during this present Sessions,) and yet are wholly unpayed, (except by
promises, and provisions made by the little Parliament.) Your Petitioners have
expected, that these Conceptions would have come to a Birth of performance
before this time, having tendered their free service to state the Accounts at
Worcester-house: But there they found Honor abroad, and self-denial not at
home, and love to the public thereby (for want of Lodging) so cold and feeble,
that it could not act, nor open the door to Actors. Let your Honors therefore
permit your Petitioners to plead in the name of Christ, and language of Canaan,
that you will take all the premises into your pious and grave consideration;
And also these Motives,

First, because the Richer persons that lent sparingly; by purchase, and
doubling are paid with advantage.

2. How unreasonable it is that the faithfullest servants should be paid least,
much more not paid at all; because they were not able to double, or purchase.

3. How dishonorable it is being told in Gath* and Askelon, to the reproach of
the Nation and Religion, and Faith thereof, and is a derision among all
opposites at home.

4. How Procrastination is Satan's Engine to give defeat to the Holy ones
command, Prove. 3. 27, 28. say not so, and come again, etc.

5. That if importunity prevailed with the unjust Judge, much more it should
with the righteous, to do right to the faithful, that are grieved.

6. That the Lord will bless thee, O habitation of Justice, Jer. 31. 23. also
one example, the 2. of the Chron. 32. chap. verse. 25. But Hezekiah etc.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that no further delay may be used. But
if all cannot be paid at once, that the first lent in 1642 may be first paid,
by Taxes, or otherways, As your Honors shall think best, Agents employed for
all the Petitioners in Essex.
Will. Tanner. John Coveney.
Agents for Suff.
George Sparling. Steven Hawe.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

