TO THE ^IGHT HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF PEERS NOW ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the YOUNG MEN, APPRENTICES, and SEAMEN, in and about
the City of LONDON.
(...) humble submission Shows,
THAT your Petitioners have lain a long time (as is well known) under
unsupportable pressures, for the redress of which, many Petittions have been
exhibited, yet to this day has not been obtained that relief which our
necessities required, and our hopes did promise, but our miseries do daily
increase and grow upon us, Trading is extraordinarily decayed, and fears
greatly multiplied, by reason of that desperate height of malice and power to
which the Rebels in Ireland have attained, and which they go on still to
perfect, by those new supplies of aid and strength they do receive, and by
reason of the exposednesse of this Kingdom, unto dangers, foraigne and
intestine, for want of a present Posture of defense, both which ^^en ruin unto
this Kingdom.

WHEREFORE your Petitioners are constrained humbly to supplicate, that our
poor distressed Brethren in Ireland (according to His Majesty's command, and
the Commons earnest desire) may be forthwith powerfully aided to suppress that
abominable Rebellion of the bloody Papists,; That the Kingdom at home may be
speedily put into such a posture of War and defense, as may enable them
against all foreign Invasion, and domestique plots and conspiracies of
Papists, and their adherents: That the hindrances there-thereof, whether
persons or causes, may be declared, In as much as your Petitioners cannot but
conceive, that such persons are either factors for, or actors of the rebellious
rout in Ireland, or of some foreign power, intending ruin to his Majesty's
Kingdom: And such causes as are alleged, can be but fained pretenses; And
that the heavy pressures lying upon us, and growing insupportable, by the delay
of relief, may be timely removed; Your Petitioners greatly fearing, that if
present remedy be not afforded from the hands of this honorable Parliament (as
from wise Physicians) multitudes will be ready to take hold upon that remedy
which is next at hand: Oppression (as Solomon says) making wise men mad.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
(...) Petition was delivered the 26. of January, 1641. (by three Freemen, five
Apprentices, and five Seamen, (being chosen by (...) rest for that purpose)
and was thankfully received and read.

London, Printed by R. Oulton and G. Dexter, and are to be sold by William
Larnan, 1642.


