TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in HIGH COURT OF
PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the
City of LONDON, in Common Council Assembled.

With the ANSWER of the Lords and Commons to the said PETITION.

Printed by Richard Cotes Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS Assembled in High Court of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council assembled.
HUmbly acknowledging the hopeful progress which your Lordships have made
upon some particulars of the former addresses of the Petitioners, wherein as
they are confident your Lordships will still go forward, so they humbly crave
pardon, if they continue their importunity, for such an effectual and speedy
resolution upon the whole, as may with Gods blessing at length settle the
affairs of this long distracted Kingdom.

And now that his Majesty is come nearer in person to his Parliament of
England, the Petitioners would gladly entertain some hope, and cannot but
earnestly desire, that God would also bring his Royal heart and will nearer,
to his chief and greatest Council; And that his Majesty will now be
persuaded, to join with his Parliaments and all his people, in the National
and Solemn League and Covenant, and give satisfaction in the matter of
Propositions, which the Parliaments of both Nations shall make unto him, for
the full assurance of his people in the future, and the firm establishment of
the Peace and Union of these three Kingdoms in Church and Commonwealth,
without both which the Petitioners cannot expect any firm or real Peace in
these kingdoms. And that his Majesty may be the better disposed to this
conjunction, and the Parliament and this City in the interim secured, the
Petitioners humbly offer it unto the wisdom of your Lordships to take course,
that such as have been in opposition to the Parliament, may be removed out of
this City, and to be kept at a distance from his Majesty's Royal presence.

These are the hopes and prayers of the Petitioners, which they humbly pray may
be as favorably accepted and interpreted, as they proceed from a sincere
heart. That which Petitioners intend hereby, is, still more and more to
manifest their integrity to the Parliament, to stop the malicious tongues of
Sectaries on the one party, who have from the Petitioners late humble
addresses, suggested some defection in the City; and to cut off the vain hopes
of Malignants, and such as have been in opposition to the Parliament, on the
other party, that they can expect no compliance from the Petitioners. For the
Petitioners do for themselves, and the whole City whom they represent, declare
unto the whole world, that they still are, and with Gods blessing are resolved
so to remain in their Zeal as fervent, and in their respects as humble and
real to the Parliament as ever, and according to their Covenant do next under
God wholly rely upon the wisdom and justice of the Parliament for the
settlement of their Peace and Propriety.

Here the Petitioners should willingly have concluded, but that the Army,
(which they hoped should ere this have bin disbanded) is now drawn so suddenly
and quartered so near the Parliament and this City; besides that in the same
juncture of time, a most dangerous and seditious Petition (as they humbly
conceive) is set on foot to be presented to the Honorable House of Commons,
the Copy where of as it was delivered to them is annexed: Which does exact
this addition from the Petitioners; That your Lordships would consider, what
effect the unexpected approach of such an Army, and the concurrence of such a
Petition may work in the people; how long time all manner of Provisions have
been dear and scarce in this City; how much the same must needs be
increased, when such an Army must be fed, before they can expect to be
served thence; and what murmurs the same may raise amongst so great a multitude
of Poor, as are already and do daily increase in this City.

And then that your Lordships would be pleased to give command, that the Army
may be forthwith removed, and after with all convenient speed disbanded; That
the Petition annexed may be out of hand suppressed, and the contrivers and
promotors thereof enquired after; And that the Parliament and this City may in
the mean time be preserved in safety; That your Lordships would please to
give this Court authority to make annual election of the Members of the
Militia of this City according to their late Petition.

And the Petitioners shall daily pray etc.

To the Honorable the House of Commons Assembled in High Court of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons of the City of
London in Common council Assembled.
HUmbly acknowledging the hopeful progress which this honorable House has
made upon some particulars of the former addresses of the Petitioners, wherein
as they are confident you will still go forward, so they humbly crave pardon,
if they continue their importunity, for such an effectual and speedy
resolution upon the whole, as may with Gods blessing at length settle the
Affairs of this long distracted Kingdom.

And now that His Majesty is come nearer in Person to his Parliament of
England, the Petitioners would gladly entertain some hope, and cannot but
earnestly desire, that God would also bring His Royal heart and will nearer to
this His chief and greatest Council; And that His Majesty will now be
persuaded to join with His Parliaments, and all His People in the National
and solemn League and Covenant, and give satisfaction in the matter of
Propositions, which the Parliaments of both Nations shall make unto Him, for
the full assurance of His people in the future, and the firm establishment of
the Peace and Union of these Kingdoms in Church and Commonwealth, without both
which the Petitioners cannot expect any firm or real peace in these
Kingdoms. And that His Majesty may be the better disposed to this
Conjunction, and the Parliament and this City in the interim secured; the
Petitioners humbly offer it unto the Wisdom of this Honorable House, to take
course, that such as have been in opposition to the Parliament may be removed
out of this City, and be kept at a distance from His Majesty's Royal presence.

These are the hopes and prayers of the Petitioners, which they humbly pray may
be as favorably accepted and interpreted, as they proceed from a sincere
heart. That which the Petitioners intend hereby, is, still more and more to
manifest their integrity to the Parliament, to stop the malicious tongues of
Sectaries on the one party, who have from the Petitioners late humble Addresses
suggested some defection in the City; and to cut off the vain hopes of
Malignants, and such as have been in opposition to the Parliament, on the other
Party, that they can expect no compliance from the Petitioners. For the
Petitioners do for themselves, and the whole City whom they represent, declare
unto the whole world, That they still are, and with Gods blessing are resolved
so to remain in their zeal as fervent, and in their respects as humble and
real to the Parliament as ever; And according to their Covenant do next under
God wholly rely upon the Wisdom and Justice of the Parliament for the
settlement of their peace and propriety.

And the Petitioners humbly pray, that this Honorable House will give no credit
to any Representation of the mind and sense of the City, contrary unto this
their solemn Profession, although even some of those who serve for the City, or
are free theoreof, or any others, should make any other Representation of the
same.

Here the Petitioners should willingly have concluded, but that the Army,
(which they hoped should ere this have been disbanded, is now drawn so
suddenly, and Quartered so near the Parliament and this City; besides that in
the same juncture of time, a most dangerous and seditious Petition (as they
humbly conceive) is set on foot, to be presented to this Honorable House, the
Copy whereof, as it was delivered to them is annexed: which does exact this
addition from the Petitioners, That this Honorable House would consider what
effect the unexpected approach of such an Army, and the concurrence of such a
Petition may work in the people; How long time all manner of Provisions have
been dear and scarce in this City; how much the same must needs be increased,
when such an Army must be fed, before they can expect to be served thence, and
what murmures the same may raise amongst so great a multitude of Poor as are
already, and do daily increase in this City.

And then that this Honorable House would be pleased to give command that the
Army may be forthwith removed, and after withal convenient speed disbanded;
That the Petition annexed may be out of hand suppressed, and the Contrivers and
promoters thereof enquired after; And that the Parliament and this City may in
the mean time be preserved in safety; that this Honorable House would please
to give this Court authority to make annual Election of the Members of the
Militia of this City, according to their late Petition.

And the Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii, 17. Martii, 1646.
THe Lords acknowledge that they have had such eminent and constant expressions
of the fidelity and good affections of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons of
the City of London, as that nothing can alter their confidence of them. The
present Declaration of your zeal and care for the honor and safety of the
Parliament by your Petition, the Lords receive with gladness, and return you
thanks, and desire you to be confident, that they will neglect no time nor
means in the improving of their power for the preservation of the happiness and
security of the Kingdom and City of London.

The particular concerning the Militia of the City of London, the Lords have
long since taken into their consideration and passed it and have transmitted it
into the House of Commons.

And for the several other particulars in your Petition, they will speedily
take the same into their consideration.

Joh. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Die Mercury 17. Martii 1646.
THE House being informed that diverse of the Aldermen and Common Council were
at the door desiring to present a Petition to this House, they were called in,
and Sheriff Edmonds did acquaint the House that they were appointed by the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, to present
this their Petition to this House, The Petition was styled, The humble Petition
of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London in
Common Council assembled. The Petitioners being withdrawn, the Petition was
read, and likewise the Copy of a Petition annexed, which is the same with that
printed Copy which was informed against, and brought into this House on Monday
last.

The Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker acquainted them, That
the house had considered of the Particulars in the Petition; And that the House
had already most of the Particulars under consideration, and have appointed a
time to take the rest into consideration, and do resolve to proceed in such
manner with them as may be most for the ease, safety and satisfaction of the
City, and the whole Kingdom. That a copy of the Petition annexed was lately
brought to this House, and that they had put it into a way of consideration;
Mr. Speaker further acquainted the Petitioners that he was commanded to tell
them, That the House takes very special notice of the declaration and
expressions of the Petitioners, and by them of the whole Cities constant,
fervent, real and sincere affections to the service of the Parliament. The
seasonablenesse of these expressions adds some weight unto them; being at such
a conjuncture of time when the enemies both to the Parliament and City did
raise to themselves vain and groundless hopes of some misunderstanding
between this House and the City, the contrary whereof this will sufficiently
manifest, for which he is commanded to give them the hearty thanks of this
House.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

FINIS.

