AMINTA: The FAMOUS PASTORAL.

Written in Italian BY Signor Torquato Tasso. And Translated into English Verse
BY John Dancer.

Together with diverse Ingenious POEMS.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter, near the Middle Temple-gate in
Fleet Street. 1660.

TO My much Honored, AND Truly Noble Friend, Mr. R. B.
Worthy Sir,
ANcient custom, and the genius of the present times admit a dedication of
those works which we esteem either profitable or pleasant to those we love or
honor, this though it pretend little to profit, and as little to pleasure
without your pleasing aspect, yet is intended as a demonstration of that honor
and respect I bear your worth: which your favors to me have condignly merited.

And to whom indeed should I dedicate both my self and labors? but to you, who
have seemed to dedicate your self wholly to my welfare? to whom should I
present these effects of my leisure? but to you, by and from whom I received so
comfortable an olium? to whom should I address, or whose protection should I
crave for this work of mine? but his under whose protection I effected it?

Yet pretend I not at all by this the least requital of your unlimited favors,
which have encompassed me round like an Ocean, but only manifest to you, what
I am almost confident you already believe; that, were my fortunes answerable to
my desires, though your retorted Graces might, and would still keep me out of
the haven, yet should I use my utmost strength and endeavors to arrive at the
Port of a wished for gratitude.

In the mean time, please Sir to accept of this poor pledge of my weak, though
willing, endeavors; and in thanks for your acceptance, this I really assure
you, That though your protection should not render it more acceptable to
others, yet will it more and more oblige me, and like a Cipher added to a
figure, double, if not treble, the score of your favors.

For the work it self, let me make this Apology, That you know it to be the
first that ever I undertook: so, for those faults which you may very probably
find in it, I shall only implore that wonted Candor and Generosity wherewith
you have often been pleased to pass by less pardonable errors.

I am sorry your Commands conceal your Name, and must needs herein accuse you
of some Injustice, both to my self and the World; to my self, in not giving
my Pen the Honor to Proclaim, not only yours, but the Virtues of your Thrice
Noble Family; And to the World, in not permitting them to be Honourers and
Admirers of so rare a Pattern of Unparalled Freindship.

To conclude. That the God of Heaven would plentifully pour down the choicest
of his blessings upon you and your Worthy Consort, and enable you to the
Continuance of your favors toward me; and me to some way to Merit, or means
to Requite them. Is the earnest Prayer of

Your Devoted Servant John Dancer.

To The READER:
Courteous Reader,
I Here present to thy view, a Work of that Excellent Italian Poet's, Torquato
Tasso, Whose sweet and Mellifluous strains, made him not only esteemed the
Apollo of his Nation, but thought worthy that Honor by Frreign Wits. This is
his Aminta; a Piece Valued by themost Refined Judgments above all his other
Poems: and so much Valued, That the admired Baptista Guarini confesses himself
its Imitator, in his Famous, and so much Adored Pastor Fido. If it have
suffered by my Translation, I am sorry. I must confess I envyed, but cannot
fancy to have reached the Happiness of Fanshaw's Style. It Is the first Work
ever I undertook, so, though there may be errors, condemn me not for the first
fault, the next may be better; hour accept this, as it is, but Friendly, and I
have enough.

J. D.

Prologue.
Cupid in Pastoral habit.
HOw could it enter into mortal breast:
That under humane shape, and past'ral vest,
Lay hid a god? nay more, no god o'th woods,
Or one of the inferior rank of gods,
A god Celestial: who does justly claim,
Among the greatest the most powerful name:
Who often makes victorious Mars to lay
His conquering sword, and bloody spear away.
Great Neptune who so fills the world with wonder,
Yields him his trident; Jove himself his thunder.
Sure with this aspect, in this habit clad,
Venus can never discern her smooth-faced lad,
Or know him thus transformed. I Am forced to fly,
And hide my self from her, because that I
Scorn for to be her subject, or my darts
Should be her slaves: and only wound those hearts
They Are levelled at by her, and what is that vain,
Ambitious woman dare my shafts restrain?
At Kings and Princes Courts she only will
That amongst great Ladies I employ my skill,
And to my lower Ministers conceads
To practice theirs amongst the woods and Meads,
In rustic breasts. I though you may me deem
A boy, am none, and will, as best shall seem
To me, dispose my shafts, since mine of old
Are both th'omnipotent torch, and bow of gold:
Wherefore (to hide my self and to fly from
Her force, not, but her prayrs strong when they come
From an importunate mother) in these plains,
I refuge seek amongst the rural swains,
And my self shelter in these woods, but she
Ceases nor day nor night to follow me,
Promising those would tell her where I were
Or kisses sweet, or what is than them more dear:
As if that she my giving too could bar
Of kisses sweet, or what is more pleasant far,
To those that hide me from her, this at least;
I know my kisses will be counted best:
(If I that love am of love understand)
So that she often seeks for me vainly, and
Looses her pains: Since none so foolish are,
As to disclose or tell her where I were.
But least by counter signs she should me know,
My wings, my dart, my quiver, and my bow,
I have laid by, yet come not I disarmed,
Or weaponlesse, for see how I have charmed
My torch into this rod; which has the same
Force it had first, and burns though with a flame
Invisible, this likewise is my old
Dart that I used, which though its head of gold
Be changed, yet this of divine tempered steel
Who er'e it pierces makes loves flames to feel.
This day I Will make the trial; and my dart
Shall show its divine power over the heart.
Less bosom of the cruel'st nymph before
This time that ever followed Dians Chore,
And chastest Silvia's plague shall be the same,
(For that is of this hard-hearted Nymph the name,)
As that of famed Aminta, who did feel
Long since, the power of my Divinest steel;
When he and she both tender used to sport,
In the chaste pleasures of bright Cynthia's Court.
But cause the wound shall be more inward, I
Will stay until some pity mollify
That so hard frost which round about her heart
Her virgin-pride has fixed, then I Will my dart
Let fly with it is full force; and cause I Will please
My self in doing it, and do it with ease,
I Will mix my self among the shepherds crew
Which passed by just now, who always do
On holidays make sport within this plain,
And to be one of them my self I Will fain;
Then with the best occasion give the blow,
So slyly, as no mortal eye shal't know.
In a strange manner shall these woods, to day,
Be heard of love to reason, that it may,
Clearly (my sacred Deity is here)
(And not my under Ministers) appear.
These rustic Silvane breasts I will endue
With divine senses, teach them how to woo
In lofty language, that it may be known
That love where e're he is, is always one,
Whether he pleases for to make his nest
Or in a Swains, or in a Hero's breast.
Then if my beauteous mother, who has tried
Her utmost art to know where I abide
By these feats know not, she is more blind then I
For blind by wrong, men call my Deity.
TASSO'S AMINTA.
Act. 1.
Scen. I.
Daphne and Silvia. Daph. ARt thou resolved then Silvia to consume
Thy fairest youth? cannot thy heart find a room
For Venus pleasures? wilt not know those joy's
A Mother takes to sport with her sweet boys?
Shall so much beauty be to woods confined?
Change, fondling that thou art, change, change thy mind.

Sil. Let others follow loves delights for me,
If that in love any delight there be.
This life me pleases best; Nor do I know
Ought I take pleasure in, but in my bow;
This is my chiefest comfort, for to follow
The wild beasts in the chase, hear huntsmen hollow:
Nor do I fear such sports will wanting be.

Da. More sottish sports, more sottish life, do see?
This life thee pleases cause thou have not proved
As yet another, cause thou have not loved.
"So in the infant world, and when as yet,
"The simple people knew no better meat,
"Acorns and water, were accounted sweet:
"But when the earth did abound with corn and wine,
"Acorns and water then were food for swine.
So should thou taste but one poor thousand part
Of the sweet joys of love, thou would say, dear heart,
Why did thou six my pleasure on such toys
And leave me widow to more real joys?
Thou Wilt sorrowful repent the lost time past
And curse it now for running on so fast.
How many a widow night, how many a day
I Have ignorantly spent! thou wilt sighing say.
Change then, sond fool, change change thy mind I pray,
Lest when'ts too late thou do repent in vain

Sil. Daphne, when I repent or over again
Repeat these words of thine, which thou do feign'
Just as thou list, then let the rivers turn
Back to their fountains; let the Ocean burn,
The wolves fly from the tender lamo, the hares
Pursue the greyhounds; then let the fierce bears,
Inhabit waters: and let dolphins range
The fields, whenever I my mind do change.

Daph. This is mere childishness, Sister, as thou
Art, I was once. (Alas!) although that now
I Am changed by age, even just so neat, so fair
My countenance was, so golden was my hair,
Just such a cherry lip, just such a Rose,
I did in th'middle of my cheek disclose;
'Twas my delight, then, Silvia, (now I find
A foolish one it was) to hunt the Hind,
Follow the footsteps of wild beasts, my net
Spread to untrap the birds, take care to whet
My dart; and if I did but chance to spy
Some youthful Shepherd cast an amorous eye,
I looked down with scorn, and with disdain,
Counting what was my grace to be my pain,
And naught was more displeasing unto me
Then see me pleasing unto others be:
But yet at length, time and th'importunate
Prayers of my faithful lover, did abate
That Virgin frost, Sister, I was (and bless
The hour) overcome at last, I do confess,
And in one night's black shade I did learn more
Then I had done in all my life before:
So now I did my former folly know,
I quite renounced both Cynthia's; life and bow:
And so I hope thou will too, and at last
Aminta's sighs may melt thy flinty breast.
How can thou choose but love him? can deny
He Is handsome? then pray tell the reason, why?
Think thou he loves thee not? or does love any
Better than thee, though he be loved by many?
If so, why does he so thy love pursue?
Think him not enough noble? if thou do
Though from this Rivers god the third thou be,
Third from great Pan the shepherds god is he.
Why then despi'st thou him? think thou the lilies
Of the fair cheeks of fairest Amarillis,
Are not as beautiful as thine? yet he
Thou see despises her, and follows thee;
She follows him and seeks his love, and thou,
Though he seeks thine, refusest his; pray now
Imagine, he, thus crossed by thy disdain
(God grant th'imagination be but vain)
Should leave thee and take her, I fain would know
Whether it would not grieve thee yea or no?
It Is better to accept him then, by half,
Then taking her both at thy folly laugh.

Sil. Let 'minta and his loves disposed be,
As best him pleases little't imports me:
Nor who his love has, so I do it miss,
Care I, mine he cannot be, since I Am not his:
And though he mine were, his I would not be.

Daph. From whence proceeds this hatred now from thee?
If I were thee I Would strive to love him rather.

Sil. It Is from his love.

Daph. Strange child of such a Father,
When was fierce tiger born of gentle lamb?
Or when from Swan's egg a black crow e're came?
Sister thou cheatest or thy self or me.

Sil. I hate his love, cause he my honesty:
And I should love him while he would not crave
Ought else of me but what my self would have,

Daph. Thou only wil'st thy hurt, he only would
Wish that to thee which wish himself he should:

Sil. Daphne, or talk of somewhat else, or hold
Thy peace I pray.

Daph. O gods! do but behold
This perverse wench! but prithee Sister do,
But answer this, If that another sue
Should for thy love, would thus requite his pain?

Sil. Who would entrap my chastity, the same
Requite should find from me, what e're he be,
Whom thou stil'st lover, I am enemy.

Daph. The Ram unto the ewe do thou esteem
Or to the tender heifer the bull deem,
Enemies to be, or does the Turtle dove
Reject her mate, because he does her love:
See thou the fragrant season of the year,
How every thing does sweet and green appear?
This pleasant verdure covering over the plains,
Invites, alas, not only nymphs and Swains,
But very beasts to love, and do not see,
How all things in the world inamoured be?
See how those two doves whisper, with what willing,
And joint consent as 'twere they two are billing!
You Nightingale which hops from grove to grove
Still as she hops, she sings, I love, I love;
The cruel Adder who does stop his ears.
And having stung, will not be charmed by tears,
Or cries, is charmed by sweetest love: 'ith woods
The tigers love, the fishes in the floods
Love too, but thou more cruel then a beast
Denyest sweet love an entrance in thy breast;
But what talk I of beasts; see thou each tree
In this vast forest? they inamoured be.
Behold with what a sweet embrace the vine
Does her dear consort lovingly intwine,
The firr does love the firr, the pine the pine;
You stubborn oak, which scarce the wind can move,
Is moved by th'power of divinest love,
Had thou a spir't of love, or if of stone,
Were not thy heart, thou would hear it sigh and groan,
And utter forth it is amorous plaints: yet thou
For all this art not moved to love, why now
Will thou than plants or beasts be more unkind?
Change, fondling that thou art, change, change thy mind:

Sil. When I of plants the amorous sighs shall hear
I Will likewise be in love, til then forbear.

Daph. Well though thou now laugh at, and do disdain
My faithful counsels; know that to thy pain
Thou will repent, thou do not while thou may
Them follow; for be sure there comes a day,
When what is to thee a pleasure and delight,
Shall be thy greatest grief, thy greatest spite;
And as thou now disdainest others, so,
Thou Wilt then despise thy very self; and know
Those so clear springs in which thou often do use
Thy most resplendent beauty to peruse,
Thou Wilt leave forsaken and neglected now,
Or stand amazed at thy wrinkled brow
But why speak I of this? since it is a sure
And common evil we must all endure:
I Will tell thee more, and mark me what I say,
It Is what the sage Elpino the other day
Recounted unto Licoris the fair
The gentile Licoris: whose beauty rare,
Has such power over Elpino, as his art
In singing ought to have over her pliant heart;
If there be any debt in love. He told
It before amorous Thir's and Battus old,
Just at the entrance of Aurora's cave,
Where writ in golden Characters you have;
All you that are profane depart from hence,
And said that it was told to him long since
By the grand Poet, who so high did sing
The life of many a Hero, many a King,
Who dying did leave him his pipe, There is
Says he, at bottom o'th profound abyss,
A horrid cave, vomiting smoke with fire,
And a most constant stink out of the dire
Furnace of Acheronta, where do lie,
In torments dark, and that eternally
Those women; who persuaded here above,
Neither by prayers, nor tears, could be to love:
And it is a just, and well deserved law,
Smoke should force tears, which pity could not draw:
Then if thou thus thy cruelty continue,
Look to be consort with that cursed retinue.

Sil. But what said Licoris to this, and how
Answered she him;

Daph. Why see! thou fain would know
Others affairs, but car'st not for thine own:
She answered with her eyes.

Sil. With eyes alone
How could she answer him?

Dap. Those very ey's
Were, as 'twere, messengers, or rather spies;
Which mixed with pleasant smiles to him made known,
Licoris and her heart were now his own:
Except he did believe, faith was as rare
In them as beauty; she as false as fair.

Sil. Why should he so believe?

Daph. know thou what Thir's,
That famous Master both of Love and Verse,
Did write, when burning with the flames of love
He wandering through the forest, did both move
The nimphs and swains to laughter? but though he
Did things worth laughter, yet his writings be
Not to be jeered; this in a tree he writ,
With th'tree it grew, and there I often read it:
The looking-glasses of false hearts your eyes
Are; and in them all deceit hidden lies,
But what avails't since shun them love denies:

Sil. I here in prattling cast my time away,
And had forgot this is the appointed day,
In which we ought to go, as we were wont,
In Eliceto for to raise the Hunt.
Prithee do thou stay for me while in the nigh
Fountain I cleanse the sweat, and dust which I,
Got yesterday by hunting of a Deer,
Which at the last I killed;

Daph. I Will stay thee here
Perhaps I Will bath me too, but first my gate,
I Will homewards bend for it is not yet so late
As't seems, and thou at home for me may stay:
But in the mean time think of that, I pray,
Concerns thee more then hunting, and say I
Bid thee take a fools counsel, so god bu'y.

Act. 1. Scen. 2.
Aminta and Thirsis. A. I have with my laments, my sighs, my groans
To pity moved, both the rocks and stones;
But moved I have not nor can hope to move
Her I adore, to pity or to love:
Remorseless Nymph, I know not which I best
May style thee, or a woman; or fierce beast
For thou to be a woman do deny,
Since more than best'al is thy cruelty.

Their. The lambs on tender grass, wolves on lambs feed,
And both do satisfy their hungry need:
But though love feed on tears, the more it have
Of tears and sighs, it still the more does crave;

Amin. Alas! alas! love long since with the food
Of my tears satiate is, now for my blood
It only thirsts, and therefore to the eyes
Of it and that cru'l nymph I Will mak't a prize:

Their. Why talkst thou thus Aminta? if unkind
And cruel she be, thou wilt another find.

Amin. How can I find another, when that I
Cannot find my very self, or pray whereby
Can one lost to himself e're pleasure gain?

Their. Do not despair, at length thou may obtain
This cruel fair; time teaches men to check,
Lions, and bring fierce tigers to their beck:

Amin. But whilst that I wait out this long delay,
I shall with grief be quite consumed away:

Their. Short the delay will be, for the disdain
Of woman's kindled soon, soon quenched again:
They Are moveable by nature, nor the wind,
Can breath more changes then a woman's mind:
Lighter than feathers, and will readier bow,
Then ripened ears before a storm; but thou,
Of thy condition farther let me know,
And the hard fortune of thy love, for though
Thou long since toldst me that thou wast in love,
Yet thou hidst from me, who it was could move
In thee this amorous fire, although that faith,
And ever constant friendship 'twixt us has
Obliged thee to discover that to me,
Which unto others might concealed be.

Amin. Thirsis, I am content to tell thee what
The woods and mountains know, but men know not,
And it is but just that I being now so nigh,
My death, should leave the reason why I die
To some dear friend, who may when I am gone
Report it, or may grav't in tree or stone,
Near the place where my bloodlesse corpse shall lie,
That if that pit'lesse Nymph chance to pass by.
She may stamp on it with her proud foot, and boast,
That her dire cruelty my life me cost;
And that she may rejoice to see me lie,
There as a trophee of her victory.
Perhaps at last she may (but things above
Desert I hope) both pity then and love
Him dead, who living by her hate was slain,
And with salt tears may wish me back again;
But listen now.

Their. Proceed; I well thee mind,
And am to help thee at thy need inclined.

Amin. I was as yet a child and scarce could crop
Those fruits the willing trees did seem to drop,
From their full laden branches near the earth,
When full of jollity and harmless mirth,
Not knowing love, or caring it to know,
With the sweetest nymph I did familiar grow,
That in the wind e're spread a golden hair,
It was the rich Cidippe's daughter fair;
Grandchild unto the great Montan, whose flocks
And mighty herds fill both the woods and rocks,
Silvia, the glory of the woods, the fire
Of every heart, of all souls the desire:
With her I kept such faithful company,
That 'twixt two Turtles never the like could be;
Nothing to me than Silvia was dearer,
Near were our houses, but our hearts were nearer:
Her age was equal almost with my own,
But 'twixt our thoughts, there was no difference known;
With her I often used to spread the snares,
To catch the simple birds, or fearful hares:
With her I used to force swift Does to flight,
Equal the prey was, equal the delight;
But whilst we thus made prize of beasts: a prize
My self was made to her all-conqu'ring eyes;
And like a weed which of it self does grow,
So grew there in my bosom, from I know
Not yet what root, a strange and unknown fire,
Which made me Silvia's presence more desire:
Her eyes were food to me, sweet, but did leave
A bitter; did me of all joys bereave:
And though my sighs, alas, now were not few,
Yet of those many sighs no cause I knew.
Thus was I, e're that I could it discover,
By her fair ey's forced to becoem a lover:
But how I came to know it at last, do thou
Take notice pray.

Their. Proceed and tell me how.

Amin. When Phoebus bright his hottest beams displayed,
Silvi' and Phillis once chanc't' seek a shade
Under a spreading beech, when, lo, a Be
Buzzing about Phillis fair cheeks chanced see
The lovely red she did in them disclose,
Did make the Be mistake them for a Rose,
And think to gather honey from that sweet,
She lights: but with too harsh salute did greet
Those rosean cheeks, and Phillis with the pain,
Of the sharp sting most sadly did complain;
When my Dear Silvia told her: Phillis pray
Lament not thus, I soon will take away
Thy pain with an enchantment, which I learned
Of the sage Aresia, and I earned
It well, for in requital of it I
Gave unto her my horn of Ivory,
Which was adorned with gold. Thus having said
Her sweeter lips to Phillis cheek she laid:
Just where the Be had stung her, and she there
Muttred some words which well I could not hear:
But O most wonderful! Phillis had ease
Immediately, and all her pain did cease.
Whether it was her Magic art or no,
That so soon wrought the cure I don't well know,
But I believe in her sweet mouth was such
Virtue that it did heal all it did touch.
I, that before had so restrained the fire
Of love, that nothing else I did desire,
But Silvia's presence, and a paradise
It was to feast my self on her fair ey's,
Or hear the sweet tunes of her warbling voice,
More pleasing far to me than was the noise,
The little pibbles make in murmuring sloods,
Or than the wind when it sings among the woods
Was now by an ambitious spirit inclined,
To a desire which wished my lips were joined
To hers. This amorous desire me taught,
A very subtle craft which at length brought
Me wished success (do but observe how love
Makes men's ingenio's nimbly for to move)
Her wondrous cure on Phillis I did see,
The sight of that taught me to feign a Be
Had bit my under lip, and though her pray
I durst not for to take my pain away
By her enchantment, yet did my lament
Express as 'twere to her my hearts intent;
She harmless soul pitying the grief that I
Made show of, proffered freely to apply
Her cure to my feigned wound, which added fuel,
To my hearts wound, and made it far more cruel.
Oh Thirsis! never Be did suck from Rose,
Honey so sweet as I did suck from those
Sweet cherries of her lips, though every kiss,
Me thought did yet want some part of its bliss,
For though I had a full desire, yet I
Was or restrained by fear, or modesty:
But whilst this honey mixed with gall descended
Thus to my heart, I sorry so soon ended
Should be my bliss, feigned that her charms did ease
Me somewhat, but not quite the pain surcease;
Which made her willingly to take the trouble,
That to me sweet enchantment to redouble;
Thus so increased this love within my breast,
That at the last 'twas forced to leave its nest:
Nor would it be kept secret, so one day,
When we were sit as we were wont to play;
Shepherds and Nymphs together on the grass,
Each lad some secrets whispering to his less:
I Silvia told, Silvia, I burn for thee,
And sure shall die unless thou helpest me;
Strait at my words there in her face arose
A blush both shame and anger did disclose:
Bowed to the ground her fair face was, and she
With naught but an harsh silence answered me,
And from me turned, nor ever would she deign,
Since that to see or hear me speak again,
Though full three years are past and I have tried
All means I could to get her pacified,
Except my death; and could but that appease
Her anger, I methinks could die with ease,
And should account it highly worth my pain,
If I by death her pity could obtain,
And for my faith would deem it recompense,
Should she lament me when I Am gone from hence;
But why should I wish grief unto that breast,
In which I fixed have my joy, my rest?

Their. But is it possible if she should hear
Thee say thus much? she longer could forbear,
This true love to requite?

Amin. That know not I,
But when I Would speak she more my words does fly,
Than does an aspe the charmer.

Their. Trust to me,
Aminta, and I will procure that she
Shall hearken to thee.

Amin. Nothing from her can you,
Thirsis, procure, or if procure you do
That I speak to her, yet alas in vain
Will be my speech, and I shall nothing gain:

Their. Why do despair so?

Amin. Just occasion I
Have to despair, nay rather for to die;
For the wise Mopsu's long since did foreshow
This my hard fortune. Mopsus, who does know
The virtue of all herbs, and talk of birds.

Their. Which Mopsus speakst thou of? of him whose words
Are honi'd, and who has a friendly smile
In's face, but in his heart has naught but guile:
Be of good cheer, Aminta, do not fear,
Those uncouth prophesies he sels so dear
To unadvised persons, I reject
As foolish, for they never have effect;
This know I by experience, and I,
Cause he has thus foretold, do hope thereby
That in thy love all things will succeed well,

Amin. If by experience thou can ought me tell
Which comfort may my hope, pray don't it hide,

Their. When I came hither first for to abide
Within these woods, I knew and did esteem,
This Mopsus such as thou do now him deem;
I had by chance occasion for to go
To the great City; which I let him know
As hoping his advice, when thus to me
He spoke, To the great land thou go, said he,
Where the sly Citizens and those o'th Court
Of simple rusticks make a scoffing sport;
Therefore be sure this counsel take of mine,
Come not near those whom thou shall see to shine
With gold and stones, and other vain devices,
But above all (and slight not my advices)
Beware, least thou be led by thy ill fate,
Or youthful curios'ty to the gate
O'th magazine of pratlers. Then strait I
Demanded of him, what that place might be?
In this place Sorceresses live, said he;
Who by enchantments do all things unvail,
What to thee seems pure gold, to them is pale
And sordid brass, those arches thou with treasure
Deemst filled, are dirt and mire out of measure;
There are the walls built with great art, and do
Speak themselves, and to speakers answer too:
Nor do they answer a dumb voice alone,
As Echo here, but in words one by one,
Tables and stools and all go tittle tattle,
And should a dumb man enter here he would prattle.
But there is worse evil yet, here may thou be
Changed into water, fire, or a tree,
Water of tears, and fire of sighs: content,
With this fond foresight I to th'City went,
Where guided by blessed fate I chanced to spy
The happy lodge, as I was passing by;
With curious eye expecting something worth
My sight, I chanced to hear at length come forth
Out of the gate such pleasant murmuring noises,
Of nymphs and Sirens the harmonious voices,
As made me stand astonished with delight,
The object pleased so both my ears and sight.
Just by the gate as guard to things so good,
A man of a magnan'mous aspect stood;
To whom I do not well know which I were
Best give that style of Duke, or Cavalier,
He with benign and grave aspect together,
Invited great and small to come in thither,
Nor did he me poor simple soul despise;
O gods what did I see there! near mine eyes
Enjoyed such blessed sights, nymphs full as fair,
As heavenly goddesses, or far more rare:
Beauties more bright then glittering Phoebus beams,
When, at his rise he guild's the eastern streams;
There sat Apollo, and the Muses nine,
Shining in all their Graces, so Divine;
And, amongst the Muses, sat the sage Elpin.
Then was I ravished, with a high desire,
Then, first I flamed with a Poetic fire;
I sang the lives of Kings, oath 'ancient times,
Scorning a mean verse, or pastoral rimes;
And, though again I to these woods returned,
By my ill destiny: yet still I burned
With some part of that fire: yet did abound,
My Pipe, still, with a more then rural sound.
But, envious Mopsus, chancing me to spy,
One day cast at me a Malignant eye:
Whereby, I hoarse became, and then long time
I silent was, and sung no more in rhyme.
Seen by the Wolf, Pastors supposed me,
Which caused my silence: but that wolf was he;
This I have told thee, that thou may perceive,
How willing is this Mopso to deceive,
And void of faith, and therefore cause he will
Thee void of hope, I Would have thee hope more still.

Amin. It pleases me extremely, for to hear
What thou have told, then of my life the care
To thee I do commit.

Their. Let me alone,
I care will take of it, as of my own;
I Will go see what for thee I can prevail,
Then in an hour to meet me do not fail.

CHORUS.
MOst blessed age of gold! not cause the floods
Streamed down pure snow, white milk: nor cause the woods
Distilled sweet honey, or, the free earth bore
Her fruits untouched, nor had her bowels tore;
As yet by the labr'ing ploughman, lambs might err
Through the thick forests, without noise or fear;
Nor yet because no winters clouds begun
T 'ecclipse that Radiant Splendour of the Sun,
With which it is warm and pleasant beams did bring
The wished for happ'nesse of a constant spring;
Nor wandering pines did yet, with sails unfold,
For war or gain compass the late known world.
But, only cause that foolish, and that vain,
Idol of errors, and deceit, that name
So without substance, which the Vulgar, mad,
Did afterward call Honor, as yet had
No Power to play the Tyrant, or control
The Peace and Freedom of a joviall soul.
But nymphs and pastors sweetly lived, nor knew
Any delight, but what from freedom grew,
Not subject, but to law performed with ease
Which nature writ; Is lawful if it please.
No need there was of Cupids torch to move
Or shafts to force the Nymphs and Swains to love,
Their very sports inflamed them and their smiles
They mix with their sweet words, and then e're while,
Both with their sweeter kisses then the rose,
Of her fair cheeks the Virgin did disclose
Freely to all; which now alas are blown,
To the delight and pleasure but of one;
Then often by the waters of a bright
Spring, lovers used to take their full delight.
But thou perversest honor first did shade
This fountain of delight, and thou first made
This freedom cease, and thou did first deny
Water to quench his thirst whom love made dry;
Thou taught'st those splendant beauties first to lie,
Veiled and obscured from every amorous eye;
Their all gold shining hair thou did restrain,
Into a net, and thou have put a rein
To all sweet dear lascivious acts, and we
Think now that theft which used loves gift to be,
And all these acts of thine turn to our pain:
But thou great Jove who with thy power do reign,
Over love and nature with a word, can tame
The greatest Monarchs and whose very name
Strikes terror, why alas do take delight,
To disturb us poor miscreants? kings of might
And power best fit thy thoughts, disturb their peace,
And grant great god that we may live at ease,
And by thy divine providence be hurled
Into the golden -- oth' ancient world.
We Will hope, since there is no joy, when once one dies
We Will hope; that as we have seen with our eyes
The Sun to set, so we may see it rise.
Act. 2.
Scen. 1.
Satyr alone. SMall is the Be, much smaller is her sting,
Yet does its wound both pain and sorrow bring,
But what is more small then love? since it conceals
It self within such minute parts, and steals
Into the smallest spaces, now it rests
Within the valley of two alp-like breasts:
Now creeps and hides it self within the fair
And curled tresses of a golden hair:
Now under twinkling eyebrows, now in the sleek
And rosy dimples of a laughing cheek;
Yet are it is wounds, it is plagues, so sad, so sore,
That naught can be imagined torment more.
Ah me! my very bowels and my heart
Boil over with blood, and like a cruel dart,
So Silvia's fair ey's pierce me, I may say
Cruel Love; but far more cruel Silvia,
Cru'ler then woods, Oh! how well does agree
Thy nature with thy name, well did he see
That it imposed thee, woods in their green brakes
Do hide fierce lions, tigers, wolves and snakes,
Thou under covert of thy sairest breast,
Hid'st anger, hatred and disdain, which beasts
Are worse by much (alas) than those of prey,
As lions, tigers, wolves or snakes; for they
May be appeased, but ay me! these are
Such, as will not be charmed by gift or prayer;
Thou slights the flowr which from the fields I chose
Because thy cheek flowers much fairer shows.
I from the orchards bring thee apples fair,
Which thou rejectst disdainful, cause there are
In thy fair bosom apples far more rare.
I bring thee sweetest honey, even such
From hives I stole thou, deignst it not to touch
Cause on thy sweet lips sweeter there is by much;
But if my poverty permits me not
To give unto thee any thing but what
In thee's more sweet and fair, my self then take;
Unjust, why should thou such a gift forsake?
I Am not to be despised, no, for I
Saw my self in the sea when it did lie
Becalmed and free from waves, this my fierce, stern
And sanguine look, these shoulders large, this arm
So strong and nervous, this rough shaggy breast,
These big-bon'd thighs of mine, and all my rest
So well knit members, are a sign that I
Am strong and lusty, if believ'st not, try;
What will it do with these tender fools, whose sleek
Face, scarce allows them down upon their cheek?
Women, in show, and Works they be, nor are
Skilled in ought else, but to dispose each hair,
In it is due order; there is not one that dare
Follow thee through the woods, to hunt the Bear,
Or, durst encounter wild Boares for thy sake.
I Am not so ugly, no: nor do forsake
Me, 'cause I am thus formed, alas, but why?
Because I Am poor, thou do thy love deny.
Alas, the Villages do follow now
The custom of the Mighty Cities: how
Well may the golden age this called be,
Since gold alone Commands imperiously?
O! thou, who first did teach the way, to sell
Divinest love, may torments, worse then hell,
Still wait and tend upon thee; may thou die
Unpitied let thy cold ashes ly
Unburied; let Nimphs and Shepherds cease
Passing to say, Soul, do thou rest in Peace;
Let the rain wet thee, move thee may the wind;
Let flocks and strangers too, be so unkind,
As for to trample on thee, thou first shamed
The Nobility of love, not to be named;
Horrid and Monstrous, it is not to be told,
How Love is made the Price of abject Gold.
But, why in vain lament I? since I see,
Beasts, for their safety, use those Arms, which be,
Allotted them by Nature, Tigers paw's
Use for defense, Lions their teeth and claw's;
The Stag does for her safety use to fly,
A woman's weapon is her Beauty. Why?
(Then since all these do use their natural arms
To conquer foes, or save themselves from harms)
Should not I when that nature has me made
Apt for to ravish, make use of the trade?
I Will force, I Will ravish what she me denies,
Nor will be moved with her prayers nor cries.
Not long ago I told was by a Swain,
That in the fountain lies in yonder plain;
She often baths her self, there I intend
To hide me in the bushes, to the end
That when she comes I may be sure to take
Hold on her; what resistance can she make
Against me, poor tender soul? and for her cries,
I Will neither them nor of her beauty prize
The power. Oh if I can but once entwine,
This hand within her locks, why then she is mine,
Nor shall the gods release her, til that I
For my revenge my arms in blood do die.
Act. 2. Scen. 2.
Daphne and Thirsis. Daph. THirsis, as I thee told, I long since thought,
Amyntas did love Silvia, and have sought,
God knows, all way's to further this his love,
And shall the more, since thou art pleased to move
Me in it: but I rather had by far
Choose for to tame a lion, or fierce bear,
Then such a simple girl, who does not know
How piercing be her beauties arms, and though
She others kills, yet is her self still sound,
And wounding others knows, not how to wound.

Their. And where is that child so simple han't a mind,
As soon as out of swathling bands, to find
Arts to seem handsome and to make her please?
And how to kill with pleasing? and with ease
Can tell what arms they be cause death? nay more,
What arms they be which life again restore:

Daph. Who mistress is of so much art?

Their. As though
Thou knewst not Daphne, it is the same does show
Flight to the winged birds, and does infuse
Swimming to fishes, teaches Bulls to use
Their horns, and makes Juno's proud bird to spread
Her Argus-eye-deckt feathers over his head:

Daph. I Would very fain know how you call this same
Mistress of arts?

Their. Why Daphne is her name.

Daph. Out filthy liar that thou art.

Their. why fool
Art thou not able then to keep at school
A thousand girls, although no need there is
In this same Art of Love of Mistresses,
For nature is their mistress, though, it is true,
The mother and the nurse bear a share too.

Daph. Come, thou too knavish art, in sum I Will tell
Thee that I am not yet resolved well,
If Silvia be so simple as she feigns
Her self to be; for down in yonder plains
Where the clear waters of the silent lake
Incircled round a pretty Island make,
I the other day saw Silvia counsel take,
How she the golden tresses of her head
In pretty curls might over her forehead spread,
And then how she might fittest over them place
Her snow-white vail, over that with better grace
Order some fragrant flowers, with lilies fair
Her white neck she would adorn; and so compare
Which was the whitest, now a lovely rose,
To her sweet cheeks to see which did disclose
The liveliest hue; then with delight would she
Smile, as 'twere boasting of the victory:
Methought she seemed to say, I only do
For your disgrace base flowers carry you,
Not for my ornament, since all may see
How much in beauty you must yield to me;
But whilst she flatt'red thus her self, her eye
By chance she turned, and turning did epsy
That I sat laughing in th'adjacent bowers,
At which she blushed, and strait let fall her flowers;
When laugh the more to see her blush did I,
Which her cheeks tinged in a deeper die;
But cause that only on one side her head
Her hair was gathered, on the other spread;
She fearful I should see again, poor soul,
As 'twere from the clear fountain counsel stole,
And though she were undrest, yet pleased was she
That, so undrest, she looked so handsomely:
I saw it and was silent.

Their. Thou do tell
What I before told thee; guest I not well?

Daph. Well did thou guess, but I have been told how
Pastors and nymphs were not so sly as now
In former times, nor young was I so bold:
The world does grow more wicked, as more old.

Their. It Is true that then Citizens used not so
Often in the Country come, nor Rusticks go
Unto the City; now their crafty race
As well as customs do with us take place;
But to our purpose can not thou procure,
That the hard-hearted Silvia may endure
To hear Amyntas speak alone, or't least
In company with thee, which she will think best.

Daph. I Will tell thee, Silvia now so coy does grow
That well how to obtain it I don't know.

Their. Amyntas too respectfully is nice.

Daph. True say thou Thirsis; there can no worse vice
In lovers be; he that would learn the art
Of divine love must lay respect apart,
Must dare demand, solicit, importune;
And if by these means he cannot overcome,
Must ravish too: Thirsis, thou know so well,
That I am sure there is none need thee to tell,
The nature of a woman, if she flies
It Is cause she would be pursued; if she deny's,
Alas it is only cause that she would have
Men to force that which first they did but crave,
She fights to be overcome: laugh not at me
That I speak thus in considence to thee,
And that I speak in rimes, but thou know, Thirsis,
I can for rimes return thee more than verses.

Their. Thou have no reason to suspect that I
Should ever tell ought against thy modesty.
But I conjure thee, Daphne, by the dear
Remembrance of thy youth that thou will here
Lend thy assistance with me for relief
Of poor Amyntas, who else dies with grief.

Daph. How neatly he conjures me, by the joy
Of mine that is past, and by my present'noy?
But what wilt have me do?

Their. Judgment and skill
I know thou have, then only, that thou will.

Daph. In sum I Will tell thee then Silvi' and I
This day at Dians well, which is hard by,
Intend to wash, where an inviting shade
For nymphs and shepherds by a beech is made;
And there she will naked bath her tender wast.

Their. What then?

Daph. What then! if thou have wit thou may
Guess at the rest.

Their. I guess, but do not know
Whether he will have the heart to come or no.

Daph. If come he wo'n't, for ought that I can say,
Stay until she looks after him he may.

Their. He so deserves.

Daph. But, Thirsis, may not we
(At leisure now) talk somewhat too of thee?
Why do not thou a sweetheart get? Alas
You Are yet but young! and scarce do four years pass
Of the fifth luster (and full well do I
Know when these arms have danced thee lullaby)
Why wilt neglected live, and void of joy?
Since without love there is no delight (my boy)

Their. A man may shun fond love, and yet not fast
From Venus pleasures, he the sweet does taste
Without the bitter.

Daph. Most unsavorie it is:
The sweet's not seasoned with some bitterness
Soon satiate.

Their. Better once satisfide:
Then before meat and after to abide
Still hungry.

Daph. Thirsis, if the meat you have
does please; the more you taste, the more you crave

Their. But who can always present have that food
Which, though he is hungry, to his taste is good.

Daph. Who seeks no good shall find none.

Their. There Is no ease
In seeking that, which found, it is true does please;
But if not found when sought torments us more.
Thirsis will never a lover be, before
That cruel love shall leave it is company
Of sighs and tears, enough already I
Have sighed and wept.

Daph. Enough enjoyed though
Perhaps thou have not.

Their. Nor desire, if so
Dear I must buy it.

Daph. Well if nothing move
Thee can, at length thou will be forced to love:

Th. Love cannot force who is out of his command.

Dap. But who is it can out of loves empire stand?

Their. Who fears his witching charms and flies away.

Daph. Where will thou fly if love his wings display?

Their. But love when young has his wings short, and so
Cannot overtake the man will from him go.

Daph. The birth of love, there is no man can discry,
And when discri'd, his wings grown great, he will fly.

Their. Some by experience his first birth can tell.

Dap. Thirsis, since thou pretendst to know so well
That Art, we will see if thou can from him run,
This I protest to thee, I Will not be won
A hand, a foot, or eye-brow for to move,
Either to help or aid thee in thy love.

Their. Fie cruel one then could thou dead me see?
If thou will have me love, why, love thou me.

Daph. Why do thou mock me, Thirsis? perhaps thou
Do not deserve so fine a mistress; how
Many a colored and smooth face be guiles.

Their. I do not mock thee; no, but thou meanwhiles
With this pretext my love do not accept;
This is the common trick: but if reject
My love thou do, I without love will live.

Daph. Thirsis, may thou contently live and thrive,
More then e're yet thou did, may live in ease
And leisure, without which love never does please.

Their. Daphne, this leisure god has granted me,
One who a god may here esteemed be;
To whom on verdant plains and cliffy rocks,
From sea to sea we feed our herds and flocks:
Thirsis, said he, let others take a care,
To chase the wolves, and thieves, let others share
Rewards unto the servants; others guard
My wal'd-in sheep; thou (from these labors barred,)
Shall sing: then just it is my pipe should move,
Not in fond fancies of a worldly love;
But that in higher strains it only hollow
The ancestors of my Jove, or Apollo.
(For which of those to call him well, in troth,
I know not, since he does resemble both)
Progenitors of greater worth by far,
Then or bright Saturn or the Heavens are;
(Low Muse to such a merit,) but yet he,
Sing I or clear or hoarse, rejects not me;
His praise I dare not chant, nor well can I
Worthily honor him, but silently,
And with due reverence; but his altars never
Without my flowers or sweet perfumes yet were:
And when I do forget him to adore,
Or worship; then let Thirsis be no more:
Let Rivers change their beds, the Soane advance
To wash the Persian banks, the Tigris France.

Daph. High ho, you are flown too high, prithee descend
Unto our purpose.

Their. Daphne, I intend,
That thou should as thou go along the way
Endeavor for to soften Silvia;
I Will procure that he come, this task of mine
I doubt will harder be by far than thine,
Then go thy ways:

Daph. I do, but I did mean
By this talk part of which thou did not dream;

Their. If I can well discern him by the face,
Aminta it is appears in yonder place.

Act. 2. Scen. 3.
Aminta Thirsis. Amin. I Will see what Thirsis may have done for me,
In what to do he promised; but if he
Have nothing done, why then, before that I
Will be consumed to nothing, I will die
Before the rigid Silvia; that abate
My death, may somewhat of her cruel hate,
She (that so pleased is with that plague, the Dart
Of her fair ey's has gi'n my lovesick heart)
Will with that wound which my breast shall endure
From mine own hands be doubly pleased I Am sure.

Their. I new's of comfort bring thee, and content,
Then dear Aminta, cease thus to lament.

Amin. What say thou Thirsis, must I live or die?

Their. I bring thee life and safety, for if I
The other had, I Would not it bring, but need
There is of courage, man, and that with speed?

Amin. What need is there of courage, pray. and where
Must I employ it?

Their. If thy Silvia were
Within a wood, encompassed round with rocks,
Where lions and fierce Tigers by whole flocks
Did range, no way to escape by strength or art,
To go to rescue her, would have the heart?

Amin. More joyful far then on a holy day,
A Country wench does run to dance or play.

Their. If she amongst murd'rers were, I fain would know,
Whether thou dare unto her rescue go.

Amin. I Would go more readier then the Stag does fly
To the long-wish'd-for fountain, when he is dry.

Their. But greater proofs more courage do require.

Amin. I would for Silvia's sake pass through the fire,
Or through the floods, when down the Mountains throw,
With a full torrent, their dissolved snow;
I Would go to hell it self, if hell could be,
Where there is one so fair so good as she;
But tell me pray, where is it?

Their. Hark then.

Amin. Go on.

Their. Silvia attends thee naked and alone,
At that same fountain called Diana's well;
Dare thou to go.

Amin. Alas! what do thou tell
Me, Thirsis? naked and alone does she
Stay for me, say thou?

Their. Unless Daphne be
There (who of our side is) alone I say.

Amin. But naked prithee does she for me stay?

Their. I say she there stays naked for thee, but-

Amin. But what? thou kilst me if that word thou put.

Their. But I cannot tell if thou had best to go.

Amin. Oh hard conclusion! which all the forego-
Ing sweetness does imbitter: with what art
Do strive to wound my almost bloodlesse heart?
Is It not enough that thus unhappy I
Am, but thou will increase my misery?

Their. Aminta, if thou will my counsel take,
Thou may be happy:

Amin. What, for the gods sake,
Do thou advise me;

Their. What! That thou be bold,
And on what fortune thee presents lay hold.

Amin. The gods I hope will keep me that I may
Never think a thought to displease Silvia:
I never displeased her yet, but by my love,
Nor was it my fault, her beauties power did move
Me to it: but let me when I cease to strive
Silvia to please, no longer care to live.
Answer me now, If in thy Power it were
To leave her love, would do it to ple asure her
Love lets me not say so, nay 't does deny
That I should think to leave her love, though I
Could do it.

Their. Why then though leave her? love thou could;
Yet, in despite of her, love her thou would.

Amin. Not in despite, but yet I Would love her still.

Their. Why then thou love her would against her will.

Amin. Yes, certainly I should.

Their. Then dare thou not
Against her will (fool as thou art) take what
At first may hard and heavy seem, once past
Sweeter and sweeter grows unto the last.

Amin. Thirsis, love for me answers, and my heart
Know's it is own means, but cannot them impart,
Thee constant use has skilled in loves great Art,
But that has bound my tongue which bound my heart.

Their. Why then we will not go.

Amin. Yes go will I:
But not where thou do deem.

Their. Whither?

Amin. To die;
To die alas I Will go, if this be all
The favor thou have done me.

Their. Think it small?
Think Daphne counsel would to go, if find
In part she did not that 'twas Silvia's mind?
And who can tell, it may be Silvia too
Know's it her self, but would not have that you
Should know she knows it; now, if thou do crave
Her full consent, thou do desire to have
What would displease her most, and then (fool) where
Is that desire of thine to pleasure her?
Or if she would that thy enjoyment were
Thy theft, and not her gift, what need'st thou care?

Amin. But who assures me such is her desire?

Their. Why see? thou do that certainty require,
Which does and ought displease her, and which thou
Ought not to seek: but pray imagine now
That such were her desire, and thou not go,
Equal the doubt is, the loss equal; so,
I think it better that courageously
Thou like a man, than like a coward, die
Ar't silent? you are overcome, confess I pray
This love Aminta; it occasion may
Thy greater Victory; let us go then.

Amin. I pray.

Their. What, stay! see not how fast the time does run?

Amin. Pray let us think first wht is to be done.

Their. We by the way will think the rest, but who
Does too much think things, seldom well does do.

CHORUS.
LOve, who can teach us thy mysterious art?
Who thy divinest fancies can impart?
Where may we learn them? who can them display?
Since (though the mind them comprehend) away?
Armed with thy winged prowes, they soar above,
Not learned Athens ere the art of love
Could teach, nor its Liceo could it show,
Phoebus in Helicon thy art never knew;
He could discourse of love, it is true, but so,
As if he did thy art but blindly know,
Or were a learner, cold were his desires,
Nor did his voice burn with celestial fires,
As sits thy power, nor could his thoughts arise
To comprehend thy sacred mysteries;
Thou only, Love, a worthy master art,
In thy sublime, and more then heavenly art;
To rustic breasts thou make known those Divine
And most Celestial Characters of thine,
Writ by thine own hand in another eye,
Thy faithful servants tongues thou do untie:
And make them glide in pure and nobler stream's,
Then ever issued from Poetic veins;
By thee divinest love there is more expressed
In broken words and speeches, then the best
Of Orators can do, and more does move
Thy silence, then their Rhetoric, to love:
Heart-conquering Love to others, leave will I
To learn thy art in blind philosophy,
Or from the learned schools: I only will
In fair ey's study this mysterious skill;
And their high styles and Poetry will less,
Then shall my rough or rustic times, express:
Act. 3
Scen. 1.
Thirsis Chorus of Shepherds. O Horrid cruelty! unheard! unseen!
Or ever yet remembered to have been
In humane breast; three hundred times, nay four
Ungrateful sex; thou nymph ungrateful more.
Why did thou, Nature, show thy utmost art,
Thus in adorning woman's outward part?
Why did her beaut'ous countenance indue
With such a sun-like soul-bewitching hue?
And did afford to grace her mind within
Nothing but falsenesse, cruelty, and sin.
Negligent Mistress! But ay me, my dear
Aminta will have slain himself, I fear;
It Is full three hours that round about the ground,
Where I him left I sought him, but have found
Nor him, nor yet his footsteps, it is too plain
I clearly see that he himself has slain;
But stay, perhaps those shepherds yonder be
May tell me news of him, friends did you see
Aminta or hear of him?
Chor. Thou do show
So troubled; that the cause we fain would know
Of this thy grief; from whence proceeds this sweat?
This sorrow; tell us if thou think it meet.

Their. I fear Aminta's ill, did you him see?

Chor. No him we have not seen, since that from thee
Long since he parted; but pray tell us plain
What do thou fear?

Their. Lest he himself have slain.

Chor. That he has slain himself! but what could move
Him such an act to do?

Their. Hatred and love.

Chor. Who two such potent enemies don't fear?
What cannot they do? but tell us pray more clear.

Their. His great love of a nymph, and her no small
Hatred of him.

Chor. Nay prithee tell us all;
This is a place of passage, and whilst you
Relate it, news may brought be; perhaps too
Himself may come meanwhile.

Their. I willingly
Recount it will, that the just infamy
Of such a strange ingratitude may rest
Upon that cruel and remorseless breast;
Aminta told was (I alas was he
That told it him and he was led by me,
Now I repent me) that his Silvia dear
This day with Daphne in a fountain clear
Would bath her naked limbs, he thither went
Not moved by his desire, but to content
My importunities: often back have gone
He would; but that I still did thrust him on;
Now when we come were to the fountain nigh;
We thought we heard a woman's woeful cry,
And not far off we Daphne saw, her ey's
Swollen with tears, when she saw us, her cries
Did pierce the heavens, run and make haste, said she,
Silvia is forced. Amyntas presently,
Not staying to hear more, flew away so
Swift as I never yet saw swifter Do:
I followed him; when, lo, we straightway see
The beauteous Silvia ti'd unto a tree;
The rope to tie her was her brightest hair,
Which in a thousand knots entangled were
About the plant; that girdle used to be
The former warder of her chastity,
Was used now to her rape, and served to bind
Unto the tree her snow-white hands behind.
The very plant it self did condescend
To this foul act, and seemed as 'twere to lend
It Is full assistance to the rape; for round
About her legs two pliant twigs were bound;
Just before her a cruel Satyr stood,
With looks denoting villainy and blood,
Who finished had to bind her; she poor heart
Did strive with all her force and all her art,
But what (alas!) could all her force or skill
Prevail against him who had such strength at will;
Aminta with his sharp wel-brandish'd dart
Aimed at, but mist, the cursed Satyrs heart;
I gathered up what stones I could, but he
Seeing us two, thought it was best to flee:
We him pursued, Aminta as his flight
Gave leave, turned back his ey's to have the sight
Of her fair members, which more soft by far
Seemed than Swans down, and whiter much than are
The snow-deck'd Alps, but when we had in vain
Pursued the rogue, he turning back again
Accosts her thus, Pardon, O Silvia fair,
These hands of mine, which with such boldness dare
Approach thy members, for they are forced to loose
These knots which ministered to thy abuse;
Then since that fortune has been pleased to send
Them such a bliss, let it not thee offend.

Chor. Words that would mollify a heart of stone!
What answer did she give him then?

Their. Why none:
But looking down disdainfully, she tried,
All that she could, her fairest breasts to hide;
He from the tree begins her hair to loose;
And thus he seemed to say, Durst thou abuse
These golden curls, base plant? which do to thee
So great an honor, ah, unworthy be
Thy branches of such knots; what vantage pray
Can we poor Lovers boast of? Since trees may
Enjoy those comforts which we want, entwine
By force those locks which bless these hands of mine
By their bare touch; this done he from behind
Unties the knot, and does her hands unbind;
In manner so as if he seemed to fear
Their touch, and yet to touch could not forbear;
Then stoops that he might loose her feet, but she
Finding her hands were now at liberty,
Looks on him scornfully, says touch not, I
Am Dians nymph. I can my feet untie

Chor. Can so much pride reign in so fair a heart?
O for so good an act ungrateful part!,

Their. He did respectfully himself retire
Not looking on her, though he did desire,
Denied himself that pleasure, which on trial
He feared would give her trouble of denial;
I heard and saw all this, and hid did lie,
And though about to check her cruelty;
Yet I withheld: but hear the most unkind
Part of all yet; she did at length unbind
Her self, scarce loose, nor bidding him adieu,
Faster then fleetest Stag away she flew;
And yet to fear I Am sure she cause had none,
For his respect to her was full well known.

Chor. Why did she fly then?

Their. She would of her rape
The rescue attribute to her escape,
Not to his modest love.

Chor. Ungrateful too
In this! but what said he? what did he do?

Their. I know not, I vexed at her rigor, ran
To overtake and hold her but in vain;
For soon I lost her track, then turning, where
I left Aminta, could not find him there;
My heart presages ill, for this I Am sure
He Would rather die than this sad chance endure:

Cho. The custom it is (we know) of those that are
In love, to threaten death, but very rare
Are those effect it.

Their. But pray god that he
One of those rare ones be not:

Cho. He will not be
So foolish, fear not.

Their. I Will go to the cave
Of sage Elpino, where I sure shall have
News of him if he lives, for that is his hant;
There on his oaten pipe he used to chant
Sweet songs, and there lament him of his love,
And make the very rocks and mountains move;
The Rivers stop their course to hear his lays,
The trees incline, and wild beasts leave their preys.

Act. 3. Scen. 2.
Amyntas Daphne Nerina. Amin. PItilesse pity Daphne sure was thine,
When thou with-heldst this hand, this dart of mine;
That so my death being delayed by fate
Might be more bitter by how much more late;
And why do trace me thus? or think to force
Hope into me by this thy vain discourse:
What do thou fear? that I my self should slay,
Thou fear my good; then prithee go away;

Daph. Despair not thus Aminta, for if I
Know Silvia well, 'twas shame that made her fly,
Not cruelty.

Amin. Alas! there is for me
No way but to despair, since hope will be
As't has been yet my ruin, still I find
It strives as 'twere to blossom in my mind;
And whispers to me live, and can ought be
Worse then a life, to such a wretch as me?

Daph. Live wretch, live still I say, and let this be
Support unto thee in thy misery;
That if thy hope in life do but maintain thee,
At length thar naked fair one it will gain thee.

Amin. Both love and fortune, though that at the brink
Of wretchedness I was, yet did not think
Me yet forlorn enough, until that I
Had fully seen what fully both deny.

Ner. Must I then always have the luck to be
The messenger of such sad news? ay me!
Wretched Mantano! what sad heart will thine
Be when thou come to hear this news of mine?
O sad and des'late father thou, nay rather,
By loss of thy dear Silvia, no more Father!

Daph. I a sad voice do hear.

Amin. And I hear sound
The name of Silvia, which my heart does wound,
Who is it names her?

Daph. it seems at first sight
To be Nerina, Cynthia's chief delight,
Who has so sweet comportment, so fair face,
Such charming ey's, such a bewitching Grace.

Ner. And yet alas, I Am forced to let him know
Of this most fatal chance of thine, that so
He may seek those unhappy bones, if no
More rests of thee; oh! my dear Silvia, oh!

Amin. Ay me, what says she!

Ner. Daphne,

Daph. what, and why
Do to thy self name Silvia, and then cry.

Ner. Alas! with reason I lament her sad
And cruel fate;

Amin. What fate can be so bad
To make thee thus lament? Ay me, I feel
My heart a dying, as though pierced with steel,
Is she alive?

Daph. Prithee to us relate
What thus thou mutter'st of her desperate fate.

Ner. Ye Gods! why am I messenger? yet I
Must tel't: did she, you know the reason why
Come e'n now naked to my Lodge, and there
Re-cloath'd her self again; she by her prayer
Prevailed with me, that I would with her go
In Eliceto for to hunt a Do.
I pleased her, and we went when, near the ground,
Gathered together many Nymphs we found;
Scarce had we spoke to them, when lo we see
A mighty wolf start from behind a tree,
Great out of measure was he, and with blood
His nose was di'd, he fiercely looking stood;
Silvia straight to her bow an arrow fits,
And she nere used to miss; so now she hits
Him just upon the head, he fly's again
Into the wood, she follows him amain:

Amin. O sad beginning, which does pierce my heart!
What end wilt have?

Ner. I with another dart
Followed her track, but at great distance, since
She was in the wood ere I could move me thence,
Yet I her footsteps made a shift to trace,
Until I came to the most desert place
Of all the wood, where, lo, by chance I found
My dearest Silvia's dart upon the ground,
And not far off from it I did espy
That snow-white veil, which I my self did ty
Upon her head, which as you see is di'd
With crimson gore, and looking round I spied
Seven fierce wolves, which seemed to lick the blood
Of a naked body, about which they stood,
Such was my hap, and so intent they were
Upon their prey, they saw not I was there;
So I returned, and this is the full tale
I tell of Silvia can, see here the veil.

Amin. Thou Have told too much, this veil, and this blood be
Sure tokens of her death.

Daf. Ah poor wretch! he
Is dead with grief too.

Ner. No, he breathes, revives,
It Is but a sudden fainting, see he lives.

Amin. Grief, why? (alas!) do thou torment me so,
And do not kill outright? if thou too slow
Be, or would have my hand the instrument
To do it, to this I Am very well content;
And it shall execute that death which thou
Refusest, or to do, or know not how;
Then since the certainty of this we know,
And nothing wants now to augment my woe;
Why should I longer stay? oh Daphne! why
Did not permit me, when I would, to die?
To this sad end reserv'dst thou me? to this!
Sure sweet my death had been, nay more a bliss,
And greatest happiness, had but that dart,
Which cruel thou withheldest, pierced my heart.
But heavens denied it, and did fear least that
I by my sudden death forerun should, what
They had ordained me, now my utmost ill
They executed have, permit they will
To make the full sum of their cruelty:
And thou permi too must) that I may die.

Daph. Restrain this frantic humor of thy youth,
Until we do hear further of the truth.

Amin. Why do thou strive to keep me off with such
Delay's? I Have staid too long, and heard too much.

Ner. I would I had been dumb.

Amin. Nymph, pray bestow
On me that blood-bespotted Vail; that so
Small, but whole relic of my Silvia;
That since no more there rests of her, it may
Witness my death, and if there ought can be
To do it may serve to augment my misery;
Though, I confess, it is not so small that I
Need to increase it, to persuade me die.

Ner. Had I best giv't him, or deny't him? I
Think for the occasion I were best deny.

Amin. What cruel one! so small a gift to me,
Who am resolved nere to ask more of thee?
In this too wretched fate, I yield with you,
Then let the Veil remain, and so adieu;
I go to turn no more.

Daph. Aminta, stay,
Gods! with what fury does he fly away?

Ner. He flies so fast, that it will be in vain
To follow him, I down in yonder plain
Will seek Montano, but I do not know
If I were best to tell the news or no.

CHORUS.
THere is no cause, which death may move
To bind him, has a noble heart;
His faith's enough first, then his love,
Nor is so hard of love the art.
By him alone that loves well, love is sought,
And like a Merchandise by love is bought;
And seeking love we often find
A Glory, which we leave behind.
Act. 4.
Scen: 1.
Daphne, Silvia and Chore of Shepherds. Daph. THat wind that brought the sad
new's of thy death,
Brought with it likewise in the self same breath
Thy present and thy future ill, but thou
(Thanks be to God) art live and well, when now
I deemed thee dead; Nerina with such grief
It told: had she been dumb, or others deaf.

Sil. The danger sure was great, and she indeed
Had just occasion to suspect me dead.

Daph. A just occasion for to tell it, though,
She had not, but let me thy danger know,
And how thou scap'dst.

Sil. I Will tell thee, I, in chase
Of a fierce wolf, unto the thickest place
Came of the wood, so that I quite the track
Did of his footsteps loose, but turning back
Again, I spied him; by my shaft I knew
That 'twas the same wolf first before me flew.
He with some others feeding was amain,
On a dead carkase they had newly slain;
Of what I could not well discern, but he
Leaving his prey came running after me.
I stood him; with intent to make him feel,
My dart than arrow was the sharper steel;
And thou know well I Am mistress of the art,
Of brandishing and lancing well a dart;
I seldom use to miss, and so, when nigh
Enough I thought him, I my dart let fly,
But was it fault of fortune, or of me,
I mist the wolf, and stuck it in a tree:
The Wolf more fiercely at me runs, and I,
Seeing 'twas vain to use my bow, did fly:
He follows me, (now hear a chance,) my vail
Hap'd to untie, and with the murmuring gale
Came through the woods, blew up and down, at last
A bot a bough tangled it self so fast,
That though my force redoubled was, my strength
Could not prevail a rescue, but at length,
Seeing no way to'scape, I thought it best
Quite to untie it, and there ^et it rest;
Which done, I ran again with all my might,
Fear adding thousand wings unto my flight,
That he nere joined me, and I came out safe
Unto my lodge, where first of all I have
Encountered thee, and wondered much to see
Thee stand amazed, and wondering so at me.

Daph. Thou liv'st, alas! but others not.

Sil. doth't greive
Thee Daphne then that I am still alive?
Hat'st thou me so?

Daph. no Silvia, I Am full glad
Thou liv'st, another death it is makes me sad.

Sil. Whose death?

Daph. Aminta's.

Sil. Is he dead, and how?

Daph. Well how I cannot tell, nor do I know
If it be certain.

Sil. Strange! but can divine
What was the occasion of his death?

Daph. why? thine.

Sil. I understand thee not.

Daph. The tidings sad
Brought of thy wretched death, such power had
Over him, poor foul, and over his wearied life,
That I believe 'thas brought him cord or knife.

Sil. I hope that vain will this suspect of thine
Be of his death, as vain was that of mine;
For when men come to the effect, they strive
(Let them boast what they will before) to live.

Daph. Silvia, thou know not what the fire of love
Can in a heart that is not of marble move,
But thine's more hard than stone, else thou believe
Would him, for whom thou yet seem not to grieve;
And would have loved him who far more did prize
Thy love, than the dear apples of her ey's.
I well believed him, knew, and saw't, when he
Having unloos'd the (Tigresse) from the tree,
An act that would have forced thee him to love,
Had had a heart; but what is it thee can move?
I say I saw him there reverse his dart
And with his full force strive to pierce his heart;
Nor did repent him, though at first he di'd
It in his crimson gore; but once more tried
To make it enter farther, and he sure
Had pierced his heart, but I could not endure
To see it, so staid him; yet believe the rage
Of that small wound did not at all assuage
His desperate constancy, but only made
A freer passage for his thirsty blade.

Sil. What do thou tell?

Daph. I saw him too when he
First understood news of the death of thee
To swound for grief; revived, he fled away
In fury with intent himself to slay:
And he will have done it surely.

Sil. Think thou so.

Daph. I cannot doubt it.

Sil. Oh my Daphne, oh
Why followedst not to hinder him, with me
Come now and seek to find him; for if he,
Thinking me dead, resolved himself to kill,
Sure now I live, remain in life he will.

Daph. I followed him, and sought him, but in vain,
For when he once got out of sight, again
I could not find him, nor his footsteps; thou
Then whither, prithee, wilt go seek him now?

Sil. Alas let us go however, for if we
Don't stay him, he will his own murderer be.

Daph. Perhaps it grieves thee then that any one
Should boast of killing him, but thee alone;
Or cruel one do think it scorn, his heart
Should wounded be by any, but thy dart?
Content thy self, how e're he dies, yet he
Dies for thy sake, thou will his murderer be.

Sil. Ay me! thy comfort's harsh, but now I find
That grief of heart, which overswayes my mind;
For his sad chance imbittered is the more,
By how much I was rigorous before,
And the remembrance of my cruelty
Torments me now, I called it honesty,
And so it was, but too severe by far,
Too cruel since it did all pity bar;
Now I repent me.

Daph. Strange! what do I hear?
Pitiful thou? what can thy flint heart bear
The least impress'on? weep'st thou? what can move
These tears? are they of pity or of love?

Sil. They tears of love not, but of pity, are.

Daph. Pity to love is always messenger,
As lightning to the thunder.

Chor. Often when rest
He hidden seeks within a virgins breast,
Who had with too strict honesty before,
Against his sly charms shut and barred the door:
He of mild pity his fond servant takes
The shape and habit, and so entrance makes.

Daph. Silvia, these tears of love be, it is too plain
Art silent? do thou love? thou love in vain:
O divine force of love! how justly thou
Chastisest those who don't thy power avow!
Wretched Aminta! like the Be who leaves
Sorrow to him he stings, but yet bereaves
Himself of life: so now thou victor art,
And dying wounded have that stony heart
Which living thou never could, and if thou be
A wandering spir't, as I believe, then see
Her tears, and though to thee all joy be past,
Rejoice that thou have overcome at last.
Lover in life, beloved in death; if thy
Eat 'twere not to be loved til thou did die,
Or if this cruel one at no less price
Would sell her love, then to him for it dies;
See thou have given her the price she sought,
And with thy early death, her love have bought.

Chor. Dear price to him that gave it, but more griev-
Ous far (alas) to her did it receive.

Sil. Could I but with my love his life regain,
Or with my life call him from death again!

Daph. Ah pitiful too late! and too late wise,
Pity assists not where fate help denies.

Act. 4. Scen. 2.
Ergasto Chore of Shepherds Silvia Daphne. Erg. SO full my breast of pity is,
and so
Clogd up with horror, that I do not know
Whither to turn me, nothing comes to sight,
Nothing I hear, which does not me affright.

Chor. What news brings our Ergasto? sure it is bad,
His countenance and accent both are sad.

Erg. I bring the sad news of Aminta's death:

Sil. Ay me!

Erg. The noblest shepherd that did breath
Within these woods; whose sweet comportments were
Unto the nymphs, and muses both, so dear.

Chor. And is he dead? and how? relate that we
May his untimely end lament with thee.

Sil. I dare not listen to this sad discourse,
Nor yet go near to hear it, though of force
Hear it I must, wicked relentlesse heart
Of mine, what fear thou? go receive that dart
Which he brings in his tongue; that so thereby
May be made known thy heartlesse cruelty.
Shepherd I come a partner here to be
Of that grief, which thou promist's others, me
Perhaps it more concerns, and as a due
Debt of my rigor I receiv't from you.

Erg. Nymph, I believe thee well; for at his death
He with thy name gave up his latest breath.

Daph. Now begin this sad story.

Erg. I surround
The Mount did with some nets, spread on the ground,
When, lo, Amyntas passed by, and he
Was too much changed from what he used to be,
Too troubled, and too sad; I ran and staid
Him, though with much ado; he to me said:
Ergasto I Would entreat a courtesy
Of thee, it is this, to come along with me,
And be a witness of what I shall do,
But this I shall requier first of you,
That by straight oath your firmest faith you bind,
Neither to hinder nor oppose my mind;
I (for who could have thought so strange a case,
Or such mad fury?) let his will take place
And did conjure, Pan, Pales, Priapus,
And all those gods are honored most by us;
He at my oaths went forward, and me led
There where the cliffy rock hangs over it is head:
Road it was none, for there no path at all,
But from the mount, a precipice does fall
Into th'adjacent valley; here a stop
We made, when I with looking from the top,
Such was the height, so level to the ground,
That with a giddiness my head turned round;
I started back, he smiled to see me start,
Which too much did assure my fearlesse heart:
Then to me said, Ergasto, I Would have thee
Recount to Nymphs and Pastors what thou wilt see,
So looking down began -- Had I here ready to my will,
The teeth of ravenous wolves to spill
My blood, I Would only choose that death,
By which she di'd who was my breath:
They tear this body should of mine,
As they did that fair corpse of thine;
But since that heaven is so unjust
As to deny, (though die I must)
My death desired, nor will send
Fierce beasts to help me to my end;
I Will find a death though not the due,
Shall end my life as soon as you.
Silvia I come, I come to thee,
Disdain not then my company;
Contentedly I shall endure
The sharpest death, were I but sure
'T would not again begin our strife,
Thy anger ceased were with thy life.


Silvia I come, this said: he in a trice
Threw himself down; I frozen stood like Ice.

Daph. Wretched Aminta!

Sil. Ay poor me!

Chor. But why
Some way to hinder him did thou not try?
Perhaps thy promised oath did thee restrain.

Erg. No; for, rejecting oaths in that case vain,
When I discerned his purpose, though too late,
I ran to stay him; such was his hard fate,
I only caught this silken girdle here,
But he went with such force it could not bear
His body's weight, and so it did remain
Thus broken in my hands.

Chor. But what became
Of the unhappy corpse?

Erg. That know not I,
I had not heart enough to see it lie:
(Pity and horror having filled the place)
So shattred into pieces.

Chor. O strange case!

Sil. If this news kil's not me, my heart's of stone,
Or rather I believe that I have none;
Shall the false rumor of my death have such
Power over his life, whom I did hate so much?
And shall not his true death, who life did leave
For love of me, me of my life bereave?
It shall: and if that grief cannot do it, a knife,
Or else this girdle shall command my life;
This girdle left behind, alone to be
The just revenger of my cruelty;
Unhappy girdle of a Master far
Unhappier, disdain not that you are
Lodged in this justly to thee hateful breast,
Since there thou as an instrument do rest
Of that revenge, which is in justice due
To your so hapless Master, and to you;
For since it was by my cruelty denied
Aminta should my consort here abide,
It Is just I should by work of thine be made
His consort, in the sweet Elizian shade.

Chor. Comfort thy self poor wretch, thou fault have none
In this, but fault of fortune it is alone.

Sil. Shepherds, weep not for me, your tears you loose,
Those pity don't deserve, who none did use,
Or if ye weep, his loss ye weep in vain,
Since that deserves a far more doleful streine;
And thou too, Daphne, dry those tears of thine,
If from no other cause they come than mine;
This s'd entreat thee do, not for my sake,
But for his worthy was, the pains to take,
To go with me to see those wretched bones,
I fear me, crushed among the rocks and stones,
And help to bury them, and when that I
Have performed this, what should I do but die?
This office I Will repay him, since no more,
I can, for that great love which he me bore;
And though these hands of mine contaminate
Will this good work: yet since pernicious fate
Permits me only to do this; I know
It will be dear to him, he loved me so.

Daph. Who would their help to such a work deny?
But afterward thou must not think to die.

Sil. Till now I lived, have to my self alone,
And to my cruelty, what rests, to none
I Will live but to Aminta: and if fade,
My hopes do there, I Will live to his cold shade,
So long I Will live, till in one point can I
Finish his saddest obsequies, and die;
Shepherd direct me, that I may not fail
To find the way which leads unto the vale;
Where ends that cursed precipice.

Erg. You are
Just in the way, nor is it very far.

Daph. Come, I Will go with thee, thou my footsteps trace,
And I Will thee lead directly to the place.

Sil. Then Shepherds, Nimphs, Meadows, and Plains adieu;
Woods, Rivers, Fountains, all farewell to you.

Erg. Alas! she takes her leave with sighs so sore,
As if she were resolved to turn no more.

CHORUS.
WHat death must yield, that love retains,
Thou peace's friend, he wars unkind,
Ever his triumphs, vaunts and reigns;
And whilst thoudo'st twofair souls bind;
Thou rendr'st earth so like the heavenly sphere,
That thou thy self deign'st to inhabit here;
There is no anger there above
And thou have mortal breasts inclined
By thy divinest art of love;
To put all hatred out of mind;
And with a power exceeding earthly Kings
Thou here below do govern mortal things.
Act. 5.
Scen. 1.
Elpine Chorus of Shepherds. Elp. IN truth, the divine law by which love sway's
His sacred Empire is not hard nor stray's
In oblique paths, sage providence the guide
Is of his works, and all his actions glide
In deepest mysteries, see by what art
By what strange uncouth means he leads a heart
To happiness! and when man thinks that he
Is now arrived at the depth of misery
And wretchedness, why then the winged boy
Transports him to the paradise of joy:
Behold Aminta, by his fall ascends
To his long wished for, and desired ends;
Happy Aminta, happy so much more,
By how much more mis'rable thou before;
By thy example why should I despair,
But rather hope that cruel one, though fair,
Who under smiles of pity does conceal
Her mortal rigor, now at length may heal
My wounded heart, and may true pity have
To cure that wound, her feigned pity gave.

Chor. see how the sage Elpino yonder walks,
And to himself of poor Aminta talks,
As though he living were; he fortunate
And happy calls him, O the sad estate
Of lovers! is his judgment so misled,
To call those happy, who find pity dead?
Is this the paradise of joy? is this
His wished contentment, his desired bliss?
Is this the great reward, the greatest ease
Love gives his servants? can this so much please?
Can this suffice? Elpino, is so bad,
Thy luck, that thou stil'st sprtunate the sad
Death of Aminta? such an end do crave?

Elp. No Shepherds, no; but let your sorrows have
An end; false the report is, he was dead.

Chor. O! how much comfort has this good new's bred?
Did he not then himself precipitate?

Elp. He did, but his more than thrice blessed fate
Under deaths doleful image did him give
Both life and joy: shepherds, he still does live,
And lives content; for now his head does rest
On his dear Nymphs so much desired breast;
She whom before, nor tears, nor sighs could move
To pity him, is now as full of love,
Is now as merciful; and from his ey's
With her own mouth his tears of joy she dry's.
I go to seek her father, old Montane,
And to conduct him unto yonder plain
Where they two be, for nothing to the sill
Of their content there wants, but his good will.

Chor. Equal their birth is, equal are their years
Their wills agree, and good Montane, who bears
Desiers to have nephews, and to fence,
His drooping age with such a sweet defense,
Will make his will be theirs; but dear Elpine
Relate to us what fate, what god divine
Could of our poor Aminta such care have
As might in that same desperate fall him save.

Elp. I am content to tell it, and no man
I Am sure can tell it better then I can.
Just at the entrance of my cave stood I,
Which you know well at the hills foot does lie;
I reasoning was of her, who in a net
First Thirsis caught, and after me, and yet
I did my thraldom far prefer above
His life of freedom, or his flight from love,
When a strange voice our ears and ey's did call
Up to the top, from whence to see one fall,
And see him on a bush of briers light,
Which stood in the midway, was all one sight;
Nature had planted on the mountain's side
A set of thorns, so thick, that they seemed ti'd,
Or wove together, here at first he fell,
Which, though 'twas like a net, yet could not well
His bodi's weight sustain, but let him go
Quite through, that at our feet he fell; yet so
Much of the force and shock it took away,
That 'twas not mortal, only there he lay
Astonished, and void of sense. Amazed
We at the sad chance stood, but when we gazed
More nearly on, and knew him, then our trouble,
Our sorrow, and our anguish did redouble;
But to our grief it was some small repreive
That he was not quite dead, perhaps might live;
Then Thirsis to me the secrets did discover
Of this disconsolate and desperate lover
We knowing 'twas in vain him to lament
Bethought a remedy; and while we sent
For learned Esculapius, whom Apollo
Taught, Physics art when he him used to follow:
At the same time he did on me bestow
The skill to tune a harp, and bend a bow.
Silvia and Daphne thither seeking came
That body which they did believe was slain;
When Silvia saw Aminta's cheeks once fair
Now void of life, now grown so pallid were,
So wan that the bleak violet display's
Not half that palenesse scorched by Phoebus rays:
She stupifi'd near void of sense does rest
Lamenting, crying, beating her fair breast
She on him falls, to take her latest kiss,
And joined his face to hers, her mouth to his.

Chor. Could she that was so coy, now not restrain
Her passion but extend the bounds of shame.

Elp. Weak love is held by shame, but love grows bold
As strong, what is it then can it withold:
She as though in her ey's she did contain
Fountains of tears, did with such plenty rain
Them on his cheeks, and they such virtue had,
That it revived again the breathless lad;
His ey's he weakly opens, and he sends
From his afflicted soul a sigh, which ends
In his dear Silvia's spirit, by her sweet
Mouth it was caught and seemed with it to meet;
Her Echo quite enliv'ned him, but who
Could now declare the joy possessed these two;
Aminta thought 'twas more then heavenly charms,
That thus enclasp'd him in his Silvia's arms;
He that loves servant is, perhaps may guess
Their bliss; but none there is can it express.

Chor. And is Aminta fully cured can tell?
No danger of his life?

Elp. He Is fully well:
It Is true he is somewhat bruised, but nothing he
Does it account, and nothing it will be;
Thrice happy he who did so fully prove
Love's worst, and now does taste the sweets of love;
His sufferings and his torments only be
Sweet seasonings of his felicity.
Shepherds farewell. For I must once again
Make haste to find out the good old Montane.

CHORUS.
CAn that Martyrdom he proved,
While he served, and while he loved,
While he hoped, while he dispair'd,
While he sighed, and while he cared,
Ever recompensed be
Though with joy's eternally?
What if sweet things sweeter more
Are when bitter go before?
What if good things better will
Be, if savored with some ill?
Yet Love I pray give me the less
Not this greater blessedness.
If thou will, bless others so,
Who this full bliss crave to know:
But let me my nymph enjoy,
For a word or for a toy,
Without sighs, and without care,
Without tears, without despair.
Let the season'ngs of our love,
Such be as may only move,
(Not such torments or such pain)
Sweet repulses, sweet disdain;
To which kind kisses may succeed,
To show our hearts are still agreed.
FINIS.
Poems.
Lucretia ( ravished by Sextus Tarquine) to her Husband Collatine and her
Friends.
TO whom should poor Lucretia bemoan,
Those wrongs, that outrage she has undergon
But to the Collatine? no more ah me!
No more, no more! thy faithful spouse is she:
Since Sextus did my innocence invade,
And our chaste bed a lustful stew has made;
If It be a sin to suffer this; if it be
A fault to yield to forcing Tyranny,
Rome judge me guilty: but if will alone
In crimes be argued: then Lucrece has none;
My body only he defiled, but still
My purer mind rests guiltless from the ill;
Nor ever did my noble soul yet move
One footstep from it is loyal constant love;
I never had thought to nuptial rights unjust,
Nor ever did invite proud Tarquins lust;
Nor sought he like a lover to prevail,
But like a bloody Tyrant did assail
My chastity: I him esteemed a foe
But yet did please him whe'r I would or no:
The Grecian Dames lamented Helens fate,
Cursed him that sacred bed did violate:
You Latin matrons my hard hap bemoan,
We have a Roman Paris; nor alone
Is Troy of such faults guilty, great men's crimes
Grow still and followed are by future times.
What shall I do? no longer shall I be
Now famed amongst the Dames for chastity.
I may be styled a Matron, but no more,
An undefiled Matron, ^s before:
Yet I am guiltless: and his force made foul
My body only, but never touched my soul.
Doubt not ye Romans; for you straight shall see
A certain token of my constancy;
I Will give you a sure sign, for since deprive
His force did me of fame, I will not live;
But by my own hands dying will proclaim
His horrid wickedness and my just fame.
They shall not point at Lucretia; never will I
Leave to the Roman Dames a memory
That shall reproach them, nor can I give way
To let suspicion feign what ere she may;
This my magnanimous right hand shall be
The steerer of my faith, my chastity;
The Princes strong hand and his violent arms
Infolded me in these reproachful harms;
My violent hand shall my redeemer be,
And this sharp steel shall from them set me free:
We Will not unto our Country be a stain,
Nor give the wicked samples to profane
The sacred marriage rites, never from me
Shall Rome a sad example take to be
Subject to willing Tyranny: nay more
Perhaps my rape her freedom may restore;
When ages yet to come shall praise my name,
And if not patient, noble me proclaim:
In Brothers blood the first of Tyrants dies
His walls. this offers as a Sacrifice
A ravished spouses blood, that Tibers shore
May stained be both with male and female gore;
Thou Father take in hand thy dart, thou Brute
No more refuse to act, no more be mute,
Nor let unpunished go such cursed crimes,
But like a man revenge them; now the times
Of thy feigned madness cease: he whose strong hand
Could overcome a woman, yet cannot stand
Before you armed men, thus only ease
And thus alone dear Collatine appease
Thou may my ghost; let not the adult'rer escape
The just reward of his most horrid rape;
Thestiad's sword was by Orestes head
Made famous: he defiled his fathers bed.
I guiltless lived, and in that title die,
Yet my fame lost no longer live will I.
Vetruria to her Son, Cn. Martius Coriolanus, about to raise civil war against
his Country.
WHat horrid madness does thy brains infest,
Thus to disturb thy countries quiet rest
With hostile arms? what! can thou think it good
To die a Latian dart in Roman blood?
Or can imagine Romes injurious hate
Deserves to be revenged at such a rate?
Consider, Martius, by this dismal strife,
Thou cut'st the thread of thy Volumnia's life;
And whilst thou do revenge thy private ill
Thou her who first gave life to thee do kill;
What can thy fury make so foul a breach?
Can envy, hatred, malice, thus far reach?
And can that venerable name of Rome
Now in thy heart find no respectful room?
Wilt turn son to an en'my, make me share,
To be a consort in this bloody war?
Those Cities thou destroy'st are ours, each field
Which thou laist wast does us our comforts yield;
Those walls which thou seekst todeface are mine,
Thy wif's, thy childrens, friends, nay very thine;
Let great Romes people guilty be, who did
Banish the man had been their glorious head;
The matrons guiltless are; with one accord
They damned the wickedness: and all afford
Curses to those base Tribunes which she sent
To exile, and in vain these wars lament.
Consider yet, these, thy wife, children, I,
Amongst thy unjust foes entangled lie;
Thou with our danger seek'st revenge: and we
Though not in guilt, in it must partners be;
Seekst thou thus to embrace me? thus entwine
Me in thine arms? alas! they are not thine
They are my foes: and now thy mother I
By thee shall led be to Captivity:
I for thy triumphs am designed, and round
About thy armed bands must be led bound.
Those arms that used to reach the dug to thee,
By hostile arms must now enforced be.
Those household gods thou used'st to adore,
By armed fury will be trampled over;
The harmless child must with the rest be flain,
The guiltless receive part o'th'guilty's pain;
For this brought I thee forth (ah luckless day)
That thou might to the Volscians us betray?
Am I cause of this evil? must my name,
Great Romulus? eclipse thy Empires fame,
Since from my bowels issued that fierce boy,
Who seeks his native Country to destroy:
Will It make me guilty of this, Martius? why
Should thou thus strive to make me basely die?
Nay this thy crime being by thy Country laid
Unto my charge will sure disturb my shade;
Were I an exul too! 'twould never grieve me,
To die by any one but only she:
Disband dear Martius yet thy mighty powers
And be pleased with us: see those lofty towers
Long since by Romulus erected: see
Those stately Temples; relics: let these be
Thy sweet appeasers, but if they will not move
Thee, yet think once more of thy kindreds love;
'Twill be a shame to thee if thou should have
Her to thy wife who will be then thy slave;
Or what great honor think thou will thou gain,
When thy dear mother captive does remain:
Be wise, though angry, let not fury throw
Thee on designs whereby no praise does grow;
If nothing else, yet let our tears thee move,
Man's suppl'ant tears will bend the mighty Jove;
But if my sighs and cries cannot thee suspend
From such vile act'ons: if thy wife contemned
Be by thee; if thy gods get no respect;
Or if thy Countries name thou do reject:
Turn thy sword in my bowels, let me feel
The sharpest force of thy revenging steel.
Those who before the mighty Rome did fear,
(The Vejans and Falisc ans) now will jeer;
How will the Samnites laugh to see that none
Can overcome great Rome, but she alone?
How willingly shall I consent to die,
Rather than see my Countries misery.
Cataline Exhorting his Soldiers to fight with Anthony.
HEre stand we fortune: nor have thou us gi'n
A Captain who has dull or sloathful bin;
What though the Romans are content to serve;
And from their ancient noble tenants swerve?
I by these wars choose rather to proclaim,
My man-like soul craves liberty or fame;
He only has true honor who dare die
Rather than live in endless slavery;
And dying thus to shun a servile shame,
Loosing his life wins honor to his name.
What though my harder fortune may deny
To my full hopes success or victory:
My daring and illustrious soul shall be,
For ever famous to posterity;
Then let our only hope of triumph rear
Our freeborn souls and make them void of fear;
Why should we tremble at the Consuls sword,
Or be obedient to the Senates word,
Since we maintain that they no Senate be,
But mere usurpers of our liberty:
Why should the mighty Rome fear Cato? why
Should it to Piso Crassus subject lie?
We Are Romans too, and from the self same race
The footsteps of the famed Aeneas trace:
They'are not alone Quirinus offspring, nor
Are they alone sprung from the god of war;
We from the same stock do descend, and claim
Right in the glories of our grandsires name:
Why should they full with gold their treasures make?
Why we oppressed with poverty? they rake
And squeeze the people to increase their gains,
Our riches are the fruits due to our pains;
They with their prouder faces do command,
And boast dominion o'r both sea and land;
Are we by birth or courage less then they?
Or have we no soul left but to obey?
Why should not they to us obedience show,
Or why should they despise me thus? why you?
Are we thy laughing stock proud Rome? must we
Be thus neglected and contemned by thee?
Whilst some with an insulting state do go
Bearing the mace before um, others flow
With heapt-upriches, these usurp the Laws,
And at their pleasure deal in every cause;
Such is their pride: the Consul seems to be
Subject unto the Tribunes tyranny;
When we like Ciphers stand, and void of state
Neglected lie like minds degenerate:
These live in stately marble structures, we
Must with poor cottages contented be,
These strive their Empire still to magnify,
And stretch their vast dominions to the sky;
We wanting all things miserably poor,
Are forced both cold and hungry to endure;
For this did nature us produce? or thus
To live? is this the fate assigned us?
Must we thus suffer? No, it shall not be
Our swords from what the gods themselves decree
Shall free us: he who bears a noble soul,
May destiny and fate it self control;
Fortune assists the bold: let us not incite
It Is frowns, nor our own slavery invite
By coward-minds; nor loose by our vain sloth,
The gaining Rome, or liberty, or both.
The hopes of gold imbolden some men's breasts,
Which an insatiate cov'tousuesse infests;
But let your courage spring from thoughts more high
It is your own; your country's liberty
You crave and fight for; here you nobly gain
Honor which truly does requite your pain;
I Will be both Soldier, and your General,
Nor me Commander but Companion call;
To Roman tyrants I Will their pride make known,
And will revenge, hers, your wrongs, and my own
This hand devoted to my Countries health
Shall fight for you; this shall restore your wealth:
Revenge the altars of the gods through death
And slaughters, give Rome new and freeborn breath
Go then, and with courageous minds assail,
The Consuls tents, and doubt not to prevail.
Hope in the Victor-gods: now only force
Convenes, sloth hurts, nor must ye have remorse,
Or being Romans, Romans fear to kill.
Pity's good after fight, before it is ill.
Unbridled fury now of all helps best;
And fear to kill, denotes too base a breast;
But whosoe'r he be that fears to die,
Half dead already is, to death more nigh;
There is no hope in flight, a double host
With all their power on each side does accost
Our tents: the Alps encompasse us half round,
The Consul is possessed of yonder ground;
That side presents Metellus to our sight,
There is no way of safety but by fight:
Go on then bravely let your sharp swords find
A passage through them, he that has a mind
To fight may escape, at least he will nobly die,
Not like a carcass unrevenged lie:
Then let not fear surprise your hearts, be bold,
The Roman people shall as well behold
The slaughter of their own, as ours, and he
That drinks this blood with his 't shall mixed be;
And though they Victors are, they shall not boast,
But rather weep the bloody conquests cost.
Mutius Scaevola to Porsenna, when killing his Secretary instead of him be was
taken.
BEhold grim Tyrant, here before thee stands,
A man had been thy death, had not these hands
Proved Traitors to my mind: had made that grave
Been thine; which now is prepared for thy slave.
If Scaevola must undergo deaths doom,
There Is none but will write guiltless on his tomb:
I set upon with fearlesse courage those
Who were our Capitols, our Countries foes;
Why are the heavens then thus against me bent?
And not propit'ous to my brave intent?
What! are the gods ashamed to lend their aid?
Or are they of this Tyrants power afraid?
Or have the fates reserved him that he
In future triumphs might a trophie be?
What ever 'twas made them thus against me conspire,
It grieves my soul it had not it is desire;
Etruria see what souls the Romans bear,
Admire the noble acts the Latians dare;
Long after me that will this fact yet do
There comes another and another too;
There want not those who hope to say they wore
A laurel died in thy crimson gore:
What though thy Camp lies free from our alarms,
And spoils our fields with unrevenged harms;
We scorn with baser blood to stain a dart,
O King, that is only levelled at thy heart:
Our nobler swords will drink the blood of none,
But thy heart blood, Porsenna, thine alone;
Those who their hands will strait in it imbrue,
Walk intermixed with thy armed crew.
Methinks I see at present one thee note,
Who strait will hide his weapon in thy throat;
Hence therefore think each hour of thy breath,
To be the assured hour of thy death;
Thou do with warlike troops our walls surround,
Hoping to lay them level with the ground,
And think to famish us whilst o'r thy head
Hangs a revengeful arm wilstrike thee dead;
That glorious Diadem which now I see
Circles thy brow was hoped a spoil by me;
That purple robe invests thy loins shall lie,
Thy blood be tinged in a deeper die;
That very scepter which thy hand sustains,
Shall, turned a club, dash out thy cursed brains;
Now Rule, now Lord and King it, with this fate
Expecting still the period of thy date.
Methinks I see how on thy curled brow,
Self-rendring vengeance sits enthroned, and how
Thy thoughts already tear me; yet I feel
No horror, nor my frighted body reel,
No trembling in my joints: know, King, I can
Both do and suffer 'bove the reach of man:
In freeborn souls pale terror never stood
In competition with their Countries good;
Those souls in whom aspiring fame her sphere
Has placed, neglect the precipice of fear.
This sacred Altar, these pure fires shall be
Witness of our undaunted constancy;
This hand to Roman freedom so unjust,
Shall for it is penance be consumed to dust;
Nor is it cruel, but most right it is doom,
Since liberty it could not yield to Rome.
On a Lady sick of the small pox.
LEt those whose towering thoughts can from the spring
Of Helicon their high-flown fancies bring,
Invoke their muse, and in their loftier strains
Distill those streams that flow from nobler veins,
My groveling muse never knew what meant the fire
Of a Poetic rapture, till mine ire,
When envious sickness seized so fair a frame,
Constrained me thus to burst into a flame:
And shall base scab I at thy malice chide,
Or thy poor silly impudence deride?
Alas! because that often those rosean buds,
Which sooner then the rest throw off their hoods
To show their native beauty, and display
Their modest blushes to the early May,
Are nipt by sudden frosts like those that meet,
When freed from swathling bands, their winding sheet
Do think therefore that thy malicious spite
Can check the dawnings of her beauteous light?
Which shines eradiant as the day when born,
On the winged shoulders of a clearer morn;
Had thou attempted on some meaner face,
Where beauties luster shone with common grace;
It might have yielded when thou did assail:
But here thy poison can no more prevail
Than can that sable mantle, which the night
Draws o'r the world, and so presents our sight,
Those lesser fires not cease to be no more,
When glittering Phoebus guilds the Eastern shore:
But stay, perhaps it was not malice made
Thy noxious heat thus boldly to invade
Such matchless beauty. Sol himself began
With anxious envy to look pale and wan,
And fearing lest hereafter should arise
Such splendour from the sunshine of her ey's,
As should obscure and dark his glory, sent
Strait out of policy an instrument,
To damp that brightness and eclipse those rays,
Which he foresaw would rob him of his bays;
'Twas wisely done! could that judicious head
Which comprehends all wit be thus misled?
Sure he forgot how that his beams do use
To clear those mists which often do circunfuse
His splendid orb, and dart with greater light
Through darkness would obscure the day with night:
So having cleared those mists she will appear,
A Sun more bright in beauties Hemisphear.
In praise of a Constable.
ALas alas! see how my muse
Has broke her ham-strings, slipped her noose,
Her fancy towers aloft, nor will
A common subject please her quill;
She Is like those reverend Sirs which preach
What Is far above their wisdoms reach,
As if their nonsense had the merit,
To have it fathered on some spirit:
She Will sing a theme'bove what she is able,
John Petty Tyrant the Constable:
But see alas she is big with doubt,
Some zealous midwife help her out,
That she may first be brought to bed
Of his light horn, or his light head;
Thanks Sir, it is done, nor thinks she scorn
In the first file to rank his horn;
In hopes she may be the Recorder,
That he is dubbed knight of the forked order;
Hail then, Sir John, and think it no wipe,
You shall have th'pot, your wife the pipe,
What would you roast your nose and ey's,
And have her freeze between the thighs?
You Will represent his Highness grace,
Let some Sir then supply your place.
But hark methinks the clocks go twelve,
Let Us up and seek those fairy elves
Which used to riot in the night,
Because by day their purse is light,
Who (maids) do use to deal their knocks,
Not pinch your arms, but pick your locks:
Hobgoblins which do use to scare
A miser worse than Bull or Bear;
He Is up and like a brave Commander,
Who Is wit would shame my Grandams gander;
First with the choicest of his crew
He man's his fort, sets some perdieu;
Then ranks the rest, and so they go
As stout as hares to start the foe;
Thus they march, but by his side,
A brave Esquire of mickle pride,
Who with quick eye and prickt-up ear,
First finds out what does cause their fear.
'Twas this Lynceus piercing eye,
A hideous Monster does epsy,
Which he beholds with start up hairs
Devoutly falling to his prayers.
And then almost half dead cries out,
Unto the rest of the bold rout:
Oh Sirs we are dead, ha'ye made your wills?
Oh dismal night, prepare your bills,
The Monster looks most wrath and wood,
As if he meant to suck your blood;
We better had fierce Lions meet,
It Is dire Sir Backbite many feet,
What shall we do alack, alack,
He has the Constable by the back,
At which words their stout General
Through valor lets his weapon fall,
Being of a courageous mind
Discharged a Lulloim behind,
Which mist the foe, my muse supposes,
And yet assailed all their noses;
Some cried the gun was foul and stank,
Because the powder was too dank,
By his quick fall my muse still boaded,
That he the gun had overloaded;
Which so recoiled at the blow,
It made him fall beneath the foe,
At which their fear redoubled, and
Like men bereft of sense they stand,
Till at the length one stout as steel
Does pluck his heart out of his heel;
And apprehends the foe, their cries
In his applause strait rend the skies:
Some said he was Sir George alone,
Some the sev'n Champions all in one,
No living man, they all agree,
Could do such feats of Chivalry;
Whilst thus they echo out his praise,
One charitably seeks to raise
Their leader, who, he strait does find,
Has shot before and eke behind:
He then with kind words does him greet,
But finds his heart stuck in his teeth;
Amazed then he pulls in haste
A bottle from beneath his waste;
Unstops and dext'rously let flies
Streams of strong water in his eyes,
And so recalled his fleeting soul,
Their joy then sounds without control;
They now march back to the Citadel,
And on the prisoners quarters fell;
Some would condemn him to the jaile,
Some show their teeth, and some their nail;
Their General, who had art at will,
Would have him thrust through with a bill;
They all concluded with a shout,
He had the wisest judgment out,
So strait they chose from out the rest
One whom they did esteem the best,
For he had long be a tried fighter,
And had destroyed Sir Skip Backbiter,
This monster Cousin Germain, and
Now takes his lance into his hand,
Shakes it, and with career does run
More fierce than ever did knight of the Sun,
And with the shock o'rethrows the foe, who lies
Rolling of the ground, gives up the ghost and dies;
And now, my friends, 'twas my intent,
But that the night is so far spent,
TO interr the monster, and to write
A full relation of the fight,
On's tomb; but hearken it does chime,
The Clock tells four, it is full time,
That sick Sir John were brought to's home,
Whither at length he being come,
Found that is wife, pitying his case,
Had got a friend to warm his place;
Here then they leave him and think best,
That all repair unto their rest;
And my muse so benumbed she scarce could creep,
Is at the length crawled home and fallen asleep.
A voyage from Egypt.
NOt of those giants great I sing,
That did hills top o't'other fling
For to climb up to Heaven;
Nor yet of Theseus noble facts,
Or Hercules his valiant acts,
Or the worlds wonders seven:
2.
I sing not of those Trojan wars,
Whose fame already mounts the stars,
Or victory of the Greeks;
Nor yet will I employ my muse
To tell you how they fed the Jews
With garlic and with leeks.
3.
But yet the best I can I Will tell
What in a voyage me befell
Made from a land of Moors:
A land of asses well you wot
I left, but yet I Will tell you what,
I chanced to light amongst I came on a Flemish ship.
bores.
4.
I never thought beasts of that race
Did use the surging seas to trace;
Their brawn is good at feasts,
But yet I Will tell you I might guess
Both lands were low, so more or less
Both people might be beasts.
5.
Good god! should I give you account
Of all my labors, they would surmount
Great Hercules his I had occasion of no more.
seven;
For I believe these bores are so
Much like the Turks, they think to go,
By bestialities to Heaven.
6.
First come aboard with a great stir,
They gruntled out, You Are welcome Sir?
I star'd and was half daunted:
They grin'd and grunted so together,
That what with that, and the foul weather,
I feared I was enchanted.
7.
The Captain strait me carries in,
And drinks to me in my own wine,
It Is true I tell you now,
And faith I judged it well as yet,
If I amongst these Bores could get
A pig of my own sow.
8.
But when we came to dinner, oh,
My mouth with water 'gan to flow
You never saw the like:
For I believe that such pure meat,
So sluttish dressed, was never eat
By any Irish Tike.
9.
I now 'gan to repent in vain,
And wished my self ashore again
To feed there like an ass,
But all alas would not prevail,
For now our ship was under sail,
I wisht't had been on grass.
10.
But come, I will observe some order,
Though they had none in all their larder,
And tell you of their diet;
I do believe you will think it good,
But this advise you that you would
Never venture for to try it.
11.
First enter then a bowl of beans,
Boiled just to mash, and swims with streams
Of grease as black as hell:
It Is good sea meat, you need not chew it,
And if you're sick with ease you spew it,
And this I think likes well.
12.
The next is lentils which they boil
With a commixtion of whales oil,
With that a little brandy;
Then Devils Cook with all your tricks,
And boil the waters of black Stix,
This dish will go beyond ye.
13.
Then comes in Stock Fish full as tough
As Bacon rind, and twice as rough,
They Will take no pains to beat it;
And I Will besworn can I get hay
That feed but like a horse I may,
I Will take no pains to eat it.
14.
To see the maggots in the Cheese
Is that which best of all does please,
How monstrously they show;
A vomit or a stool to urge,
You need no glister nor a purge,
Never fear but this will do.
15.
But if on Sundays we did get
A piece of powdered beef, why it
Was monstrous rare and fine,
O then you would see them flash and slay,
And swear by the Sacrament that they
Like Hogon Mogons dine.
16
It Is true the flesh a hogo has
But yet with them it well does pass
For wondrous good fare,
And now I Have told you of their meat,
I Will tell you who they were it eat,
You Will judge what Bores they are.
17.
Then first the Captain mounts the stage,
And he appears a Saint of age
Although he be not old;
Yet so his grace his age outstript,
That full nine years since he was dipped,
As I have often been told.
18
O it is a fatted Boar I Will swear,
That with his bristles and his hair,
He Is full ten foot about,
And faith when first I did him see,
I thought Golias such as he
Though this wa'n't half so stout.
19.
Had you but seen with how much pains
He Would wallow down the meat like grains,
'T would put you in a fear;
For if you seek the whole world round
Scarce such another would be found,
Unless't a Marriot were.
20.
I wondered much how he could stay,
To hear grace said, or rather pray-re
For 'twas not he that said it,
But if you understand aright,
It did but whet his appetite,
God! how he after paid it.
21.
Next mounts the mate our holy brother,
The world affords not such another;
It Is a most precious Saint,
O you might hear him preach and pray,
Till quite his breath was gone away,
I Am sure til I did faint.
22.
O what a piece of carrion 'twas,
As lean as any straw-fed Ass,
A pox upon his lungs,
For had you heard his tittle tattle
You would have sworn by his prattle,
He had had twenty tongues.
23.
You Will judge the rest of this foul rabble,
And put me to no further trouble;
That I felt there was sore,
And I imagine all like me,
That were they caught but once, they would be
Intrapped by them no more.
24.
I do believe these are the swine,
With whom the prodigal did dine,
At least like them they be:
But if his whores were of this kind,
He had a devilish lustful mind,
Faith he should -- for me.
25.
But all this while we under sail
Endured many a bitter gale,
And yet I wished for more;
I was so tired with hard fare,
That in good troth I did not care
Though I came wet ashore.
26.
At length we reached Messina; here
The Spanish Boys did scold and jeer,
And called me English dog,
I thought they with more reason might,
Against the Captain vent their spite,
And call him Flemish hog.
27.
Well, here I some refreshment got,
I after wished I had it not,
It made my grief the more;
For all my hate to Borish diet,
Yet I was forced again to try it,
Which worse was than before.
28.
Scarce gotten from Messina well,
Becalmed before the gates of hell
Full fourteen days we lay;
Judge now in what a case we were,
They call it Strombello, and here
The Devil dwells they say.
29.
I think the Dee'l had a desire,
To Cook a whole Bore at his fire,
But none were good enough;
'Twas well for them they wa'n't in case,
And though the Captains burly face,
Yet he was found too tough.
30.
At last we reached unto our port,
Which made my heart begin to sport,
I thought I was in heaven,
This voyage taught me how to preach,
But all the doctrine that I teach,
Is we are the Flemings leaven.
Dom. Baudii. Gno. Iamb. lib. primus.
WHo bears a manlike soul, or valiant breast
Provokes not dangers to disturb his rest,
Nor is so prodigal on every cause,
Too light to spend his strength, but when the laws
The true Religion, or his Countries good
Crave his assistance, freely spils his blood;
To cast away our life denotes a fear,
Who throws not off that load he cannot bear?
Cato or Cassius scarce deserved a room
In fame, and virtue groaned to raise their tomb:
We might more justly praise to Otho lend,
Who lived a woman; like a man did end.
The Defiance.
1.
NO more, no more, no more fond love will I
Own thee to be a deity,
No longer fear thy bow or dart,
Or think the have power to wound a heart,
There Is none but fools are subject to thy skill,
I Will scorn thy force, and love but where I will;
Let dotards hold thou can control
The motions of a noble soul,
I Will never fear to be thy slave,
Or think that o'r my heart thou power can have.
2.
Then childish boy, go let thy weaker darts
Pierce sottish fools or mad-mens hearts,
In vain, in vain they here are thrown,
Think not with steel to pierce a heart of stone:
No, thou may sooner move the firmament,
Make the poles meet, than make my heart relent;
It Is too too firm, nor will it be
Bound to so base a slavery,
Nor can my noble constant mind
To any force or power be confined.
3.
Nay I Will not only not be slave to thee,
But thou shall be a slave to me,
I will usurp thy power and find
Ways to subject a female mind,
Which thou fond boy could never boast to know,
And not ensnare, but fairly force my foe,
Whilst thou shall pine because
My power exceeds thy laws,
And shall be forced to yield to me
Thy bow, thy dart, thy very deity.
The wonder.
1.
I Cannot devise what Devil it is can move
Men to this fond, this foolish passion love,
In the best woman I spy not one part,
Worthy to wound a noble heart,
Nor can the beauties of a face,
A comely carri'ge or a grace,
Wit or discourse, in my poor soul take place.
2.
It Is true in beauty I find some delight,
But yet no farther than to please my sight,
I love fair eyes, I love a Rosy cheek,
I love a skin that is smooth and sleek,
I love soft breasts: but of all these
There Is none that with my heart agrees,
They only serve my outward sense to please.
3.
Strange that menssouls should be bewitched and (...)
Subject to darting of a female eye,
No soul's sure so ignoble to take fire,
From such a low base-born desire,
They Are made our servants, and shall we
By loving them, make them to be
Equal? nay grant them superiority?
4.
There may be witchcraft in a comely grace,
There may be witchcraft in a beauteous face,
But I for ever that power in love dis-own,
That makes me others slave then is own,
It Is worse than Turkish Tyranny,
In love for him to make me be
To her that is my slave in slavery.
The Composition.
THreat'st thou to wound me? fool thou threat'st in vain,
Thou may shake heaven with lesser pain,
Or make the mountains plain,
The Northern pole go move,
Go bring the bright Sun from above,
And then come boast thou have forced me love.
2.
I Would have thee know I have a flinty heart,
That scorns thy utmost power or art,
Nay thy all-piercing dart,
Go and let it is steely head
Imprint it self on hearts of lead,
None break a flint but on a feather-bed.
3.
I dare thy foolish threats, but had thou come
With prayers and humbly sought a room
Perhaps I had gi'n thee some,
Strong Rhodes was found
Against Turkish force to keep her ground,
But fair conditions offered, did compound.
4.
Then if that laying by thy bow and dart,
By league thou will secure my heart,
Let Us thus conditions part;
I Will leave that whole to thee
But thou must let me still go free,
With bag and baggage both from it and thee.
The Conquest.
GEntly kind love restrain, restrain thy hand,
Keep back thy cruel pricking dart
Lest it not wound but kill my heart;
I yield, who dare resist if thou command;
O let it be enough for thee,
That thou have gained o'r me the victory,
Do not insult upon my misery.
2.
Should thou continue still to conquer me,
And should not to my o'reflown grief
Send some small comfort or relief,
Death would at last of both have victory;
Be merciful and let me live,
Lest while t'inlarge thy power thou do strive,
Thy cruelty Subjects of life deprive.
3.
I ask no more, but so far pity me
As with the self same dart
To wound her frozen heart,
That so she may no more relentlesse be,
And thus shall thou two subjects gain,
Who will this victory of thine proclaim,
And ever honor thy all-conquering name.
Reason in Love.
It Is not the luster of thy darting eye
Which shines so gloriously,
Nor is it thy twin-born milk-white breasts which show
Like mounts of purer snow,
It Is not thy cherry lip or golden hair,
Which makes me judge thee fair,
Nor is it thy pleasant sweet discourse or wit,
Nor what proceeds from it,
Thy comely carriage or thy grace, can move
Me to adore or love.
But it is thy purer soul which still I find
Compliant to my mind;
In all things but what would most pleasant be
That is thy loving me,
Were then fair Hellen fairer, could thou boast
Thy beauty o'r the most.
Did thou in all men's judgments where you are seen
Exceed the sea-born Queen;
If the least falsenesse in thy soul I see,
Thou Would seem most foul to me:
Were thy mind blemished with the smallest blot,
Or the least faithless spot,
The blackest ill-look'd Indian would appear
To me than thee more rare;
It Is the bright soul that darting out it is light
Makes beauty a delight,
Which else like the inclouded Sun would be
Gloomy and dark to me:
It Is that alone which me thy slave can make,
And love thy body for thy fair souls sake.
Beauty.
1.
THou soul-bewitching devil, at first made
Men's inward senses to invade,
That have the power to invite
Man's purer mind unto a feigned delight:
That first do conquer with thy flattering eye,
And then insult'st upon our misery.
2.
Thou heart-entrapping witch, which do deprive,
Men first of sense, and then of life;
Thou snake that li'st'mongst fairest flower
Raised by the moisture of sweet April showers;
And so with greater ease do work our harms,
Regarding none but only thy own charms.
3.
Thou mere conceit of man's imagination,
Blown up and down, fixed to no station;
Which have no more in thee of bliss,
Then what by his fond soul imagined is;
So, if a Chaos by him deemed be,
Fair it is, by much more beautiful then she.
4.
Thou painted garnished flower, only made
To flatter men, and then to fade:
That so they punished may be,
Like Tantalus, not to enjoy, but see;
Mounting them up, first to a promised bliss,
To let them fall to more unhappiness.
5.
Thou fruit, like cursed Sodoms, which do lie
Delighfull pleasing to the eye:
But if once touched like them you are found,
But only fair without, within unsound
Like summer pears, a pleasant outward part,
But if once cut, found rotten at the heart.
The Variety.
THou say I swore I loved thee best,
And that my heart lived in thy breast,
And now thou wondrest much that I
Should what I swore then, now deny,
And upon this thou taxest me
With faithlessenesse, inconstancy:
Thou have no reason so to do,
Who cannot dissemble never must woo.
2.
That so I loved thee it is confessed,
But 'twas because I judged thee best,
For then I thought that thou alone
Wast virtues, beauties paragon:
But now that the deceit I find,
To love thee still were to be blind,
And I must needs confess to thee
I love in love variety.
3.
Alas! should I love thee alone,
In a short time I should love none;
Who on one well loved feeds, yet,
Once being cloyed, of all, loathes it;
Would thou be subject to a fate
To make me change my love, to hate?
Blame me not then, since it is for love
Of thee, that I inconstant prove.
4.
And yet in truth it is constancy,
For which I am accused by thee;
To nature those inconstant are,
Who fix their love on one that is fair;
Why did she, but for our delight,
Present such numbers to our sight;
Amongst all the earthly Kings, there is none
Contented with one Crown alone.
She inconstant.
HA! now you think you have cheated me, oh no,
I did believe you would do so:
Who ever did the various wind
Still constant to one corner find?
Whenever did the changling air
Show it self still serene and fair?
Yet we might sooner hope these thus should be,
Than think to find in woman constancy.
2.
We may as well command the Sun not move,
As you with constancy to love,
Or bid the sea be free from waves,
When stormy blustering Boreas raves,
Nay we as well the Moon might woo,
To leave her weekly change as you:
Your nature it is, and should you constant be,
I fear you would prove unnatural to me.
3.
You lighter much than feathers are, and so
Must move with whar ever wind does blow,
Hurried about, now here, now there,
Now yonder; but yet fixed no where.
Perhaps at length a gust may be
To bring you back once more to me;
But Jove forbid: for yet I fear thou would move
My ensnared soul to ruin in thy love.
The Resolution.
1.
NOw by that beauty I so much adore,
I am resolved to dote no more,
No longer shall my passions strive
Me of my reason to deprive,
No longer will I subject be,
But nobly set my heart at liberty.
2.
Then go dear heart, and be no more confined
To a woman's changling mind;
Why should thou a subject be
To their selfe-will'd tyranny;
Break, break thy bands and fetters, know,
Subject to her, you are subject to a foe.
3.
There Is naught in her that thee her slave has made,
It Is thou that have thy self betrayed,
By fanc'ing that her beauties shine
Like something more then half divine:
Think then thy self deceived to be,
You Are undeceived, and art than thought more free.
4:
It Is men alone that women's Empire raise,
By wooing them with fancied praise;
When, if we would their masters be,
They must grant Superiority:
Nay, did we cease to flatter thus,
'Twould not be long ere they would flatter us.
5:
Cease then my heart, and dote no more in vain,
Thou never thus the fort wilt gain;
No more upon entreaties stand,
But learn like her how to command;
Those Castles which find no remorse,
On summons must be taken in by force.
She Weeping.
1.
SEe how she weeps, with what a grace
Sorrow it self shows in her face;
See how her ey's still dart their beams,
Nothing ecclipsed by those streams;
See how those tears sprung from her eye,
Like pearls enchas'd on rubies lie.
2.
So have I seen the clouds distill,
Their heat drops, yet the Sun shine still:
Which only some refreshment yield
To the before Sun-scorched field;
Ah! precious tears, might you but be
Of half that comfort unto me,
Then should I deem them far more rare,
Then all the Ocean jewels are;
But what avails it, since in vain,
I hope they should refresh my pain?
Since, Ah poor me! I plainly see
They tears of grief, not pity be:
The Wish.
1.
NO: my desires are limited; nor expand,
They half so far: I do not crave,
To have dominion over a mighty land,
Nor Cressue riches would I have;
The Grecian Empire would not be,
Of any comfort or content to me.
2.
While she, dear she, deigns not to cast an eye,
Of pity, or regard my grief,
Rather insults upon my misery;
So far, so far! she is from releife;
Ah fairest Nymph, all that I crave,
Is that one look of pity I might have.
3.
Would thou be pleased but once to smile on me,
For that smile I Would the Indies slight,
In them there could not half that comfort be;
Not half that pleasure or delight:
No, the whole world to me would seem
For such a favor of too small esteem.
4.
One smile I wish, nor would I have thee be
Too lavish of such boons as those,
Ah! how much would poor one recomfort me,
One smile enough thy pity show:
And should thou not it then withold.
With joy I die, or else grow over-bold.
Despair.
1.
AH me! my tears and sighs I waste in vain,
In vain of her I beg releif,
Who neither pity's nor regards my pain,
Nor will yield comfort to my grief.
2.
No more, no more in vain to thee I Will cry,
No thou my sighs no more shall hear,
But to some lone shade I Will retire and lie,
Lamenting my hard fortune there.
3.
Where the kind Echo from th'inclosed air
Shall grant to me what ever I say,
And from the hollow rocks answer my prayer,
Nor ever, like thee, say me nay.
4.
But yet I fear lest while I here impart,
And tell my griefs unto each tree;
My bosom be not left without a heart,
'Twil still burst out and fly to thee.
Love or no Love.
I Think I loved but for pastime, or so,
Nor can I well tell if I loved or no,
Sure, Love, I did but jeer thee: for I find
Thou have left no impression on my mind;
Thy shafts never yet touched me, nor did thy dart
That I was sensible, ever wound my heart,
Yet I can love without thee, nor can thou
Subject that heart will sooner break than bow.
Strange! that men should be causers of their woe,
And fancy passions when they are not so,
Thou have no power to conquer; but what we
By fancying a subjection give to thee.
I can love so that neither my desire
Can mount so high as to be termed a fire,
And I can cease to love when ever I please,
Nor one, nor the other shall disturb my ease.
Go then fond boy, and break thy feebler darts,
And boast no more thy power to conquer hearts,
Since I have learned to fool thy power and thee,
And love, or not love with Tranquillity.
Gold.
1.
BAse sottish Idol, which do vainly boast,
TO extend thy power from coast to coast,
Vaunting that there Temples be
Reared in every heart to thee,
Boast no more, for thou shall find
No altars smoking in my mind.
2.
What though the greatest kings thy subjects be,
I Will not sacrifice to thee,
Nor will spend one idle hour
To adore thy flattering power,
Fools! to adore a god will be
False to um in necessity.
3.
Let the cursed Tyrant new inventions find,
To please his never glutted mind,
Let him his Subjects squeeze and rake,
And full with gold his checquer make,
Yet at the end he shall confess
Mine is the greater happiness.
4.
Let the fond merchant seek the Indian shore,
To find out treasures more and more,
And venture life and liberty,
Nay wife and children all for thee,
Having done what he can invent,
He Will find that I live more content.
5.
Let the learned Chemist striving to extract
Thee from his fancies, or compact
The Elixar to increase his gains,
Loose both his treasure and his pains,
And then he will confess that I
Have lived by much more happily.
6.
Let the extorting Us'rer carp and care,
And pinch his guts his god to spare,
And let him unknown ways invent
To raise, or else to rack his rent,
To leave his gold he will make more moan,
Than ever I did to have none.
The Farewell.
1.
NOw perverse world I Will bid thee quite farewell,
What is there in thee that can please?
Thy greatest joy's disturb our ease,
Thy favors thou at too dear rate do sell,
No, I Will thy slave no longer be,
But quite retreat my self from thee,
Or to some pleasant shade, or to a gloomy Cell.
2.
There in dull silence will I spend my days,
Slighting thy favors and my fame,
In vain men seek to get a name,
Or their false glory in thy crowds to raise,
Since that their living trophies must
By time or fate consume to dust,
And then what rests there of their toil-got praise?
3.
Yet in despite of thee my name shall be
The talk of ages yet to come,
In every time there shall be some,
Which shall applaud me more for leaving thee,
Then those fond simple fools who do
Embrace thy woes and honors too,
And make me famous to posterity.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for JOHN STARKEY At the sign of the MITER, near the middle
TEMPLE-GATE in Fleetstreet.

Courteous Reader.
These Books following are printed for, and sold by John Starkey, at his shop
at the Miter, near the Middle Temple-gate in Fleet Street.

Books in Divinity.
1. MR. Thomas Hall's Practical and Polemical Commentary, or, Exposition upon
the third and fourth Chapters of the latter Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy,
wherein the Text is explained, foam Controversies discussed, sundry Cases of
Conscience are cleared, many Common Places are succinctly handled, and diverse
Useful, and seasonable Observations raised. fol.

2. Mr. Thomas Halls Homesus Enervatus, or a Confutation of the Millenarian
Opinion, plainly showing that Christ will not Reign with the Saints for 1000.
years on Earth, with a Word to our fifth Monarchy men, in octavo.

3. Mr. Thomas Halls Apologia pro Ministerio Evangelico, in qua plane and plene
ostenditur ejus necessitas, dignitas, Efficacia and Vtilitas; in 8o.

4. Mr. Richard Baxters Directions, and Persuasions to a sound Conversion, for
prevention of that deceit and Damnation of Souls; and of those scandalls,
heresies, and desperate apostasies, that are the consequents of a counterfeit
or superficial Change, this being the second Part of the Call to the
Unconverted, in octavo.

5. Mr: Richard Baxter. The Grotian Religion discovered at the Invitation of
Mr. Thomas Pierce in his Vindication, with a Vindication of the Synod of Dort,
from the Calumnies of the New Tylenus, and the Puritanes from the censure of
Mr. Pierce, in octavo.

6. Mr. Richard Baxter of Saving Faith, that it is not only Gradually, but
Specifically distinct from all common Faith, being a Treatise in answer to Mr.
Barlow of Oxford, in quarto.

7. Dr. Thomas Goodwin Opuscula Theologica, in octavo.

8. Mr. Thomas Gataker, Gods Eye on his Israel; being an Exposition on Numbers
23.21. in quarto.

9. Mr. Thomas Gataker, de Justificatione, and de Dipthongis, in twelves.

10. Mr. William Cartwright of Oxford, his Sermon of the Passion of Christ, in
octavo.

11. Mr. Thomas Warrens Justification Justified, or a Treatise of Justification
by Faith, in octavo.

12. Mr. Thomas Coopers Act of Giving, or a Guide to Charity, in octavo.

13. Mr. John Phillips Christian Alphabet, Containing Grounds of Knowledge unto
Salvation, in twelves.

14. Mr. Adam Harsnets Gods Summons into a General Repentance, in twelves.

15. Mr. Thomas Hooker of New England, his Miscelanies, containing five
Excellent Treatises in Divinity, in twelves.

16. Mr. Richard Sedgwick. The Synopsis of Christianity, in an Exposition of
the Commandments, Lords Prayer, and the Creed, in octavo.

Books of History and Humanity.
17. LEtters of Affairs, Love, and Courtship, written to several Persons of
Honor and Quality, by the Exquifite Pen of Monsieur de Voiture, Englished by
J. D. in octavo.

18. Mr. Walter Mountague his Shepherds Paradise, a Comedy privately acted
before the late King Charles, by the Queens Majesty, and her Ladies of Honor,
whose names are prefixed, in octavo.

19. Mr. Thomas Halls Phaetons Folly, being a Translation of the second Book of
Ovids Metamorphosts, Paraphrastically and Grammatically; with an Essay on Ovid
de Tristibus, in octavo.

20. Mr. Agricola Carpentars Magical Description of the soul, in octavo.

21. Mr. John Hayes Complete Tradesman, or a Guide for the true Stating of
Interest, at Six per Cent. per. Annum, with other useful Tables, in twelves.

22. A Relation of the Life of the Famous Christina, Queen of Sweden, whereunto
is added her Genius, Translated out of French by J. H. in quarto.

23. France no friend to England, or the Rosentments of the French, upon the
success of the English, as it is expressed in a Remonstrance to the King of
France, upon the surrendering of Dunkirke into the hands of the English,
wherein much of the private Transactions between Cardinal Mazarine, and the
late Protector, Oliver, are discovered, Translated out of French, in quarto.

24. Mr. Henery Prashams Truth of Time, Revealed, in twelves.

25. Aminta, the Famous Pastoral, written in Italian, by Signoir Torquato
Tasso, and Translated into English Verse by John Dancer; together with diverse
Ingenuous Poems, in octavo.

In the Press.
A Rare Piece, Entitled, the World Surveyed, or the Famous Voyages and Travells
of Monsieur Vincent Le Blanc, Alias, White, a Frenchman of Marseilles, who,
from the age of twelve years to threescore, traveled through the East and
West Indies, and most habitable Parts of the World: with a Description of all
those Countries he past through; the whole Work enriched with many pleasant
Histories, Translated out of French into English, by W. P. folio.


