The Life and Death of the right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of ESSEX, the Noble
Branch of his thrice Noble Father.


WHo shall assist me, whilst I show
That which the world admires to know,
The worth of Him, whose valiant Sire
Moved great Eliza to desire,
O thou Divinest, show to me;
Add to my skill in Poesy;
And grant, like to Linus, so termed by Virgil.
Apollos son,
My Verse may smoothly, sweetly run.
Before our Essex Father gat
Into that Cecil^s unknown hate,
And ere his fatal hap it was
With fierce Tyrone some words to pass,
He was the wonder of his time,
For virtue, Martial Discipline.
Eliza great full often did view,
How fast her Knights he overthrew,
When he, like Mars, in armor bright,
Did shine, none durst be opposite.
"But what on earth so firm may stand,
"That Change it cannot countermand?
"Or who is he can long subsist
"In joy, and never taste of sorrovv
crist?
"Even from the cottage to the Crown
"The change of state full often is shown;
"So that there is nothing permanent,
"Man's state's with joy and sorrow's mingled
blent.
His gracious favor with the Queen
Incensed the irefull Lords to Spleen;
So that they any vantage joy'd
To find against him, who now employed
In taming of that rebel crew,
His unadvised rashness drew
A harsh Fate on him, and his Foe
Rejoiced to see his overthrow.
He leaving earth, his valiant Son
To tread his Fathers steps begun.
And his rare virtues joyed more
The Commons, then his Sires before;
While all the earth his fame began ring,
His worthy praises ecchoing.
What time alas our sins were high,
When flourisht all impiety,
And for our crimes, our angry God
'Gan scourge us with an iron rod,
When brother did against brother arm.
And soldiers 'gan in Troops to swarm;
"When Englands Prince his charge forsook,
"Cast out his friends, and Fautors took,
Then our great Essex chosen was
As fittest Leader, forth to pass
Before that Army, whose great zeal
Them tamed had, to serve the Weal
Public, from being under brought
To those its utter ruin sought.
"As does a Father, when his Son
"Some heinous Fact, or crime has done,
"Does scourge him, and if that not do,
"Lays him in prison to his woe,
"Yet hates him nere the worse, but he
"From Hell would his preserver be.
So God, when he the Plague (his scourge)
Had sent, repentance for to urge
From us vile wretches, steept in sin,
Yet could not our affections win;
Death on his pale horse he gave charge
Thousands of souls for to enlarge,
That those that would not here repent
Their sins, might them in hell lament.
And now each man his neighbor slayes,
The son to death his Sire betrays.
And now a at Edgehill
Battell's pitched, and they
Desire the Fortune of the day:
Great Essex, at his Armies head,
With Speeches brave encouraged
H^s valiant soldiers, and in fight
He was the Foes first Opposite,
And by his valor, to his fame,
His Truth is the Kings soldiers that day showed themselves very valiant.
valiant Foes he overcame.
So Scipio, when to free from thrall
The Romans, vexed by Hanniball,
Went forth, and that same scourge of Rome
By valiant prowess overcome.
But our brave Essex here gave ore
His warlike charge, and as before,
(His haughty helmet laying by)
His Robes of State he presently
Put on, and now by counsel grave
"The States second time does save.
When he had lived so long, to see
The g^ining of that liberty
Himself had strove for, and his Peers,
When peace sang gently in his ears,
O then, even then, Death reft away
This Lord, to Englands great dismay.
"O Death! thou were too much obdure
"Englands great loss so to procure,
"Thou Have taken one Pillar clean away,
"A prop most strong for Englands stay.
But why in vain do I deplore
"His death, who by his loss has store
"Who now do sing unto the Three
"Chanting celestial Harmony
Amidst that glorious crew, who still
Stand pressed, to act their Makers will.
"Sleep famous Essex in thine Vrne,
"While we wi^h tears thy loss do mourn.
And let this Epitaph be writ
Upon thy Tomb, to garnish it.
(THE EPITAPH.)
LEt no rude foot presume to tread,
But with great awe, upon this Dead,
"Lest that his Genius rise from hence,
"And terrify his insolence.
But Reader know, who ere thou be,
Here Essex sleeps, whose Ancestrie
Were famous Worthies, all their worth
Were joined in Him, and at his birth
The Heavenly Motions did agree,
Their best Infusements all should be
Injected in him, that his Fame
Might be his Heir, and keep his Name
Alive on earth, and equallize
Achilles
His, whose resoundeth to the skies.
LONDON, Printed for J. Pots in the great Old Bailey, near the Sessions House.
1646.


